THE HISTORY OF THE WOMAN OF GREAT FAITH.

Recorded by Saint Matthew, chapter 15. v. 22. etc. and by Saint Mark, chapter 7.24.
where three very strong encounters are beaten back by her unmatchable faith.

Treatised and expounded for some help to the weak in faith.

By ROBERT HORN, a Minister of Jesus Christ.

1 John chapter 5. v. 4. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our
faith.

LONDON: Printed by T. H. for Philemon Stephens, and Chr. Meridith, at the
gilded Lion in Paul's Churchyard, 1632.

TO The Noble Lady, the Lady Harley, the pious Consort of that religious
Knight, Sir Robert Harley of Brampton in Herefordshire.
Christian Lady:
I Present you (here) with some fruits of my age, the root (out of which they
sprung) stands in that famous history of a Woman of rare Faith; and because
a Woman, therefore the fitter to be commended to you, and this for the truths
sake that dwells in you. This truth is that noble Guest that takes up lodging
no where, but in a heart, such as is according to the faith of Gods elect. Such
a room of special receipt it has found in you long: a Chamber or room
trimmed for a Daughter of heaven, so highly borne: and for this, you are the
observation and speech of many, of so many as know you, and the grace of God in
you: which (though now offered to the eye) is not so much to show what you are
in a right understanding, as to set you further forward to the prize of that
high calling, at which you aim, and not at things by the way, the aim of
those that delight to be blown up with the wind of praise, for what they do
well. Worthy Madame, you have run well, few of your sex, and sort better.
Keep on as you do, there is no standing till you be as your father in heaven
would have you to be, perfect as he is, Mat. 5.48. Here are the steps of faith
in a woman, a Canaanite, tread in them, and you are sure of your way. In this
you go not alone, and you have a worthy Leader; your dearest Husband is he,
who (being the guide of your life, and to your precious faith a most able
coadiutor) does by his godly precedence, chalk you the way for your safter
going on. And if I shall, by the blessing of God upon that which is here done,
be vouchsafed worthy to add, though the least grain of improuement to the
aright ordering of your steps in this way of faith, I shall think my labor
and desires very happy, and the same highly advanced. And now for this, and for
the sweet children of your body, likewise for the Parent of them, your most
loving Husband, and my most kind Patron, I do, and still pray, who am

Your good Ladyships very greatly bounden for the service of your faith, Robert
Horn.
March 27. 1632. from Ludlow.
Errata.
PAge 8, line 26, read make crosses enough, p 11, l 14, r they have, p 12, l
21, r out of Egypt, p 17, l 17, t known, p 30, l 24 r did not forget, p 35, l
8, r feed, p 41, l 21, r teach, p 56, l 16, r whom, p 113, l 8, r in Christ, p
121, l 20, r their, p 123, l 23, r and not hold, p 136, l 16, r strange Star,
p 148, l 3, ^ patience help to, p 149, l 23, r over our, p 152, l 5, r
obsecration, p 157, l 3, r ( one, p 159, l 21, r with their, p 172, l 10, r
blessed song, p 178, l 9, r loath, and l 10, r she sits down, and l 18, r
says, p 179, l 9, r to weet, p 180, l 12, r with, and l 13, r with p 190, l
17, and 18, r who in a s^rt, p 204, l, 21, r enlarged, p 207, l 17, r a sheep,
p 209, l 11, r promise is, p 225, l 10, r tale, p 230, l 7, r but all, p 235, l
15, r thank, p 237, l 2. r privilege, and l 4, r life Christ says, p 242, l
17, r heart, p 253, l 15, r then, p 263, l 28, r believes, p 275, l 12, r
fight, p 278, l 5, r detraction, p, 287, l 3, r only that.

Matthew. 15.21. with Mark 7.24. etc. Then Jesus went thence, and departed into
the coasts of Tire and Sidon.
MATTHEW and Mark do (both of them) make a remarkable report of a famous
History; we will draw one thread from both, and supply the defect of one of
them by another. The History concerns the singular commendation that Christ
gives to a Woman of great faith, the Woman was a stranger, a Cananite, the
Cananites, an accursed nation, and she of them, which makes the story more
remarkable; it concerning a woman, a Cananite; the weakest sex, and the
wickedest nation, and here we have Jacobs hold in Canaan, Genesis 32.26. or the
victory of faith in a woman a Cananite, 1 Ioh. 5.4. and in the whole of the
history, we may observe the occasions and subject matter: the occasions are
partly in this word of context, then; and partly in the text it self. And those
are such as were out of the woman, or in her, they out of her were in the
Pharisees, Mat. 15.12. in her daughter grievously vexed with a Devil, Math.
15.22. and in the fame that went of Christ; she had heard of him, Marc. 7.25.
the occasion (which was an occasion of fault in the Pharisees) was this they did
bind upon tradition against Christ, Math. 15.2. and the truth he taught, they
would not dispense with customs of their own invention to keep him, and, (not
his doctrine only, but the miracles he did, displeased them) therefore, from
them and from thence, that is from the land of Genesareth (where he was;) he
departed to the furthest part of Galile, in the skirts of Tire and Sidon, And
so went far enough from them: Doct. 1.
which teaches that Christ cannot abide to be, where his service (for the
substance of it,) is set in ceremonies, or mixtures of man's clay with his head
of gold. Dan. 2.32.33. they that let go the substance in religion for shadows,
make God weary of them. In the old Testament, the Jews had Moon-times and
Feast-dayes of their own appointement: and the Lord says that they were to
him a burden and wearines: Esa. 1.14. and, when they called not upon him, or
called upon others with him: and when they brought to his altar, not his
sacrifices, but the offerings of their own head, the Lord says that they made
him to serve with their sins, whom they should have served with his own
sacrifices, not with that Swines blood, and what was this but a wearying of
him? Esa. 43. verse. 22.24. though God had wrought wonderfully for his people,
in the eye of Pharao; and of the whole Kingdom: yet when there was no enemy
left, they left God by limiting him to their devices, and by tempting him.
Therefore (as follows) God was wroth, and greatly abhorred them. Psalm.
78.40.41.58.59. at another time they provoked him with their inventions: and it
is said that the plague brake in. Psalm. 106.29. So in the days of Ames, they
put words of their own pleasures into the mouths of his Prophets, and gane
them their text: therefore, the Lord says; that he was pressed under them as
a cart full of sheaues. Am. 2.12.13. and cold he be more wearied? therefore,
it is a vexation to him, when a people is more zealous of traditions or of men's
inventions, then of him. The reasons, Reasons.
what Master will not, to a vexation, be weary of that servant that will not
do what he shall command, but what himself lists? we are Gods servants,
not to follow our own head, but to follow him. When (therefore) we walk in
our own devices, not in the steps of his word, must it not needs vex him, and
so cause him to leave us, when we leave him first? Secondly, such spillings are
but strange fire, as all else are which in worshipping he commands not, and
such fire the Lord will devour with fire from heaven, as he did Nahab and
Abihn, the Sons of Aaron. Leuit. 10.1.2. And would he so do, if such acts of
presumption did not greatly provoke him? Saul sought the Lord in his own way,
and found his own destruction. He would not obey, as he was commanded, but as
he listed: therefore, the Lord had no pleasure in him, nor in any of his
offerings. 1 Samuel 15 22. Thirdly, God is pleased when we do his will, and obey
his word. And obedience, in this sense, is as the salt of the offering, that
keeps it in good taste; without which, it stincks before God. 1 Samuel 15.22. as
before. Ier. 7.22.23. and is God pleased when his word is obeyed? then, it must
needs vex him, when it is not. Such servants, and they that so serve, do but
mock God with a show without substance, and he will not be mocked. Galat. 6.7.

The use is (first) for instruction and teaches that to complement with
religion, Use 1.
is to drive away Christ and religion. He is no good Christian whose
Christianity stands (all) in outwardnes. Romans 2.28. neither he who flides into
a visible garb of Christianity only by custom, and the imitation of times.
The jews did so, and had glorious words for a cloak of their falsehood. Ier.
7.4. They had (as most of our ignorants now have) a spiced conscience in vain
things, but no conscience of worshipping in Spirit and truth. Such worshippers
were the Samaritans: they stood upon the formalitie of Jacobs Well, when there
was no water in it, such as Jacob drank of, when he drank of the Spirit. Ioh.
4.12. So nature and custom taught them their religion: and have the most of
our people any other teachers at this day? If they pray, it is in words without
any heart, even when their lips march, as Iehn. 2 King. 9.20. they care not,
if he, that is the Salt of the Parish (the Minister) keep his whitenes,
whether he have any savor in him or no. Math. 5 13. and so they love rather
to see then hear a Preacher. This is not to do after the doctrine here, but
contrarily; and will Christ tarry, where he has but an outside, and not the
inwards of a true welcome in the Gospel? One says well: he that is married to a
fleshly religion, or religion of no Spirit, cannot have Christ for his Husband.
All ceremonious worshippers are of this stamp molded into no religion but what
is carnal and stands in worldly matters, and therefore, the marriage bond is
broken between Christ and them. Against this doctrine offend the Papists, who
hold of Peter by succession (if so) but not by doctrine, not having the faith
of Peter, they catch at his chair, and keep the bones of the Saints, though
no marrow be in them. Yea they make crosses (...), while yet they make the
Cross of Christ of no effect, and will Christ tarry there, where he is so
dallied with?

An admonition (therefore,) Use 2.
if we would keep Christ, to keep in with him, by bearing upon substance in
religion, and not upon forms only. God is a Spirit and a living substance,
Ioh. 4.24. will be worshipped substantially. Now, to worship substantially, is
to serve God by his word where, his service must be learned of himself; who
left making, after he had made his last testament, hence, the second
commandment sends us to God, the only Maker in the frame of religion. Exodus
20.4. In making of the tabernacle every thing was precisely commanded, the
silk, the color, the smallest Goatshaire, the least pin was stricken in with
Gods own hammer. Exodus 26.4.7.15.16. And then shall we think to please God,
when we use not his hammer, but our own, for the pinnes we hang our faith
upon? all good meanings (the spring of our own brain) what are they but our
unreasonable service of God? and what is that but the sin of witchcraft? 1 Samuel 15.15.23. and what upon this but a provoking of Christ to a departure? The
Lord seeks such to serve him, who scrue in spirit and truth. Ioh. 4.23. And
does he seek such worshippers? questionless, he is delighted with such a
worship; and further, he seeks this service, that has no need of our
service, and it is to our own profit, not his, and (then) shall he not have
it, that we may have him ever? Quest. but, what is it to worship in Spirit and
truth? Answ. To worship in Spirit, is to worship spiritually, not carnally, and
in ceremony; and to worship in truth, is to worship otherwise, then the
jews, who worshipped in shadows of things to come. Heb. 9.9.10. Where it
appears that the service of God in the Gospel, must be in manner, wholly
inward and spiritual; whence I infer that they who use Gods worship or any
part of it, as matter of ceremony and form only do, with Saul, go to graves
to enquire at the dead. 1 Samuel 28 7.8. but (then) the Lord was departed from
him, ver. 16. (that the Devil said truly:) and (then) he will leave us, which
would be considered of those Christians, who (so (...) here a form of Gods
service) never care whether it edify the conscience or no: never seek for
Gods seal upon it that it may imprint blessings: and never hold Christ with
the right hand, that he may not go away (as here) from the Pharisees, whose
devotion was (all) set in a ceremony of religion.

But whither did Christ go, going from the Jews? departing from them; he
went as far as (well) he might, he went to the hithermost coaste of the
Gentiles, whereof he was the appointed light. Luc. 2.32. And so, (as the Sun
of the heavens) he sends forth some beams of his approach before him, as the
messengers of his coming, not long before he came. The Sun went low in
Judea, but was not down: and Christ was going away, but not gone: therefore
Christ departed but into the coasts of Tire and Sidon, and not far into the
country. Here he desired to repose himself, and was received, where his own
received him not. Doct. 2
Math 4.15.16. And here we learn that when Gods own people will not receive
the truth, a strange people shall. For Princes shall come out Egypt: Ethiopia
shall soon stretch out her hands to God. Psalm. 68.31. as God said to Elijah;
so he has not only seven, but seventy times seven thousands, wherewith to
seed Israel in the thin spring of true worshippers. 1 King. 19.18. and he is
able, out of the seed of stones, to raise up ehildren to Abraham. Math. 3.9.
when Ieresalem would not receive Christ, Egypt. did. Math. 2.13. and here, Tire
and Sidon open their doors, when Iewry shut hers against Christ, and Christ
says that he has other sheep then those of the fold of Judah. Ioh. 10.16.
reasons, Reasons,
the first may be taken from Gods unquestionable right and property in all
things: for all are his, made or not made. Ioh. 1.3. Heb. 1 2. Now he that is
Lord of all, may choose where he will; For, may not the King abide with us, or
set his throne in Scotland? Secondly, he that can make stones, can (as was
said) of stones, raise up children to Abraham. Math. 3.9. if one world will not
he can make another that shall: for, he is All-mightie. Psalm. 115. 3. and so
from the power of creation in God, we draw a second strong-binding consequent.
3. A reason may be drawn from the inconvenience that would follow, if it were
otherwise, for it could not but make a people exceedingly arrogant and proud,
if God could not be God without them. For, would they not then say; let him go
whither he will, he must come again?

The use is for correction, Use
some in their prosperity think it cannot be otherwise, and David in some of
his good days, thought he should never be removed: Psalm. 30.6. But he found
the contrary, and repented. ver. 7. Jerusalem was impenitently proud of her
strong foundation: and Jerusalem (the speech of all the world) was made an
heap. Lament. 1. Rahel, despising Leah, became barren, and Leah fruitful,
Genesis 29 31. so when the Gentiles were reputed vile, and the proud Jews despised
them; the Leah of them became a fruitful mother of children. After, the younger
Sons had more honor, than the elder in the house. Luc, 15.29.30. This is
written for our learning that have drunk so deep of Gods mercies, in the cup of
the Gospel. The Gospel has been a rich wise unto England. But, as some that
marey for wealth: so many among us, that marie, not the power of the Gospel, but
the good days of it; behave themselves in it, as if they had said; the marriage
were good, if the wife were away; and these Gadarens love their hogs better
then Christ: who (therefore) will go from such, without bidding to be gone?
Math. 8.34. As therefore, when Aholah and Aholibah (being sisters) did partake,
one with another sins; (lerusalem with the sins of Samaria;) they drank
(both) of one cup: Ezech. 23.2.4.9. so, if we of this nation prove Aholah, and
justify Aholibah in hers and her sisters sins, we must look to pledge them
in the same cup of destruction, that was their death many hundreds gone,
therefore let us not flatter our selves with a showing promise of long days in
the Gospel, if we walk not more worthy of it: for, if we refuse Christ's
supper, he will, without us, have ghests to fill his house. Luc. 14.21.23. and
he cannot want a Church, though England were under ground. God is bound to no
nation: and in every nation, he that fears God and works righteousness is
accepted of him. Act. 10.35. our glory is not in this that we have the name
of God in our mouths and Churches; but that we glory in God. Ier. 9.23. The
rather to move us, consider we that the Lord has change of ground, which, he
may at his pleasure, turn up with the plow of the Gospel: and if it lose edge
among us, he can whet it at the grind stone of the Savages in America?
Again, he spared not our elder sister the Church of the jews, when she
sinned against him, Psalm. 80.8.9.10. and shall we (the younger Sister) think to
fare better, not doing better, or doing worse then she that first opened the
womb by an elder calling? what ground in reason, for such presumption?
thirdly, and again, let it be thought upon that to whom much is committed, of
him or them, much will be required. Luc. 12.48. If it may be said of us, as it
well may, and as it was said of the house of Israel: you have I know of all the
families of the earth; (for all Europ being, at this day, in combustion and
blood, we enjoy our selves and know no war:) then what follows is a
conclusion proper to us; therefore will I visit your iniquities upon you. Am.
3.2. For, will he suffer such pieces to go from him, and not know how? Luc.
19.13.15

But is Christ among the Gentiles? his salvation does (therefore) belong to
them. Which (thirdly) teaches that salvation is of the Gentiles. Doct. 3.
We heard before out of John 10.16. that God has more in the bunch than I^dah:
and the second Psalm does prophecy of an other inheritance, even that of the
heathen, who shall come unto Christ from one end of the earth to another, Psalm.
2.8. Isaias says, that nations shall offer themselves to the root of Ishai;
which was not David, but David's Lord: and that he has a remnant of people out
of Ashur, out of Egypt, out of other places, and out of the Isles of the sea,
Esa 11.10, 11. And further, that he shall bring forth his judgment, that is,
his Law to the Gentiles, who should receive it, Esa 42.1. After S. Peter had
preached to the Gentiles, they of the Circumcision (the jews) contended with
him; to whom he made answer, that God would have it so: and that he was not to
forbid the wind of God to blow where it listed, for says he, could I let
God? Act 11.2.17, 18. The Apostle S. Paul calls this, the riches of the
world, and the riches of the Gentiles, Romans 11.12. rich indeed, when for so few
cast off (and yet all were not so) so many were called to Christ as (then) were
in the broad field of the nations. And thus it is plain that Gods salvation
goes (now) farther than the wall of Israel. Reasons.
The reasons, for else Noah's prophetical prayer should be fruitless, Genesis
9.27. and many prophetical texts in Esa and others false. Secondly, then God
should have respect of persons, where there is no such thing with him, Act
10.34. Thirdly, the first fruits of the heathen, this woman with others make it
evident, from effect, that the whole crop of the Gentiles did belong to God.
Fourthly, and therefore did God shut up all in unbelief, as in some common
jail, that he might have mercy upon all, that is, upon the kinds of all, Romans
11.32: wherein he had failed, if he had kept the Gentiles in ward perpetually.
But the veil between the outward Court and the Sanctuary, was rent at Christ's
death, Matthew. 27.51. and then he said to the prisoners, go forth, Esa 49.9.

The use is for instruction, Use 1.
teaching that great grace is come to us, the sinners of the Gentiles: and that
we have great cause of glorying in God for his merciful health. We that were
dead in sin, and trespasses, are quickened, Ephesians. 2.1. now we are written
among the living in the Gospel, whose names (before) where not in the book.
Our duty in this case, is to beware that we race not the book by our
contempts, neither blotit, and our names in it with the pen of our sins, Romans
11.20, 21. Be we advised then how we join in answer with those, who (bidden to
the great Supper) absented themselves by their farms, and yoakes of Oxen, Luke
14.18, 19. God has pitied us, let us not be cruel to our selves: he loved our
salvation above the life of his Son: John 3.16. let us not undervalue it with
Esau, to a portion of meat, Hebr: 12, 16. nor let us with the Papists, open a
shop of our own doings, when the Lord has done alfour works for us, Esa
26.12. for God has not given us this great stock of his gracious bounties to
set up for our selves, but to occupy for him, Matthew. 25.25. much less to put
it out to bad uses, or to consume it on our lusts, Iam. 4.3.

Is the salvation of God come to the Gentiles; and (if to any) to us of this
nation? it reproves the cold affections of the most among us, who receive it
with no better welcome. The Lord has cast the seed of his word, and the
precious stone of his Gospel among us: and where others labor and trade with
earthly wares, he has made us the Merchants of a rich Jewel, wherein is life
and salvation: but this ignorance that is among us, and this untowardness that
is in us, either to learn the good will of God, or to practice that we know,
has made us the merchants of the earth, and not Merchants of so heavenly a
treasure. It cannot be denied but that great grace is come unto us, and that
the Lord has set up his Altar in this Realm for his worship: but as when the
Ark of God was with great gladness received of the Bethshemits, after it came
from the Philistims, but with little reverence used, it became the death of
50000 and 70 persons, who died in that contempt, 1 Samuel 6.19. so, it is to be
feared, and almost to be looked for, that if (generally) more care be not
taken that the Arc of the Gospel have better rooms among us, and welcome to
us, than now it has, or (of late) has had, that even that worthy thing, which
otherways would have bin our life, will prove our death, and the death of all
the whole Realm: without such redress of our ways (as one well says) what
can be thought, but that which (otherways) should have been, and would have
been the water of life to save us, will be but a sea of waters to drown us:
and become for a sweet powder of health, a strong dose of destruction: and for
meat to feed us? poison to kill us: and for a word of glad news, a word of the
saddest that ever was heard.

So much for the occasion of this conference in the Pharisees, the other
occasions follow, out of the text of S. Mark.

Mark 7.24, 25, 26. And entered into an house, and would have no man know it:
but he could not be hid.

For a certain woman whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of
him, and came and fell at his feet.

The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation: and she besought him that
he would cast the Devil out of her daughter.


IN these words (which we take up for supply of what S. Matthew has not) we
have the other occasions of the following conference, where (concerning it) the
Evangelist S. Mark speaks of certain adherent circumstances, and (then) of
the occasions themselves: and first, there is a bar set against the woman's
coming to Christ (for he would not be known): and then it is removed; for he
could not be hid. Christ never showed himself, but his power was great, full
of excellency and wonder: yet as Ioh. 7.3 6.10. so here, he shunned all
opennesse. He was always worth the seeing; yet, here and now he would not be
known. And now this humble mind in Christ, who (though he might have honored
himself) would not; Doct.
does teach all Christians to be humble in their gifts. When Christ's brethren
would have him to get credit by seeking to be openly known, he would not
ante-date his fathers time, nor go openly to the feast, but secretly, and in
no show, John 7.4.10. In the Chapter before, some would have made him a King:
but his hand (such as it was then) being not fit to hold the Scepter, he got
him from them to a mountain, where was no company, John 6.15. Further, he
commands his to learn of him; and what is the lesson? it is to be meek and
lowly in heart, Mat. 11.29. Hereupon the Apostle S. Paul bids Christians to
carry the mind that was in Christ, who emptied himself of all outward glory,
and made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.5.7. so humble he was in his rare
excellencies and high place, that he washed the feet of those, who should have
worshipped at his feet, John 13.5. and thus Christians, (though of never so
great gifts, and eminent place) should be humble in them: for what are their
drops to his full sea? Reasons.
the reasons. First, much good will come unto us by doing so: for, where the
ambitious and proud are tossed upon a restless sea of cares, we shall find
rest unto our souls, Matthew. 11.29. where they have a storm of perturbations
in their minds, we shall find nothing but a sweet calm of quiet affections
in them. Secondly, it shall be for our greater honor: for, they that humble
themselves shall be exalted, Luke 14.11. Men shall lose nothing by humility,
as they shall get nothing by pride: by which what man ever made a saving
bargain? the lower or deeper we lay the foundation, the stronger the building
is, Luke 6.48. and so, the humbler in grace, the surer of grace: and who having
any good thing, would not be sure of it? Thirdly, by pride in our gifts, we
pull from God to take to our selves (as our own) that which is his: and can
this glorying be good, which is so unjust?

The use is for reproof of th^se that swell (as if they had a T^^panie)
because their gifts exceed the common rate of vulgar or ordinary. Use
Christ would not be known, but such would not be hid. Moses countenance
shone, and he knew it not, Exodus 34.29. these know all and more too: but
(thus,) following their own shadow, they drive it further from them: the way
to catch it, is to fall down upon it: so, they that praise themselves with so
loud a voice, lose the shadow of honor which they so pursue, where they way
to get true honor is to fall low in the opinion of the best they do. He that
will enter in at a strait and low gate, must strive and go low: such a door
of entrance, we have into Heaven, Matthew. 7.14. and what going in (then) without
an humble and low mind? proud members cannot belong to an humble head. Such is
our head Christ: and (therefore) no humility in us, no affinite with him.

So much for the bar put, the same removed follows in it, and in the reason
of it.

But he could not be hid.
THere was a bar in the door of the woman's coming to Christ; for it was said
that he would have none to know where he was: but here it is taken out, for,
he could not be hid: that is, the fame of his miracles and teaching could not
be kept within the wall of Judea, it flew out to those that dwelt in Tire and
Sydon (colonies of Phoeniesa) And further, Herod heard many things of him, Luke
23.6. his Doctrine and works made him much spoken of in the Kings court: and
here, upon the legs of the same report that went of Christ, this woman came
unto him: for it is said V. 25. that she had heard of him: Doctr.
where we see that God has means (even out of the Church) to bring those to
his salvation that are appointed unto it. When Israel went out of Egypt, a
great multitude went out with them, whereof some (no doubt,) even in Egypt,
had learned the way to Iehoua, Exodus 12.38. Iethro had few ordinary means
(indeed none) to be as he was: for, he was not in the Church to have them, and
he was Prince of Midian, Exodus 2.26. yet was the father both in Law and in
counsel to Moses, Exodus 18.14. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. and what means
had Job from the Church, when the Church was but in his own house, and where
(out of it) were none but the wild of the nations? Job 1.1. Further, was not
Ruth a Moabitesse made an Isralite out of Israel? Ruth 1.4.16 17 a little maid
carried out of Israel young, and bred in Naamans house (no house for the
knowledge of the true Iebova) yet did forget the Prophet that was in Samaria, 2
King. 5.2, 3. and what means had she in Naamans house to preserve the
knowledge of him? and what means had the widow of Sarepta (which was in Sidon)
to whom Elijah was sent, 1 King. 17.9. had she any Church means: yet her name
is in the role of the blessed, so happy, that a great Prophet was commended to
her. Luke 4.26. the like of Naaman the Leper, who (of all the Lepers in Israel)
was only made clean by Elisha, Verse 27. In the captivity many of the people
of the land became Jews, Hest. 8.17. Was that conversion made by an ordinary
way? And so we see that out of the Church, there are means other than
Church-meanes to bring those to life that are ordained to it: the reason,
salvation is the Lords, that is, Reasons.
it is in his hand and bestowing; and therefore he can give it in what hand,
either of means, or no means, as best pleases him. When the woman in the
wilderness could not upon on her feet go, from the Dragon that pursued her,
God gave her wings to fly from him, Apoc. 12.13, 14. So, when we have not the
feet of the means to go from destruction in an ignorant estate: God can give
wings without means to save us, when ordinary tillage fails, as in the
wilderness he did; he can plow the heavens, and rain Manna: for his time is
to work when means fail, who can work without them. Secondly, the wind
blows where it lists, Ioh. 3.8. and if the wind, shall not he that moves
in the fearful winds? Thirdly, to conclude God within means, is to deny
him to be Almighty: but he can do whatsoever (by what way soever) pleases
him, both in heaven and earth, Psalm. 135.6.

The use is, Use 1.
(first) for instruction, teaching, that if God have means for the salvation
of the Elect out of the Church, then we need not to doubt but many of our
Elders, living in Popery, were saved: for as God had an Arc for Noah, and for
those that with him entered into it, in the general flood, Genesis 7.7. So we
fear not to say, that God had his Arc of salvation for those our believing
Fathers, who in that general flood of popery, did cast themselves wholly upon
the merits of God in Christ, though confusedly, and by unknown means, and in
this sense, where our Papists object and say; Do ye think that all your
forefathers that lived and died in the air of popery were damned; I doubt not
but we may safely answer, and that with the voice of God, that all did not,
and that God had among them, more than his seven thousand, that in the bastard
Israel of that age, did not bow the knee to the Baal of Rome, 1 King 19.18.
Many (I doubt not) were sorry that the mist of the time being so thick, they
could not see whither they went, and therefore prayed for Gods extraordinary
thread in that labyrinth of ignorance, and had it; for with application to such
we may say; the time of that ignorance God wincked at, and was merciful to
some in it, though not by an ordinary rule Act. 17.30.

The second use is for comfort to those who by some long sickness are kept as
with some chain, Use 2.
from Church assemblies; so it be their trouble that they cannot be in place,
and the like to those that have, and long have had an impediment in their
hearing: for, he that has a way out of the Church to save his, has no shorter
arm in the Church, (the ordinary means failing) to bring his, by an
extraordinary way, to his salvation. Some would gladly have a Preacher, and
be as glad to hear him: but they are not able (themselves) to provide one,
and they that are able, are not the Merchants of that pearl, Matthew. 13.45. In
this case and when no Preacher is near, let them remember that God can fi^d
them by a Reader, as he fed Elijah by a Raven, 1 King 17.6. But it is not safe
to trust to a miracle, when by our convenient travel, we may hear a Preacher,
not breaking the Churches peace. For then we must do, as it was prophesied we
should do: run to and fro, that knowledge may increase, Dan. 12.4.

The reason why Christ could not be hid follows.

VERSE 25. For a certain Woman whose young daughter etc.
THis is the reason why Christ could not be hid. He was so followed by the
weaker sex, a Woman, and (which is stranger) a stranger, a Cananite, that he
could not, where, we may note the importunity and boldness of Faith: that
grace, which is the victory over all denials; and that which will have no nay.
For, this Woman, having sought Christ by hearesay, and by her Faith found him,
and bound him in a sort, to dispossess her vexed young daughter, she rests not
till it be done. And so in these words and in those that follow here, and in S.
Matthew, we have the other occasions of the conference following, that, in the
Woman, was her strong Faith, which is here gathered: and, out of her, the
occasions were; her daughters vexation by a Devil, and the report that went of
Christ both of them set down in this verse, some adherent circumstances there
are; asthe description of the woman by her sex, and country in the next
verse. And her manner of importuning Christ, here and in S. Matthew, the manner
this: it was with a crying tongue, she cried unto him: Math. 15.22. and with a
low gesture down to the ground, she fell down at his feet. Marc. 7.25. But of
these, when we come unto them in the Evangelists own order. Mean while we
will consider, who came to Christ, and why. For the person that came to Christ;
it is said here, that a certain Woman came unto him. The word (as we heard)
had lost edge among his own people, and (here) he whetteth it among the
Gentiles. In Iewrie, where God was known, Christ could find but few that would
receive the grace which he offered: here, in a land of darkness, and among the
cursed Cananites, a Woman and Cananite, does in a manner, even compel him to
give the grace which he offered not. And here, a Woman is opposed to Men: a
Cananite to men in Israel: a cursed stock to a holy seed: a whelp of Canaan to
Abraham's Sons: no Scholar to great Divines: one of no learning to learned
men: and where none of the Pharisees would follow Christ, she, a simple Woman,
could not be driven from him. Thus, the word that had turned edge in Judea,
got a sharp edge here, being whetted upon a Cananite, which could not but be a
shame to the whole land of Iewry, to the Doctors, and all the Rabbis there:
Doct.
and teaches that God does (often) confound the learned and wise by the weak
and ignorant. Solomon sends the sluggard to school to a very homely Master,
the industrous Pismire. Prou. 6.6. and the Prophet Isaias conuinteth and quite
shameth the ignorance of Israel by greater knowledge in the Ox and Ass;
saying, the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib: but Israel
does not know, Gods people does not consider. Esa. 1.3. so Christ, by the great
Faith of the Centurion (out of Israel,) does reprove the no faith, or the no
such Faith in Israel. Math. 8.10. also, by the mouths of Babes and sucklings he
stopped the mouth of the chief Priests and Scribes, who (for that) had great
indignation at him. Matthew 21.15.16. and thus God conuinceth the wise and strong
by weak and foolish things. Reasons.
1. Cor. 1.27. the reasons. One reason may be taken from God himself, another
from the Godly, and a third from those great Ones, that are wealthy and
learned, but neither godly, nor wise: the reason that concerns God is, by
such means, to show his power, and to extol his praise; for, it points, as
with the finger, to God, as sole Agent in every great and notable thing done,
which (therefore) he does by simple and strengthles instruments. So Gideon and
the few with him, must discomfit the maine army of Midian, but neither with
sword, nor weapon in hand, but only with blowing of trumpets and breaking of
pitchers. Judge. 7: 16.22. and the Apostles (some of them but simple Fishermen)
yet with the sword of the Spirit (which is the word of God) in their mouths,
were able and did cast down all the wisdom of the world that resisted them.
Now, in this and the like who has the glory? can the weak hand of the means,
rather, shall not the strong arm of the Lord have it? Secondly, and in respect
of the godly, this serves to teach them, that that strength, by which they do
great things (being themselves weak persons, is not theirs by any entaile to
nature; but by power from above, and so it excludes all rejoicing in flesh, or
of flesh in Gods presence. 1 Cor. 1.29. Thirdly, for great ones and wise, but
not godly; when they are put down by ignorant persons and simple in the world,
but wise in God; it is to provoke them, as God did the Jews by the Heathen.
Romans 11.11. at least, it cannot but make them ashamed before God and the world,
when they whom thy condemn for such fools, may, nay must touch them.

An admonition to Christians in title, not to lose all shame, Use 1.
when such examples should provoke them, as we see in this woman a Cananite,
and in such, rather, then lose al edge, let us whet upon such grind stones: if
praise come out of the mouths of babes, if, in them, God has ordained
strength, Psalm. 8.2. Matt. 21.16, Let the elder men, for shame, come to Church
to perfect his praise: for, in all liklihood, they are nearer the grave then
they, and so in all reason, nearer to God or to the Devil. If children can
give an account of their Faith; it must needs shame them, that are past
children, not to can to do it. More years should have more knowledge, and
riper judgment, if the Woman be more religious then the Man, it should make
him to run: and where the simple in knowledge can say more then the learned,
it should make them to blush. To speak particularly, and more distinctly: they
that scorn to be Catechized as children, and yet have as much or greater
need; should at least, be in place, when children and youths answer the
Catechism, that, with shame, they may see their great ignorance and amend it.
In other affairs, we can, say to our Servants; can a little child do this,
and cannot you? and why not so in the affairs of religion? but we keep no
shame for such matte S. Young men are ashamed to be behind others in
impudency, and not before them in vanity: (a shame taught in Satan's school,
who does rent the wardship of such for the pleasures of sin:) and yet are not
ashamed to come after every mean Christian in goodness.

But this Woman's forwardnes to Christ (having no guide to him, Use 2.
that we read of in a virtuous Husband living) does reprove many backward
women (besides men) in these days, who professing Christ, and having Guides,
follow, (as Herod did the Wisemen to Christ) never a whit. Mat. 2.7.8. Some
women turn their husbands edge, and become manifest rubbes in their way to the
mark of godliness; and such was the new married Woman in the Gospel, of whom,
he (that was bidden to the great supper) said: I have married a Wife, therefore
I cannot come. Luc. 14.20. But some women would come, and cannot, their
world-following husbands keeping them from Church, as in ward, from Christ. I
would advise such husbands to stir up themselves by so good an example in
this holy woman, and to set it as a prick in their sides, but they will not be
gotten, in the afternoones of the Sabbath, to come to Catechisings and
preaching: as soon you shall catch a Hare with a Taber, as persuade them.

The reason why this Woman came to Christ, follows in two occasions of her
coming to him.

Whose young daughter had an unclean Spirit:
OR, as S. Matthew read's out of the Woman's own speech to Christ: was
grievously vexed with a Devil. Matthew. 15.22. This is another occasion (as it
were leg) of the Woman's coming to Christ, and (consequently) an impelling
occasion of the conference had with him, and this made her to come readily, and
running to him. Here, a sharp assault was made upon her Faith: who, being but
lately (it would seem) converted from Paganism to religion, had so ill a
welcome to God, as to have a Devil thrown into her Daughter: yet the shield
of Faith in her right hand warded off the temptation; and she neither laid
blame upon the holy Faith, unto which she was converted, nor repented of the
change, followed with so grievous an affliction. Many would (in such a case)
have thought they had made but a bad change of their old religion, thus to be
welcomed by the Devil, in a new: but her Faith (which was an occasion, in her,
of this conference) would not permit her so to mistake; rather it drives her to
the throne of mercy, with an implicit confession of her little worth in any
thing: for Matthew. 15.22 with the voice of a crying supplication, she said: have
mercy upon Me, O Lord. Surely it was no light affliction, and it could not but
be strange news to a woman, and that woman a Cananite, to have a kind of hell
in her house, or a devil at home in a daughter so dear unto her. For, what
might she think, but that God had cast her off, who thus had cast the Devil
into her Daughter? yet she bore all quietly (as we heard) and, in her faith
(attended with hope,) went boldly to Christ for help. Doct. 1.
From hence we are taught that the nature of Faith is to follow Christ under
any cross. So the Prophet in trouble gave not over, but took surer hold,
fastening upon God for deliverance, to whom he directed the eye of his soul.
Psalm. 25.1.2. at another time, in some great trouble of mind, and question of
life, he commended into the hand of his supreme Lord, the spirit, which God
had redeemed: Psalm. 31.5. and so, went not from God in that cross but, by its
approach, drew nearer unto him. Hereupon, Christ inuiteth sinners, that are
pressed down with the weight of their corruption, to come to him. Matthew.
11.28. by Faith Peter speaks for himself, and all his fellow-Disciples that
they had forsaken all to follow Christ. Matthew. 19.27. that is, that to be with
him, they stuck at nothing, and by like Faith, he could boldly say that he
would follow him into prison and unto death. Luc. 22.33. Saint Paul (being
faithful) was so well provided against troubles that might come, (all which
he received upon the shield of his assurance in Gods promise) that he was
resolved that none of them (even unto death) should separate him from the love
of Christ. Romans 8.35.38. Those witnesses (also) of Christ, spoken of by the
Author to the Hebrews (of whom we have a large Role in the 11. Chapter of
that Epistle) were (all of them) faithful men and women; and therefore, having
pitched upon Christ, no terrors of deathcould take them off. Hebr.
11.35.36.37.38. so certain it is that no cross of troubles can beat the
faithful from Christ. Reas.
The reas^ns: Faith is our eye into heaven, the spiritual eye, where with we
see those innumerable pleasures which are at Gods right hand: the least
whereof, laid in balance with all the glory on earth, is as a Kings crown to
a s^pter of reed: for the heauiest afflictions of this life, s^iled but light
in the heavenly dialect, are as nothing to that far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory that they work for us in an ever enduring kingdom,
2 Cor. 4.17. our work here, (not worth a straw,) is paid with gold. And who
knowing this (and the faithful know it) will stick at any hardness, to have
so rich a reward for so small labor. Secondly, where faith is, all troubles
are swallowed up in victory: for, faith is the victory that over comes the
world, that is, whatsoever troubles are in the world, 1 John 5.4. Now, where no
troubles are of force, what shall force any withdrawing in that kind? Thirdly,
faith is the ring of our contract with Christ, the chiefest of ten thousand,
Cant. 5.10. and what faithful soul so contracted, will desire to be loosed
again, and not rather long for the marriage day? Philip. 1.23 A good marriage
would not be broken^ for any thing: and should any troubles (then) break
between Christians and such an husband? and, if they should not, they shall
not in those that are Christians indeed. S. Paul a notable Christian, and
chief Apostle, would not (as we heard) to die for it, make the marriage void
that the spirit had made between Christ and him, Rom 8.38. Acts 20.24. and
21.13.

The use reproves those, Use 1.
as persons of no faith, who are ready to cast off Christ for every cross. If
you would know an hypocrite, look in the face of him that is weary of his
profession when a cross comes, and there you may have him: the true believer
is as true cloth, that is, as cloth truly made, that will not shrink in the
wetting: the hypocrite pulls in at every sh^wer; if a dear year come, the
Gospel shall hear of it: and then he talks of the merry world, and when the
mass was up: for, then there was ple^^y of all things. And this was the song
in Ieremias days, taken up by a desperate people, who (opposing the Prophet)
desperately said: The word that thou have spoken in the name of the Lord, we
will not hear it of thee, Ier. 44.16. and why not? their reason was such as
theirs with us, who measure religion by the belly: so long (said they) as we
burnt incense to the Queen of heaven; we had plenty of victuals, and saw no
evil: but since we left off, we have wanted all things, V. 17.18. This woman
endured a greater matter than some restraint of victuals: yet did she not
mislike her profession for it, but for it pinned faster upon Christ: and, they
who have seen him that is invisible, Heb. 11.27. will do no less. The
messenger whom Iehoram sent to Eli^ha, wanting this eie-sight, said: Behold
this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait on the Lord any longer, 2 King.
6.33. He should have charged the sin of that age, but he foolishly charged
God: so too many in these days, wherein sin is at full age, when any
judgment is justly executed by famine, pestilence, or otherways, blame God,
or religion, but sparingly, (if at any time,) their sins, the true causes of
all plagues that come. From all this we may conclude, that what soever the
dearth of other things is, the dearth of faith is graeat.

The second use is for examination: where, we shall find the true Christian,
Use 2.
if we seek him in his constant adhering to Christ, notwithstanding the many
troubles that may arise for his sake. This is the seed sown in good ground
which abides with patience, notwithstanding the injury of the winter, Luke
8.15. so does not that that is sown upon stones: for; in the day of tentation,
it goes away, V. 13. The other grows into a blade, and comes unto fruit: this
for want of rooting, withers away, Matthew. 13.6. if it escape the winter, the
Summers-Sunne strikes it dead: such are the faithful and unbelievers: They
that receive Christ in an honest heart, will keep him, come what troubles can:
but they that otherways receive him, and in no deep earth; that is, good
ground; when persecution comes, on when preferment is toward, they are gone: so
Demas could tarry no longer with S. Paul than the world would give leave, which
he embraced, as in both arms, 2 Timothy 4.10. They that hold Christ in true
affection, will follow him, whither so ever he goes, Matthew 8.19. neither the
winter of Satan, nor the Summers of the flattering world shall stir them: any
thing shall those who will keep their Summer, but not their winter with him.
It is easy for men to be doing while nothing is against them: but, if that
wind blow cold, they that profess but in the warm Gospel, will, when the
winter is upon it, presently give over.

But this woman fet over by troubles, Doct. 2
comes to Christ; the wind blows her to him: and this teaches that
afflictions are profitable teachers. Manasseh, the strangest Convert, and
greatest sinner that we read of, learned that in the school of the cross,
being bound in chains and fetters under Ashur, which the magnificence of a
kingdom could not teach him: for, being in tribulation (says the text) he
humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, prayed heartily unto
him: and after his return to Jerusalem, made a worthy reformation, 2 Chr.
33.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. When Jonah lay in the center of the sea, shut up in a
whales belly, he received that true knowledge of himself, which (before he
was so cooped up) he sought not after, Ion. 2.8. and 3.2.3. The people that
cared not for God in their good da^es, in their bad of troubles, made many
errands to him: it is said, when his chastening was upon them, that they powered
out a prayer, or were plentiful in praying to him, Esa 26.16. and so in
trouble better than out. Hereupon the prophet confesses, that it was good for
him that he was afflicted, giving this for reason; because that through
affliction and trouble, he was made a good scholar, proceeding to a good
degree in Gods testimonies, Psalm. 119.71. and indeed, trouble is one of those
servants, whom the feastmaker in the Gospel sent to compel his Ghests to come
to his great Supper, Luke 14.23. It was that, that made the prodigal to look
home, after he had been long from his father in a far country of sin, Luke
15.17. and it was that, that made Saul in his iourny against Christ, (after he
was stricken down by a light from heaven) to humble himself unto him whomhe
persecuted, and with a trembling all over, to say: Lord what will thou that I
do? Act. 9.3, 4, 5, 6. And thus afflictions are good schoolemasters; Reasons.
the reasons. We are all (naturally) full of the dregs and lees of sin,
which by afflictions, as by pouring out, must be taken from us, Zeph. 1.12
these are the fire to burn out the dross of the natural man: And these bring
us, as misery did the prodigal, to a sight of our selves, Luke 15.17. Job.
33.16.18. Genesis 42.21 also these make us pray in words of fire, Hos. 17.14.
Psalm. 107.4, 5.10.18.26. where otherways, we would either not pray as
Atheists, or as hypocrites, coldly, and but for fashion only, Psalm. 14.4. for in
prosperity, we go from God, but when he hides his face, we seek him
diligently, Hos. 5.15. afflictions (fur there) contain us in obedience to God,
and keep us in, as with a hedge, that we break not out, as unruly cattle
that wander from their pasture, Hos. 2.6. they draw us from the love of the
world, which would rob us of the love of God, 2 Samuel 19.34, 35. 1. John 2.15.
or as a storm at sea, they make us to wish to be in our haven, Psalm. 107.26,
27, 30. and judge is with the rod here, that hence we be not judged to hell,
1. Cor. 11.32. thus, from the effects of good offices done us by our troubles;
it is evident that they are good and profitable Monitors. Secondly, if we
consider the essiciencie of them, they are good; for, they are of God, and come
by his will: therefore the Apostle says: All that will live godly in Christ,
shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. he says all, excluding none, and
making a necessity of it, he says, shall: and would say neither, if
afflictions were not of God: for, what evil in the City, (the Prophet means
the evils of adversity,) and the Lord has not done it? Am. 3.6. Thirdly, the
end of afflictions, (and the end makes all;) proves them to be good: for they
are the puttings of us from our sloathfulnesse to God; and where we would cast
our selves, (as the possessed in the Gospel) into the sire, and sometimes into
the water, to destroy our selves, Mark 9.22. Gods corrections in their ends
(for, such are they) stop us, and his loving crosses save us. Also the end why
God sends them is, by them to fit us, for the holy City, into which nothing
enters that is unclean, Apoc. 21.27. and as the parching heat ripens the
corn, so they prepare us for Gods salvation, that we may go into the barn,
as a shocke of corn fully ripe, Job 5.26. And are not all these good, the
effects, the efficiencie, and the end of our troubles?

Are afflictions so good Techers? Use 1.
it should teach us to learn somewhat of such Masters, if God make us whole
after some tiring sickness; by such a correction removed, we should resol^e
to sin no more, to weet as we did, that a worse thing come not after. Ioh.
5.14. For, if God take away the cross of sickness, shall we cross our
salvation, by doubling our sins, which, in the single, can cast into hell? if
he restore to a land the years of corn, after some years of dearth in it,
that land must, by such a hard time, altered to fruitfulnes, learn, more to
fear God, and less to sin, then it did; It must not (therefore) play the
wanton, with the abundance so given: for, so we may perish with the quails in
our mouths. Psalm. 78.31. If God pay our debts; we must not run in farther
by a riotous life: and if he spare our bodies, we must not destroy our
souls, his loving correction should make us whole, not more sinful, if God
remove a plague, the plague of sin should go with it: and if God spare us from
death, we must not make a covenant with death: Esa. 28.15. Nor sin against
him, because he bears with sin in us: rather, we should search our ways, and
turn to the Lord. Lament. 3.40.

But are all troubles for the good of Gods children? Use 2.
let Gods children (next) learn, not to be too much cast down with those
things that should rather raise them. For, shall afflictions be judged evil,
that do us so much good? or, if they were evil (as natural men say) why does
S. James wish us to count it all joy to fall into them? Indeed, to be fed with
the bread of tears, and to be so sick, and so to languish, that the soul
abhors all manner of meat. Psalm. 107.18. What taste can it have in the
palate of flesh? If we measure things by the carnal line, it cannot. But the
natural man is no competent judge in these matters: and that that is borne of
flesh is flesh: for, what natural man perceives the things of the spirit of
God? 1 Cor. 2.14 therefore, we must go another way to work, and measure by
future things, not by present sense. Hebr. 12.11. The only fit Judge is the
spiritual man: which, (if it may be Judge) will make us to rejoice in
tribulation, and with Paul and Silas, in prison. Act. 16.25. The wicked man in
affliction like a dog in a coard, does nothing but houle, and bite the coard
with his teeth; the godly man is patient in tribulation, because of his hope,
Romans 12 12. takes all quietly and contentedly without murmuring, and without
reasoning; and, as a young bird in a cage, sings sweetly, and in the music of
the holy Ghost, divinely to God; where the other, like an old bird, is sullen
in his troubles, and beats himself to death in them, without comfort for the
present, or hope for the future:

Further, notwithstanding that this Woman's young daughter had an unclean
Spirit, that is, a devil in her, with which she was grievously vexed, yet did
she not send, neither go to the Idols of the land for help, or to the devil
in them, (though her country people so did:) but she comes directly to Christ,
her faith setting her in the way to him, and to no other. For religion (if
right) knows no other way. Where we (thirdly) learn that religion will not
be beholden to the Devil for ease, in any trouble, Doct. 3.
therefore Micaiah, a true Prophet of the Lord, would not humor the King (as the
four hundred false had done) to gain his freedom by it. 1 King. 22.14. nor
Daniel shut the window, which he opened to the true God, in prayer, thrice a
day, though he try Masterie with the hungry Lions for it. Dan. 6.10. Nor his
three godly companions, (the three faithful Servants of God, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego) give a knee to the golden Image that Nabuchodonezer had
set up in the plain of Dura, though they should bake for it in a fiery oven.
Dan. 3.16.17.18. Nehemiah (that noble Leader) would not fly, (to the reproach
of God and religion,) though to save his life. Nehem. 6.11: And when Peter
took Christ aside in sad counsel, persuading him not to go to Jerusalem,
where he was to suffer: did Christ thank him for his great good will? rather
did he not tell him that he was a Satan unto him, that would offer, upon any
respects in flesh, to draw him from doing his fathers will, in giving himself
an offering for sin. Matthew. 16.21.22.23. the reosons. Reas.
It cannot be without treachery, and wrong to religion: for, this were, for a
subject of Iehoua to turn Pensioner to Satan, and what subject to a King, can
hold intelligence with another King, his enemy, about affairs of State, and
not be traitor to him? Secondly, the Devil is Gods enemy, and (if we belong
to God) ours. Now what good servant will be beholden to his Masters enemy for
the having of that, which (had) cannot but justly displease the Master? and can
a Christian servant be beholden to the devil by dependence, and not gri^ue his
proper, all sufficient Lord, from whom he departs by such distrust of his help,
when he should cast himself vp^ (...) him wholly, and for allthings? Thirdly,
Gods corrections are (al) for our good, and in love, to reclaim us from some
way of sin wherein we walk displeasingly to him, and can we take way from
him to the devil, for avoiding (if so we could) so profitable discipline, and
not greatly offend God? can a child run out of his Fathers house to his
Fathers enemy when he takes up the rod, and not greatly displease? or, will it
not provoke him more, that he should run to an enemy to save him from blows
necessary? the application is easy: the use is next.

And that is for instruction, Use.
teaching that they fail much in religion, who, if a tooth do but ache, must
seek a charm for it, if some lose any thing, the devil, by a Witch, must
bring it again, or, if they be sick, some wise man (that is, wizard) must be
dealt with for their health, if one devil bewitch them, another must be hired
(it is the devils wages) to vnwitch them, as if one devil should be sought
unto to cast out another, of such we may truly say, that God is not in all
their ways. It was the sin of Saul, 1 Chr. 10.13. and of Ahaziah, 2 King.
1.2. two Kings, and two runne-awayes from God, that they lest the path to him,
and walked in bypath to graves and devils, and can men follow in such an ill
leading way, and not sin? the same may be spoken of those who (though
secret things belong to God, Deuteronomy. 29.29.) yet by a curious and o^erbold
inquiry at the stars, will force them to speak where God will say nothing,
is not this to go from the living to the dead? Esa. 8.19. And do starre-gazers
better, and they that calculate natiuities? some are (indeed) more tolerable
then some; but they hang all upon one string; all are alike forbidden, as an
abomination to God. D^nter. 18.10.11.12.13.15. For, here, a Prophet is opposed
to a Witch, and all such Witches children; God speaking in the one, and the
devil whispering in the other, when God has closed up a thing with his seal
of secretle, is it not impious curiosity to offer to open it by an
extraordinary inquiry, and not at his mouth? such arts deserve to be
sacrificed where books of such arts were. Act. 19 19.

The other occasion of the conference follows.

Heard of him, came and fell at his feet.
THE further occasion of this conference was the same that went of Christ,
which this woman received, not as matter of talk, or of ordinary news, but
as a word of Gospel, or glad tidings, reflecting upon her self, and her
miserable young daughter. Therefore, she heard with faith, came in haste, and
fell down reverently at Christ's feet. For the first, which is her hearing of
him; as it shows that, in Gods dispensation, there are fit means for the
drawing of his elect unto him, and that hearing is one: so it shows (also)
that this woman gave her self into the hand of the means, for her coming to
Christ: for, having heard; she came without delay, and worshipped. The ready
way to Christ is to hear of him with confidence in his salvation, and this way
the woman took unto him, having heard of him by the word of fame. For, she had
a surer word then this, in the wind of heaven that blew within, that is, she
heard outwardly (as many else did, who were never the better;) and she heard
inwardly, as fewels did; and who (then) with such a Faith? she had a taste of
the general promises of the word, and the spirit taught her the application;
but by both means she was brought to Christ. The means (here spoken of) is
the report which she heard, and so we see, that hearing is our rode to Christ,
Doct. 1.
this woman (first) heard of Christ, and (then) came unto him, and Christ
himself, where he speaks of coming to him, says: he that comes to me, and
hears my words; that is, he that, by way of hearing, comes. Luc. 6.47.
hearing (then) is the way; so, after that a certain woman had said to Christ;
blessed is the womb that bare thee, he answered, saying; rather blessed are
they that hear the word of God and keep it. Luc. 11.27 28. where hearing goes
before keeping, and they that would keep, must hear. But does Christ deny that
his Mother was blessed for bearing him of her body? I answer, he does not:
for, the word rather does not implie an absolute denial, but a comparison
between less and more, as if he had said, I do not say that she is not
blessed for bearing me on her body but I say, that she was more blessed, and
so are they that bear me in the womb of faith by good hearing: further, our
Savior proves some Jews not to be of God, by this reason, that they will not
hear Gods word: for he says, they that are of God, hear Gods Word: and
contrarily, that they are not of God, that hear it not, John 8.47. A like
argument is made by a favorite of his, Saint John, 1. Ioh. 4.6. and Solomon
requires in the house of God, and in those that come unto it, a readiness to
hear, Eccles. 4.17. So does David, the father of Solomon: and further says in
effect, that they are shut up in a hard heart, that put off the day of hearing
it, Psalm. 95.7. and the blessed Mother of Christ, (blessed for this,) laid up
the word in her heart, as in a safe Castle of keeping it, Luke 2.18, 19. this
was the way to Christ in the old Testament, Deuteronomy. 4.1. and 5.1. Pro. 4.1. and 5
1. and is the way unto him, in the new, Apoc. 2.7. 11. 17. 29. Matthew. 13.9.18.
Reasons,
Therefore, God spoke in the old Testament by his Prophets; and in the new, by
his Son, Heb. 1.1. the reasons; When we are called to Christ, it is by a
speaking to us, and the object of speech is, hearing, not sight, Deuteronomy. 4.12.
Secondly, there is no coming to Christ but by faith, as there is no coming to
a town but by the way, John 7.37, 38. but no faith, (I mean of ordinary
generation) without the word; and that word must have a hearer, Romans 10.17.
Thirdly, none come to Christ but his sheep: and no sheep of his, that have
not his caremarke: that is, who (as he says himself) hear not his voice,
John 10.27.

The use, Use 1.
for instruction, teaches that those among us, come not to Christ, who decline
the way, without which, there is no ordina^^e coming to him: the recusant
Papist, and the bad Church-comming Protestant, who turn their faces, not
toward the East, where the Sun rises upon the Saints in holy assemblies,
but toward the West, where it sets in dark superstition, and in the night
of ignorance, are (both of them) out of their way to Christ: and (both of them)
worse than the three kinds of bad ground, all which received the seed, Matthew,
13.7. which they will not, or but when they list themselves. Some with Jeroboam
think (whatsoever they say) that it is too far to go to Jerusalem, or too
much to come to Church, morning and afternoon: and therefore, (with that
guide to idolatry) make calves at home, of wanton impediments from Gods house:
but, O that they considered in heart, that whiles they thus follow the worlds
way to vanity, not the Church way to God, they are in a broad way to
destruction, not in any way to Christ, and that God and they cannot meet in two
so contrary ways: then they would be where they might be sure to meet him in
the assembly, Use 2.
and not where (if God should call them away in such contempt) they are rather
sure to miss of him in his salvation. And, now, as they that will not hear
(and may) are in no way to Christ: so they are out of the rode to him, who
neither have, nor care to have a Preacher, their leading star to the Lord of
life: for how can they hear without him? Romans 10.14. And so (for a second
instruction) we infer, that it is a great want to want a Preacher in a
congregation: but some feel not the want, and some slight it some say no
matter for this preaching: they may as well say, no matter for coming to Christ
(...) some think they have too much of it. But can we have too much of Gods
blessing? and is not preaching a special blessing of God, the same in a Parish
that the Sun is in the heavens? and can we spare the Sun? therefore to wish
(as some) that preaching were gone, were to wish we had no Sun by day. But, to
answer such, I say that the use of a Preacher is more then of an Angel. I
speak a great word now; but it is a true word. For, the Apostle, Romans 10.14.
makes it impossible (understand impossible by an ordinary way) to be saved
without a Preacher; but not so without an Angel.

This woman heard, and came to Christ: and I doubt not but with haste, as the
Shepherds did. Luc. 2.16. In the text there is no more but that, she heard and
came. Now what she did for her self, and her daughter, that we must do for
our selves, when we know what is to be done (which we do by hearing) we must
not put off to d^e it. What the word commands must be heard with obedience,
and be done presently, this is the doctrine here, bi^ding to expedition in all
Gods services. The Prophet says, to day; neither giving nor taking a longer
time. Psalm 95.7. Joel says, now, and presently, speaking of a turning to God.
Joel. 2.12. Isaias also exhorts a differring people (such as we are) to seek
the Lord while he may be found; Esa. 55.6. implying, that they may seek, and
not find him: as when they seek in their day, not his, or as Esau sought him
with late repentance. Hebr. 12.17. and he was a good man of God, who delayed
not time, but made haste to keep Gods commandments. Psalm. 119.60. In this way
we must run, v 32. saluting none that may stay us, as Christ said to the
seventy in a case of like haste. Luc. 10 4. Here, no acquaintance must stop
our way, or us, and we must be fervent in spirit, serving God. Romans 12.11. For,
they that are hot upon a thing, will not be long in doing it. The reasons,
Reasons.
we shall not (then) lose our labor, for, our work is with the Lord, who
loves a cheerful, that is, present giver. 2 Cor. 9.7. on the contrary, and
when we come off so heavily; what thanks for what we grudgingly for go? 1 Cor.
9 17. a ready mind commends the service: and if there be a willing mind, it
is accepted. 2 Cor. 8.12. Secondly, the edge of a good mood is soon turned, if
it strike not upon the present occasion; our metle is like iron: where if we
strike not while it is hot, what working upon it? and so what working of the
mind to God, while we let it cool, by putting off to do service? Yet a little
sleep, and yeta little slumber: and what will be next, but deep security,
and no awaking? Pro. 6.10.11. and so; not fit to day, unfitter to morrow.
Besides; there are many lets in our selves, and stoppes offered by others in
our purposes of well-doing. The corruption of times, the baits of evil
fellowship, the temptations of Satan, the course of this present world, lying
wholly in wickedness, the custom of sin, with the like rubbes to goodness; all
these offer to put shakles upon our feet, when we set them in the way of Gods
commandments; if (then) we give them the start of the time against us by the
sin of delay, what hope that cuer we shall be brought forward to any true
purpose of amending our ways, and our doings? Ier. 7.3. and 26.13. 3ly.
occasion (which is bald behind) and the seasons of time (once lost) are not in
our power, more then a bird which we have let fly: and there is no calling in
of time, when it is far out and gone: therefore wise men will, and Christians
must redeem it by doing good while they may. Ephesians. 5.16. Gal. 6.10. He that
observes the wind, shall not sow. Eccles. 11.4. that is, he that puts off the
seed time, for every change of weather or rising of winds, shall lose his
hope, and so shall he, (and that of a better harvest) that observes the wind
of delay in things to be done presently.

The use is for the reproof of those, who, Use 1.
(having long heard of Christ) have not (for all that) taken up one foot toward
him by repentance, in a new creature, rather who, like Antipodes to his
salvation) go contrary to him, not observing any thing that he has
commanded, or his word teaches. To such he may say (as once to the obdurate
Jews;) ye will not come to Me, that ye may live: Ioh. 5 40. For as the
bidden ghests in the Gospel, they absent themselves by carnal delays. Luc.
14.18.19 20. or if they come, it shall be when they can find nothing else to
do: and then, rather to catch, then to be caught, as if they had lost their
right ear with Malcus. Luc. 22.50. Their Adders care will not be charmed with
any persuasion to obedience. Psalm. 58.4.5. they rather go to see then to hear.
Matthew. 11.8. and if they make any haste, they make no good speed. Peter and
the other Disciple ran to Christ, whom yet they thought to be dead in the
grave. Ioh. 20.4 and shall Christians make no haste (a sign of no good will)
to him; whom they know to be alive in his word, and gloriously living in
heaven? but, in such matters, men strain courtesy, their betters shall go
before; in other matters, none shall have the start of them, their betters or
equals.

But, Use 2.
must there be no putting off in Gods scruices? then, our repentance (which is
a service of God) must be speedy. And here, we must follow and do after the
counsel that the Angel gave to Lot: it was to fly, for his life. Genesis 19 17.
it concerns us more: for, not our bodily life, but life of soul and body is
that which we must look unto in our flight to repentance; where, we must
make speed, and not put off to get an eiectione firmae against Intruders upon
the Lords inheritance in us: that is, against sin and Satan, the strong men
that have so long kept the palace. Luc. 11.21. we lose no opportunity when we
would graft, or sow, or stock up, and shall we lose those sweet opportunities
of time which God has given into our hands for the stocking up of sin, and
the grafting of good things, which (after) may grow in us to trees of
righteousness? shall we not sow grace in the spring of youth, when the time is,
but put off to the reape-time of sickness before death, when time shall be
no more? our Savior biddes us to strive to enter, while the gate of heaven
has some (though a strait) passage; and is somewhat open, though not
wide-open. Luc. 13.24. and therefore not to tarry till it be altogether shut
up with these words; depart ye workers of iniquity. v. 27. let us (then) with
a speedy hand graft the word in our hearts, sow seeds of grace in our lives,
and have the instruments of stocking up ready, that no root of bitterness spring
up to trouble us. Hebr. 12.15. of ten virgins, five were called foolish for
neglecting time. Matthew 25.1.10.11. let us (therefore) walk circumspectly as
wise, not as those fools, that knew not their time. Ephesians. 5.15. Coloss. 4.5.

The occasion of the conference, (that which was in the Woman her self)
follows in two things; as, in what she did, and what she said.

And fell at his feet; the woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician, etc.
THis woman being come, and having entered the presence, she delivered her
petition, lower than upon the knee, to Christ: for, she fell at his feet, and
with a crying tongue besought him to be good to her in her daughter, or to show
mercy to two in one. Quest. But was she an Israelite, one brought up with
Moses, or taught in the Law, that did this? Answ. It follows, she was a
Greek, a Syrophenician by nation: that is, as has been said, a stranger in
that regard: by Greek the Evangelist means a Barbarian in respect of Israel,
as Gal. 3.28. not borne in Greece, properly taken (for she could not be a
Syrian, and so) but in Phenice of Syria: and by a common received name, a
Cananite, as Matthew writes: if she had been bred in religion, it had not
been so strange, as it was strange for a Cananite to show such a faith: one
effect whereof is here showed in the humble gesture she used, coming to
Christ: for, she fell at his feet, so low she was, so humbly she came unto him,
which teaches, Doctr.
that they who come in nature of Petitioners to God, must come humbly to him,
as upon both knees: when we come to worship before his face, we must kneel
before the Lord our maker, Psalm. 95.6. the godly will enter with reverence.
David was uncovered before the Arc, 2 Samuel 6.20. and men (like David) will be
bare headed speaking to God. In this matter the Publican (to show a dejected
mind) stood afar off, Luke 18.13. where the Pharise (not humbled) pearched
higher. Ezechiel, (prophesying) fell down upon his face, Ezekiel. 11.13. so did
the four and twenty Elders in heaven, Apoc. 4.10. and 5.8. a president for us
on earth. The reasons; Reasons.
In such the heart must be humbled, 1 Chr. 17, 16, 17, 18.19. and where that
goes low, the body cannot but go low with it, it being the moving wheel of
the body, and of the whole man, where it bends, the knee will bend, and both
fall down, and we upon both. Secondly, he is worthy: for, (as the four and
twenty Elders said) Apoc. 4.11. he made knees and all: and can we give him
less than his own? Christ (therefore) fell on his face, Matthew. 26.39. or as
Mark reads, fell on the ground, when he prayed, Mark 14.35. Christ gave so
much to his Father: and shall we give less? or, if we fall upon the knee to a
mortal Prince, shall we not fall down flat before the Lord that made us?

The use is for taxation of some proud, Use
and uncivil beggars in Gods house, who pray sitting, and covered: to whom I
say (as one once well said) if every knee were of gold, it could not be too
good to be given to him (even unto the dust of the ground) who fills this
house. We will not speak to a great man, and our hats on; how dare we (then)
be covered, speaking in prayer to the great God, if we had him in any
reverence, the knees would do reverence that come before him: therefore, of
Saint James it is written, that his knees became hard as a Camels hoof, with
often and long kneeling in prayer: but it may be written of some in the book
of their shame, that their tender knees cannot endure to touch the hard ground,
when they should bow down to pray: if they uncover the head, that is all: they
neither fall on their faces, nor down on their knees in worshipping. I speak
of those that are young, and have able bodies: for, all are not such: and they
that be not, may stand up, which is a fit gesture in prayer; and used by the
godly Patriarchs Isaac, Jacob, and others: the Pharise stood praying, and is
not reproved for that, Luke 18.11. and so did the Publicane, who went home
justified more than he, 13.14. But the humbler the heart is, the lower will
the body go in prayer: therefore, (in sign of humility) children ask
blessing upon their knees: we are not worthy to gather up those crummes of
grace that fall from our Lords table: and are we too good to ask them on our
knees, and bare headed? Indeed, God requires the heart: the knee does little
service, and the hat off, as little reverence: yet as out of the abundance of
the heart, the mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34. So from an humble heart proceeds
the humbling of the body, the humble bending of the knees, and our humble
uncovering before that Arc of presence at Church. Hypocrites are prodigal
enough this way, in their double diligence, and Judas kiss, but all that which
they do with such an outwardnesse, and far from the heart, have no thanks
from God: but where Christians do as much under, as they over, it argues,
(save where necessity gives the Law) a proud and vnhumbled soul.

So much for that the woman did, what she said, follows.

She besought him: Or according to S. Matthew, Cried unto him.
IN these words, we have the manner of this woman's petition, and in the words
following, the matter; for the manner she besought Christ, not coldly, but by
crying unto him. Christ called not to her; She cried to him: so strongly did
her faith work. Common beggars when they would have an alms, will cry for it:
but this cry was of an other nature, and stirred up another way: even, by the
renewing of the holy Ghost, shed on her abundantly or richly through Christ,
Tit. 3.5, 6. and this made her to cry in the Spirit, Doct.
as well as with tongue and voice. By this means, she was strong in faith,
and strong in prayer: and so we learn that powerful faith causes powerful
prayer. Jacob was a man of singular faith; therefore he made strong and
preualent prayer, Genesis 32.26.28. Moses one that saw God face to face, was a
great believer: and he also is said, to make crying prayer, when no voice was
heard, Exodus 14.15. Hanna (likewise) prayed with a troubled spirit, but in no
voice of words; her faith spoke, her tongue said nothing, 1 Samuel 1.12.13. and
the Prophet that had within a fire of faith, brake forth into a flame of words;
he believed, and (therefore) could not but speak, Psalm. 116.10. Ichosaphet
prayed powerfully; his faith had made him a good Orator, 2 Chr. 20.6, 7, 8, 9,
12. Daniel in the captivity, was not behind him: his fervent faith gave him a
hot breath in prayer, Dan. 9.2, 3, 5, 19. and zealous prayer (such as Elijah
made) is called by S. James the prayer of faith, Iam. 5.15.17, 18. the reasons.
Reasons,
Prayer is a fruit that grows upon the stalk of faith, called therefore (as
was said) the prayer of faith: and therefore what the tree of it is, such is
the fruit, of more or less earstnesse, as we more or less believe.
Therefore, as our faith is, so are our prayers; warm faith, hot prayer; little
faith, small prayer; no faith, no prayer: they increase or decay together.
Secondly, they that have faith with power, are more spirit than flesh: which
none are, but they that have the spirit in a good measure, which is the spirit
of grace, and of supplications, Zechar. 12.10. and then how can they but make
strong prayer, that have the spirit of prayer? all that have faith with power,
have this power: and (therefore) powerful faith, powerful prayer: for this
faith is resembled to fire, and unto life: the greater fire, the greater heat;
the more of life, the stronger motion.

The use is for the right trial of our faith: Use
where we may judge of it by our prayers; they that pray coldly, have but a
weak faith or small fire within: but they that (otherways) are of great
faith, run a spiritual descant (with Daniel) in their prayers, Dan. 9.19.
their heart is prepared; and they are not as the dull and sloathfull in their
devotions, that need a rowsing up. The Prophet David in his one and fifty
penitential Psalm did often change words: it was not to show his eloquence,
but to testify, as his great fault, so his great faith: which he showed by
tossing this way and that: or, (as (a sick man in bed) from one side to
another, Psalm. 51.1.2.7.9.10, 11, 12. so Gods children in distress: as they
have faith to believe, so they change phrase in their complainings: otherways,
with Baals Priests, though we put never so much wood about the Altar of our
prayers, no fire from heaven falling upon them, we may cry loud enough and
long enough, and have no answer, more then they had. 1 King. 18.23.26.29. But
if we have faith; we will pray with Elijahs Spirit, and not coldly, by putting
wood, where no fire will take. v. 36 38. For, the Spirit (if we have it) will,
by our faith, put fire unto our words, and make them to smoke into heaven, and
this is to pray as Elijah did, whose sacrifice God kindled from above. Hence
appears (that they want faith, who only out of custom) salute God in their
formal prayers; where, they pour out great Hypocrisy, but no prayer in
Spirit and truth; and thus, they give God the time of the day in some cold good
morrow, who bid him be gone all day after: and, at night, when they should make
him the keeper of the house, they do not once speak unto him in prayer, to be
near, by driving away all evils that may hurt, in case of his absence from
their help and protection.

So Much for the manner, the matter of the Woman petition follows, out of
Matt. 15.22. in the combat it self, or the issue. v. 28.

Saying, have mercy on Me o Lord, thou Son of David.
THIS is the matter of this Woman's petition: and now the Combat begins
between Christ and her, at the weapon of her Faith. In this fight she makes
diverse requests, and receives sundry repulses, the repulses were three; and in
those three she warded off three very sore venies offered against her Faith,
the shield of proof against them. The requests were either her own, v.
22.25.27. or of the disciples for her. v. 23. The first of the requests, which
was her own, is in the words now read. Wherein we have the grace she begged,
and the persons; the one, for whom; and the other from whom. The grace she
begged was the grace of mercy: desiring Christ, in mercy, to pity her that
could deserve nothing. And so, she begins well, and at the right end,
waighing anchore in a safe road. Papists cast it on the sand of their
deseruings: but she sends all away, save Gods goodness to his humble handmaid.
In all Canaan there was not such an other (and how many in Israel?) yet the
whole of her request was mercy; and that Christ would show his mercy to a
miserable sinner, Doct.
from hence the doctrine is, that whatsoever we have, or can ask of God is out
of mercy. So, Jacob, praying to God to be delivered from the hand of Esau, his
bloody brother, prays out of his mercy, for such a deliverance: confessing,
in true humility, that he deserved no such thing. Genesis 32.10. Also the
thousands of the Lovers of God, he is said to respect by showing his mercy to
them, and no otherwise. Exodus 20 6. David (further) craves of God that he
would wash his sin (that which he was so sick of) in many mercies, as it were
waters. His sin was great (and he knew it) and therefore speaks of a through
washing for it. Psalm. 51.2. Jeremy says, it is the Lords mercy that we are
not consumed in our sins. Lam. 3.22. still then, the finger is upon mercy.
Zachary (likewise) speaking of that spring of day from heaven, (Christ, the
true Light) that visited us, says, that the tender mercy of the Father sent
him. Luc. 1.78 Here upon the Elect are called Vessels of mercy, Romans 9.23. The
Redeemed of the Lord, the redeemed by mercy. Ephesians. 1.7. and Paul, called to
Christ, called in mercy. 1 Timothy 1.13. our begetting a new is through Gods
abundant mercy, 1 Pet. 1.3. and our life after death, the riches of his mercy
through sesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6.23. and so, all is out of mercy, Reasons.
The reasons, by nature, we are the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. enemies to
God, Romans 5.10. our imaginations only evil, Genesis 6.5. our wisdom (simply)
death, Romans 8.6. and we to every good work reprobate. Tit. 1.16. This is our
natural state: and, in this, what plea can serve but of mercy? also, herein,
what could induce God to do us good, but a mind of mercy? Secondly, in many
things we offend al, Iam, 3, 2. nay in the best that the best do, much may be
found amiss, as coming from them: and is not the pardon of offenses, a work
of mercy and, what but mercy can amend what is amiss? and, for our good; we
may say of it all, as Jacob of all his wealth: God has had mercy on Me,
therefore I have all this. Genesis 33.11. and, if all be of grace, merit is shut
out, and mercy must enter; which is the first part, and all of all our true
welfare. Ps. 32.1.2. and 145.9.

One use of this is to keep God up in all we receive, and have: thas is, in
all them to maintain his glory, that we live, it is his mercy: and his
mercy that the ground does not swallow us, nor the heavens over us, fall down
upon us. We have not a morsel of bread but by his gift, Matthew. 6.11. nor
garment to put on, but what we have from the wardrobe of his sufficiency. That
we are saved it is his mercy, and his tender mercy that we fall not
(presently) into hell. And (surely) whosoever uses any of his good blessings,
and does not thus reckon for the^, is a thief of them; and so is he that
enters otherwise then by this door, into them. Which would be remembered of
all; chiefly of the richer sort of people, who are aptest to forget God at
their full tables, and when their heaps rise. And (therefore) to such I say,
are your barnes full? Gods mercy has filled them. Or have you much? His
blessing upon your basket, has caused that increase, it is his entire gift;
let it not pay tole, by taking any praise thereof to your selves. If he have
let out his vineyard unto you, give him of his own fruits, freely. Give to his
poor, and (willingly) to charitable deeds. If you lay them not out so, or
only upon your own lusts, not his mercy, but his justice has given them, if
you further not his glory by them, you shall answer for them to the uttermost
farthing. But your account for his loue-tokens will be far greater, as they
be far better. If God have given you his Gospel (one of his best gifts) and
you despise the gift, as inferior to the peeble of we^^th, you discredit his
wisdom, and (in one of his best loue-tokens) his best good will: and so give
him not the glory of his own, but for glory, shameful contempt, which
reflecteth upon those, who, both vilify the Jewel, and the casket that keeps
it; that is both the Gospel it self, and the able Minister of it.

Popish arrogance is here in the second place, Use 2.
reproved, which will hold in no tenure, but of merit, if a Papist do a good
work God must be beholden to him for it, if not altogether, yet some way. But
how was David and other Saints ignorant of this; who (though they had been
painful worke-men in the law) yet disclaming, or not setting any price upon
their best deeds, gave up all to God, (the best of all) as not worthy to pay
any debt, or to go in the reckning, when God should take unto him his
judgments? Psalm 51.1. and 123.3. and 143.2. All the strings of their
instrument are tuned to mercy, when they speak to God against their sins, or
for grace. For, David is still harping upon this string: and the best of Saints
give themselves lost in the law, when the question is of their obligation unto
works. Psalm. 130.3 in this case, their appeal is wholly and altogether to
court of chancerie from the common place of deeds. Mercy is all their plea,
and the righteousness of Christ, the robe with which they are covered. By it we
enter (as the wise) with our lamps burning: Matthew. 25.10. without it (as the
foolish in that order of virgins) we may stand long enough, and cry loud
enough, as that; this we have done, and that we have done, and get no
entrance. v. 11.12. For, what is all our righteousness, and the best we can
do, but menstruous matter. Esa. 64.6. and must we say, when we have done the
best we can do, that we are unprofitable; Luc. 17.10. And shall we say that,
(being such) we are such as may well merit the wages of eternal life?

An apology for late comers to Christ. Use 3.
For, Satan will object against such, that the day being so sarre gone, that
short time will be but little time to work in: for, the night comes, when no
man can work. Ioh. 9 4. To him and to this they may answer; that the time,
which is short, is supplied with the mercy of the Lord, that is for ever: and
that they, who were hired about the eleventh hour, received (every man) a
penny. Matthew. 20.9. Indeed, if none should be faued but they who have labored
the whole day, then none could be saved that wrought but the third, or sixth,
or ninth, or last hour of that day but in the parable of the laborers, we
read the contrary. Matthew. 20.8. and here we see that the beginning and end of
all* is set in Gods mercy; if it were otherways, we might well doubt of our
salvation, with a Papisticall fear. This is spoken for their sakes upon whom
God has had mercy, though later, then upon those, whom he has called up
(more early) to work. It is not spoken to encourage the presuming sinner, who
thinks that the last sand of time, in his hour glass, is time enough to
repent, and to turn to God: and therefore puts off, in the course of sin,
till his time be out. For, if that man be saved, God shows a miracle, rather
then work of mercy, in saving him.

The person follows for whom the Woman craved this mercy at Christ's hands.

Upon Me.
Mercy this Woman craved for herself: but for her self with reference to her
daughter, whom an unclean Spirit so vexed. And (here) nature taught her to
take her Daughters affliction for her own cross; but her Faith (a better
teacher) had taught her better: which was that God, striking her Daughter,
struck at her. And indeed (sometimes) God purposing to punish the Parents,
begins with the children, thus he began at the first borne of Pharao, but
made an end, with the end of Pharao himself, whom the waters of the red sea
covered. Doctr.
And so we see, that God does not always (directly) smite a people, but
(sometimes) indirectly, and at a second hand, in their grain, cattle, and the
fruits of the earth Sometimes in the servants and children of the house, he
strikes at the Master and Parents. In Ieremies time, when God meant to plague
the disobedient Jews; he begun the plague in their cattle, which he punished
with lack of food and drouth of water. Ier. 14 4 5 6. David (also) was punished
with the punishment of his people, who died by the pestilence to the number of
threescore and ten thousand. 1 Chr. 21.17. and the Widow of Sareptah God
punished with that (which indeed) was a punishment, the death of her Son. 1
King 17 18. Thus he struck at Pharao, but far off, in much loss of cattle
and corn. Exodus 9.6.21. and then nearer, when he struck at him in the hail,
that slew all in the field, both man and beast: v. 25. and nearer yet, when he
smote a I the first born in his Kingdom with death, and so, as there was not a
house, where there was not one dead, Exodus 12.29.30. but then he struck home,
when he drowned Pharaoh himself, with his chose^ Captains, and all that pursued
Israel, in the red sea Exodus 15 4 5 Ps. 136.15. and thus the plagues of Egypt
ran, as by a train, from the waters to the fruits, from them to the beasts,
from the beasts to men, and from common men to the King himself. Exodus 7. and
9. chapters. In Hosea the Lord warned, or by a fair warning stirred up those
of Israel that had fallen from the house of David to Jeroboam, and from the
true service of God to the service of the Calves, when he smote with death the
beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven. Hos. 4.3. and here he summoneth
this Woman by the Devil in her Daughter. Thus (therefore) God gives warning to
men by harms further off, and before he strike to the heart: and as his
lightnings go before his thunder: Apoc. 4.5. so does his admonition, before a
cutting off. The reasons, By this course, Reasons.
the Lord is more righteous, and man more inexcusable; who (therefore) cannot
say that God stole upon him without warning given, or came privily (as behind
his back) upon him in some sudden destruction, when, by his judgments upon
others, or inflicted otherways, he thus openly, and (as to his face) proclaims
what he will do Secondly, God will use all means to fetch home-a sinner, and
this is one: which is to save with fear, as pulling him out of the fire. Iud.
23. so the stubborn and rebellious Son was by the law, to be stoned to death;
it was that the punishment might be exemplar; and that all Israel might hear
and fear. Deuteronomy. 21.18.21. It may be, men will turn unto the Lord, when they
see the vengeance; that is, seeing what is done unto others Therefore the Lord
(slow to wrath) will not omit any such drawing possibility to repentance.
Joel. 2.13 14.

The use for admonition, Use
teaches Christians to make good use of all Gods strokes, further off, or upon
others, threatening the like, or a heavier hand upon themselves. When God
touches us in a beast, or some like commodity for a warning we must be
sensible of it, as of some prick given us in our arm, or leggo, for, shall he
strike our beast, and we (worse then beasts) never be moved at it: or pass by
it, as by some idle hand, as if (not God) but fortune had stricken it? what
though we may spare him, and that there are mo in the stable; shall God lose
the opportunity that he sets for us? and we sin still, till a worse thing
come unto us, Ioh. 5.14. The poorer sort are much troubled at every such cross
in their cattle orgrounds; but little (I may say for most of them, never a
whit) better by the hand, and, for the richer sort, no such accident shall
humble them. Few of one or other, call any sin the more into question for Gods
hand upon them in such warnings, further off; If the poor man lost a beast,
the loss does not work upon him to repentance: and if a rich man lose one, he
cares no more for it, then if he had lost nothing. This Woman made another use
of Gods hand upon her in her little child: so good Christians should.

The person from whom this Woman beggeth this mercy, follows.

O Lord thou son of David.
THE person of whom this woman asked mercy, is Christ; described here by his
two natures of God, and Man: of God, where he calls him Lord: of man in the
next words, thou son of David: and of David in the natural line, as borne of
Man, and in the regal, as eldest (now) from him in the throne: and here we
have two hands of faith up to heaven; the one of faith in Gods power that he is
able: and the other of like faith in his readiness, that as he is able, so he
will not be unwilling to help her: therefore she calls him both Lord and the
Son of David, as much as if she had said; I know thou art able, being Lord of
all, and I believe that thou art willing, being the promised seed, full of
humanity and tender compassion; therefore, hear me, and have mercy. And
these two concurring in prayer as the two Lions under the throne of Solomon,
Doctr. 1
1 King. 10 19. bear it up with good assurance: which by so good a Precedent,
teaches that Christians must unto prayer bring faith, both in the power, and
good will of the Lord to help them. The Leper coming to Christ was lame of
one of these legs, when he prayed for his clensing; he confessed he was
able, but he could not tell that he would; for he said; Lord if thou will thou
can make me clean, Matthew 8.2. This woman knew he could, and doubted-not but
he would: therefore (in a reference to both) Christ says, believe, and it shall
be done unto you: Mark 11.24. so much was required of the two blind men, for
being asked if they could believe, they answered that they did, Matthew. 9.28.
And so much is implied in the prayer, which (we call the Lords prayer) where
what we have prayed for, we are enjoined to seal up with the Amen of faith,
Matthew. 6.9.13. Hence therefore preservation from perishment, and preferment to
life is promised to none, but that are believers, John 3.16. the reasons.
Reasons.
Without faith in the power and good will of God, when we ask any thing in
prayer, we deny him to be our father, one ready to help us: and our Father
in in heaven, one able so to do, seeing his residence is in heaven, and his
Majesty fills the heaven, 1 King. 8.27. Psalm. 15.3. and denying either, how
can we think to be heard? Secondly, the commandment is, that we pray in
faith, Iam. 1.6. but where is the obedience, when we believe not in Gods
Power, or when we mistrust his will? it is necessary (therefore) when we come
to prayer, that we have faith in both, praying for things, warantably to be
paid for, Dan. 9.19.

First, Use 1
this makes against those heretics, who (with Arrius) deny Christ to be
God: for what assurance can they have in their prayers, or boldness toward
him: also, and against those, who with Cerdon, Marcion, and Manicheus, have
denihim to be man: for how can such, or how could these premise to themselves
any readiness (...) Christ to hear, when they should call? we that believe
both: that is, that he was the Son for ever; and the son of David in time;
that is, Man, in house with us, or Man in our nature, may bear up with great
comfort, so long as our life is not against says, and so long as we mar not
our prayers with our sins, Esa 1.15.

But are we bound in the chain of faith to believe (when we pray) that Christ
is both able and willing to deliver us in our troubles? Use 2
then if our prayers fail of this help when we have sought it, under our
Christian interest in both terms, the fault is our own, because we have tied
our sins upon the pravers that we made; for, Christ would by his goodness,
but we by our bad lives will not, Matthew. 23.37. the giving hand is ready, but
so is not the hand that should receive the gift.

A comfortable inuitation, Use 3
or call to true Christians, to ease themselves upon Christ in all the burdens
they bear for his sake, and a good conscience if they be laden with these; and
desirous of him; these two in him his ability and readiness to help can not but
work strong affections of desire to come unto him: and being come, what
follows but ease and refreshing? Matthew. 11.28. If (then) thou find thy
self fast laid up by the Law, at the suit of sin, Gal. 3.23. or sold under
sin, needing a Redeemer, Romans 7.14. Behold him that was made under the Law,
or cast in the Law for the debt of men, not only able to discharge the whole
sum, but willing to bring thy soul out of prison: and thou have seen him
that has engaged himself for thy liberty, being one of the few, that thirsts
for his salvation more than for all riches, Gal. 4.4: 5. and who is in sin;
as a malefactor in prison, that would gladly be delivered, Romans 7.24. But this
never a whit concerns those, whose sins are not a burden, but an ease unto
them, and not their affliction, but their glory.

Now (further) where this woman calls Christ Lord, she calls him so in regard
of the great power he has equal to his Father. Lord in Scripture is taken,
ciuilly, for a name of reverence: also, possessiuely for an owner: and
essentially for one with Iehoua; in all these respects, Christ may worthily be
called our Lord: but here (chief^ly) he is called Lord, (as I take it) to
signify his absolute dominion in heaven and earth: and so we have what this
woman believed concerning his deity, and great power, as God, which teaches
that Christ is an absolute Lord, Doct. 2.
or Lord of all: the Lord that has the heaven for his inheritance, and the
ends of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8. The Lord Christ that sits
at the right hand of God, till all his enemies be made his foote-stoole to
tread upon, Psalm. 110. 1 Cor. 15.25. the Lord of life, Act. 3 15, and the Lord
of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. also, the King of Kings, Lord of Lords, 1. Tim. 8 15.
and this name is written upon his garment, and upon his thigh, for a lasting
memorial. Apoc. 19.16. the reasons. Christ is one with his Father in title of
power, and effect of doing: and therefore, Almighty as he is, Ioh. 5.19. and
10.30 and doing, as he (who is Almighty,) does. He is our Michael, our strong
God, Apoc. 12.17. and who so strong, but he that is God? Secondly, his power
appears to be above all powers created, for as much, as he made us of
nothing, Hebr. 1.2. and redeemed us, being worse then nothing. Apoc. 5.9. He
that buies a commodity is owner of it, and shall not he have us that bought
us? so he that makes a work, has the praise of it, if it he praise worthy.
And shall not he be praised in us, and for us, that made us? And if so: who
is so worthy as Christ, and what God (among all the Gods) like him? Thirdly, He
is the law giver, and ludge of conscience: Iam 4.12. and what man, what Angel
is so? and who but he, who is Lord of men and Angels?

The use is for admonition For, is Christ, the Lord over all? Use 1.
we must acknowledge, and use him as our Lord. He offered a price, when he
offered himself. 1 Cor. 6.20. and does not this bind us to offer our service,
and selves to him? This will not be, in the general, denied: but then, in the
particular, we must obey his word, Ioh. 15.14. and be are his correction. Hebr.
12.5. we must think, and speak of him re^ erently, and bring gain and glory
to him in the place he has set us. Good Servants will be for their Masters
lawful profit, and not discredit those whom they serve. Christ's servants must
be no other to him. By their receipts in the power of godliness they must make
others better, and so bring him gain that way. Ministers must put a stock of
good people upon his grounds by attending their charges, and Masters of
families must not be gain^rs where Christ is a looser, they must not keep in
house a bad workman for the Lord, because good for themselves; though a
swearer, a scorner, a foul mouthed talker, a profane person like Esau, and,
for practice of religion, a mere Atheist, all must seek his kingdom in their
places, not their own greatness, severed from it. Magistrates must draw for
him, and set the point of authority to the breast of offenders against his
laws. Christians (generally) must lock their doors against all the profane
fellowship of wicked men: against it they must shut the windows of their
senses, and the doors of their hearts, and not shame the calling whereof Christ
is Lord and Maker: we say, Lord, Lord, Matthew. 7.21. we must not therefore carry
the key of our selves at our own girdles, but resign up all to the Lord of
all: we profess we know Christ: and therefore confessing him in word, we
must not in our lives deny him, Tit. 1.16.

Is Christ the absolute Lord, Use 2.
or Lord of all? this is for much comfort to true Christians: all things are
subject to him, who has subdued all things to them: he has trodden upon Satan,
that they might tread upon him, who (else) would ride over their backs, Romans
16.20. He that is their head, is head over all: and what cause to fear any
adversary, fearing him? Queens on earth, (so long as they please) need not
care for the displeasure of any subject: Christians by marriage with Christ,
are his spouse and Queens to him, who has an absolute Sou^raignty in heaven
and earth; and therefore need not to fear what men can do to them: the* be
under Christ) the royal husband of this wife, and so under his frouns in all
they intend to do against his Church which is his spouse and Queen, united to
him in a most near tie. He that chained the devils, and can bind men and
Tyrants to his pleasure, says to them: touch not mine anointed. Psalm. 105.15.
Also, he that can raise the country, and draw the world after him, commanding
in all the earth, says: those mine enemies that will not have me to reign
over them by mine ordinances and servants, bring hither, and slay them before
me. Luc. 19.27. They that smite the apple of his eye in these, shall find they
have stricken him in the eye, Zach. 2.8. who will be avenged of them for both
eyes. Judge. 16.28.

Another use is for instruction, Use 3.
teaching Christians (for as much as Christ is the Lord of all) to suffer him
to dispose of all (...) ways: whatsoever shall befall them here, they must
remember that all is from him: and never forget to bear patiently what their
Lord has done, Psalm. 39.9. whether they win or lose, they must with Job give
thanks, and bless his name, that gives and takes away, Job 1 21. with like
consideration we must strengthen our patience when strange judgments come;
for, first we have deserved worse by our sins; and secondly, they are sent from
him that is Lord of men and angels; and has power, as he sent them, so to
take them away: we may and should fear, when they are toward or upon us,
Psalm. 119.20. but murmr we may not, lest we be found fighters against God. A
second use of instruction is, to teach us to use no creature, (seeing we have
all in Christ's right, and all from him, as Lord of all) without prayer, as by
leave from him, 1 Timothy 4.5. we are here but stewards, Luke 16.2. and such as
have all good parts of mind and body upon a reckoning, if we have learning,
wit, honor, wealth, the Princes favor, or other good thing besiede, they are
our masters goods, which we have in an inventory from him, and therefore to
him we must account for them: one day he will know to what use we have put
them. A third use of instruction is, to teach those that are Lords over others,
to remember that they have a Lord above them: therefore, as fellow servants in
Christ, what they command, must be just, and what they impose, no other than
what the supreme master of both would have to be done, Ephesians. 6.9. They must not
command, nor cause them to break the sabbath, to li^, to say that evil is
good for their pleasure, or gain: for, the Lord above will punish such
commanders, and hold them guiltless that so obey. It is necessary therefore in
such case, for the greatest on earth to look up to a greater in heaven.

In the second place, this woman calls Christ the son of David: the former
name of Lord, implying his deity, and the large power he has in Heaven and
earth, Colos. 1.16, 17. was a light too glorious and beating in a mortal eye,
therefore in these words, (the Son of David, or man as David) she has a
lantern to put it in, Psalm. 113.17. and so Moses face (which was so bright and
shining that the people durst not come nigh) is covered with the veil of
flesh, Exodus 34.35. Christ so high in Maiesti^, descends, taking our nature
that we might not fear to come unto him more than Joseph's brethren to come to
their brother after he had opened himself, saying, he was Joseph, Genesis
45.3.5. By this speech of the woman, calling Christ the son of David; it
would seem that she spoke with persuasion, and not out of fancy, or of
somewhat floting in the head: where it may be rightly conceived, that she had
either read or heard so much out of the word of Scripture; and so held by a
good Charter what she spoke with the voice of her faith in Christ; as much as
if she had said: as ever thou wast borne of a woman, have mercy upon two
pitisull distressed women, the mother, and her afflicted daughter, before she
called him Lord, or Jesus Lord; now sheecalls him the Son of David, and so
has two strings to her bow; by the Son of David in the natural line, she
means the Son or of Marie, and of Man, in the regal, the Son of King David,
next to the crown of Judah; from whence we may draw those two propositions or
axioms; the first, Doct. 3
that Christ the Son of God, was the Son of Man; the second, that he was
man in the best blood of king of the Jews: for the first, it teaches that
Christ was the Son of David; that is, of Marie in the house of David:
therefore Esa speaking of him, by way of prophecy says, to us a child is
borne, to us a Son is given, Esa 9.6. And the Prophet Micah speaking of
Christ, says, that a woman shall travel and bear a Son: and this Son was
Christ, the Son of Mary, Mic, 5.3. Hereupon we read of the generation of
Jesus Christ, Matthew. 1.1. made of the seed of David, according to the flesh,
Romans 1 3. This is that word, which was made flesh, John 1.14. the substantial
word, which was ever with God, and was God: his manner of birth S. Luke has
storied with the circumstances, Luke 2.1 4.6, 7. S. Paul calls this, that
great mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. and it was great indeed, without all
controversy, and beyond all example: for, how wonderful and great, that God
should be manifested in the flesh? that he should be made of a woman, that
made al, Gal. 4.4 that the humble handmaid should become the Mother of her
maker? that the ancient of days should be borne in time? that the feeder of
all things, should suck the breast? and she have a Son, that never knew man?
nay, that he should be swadled in clouts, that swadleth the winds: and who is
equal to God, make himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7. that he should be the
everlasting Father, Esa 9.6. and yet a young infant? contained in the manger,
and borne in a stable, that fills heaven and earth with his glory? Luke 2.7.
and to be short, fly before kings, who is King of kings, and casts contempt
upon Princes? Matthew. 2.14.22. These, and the like particular effects of Christ's
humanity manifest Christ to be Man: the reasons. First, Reasons.
it was necessary that he should be so; for man having offended, the offense
must be punished in man: and so it was requisite that he should be of kin
to us who offended, that in our nature, that offended, he might make the
amends, and satisfaction. Secondly, he must be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, who would have compassion of us sinners, Hebr. 4.15. and who can
be so kindly touched with them, as he that has felt them first? who Heb.
2.18. will sooner pittic a disease in an other, than he who has had the
disease himself, and (himself) has felt the infirmity? our diseases (but as
man) Christ could not have, having them; he must die of them, which, (but as
man) he could not do, Heb. 2.9. Thirdly, the promises and prophecies of the
old Testament must be performed in the new: now, Christ was the woman's seed,
which was promised, Genesis 3.15. and the virgins Son, of whom Esaias prophesied,
Esa 7.14. Fourthly, God herein provided for man's great good: for, what greater
than to have a brother, so highly exalted and borne? Hebr. 2.11. one who is
merciful, Hebr. 2.17. and will not fail to show kindness to his own house
1. Tim. 5.8.

The use is for the singular comfort of all that are in Christ Jesus: for, Use 1.
hereof rises a great a liance between God and them, being hereby brothers to
Christ, who is the natural Son of God, Heb. 2.11. and what may not one kind
brother expect from another? by sin we had lost this acquaintance with God,
Esa 59, 2. by him that was made sin, that is, an offering for sin, 2 Cor.
5.21. this acquaintance is renewed, and we brought again into fanour, or
brought near, who were far off, by the blood of Christ, who is our peace,
Ephesians. 2.13.14. hence Christ is called Shiloh, Genesis 49.10. and the Redeemer, or
kinsman, Job 19.25: Now, Shiloh is the skin that lappeth the insant in the
mothers belly, and what can be nearer? his flesh assumed is the corner stone
of our coupling to God: by means of it, he is that great Immanuell, God with
us, Esa 7.14. being so, and so near by the union of the two natures in Christ,
of God and man, who is not comforted that is in him? for, being in him, we are
members of his flesh, of his body, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. and will
Christ suffer any member of his body to be abused, or any bone to be broken,
and who will not spare his own flesh? If Christ had taken unto him the nature
of the Angels, or of the whirlewinde, or of a Lion, we might well have seared
our destruction: but being clothed with the condition of an advocate, of a
brother, and of a pitiful man, what cause of fear, rather what true matter of
boldness? we run from a Lion, and hide from an Angel, but who will from a
brother? Loud winds do fright us, so does not the quiet calm of a loving
kinsman, and of one joined to us so near in flesh, as Christ and we.

The 2. Use 2.
use concerns us in duty. For, if Christ drew so near to us in our nature,
we must draw as near (as we can) to him in the divine nature. 2 Pet. 1.4. did
he take flesh to come near to us? we must put off flesh to come near to him.
Is he God with us? we must be Men with him. Was he made flesh? we must endeavor
to be made Spirit. As we have a living way by his flesh: Hebr. 10.20 so we must
not pamper flesh, to walk in our own ways: and as he came down from heaven
to us, so we must go up from earth to heaven to come to him. Our conversation
must be in heaven, Philip. 3.20. though we have flesh on earth. But is it so?
and do weso? nay but our pleasures keep us down, our profit keeps us under.
Either covetousness, as an arrow shot from hell, nails us to our money, or the
delights of life, as lime twiggs set by the devil, ensnare us to earthly
things, when we should be heavenly minded; and so, we cannot have our
affections where we should set them: Coloss. 3.2. or, we have married a wife,
and we cannot come. Luc. 14.20. In the Inn of these things, there is no room
for Christ. Luc. 2.7. and what filles the house but such as these? the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of life (all which are in the world)
I Ioh. 2.16. do wholly take us up, souls and bodies; and we are so espoused to
them, we forget we have another husband.

The 3. use is for instruction, Use 3
teaching how much Christ humbled himself; and that therefore we should learn
of him to be meek and lowly in heart. Matthew. 11.29. to be meek and lowly in
heart is the perfection of a Christian, who, the lower he lays his
foundation, the surer will his house stand, and to be so, the way is, to take a
sight of our selves in good and heavenly things. For, then, in us, we shall
find that, which will humble us far below that which (we think) we are,
measured by carnal reason, if we fear, that is, suspect all we do, or the
best we can do, we shall not be high minded: so the Apostle tells us, when he
biddes us, not to be high minded, but to fear. Romans 11.20. Christ emptied
himself for our filling, and humbled himself for our example. Philip. 2.8. We
have nothing to let out but wind: and, if we could see our selves in true
account, we are low enough. But (like purblinde Laodiceans). we can see
nothing but fullness, where is nothing but indigence, and want. Apoc. 3.17.
either we stand upon the clay feet of gentry: and (then) who shall go before
us? or upon terms of self-sufficiencie (like Pharisees) and (then) we have
need of nothing. But so long as we are so minded; we will never be followers
of Christ in the practice of humility: therefore, as Christ was abased for us:
so (if we will be filled with Christ) we must empty our selves of all high
conceit of our selves, that his Spirit may fill us. And, for these fillings
with wind: we must prick the bladder, that they may go out. More distinctly
and plainly; we must purge out selfloue, and self-liking, and be nothing for
his sake, who, for ours, made himself nothing. If we will be proud: let us
(as one says well) be proud against Satan for Christ; but humble to all men,
in Christ. In giving honor, let us go before others: but before none in taking
it. Romans 12.10. Finally (as the Apostle says) let us be of like affection, one
toward another, and not mind high things, and let us condescend to men of
lower estate, and not be wise in our own conceits. v. 16. so shall we walk
in the steps of Christ's humility; who, being so high in glory, laid away his
glory; and (of the Son of God) became the Son of Man, a worm and no man.
Psalm. 22.6.

Further, Christ was not only the Son of David in the natural line, but in the
regal, the next to the crown of Judah, after his Mother, and supposed Father,
Joseph. Doct.
And so we learn that Christ Man, was (of all men) the noblest Man. For, one
way, he was the Son of God: and another way of kingly rank among the Sons
of Men. Next in succession and blood to the Kings of Judah by Father and
Mother, as by Joseph from Abiud, Matthew. 1.13. and by Marie from Rhesa, Luc.
3.27. and by Joseph and Marie from Zorebabel. Matthew. 1.13. The Wisemen ask;
where is he that is borne King of the Jews? Matthew. 2.2. For, so it was
preached to them by the tongue of heaven in a strong star; and it seems that
Hered had heard as much. Matthew. 2.3. Indeed at the time of his birth, the
soueraignety of it was gone, and the Sun of it down, and so Christ was a
titular, not real King. The Scepter was now in a Roman hand: the Emperors
there, were Kings of Jury: and Christ (as was prophesied by Esaias) but a bud
out of a dead stock. Esa. 53.2. Yet had he an euer-during throne, better then
all the kingdoms of the earth. Hebr. 1.6.8. and so, was, every way, (of al men)
the noblest Man; The star, (which the wisemen followed) showed it: Matthew.
2.2. Herod, ( Casars vnder-King) feared it, v. 7. Christ contessed it. Ioh.
18.37. the Jews (questioned by Pilate) could not speak against it, though
saying nothing for it. For, Ioh. 19.15. they said, we have no King but Casar.
Ioh. 19.15. Reasons.
the reason why Christ should be thus, every way noble; may be taken from the
good pleasure of God, and fitnes to him. For, first, God would have it so: and
therefore so; partly to fulfill the prophecy, Zachar. 9.9. partly to keep his
word: For, he had promised as much. Ps. 89.27. and it was fit that the high
borne of God, should be the noble borne Son of Man, therefore Kings and
Judges are commanded to fear God, and to reverence Christ: Ps. 2.10.12. that
is, whole Christ, God and Man, and now, he must needs be great and noble, whom
Kings must reverence and Judges fear.

This is for instruction, Use
teaching that it is no disparagement to be a Christian; seeing that Christ,
after whom they be called, and of whom they are followers (if true Christians)
was in both natures so high, and nobly descended. For, is it any disparagement
to be the Kings follower? or if this be an honor, it cannot but be a
special grace, to be follower of the King of Kings. And, as it is no
disparagement, so it may be for our great encouragement to follow him as
Christians indeed. For, true Christians are Christ's brothers: and so brothers
to a King, and that of Kings; to such Christ (the elder brother) conueighs his
nobility in part, by making them the Sons of God, Ioh. 1: 12. a royal
Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. and a people peculiar to himself. Tit. 2.14. and, so,
it is the fairest Flower of noble blood to be a Christian, and to be able to
draw arms from his holy arm, who rules the Nations with his rod of y^on.
Apoc. 2.27. the best thing in thy scutchen, if thou be a Gentleman, and the
purest gemme in a Kings crown, is to be a true Christian, the child of God by
regeneration. Tit. 1.15. Be we exhorted (therefore) to labor after our true
engrafting into him which is the ensign (if any) of true nobility. One says
(and it is truly said) that noble birth without this new birth in Christ, is
base and vile before God: to be a repentant sinner, inuesteth spiritual man
into a royalty that makes him, both an heir of the earth, and coheire with
Christ in heaven.

That that followed upon this first petition of the Woman which was a sore
repulse, follows out of Matthew. 15.23.

VERSE 23. But he answered her not a word.


THis not replying to the woman's request by any audible voice, was a very sore
and grievous repulse to the ear: it may be, he spoke in good words and
comfortable to her crying heart: yet the temptation was great, saying, he gave
her not one word of answer: her tower was summoned when the devil was sent
into her daughter: and now it would seem to be taken. For her Savior, passing
over with silence as in disdain, what she had so humbly entreated from him
concerning her daughter; how could such an answer, without answer; but cut her
to the heart? the rather seeing that she might have thought that the name, that
went of Christ for kindness and true humility, was no true report, nor fame
of credit, but a fiction: and was not this a great temptation, able to overcome
a very strong faith? for what can more daunt a good Subject, than that his
Sovereign passing by, and petitioned unto, should not vouchsafe to speak unto
him, or once to look toward him? It was (much) this woman's case: and here
where Christ answered nothing at the first, though cried unto: Doct.
we learn that God (often) takes day with his servants, and puts them
off, when they cry unto him: the Prophet David complains that he cried in his
prayers day and night, and had no hearing, yea that he roared in them, and was
put off, Psalm. 22.2. afterward, God so prolonged him, that he thought
himself to have been utterly forgotten of him, Psalm. 42.9. The Church in the
Lamentations fared, as if God had set a thick stone wall between his ears
and her prayers: and therefore says, that he covered himself with a cloud,
that her prayers should not pass through, Lam. 3.44. as if she had said, that
God was resolved not to hear, and Esa, speaking of the iniquities of Judah,
tells her, that these did separate between God and her, Esa 59.2. Job says
that he sought the Lord East and West in his prayers, and could not find him;
his words in effect are: If I go to the East, he is not there: if to the West,
yet I cannot perceive him, Job, 23: 8. backward or forward, or howsoever, he
hides himself that I cannot see him, v. 9. so Habakuk in the person of the
Church under a great oppression, cries out and says; how long shall I cry,
and thou will not hear? even cry out of violence, and thou will not help?
Habuk. 1.2. And thus God (often) puts off to answer his Churches prayers,
and (after many calls) makes as if he heard not, when his children cry in
their troubles; the reasons. Reasons.
God will prove their faith and their patience, 1 Cor. 11.19. which are tried
by his delays, as a Pilots skill in a storm: but what would become of these
and of the patience of the Saints, if they should but ask and have? Psalm.
42.11. Secondly, when we have sped, we have done: therefore, God to keep our
prayers going; does not presently hear, nor till after some good time of
attendance: also, he will have us to know the worth of his goodness; which is
better known, when we come hardly to a thing, and with much ado, than if we
had it at the first asking: thereby Abraham waited for Isaac (the Son of the
promise) till he was very old, and his wife by course of nature, past bearing,
Genesis 18.11. it is an old saying, casilie gotten, soon forgotten. Thirdly, Gods
time is later than ours, and though he be ready at all times, yet so are not
we: but when we are his, blessings will not be long in coming; therefore
(till we be,) we must bite upon the bit of hardness, and wait his leisure.

An admonition to Gods children, Use 1
not to give over, though God put off. Isaac waited long upon his knees for
Jacob, yet rose always from prayer with a stomach to come to it again: God
heard him not in twenty years, yet that long revolution of twenty years did
not weary him: and he wrestled with it, with like success as Jacob his son
after him did, who wrestled with God, and prevailed, Genesis 32.26. for. God will
not put off his servants for ever, though he do for a time, and for their
trial: the vision is but for his appointed time; and it will speak at last, 1
Habuc. 2.3. sometimes the Lord will not answer; it is that we might cry louder
in our prayers; and sometimes he goes from the door; it is, that we might
knock, with Peter, till it be opened, Act. 12.14.16. if he go from us for a
time, it is but as one friend goes from another to return with so much greater
comfort as there was sorrow at parting, and then our joy shall be full.

The second use is for reproof of those, who, Use 2.
because God comes not presently to the door, and at the first knock are
gone: Christ's method is to try his childrens patience before he crown it with
his gifts: but these (ignorant of the good ends of Gods denial) if they be
not heard at once, will not ask twice: and because the bridegroom tarrieth
long, they slumber and sleep, though not having either oil in their lamps, or
faith in their hearts: but when they awake, this their foolishness will
correct them: and when there shall be no opening, Christ will say: Verily I say
unto you, I know you not, Matthew. 25.3.5.12. for our better stay, therefore, in
this matter let us learn, and not forget that God answers not his best
children presently, and that here was a good woman indeed, to whom Christ
(though she cried after him) answered not a word.

This (therefore) may (thirdly) serve for the instruction and comfort of weak
souls in their fits of temptation: Use 3
where though God speak not to their senses, as Christ said nothing to this
woman, yet he will speak in a voice familiar to their faith: and speak by
his hand and seal in their heart, assuring them that all this stay is to do
them good in their later end. I doubt not but he spoke so to this woman,
rounding her in the ear of her soul, and telling her in a still voice; that
though he be absent for the present time, yet he will shortly be with her, and
when the house is ready for him: we are not to be discouraged (then) that God
does not answer us presently, when we sobbe unto him out of our miseries; for
yet a little while, and he that comes, will come, and will not tarry, Heb.
10.37. Our fathers trusted in God, and were not confounded, Psalm. 22.4.5. do
we as much, and we shall speed no worse. In these slipperie ways, patience
must lead our feet, and hope with patience to set them upon good ground;
though Christ be far off in heaven, as Joseph in Egypt, yet Joseph is a
live, and our Redeemer lives, Genesis 45.28. Job 19.25. here (therefore) let us
not either think in our heart, or say with our tongues, (as Jacob in his
fear;) Joseph is not, and Benjamin shall not be, Genesis 42.36. for he that
lives, and whom we think to be dead to us, will shortly send for us by his
comforts, which (as the charets sent by Joseph unto Jacob) will truly revive our
spirits, Genesis 45.27. Mean while let me speak to the heart of Jacob, in a land
of distress. Poor soul (that art so much cast down) remember that thy
Savior has said, that the Kingdom of God suffers violence, Matthew. 11.12.
and that (therefore) thou must force the gate of heaven by patience in all
tribulations, and by earnest prayer in the longest delays of the Almighty,
Luke 13.24. for prayer avails much if it be fervent, Iam. 5.16. if we knock
hard patiently, it shall be opened unto us. They that knock softly, or far
off, as at some out door by any coolings this way, must not think to be heard
as they, who come nearer in the prayer of faith, and constantly call upon ^od
in trouble: for who is so soon heard, (knocking at the furthest, or outmost
door of the house) as he that knocks at the hall-doore, or Parlour door,
where the companies be? so what hope to be let in to God, so long as we draw
no nearer? but either knock far off as strangers, or give over of waiting any
longer? Pray we (therefore) and (though we have no answer) pray we still;
for, he is faithful that has promised, and God cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy
2.13. if he tarry and abstain from words, yet in silence, he speaks to us by
two very effectual Prolocutors: Namly, his general promises in the word, and
his spirit in our hearts. And, this is the victory of the Saints: let us
remember, and not forget it: so, we shall not fall; for, he that fights against
us with one hand, holds us up with another: and (then) how can we but keep up?

The persons follow that entreated for this Woman.

And his disciples came and besought him, saying: Send her away; for, she
cries after us.
THE Woman besought Christ for her Daughter: Christ answered nothing. Now, his
disciples touched (it would seem) with commiseration, and not provoked only
(as some write) by her clamorous importunities, did take upon them to entreat
the Master for her. I beliue, with the text, that her crying tongue much moved
them; yet I cannot think, without a text, that this was all; or that the
disciples had no more in them of good nature and pity, then not to regard
which way it went with a woman, under such a condition of misery, as hers was,
who had the devil at home, in her daughter, and therefore where they say, send
her away; I take the meaning to be as much, as if they had said: Master, you
hear the woman's cry, and you see her importunities; do somewhat for her (we
beseech you) to her comfort, and of her daughter, terribly vexed of Satan. For,
must Gods children have a feeling of others miseries, and shall we think that
they who were so near to Christ, had none? In the text it is said, they had:
for, it says, they besought their Master, or prayed him to be good unto her:
where we have first, their (...), it is said, they besought him: and then the
reason: for she cries after us. The Papists make this text, a text of
warrantie for the invocation of Saints departed; but they reckon without a
text, they make such a reckoning by this text, that affords them not a farthing
in true worth, toward it: for, neither did the woman bid them to speak for
her to Christ: neither did he grant any thing to her at their request: nor
were they dead Saints, but living, that made request for her: and so, we see
no warrant here for Popish prayers to dead Saints. But where the Disciples
(living) make request for this woman, in manner as we have heard, Doctr.
we learn (out of so good an example) that it is the duty of the Saints
living to help one another with their best prayers. The Apostle S. Paul (for
this) requires supplications by all, for all men, 1 Timothy 2.1 S. James in
effect requires as much in this duty of exchange, Iam. 5.14. for, he
requires confession of fault, and (after the fault confessed) prayer to a
spiritual healing v. 16. And in obedience to such a duty, Izaak prayed for
his wife, Genesis 25.21. Moses for the people, Exodus 32.11. and David entreating
for the congregation, prays, that God would set the strings of that
Instrument, that they may be tuned ever to songs of praise for his mercies:
which is meant where he prays for the preparing of their heart unto God, 1
Chr. 29.18. when Peter was kept in prison, instant prayer was made of the
Church for him, Acts 12.5. the conclusion of the eight and twenty Psalm is:
save thy people, and bless thine inheritance, feed them, and set them up for
ever, Psalm. 28.9. also giving of thanks and prayers for the Churches of Saints,
was the Apostle S. Paul's daily exercise, Ephesians. 1.16. and these two presidents
of the Psalm, and of so worthy an Apostle, do conclude all Christians under
a like duty of those mutual offices of praying one for another: Reasons.
the reasons. Here in lies our principal bond to the Saints, Romans 12.13. and
therefore, we that believe a Communion with them, must either thus discharge
it, or die in the Churches debt, Acts 7.60. Secondly, the Saints on earth pray
for us; and if we will hold the balance even between them and us, we must
do as much by the justice of exchange for them, or we greatly wrong them, and
our selves: and here we should remember the old saying, which is a true saying;
that one good turn asks another. Thirdly, we must further (all that we may)
one another salvation, Heb. 3.13. but, how better, or with better speed, than
by prayer, which will make them (with Elisha) in all changes to say: there are
more with us than with them, 2 King. 6.16. Fourthly, as we would have Christ's
Church to grow with people, we must water it with our daily prayers for the
whole body, and for every member. Fifthly, in the natural body, (it is the
Apostles comparison,) one member desires another welfare, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.
and should it be otherways in the mystical of Christ? and if so, what readier
means for the true welfare of the whole Church, and of every part, than to
importune the Lord in our prayers for their prosperity and peace, Psalm. 122.6,
7. Use 1


The first use may be for reproof of prayerlesse Atheism in many among us,
who yet have the name, and sace of Christians, for how can such pray for
others, who pass days and nights without any prayer for themselves? they rise
in the morning without all acknowledgement to God that kept them and at night
they go to their beds, as beasts to their dens, without praying to him that
must keep them: and so deserve to be branded with this mark of an Atheist:
they call not upon God, Psalm. 14.4. But these only are not under reproof,
(who pray so seldom, if at all) but they (also) who though they pray daily
and often to God, yet forget the Churches particular affliction: the Churches
of Germany and of the Palatinate, long in tears, and blood, and now almost
consumed in the fire of war, were for all this never spoken for unto God, by
such when they made prayer and supplication unto him: and how many (now) do
earnessly call upon God for health to Cambridge, (One of the two famous
Schools of the Prophets in this Kingdom) so long shut up, and made desolate
by a wasting Pestilence? how many (I say) are they that have prayed for the
opening again of that fountain, so shut up, and for the seeding of it with
Scholars? These coals, sent from between the feet of the Almighty, burn to
a flame in other parts of this land, yet how few shed one tear to quench them?
And (as one says) though God discharge not his great Cannon upon London (as in
the year 1625, which has been too much forgotten) yet his small shot plays
upon it by 60. under or above, in the week buried of the destroying
Pestilence, and yet how many, either there or abroad mend their prayers, (I say
not their lives) for it? Further they are here reproved who in their envious
prayers speak not only for themselves to God: or, if they go a little
further, it is not far from the doors of their own house, praying only for
Christians of their own blood or kin. These are churles in religion, such as
Nabal in the world, who said; Shall I take my bread, and the flesh which I have
killed for my shearers, and give it to men, whom I know not whence they be, 1 Samuel 25.11. Thus Nabal, and so those spiritual Nabals say: these are strangers
neither of our house nor flesh; and what be they to us, that we should so
much, and earnestly seek their wealth, by praying for them? And thus, our
fathers daughter (the Church) is a stranger and of no kin to such bastard
Israelites. Lastly, they are reproved who brew mischief, that their enemies
may drink it: and so plot evils against those, against whose evils they
should pray, and pay good for evil, Matthew. 5.44. Romans 12.21. But they are
far from this rule of charity, who curse their brethren in their persons, or
estate: some wish them a heavy death, and that being down, they may never rise
again: and for their cattle, their prayer is, they may die of the rot, or go
away as an untimely fruit: and for the substance of their house, that it may
melt away, as Snow before the Sun: but some, when they should pray for the
Saints, Ephesians. 6.18. bitterly curse them; only for this, because they are
Saints: so profane husbands deal with their religious Wives, and wicked
Parents their godly children; and carnal Ministers with the best in their
charges.

But must we pray one for another? it is for instruction, Use 2.
teaching us, that though they be our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers,
that vex us; yet we must pray for them that God would turn their hearts,
though they wrong us, we must not them, though it lay in our hand to do it,
rather, we must pity them, and pray God to forgive them, as Christ and his
Martyr Stephen did. Christ did it, when they were nailing his hands and his
feet. Luc. 23, 33, 34. and Stephen did it, when the stones were clattering
about his ears. Act. 7.59.60. and we must do it, not only in cold blood, but
even when the wrongs are fresh, and newly done us. I speak this, because some
will be persuaded, while the injury is of some standing, to take up: But not
so, while they feel the nails with Christ, or with Stephen, the weight of the
stones that fly about them. For lust of revenge drives them, as with wind and
tide to another coast then that of the haven of peace. But against this lust we
must fight by the spirit of love, which with the cloak of charity (as far as
it can) will cover all defects. Pro. 10.12. Say then that men have (much)
offended us, we must (much) forgive them; and, (for a sign of love) pray God
to forgive them: further yet, we infer from this doctrine, that if it be
against the rule of charity not to pray for our enemies; it is certainly
against the rule of it, and of nature not to pray for our friends: and how
greatly against all rules of charity and nature, when husbands, wives,
parents, children, of one blood and of one bed; when they that dwell in the
same town, in the same street and in the same house shall refuse, or be
negligent to do this duty to those so near unto them? for, if these shall not
pray one for another, who should? They have denied the faith who provide not
for their own in temporal things. 1 Timothy 5.8. and do they keep the faith, that
in spiritual so fail them?

The reason of the disciples entreating for this woman, follows.

For she cries after us.
THIS reason, which the disciples gave for their entreating of the Master on
the Woman's behalf, shows, that Christ's silence did not breed in her (as in
many it would) a sullen and dogged pettishnes; which rather (as a little water
cast upon a Smiths forge) did make the flame of her faith to ascend up higher:
but caused her, as (before) to speak in her faith to Christ, so now to cry
unto him in it. Christ, in that silence, had put upon him the person of the
deaf Judge: therefore she gets him by her importunity, to do her justice
against her adversary, the devil in her daughter. Luc. 18.3.4. Doct.
In which example, we are taught to importune the Lord in our prayers, and to
keep a good edge upon them, whatsoever our repulses be. Jacob kept his hold,
in seeking a blessing, till he prevailed, though with a foil. Genesis 32.26.31.
the shield of Faith, in his hand, he turned every way as the Angel offered at
him. So Moses prayers kept edge, and his hands, held up in them, were steady,
till the going down of the Sun: till the day failed him and Amalek was
destroyed, he gave not over praying. Exodus 17.12. Both of them kept to prayer,
till their prayers had done worthily for them. So the Prophet David was early
and late at his prayers, waiting for Gods promise. He rose with the early
morning to pray unto God; and, his eyes prevented the night watches. Ps.
119.148. Morning, evening, and at noon he prayed, and cried out in his prayer,
making a grievous noise in it. Psalm. 55.17. Daniel upon his knees, prayed three
times a day, when it was death so to do. Dan. 6.10. And Annah continued praying
before the Lord in his tabernacle. 1 Samuel 1.12. Also, the Apostles precept is;
pray continually: that is upon all occasions, and without wearines,
importunately. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Christ spent whole nights in prayer. Luc. 6:12.
and 21.37. and how frequent therein, the night before his passion? Matthew 26.44
these examples, and the best in Christ, besides many precepts for importunity
in asking, show that our prayers should never turn edge, till they speed in
the thing they go about, upon good warrant of asking. Reasons.
The reasons, it is the only way of good success in praying, for, if
importunity can overcome an unrighteous Judge. Luc. 18.6.7. How much more, the
righteous God? Secondly, we know not at what hour the Bridegrom will come,
Matthew. 25.5. Therefore, we must be instant (at all hours) with the oil of
faith in our prayers. v. 10. Thirdly, to faint in prayer, is the argument of an
evil heart, Hebr. 3.12. and to give over, a note of small strength. Pro.
24.10. For, this is a distrust of God, and so a departing from him.

The use is for instruction, Use
teaching that importunity in our prayers is a Jewel, worthy to be worn in
the heart and lips of all true Christians. It may anger men: but it ever
pleases God when it is done in sincerity, without guise: the contrary has
in it a strong spice of distrust in God; and gives him most just cause to
proceed against such as against those, who hold him false in what he
promises, and therefore will not trust him without a pawn. But this is our
inbred sickness, and every natural man has it. Every one (therefore) must
labor to purge for it betimes, and to spend that bad humor, by spending good
hours with waiting for the promise, that keeps our prayers on foot, till he
come unto us, to whom we pour out our souls for a hearing. To this our
Savior has led way in the parable of that friend in bed, who (though in bed)
is raised up by another friends importunity. Luc. 11.8. it was to have some
loaves upon loan, v. 5. which (through the borowers said importunity) rising,
(though at midnight) he gave him. So, we that desire bread of a better
substance; if we shall pray always and not be weary, Luc. 18.1. that is,
continue asking, and not give over; we shall have it. But some are quickly
nipt; every little repulse goes to their heart: where yet Christ prayed with
the blood down his face. Luc. 22.44. and they that be his, will so pray; and
(as he) not be daunted for any crosse-blowes, till the hour come, wherein
their father will hear them.

So Much for the disciples request, the Masters sharp reply follows.

VERSE 24. But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of
the house of Israel.


CHRIST (before) answered nothing: now, he answers in words (seemingly) worse
then nothing. For, now he refuses her as not of his charge, or not within his
commission; but a stranger in the wild of the Heathen, to whom he was not
sent, and this must needs be a sorer venny then the former, offered at the face
of the Faith of a sad and distressed Cananite. For, what? Christ, (the Savior
of the world) to make no better an answer to his poor Petitioner, then that it
was not in his commission to do any thing for her, how could it but cut to the
heart? and yet his answer was: I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. As if he had said: the strayes of Israel I am to bring home,
and not the strayes of the Gentiles. And (here) the words of Christ seem to
fight both against her says and hope in a most sharp encounter: for, here her
Savior is in show against her. If an Angel from heaven had told her so, she
might have found a word of answer in the word of God: But when her Savior
shall tell her as much with his own mouth; what shall she say? what might she
think? Object. But was not Christ sent a light to be renealed to the Gentiles.
Esa. 49.6. Luc. 2.42. And was not his salnation prepared before the face of all
people? v. 31. How was it (then) shut up in Israel? Ans. It is true that Christ
was sent to the Gentiles: but not then, and when he spoke so to the Woman: nor
till the partition wall was broken down between lew and Gentile: nor till
both became one in the salvation of God. But to the words themselves, by the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, Christ means the 12. tribes of Jacob, to
whom this word of salvation was sent. Act. 13.26. But, when they put it from
them, it came to the Gentiles. v. 46.47. And where Christ says he was not sent
but to those of the houses of Israel: his meaning is, that the day of the
Gentiles was not come, which (yet) was coming; and that yet the light was in the
Horizon of Israel. And where he says he was sent, (possessedly) to the Jews
and (impliedly) to the Gentiles; he says in effect, that he is the saving
shepherd of both by his Fathers ordinance. This is the meaning of the sentence
in whole (not to break it in any more pieces,) and it shows to whom Christ
was sent by his first commission, and to whom he was not sent yet; Doctr.
the Doctrine of the whole is this; Christ is shepherd to his lost ones in the
whole Israel of his Church on earth: this was typified in David, Ezeck. 34.23:
and is verified in Christ; who (therefore) is called the good shepherd, that
knows his, and is known of his, John 10.14. for this, he is in name, the
shepherd of Israel, Psalm. 80.1. and in true effects, one that leads Joseph
like a flock, Psalm. ibid. that is, the Savior of his people, Matthew. 1.21. and
that seeks out, and brings home the strayes in the wilderness, Luke
15.4.5. John 10, 11.16. Further (therefore) his name is, the great shepherd of
the sheep, Heb. 13.20. the shepherd and Bishop of souls, 1. Pet. 2.25. the
chief Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5.4. and the Pastor which is One, Eccles. 12.11. the
reasons: Reason^.
the first reason shall be from his effects; for he is the Advocate that
speaks for them, 1. Tim. 2.5. and the hostage that has laid down his life,
to save them, Ioh. 10.15. also he has the words of eternal life, John 6.68.
and (therefore) as there is no going from him, so there is no coming to God
without him, John 14.6. further, he does all things that belong to a good
Pastor, for he brings them to their pasture, and leads them to waters of
quietness, Psalm. 23.2. he coats them in his Church, and feeds them with
judgment, Ezeck. 34.16. being lost, he seeks them, and being found, looks
to all their ways, v. 24, 25, 26, 27. he keeps all their bones, Psalm. 34.20.
and not one of them is lacking, Ier. 23.4. John 17.12. Secondly, it was the
decree of the Father, that Christ should be set for the fall and rising again
of many in Israel, as Simeon in his (...) Luke 2.34. which decree is no idle
purpose, but a deed of sucrtie: a conclusion in heaven, and ordinance under the
seal of eternity. Now to be sent as Christ was, for a lost people (such as we
were) what is it but to be the saving shepherd of them by an everlasting
decree? Thirdly, our error was in the heart, without all knowledge of our
ways, Psalm. 95.10. and what created thing can heal the heart, or lead the
ways of it, but the Lord of spirits and hearts; even he that made us these
souls (the Lord Christ) who only is the hand, that can and does deliver from
the hand of hell: thither we erred in the first man: and from thence we are
brought back by him, and only by him that is God and man.

The use is for instruction: Use 1.
for is Christ the saving Shepherd of his people and sheep? then they must be
his people and sheep that will be sau^d; that is, they must ^eare his voice,
and follow him, John 10.27. or hear and obey, for this is true following: they
must receive his mark and print upon their hearts, Cant. 8.6. and open to him,
John 10.3.5. for we cannot look for salvation, carrying Christ in our hearing
only, much less in no ^earing; we must lodge him in the practice of what we
hear, if we will see his salvation. Swine (therefore) that are always
rooting and covetous, must be made sheep, and their faces must be to heaven,
whose s^outs are ever in the ground, if they will be gathered from their
errors in death, to the salvation of God: and so must they who being washed in
the Sacrament, return to the mire of sin, as Swine: and they, who when the
pearl of the Gospel is offered them, tread it (profanely) under their feet,
run grunting from Church, and rail against those that teach them, renting
them all to pieces, Matthew. 7.6. for, (else) they are not sheep, whom Christ
will bring with him, but fit Innes for the Devils to guest in, Matthew. 8.32.

Another use for instruction is this: Use 2.
if Christ be the saving shep heard of his lost sheep, then we are but lost
without him: when the Disciples were upon the sea in a great tempest, the ship
tossed with winds, and (almost) covered with water, they cried saying; Master
sane, we perish, Matthew. 8.25. This is our case, and in this case as men ready
to perish upon the sea of this world; and confessing so much except Christ be
in ship with us, to save us, we must ^^ie unto him, praying him to be near in
his salvation, that we perish not; so did the Disciples in a storm upon them;
and so should we in all storms of trouble: that we may do so, we must feel
our loss without Christ, and fear our destruction, not having him: for,
Christ came to save that which was lost, Matthew. 18.11. therefore not lost in
our own sense, not saved by him: and what use of physic in a sound body?
Mat. 9.12. Christ preaches liberty to prisoners, Luke 4.18. if therefore we
be not prisoners in the chain of our sins, nor sensible of so much, what
need any liberty? what need any healing of a broken heart, where none are
brokenhearted? before a wound be made, what need of oil or opening, Luke
10.34. the broken and contrite in spirit are for Gods cure, Psalm. 51.17. when
we are at the worst, and (unfeignedly) desire better, we are fit for Christ,
also being burdened and heavy laden with sin, we are in case to come unto
him, who has promised to ease us, Matthew. 11.28. Let us remember this, when our
sins are a burden too heavy for us to bear: for the sins that truly
grieve us, shall never hurt us: and when our whole work is cast down, then is
Gods time to build us, Psalm. 51.10.

A comfort to poor wandering sheep: Use 3.
for being poor and lost, they have a shepherd that will seek them: which
made the Prophet, who had stayed like a lost sheep to say: seek thy servant,
Psalm. 119.176. Men will not be troubled for their way, that have a good guide;
and what need we who have such a Leader? though the wolf and Bear with the
roaring Lions of the world waylay us, Christ will conduct us in the way, where
no beast can come that is hurtful, and seeks our destruction, Esaias 11.9.16.
If we will go a long with him, we shall go safely by the way, and (where
others fall, or are snared) our foot shall not stumble, nor be taken, Pro. 3.23.

The Woman's beating back of the former sharp reply follows.

VERSE 25. Yet came she, and worshipped him saying; Lord help me.


CHrist has twice (now) resused this woman in her petition for her daughter
and her self, yet will she not be put by: his compassions might seem to be
shut up against her, but she has the key of them in the faith which (with
Abraham) against hope, believes in hope. Romans 4.18. and though his last answer
had a very hard shell; yet ((...) to lose so sweet a kernel for the labor,)
she s^ts (...) in great humility, craving the help of Christ for the opening
of that my sterie, which (as too hard a shell for a beginner in the Gospel, or
child whose teeth are not all, or but newly come) she was not able to pierce
into. And therefore, where she (...) with worshipping, Lord help me, it is in
effect, as she had said; I will not reason with my Lord in point of argument,
nor take upon me the skill to untie so hard a knot as his blessed hand has
knit; therefore, with falling down low at his feet in worshipping; I beseech
my Lord to help me: a short prayer, and very passionate; for her soul was
troubled, and she could not say much; yet would she not give over the hold
that her faith kept, nor believe any thing against her own salvation: For,
Christ had said in the letter of the word, that he was sent (to ^eet by
special commission) to the houses of Israel, not to a Cananite: Doc^^, 1
from which example or miracle of rare faith, we learn, that Christians must
admit of nothing, (in the sharp exercise of their faith) to the contrary of
their salvation: though Satan (...) objector, or corrupt fear, taking part
with him, yet (against ^^th) they must hold fast their salvation: yea, though
the letter of Scripture should say: they cannot be (...), yet they must not
receive it into (...) but examine that Scripture by other Scriptures th^^ sa^^
or may say otherways* and here they must hold the general promise against all
bars: the clear phrase must be heard before that, which is in a cloud: to
be short, they must break off all disputes with Satan, and their own v^
quiet hearts, and say: why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou ^o
unquiet (...) me? yet hope in God, Psalm. 42.11. and 43.5. after they must turn
in to God: (...) bleeding heart, and (...) weeping ey^s and say with Hezechiah
in his lamentable song, O Lord I am opressed, undertake for me or ease me,
Esaias 38.14. At any hand, (having faith in God) they may not for any thing
distrust his sa^uation. Abraham would not give his salvation for last, though
he was to offer up that earnest of it that God had pledged to him in Isaac,
the feed of promise, Genesis 22.3. Romans 4, 18. The Apostle S. Paul was persuaded,
(and this must be our resolution) that neither death nor life, nor Angels (the
evil you must think, for the good will not) can or shall separate us, (^s it
could not him) from the love of God, which is in Christ ^esu our Lord, Rom
8.38.39, the same ^postle would not give away his salvation, because so great a
sinner; but takes faster hold, because Christ came to save sinners, of which
^ee was chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. so, the father of the child that had a d^mbe
spirit, though of little faith when he came to Christ, (for he said, If thou
can do any thing, ^elpe us,) yet he would not lose (even) that little says
which he had; but crying with tears, said: Lord I believe, help my
vnbeloofe, Mark 9.22.24. Job would believe even beyond death; for, though the
Lord would kill him, he would trust in him, Job 13.15. Job knew by his says,
that he that takes away life, is able to make to live; he knew the cup of
despair to be the cup of death, and did fear it as much as man would to
drink poison. And thus we see, that we must maintain our salvation against
all objections of Satan, the litterall Scripture, or our own misjudgements:
for, so did this woman, (a woman of excellent faith,) who had many sore
skirmishes, which she endured: being scarce warm in the Gospel, a very cold
blast began in her face, and welcomed her to Christ: her Physicion (seemingly)
gave her over: the courteous Savior answered nothing, and when he spoke it was
no better than if he had said nothing: the Disciples entreated for^^er, but to
no purpose; and Christ said (speaking to the ear) tha^ (...) might do nothing
for (...)) et this woman would have no nay: for reposing on Christ in the
general promise, she doupted not but he would make good what he had spoken,
though she knew not how: and she had reason for it: for God will not go from his
word; he will never deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. the reasons why Christians must
believe nothing in bar to their salvation, are; For first, Reasons.
it is an injury to God who has decreed it, whose promises are all yea, and
(in him) Amen. 2 Cor. 1.20. Secondly, it is a wrong done to the sufficiency of
Christ's blood, that was the price in their redemption, 1 Pet. 1.19. And
thirdly, it teareth the seal which the spirit has set unto their salvation:
for after they believe, they are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians.
1.13, a second reason: they that cast away their hope for salvation, and cast
not anchor there, do wilfully damn themselves; having neither the life of
repentance in them, nor the new life of one borne to God. Christians must not
do so, and true Christians will not. Thirdly, they must believe the word that
says; Whosoever believes, that is, with repentance, and in a holy life, shall
not perish, John 3.16. Now, believing so, and being such, how can they believe
against their salvation, and not discredit the word that says otherways?

A reproof of their too great fear, Use 1.
who having lined orderly in the Gospel, and having been sorry with a godly
sorrow where they failed, or did otherways; do (for all this) in their fear
join with Satan to put out their name, where God has written it, who has
written it in the book of life, to whom I say, b^ the word of the Lord, that
they should rather labor their own comfort, and rejoice that their name is
there, Luke 10.20. Phil. 4.4. Object. but they will say, how shall we be
assured that our names are written in heaven? if we knew it, we should be
glad indeed: Answ. I answer, do ye love the brethren, that is, the godly? and
do ye know that ye love them? this is a token (and well fare a good token)
that ye have passed from death unto life, 1 John 3.14. do ye hate sin, and
love righteousness? though ye do the evil ye would not, and not the good
ye would, (it was a principal Apostles case, Romans 7.19.) the seed of God is
in you, and ye grow into heaven, 1 John 3.9. Do ye s^^ue to the p^rit^cation
of heart, and (...)? your hope is authentical; for, as he that has this
hope, must purify himself, as God is pure, 1 John 3.3. so he that does so,
may well hope (with a seeing hope) to b^e s^ued? D^e y^e ascend up by stairs
(in your s^lues) to the election of God? and can ye find the steps of it in
your effectual calling in the Gospel, in your holy conversation in it; also
in your spiritual Sonneship, which is your adoption in Christ? can ye truly
say that ye are called, that ye are sanctified, that ye are Sons, and so
justified? ye are Gods elect ones, and shall (most surely) be glorified? Romans
8.30, ye know the commandments: but do ye work at them daily in your
obedience by killing sin, and quickening grace: if ye do these things ye
shall soiourne with God in his temple on earth, and dwell with him in his
glorious Temple in heaven, Psals 15.1. and further, do ye make your calling
and election sure 2. Pet. 1.10. it is sure in God, but do ye make it sure to
your selves by infallible signs, and true effects of grace? if ye can do so,
your salvation is sure enough, though neither signs nor effects be free from
weakness; for what has perfection here but sin? finally, do ye bele^ue
the general promise in the word with true (though imperfect) application? he
that will be saved must believe in the Son of God to his salvation, John
3.16. and he that so believes, knows himself to be under the general
promise, and one in the general pardon comprehended: and therefore d^res to
apply it as particularly, as if he saw his own name written in it: for, so
every Pris^ner at the bar (when any general pardon is out) will bring it
home to himself in his own particular case. Now, what common Prisoners at
man's bar do: shall not believing, and truly humbled Prisoners in sin, do
before the bar of Ichouah? or will every malefactor (condemned in bar of
judgment) plead the general pardon for himself, and shall a justified, that
is pardoned sinner do less; and not make the general promise to belecuers,
particular to himself? this is too much fear, and here reproved. Men will be
captious with offense, in other cases: and may not Christians without offense,
in this case, take Jacobs hold, and say to God; I will not let thee go, except
thou bless me, Genesis 32.20. Benhadads servants could take diligent heed to the
words of the king of (...); and when he let a word fall to their Ma^^e^s
a^uantage, they were captious enough: he called Benhadad his brother, 1 King.
20, 32. and they straight had it by the end, and said: thy brother Benhadad, v.
33. Christians believing rightly in God for salvation, should do likewise:
they should holily catch for themselves, as Benhadads servants for their
Master, every advantage in the word, that may make for their better stay and
rest upon Gods salvation, In the word, Christ is styled our brother, Heb. 2.11.
we should here apply (and we may without presumption) and say: our brother
Christ, or Christ my brother; for Christ is brother to believers: and therefore
to me a believer. Indeed in the sharp brunt of the spiritual cross, it is
hard: rather impossible to the flesh of a much dejected Christian to use this
boldness toward God: and some (wh^ (...) voices in their f^are, have ^^g^ed
great distempers within,) have reasoned rather against (than with any) hope and
said: that Christ (indeed) came into the world to ^aue sinners; but not such
sinners as they are, singling out themselves: and as Isaac said: here is fire
and wood, but where is the Lamb for sacrifice? Genesis 22.7 so these, in their
haste have said: here is hell (sure enough) and wood enough to it in the
infinite trespasses of our life; but where is the sacrifice for sin: but to
such I say, though they see not the Lamb, appointed for sacrifice (as Isaac
saw nothing for sacrifice, when his father was about to sacrifice him) and
though their eyes misted (for the present) with blind distrust, they cannot see
so far, yet when the storm shall begin to take up, they shall see clearly
with Abraham, that Isaac (who in and Sox^ may be offered up) must live; and
that Christ (the Lamb slain for them,) is the sacrifice that will save them
from the hand of death: for, to those that are in him (and all right believers
are) there is no condemnation, Romans 8.1. To conclude, whatsoever thy
temptations are, or may be; trust still in God, and say to thy soul (as the
Prophet to his) wait upon him, Psalm. 43.5.

A comfort to true Christians greatly humbled by their sins. Use 2.
For, if they must believe nothing to the contrary of their salvation; what is
it that can discourage them, seeking Christ in true repentance? for, now their
head is kept above water, or, being ready to sink, there is a hand out to
receive them. Matthew. 14.30.31. And here, it is as true, as worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. 1 Timothy
1.15. then, though we be sinners, (so we be penitent, and heartily sorry that
we have sinned;) either Christ's coming into the world, was to no purpose, or
it was to save such, and then, why should there be any staggering? though our
sins be great: God is greater that has forgiven us, all our sins. We can
not have mo sins, (or more heinous) then Manasseh had: yet, when he greatly
humbled himself before the Lord, the Lord was entreated of him. 2. Chr.
33.12.13. This Woman had but the general promises, contained in the word of the
old Testament, and yet believed. We have more: for, the anchor of our Faith has
two unchangeable rests to bear upon, as the promise of God, and his oath, Heb
6.17.18. and shall we be faithles? or, shall we belecue any thing against
that which is so surely ratified, and by two such witnesses in heaven? Can God
be false of his word, or forsworn? he has said, whosoever believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved. Marc. 16.16. Thou (therefore) that do believe, and
have been Baptized, must be saved, or God must crack his word. But (as was
said,) he cannot deny himself, his word and deed are one: and, for any to
believe any thing against his salvation, is to make question whether God be
Almighty and true, and whether his word shall stand, or ours. But, heaven and
earth may pass, the word of God shall not pass. Matthew. 24.35. In this case
therefore, what shall let, that Gods promise should not take the effect in
justified man's salvation, through faith? Romans 4.14.16 Quest. But was it not
great presumption in this Woman to believe against Christ's express word? Answ.
She believed not against it in the true sense, but in the letter, which seemed,
but was not against her. She denied not his words, only she demurred upon
them, as Abraham believed Gods word of promise concerning Isaac, though that
same word commanded Abraham to offer and kill him. Hebr. 11.17.19.

More distinctly, and particularly, we may consider in this Woman's humble
request two things: as, the person to whom she makes it, and the thing for
what. The Person is Christ the Lord: but why not to his disciples? and why not
to him by them? the reason was: her faith, being a true faith, set her a better
and a nearer way: and that was directly to Christ, and not about to, or by the
creature. The Lords prayer (the text and mother of all true prayer) directs to
none but to our Father in heaven. Matthew. 6.9. Doct: 2
In the old Testament the call is unto God the text says, and that in the word
of Ichouah; call upon me. Psalm. 50.15. In the new Testament, we have the same
directing precept for coming to God in our prayers, no other spoken of: for
Christ says to all in necessity; come unto me. Mat. 11.28. that is, to him,
who is our God, and deliverer in troubles; and who can (and only can) ease us
of them. Therefore, the lost Son (in that parable by Saint Luke,) came to his
Father, not to his fathers Hindes. Luc. 15.18.20. In all the Psalms of David
(which are Psalms of prayer) we find never a Lady Psalter: they are (all)
directed as incense to God. Psa. 141.1.2. To whom did Moses and Aaron, among
Gods Priests pray, and Samuel among his Prophets? it is said; these called upon
the Lord, and he heard them: others could not hear them. Psalm. 99.6. Reasons.
The reasons. Prayer to God, is a part of Gods honor, which glory he^ will not
give to another: Esa. 42.8. It is his service and worship, and we must only
serve and worship him. Matthew. 4.10. Secondly it is a vain thing in our
troubles, to call upon those that cannot help us, that cannot hear us. Now,
none can, in that ease, help us but God, nor hear us but he; the Angels know
not our thoughts, and the Saints are far from hearing us: Esa. 63.16.
Thirdly, the Object of faith must be the subject of prayer: but in God only we
believe; and therefore to God only must we pray. Romans 10.14. Fourthly, and
besides, it is a folly to call upon any name but the LORDS in prayer. For, what
need two labors, when one will do? and who will go about, when he may
directly go forward? going to Saints, or Angels, we go about: but go
directly forward, when we go to God: again, going to God, we save the labor
of going to any other: and shall we spend labor against Scripture and
Religion, where we may save it to Gods honor, and cannot levy it but to his
reproach,? for, (then) we call into question his power, or truth?

A reproof of those who (much unlike this woman) do not in the day of their
trouble, Use 1
call upon God that binds them, but upon those, (or those first and rather)
that are standers by, as the Saints that can neither hear nor help them:
there is but one Mediator, or Master of request between God and us, the Man
lesus Christ: 1 Timothy 2 5. and Popish aduocat^s are put out of office by one
that is able p^rfectly to faue all those that come to God by him, Heb, 7.25.
Hereupon the primitive Saints concluded their prayers, neither by Peter nor
Paul, neither by the virgin Marie or other Saint, but by Jesus Christ. Papists
tell us that i^ is presumption to come first to God: but is it presumption to
do as we are commanded of God himself (as we heard) Ephesians. 3.12 Heb. 4.16.
and of Jesus Christ? Was David in all his poenitentiall prayers, in which he
came to none but God, presumptuous? Ps. 6. and 32. and 51. was the contrite
Publican, Luke 18.13. the confessing prodigal, Luc. 15.25. and the humble
Centurion, Matthew 8.5.6. presumptuous? and did a whole cloud of holic persons,
men and women enter presumptuously, who entered so? rather they had entered
presumptuously, if they had taken another way. If the King should say, let no
man dare to present any request to me, but in the hand of the Prince: were it
not presumption to offer our requests in any other hand? God has said, This is
my beloved Son, (speaking of Christ) by him pray unto me, John 16.24. and can
they be innocent, and not offend presumptuously, that do otherways? the
presumption (then) is in Popish prayers, made in the name of Saints, not in
ours that acknowledge no man but Christ in all we ask. But they say (who
commit this sacrilege in their Saints prayers) that as men come not to earthly
Princes but by means and friends about them: so neither should we to God
without mediators: to which it is answered by the whole College of our
Divines, the reason is much unlike and that there is a great disparison
between our coming to God, and to earthly Princes; for earthly Princes have
need of a Remembrancer: so has not God, before, and unto whom all things are
present, Psalm. 111.5. earthly Princes may be put in fear; but God fears no
man, Prou. 21.30. earthly princes cannot hear all themselves, either because
they will not, or because the affairs of the throne will not suffer them: but
Gods ears are open to all that call upon him, though all speak together and
at one instant, Psalm. 34.15. and 139.7, 8, 9. earthly Princes sit under stare,
and men may be too base to come unto them; but here poor Lazarus may come as
soon, and as welcome, as the greatest he in Christendom, Luke 16.22. and
there is no respect of persons with God, Job 34.19. and (to be short) earthly
Princes (if they were too open) might fall under the hand of some villain: but
what hand can reach him that dwells so high in heaven? and so we see that it
is not with God as with Princes: but so much is written in books against this
sacrifice of Saints prayers, that I need not to be upon it any longer. But
some (not Papists) in their affliction, go not the kings way, but another
backe-way to witches, and witches children for help, as did Saul and Ahazi ab,
1 Samuel 28.7, 8. 2 King. 1.2: This woman came directly and only to Christ for
her daughter; and therefore that which commends her, reproves these: but
this was spoken of before.

A comfort to the godly in all their troubles: Use 2.
for they have one (such an one as this woman sought and found) to fly unto.
Now if the King be our friend, what need we to fear, because an ordinary man
is against us? if the Judge favor thee, what can the simple countrie-man do
against thee? God (above all) being with us, what need we to care how many, and
how great they be, that are against us? Romans 8.31. if men fail us, our
comfort is, we may go to him that will never fail, Heb. 13.5. this is the
beaten way of the Saints in trouble: they that have held it, never repented:
and you may write, probatum est, (as Physicions upon proved medicines) that
this course or way to God, in misery, is your sure and only way to prosperity
and peace: this way ou^ fathers walked in: for they called upon God in their
distress, and he delivered them: and being found in this way, we cannot be
lost in any trouble.

The woman's request was short, but pithie, full of power, and from a troubled
spirit; and because from it, it was better welcome to him that despises not;
rather greatly respects a broken heart, Psalm. 51.17. Esa 61.1. and 66.2.
Doct. 3
From whence we may gather that acceptable prayer stands not in the power of
words, but of spirit: for, where there is a flood in the heart to bring it to
God, no matter though there be an ebb of words and phrase in the tongue.
Christ's prayer in the garden was short, but of great power, Matthew 26.39.42 44.
also the Publicans prayer; God be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13. was
more in spirit than in words. And what expressions were there ^ 14.15. so far
at that time, from all force of words, that a word was not heard to come from
him, which is not spoken to condemn long prayer, neither zeal in prayer that
makes it to break out into a fire of words: for, long prayer is sometimes
necessary, as at a public fast, and never amiss: when the troubles of the
Church, and good occasions otherways give it length. Christ made longer prayer
than that he taught, Matthew 6 9 etc. and sometimes spent the whole night in
prayer. Yet prayer is not in length, or excellency of words, for the power of
it, but in spirit, and in an humble heart. Reasons.
The reasons. Long and eloquent prayer may want a heart without which it is but
as the singing of a Nightingall; pleasant in the variety of sweet voices, but
without any soul. Now the prayer that wants a heart (how curious so ever in
well set words) wants that, that should commend it to God, as a reasonable
service, pleasing him, Romans 12 1. where (yet) short and plain prayer coming
from a broken heart, or heart (as it were) bruised between the wall and door,
because of sin, is the sacrifice of God, or a service of acception. Secondly,
the prayer of faith is preualent and effectual. Iam. 5 16. but (as it was said
of the true Circumcision, Romans 2.29.) such prayer stands not in the letter,
but in the heart: sound faith can do much with God without oratory, or long
prayer. The Pharisees made long prayers, but with what praise, when ((...) zeal
of God) but a covetous heart enlarged them? Matthew. 23.14.

A comfort to Christians o^ short memory, Use 1
and of as unreadie invention: such cannot power out their minds to God in
such a fluence, as they wish, and some can: but God will take their short
wishes in good part, coming from a mind willing to do^ more, if it were able:
where Christians must not strive in full and large prayer to outgoe those, who
far outreach them in their faculties of memory and quicker invention: for,
here, as in giving of alms, so in prayer, every one must do as he is able:
and it is accepted according to that a man has, 2 Cor 8 12. even short prayer
by way of ejaculation, (when a troubled soul wingeth it) flies beyond those
visible bauens, and ascends up to God: in the ear of the Almighty it is
eloquent and material prayer: yet such must take heed that no love of gain,
or more of pleasure than of God take them away from larger offices in prayer,
or that a lazy mind do not contradict it. Use 2.


A reproof of that stage like service in the Papacy, which stands upon
length and filling of time, and (no way) upon godly devotion, which is in the
Spirit: such think that they shall be heard for their much speaking, Matthew.
6.7. but they cannot so charm God: it is the well tuned heart, not the noise
of words, that makes sweet music in his ears: bodily exercise is to him as
swines flesh, Esa 66.3. not only unprofitable, but odious, 1 Timothy 4.8. Let
them consider, who tell their prayers upon their beads, and give them in by
number, when they pray privately to God: and let them consider, who in their
public service to him run over so many Pater-nosters, so many Creedes, and
Aue's, which they neither understand, nor (for two of them) fitly apply to
prayer: five words with the heart, are better than five thousand of that wordly
S^nago^ue* where is neither faith nor heart, 1 Cor. 14.19.

What this woman prayed for, follows.

Lord help me,
THat which this Woman prayed for in express terms, was the dispossessing of
her daughter vexed, as we heard: but more is included, as his hand of help to
the salvation of both: for, what can be less intended, by such a faith as
she had: besides, the next venie, given and avoided, shows as much: and so it
is as much as if she had said: whether I be a (...) or no, this is sure that
lost I am, and in no possibility to return, except thou (Lord) seek thy
servant; which is the case of my daughter also: O (therefore) seek and help
us, or be merciful unto me, and throw out my daughters devil: so much is not
expressed, but understood; and so far her prayer of faith carried: Doctr.
the point is, Christ is helper to those that seek him by faith: therefore is
he called the Savior of those that trust in him, Psalm. 17.7. and so much is
confessed by David in his Psalm of complaint, where he says: Our fathers
trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver them, Psalm. 22.4. and
(so) we see, where faith is leader, deliverance will not be far behind:
when God was ready to take away the rebuke of his people; Esa says, that men
should say, this is the Lord, we have waited for him, and he (...) save us, Esa
25.9. when all strings fail, this will hold, which the Apostle trusted unto,
as to a sure one indeed; I know in whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12. as much
as if he had said, if the worst come, be whom I have trusted with all, will
be my sure keeper: the same Apostle labored, that is labored worthy he, and
(yet) was rebuked: howbeit, trusting in the living God, it was no trouble to
him, for he knew that God, in whom he trusted, would be his Savior at the
last, 1. Tim. 4.10. And thus it is plain, that Christ (the Lord) is helper to
all that seek him by faith: the reasons; Reasons.
the promise (...) made to such, Mat. 11.28. and who ever were confounded that
trusted in him, Psalm. 22.5. Secondly, his readiness to help in such cases, does
promise no less: for, even when men scarce dare trust him; as in the example
of the Leper that worshipped, Matthew. 8.2, 3. he pardons the ^nfirmitie of
their faith, and belpeth them: how much more when they trust him with all? even
men in whom there is not a drop of that goodness, which in God is sea-full,
will not fail those that trust in them. Thirdly, (therefore) all places of
refuge were figures of Christ, and fingers to him: and he takes away all
refuge, that in trouble, he may be the refuge of all that trust in him.

The use is for instruction, Use 1.
teaching that if in our troubles we be not deliuerered, the fault is in our
selves: and this, because we trusted unto our selves too much, and trusted not
in God that would have saved us: or we waited not on him in obedience, and with
faith, but made too much haste, not tarrying the time till he would come to
comfort us: and what marvel that we perish from the salvation of God, when we
run out, and in nothing keep the path of life?

An admonition (therefore) to Christians, Use 2
with this Christian Cannanite, to wait for Gods goodness and truth in the way
of faith, with repentance: for, God must see our amendment, if we will see his
salvation; if we will have help from him, we must do reverence to him: and
we must be as this woman was, strong in patience, and nothing in our selves,
if we will reap fruit from our patience, and be somewhat in him. This woman,
as low in heart as in body, waited for Christ's help, and (after one reply
more) had it with advantage: so sure it is, that the poor shall not always be
forgotten, nor their expectation perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18.

Christ's third reply, that which cut indeed, follows.

VERSE 26. But he answered and said, it is not meet to take the Childrens
bread, and to cast it to dogs.


SAints Mark reads Christ's answer thus: Let the children first be sed, or
filled, Mark 7.27. and so supplieth what S. Matthew has not: as much as if he
had said; what may be hereafter, ye shall know, but your hour is not yet,
and ye come too soon: where he does not simply reject her, but for some time,
and without quite cutting her off, suffers her to hang still by some thread of
hope upon him: for he does not tell her that she should never have any
feeding from him, but that she should not yet: as appears in the text, that
does not altogether deny to give what the woman asked, but only puts her to
her attendance for it: where we learn, Doctr. 1
that Christ does not trample upon those that are down, but rather reaches
them his hand to rise by: he will not take the weak Christian at the worst,
but tells him how to recover, when through anguish of Spirit, his soul is in
perplexity. Hereupon Esaias says, that the Lord will not contend for ever, or be
alwaie chiding, Esa 57.16. his reason was, lest the spirit should fail before
him: that is, lest in stead of breaking his children, to their amendment, he
might break them to destruction: so they might die under the wound: and that
were in curing the disease, to destroy nature. In the 125: Psalm, verse 3. we
read, that if his rod in the hand of the wicked, or kept in his own hand,
should still rest upon the lot of the righteous, or never sease to lash and
gaul them, that (then) it would make them desperate, or full of impatience;
which is meant by the putting forth of their hands to iniquity: as if they
should judge it all one to be wicked and godly. Further, Christ is said to be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15. that is, to be one that
pittieth our infirmities, and has us in his heart to do us good: therefore,
he said to Saul when (like a Basiliske) with his breath, he sought to kill all
that were of his way, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.2.4. The
head in heaven, could not abide that his foot on earth, should be trodden upon:
and so we see, that Christ is tender toward his weak Saints, and far from
thrusting the weakest to the wall: Reasons.
the reasons; Reason (for our parts) there was none: but seeing that God (out
of love) had made Christ, (his Son) the mediator, he was to be faithful,
Heb. 2.17. and one part of his faithfulness, was, to bind up the wounds of
his sick members: and hence it is that he shed tears for those that shed his
blood, Luke 19.41. Secondly, it was put in his commission, that he should heal
the broken hearted, Luke 4.18. now, to heal is to cause health, not to make
sick with incurable bruisings. Thirdly, these sweet names given him by
assigment from his Father; as the name of a Lamb, John 1.29. of a hen,
Matthew. 23.37. of a husband, Esa 54.5. Genesis 31.32. of shepherd, Psalm. 23.1. and
brother, Heb 2.11. serve to testify how much he is to us in the gentleness
and naturalnesse of his love.

In the use of this, Use 1.
a Christian with comfort may arm against despair in many bruisings. It is
Christ, and what cause of fear? It is I (says Christ to his trembling
disciples,) be not afraid, Matthew. 14.27. so the Angel (speaking to the women
that came to the grave) said: Ye seek Jesus that was crucified fear not,
Matthew. 28.5. therefore, though thou be a reed, and (not whole, but) bruised,
yet be of good comfort, come in thy bruised reed, to Christ, (who calls
those that are heavy laden, to come to him, Matthew. 11.28.) and in stead of
breaking, he will heal thee: and (now) is Christ so merciful as not to
break us: let us not be so unmerciful to our selves, as to break our selves
by despair.

This may be a lesson to Ministers, Use 2.
and the stronger Christians, teaching them how to behave themselves toward the
weaker sort: and that is, to bear their burdens, Gal. 6.2. and not to lay
more upon their backs, when they have enough, or more than enough already. One
says well, that Satan sets upon men when they are weak, as Simeon and Leui
upon the Sichemits, when they were sore, Genesis 34.25. But Christ will not break
this woman, though a bruised reed, but puts her in heart, and gives her hope,
Esa 42.3. so contrary are Christ and Satan. A Minister should desire rather to
bind up a sick sheep, than to weary a hundred curres; that is, rather to
cure the wounded in spirit, than to spend labor upon hardened sinners: for,
indeed the preaching of Christ to the bruised in heart, is of more consequence,
than the thunderings of justice against a hundred Refractaries that care for no
rebuke: the latter is to be done; but the former in no case to be omitted.

Further, S. Mark binds that with a (for or) note of a reason, which is not
so bound in by S. Matthew, but simply set down, and without such dependence:
for he says only, that Jesus answered and said: It is not meet, or good, etc.
both have one meaning and end, which is to show, that it is no meet or honest
thing that any whelpe of Canaan should presume to sit at table with the
children of the house; and here he gives the dead blow: not only rejecting
her, as one of the heathen without the wall, but as sprung from the worst of
the nations, the Canaanites: first, he answered nothing, and (then) from the
woman's purpose, now he strikes at the head, telling her, that he may not do
that, which is neither good, nor comely, nor honest: a sore veny to be warded,
but by a strong faith indeed. and therefore as Joseph fared with his brethren
before he would open himself unto them, Genesis 44.15. and 45.1, 2, 3.16.17.
etc. so does the true Joseph, that was sold into the hands of sinners, deal
with a pitiful plaintiff here: for, he speaks roughly to her, and in the
whirlewind; or so as she might seem to be much worse after she had prayed
unto him with a lamentable cry than before; yet the last makes the amends for
all: Christ tells her who he is (as did Joseph) and opens himself to her
singular consolation. And so we see, Doct: 2
that God does (sometimes) answer roughly, where he means not to deny; thus
God held David to hard meat, not answering as he expected, but so as in his
own sense, he seemed, and feared as one utterly cast off, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9.
but was not, v. 10.11. he says will the Lord cast off for ever? v. 7. long he
had been off, and therefore he so speaks: yet v. 10. he confesleth his
infirmity, or want of faith in so saying: and here God quickened his hope, and
let him see where he was: his long night made him to think it would never be
day: but though great darkness was upon him, yet he remembered the perpetual
covenant of day and night to Gods servants; and when he looked up, he saw it.
In another Psalm, the people after their return our of captivity, prayed
mightily to God under his heavy displeasure, which vexed them long: and
therefore they say, will thou be angry with us for ever, Psalm. 85.5. so great
was his anger, and so terrible in effects, that they thought it would never be
better: yet these were the people of his love and near salvation, against whom
he so fretted, and for so long, v. 9.10. and they were his people (whose
prayers he heard) against whose prayers he was said to be angry, or to smoke
again, Psalm. 80.4. the like we read in Psalm. 89.46. the words are, Lord how
long will thou hide thy self? what for ever? it was long ere he would be seen
in his comfortable presence, and in the face of his throne toward them:
nevertheless, at last, he was visible in his clemency and goodness to those
from whom he had hid himself so long, as if quite gone from David's house in
the ruins of the state then: still (then) we see that God answers roughly
at the door, when his servants knock to come in. God dearly loved Daniel,
and he made many prayers for the peoples return in the captivity: yet was he
put off, and they not delivered, till the just time came, in which he had
appointed their deliverance, Dan. 9.22.23, 24, 25, 26. mean while, they were
in subjection (still) to all affronts, and indignities of a barbarous nation;
and thus for a while, Christ deals with his brethren as Joseph with his
brothers, and with Benjamin, his full brother; for, how rowndly did he deal
with them, and how sharply with him? in like manner does Christ with his;
Reasons.
the reasons; there is a great deal of corrupt nature in the best, that must
have a hard rubbing before it will out, and which must be washed thoroughly, as
in many waters, before it be clear, Psalm. 51.2. Now God will scour his
vessels of honor before they shall come to his table, in his kingdom, Apoc.
21.27. Secondly, there may be hypocrisy in our best prayers which is not so
soon perceived and repented of, if they should be heard at first, and before
they have stood (sometime) upon our hands; and it is in this, as in the grain
that we carry into our barnes; it must have a wintering, the snow must lie
upon it, and the nipping frost pinch it: so if the Lord shall gather any fruits
of his children, they must sometimes feel the hard weather of repulses, and
sometimes be turned back again with denials, when they put up their requests
to God. Thirdly, this makes the grace of hearing, (when it does come) better
welcome: and it cannot but be sweeter, that has such sower sauce to it: for
when is a dry house more comfortable than when men come out of weather and wet
into it?

A good direction for patience and sound comfort, Use
when it seems to be worse with us after many prayers and as many zealous
sobbes to heaven, than at any time before: for this poor woman, after she was
turned (as was said) from her country gods to the true God, found things to go
worse with her, than they did in her Cananitish religion. Joseph would not know
his brethren, when they came for corn into Egypt, but speaks roughly to
them, and tells them that they are Spies, Genesis 42.9.14. so sometimes Christ
will make as if he knew not his brethren; and (here) he made show of not
knowing a Sister in him: and when they come for the corn of relief in a
troubled conscience to him (as to Joseph in Egypt,) he will look strangely
upon them, and deny them: again, though Joseph knew his brethren well enough,
and knew they came for food; yet they shall not know so much, and food they
shall have, but trouble with it: for, when they have it, he will arrest them,
first upon one action, and then upon another, Genesis 43.18. and, 44.4. God knows
what we have need of before we ask, and supplies our wants always in good
time, but (mean time) with Joseph's brethren, we must ea^e the bread of
affliction by loss of goods, or good name, or by other arrests and hindrances:
sometimes we shall be condemned, and sometimes condemn our selves for Spies,
and hypocrites: and when we think that all is over, the cup is found in
Beniamins sack, Genesis 44.12. that is, we must come to a new reckoning, and
much more is behind. Judah must tell a sorrowful tale^, Genesis 44.18, 19. etc.
and the best fall into great affliction before they be delivered: then, (and
after many trials) Joseph cannot refrain, Genesis 45.1. and Christ can hold no
longer. I am Joseph says he, v. 3. It is I says Christ, Matthew 14.27. come
near, and be not sad, Genesis 45.4.5. I have heard your silent prayers, and
secretest groans, yea all the troubles of your heart though hitherto I took
upon me not to hear them: and now dwell with me for ever. So or much to this
effect, Mr. Burton in his second Sermon of David's evidence. Thus, you see the
worst in all Christ's denialls waiting upon him with the prayer of faith. Jacob
striving with this Angel, may receive a blow, Genesis 32.31. yet shall his name
be Israel, one that has prevailed with God, v. 28. He that goes over a
bridge, (having a weak head) must not look upon the water, but toward the
other side: so Christians in their troubled prayers, must look over and
beyond, and not at the present affliction. It is their patience that brings the
quiet fruit of tighteousnesse Heb. 12.7.11. and they must bear the terrors of
the Lord with a patient mind: Iehu marched furiously, yet Iehoram had not
cared, so it had been peaceably: therefore he said: is it peace? 2 King. 9
22. when God marches upon us in many sore repulses, we need not to ask with
Iehoram; for we are sure that it shall be peace at the last; and therefore,
though he march never so furiously in them, let us not care, having sure hope
to hold by; for it shall be well with them that fear God, and do reverence
before him, Eccles. 8.12. In all this he makes sick for a time, that we may be
whole for ever.

The text of S. Matthew follows.

It is not meet to take the childrens bread, etc.
THis text of S. Matthew may be considered in the allegory, or litterall sense:
the allegorical sense is the fit sense of this place, and is a gauling blow to
the woman: for what might she think, when he that has the bread of life in
his gift, shall tell her, that to give it her, were no better charity than to
give the bread of the children to whelps: might she no^ here think, that her
self was a dog, and her daughter a whelpe of reprobation? Indeed all the
heathen, and (chiefly) the Cananites were (then) no other in Gods account,
save some gleanings of mercy among them. Therefore here by dogs, our Savior
means chiefly the reprobate Cananites worse than dogs; and all are no better
since the first sin, but where the election has obtained better: Doctr.
where observe what all are by nature, and out of Christ; cursed and miserable,
not so happy as dogs: for, as there was no safety, but in the Arc, Genesis 7.23.
so no salvation, but in the Arc of Christ's flesh; out of Christ, out of
heaven; and no coming thither, but by him, the way, John 14.6. Ismael was a
great man in the world: but of no comparison with Izhak that was in the
covenant, Genesis 17.20, 21. the inheritance of life, with the best conueyance,
went that way: Esau was Jacobs twinne-brother, yet because in no covenant with
God, hated as a dog; Jacob in covenant with him, was beloved of him, Mal. 1.2,
3. Saint Peter in the Acts (speaking to the children of promise) says, that
God unto them had raised up his Son Jesus, Act. 3.25, 26. but, with the good
effect of turning them from their iniquities, wherein (if they had abidden
still,) they had been no better than dogs, and the unclean swine of the
Gentiles: the justified Gentiles, were differenced from the other by faith,
which was their grace of being in Christ, and of being the children of Abraham
after the Spirit, Gal. 3.8. but the wild among them, who still wandered in the
by-waies of nature, had no such privilege: And thus we are all by nature (as
Christ called this woman, with reverence to nature) dogs, or worse; Reasons.
the reasons: all that (since the fall of the first Man) were not, in a change
of nature, given to Christ, are in such nature unchanged, given to Satan in a
reprobate mind, John 17.12. and 3.36. but also (so given) are under a woe,
even a w^ unto damnation, Matthew 26.^4. worse than never borne, and so worse
than dogs; which (having a being) have an end of being miserable, when they
die: but not so, these. Secondly, by nature we are children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
under Gods displeasure, so long as such; and sinners, 5.8. coming ou^ of, and
lying down in an unclean bed, Psalm. 51.6. and enemies to God, Romans 5.10. till
reconciled by the gift of a better nature in Christ: and now, put these
together, children of wrath, sinners altogether, and enemies to God and Christ,
and what difference between men and dogs, in point of true happiness, save
that men are worse? Dogs (as they are no children) so they are not children of
wrath, nor sinners by nature, nor in their kind, (who do but their kind)
enemies to God. Man is, all men by nature, are; for the nature of all is alike
in all, and no barrel better than another: was not Esau Jacobs brother? Mal.
1.2. that that puts difference between an Israel in the flesh, and an Israel
in Christ, is Gods election, and his love before time entered, Romans 11.7. Use 1.


The use is for admonition to us that are now Christians, better much than
dogs, and Princes that are not; aduising us to take heed of a revolt, and
(having cast) to beware how, with dogs, we return again to our vomit, 2 Pet
2.22. If we will come to Gods table, and feed with the children, we must lay
away our snarling nature, and not come with unpurged consciences thither: we
are called to holiness, 1 These. 4.7. without it we may feed among dogs. In
hearing of the word, or after hearing, we must not play the dogs, snarling
at those that break the bread of life unto us: it is a property of curres to
snap at those that bring them their meat: at prayer, we must not enter without
reverence, nor lie all along as dogs do: we are set at table with the
children, we must therefore forget, and not do after the kind we came of,
that is, snatch one at another by brotherly dissentions: we cannot but forget
malice, if we remember our high calling in Christ. Some will not come to the
table where the children are, such as they count enemies, lest they should meet
them there, nor to Church lest they should tread upon the ground they go on:
and what may we think of such, but that, neither will they come to heaven,
lest they should meet them there: nor go the way of salvation, lest they
should go their way: these are yet in their old nature, not changed from dogs
to children.

But are the best by nature no better than the miserable heathen were; Use 2.
or, than were the Cananites? it may serve for instruction, teaching that there
is no difference, and that all have sinned, Pom. 3.22, 23. if one nature speed
better than another, grace, or the gift of God by grace has made it happier,
Matthew. 11.26. God, when he saved fallen man, stamped in lether, who might have
set his stamp upon the nature of Angels, and so have stamped in gold: but
Christ refused their nature, and took ours, Heb. 2.16. hence came our
happiness (and hence only) which was denied to the Angels that fell. Now,
(therefore) what have thou that thou have not received, 1 Cor. 4.7. or why
should any by any claim from nature, whether Papist or Pelagian, lift up
himself? As Merchants place their counters for thousands, hundreds, tennes,
and for nothing: so this Merchant of pearls has placed us in a higher cast of
his rich grace than many thousands unto whom he has had no such respect:
shall we therefore boast our selves in comparison of them, as if one counter
were better than another, save in account? If God should cry down his stamp
in us, that gives us all the value we have, what would become of our base
metle, rather of our nothing? and should not this take away all comparatiue and
unseemly rejoicing in flesh.

The third use is for meditation, Use 3
and teaches us often to think of the unworthiness of this our (now) corrupt
nature. Of some we use to say, that they are of a very good nature; but the
truth is, nature is alike in all, though better set in some, than in some by
the God of nature: hence, some are of a calmer spirit, and some more
boisterous: which difference proceeds not from the nature of the clay, (alike
in all) but from the Potters workmanship. One says, that a Lion chained does
not that hurt, which one loose does: for this, what may we (...)? the Lions
nature, or his chain? so, when some are of better temper than some; the
thanks is not due to them, but to Gods chain upon them by restraining grace.
In the glass of Cain, Saul, Judas, we may see our natural faces, and our
natural mold; also that the seed of an ill corn is sown in us by natural
propagation. Here therefore is matter of deiection for the best, and let them
think of it as they should: all are hampered with a miserable necessity of
sinning, Romans 7.19. and as a fire brand, never so little stirred casts out
sparks every way: so, corrupt nature in us, upon every motion breaks forth
into wickedness: no day goes over us but some concupiscences of sin go
through the heart, and should not this humble us? truly, if any thing shall,
this will: which (therefore) should teach us to watch the fire that it get not
into the dry straw of our nature, and burn to destruction: daylic we should
purge by repentance, who have a nature from which such foul streams of lust
rise up, and fill the house.

The bread of the children, in this place, is that holy thing that may not be
given to dogs, Mat. 7.6. that is, to the unholy and profane: and it teaches,
that what is holy, Doctr. 2
is not to be offered to all that will, as the bread of Church priueldge, the
bread of the Sacrament, and the bread of life, Christ says as much in full
words; where he bids us not to give that which is holy to dogs, as we heard,
Matthew. 7.6. Object. ye will say; are Christians dogs? Answ. I answer and say,
that Christians, who are but Christians in title, and in life grosely wicked,
are no better, nay worse: and (therefore) if thou will not be a dog in the
sacred trope of Christ, put on Christ, and adorn thy calling with a pure
conversation in him: let more than the bar of reason difference the dog and
thee: but to proceed; this offering of holy things to all that will, is called
by Malachy an offering of unclean bread upon Gods Altar, Mal. 1.7. a fault in
many places, where the table of the Lord is not regarded: that is, where all
that will, are received unto it, hand over head: the contrary practice has a
commandment from Gods own mouth, where the charge is, to take the precious
from the vile, Ier. 15.19. that is, to gleane the Saints from a riffe raffe of
people, and to minister unto them with putting of difference; which (therefore)
is called a gathering of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.12. S. Paul would have an heretic
rejected after two or three admonitions, Tit 3.10. for, when enough is said,
what need any more labor in vain? and to what purpose, should we give the
bread of further persuasion to such? Reasons.
the reasons: one is in the text: for it is not meet or decent so to do: and
Christians must do that which is honest, pure, and of good report, Phil. 4.8.
Secondly, it is an offense and a share, when good and bad are indifferently
admitted to the table of the children: for the godly may hereby loose edge, and
the wicked, upon this look for none: it will make the wicked to be still as
they are, and the godly to be worse: for, may they not say, with some
discoutagement; what? and is there no difference between being good and being
evil? rather they should be shut out with the key of excommunication, and so
have no room in the Jerusalem below, that have not an inch of place in the
Jerusalem above; for, dogs come not thither, neither any unclean thing, Apoc.
22.15. Thirdly, the figure must be fulfilled in the thing figured: unclean
beasts (under the Law) might not be brought into the Tabernacle, nor offered
there, Esa 66.3. now, unclean persons in the Gospel, are these unclean
beasts, which (therefore) should be suspended from the bread of the Children
till they be purged by repentance, that they may receive the bread, to which
they had no interest in their unclean estate, the bread of Church-priuiledge,
of the word, and of Sacraments, with the absolution due to sorrowful sinners.

The use is for information, Use 1
and concerns the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, teaching (therefore)
that they should be able to judge by the word, who are worthy (that is, well
prepared) Communicants, and who not, to whom they may safely break the bread
of salvation, and among whom they may not cast this worthy pearl, to whom they
should preach peace, and to whom the war of the Lord: so every servant may
have the portion of meat that belongs unto him, Matthew. 24.45. but, for those
that have not the Spirit of putting difference in this manner, such cannot but
offer unclean bread, and profane (both) Gods house and services, which the
ignorant and unlearned in this office do.

A reproof (further) of those Ministers, who being able, Use 2.
for learning to make this difference, through want of good conscience will not.
These receive to the Sacrament all that will come, and preach as much peace to
him that is at peace with his sins, as to him that is out with them, and with
himself, for them. The Apostle (indeed) bids a man to examine himself before
he come to the Sacrament; 1 Cor. 11.28. but does this give bar to the
Minister in his duty of Church-examination? and may not both be done; the
private by a man's self, and the public by the Minister? else, why have
Ministers the charge of the Lords table, and the Churches keys? if they may
not see that no guests (grosely unworthy) do come thither: I say grosely
unworthy (for hypocrites, God must give the sentence, not man, Matthew. 22.12.)
why are they keepers of the Lords holy things upon which they must wait? 1
Cor. 9.13. if they may put back no offering, what do they there? Moreover,
they are here reproved, who in preaching the Gospel, forget, or do against
the counsel of S. Jude; which is, to have compassion of some, and others to
save with fear, Jude 22.23. rather, they preach a word of fear, where they
should show compassion: and put heat into those, whom they should strike to
the heart with sharp reprehension: they open the great Church door, where
they should shut all the doors, as upon common drunkards, swearers,
whoremongers, and such goats: and scarce open a little wicket to those that
will not offend maliciously: they give the bread of absolution to those, whom
they should keep in prison (bound with the Lords chain,) and feed with the
terrors of God: but the bread of wormwood to those, that go foftly (already)
and in the bitterness of their soul, laden with sin, Esa 36.15.

In the letter what Christ says here, must not pass, but with observation:
and therefore, where he says, Doct. 3
that the childrens bread must not be cast to dogs: it may teach, that dogs are
not to be fed with the bread of hungry Christians. It was in all probability,
the rich man's sin, who (for his cruelty to the poor) burns now in
everlasting flames in hell, Luke 16.21. the fatherless did eat of Jobs
morsels, not the dogs; Job 31.17. and they that keep dogs to keep away the
poor, sin as reprobate Dives: for where order is kept, as in heaven, dogs
are kept out; without are dogs, Apoc. 22.15. it is meant of dogs in the figure,
but shows that dogs in kind, should have a dogs place; the reasons: Reasons.
One reason is in the text: it is by divine ordinance, the bread of the
children, not the bread of dogs. 2. It is a profaning of the creature when we
use it, and not to Gods mind or end: for, then we use it in a contrary way to
the word, that sanctifies every creature, 1 Timothy 4.5. but to give the
childrens bread to dogs, is to use it against Gods mind and word of
institution: and so a profaning of it. Thirdly, Christians are bought with a
price at the rate of Christ's blood, 1 Pet. 1.19. and shall we under value them
to dogs, which (dead,) are cast into a ditch.

An admonition to Christian gentlemen, Use 1
and others to be at less charge with their dogs, and at more with Christians
in the image of God. Some bestow more upon dogs and Hawks in one year, than
they do upon the bellies of hungry Christians in many: also some will put out
a sick servant, who yet will take order for the help of a sick beast: for
the one they will have a drench; of the other they have no care: and is not
this to prefer a beast in the stable, before a Christian in house: and one
that has no soul, before one, for whose soul Christ died? If this be not to
give the childrens bread to dogs, what is? An item (here) to gentlemen that
must have their dogs to come upon the table, who should gather crummes, and be
fed with bones under table: and it admonishes them, to use the table of the
children with less contempt.

A reproof of those houses of ill report, Use 2.
who when men have drunk too much, fill in more: which is, to give the
childrens bread to worse than dogs, save in this, that they return to their
vomit as dogs do, Pro. 26.11. In the time of Habackuk this had a woe: woe unto
him that gives his neighbor drink, by putting his bottle to him: that is, by
giving him more than sufficient, Habac. 2.15. it had a woe then, and has it
none now? to make him drunken, and to look on his nakedness; They say, it is
the fault of the takers, not of them that give in excess: but Gods word says,
that it is the fault of both: for, thou should not suffer thy brother to
sin, or suffer sin upon him, Leuit. 19.17. much less put thy bottle to
him, and fill in his sin. They say they must utter their drink and wine: but
must they needs do it by sinning against God and their neighbor? has God
laid any such necessity of sinning upon a trade of his own creation? I
confess the trade used lawfully, to be of God: but as men of no conscience use
it now, in town and country, it is the devils Brew House and Tavern, having
his sign at it, which is; drink and pour in, till neither hand nor foot can
do their office: whiles these have their over, upon their table of spewings,
the table of many a good Christian has little enough: their bellies sound like
shaumes, whiles the full bellies of these cannot crave one drop more.

By Children (here) are meant the Jews, whose bread (for the present) Christ
judges to be cast away, being given to the heathen: where it appears that the
Jews were in covenant with God before us, Doct: 4
the sinners of the Gentiles: and it teaches, that they are our Elders in the
prerogative of Sons: hence they are called the natural branches, as it were
the natural Sons of the house, and we but sounes in law, Romans 11.21: and the
fat Calfe was not killed for the prodigal Gentile, till the elder brother, the
Jew, was angry and would not come in, Luke 15.28. Act. 15.46. mean time, as
we heard out of S. Mark, Christ says; Let the children first be fed; as if
he should say, let your elders be served before you; and when I have done with
them, I will come to you, Mark 7.27. Moses says, and asks if any were so
great, that is, so greatly preferred as they, who have Jehovah so nigh them?
Deuteronomy. 4.7. God set his love upon them, and spoke unto them so as he spoke not
else to any, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. Psalm. 147.20. hearing his voice, he says, they
should be his chief treasure, though all the earth be his, Exodus 19.5. his
meaning is, that he would dwell at home as at Court with them; but with
others, as Kings in their countries far off. The Prophet Jeremy for this,
and, because to them were committed the Oracles of God, calls them, not
servants, but borne in the house, Ier. 2.14. now, who knows not hte great
odds of difference that is between a servant and a Son? when we were
without God, and without Christ in the broad field of the Gentiles, these were
his special enclosure, to whom pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the
covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises,
Ephesians. 2.12. Romans 9.4. we had the Oracle of the Word from them, and they from
God, Romans 3.2. and thus their preferment was great in comparison of us: the
reason: Reasons.
we can give none but this, that God would have it so, Am. 3.2, who does what
pleases him in heaven and in earth, Psalm. 135.4 6. He set his love upon them,
who may love, whom and where he will: Romans 9.13.15. and not for any worth in
them more then in others, says Moses: but loved because he would love them.
Deuteronomy. 7.7.8.

Are the Jews, Use I.
our elders, in covenant with God? it is for admonition, teaching us not to
forget them in our prayers; and, being gone from our Fathers house, to pray for
their return: and this the rather, and with warmer affections, seeing their
coming in again is promised, which we expect according to the Scriptures of
Romans 11.25.26. Isa. 27.9. Luke 2.32. Act. 1.6.7. Luk 1.33. We will not enquire
(here) how many, nor the exact time how soon they shall be called: for, that
is counsel to us, and of those things that the Father has put in his own
power: Act. 1.7. He that looks too steadfastly and long upon the Sun, may at
last see noth^^^. Therefore we must leave these secrets to God, Deuter. 29.29.
and hold unto things revealed.

A reproof of those who instead of praying for them, Use 2
fill their mouths with their reproach. Where they show how little they desire
their fellowship in the house, wherein they were sons, when we were
strangers: we should rather fear by their example, then so boast against the
natural branches, who may also be broken off as they were, if we sin as they
did. Romans 11.18.20.

The woman's reply follows.

VERSE 27. And she said, Truth Lord; yet even the dogs, or whelps, eat of the
crummes which fall from their Masters Table.


THe woman answers Christ (here) with retorting his own argument upon him.
Where, though she confess her self to be a dog in his sense, saying,
Truth Lord, as confessing so much: yet she will not lose all interest to his
Table, but will have somewhat from it, though under the table as a dog. As if
she had said: It is true Lord that I am a dog, as thou have said, and that by
my cursed nature and nation: yet (my sweet Savior) bestow some crummes of thy
grace upon me. This might be the woman's humble reply to Christ's calling, or
comparing her to a dog. Some would have said otherwise (being so cut to the
gall) and have had an action against him for calling them dogs. But she
iustifies Christ in what he had said; and impliedly rather, confesses her
self to be a dog, then can think that he could speak falsely, who called,
or compared, her so. After (yet) she uses his own weapon against him by an
inuersion of what he had said, as making rather for them against her. Doctr.
But (first) we have the woman justifying Christ the Lord in his sharpest
answer to her: which practice of hers teaches us the like, and that is, to
confess Gods justice and truth in his roundest dealings with us. So David
cleared the Lord (in point of his justice) even when he suffered under his
sin unto the brimme of hell. Nathan the Prophet had denounced the angry
sentence of the Lords justice against him, for adultery and blood: he had told
him from God, that evil should be raised against him out of his own house:
that the sword should lie upon it; that his wives should be defiled, and the
child of adultery should dye: 2. Sam. 12.10.11 14. yet David reasons not
against Gods true and righteous judgment in all this, but judges truly, that
God was true, holy, and righteous; and that his sin had deserved all that was
then decreed against him, Psalm. 51.4. his words are: Against thee (and with the
double in token of earnestness) thee, have I sinned: therefore be thou
justified when thou speak, and clear when thou iudgest. It was a good sign
of Elies salvation, that he submitted to the Lord in that heavy judgment that
was pronounced against his house: for he said, It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good. 1. Sam. 3.18. Good king Hezekiah subscribed accordingly, and
said, The word of the Lord is good, 2. King. 20.19. as if he had said to the
m^^^enger; There is no fault in thy message, all is in my sin. When Shimei
railed on David, calling him murderer, and a man of blood; he saw the the Lord
to be just in that wicked mouth; and therefore says to Abishai, and to the
other, Suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him. 2. Sam. 16.11. as if
he should have said: This is little enough, and I have deserved more. After
David, Daniel clears Gods severity in the heauiest plague that ever was
brought upon a nation. Dan. 9.13, 14. And Jeremy did the like in his book of
Lamentations: for, saying, that Jerusalem was then as greatly despised as ever
greatly honored before; he says, that it was, because she had greatly
sinned. Lament. 1.8. All these did confess a righteous Father to the
judgments that were (then) in the world, making sin the proper efficient of
them all. The reasons. Reasons.
They know, that God could not but be just in word and deed, as was said, Psalm
51.4. and therefore in both justifiable. For, what can he say or do amiss,
that can neither say nor do otherwise then well? Secondly, God is not only
true, but the truth; nor only just, but justice it self. Ioh. 14.6. 1. Cor.
1: 30. Now truth can never be a lie, nor justice unrighteousness. Thirdly,
Gods children must be contrary to the devils children, and do contrarily. The
devils children condemn the Lord, 2. King. 6.33. Gods children therefore must
clear him; they justify themselves, Ezekiel. 18.25.29. these must instifie him.
A good natured child will rather take fault to himself, then charge his
father: and what children are they that charge God with fault who cannot
offend? Romans 3.5.

An admonition to Christians to see their own deseruings, Use 1.
and faultiness in all that is upon them from God, and to pray for such eyes;
for, (then) they will not charge him with wrong, who can do nothing but what
is equal and just, Ezekiel. 18.4.2. Chron. 19.7. The more we behold our selves in
this glass, the more patient we will be in the hardest things that come. So
was Job, who therefore answered the Lord and said, Behold I am vile, and what
shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth: Job 40 3. Till God had
opened his eyes, by showing unto him his sin, and by making it apparent, as
the light at noonday, now impossible it was for a God, so innocent, to punish
without cause; he stood stiffely upon his justification, and thought he could
set down God with his arguments, Job 23.3.4.5. here his eyes were held, and
scales of self-sufficiency were upon them; but when his sight was clearer, he
said as we heard. When Jeremy saw as he should, he said, O Lord, if I dispute
with thee, thou art righteous. Iere. 12.1. he knew he should be at a nonplus,
if he went on, and therefore yielded without any more ado. So, if we would
rightly consider our ways, and our selves in sin, instead of reasoning with
God about our troubles, we would confess his just hand upon us, and say to
our selves as the evil doer to his fellow, we are justly here. Luke 23.41. but
we measure the punishment, and weigh not the sins that have caused it, and
therefore that God strikes too hard for small matters. Hence, some complain of
too much strictness in God, when for tasting of a little fruit, he would
cast all mankind into misery. But these never yet considered rightly the
merit of that sin, and majesty of the person against whom it was committed.
The wages of every sin is death eternal. Romans 6 23. and Gods majesty makes
every sin great, though small in our eyes. And here though the matter, in
which the sin was done, were small, yet was it no small sin to be
ambitious of Gods place, to believe the devil before God, to be so unthankful
for so large a liberty in all the other trees, not to be contented with ones
estate, to break a known and easy Commandment, and to cast away the whole
world of mankind in one sin. Again, some think it too great scueritie in
God to drown a whole world of men in one Flood, so as none were saved but
eight persons. But they that thus put finger in the eye, repining at Gods just
doings, besides the blasphemy of such a wicked taxation of the righteous God,
they neither know his greatness, nor how great a sin it is to offend it.

A reproof of their impatiencie, Use 2
who murmr against God for every little cross he sends them in their
children, in their cattle, or corne-fields. For, thus to murmr, is to say
plainly, that they deserve no such unjust strokes of his hand. But if God
should take away all, as he did from Job, we should take the loss as Job did,
blessing his name, Job 1.21. Nay if he should raze us out of his book of life,
we should be dumb and say nothing, because he has done it. Psalm. 39.2.
how much more should we hold in, when he does but softly touch us, and not send
his iron into our souls? Some yield to the Lord with a forced submission,
saying, What remedy? as if he carried all by the elder hand, and plagued
them, because they could not resist him. Where (yet) it is their own
wickedness that has corrected them, Ier. 2.19. only the Lord then used his
great power to make good his justice upon them for wilful transgression. For
just is the Lord, and nothing shall fail of all that is written concerning
him; not one syllable, not one letter, or small prick, Matthew. 5.18. Of this
woman, Use 3
(the mirror of a worthy hearer) all hearers should learn patience and
application in the sharpest reproof of the word. When it rebukes a sin,
they that be guilty, should turn the edge to themselves, confess a truth,
and not kick against the pricks of it. Acts 9.5. The Apostle Saint Paul,
where he found sin, made an owl of it, and follows it with crying out, Who
shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7.24. He was a persecuter, a
blasphemer, a great sinner; and he tells the world with his own pen, that he
was so, 1. Tim. 1.13.15. But how many will do so now, and give God the right
of his justice, by keeping their sins always in sight, and by branding hell
in their foreheads, as the Apostle did? rather, when they should say, truth
Sir, to the Preacher, they rise in his face for speaking but truly and justly
of their sin.

The inuersion of Christ's Answer follows.

Yet even the dogs eat of the crummes, etc.
Here the woman (as we heard) makes use of Christ's argument, and turns the
point of it upon her self. For, she says, Yet even the dogs, etc. as if
she should have said, Though (in thy meaning Lord) I be but a dog, or
whelpe, under the table of the children (and I presume no higher) yet I may
gather up the chippings that fall from the table, where the children have so
much. What therefore is not denied to a dog, give (Lord) to thy prostrate
handmaid. Or thus: The table of the children was never so sparingly set, but
that somewhat would fall over to those that waited below. I am one that humbly
wait below: Lord say to thy servants soul, I am thy salvation. Psalm. 35.3.
This may be the woman's answer in more words. And here was great faith indeed;
and (with it) great humility. This woman was faithful, and yet humble: and so
we see that certainty of faith may stand with humility. Indeed, Doctr. 1.
foolish presumption will be answered with nothing, though it have nothing to
say, and be brought to a stand: where true faith goes forward, though
limpingly, as upon stilts. For, it bel^ues beyond reason of letter, and above
hope under hope, Rom 4.18. Abraham (the pattern of faith) was humble enough,
when he drew near to God. Genes. 18.27. And Daniels three companions in the
captivity, were not conceited of themselves, when yet they could say to the
king, The God, whom we serve, will deliver us. Dan. 3.17. And blessed Mary
might be the servant of the Lord, and the mother of Christ too; who bore him in
her faith, as surely as in her belly. Luke 1.38. Also he greatly trusted in
God, who (yet) could say, Lord, my heart is not hautie, nor my eyes lofty:
Psalm. 131.1. And Iehosaphat, that strongly reposed on God, said, that he could
not tell what to do, or that he had never an eye upon himself, but his eyes
were toward the Lord, 2. Chro. 20.12. Thus true faith has room enough for
humility. The reasons. Reasons.
To do what we are commanded to do, upon a promise, is not pride, but
obedience. Now we are commanded upon a promise to believe: and therefore, we
may believe, and be humble. Ioh. 3 16.27. Beggars are humble enough, and yet
importunate: such a beggar is faith, which has nothing but what it seeks and
gets abroad, Psalm. 40.17. and therefore (as a beggar) it speaks with prayer,
and humbly by petition.

Use is (first) for confutation of Papists, Use 1.
who call true confidence in God, proud presumption. Their tenent is, that none
can without an arrogant spirit believe the certainty of their own salvation.
But we see the contrary in this humble and prostrate woman: and (verily)
whosoever trusts most in God, has the least opinion of his own worth. So,
this woman passing others in faith, went before them in a low conceit of her
self. But they who say, that it is pride and arrogancy to trust in God for
salvation, hold it no pride to trust in themselves for it. Hence the vulgar
(which are of their teaching) say, that they hope to be saved by their good
meanings, and their good deeds.

The second use is, Use 2.
for the trial of our faith: for, the humbler in the opinion of ^ur selves,
the stronger in faith. The more we trust God, the less we trust our selves,
though never so full of good works. Job was a painful workman in the Law, yet
says, that if God should contend with him, or pose him hard, he could not
answer him one of a thousand, Job 9.3.14. David confesses as much, Psalm.
148.2. which is, that no flesh, if the wind of justice blow upon it, can stand
in Gods sight; for so, in his sight shall none that lives be justified. Could
there be better men then these two, and of better faith? and yet how humble in
all that they did? So, the returning Prodigal had great confidence in his
father; yet cast himself below a son, and thought himself not worthy to sit
with the Hindes, except his father were so pleased: I herefore he faith, I am
no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants:
for, unworthy to be so, except thou make me so. Luke 15.19.21. To be short,
how many more faithful then this woman, and how many more humble? Therefore
the denials of Christ were but as so many strong winds, to cause the flame of
her faith to rise up higher.

But here further, the woman speaking of some crummes or fallings from the
table of the children, intimates that it was a full table, a table that ran
over, and where was no want, but exceedings rather. And (here) learn that the
Jews diet (in time of the Law) was no spare diet, Doctr. 2
but a table running over to the Gentiles. Naaman the Syrian, Luke 4.27. the
widow of Sarepta, Luke 4.26. the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4.28. the Centurion in
Saint Matthew, Matthew. 8.5.6.7.8. Job in Vz, Job 1.1. and this woman here* were
all fed, though not with the whole loaf, yet with crummes from the childrens
table. And crumbs were good fare in the hunger-bitten land of the ignorant
Nations. Though (God) then but dropped upon them, yet (in the Gospel, and when
the Jews would not come to the Kings wedding dinner, Matthew. 22.9, 10.) they
had a plentiful rain of grace, which was shed upon them abundantly, Tit. 3.6.
and then the hall was set round with guests. It is sure then that God ever kept
a good table, and a table well appointed for all that would come. The reasons.
Reasons.
It is for his greater glory: for, that housekeeping is much commended where
is no want. But God spares for no cost, where his guests come willingly: if
they want not a stomach, they shall want for no meat; for he that is rich in
abundance of all heaneuly treasures, will serve them of all that their heart
can desire. Assuerus feast, that which he made to his Princes, was much spoken
of, Hest 1.3, 4.5. and will the Lord of glory do less in that banquet, which
he provides for his peoples salvation, then a mortal sinful man did in that
which was made for his magnificence? Secondly, God dearly loves his children,
and they shall have of the best. Where men love dearly, they will provide for
them as they are able, and wish they had better. But this wish needs not, where
he makes the feast, who is rich in grace: and, neither loath to go the charge
where he loves, as miserable; nor in any want of ability to do it, as
insufficient: for he has will and ability both. Thirdly, it is the wedding
dinner of the Kings Son, Matthew: 22.2. and do Kings make a spare dinner when
they marie the Prince, their eldest Son? Hence we read of the fullness of
Christ, John 1.16. and so not of a scant measure in him, but of a measure
running over: his grace is not by drops, but by showers.

Was the table of the children under the law so well set and furnished? Use 1.
it must needs be much better under Christ: or, is the bread of grace now in
greater abundance? it makes for the greater condemnation of those that famish
at so full a measure of the means: for has God bin at such charges with his
last great supper, and (as contemners of his bounty) will we not taste of his
meat, or (as the recusant guests, spoken of, Luke 14 17, 18, 19, 20.) not come
to it at all? we have that now in big loaves, which this woman begged, but in
the chippins and crummes: yet how earnestly and with what a faith did she
crave those fallings from the table of the children? and with what
unwillingness do we come to meat, that are invited, and may sit down at
table in nobler graces? she desired to drink of a small brook; and we will
not put our mouth to the river of life.

Was Gods table (anciently) well served, and better now? Use 2
it is for the confutation of a Popish idle, but wicked conceit; which is,
that, that table (as poorly served) must be supplied from the common chest of
Saints merits, disposed of by a man of sin at Rome: for, this treasury
(according to the doctrine of that Church) is the common place of all that over
plus of works, of merit that the Saints did, and which they had to spare for
others: but might not the best of them have said, (not as the five wise
virgins, lest there be not enough for us and you, Mat. 25.9.) but as the truth
is; our merit was never any thing with God, for our selves and therefore
neither any thing for us or you? here was no want: and what need a supply then?
or if any were, (as none was) what were the Saints spoone-full to Christ's
sea-full? or their drop (rather nothing) to his fulness, that gives ple^tifull
redemption to his Saints?

Thirdly, Use 3
this doctrine of the riches of Gods grace may be our great comfort in all
corporal wants: and (therefore) wanting corporal food, or corporal health,
or other corporal supplies, we should not be troubled seeing we may always
have that which is more or better than all these; and that is, that which is
sufficient for us (as the answer was to S. Paul, 2. Cor. 12.9.) a sufficient
portion of grace. I know that many had rather have a penny in purse than it,
who say with Esau; they are almost dead, and what is that birthright to them?
Genesis 25.32. also it may be, that as Anna, so the godly, (though with her, they
have a worthy portion, otherways) may weep and grieve too much, because (as
she was barren of children,) so are they in these outward things, both barren
and bare, 1 Samuel 1.5. 7 but what Elkanah the husband said to Anna his wife,
that Christ, the gracious husband of his Church, says to her his spouse, and
to all the godly: am not (...) better to thee than ten Sons? that is, better
than all those outward things, as health, food, apparel, goods, good name, or
any good thing of no higher rise? v. 8 or, it is not better to have me, than
all these (with a Kings crown to boot) without me?

So much for the conference it self, the issue of it follows.

VERSE 28. Then Jesus answered and said unto her; O woman, great is thy faith.


NOW we are at issue concerning the conference between Christ and this woman;
which stands in two things: as the commendation of her great faith, in these
words; and the grant of her request in the next. She had received three
repulses: and if she had received (not three, but) threscore more: with such a
faith she could not have gone away confounded. Object. Some, with their
dimunitiues, would make her faith less than Christ has said, and the matter
of it not so great; saying, that her request was no more but that Christ would
heal her daughter sick of a devil in her: and what is that to salvation?
Answ. I confess there is no more expressed in the text: yet this answer of
Christ, and the woman's carriage in her former sore flight, show that more was
at the stake, and that the health of her daughter was not all the matter: the
salvation of her and her daughter was chiefly sought; and her daughters
health, as Christ's pawn for it; who (therefore) says: be it unto thee as thou will; or that, and much more than that. In so ample a grant, then, how can it
be but that more was meant than her daughters well being in the body, as the
forgiveness of sins to both, and to both, faith in Christ, to salvation?
Further, Christ does not say, Woman but with a sacred exclamation, O woman, as
pained till he was delivered of so much: his affections boiled as Joseph's did,
till he had opened himself: and now he melts over her, as he over his
brethren, when he had told them who he was, Genesis 43.1, 2, 3. nor does he only
commend her great faith, but wonder at it, as before at the Centurions, Matthew.
8.10. and therefore says, O woman, as if he had said: O noble daughter of
Abraham, noble in so great a faith: I must now tell thee that I am that Joseph
that God has sent, in this spiritual long famine of Canaan, to thee, and to
thy daughter: shortly Jacob will be in Egypt, and the hour of the Gentiles
is near, but yours is come already: and now the devil is gone out of thy
daughter: thou have had power with God: thou shall have power against devils:
such is the meaning of the words now read. And now where Christ speaking of a
good woman indeed, detracts not from her, but gives her, her due: we learn by
so worthy a precedent, to speak truly of good men and good things: the
Hittites, (though ignorant of the true God) gave to Abraham his true respect,
as that he was a Prince of God among them Gen 23. 6 and when the brethren of
Joseph envied him for his dream, his father regarded him for it, Genesis 37 11.
the women in their fo^g and dance, gave David his due: but the thing displeased
Saul, 1 Samuel 18.7. The like did Abimelch, who speaking of David to Saul, said,
he had not such another servant, 1 Samuel 22.14. and Christ the Lord (for
example to us) does elsewhere call those that improued his spiritual talent,
(as they were indeed) his good servants and faithful, Matthew. 25.21.23. so
Barnabas is called by S. Luke, in his right name, a good man, Act. 11.24. and
so we must not nip with the frost of (...), but cherish the spring of good
things where God has put them, and give them a true report: Reasons.
the reasons. for else we wrong the owner, that is, God from whom is every
good giving, and perfect gift, Iam. 1.17. Secondly, the contrary is forbidden,
as false witness against our neighbor: for what other do we, when we take
away a righteous man's righteousness from him, and speak evil of his good,
Esa 5.20.23. but speak falsely of him? Thirdly, the devil (who is the accuser
of the brethren, and a slanderer,) does belie the goodness of the Saints, Job
1.11. and shall Christians, that should follow Christ, be like the devil?
Fourthly, we should encourage the good in their good way, but to speak
otherways than well of welldoing, is not to set them forward, but backward in
goodness.

The first use is for reproof of those who are so blinded with anger against
the good, Use 1.
that they can see no good where much is: and here the old saying proves true,
that ill will never speak well. If any little fault be in such, they blow
with their strongest wind, to send it as far as their breath will carry: so
far from commending things commendable in them, that they grime them rather
with their black tongues, calling all their holiness hypocrisy. Papists were
wont to be alone in such wrong done to true Christians; but company comes unto
them, even out of our own profession; and this leprosy of a foul tongue is
gone from Naaman to Gehazi, from them to some Protestants, as great mockers of
sincerity in profession, as Papists are. 2. King. 5.27.

The next use is for instruction, Use 2.
teaching us to love good men for the good things in them: for so we will love
such much better in whom they be. We love gold, though in the filthy oar; and
will take up a jewel, though trodden in the mire: so if we loved goodness for
it self (that is, truly loved it) we would not neglect it, though in the foil
of a bad man, or trodden in the mire of a heart very sinful: much less would
we dis-regard it placed in a worthy subject Parents love their children with a
strong love: the reason is, they have that in them which they love; nature. So
Christians should follow true Christians with like force of true love; the
reason is, they have that in them which they should love; grace. This love of
parents to their children, makes that they care not how much good they speak,
or hear spoken of them, so if like love, or any were in us toward these
earthly Saints, we would speak our selves, and be glad to hear others speak
much good of them, for the grace of God in them.

Thirdly, Use 3
this is for admonition to Christians to beware of envy in regard of graces,
which are in others, more then in themselves. For, such will bitterly, from
that wormwood of envy, (instead of praising) oppose against them. So did
Joseph's brethren; and therefore rose up against their better brother, Genesis
37.4.18, 19. And Cain set his cruelty on work against Abel, a far better
man then himself, and his own natural brother: where nothing could ease the
great pain of his envy, but a medicine made of his brothers blood. Genesis 4 8.
So the Pharisees and Priests among the Jews, watched Christ in the grave that
he should not rise: Matthew. 27.66. and so the envious among us (lovers of
themselves, 2. Tim. 3.2.) put virtue in the grave with Christ, and watch it
that it rise not. But further, as Christians must not wrong others in their
good parts by envious detractions; so, neither (having such good parts in them)
must they wrong themselves by false testimony: I say, false testimony: for
there is false witness against a man's self, as well as against his neighbor.
Many well indewed of God, in some fits of the spiritual fever, fare as if
they had nothing; no faith, no hope, no grace. And some, in the affliction, say
(though before they had done exceeding well) that they were never good before
God, nor sound in profession, but hypocrites. So the devil would have it. But
should Christians join issue with Satan against themselves? Is not the devil
strong enough without our help; and except we wrong our selves to gratify
him? rather, we should fight under God against him, then with him, against our
own soul. For so did righteous Job, in the thickest mist of his troubles: His
friends had urged him hard, and would baue persuaded him, that though he had
done many good things, yet it was in no soundness to God. But Job (though he
had otherwise lost all; his children, servants, substance, and all) yet he
would not be so great a loser to them and the devil, as to part with his
integrity in what he had done. Job 27.5. for where he had failed, he knew he
had made up the reckoning by repentance, and sorrow for sin. and (therefore)
doubted not, but that so much was left as would comfort him, and reprove them.

Our Savior purposing to commend this woman's unwearied petitioning to him in
regard of her daughter and her self, commends that which was the root of that
fruit, her great faith. Which faith is a grace of persuasion, whereby we
believe for our selves, and particularly, to eternal life. And to this faith
of hers, the health of her daughter is ascribed, as the branch to the root that
bears it. Where we see, Doct. 2
that by faith we have acceptance with God; the good works we do, being as
fruits of that tree. Hence David speaking of a justified sinner, says, that
the book is cleared by forgiving the debt, and not by any satisfaction made,
Psalm. 32.1.2. This faith believes, and works have nothing to do in her office.
Therefore, says the Apostle Saint Paul, To him that works not, but believes
in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.
Romans 4.5 that is, all the satisfaction that a justified sinner can make, is to
believe, that it is made without him, or any thing that he can do. And so faith
obtains by imputation: what it gets in the account, it gets it by Christ that
has paid the whole debt of sin, and turns over his obedience to those
that cannot obey but imperfectly and unprofitably, Luke 17.10. and so have no
righteousness but what is his: Rom 5.22. Hereupon the same Apostle Saint Paul,
speaking of himself, a justified sinner, says, that the life he has in the
new life of the Gospel, is not his, but Christ's, who breathed it in him, and
lives in him. Galat. 2.20. all his mind ran upon the gain he had by
Christ, having his righteousness: all other things in the world were but loss
and dunge to this, Philip 3.8, 9. Therefore in his Epistles to the Romans, to
the Galathians, and Ephesians, he strongly pleades the cause of faith in the
power of justification without works: plainly, in the second Chapter of his
Epistle to the Ephesians, verse. 8. and 9. he excludes the best things, left in
nature, and the best works in new nature from the merit of salvation, saying,
We are saved by grace: not of our selves, against Pelagius, and not of works,
against Papists: and gives the reason, which is to prevent all boasting in our
selves; as if we did, (as Papists say we do) bring somewhat in hand to the
purchase of our salvation. And so we see that faith makes our way to God, and
that works follow. Reasons.
The reasons. Our works (the best of them) are imperfectly good, and partly
evil: and what account can such have before him, whose eyes cannot behold
evil? Haba. 1.13. that that pleases him, is Christ absolutely holy, and
Christ's righteousness perfectly good; only (...) that: but neither he nor
this, is ours, further then by the grace of faith we can make them so, with
application to our selves. Secondly, the best come out of an unclean pit, and
their best works are but as foul rags, Isa. 64.6. And who can bring a clean
thing out of filthiness? Job 14.4. Now can any thing that is unclean and
filthy enter into so holy a place as heaven, and stand before so holy a person
as the Lord? or if it cannot; our persons not purged by Christ's holiness, and
our works not covered with his justice, whither shall they go? in heaven there
is no place for them; and they must stand without, with dogs, sorcerers, and
other sinners. Apocal. 21.27. and 22.15. It was sin that brought us out with
God it must be that (which we have not, perfect righteousness) that must bring
us in again. And this is the Son, in whom the Father is well pleased. Matthew
3.17. all other things (as we heard) are loss and dunge: and what good savor
in works of dunge?

This is against the Papists, Use 1
who (like dogs) bark against the truth of sole justification by faith.
Their tenet is, that the righteousness whereby we are justified is inherent in
us. But the righteousness, that does justify, is called a robe: and why a
robe, but because we have it (as we have our clothes) from another, out of
our selves? Flesh and skin we have from our mothers, but our apparel is made
us. So nature we have by birth, but grace by gift in the hand of faith.
Therefore Saint Paul desired to be found in Christ, Philip 3.9. clad with him.
Object. True, say the Papists, all we have in our first justification or
change to righteousness, we have from God only, and all is due to him for
it. But (say they) there is a second justification or change, and that as a
stock given us to set up for themselves, as it increases under our hand,
makes some part of pay to our salvation. Answer. But if the Apostle (as we
heard) had known any justification but one, and that one only and altogether
by gift, he would not have given away his own part, as he did, and have
acknowledged no other justification, but that of being in Christ. And further,
the Apostle gives the reason why he did so, though in another place. For,
speaking of God that justifies and saves only, he says, For (and that for
must stand) For, (says he) of him, and through him, are all things. Romans
11.36. by all things, we must understand all good things; specially, the good
things of life eternal: and these all are of and from God. And now where we
speak of faith, we understand not such a faith, as Saint James reproves,
which is a faith without works, and so dead, as the body is dead that
breaths not, Iam. 2.26. but a says accompanied with or breathing, in
manifest symptoms of new life: such a faith this woman had which in her was so
commended. And yet faith only justifies our persons before God: good works
serve but to justify our faith before men, Iam. 2.18.21. Also though we
acknowledge good works to be the quick pulses of a loving faith, yet withal
(we say) that they come not to God in way of justification. For true it is
that we must do good works, if we will be saved: and yet it is as true that
we shall not be saved for them.

An admonition to Christians to labor to get and hope faith, Use 2
so greatly commended in this woman of great faith: and to do so, we must use
the means; as (first) the Word: faith is by it, Romans 10.17. If (then) we will
wrestle with God by faith, when he proves our faith by temptation; we must know
what promises God has made in his word, and upon what terms: Psalm 9.10.
so we shall hold him by the words of his own mouth, and with Jacobs hand
till he bless us; who will surely do it, for be cannot deny himself. But
how shall we know what promises God has made in his word, and to whom, and
upon what conditions, when we know neither East nor West in it, and when we
turn from it in the day of hearing? When Satan shall sift us in the maine
point, how shall we hope in more then the chafe, if we be not sound grain by
the knowledge of salvation? Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the Word, Romans
10.17. Therefore no hearing, no faith: and without, what possibility to please
God? Hebr. 11.6. and not pleasing him, what hope to be saved? A fearful
darkness (therefore) must needs be upon all that want this Sun of their holy
faith. And let them think of it, who (as one says well) have passed an estate
of their souls to ignorance for term of life: neither have they heard, nor
will they. For, how can such obey, when they know not God: and not knowing him,
how can they escape the vengeance that is threatened in the flame of fire? 2.
Thessal. 1.8. Secondly, if we would have and get faith, we must pray for it to
the author and finisher of our faith. Hebr. 12.2. Mark. 9 24. Luke 17.5. They
deserve not good things that will not open their mouths for them: and we have
a saying, Spare to speak, spare to speed. Faith (then) being of good things
the best, how unworthy shall we show our selves of so fair a Jewel, if we
will not ask it? Thirdly, as we get faith by the Word and prayer, so (being
had) we must keep it in a good conscience. For faith and good conscience are
relata, one cannot be without the other. He that puts away good conscience in
his life, puts away faith: they come together, and go together, 1. Tim. 1, 19.
and 3.9. Paul might earnestly (as with the hold of faith) behold the counsel,
who had lived in all good conscience, from the day of his conversion, to that
day. Act. 23.1. But with what face of faith can they appear before God or man,
who (hitherto) have had no clear conscience toward either? Act. 24.16. And who
(therefore) being men of no conscience, are men of no faith.

The grant of the woman's request follows.

Be it unto thee even as thou will.
OR, with such a faith, ask what thou will, and it shall not be denied thee.
Here the woman's request is granted with the advantage: for, be it as thou will, is a large overplus: she expressed no more but her daughters freedom
from Satan's possession: but more is granted, even what she will, as was said
before: her daughters cure was but that some thing in hand for a greater
matter: and both the greater and less are yielded to such a faith; which is
the p^^^ciple and c^iefe in the good issue of this conference between Christ
and her: where we have (first) the general issue, and (then) the particular
effect. In the first, the book was drawn; in the second, it was signed with
the health of the woman's daughter, and there Christ's hand was to the book.
Quest. But might the woman have had what she would ask? and what if she had
asked her house full of gold and precious stones, should she have had it?
Answ. I answer, true faith (such as this woman had) will ask within the word
and promise, and no otherwise: and to such and to no other, is this large grace
offered. 1 John 5.14. it is not entrusted to greedy persons, and covetous that
have no faith: in a true faith there is no vain wishing or woulding: but what
God is pleased to give, that and more than that, it will not ask: but (here)
where so much is granted to the woman, more than she durst presume to ask:
Doctr.
we learn that God is a most bountiful giver: what we dare not ask for our
unworthiness, he, for his own worthiness will give unto us: commonly, his
gift is larger than our prayers, if we pray in faith. The Israelites asked but
bread, and God gave them Angels food, Psalm. 78.25. Elijah prayed that it might
not rain, and it rained not on the earth for three years and a half, Iam.
5.17. the King asked life, and the Lord gave him a long life, Psalm. 21.4.
Solomon desired wisdom, and God gave it him, and more, 1 King. 3.9.12. The
prodigal asked to be a servant in the house, and the father received him in
equal terms, with his eldest brother, Luke 15 19.22, 23. so, the repentant
Malefactor, asking no more but to be remembered of Christ in his kingdom,
received answer, that, that day he should be with him in paradise, Luke
23.42.42. thus more is given to our prayers than is asked, asking as this woman
did. The reasons: Reasons.
all the reason for this is in Gods nature, who is a bountiful giver, Iam.
1.5. he makes a kings dinner, and biddes us (poor beggars) to it, Matthew.
22.1, 2, 3. and thus as the heathen Monarch once said to a poor man, to whom
he gave a city, refusing it, as too great and much for him; that the matter
was not what became him to receive, but what was fit for him to give: so here
the matter is not what we are worthy to receive, but what pleases him (the
worthy God) to give: and now he that spared not his own Son, but gave him to
death, that we should not die, what will he not do for us? Romans 8.32. or was
he so liberal in his Son, and will he pull back in small matters?

Papists are here reproved, Use 1.
who add to Gods bounty in man's salvation: his gift in it, is rather over
than short, yet they will help it with making some part of payment, where all
is free: but he, that made this dinner is a King, Matthew. 22.1. and Kings, when
they have royally dined their Subjects, do not take a shot of them; either
(then) our Papists believe not that God is so bountiful (as we have heard) the
God that gives liberally, and does not (as some meats in the stomach)
vpbraide the receivers; Iam. 1.5. or they offer manifest contempt to his
bounty and goodness.

A comfort to humble sinners, Use 2
who find in themselves no matter able to draw any thing from God: for such
may say with the Prophet; return unto thy rest (O my soul) for the Lord has
dealt bountifully with thee, Psalm. 116.7. If we say, we are not worthy: our
unworthiness (having it in a true account, and rightly humbled for it) will
rather open the face of God, than set him out with us: for, blessed are the
poor in Spirit, Matthew. 5.3. God keeps no ordmarie: and here he pays best,
who (in his true repentance and vile esteem of himself) confesses he has
nothing to pay: such (as being thirsty indeed) are called to the waters of his
rich grace to drink at will, Esa 55 1. and this (Christian soul) is thy best
buckler to ward off the stroke of insufficiency, which Satan (the obiector)
will offer at thy weak estate in a day of temptation: for, no more is required
for satisfaction to the justice of God in thy many sins, but, with submission
to God, and repentance for sin from a soul of sorrows, to confess thy
great unworthiness, and the liberality of thy Host: for, the reckoning is
(which is soon made,) there is nothing to pay, and ye are welcome: buy Wine
and milk (as Esaias says) without money, and without price, Esa 55.1. And thus
the book was drawn.

The signing of it follows out of Mark 7.29. and Matthew 15.28.

Mark 7.29. And he said unto her, for this saying, go thy way; the devil is
gone out of thy daughter.

and Matthew. 15.28. And her daughter was made whole, from that very hour.


THE book drawn in the former sentence, is signed in this of Mark, and the
other of Matthew. Mark uses the trope of a metonomy, putting her saying, for
that, that caused it, the effect for the cause: the cause was her faith, which
thrust out such a saying, or made her so to say: hereupon Christ said; for this
saying; that is, for that faith that caused it, or because of it: go thy way,
or, take my word, the devil is gone out of thy daughter; not of his own
accord, but by power of authority from me. This woman was a woman of great
faith; yet Christ helps it with a seal of sensible matter, in her daughters
cure: Doctr. 1
and so it is plain that God (for the help of his weak servants) signeth
their faith, and his other graces in them, with outward things. God made a
promise to Abraham, and writes it in his own flesh, and in the flesh of the
males of his house, when he gave charge that he, with them should be
circumcised, Genesis 17.10, 11. And when God by his Angel, would smite the
Egyptians, and spare his people, for the stronger assurance of their faith,
he signeth the two side posts of their houses with the blood of the Lamb
called the blood of the Passover, that the destroying Angel seeing it, might
pass by, Exodus 12* 22, 23. Also God promising deliverance from the hand of the
Midianites by the hand of Gideon, does seal it with two signs, Judge 6.36, 37,
38, 39, 40. and our deliverance from the Madian of hell, in the estate of the
new Testament, he signeth with the two Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper: and so he does not punish us (as he might) for not believing: (and
what great person will not storm, if his word shall not be taken;) but gives
us somewhat in hand to confirm us rather: Reasons.
the reasons. The best are weak to hold the graces which he gives of faith,
hope, love, patience, and other: therefore, and because he would not have so
precious wares to go to loss, who says; gather up the fragments that nothing
be lost, John 6.12. he strengthens with sensible helps the hand into which
he puts them. Further also, faith is that ladder, which Jacob saw, and that
raught from earth to heaven, Genesis 28.12. Now a ladder has steps upon it,
higher and lower; and so the ladder of our faith, which reaches from us to
God, must likewise have like steps of help, or risings toward him: and yet
further, we are but babes in faith, who (therefore) have need of outward
things, as a wall to hold by. Secondly, the stubborn heart of nature is not
quite gone from the best believers in their new estate of grace, and still it
has a stubborn root: and therefore must have many hands unto it, besides the
promises in the word, to pull it up. Thirdly, the end of Christ's coming (one
of them) was to strengthen the weak lambs of his Fathers election, Ezeck.
34.16. Now, the best that are, believe but weakly, Matthew. 8.26, and therefore,
Christ must either lose the end of his coming, or keep and fulfill it by
strengthening the weak in faith.

The use is (first) for instruction, Use 1.
teaching Christians to confess the weakness of their faith, and that it is
not so easy a matter to believe as they think: some say they never yet
doubted but this easy believing is a sure sign (no surer) of no faith: for
they that believe indeed, are not high minded but fear, Romans 11.20. and some
(again) trust to their old store, never seeking, (as the disciples prayed) the
increase of their faith, Luke 17.5. but wherefore does God so help (even) the
best in their weak faith, if it were strong as it seems in their imaginate
degree of believing? besides, the shield of faith must be managed with more
humility, or we shall never make use of it against Satan's fiery darts, either
to Gods glory, or our own preservation, Ephesians. 6.16.

A reproof of those who despise in the sin of Ahaz, Use 2.
the helps of their weak faith. Isa. 7.12. which would be considered of those
that find no taste in the Sacraments, neither tarrying at Baptism, nor caring
to receive the Lords Supper more then once (if once) a year. Indeed, God is to
be credited of his word, yet (in regard of our weak estate in says) his
seals confirm us more. When we have an honest man's seal and writing, with his
word, we doubt no longer. The promise of God is sealed and delivered in the
Sacraments, to make it of less question with us in our staggerings here: yet
in contempt of them, we had rather hold by no lease, or one that has no seal
unto it; then come and be at the Sacraments on the days of sealing. The Lords
Supper is the feast of thanksgiving, (and here we should take the cup of
salvation, Psalm. 116.13.) but if a few of the meaner sort come to give thanks,
those of higher place take state, as nothing concerning them, who should be
most thankful. And may not Christ (then) say, as of the Lepers, Are not ten
cleansed? But where are the nine? Luke 17.17. that is, are not all bounden? and
yet where is one of ten that obeyes? For of sixteen score in a Parish, how few
come to meat, as Saul said of David, Yesterday, or to day? 1. Sam 20.27. If it
were to take some house or piece of Land, we would take it over another head
for have: but where we may buy for nothing, Isa. 55.1. we let all go; house
and land, though of far better purchase in heaven.

Upon this answer to the woman, and Christ bidding her to go her way, or to
take his word; she gave over, went away, and believed, though he went not with
her, in person, to cast the devil out of her daughter. And so she believed
what she did not see. Doctr. 2.
From whence we may gather, That Faith (and she had a great faith) stands
not in sight, but in the promise of the World. We (therefore) are said to
behold the glory of Christ, not by face, but in the mirror of the Gospel 2. Corinthians. 3.18. Simon Peter had faith, and that made him to take Christ's word
for that which he saw not. Luke 5.5. And that true Israelite, Nathanael,
believed upon a word that Christ spoke, Ioh. 1.47 48, 49. Abraham received the
promise (and so did that cloud of faithful Saints, spoken of in the eleventh
to the Hebrews) by faith, not by seeing; by an invisible hand, not by an hand
of visible matter. Romans 4.20.21. And this is the word of faith, that we
preach: not the word of man, which is but the word of opinion. Romans 10.8. and
this is the ground of things hoped for, and evidence of things that are not
seen. Hebr. 11.1. Therefore Christ's first Text was, Repent, and believe the
Gospel, Mar. 1.15. he says not, Repent and see, but repent and believe what
you cannot see. And it is no proper speech to say, we believe what we see: for
faith goes when sight comes. Hebr. 11.1. And thus the object of Faith is not
sight, but matter that cannot be seen. Reasons.
The reasons. Faith is in the heart, Romans 10.10. therefore not under sense:
also of things to come, and therefore neither under sight. For who can see that
that is not? Secondly, the object of Faith is God the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. And is God, in Trinity, under the sense of sight, whom we see with
other eyes in the glass of the Gospel? For in it we have Christ, and in him
eternal life. Ioh. 5.39 But neither he, nor it is in the norison of our sight:
and what mortal eye can see so far?

A reproof of those who go all by sight. Use 1.
In matters of high mystery they will go no further then reason does bring
them, drawn from the senses: where it is reason of faith that must persuade in
such cases; or else when will we believe the virginity of the mother of
Christ? the three distinct persons in one entire God head, the rising again of
the same bodies, long ago consumed to dust and nothing; and the like sacred
mysteries of our most holy faith? Some that profess to believe in Gods power
and goodness, will yet believe no further then they see. They will trust God
upon a good pawn, as if he fill their barnes with corn, and their purses
with money; otherwise they will trust him no more then men will bankrupts. He
has given his faithful word, that they who seek him in faith, Psalm. 34.10.
and serve him in righteousness, verse. 15. shall want no good thing. But do
they take him at his word, who lie, and cosen, use violence, and draw blood to
be rich? And do they trust him for their provision, who (being poor) fall to
practices against good conscience, steal, and take his name in vain? Prou.
30.9. these can skill of nothing but what they have in hand. Where the
faithful believe without means and against them. Dan. 3.17. When they have
nothing, they know God has enough, and they sufficient in his storehouse of
providence. They will believe in his power for their safety, though they
should have all the world against them, Psalm. 3.5, 6. and though they be
drunken with gall and wormwood, they will not doubt to be made sober again,
with the sweet mercies of the God of their salvation.

A direction for Gods mourners, Use 2.
when with Isaac (ready to be offered up) they see the fearful knife and
wood, but not the Lamb for sacrifice: Genesis 22.7. that is, see their fearful
changes, but not the issues of them. In this case, they are here taught with
Abraham, to say in their faith. that God will provide; that is, work, though
they see not how: ver. 8. Indeed when the favor of God is in the eclipse, God
darkeneth (for that time) all the lights of his children: they cannot see his
love, and they feel a great measure of his wrath in the best things they do.
Hence they judge themselves to be cast-awayes from the life of Christ, which
is the case of Gods best Saints. It was the case of Job, David, Hezek^ah,
Jeremiah, and other of the Lords worthies, Job 13.26. Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Isa.
38.10, 11, 12. etc. Ier. 20.14, 15 But their darkness brake up after a while,
and their Sun returned, as after a recovery out of some great eclipse, or
loss of light. Therefore mean while, and so long as thou feel such an
eclipse of thy lights, remember the years of the right hand of the most high,
Psalm. 77.10. his former mercy and truth toward thee, which are in him without
repentance, Romans 11.29. And when thou have greatest temptations to despair,
labor most against them. Though thou can see no reason to believe, yet
believe with all thy heart. If Gods favor seem to be gone in the eye of thy
reason, look abroad with the better eye of thy faith, the eye that sees
(even) those things that are not, and it will give that a being which reason
gives for lost. The object of faith is the promise of God, not things under
sight. And therefore when all things seem to go one way; and when heaven and
earth, the Sun, Moon, stars, and all the elements go against us, here is
just matter for our faith, a grace that is able to draw some thing out of
nothing. Here let us believe and wrestle against hope under hope, and (under
the dark cloud) against hell, and devils, that envy our salvation. If they
say, ye have lost Gods favor: let us say, and with the voice of faith say, it
is lost to our feeling, but not to our faith: for, we believe, and we will
believe, though the Lord should kill us, Job 13.15. And thus, the doctrine of
faiths object in things, not visible, or not presently seen, will be a good
cloak for the weather, when rainy days come. And what storm can stay us in
our spiritual course, being so well provided against what may come hereafter?

The third use is for conviction. Use 3
And here desperate is all the Religion of Popery, which stands altogether
upon sense for worshipping, and upon sense for salvation. They cannot pray, but
before a Crucifixe, nor worship devoutly but before an Image. And for their
salvation, it is in works that are visible, not in grace that saves us. Ephesians.
2.8. Beyond the eye of reason, and further then the care of sense, they will
not have the Ignorants (that follow them) to go for assurance that they shall
be saved. They must not believe their own salvation, a thing they cannot see;
only they must hold it in a slippery hope, or certainty uncertain. But the
old saying is here true, As good never a whit, as never the better. To allow a
certainty that may fail (and they allow no better) is in a seeming to build;
and in true substance, to pull down. Look Romans 8, 15. Mark. 11.24. 1. Ioh.
3.23: Romans 5.5. Luke 10 20. 2. Cor. 13.5.

The particular effect follows.

The Devil is gone out of thy daughter.
WE have heard of the general issue; now follows the particular subsequent
effect or success of this conserence. The devil that did go into this woman's
daughter, is now gone out, compelled by Christ's authority and sovereignty.
Where we may consider what Christ said to the woman, in these words, and what
followed upon it in the next. Christ tells her that the devil is gone: we must
think against his will, and dispossessed by a stronger, even Christ, that had
cast him out. And here observe, That Christ is the Soueraigue Lord of the
devils. Doctr.
The Author to the Hebrews says, that he had destroyed him that had the power
of death: to wit, the devil. Hebr. 2.14. the effects show it. For he commanded
the foul spirits, and they came out. Luke 4.36. Now to command and get
obedience, is to have dominion. The devils confess as much, who (therefore)
cry out at his approach toward them, Matthew. 8.29. Also how may devils, being
entered into men, did he cast out with his only word? Mark. 5.8, 9, 10. and
9.25, 26. The seventy, when then returned, said to Christ, Lord, even the
devils were subdued unto us through thy Name. Luke 10.17. And how (then) can he
but have authority over the devils, of whom this is spoken, and by whom so
much is done? Reasons.
The reasons. So much was promised to Christ, the feed of Mary, Genes. 3.15.
and Gods promises never fail, can never: for; if he say the word, it is done,
Psalm. 33.9. Secondly, this was the end for which God (his Father) sent him, 1
John 3.8. and what shall cross the way of his ends? Men's ends have a superior
disposer, Pro. 26.33. and (commonly) are ill set; but who can say so of Gods
ends, that they have a superior, and that they are not well set? and what then
can hinder, that they should not take effect in their just execution? Thirdly,
Christ is the Savior of his people, and this was the name given him by the
Angel, Matthew. 1.21. but how should he save his people, if he could not by a
larger power destroy his peoples enemies? how can he dwell in them, and not
put out the usurper? Luke 11.22. and how should we do then? and who shall
tread Satan under our feet, if Christ do not, or could not? Romans 16.20.

A comfort to all Christ's members: Use 1.
for the power of their head is to save their heads, and the subjection of the
devils to Christ, is their victory over them in him. The life the devils have,
is but a vanquished life, or life of repryuie in prison till the day of the
last general assizes, the day of their full dam^ nation: and so they are of no
power against any of Christ's true members, being as dead Lions, and Christ's
members being as Daniel among the Lions, Dan. 6.22. S. James makes them no
better than Cowards, who (if a man turn again) will fly, Iam. 4.7. come
against them with faith, and they are gone, 1. Pet. 5.9. Object. You will say,
but it seems not so. Answ. I answer, what matter for seemings? for, seem as
it will, it is so: the brazen Serpent seemed a living Serpent, and terrible,
but was not. Indeed in the reprobate seed the devils draw breath: in the seed
of grace, they gasp as a dying man, and draw their last breath of hope, here
and hence. They got down Christ by our sins laid upon him, and to this day
they nible at his heel, his members and servants by their own sins; but
their Scull is broken, Genesis 3.15. and Christ has triumphed over them unto
their unrecoverable perdition, made an open show of them, after the old Roman
solemnity, and spoiled them for ever, Coloss. 2.15.

A terror to all the wicked enemies of Christ: Use 2
for he that has subdued the devils, the stronger, can casily master them, the
weaker; shall (then) the blasphemers of Gods name, shall drunkards,
whoremongers, oppressers of the needy, sabbathbreakers, and other sinners
think to carry out their matters still as they have done when he that is
Sovereign Lord, of the devils, shall make inquiry after them, to their full
destruction in the hells? The men of Samaria (speaking of Iehu) say; two kings
could not stand before him, and how shall we? 2 King. 10.4. not only not two
kings, but not all the devils of hell (stronger than all kings, not
strengthened with Christ) could make their part good against him, that has the
keys of death, and hell, Apoc. 1.18. even Christ the Lord; and shall weak
men, being ungodly, and sinners, be able to make head against him? no verily;
for the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous, Psalm. 1.5.

The consequent of Christ's speech to the woman follows.

And her daughter was made whole from that very hour.
S. Mark adds, Chap. 7. V. 30. that,

When she was come to her house, she found the Devil gone out, and her
daughter laid upon the bed.

BOth S. Matthew and S. Mark pitch upon one thing; only S. Mark has a
circumstance which S. Matthew has not; and that is, that When she came to her
house, she found her daughter laid upon the bed: because (it is like) not
perfectly well, though much better than before, the devil being gone, that
cast her into those fits; and so she had no more of them, though not quite from
weakness, the remainder of her former distempers. And now where the woman
found it to be, as Christ had told her, we learn, Doctr.
that what Christ (the truth) says, is done; his word and deed are one; also,
Gods promise in the word is sure, nothing can make it ineffectual, Romans 3.3.
yea all his promises in Christ are yea, and in him, Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. Christ
himself says, heaven and earth shall pass away, or run into nothing,
before any word of mine shall pass, or not stand in force, Matthew. 24.35. and
it cannot be that the word of God, (and consequently of Christ-God,) should
take no effect, or fail in performance, Romans 9.6. Hence I conclude, that Gods
promises, and the promises of Christ-God, are as certainly done as made, no
tract of time can anull them, Reasons.
Galatians 3.17. The reasons. One reason may be taken from an attribute in God
and Christ; which is, truth in the abstract, John 14.6. 1 John 4.6. Deuteronomy. 32.4.
In the concrete, he that is true may be false; but truth can never. Secondly,
and a second reason may be taken from an impossibility that God or Christ
should lie: it cannot be says S Paul, Romans 9.6. and so said Samuel, 1 Samuel
15.29. or, if an honest man will keep his word, is it possible that God, or
that Christ, who is God should break his? truth may be in men, and is in the
blessed Angels: but truth in men and Angels, is as those things that are set
with the hand; in God and Christ-God, as things that grow naturally and without
hand: and if it be impossible that God should sin, (and it is impossible he
should Hebrews 6.18. Habac. 1.13.) then he cannot deceive which in true account
is to sin.

The first use is, Use 1.
for the reproof of those who are not followers of God, or Christ in what they
say: for, (as it was said of the Pharisees and Scribes, in Moses chair) they
say and do not, Mat 23 3. they can promise by the ^ll, but pay by the inch:
their mouths talk of vanity, and their hand is the hand of falsehood, Psalm.
144.8. their words and deeds fall out by the way: and many promise largely,
yea, and shake hands upon the same, who yet keep no promise. May not such men's
words well be called wind? for, as when the wind blows, we hear a sound
but cannot hold the same: so when such promises are so made, we hear a sound
of words, but beside words, which we cannot hold, there is nothing to hold by,
but a wind of promises that turns with every weather: Gods promises are yea
and Amen, 2. Cor. 1.20. theirs are yea and nay: not careing how many they make,
nor how few they keep: but as Peter said to lying Ananias, while it remained,
appertained it not to thee? Act. 5.4. so I say to thee before thou did open
thy mouth to thy neighbor, was it not in thy power to promise, or not? but,
having promised, the power is gone from thee to the other: and not keeping
promise, thou lie both unto God, and unto man. God takes hold of thy words,
though man cannot: and let this teach us to hold in, and not to speak rashly,
lest as a river over flowing, we leave much slime behind us, the slime of
many and great untruths. And further, let us consider what we are in Gods
book by our many promises, not kept; and so blot the book by repentance, that
they may not stand there against us in the day of his Audit. Use 2


The next use is for comfort. For, is Christ's word and deed one? then what
Christ has promised, concerning salvation, to believers, is as good, as in
hand: on the word of the Gospel (therefore) we must rely by faith in all
quauerings of times and men; here Abraham held fast, Romans 4.17, 18. and if we
will walk in the steps of his faith, we must keep his hold, and not let go
for any temptation. But some say, I could do so, if Christ would speak to me,
as God did to Abraham; but art thou a believer? in speaking to believers, John
3.16. he speaks to thee; and when God spoke to Abraham, he spoke to all that
should be of his faith. In the person of Abraham, he speaks to us as Christ
exhorting to a spiritual watch, says, What I say to you, I say to all Mar.
13.37. And therefore, let no believer go away, as unspoken unto, when all are
called; and are they called to send them empty away? no, but hungring for him,
he will fill them with good things, Luke 1.53. Quest. But how shall we know
that? Answ. He has made promise to all in covenant with him, under the ^eale
of an oath, that he will be true unto them, Ezech 16.8.
Heb 6.17. and ratify what he has said; besides, he has left it written in
the Gospel, and sealed it in the Sacraments; and will he deny his word, and
hand unto it?

The circumstance in the text of S. Mark, omitted by S. Matthew, follows.

Mark 7. VERSE 30. When she was come to her house, etc.


CHrist does not wholly and at once, heal this woman, but keeps some part of
her health in his own hands: and it was, that the benefit of it might tarry
longer in the memory, both of the one and other; from whence^ gather that God
will not give all his health and good together. Doct.
The Samaritane did not restore the wounded man before his departure, but left
something to be done till his coming again, Luke 10.34.35. S. Paul prayed
earnestly, and often against an old infirmity, which (yet) was not wholly
removed, (though much amended) and continued with some prick of remembrance, 2
Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Jacob (also) had a worthy victory, yet with a remembrance in
his thigh, Genesis 32, 28.31. Reasons.
The reasons: the first, it is for our greater good, and Gods greater glory:
for our greater good; that we may not commit the sin, of the unthankful;
which is to slight a benefit, when it comes easily, and at once: and for Gods
greater glory, that he may have more, (and longer) thanks. Now, God will
have us to profit by his benefits as well as by his corrections; which is a
benefit with a blessing. Secondly, the harder we come by a thing, the better
we will regard it: and (here) if health, or liberty, or comfort, come by
degrees, we will better respect them, than if they should come instantly, and
at our first prayers: and God will not have any of his good gifts neglected:

The use is for instruction, Use 1.
diverse ways; where first it teaches, that God will have his goodness to
tarry long in our memories; hereupon the Prophet summons his soul to this
duty; praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, Psalm.
103.2. He knew that God conferred them to be remembered, Psalm. 111.4. and that
the forgetting of them, was the next way to lose them, and him that gave them:
for he said to Israel, that had forgotten, and was unthankful for so many
deliverances; ye have forsaken me, and served other Gods: therefore I will
deliver you no more, Judge. 10.13. Secondly, this teaches Christians to provide
for the memorial of Gods loving kindness, and of the mercies he has showed
them. So did Samuel, when he pitched that stone of help^e between Mizpeh and
Shen, 1. Sam. 7.12. God had wrought himself much in their many deliverances;
and he called the name of the place, Eben-ezer, saying; hitherto the Lord has
helped us. David kept a day-booke of Gods goodness in the like kind, and
filled his Register; that we may do as Samuel and David (two excellent
leaders) did, we must (first) call Gods benefits to our mind, and common with
our selves, when to do it, and wherein, Psalm. 116.12. Secondly, we must set a
fit price upon them, and thirdly, put them over to good use; for, practice
(here) is the best mem^ry, and they best remember Gods kindness, that best
v^e it; for the first, it was commended to the Church in a Psalm, or song;
where the Lord would have the Israel of his favor to draw down the line of
his praise, from the fathers to the children; and (therefore) often to speak of
his marvelous works, Psalm. 78.3, 4, from the youth of the Church to the age
of it, this must be done, Psalm. 129.1, 2. For the second; Jacob confessing
that he was less than any of Gods mercies, or than all, Genesis 32.10. and
David, when he said; who and I, or what fit subject for so worthy blessings,
(such as there were spoken of,) 1. Chro. 29.14. did (both of them) set a good
rate upon every mercy that came. And for the third, (which is the good use,
and best memorial of every blessing,) it is our thankfulness for it: as,
when God gives health after some long sickness, plenty after some great
dearth, and peace after war; then to walk humbly, in these favors, with
him, is to praise him for his mercies. Lastly, this teaches us patience, when
any affliction is long upon us: for, God excerciseth his best children, either
with suspending his helps, or with helping them, but in some sort, and by
degrees. Some break out, if they be not free from all troubles, and from al at
once: but Gods chidren hold in, knowing that his method in curing of troubles,
is to remove them; not as is most desired, but as is most fitting: and thus
God, in pulling his Church out of Babylon, left them not without enemies, even
in Jerusalem, Nehem. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. therefore, Gods children must not be too
hasty, because they see not their hope where they look to receive it, but
wait upon God, and hope in him, Psalm. 37.7.

The second use is for reproof of those who will be their own loaders in the
carriage of their burdens, bearing as much, Use 2.
and as long as they think good, or, with Iehorams Messenger, they will wait
upon God no longer, 2 King. 6.33. What they ask; and all they desire they must
presently have, or (like little children) they wax pettish, and nothing can
please them: So the Jews impatient of Gods yoke, would needs make the reed of
Aeg^pt their stay, Ier. 43.3, 4.5, 6, 7. either God must hear them as they
will, or they will be heard where they should not. And i^ God will not answer
Saul, the devil shall, 1 Samuel 28.6.14, 15. Many (at this day) fall into these
p^euish fittes, if God do not hear them as they would themselves: if in some
sickness they be not made all whole, all is lost; and that little which is
wanting does more trouble them, than that which is restored does give
satisfaction: we read of no such repining in this woman, though when she came
home, she found her daughter laid upon the bed: that is, not thoroughly well,
but weakly so.

The last use is for consolation. Use 3
In this woman, and in many of Gods servants, we see, that God does not
presently, and at once take away all that troubles them, but at times, and at
part: and (therefore) if the like befall us, (and why may it not?) we may say
with S. Paul, that no temptation has taken us, but what is common to man, 1
Cor. 10.13. and with S. Peter, that no strange thing has happened to us,.1 Pet.
4.12. for the best of Saints have trodden the way of such sufferings: and if we
have changes, they have complained of armies, or of a great muster of them, in
their days, Ioh. 10.17. If God cast us into an ague, (that might cast us into
hell,) and not suddenly pull us out of it, who may ever hold us in torments
that shall never end, we are un reasonably cast down; where rather, and
contrarily, we should be much comforted, that God does judge us in a small
ague, who might judge us in hell. If we feel but a little, who have deserved
so much, how unthankful are we, if we cannot rejoice in a light and
momentaine change? rather, let us raise our spirits, even in long troubles,
(for what are they to the long time of eternity?) much more, in some reliks of
trouble, let us be so minded. If one forgive us the whole debt of some
thousands, and put us to pay but a trifle (which we may easily do) would we
not willingly pay that little? it is less that God puts us unto, in respect
of the least sin: and here, the devil may not only, for a short time, be in
us, but in us, and round about us for ever: and shall this trouble us, that
(the Devil gone out) we are laid upon our beds?


