An oversight, and deliberacion upon the holy Prophet Jonas: made, and uttered
before the kings majesty, and his most honorable council, by Ihon Hoper in
lent last past. Comprehended in seven Sermons. Anno. M D.L.

Except ye repent, ye shall al peryshe. Luke. xiii. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.

To the most puisaunt Prince, and our most redoubted Soueraign Lord, Edward
the syxt, by y^ grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland, defender
of the faith, and in earth next, and immediately under God, of the Churches of
England, and Ireland the supreme head. And also unto the most wise, godly, and
most honorable Lords of his highness privy counsel, his most humble, loving,
and obedient subject Ihon Hoper, elect and sworn Bishop of Gloucester,
wysheth al grace and peace from God, with long, and the same most godly and
prosperous reign over us, in all honor, health, and perpetual felicity.
AMong al other most noble and famous deeds of kings, and Princes, none is
more godly, commendable, nor profitable to the common wealth, then to promote,
and set forth unto their subjects the pure, and sincere religion of the
eternal God, king of al kings, and Lord of al Lords. Then shall justice,
peace, and concord raygne, the door of Idololatrie be shut up, vi the which
has entered all evil, and kings and kingdoms fallen into ieopardye, as the
writings of y^ Prophets do testify. But the more this noble fact is glorious,
godly, and princely, the more difficile and hard it is. For the enemy of God
and of al mankind, the Devil, customablye is wont to deceive the princes of ye
world, so that either they utterly neglect the religion of the true God as a
thing folyshe, and of no estimacion, either provoke the^ cruelly to persecute
it. If he ca^ bring neither ye one, neither the other of these to pas: he will
do the best de can to preserve a myxte, and myngled religion, that shall
nether plainly be against, nor wholye with him: And so use the matter, that
partly gods truth shall take place, partly the supersticious inue^cion of
man. The which myngled and myxed religion is so much the more dangerous, as
it is accounted for pure and good. Therefore it is earnestlye forbidden by God,
as the examples of the scripture declares. Iehu the king of the Israelites
when he had removed all gross and sensible Idololatrye: and with the sword
had taken away all the Idololatricall priests. iii. Reg. x, is reproved of
God, nevertheless because he walked not in the law of God with all his heart,
and left not the ways of Jeroboam. And against these minglers and patchers
of Religion speaks Elias the Prophet, iii. Reg. xviii. How long says he
will ye halt on both sides. If y^ Lord be God, follow him, if Baal, go ye after
him. Even so we may justly say: If y^ priesthod and ministry of Christ with
his notes and marks be true, holy, and absolutely perfect, receive it: in case
it be not, follow y^ pope. Christ can not abide to have the leue^ of the
pharisees myngled with his sweet flower. He would have us either hot, or cold,
the luke warm he vometeth up: and not without a cause.

For he accuses God of ignorancie and folishenes, that entendeth to adorn and
beutifye his doctrine and decrees with human cogitacions. What king or
prince of the world would suffer his statutes, laws, and testament to be cut
of, and set on at every man's liberty and pleasure? Should not the same glory,
majesty, and honor be given unto the laws and testament of Christ, that is
sealed with his precious blood? The word of God wherwyth he governs and
rules his church, is a septer of iron. Psalm. ii. and not a rod of wylowe to be
bowed with every man's finger, either a read to be broken at man's will: no,
neither a piece of lether to be stretched and reached out with any man's teth.

These things be spoken of me most gracious and virtuous king, to commend
your maiestyes and your most honorable councels doings that seek the glory
of God and the restitucio^ of his holy and Apostolycall church. The which
thing, as your highness and your most honorable and wise council, have
gracyouslye be gone: gods mercy in the bowels of Christ Jesus grant you most
graciously to perform. The people of England were oppressed with the
vyolente and cruel tyranny of Antychryste: darckenes and ignorauncie occupied
y^ minds all most of all men, so that few knew the true way to eternal
saluatyon. And yet many Princes and wysemen delight and tarry in this
darckenesse, and can not or will not bare nor suffer the radiant and shynynge
beams of the Gospel, more then the night crow can the beams of the son:
but the merciful father of heaven shall better their syghte when his good and
merciful pleasure is. But the Lord be praised your majesty: your most
honorable and wise counsel, have not cared what y^ greatest part, but what
the better does, that the law of the high and mighty God, may be known to
your hyghnes people, as did David, Iosaphat, Ezechias and Iosyas. And in your
majesty's so doing, ye bind not only the true and living members of Christ
to give God thanckes in this behalf but also declare your self to be the
very fauroure, nource, and helper of the word of God according to the saying
of Esaye.xlix. Persevere gracyous king in this quarrel and dangerous
enterpryce. Your hyghnes shall not neade to fear either the strength or
cautelles of your enemies for there is no wit, wsdome, nor counsel against
ye Lord as Salomo^ says pro. xxi. No although they had silver as the gravel
of the sea, and gold as commune as the claye of the streets. zach. ix. for
albeit the horse is prepared for the day of battle, yet the vyctorye comes
from the Lord Proverb.xxi. I am he says the Lord that do comfort you, what
art thou that fear mortal manne, either the son of man, that shall be
made as hay, can thou for got the Lord thy maker, yt streachith forth the
heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth? Esa. li. Let these
diabolycall soundes, and speakynges of euel men, nothing trouble your
highness, nor your wise and godly councellour^. As long as the king is in his
tender age his council should do nothing in matters of religyon. For those
men's folishenes (rather I should sai malice) is condemned by the word of God
that teaches how a king in his young age with his wise and godly counsel
should abolyshe Idolatrye, and set forth the true, and godly religyon of
the living God. Thus declares the notable and godly fact of Josias that
followed the relygyon of his father not Ammon the Idolater, but of David, nor
declynynge to the rightt hand, neither to the left hand. And destroyed not
only the Images of his father, but also of Ieroboa^, and of Solomon. iiii.
Reg. xxii.xxiii. This scuit of Josias holp his godly cou^cellers, and virtuous
priests. Eue^ so Ioas being but a child was holp by his cou^cellers in the
like procedinges and reformacio^ of religion. In case yt princes, Bishops, and
priests had not known it to be the commandment of God to have obeyed
these.ii. young and godly kings, they would not have consented unto his
procedinges.

But we see how glad they were to do it. The Princes and councillors moved
no sedicion, the Bishop and the priests sought not for the defense of their
proper doctrine, either to myngle theirs with gods, but were content with the
sole and only law of God. Ye noble Princes and councillors, praise be unto
the living God for your great wisdom, and godly assistaunce in this behalf.
And the Lord be magnifyed in all the godly and learned Bishops, and others
of this Realm that have, and do put to their helps and studies to bring the
church of Christ to her old, and reverend perfeccion again. And al other
that hinder your majesty's godly purpose, openly, or secretelye, God will
douteles revenge at length.

The godly and virtuous begynnynges, most noble Prince, of your father the
kings majesty, Henry the eight of a blessed memory, shall by your hyghnes
godly be ended, in him that can and will do al things for Christ his dear
sons sake. And a thousand times the rather shall your majesty restore again
the true ministry of ye church, incase ye remove and take away all y^
monume^tes, tokens, and leauinges of papistry. For as long as any of them
remain, there remains also occasion of relapse unto the abolyshed
supersticion of Antichriste. Seeing I see in the writings of the Prophets, God
to require the obseruacion of his law only, concerning religion: and
threatens all Princes, priests, and prophets with his displeasure that neglecte
or contaminate it with their own cogitacions: I can do no less, how soever
the world shall take my doings: but exhort and pray the magistrates to
bring the church to her first perfeccion. For if I should study to please
man herein, I were not the servant of God. And I am afraid lest the dissease
that infected the Pharisees, infecteth also many now a days, that minister in
the church, unto whom Christ spoke. Ihon.v. How can ye believe, that seek
glory one of other, and the glory of God ye contemn. God give grace I may
not say. Hinc ille lacrime.

Help ye therefore O ye Bishops and pryestes, the kings maiestyes and his
noble couurelles procedinges, that all things may be brought to a perfect
and Apostolical reformacion, it is not inoughe to lay the foundation of the
temple, but there must be builded upon it gold, silver, and precious stone.
But in any case we must take heed we lay no straw, nor stubble upon the
foundation, if we do, it will be burned. i. Corrinth. iii. If we do not build
up upon the foundation, then shall we be shente as the Israelites were. Agge.i.
Let no manue excuse him self upon the kings majesty's age, for the age
can not excuse the kings majesty it self, If his relygyon in his youth be
according to gods word, he has the favor and promyses of God to
bless, preserve and keep his majesty, and his Realm, though the Devil,
and his members would say nay. If in youth his majesty take a wrong
relygyon, he shall be assisted of gods displeasure, as it is to be
seen.iiii. Regum. xxi.

Manasses being of twelve years old was crouned king, and in his youth
revoked the Idololatry that his father Ezechias had abolished, and in his so
doing displeased haynously y^ majesty of God, and at length was sore
afflicted, and punyshed for his so doing. Behold y^ displeasure of God in a
young king for a false religion. Ieoachim crouned the eight year of his age,
for the evil he did in the syghte of the Lord, he was taken prisoner by the
king of Babylon.ii. Paral. xxxvi, with all the goodly vessels of the Lord

This king raygned but three months and ten days before the Lord revenged
the false doctrine he maintained. These examples I dout not, most godly
king, and virtuous councellers, month you to be careful of the true
religion. The Lord has strength and power enough, seek ye him, and give no
place to the infirm persuasions of the flesh, for the Lord shall be with you.

Souche as think peace and quyetnes, shall come to the realm a better way,
then to have the true relygyon of God restored, they shall know the contrary
in the Prophet. Ie. Chapter.vi. the which Chapter if the kings majesty bare
in mind and follow it is wourthe a kings revenue: If a Lord, the value of his
land: if the Bishop, the estimacion of his Byshopprycke: if the marchaunte
the gaynes of his labor: if the husband his Oxen and plough. And the same
commanded God, Leuit.xxv. Observe my statutes, and my judgments then shall ye
dwell safelye in the earth: and the earth shall bring forth her fruit, ye
shall eat and be satyfied, and dwell in the earth with out fear. It is a
fond opinion most gracyous king, and unmeet for a chrystyan man to bare the
Magystrates of God in hand that incase the doctrine of Christ, and his holy
sacraments should not be decked and set forth with these plausible, and well
liking ceremonies (that is to speak playnelye with papysticall superstisticion)
it were to be feared of sedicio^ and tumults. Doutelesse if the Popes members
would not deceive the people, but teach the^ gods word, y^ people would sone
see the truth, and willingelye leave as much as God and their king should
command them, as y^ gests and factes of Iosyas, and Ioas declares. Most
gracyous king and noble councellers as ye have taken away the Mass from the
people, so take from them her feathers also: the altar, vestmentes, and such
like as apparelled her. And let the holy communion be decked with the holy
ceremonies that the high and wise preyste Christ deckyed and apparelled her
first of all. And from whence (mighty Prince and soueraygne Lord) spryngeth
war, and sedicion? Come they not from the only God being angrye, for the
neclectynge of his law: so we be taught by Esa. l. And Ieremye.ix. says,
who is wise and understands this, and he unto whom the mouth of the Lord has
spoken and declares wherefore the earth perishes, and is like unto the burned
wilderness yt no man may pass by it. And the Lord said, because they have
forsaken my law, which I put unto them, and heard not my ways, and walks
not therein, but followed the desire of their own hertes, and after Baalimas
they were taught by there fathers: And because we myngle men's inuencyons
with his law. For he says men worship him in vain with the precepts of
men Math. xv. And in the.ix. of Jeremy the Lord declares other manner of
causes of war and sedicion. The forsakynge of his law, not to harken unto
his voice, nor to walk in his ways, to go after the prauitye and euylnes of
ever own hearts. The viciatynge and just use of the Lords supper. i. Cor.
xi. Also y^ neglecrynge of wydowes and orphalynges causes, not to judge right
judgment to the power Ierem. v. These causes must be avoided or else truly
thy saying of Ieremye will take place. Chap. vii. You trust in your selfs
and in lies that nothing profytteth. The next way to return the hand of
gods anger, and great displeasure against us is to follow Iosophat the king,
that appointed good judges and godly pryestes in every cyty. The judges to
judge after the true laws of the realm, and the preystes to do all things in
the church according to the word of God which teaches such knowledge and
fear of God and of the magystrates, that all the wisdom, laws, and books
that ever were made be but counterfeete and folyshe in respect of it. Nor ever
had God in heaven, or king upon the earth such a friend as is the holy
Bible. For it reaches y^ people and subjects of the realm, the fear of God,
obedyence to the kings majesty and his Magestrates and all mutual and
fraternal love. This example and counsel of Iosaphat if it beneglected there ca^
no godlynes be among the people as the text says when Prophecye wants,
the people shall be dysipated and scattered abroad Prouerves. xxix. To the
doings of these godly offices should all men be exhorted specyallye such
as bare the name of Bishops and preistes. If they will not be desirous and
glad to have, and help the mynistery of the church to the primatyue and
perfect estate again, the Lord does cry vengeance toward them, and will
not only require the lose of them selfs but also of all the people at their
hands Ezech. iii. xxxiii. Let them remember the complaynte of God him self
Ierem. i. My people has have a lost flock, my shepperdes have deceived them,
and have made them go astraye upon the hills. If these threatenings will not
amend them Gracyous King, and you my honorable Lords of his high counsel,
must do with them as the mariners did with Jonas. What y^ is, seeing it pleased
the kings majesty and you my Lords of his most honorable council in the
lent to hear by me, I have now at the request of many godly persons caused
it to come abroad, and dedicated the same to your Pryncelye majesty, and
most prudente Counsel that your hyghenes may be both judge and record of
my doctrine unto your Maiestyes true and loving subjects. The which doctrine
is Catholyke, and godly in all things nothing dyssentinge, but agreeable with
the Prophets and the Aposteles, as I am, (according to my bonnden duty)
redye at all times to make answer, if any thing shall be attempted to the
contrary. Incase there be now and the^ added a word more or less, or
peradventure some sentence, yet I know well ye matter is not changed nor
aultered other wise then I spoke it before your majesty, for I have
memoryaies, wherein I wrote before y^ inuencio^, order, and disposition of all the
matters I would entreat upon: As I use, and ever will do of all things I
speak in gods behalf to the people, wryt my self, or cause an other to
write, the pethe, and disposycion of al things I speak upon, that I may as
well learn a farther knoweledge my self thereby, as make answer to mine
enemies, if any should accuse me of false doctrine. The God of all strength and
consolation govern pour majesty an your most honorable counsel with his
holy spyryte, and give you the vyctorye of all your ennemies Ami. Anno. M. D.
L. Septembris.vi. Sense y^ angel of god slew in the army of Senacherive gods
ennemie a hundredth thousand and syue thousand men. Anno. M.M.C.C. lxxx. viii

The first Sermon made the.xix. day of March, in the year of our lord a.
M.CCCCC.L. before the kings majesty and his most honorable Counsel, by Ihon
Hoper Preacher, upon the holy Prophet Jonas.
Preface unto the Prophet.
IT is the office and dewty of every good child, that studiousli laboreth to
obey and follow his fathers commandment, before all things, to know
perfectly the nature and condition of his fathers will. Whereof if he be
ignoraunte: many times in the same things he judges best of, he most
offends, and the things most pleasant and acceptable, as things most
dyspleasau^t and unacceptable unto his father: he flies, and refuses. Even so
we that be subjects and the children of God the father almighty, can do
nothing gratefully and acceptable unto his Majesty, except we first know his
good will and pleasure toward us: or else we shall there most offe^de him, where
as we mind most to please him. And again happyly to improve as pernicious and
heretycal, that his wisdom approves to be most Godly and profitable.
Wherefore as the first point of a loving Child, is to know, what pleasyth,
and what dyspleasyth, what contentyth and what discontentyth his father, least
he should by ignorance displease, where as his sonnelyke affeccion by natural
zeal would please: so is it the second point of a good Child (his fathers
will once truly known) dyligently to observe and keep the same, least he
should by negligence or contempt be seen wilfullye to contemn the thing he
has with dylygence and study obedyentlye submyttyd him self unto. And
incase (as such cases be most common and daily) that infyrmities or other
occasyon led the son from the obedyence of his father: The third point of
his dewtie is, speedely to acknowledge his offense, and desire pardon and merci
for his tra^sgressio^, As the prodigal and disobedient son did. Luke. xv. And
David. ii. Samuel. and so after the remyssyon and pardon obtained, to be more
circumspect and wise how he fall and transgress again. Psalm. li.

These proposicions and sentences be so true, that no reasonable man doubts of
them. But as the devil has left in the world no truth nor verity, which by
argument and question he has not called into dout: so trobleth he in this
case the minds of men with two questions. The first is how and from whence
the will of God may be known. The second what ye will of god is: So has he
prevailed among men for sin, that the truth of these questions is unknown
to the greatest part of the world, as it was in Moses time, Christ's time, and
now in our time more ignoraunte and far from God, the^ they. He persuaded in
those days that the will of God was known, not from heaven nor out of the
scripture Canonical, as the Patriarchs, Prophets and the Apostles tawghte, but
that it was known by the writings, decrees, and statutes of me^ that were in
the earth, and that the will of God was to do that man commanded, and not that
God commanded.

But as almighty God left not his Church the^, without some that should keep
the truth of both these questions among the people, to preserve the^ from
the danger that must needs follow, where as truth is not known. So has he
done now at this present time. And by the same authority (as the devil
authore and father of all questions and lies) was confounded the^, so is he
now. Moses instructynge the people in the truith of the first questyon whence
the will of God should be known, commands them neither to look it in Aegipt
nor else where, but in the word of God. Deuteronomy. xxx. and Sayncte Paul does the
same. Roma. x. and S. Ihon.i. says: Noman has seen the father, but ye son,
and he unto whom the son has opened the father unto. God therefore and his
blessed will is known unto us, because he has spoken unto us by his dear
beloved son.

Heb. i. As he spoke before time unto ye world by his prophets. From Christ
therefore and his word, comes the knowledge of Gods will, for the father bid us
hire him. Mat.iii.vii. Io. x. Now what his will is, ye truth also appears out
of the book of God and out of none other man's writings. Mark. i. his will to
the world is this: Do penance, and believe the Gospel. That is to say: let
every man bewail, and repent him of his sins, and desire the remyssyon and
pardon thereof for Christ's sake. For whom, the Gospel shows, our sins
shall be forgiven. Ihon. i.iii.iiii. v. vi. Math. xi. Romans v. Ephesians. i. This
doctrine from the fall of man has been always taught in the Catholic Church
of Christ unto al nations, as the wrytynges of the Prophets, and Apostles
does testifye: in whom is fully, and abou^dau^tly contained al truth, and
verity, and left here for our doctrine and consolacio^. Romans xv. Among the
which is also contained as a most faithful witness of all truth, and verytie,
this holy Prophet Jonas, who was send by God to the City of Niniue, to
preach unto them Gods pleasure, and amendeme^t of life, or else within fourtye
days, both they and the City, should be destroyed.

This Prophet have I taken to interpretate for two causes. The one, to declare
unto ye kings majesty and his most honorable counsel, that the doctrine we
preach unto his majesty's subjects, is one and the same, with the Prophets,
and Apostles. And as old as the doctrine of them both, and not as new as these
Papystes, and new learned men of Papystry, would bear the people in hand. The
second cause is: to declare which way the sinful world may be reconcyled
unto God. And for the better understanding of the Prophet, I will divide him
into four parts. The first co^teineth, into what danger Jonas fell by
dysobeing of Gods commandment. The second part conteyneth, how Jonas used
him self in the fyshes bellye. The third part contains the ame^deme^t, and
co^uersyon of the Ninevites at ye preaching of Jonas. The fourth part
co^teyneth an obiurgacion, and rebuke of god, because Jonas lamented the
salvation of ye people and city.

The first Part.
The first part is divided in to three members. The one contains the
Embassage, and legacye of Jonas unto Niniue. The other conteyneth Jonas
dysobedience. The third conteyneth the pain and punishment of Jonas
disobedience.

The Embassage is described with these words.

THe word of the Lord came unto Jonas ye son of Amithai, saying: Arise, and
get the to Niniue that great City, and cry out against it, for their
wickedness is come up before me.

It is not ye lest help that the reder or teacher of any prophet or other part
of ye scriptur shall have, to know of what place, under what king, in what
state of common wealth, ye prophet lived, yt he purposith to interpretate: al
these things as touchi^g our Jonas, is declared in the iiii. book of ye kings,
the. xiiii. cap. He lived in Samaria under an Idololatrical king Jeroboam, ye
son of Ioas, a detestable Idololater: and in Judah at yt time reigned king
Amasias

And this Jonas labored in the ministry of Gods word at one time, with Amos,
Oseas, and Ioell the true Prophets of God. The state and condition of the
commone wealth, was troublous and very unquiet, forbecause ye Israelits by
their Idololatri in following yt learning invented by man, and leuing ye word of
god, God punyshed them with many great and cruel wars, Yet after his
accustomed pytye and compassion upon those that he punysheth, to remove ye
occasion that works gods ire and displeasure, he sent them diverse times his
holy Prophets, that should call the^ from their Idololatry and corrupt living
as Elias, Elizeus, and this our Prophet Jonas, but all in vain: they would be
noughty Idololatres and vicious lyuers continually, mawgree gods head, and
would (as we now adays, for the most part do) rather give faith unto the
Prophets of men, and liars, then unto the Prophets of god, that be true men:
But there reward was (as ours shall be, except we amend) utter destruccio^, and
loss both of them selves, and their commune wealth. The commone wealth and
state of Israel and Judah, thus troublouslye being afflicted, the commandment
of god came unto this our Jonas, that he should go to the great City of
Niniue, as the text says. In the which words note first that no man can, or
may teach truly ye word of god, but he be called ordynarylye, or
extraordinarily. Ordinarily where as is no corruption of the ministry in the
church, neither in doctrine, neither in the right ministracion of the
sacraments, which be as seals and conclusions of Gods holy word. Where as
this integrity I say remains in the Church, noman ought without the
appointment of the higher powers to intrude or appoint him self to preach, or
minister, as it was in Moses time and the Apostelles.

Extraordinaryly is, when immediatelye any man is called by God, where as the
ministry of the church is corrupted, as it was in the time of yt prophets and
of Christ, that called to minister such as the common face and greatest
multitude of the world, would not admit, no not the high bishop, and those
that then were called the holy church, as is to be seen by Amos, Jonas,
Hieremie, Moses and Paul, with other. They are to be rebuked therefore that
intrudeth and put them selves without lawful calling into ye ministerye of ye
Church, other with money, or prayer, and bye them selves into the Church,
which thing through al papistry is aco^mon practyse and daily used thing. For
in case they sought not of their bishopprik more riches and honor, then the
necessari travels and labors that be annexed unto the vocacacion, they would
not strive so sore who might lepe up first to the bishops and persons
vocacion. There would not so many princes contend, and labor, for the seat of
Rome, the nest of abhominacion. If there were not in it rather the patrimonye of
Judas and Simon Magus, then the labor of Christ and Peter, more ease then
pain, more riches then bourden. The Text says: that this prophet being called
by God, was sent to Niniue. Of this cities original, read the.x. of of Genesis
It was the chief city of the Assiria^s, unto the which Jonas was sent and the
consideracion thereof, that in case the head City be well instructed of a
realm, there is the better hope of all the reast. Therefore god has used from
the beginnynge of common wealths to be merciful unto the greatest cities
thereof, and has sent the most preachers of y^ truithe, as it is to be seen in
these days, what God has showed upon London. And as he offers them first
the tokens of his merci, so first he reue^geth their unkindness with his
punishment (if they neglect and contemn the grace offered.) It is to be noted
that this City of Niniue was Idololatrycall, and Gentelyshe, never under the
dysciplyne and doctrine of Moses.

Yet unto it sends the lord his Prophet to declare unto ye Jews that the
Ceremonies and works of the law, whereof they most gloried and extolled them
selves, were not necessari to salvation, but given for a time to exercise
their obedience in the commandment of God. And to trust in Christ of who^
their rites and sacrifices were fygures and shadows of: further the Lord
declares by this embassage unto Niniue, that the ignoraunte and supersticious
Ge^tils be more ready to receive the living word of God, then the hard hearted
Jews: As it is to be seen at this present day. More easy it is to convert
unto God ten simple and ignorant souls, the^ one that has been brought up,
and is wedded to the ungodly doctrine and tradycions of men. Moreover the Lord
in sekyng the wealth of these Assitia^s, declares that he is not only the
God of the Jews, but also of the Ge^tils. Romans iii. Act. x. The text declares
to what end Jonas was sent to the City. What to doto bring in the Ceremonies
of of Moses law? Nay, but to cry out against it. That is to say, plainly and
openly to show Gods pleasure unto them: and not against one or two of the
city, but generally against the whole City, without respect of persons:
Against the king, the Princes, the lawers, the Priests, and the common people.
And this was the duty and office of all the Prophets.

Esaias. lviii. Cry out and cease not. Also Hier. ii.vii. The same
commandment was given to all the Apostles, Mark. xvi. Math. xxviii. The same
commands S. Paul. ii. Tim. iiii. preach in time and out of time. Th^s is
the note and mark to know the bishops and ministers of god, from the
mynisters of the devil: by the preaching tongue of the Gospel, and not by
shauyng, clyppyng, vestyments and vtward apparel. The text makes answer to an
obieccio^ that might be demanded wherefore God would send Jonas, a man of
base sort, to rebuke so great a king with his council and common wealth.

Because their syns are come up before the face of the Lord.

Of this answer we learn three things. The first that the Lord seyth,
marketh, and is displeased with our sins, although we live in all security
and careless, as though our sins offended God nothing at all. The second, as
many times as God sends such Preachers, as without fear shows unto the
world Gods word, and punyshmente for sin, that their sin is full ripe,
and that they must either amend at the preaching, or utterly to peryshe
under the plage, and scourge of God.

Thus Noah was preacher before the flood, Jonas before the destruccio^ of
Niniue, Loath of Sodom, Christ and his Apostles of Jerusalem. Seeing now that
God has sent his word, his king, his magistrates, and his Preachers into
England, it is (take heed of it) a very token, that the sins of England is
ascended up into his sight, and that out of hand we amend, or suddenly to look
for the most severe and cruel punishment of God. Al men confess, that sin
never so abou^ded, but none of us say it is I that provoke the Ire of God. and
I will amend. The nobility puts all the fault in the people, the people in
the nobilitye, in the Bishops, merchants, priests, and other. But will ye he
judged, at one word by the testimony of a noble wise man. Noble Esaias the
prophet says: The Ox knows his Lord, and y^ Ass his owners stable, woe is
me, ye sinful people, people laden with iniquity, a sede malicious, lost
children: ye have forsaken the Lord, and the holy one of Israel ye have
provoked, as Esaias. i. Let every man look upon him self, knowledge his sin,
and study to amend it from the highest to the lowest, for the Lord is ready to
smite.

The third doctrine out of this place is a descripcion of Gods nature, and
long sufferaunce toward kingdoms, realms, public and private persons, for
where as he might most iustlye punyshe and take vengeance upon us for sin, he
is yet so merciful that he premonysheth, and forewarneth of his scourge to
come, by his prophets, Apostles, and preachers, and wylleth the world to
amend: in case they so do, he will turn his Ire from them, if they will not, no
remedy but utter destruction, as ye may read. Gene. vii. of the flud. Ge.
xix. of Sodomme. Exo. xiiii. of Pharo. But let us rather follow the example of
the Niniuits and amend, then the example of the Aegiptians, and perish. Thus
much is to be taken head of, in the legacye of Jonas in the first part of the
chapter.

Now follows the second part containing Jonas dysobedie^ce after this sort in
ye text.

Where upon Jonas rose to fly from the face of the lord into Tharsis, and came
to Iapho, and found a ship pressed toward Tharsis, paiing his passage, he
went into her, to come with them unto Tharsis.

Jonas was commanded to cry and preach against ye Ninevites, but being afeard,
and suspecting yt difficulty of yt vocacio^, flyith an other way. Here first ar
two things to be noted: whether he flies, and from whence he flies, the text
says he fled to Tharsis, which some me^ think is yt sea called Mare
mediterraneu^, but y^ more true opinion is, yt Tharsis is the citi caled Tunes,
or Carthage. Iapho is the city called Ioppe, a haue^ town in Palestina. He
flies from the face of God, that is to wit from the beneuolente and mercyful
god that appointed him to the vocacion of preaching. Of this text we learn
many Godly doctrines. First, how hard and difficult a vocacio^ it is, to be a
preacher, that incase he be not with a synguler mercy of God comforted and
strengthened, he can not, nor is it possible he should preach truly Gods word, as
it is to be seen by Moses. Ex. v. vi. Esaias. vi. Hier. i.ii. Math. x. and in
this ye may see the dyuersitie between the ministerye of God, and of y^ devil,
of Christ, and of Antechrist. Christ's mynistery is full of labors, pains
sclounders, and calamytyes. Antichrist is full of care, pleasures, commodities,
and honors: as ye may see through all the kingdom of the Pope, for there is
not a byshoppricke nor benefice ca^ fall, but ten ar reddy to take it or it come
to the ground. Yea, and healpe away the incumbe^t with an Italion fig before
time, as ye may read of Uictor the third. The second doctrine is, that who so
ever leaves undone the office commanded unto him by god, flies from the
favor and good will of God, as it is to be seen. i. Regu. xv. Here be al
bishops and priests admonished to beware how they leave their deuties and
cures. They fly from y^ face of god as many as bear that name and preach not
the word of God, and instruct not the people after the mouth of god. Miserable
and cursed is our time of gods own mouth that there be such dom bishops,
unpreaching prelates, and such asseheadded Mynysters in the church of God.
Christ institutid nether singers, nor massers, but preachers, and testimonies
of his true doctrine. Mar. xvi. Mat. xxviii. Luke xxiiii. Act. i. He that
leaves this doctrine untaught in the church, or teaches a contrary doctrine
flies from the face of god, and do incur the danger and dampnacion that is
written. Ezechi. xxxiii. iii.

I will require their loss (says God to the preacher) at thy hand. Let noma^
therefore be offended if the crier speak against the faults of al degres
without excepcion: seeing he is commanded so to do upon the pain eternal of
his soul, and Paul says: woe be unto me, if I preach not. i. Cor. ix. Let
all men take heed to do the thing that apparteyneth to their office, least
they depart from the face of the Lord, as kings do, if they make any laws
contrary to the law of God and the law of nature, or suffer their subjects
to be tawght in any doctrine for the salvation of their souls, beside and
contrary to the express word of god.

The justice departs from the face of God, when yt he for favor, preposterous
peti, or for bribes judges not justly. The gentle men when bysyde charity seek
themselves with the hurt of their neighbors. The commons of every realm
departs from the favor of god when sediciously, and inobedientlye they make
tumults, and sedicion, lyftynge up weapon against their king and rulers, which
leads to eternal da^pnacion. Romans xiii. Number. xvi.

But a man might say: toush, it is not so great a matter, if a man walk not in
his vocacion, neither yet is god so much offended with dysobedie^ce, but this
fleshly and perverse opinion, may soon be corrected, if me^ would consider the
dangers that this poor man Jonas fell into, for his dysobedyence. They be in
number six. The first is the perylous wyndes that troubles the ship. The
second, his sin and dysobedience is detected and made open by lottes. The
third, he is examyned what he is. The fourth, he is constrained to give
sentence of death against him self. The fyfth, the shipmen cannot save him.
The sixth, he is cast into the sea.

The first danger has two parts: The one shows the danger of the ship.
The other shewith how the mariners behaueth the^ selves in the time of their
danger. Of the first, thus says the Prophet.

The Lord hurled a great wind into the sea, and there arose a myghtie
tempest in the sea, so that the ship was in Ieoperdie of going in pieces.

Well we may thyncke to escape the danger of GOD though we neglect our dewty
and vocacion, but truly it can not be so. Whither says Dauyd should I go
from thy spirit, and whither should I fle from thy face? Psalm. cxxxix. There
is no corner of the world where in man may hyde him self from the knowledge and
punishment of God, if we neglect the worckes of our vocacion. He has all
things in his hand, heaven, earth, the wyndes, and the waters, with the which
he uses to punyshe the wyckednes of transgressors wythall at his pleasure,
when he will, as it is to be seen. Samu. i.

Of this place of the text, we learn that whosoever contrary to Gods
commandment, studieth to avoid one yuell, falls into many. The bishop or
the preacher that for the love or fear of the world lets to speak the
truth, falls into the burning and damnacion of his own conscience. The
people that against gods law would defend the pouertye of their bodies,
lost body, soul, wife, children and all together. The corrupt Judge in
searching to serve hyz own turn or his frenfrends in corrupting of justice,
brings both him self and his friend into the danger of eternal dampnacion.
The text proceeds yt shows how the mariners behaved them selves in this
danger, yt which thing is dylygently to be noted. For in them is expressed
averi liuelye image of all men that lackyth faith, how they fear above
measure in the time of trouble. Their doings is expressed four ways: First
their faith. Second, each of the^ calls upon his own god. Third, they
exonerate the ship. Fourth they wake Jonas out of his sleep.

The fear, declares ye greatness of the danger they were in, and their
ignorance of God, who only comfort in the days and hour of trouble.

That every man calls upon his own god, it appears there were people of
sundry and diverse nations, and also what is common to all men under the sun
that have not lost the use of reason when we be left destitute of humane
healpe, we call upon god, not for love, but for fear, as it is said: metus
primus in orb Deos fecit. That is to say: fear was the first that made Gods
in the world. These mariners are of some part to be followed, of some part not,
that in the day of trouble they pray, we ought to follow them: that they
pray not to the one and sole God, but every man to a sondrye God, they may
not be followed. For there is but one patron and helper for all men, and he is
never nor no where known but by his word. Man's reason knows right well in
the time of trouble that there is a god, but who he is reason cannot tell.
Therefore worshippeth reason an idol of his own head, under the name of God,
and then follows man, either his own opinion, either the tradicion of his
elders. And this is the fountain of Idolatrye, when that every manne thyncketh
him to be his God, that he him self, his elders, or custom has taken to be
god. From hence came such diuersitye of gods among the Gentiles, and so many
patrons among ye supersticious sort of Christians. These gods all together be
forbid. Exodi. xx. Deutrono. vi.

They lyghten the ship when they felt that prayers auayled nothing, they
turn to labor which also eased them nothing. Whereby we learn that al
gods and goddesses be but vanitye, saving our god the father of Jesus Christ.

And no labor nor trauayl avayleth with out the favor of God. Luke. ix. The
woman had spente all she had on Physicions, yet nothing the better: so does
the Papists in Masses and yet their conscience nothing more delivered from
sin, and those that pray to Saynctes attayneth nothing. If their request be
sometime granted them, it is none other then a punishment of their
Idololatry.ii. Thessa. ii. The fourth thing they do, they wake Jonas.

But Jonas gate him under y^ hatches where he laid him down and slombred.

The text notes two things: one that Jonas slept: the other how the mariners
awoke him to call upon his God. Jonas sleep sygnifyeth two things. First, that
when we thynk our selves most at reast: then be we most in danger, as it is
to be seen by Baltheser in y^ prophet Daniell, and Math. xxiiii.ii. These. ii.
Luke. xii. The second is, to declare the nature of syn, whiles it is a
committyng the prycke and danger thereof is not felt, but it delyteth rather
man: So without fear, eat Adam and Eve the apple, Peter denied Christ. And
because God, out of hand punyshethe not out sin, the devil bewitcheth our
minds, and wits, and bears us in hand, that he will never punysh, and that
God seythe not our sin, nor is not so greuouselye offended with our sins.
So yet slepeth the sin at this day of them that persecute God and his holy
word. The sins of false or negligent Bishops and priests, the sin of the
corrupt judges, and sedycious people: but it will awake one day as ye may
read Genesis iiii. and here by our Jonas. At the hour of our death sin will
awake, and with our own sin the devil will kyl us eternally except we awake
betime. That they desire Jonas to pray unto his God, it declares that al
Idololatrye and supersticious persons thyncke one god to be stronger then the
other. As it is to be seen in papistrie at this present day, where as it is
disputed which lady is best, our Lady of Bullayne, or our Lady of Rome.
Sayncte James in Italye, or Sayent James at Compostella? Father this text
declares that Idololaters always seek new gods where as their old god
dedeiueth them, so is it among Christians when the matter is plain desperate,
they lot y^ matter, between three, or four Idololatrycal Pilgrimages which one
of them shall be the Patron of his health. Where as ye word of God is known,
there is no suit but unto one god by ye mediacion of Christ: Beside who^ there
is no health. This God I commend unto you: unto this god make your prayers,
for sake that heretical doctrine that deuideth your hearts in prayer part to
god, and part to saints departed. For god is sufficient to help and will healpe
alone. Esa. lxiii. to him be all honor and glory, now and for ever. The end
of the first Sermon.

The second Sermon upon Jonas, made by Ihon Hoper.xxvi. of Februarye.
The Preface.
Unto every man is appointed his vocation: to one this, to an other that: One
to a private, an other to a publyke vocacion, and each of the^, either is
lawful, or unlawful. That is unlawful that fyghteth and repugneth with the
word of God, as the vocacion of baudes, Idololatres, mass mongers, common
receauers, and mainteiners of disers, and dysse houses with such like. In
these, or any like, who soever continually still without repentance is
subject to eternal dampnacio^. The other vocacion is lawful, and stands with
the word of God. Of the which S. Paul speaks. In what vocacion any man is
called, in the same let him abide. But this lawful vocacion we transgress,
two manner of ways. Either when we bear the title or name of the vocacion, and
do nothing appertayning thereunto (which is condemned by God in that he
commanded in Adam al men to avoid ydlenes. Gene. iii. in the sweat of thy
brows thou shall eat thy bread: and Paul i. These. ii. These.) Either when we
do, in the vocacion that we should not do. As for example a bishop to teach
false doctrine for a true. A judge that should judge truly corrupts
judgment for favor or monye. A Merchaunte to wax richer by false
contractes, or corrupt wares. Into what danger each manne falls that any
way transgresses his vocacion, it is to be seen by this our Jonas, who in
voidyng of one danger falls into six, as ye have heard before: of the which
six, we have spoken but of one. And in the one noted many, and profitable
doctrines, as well declaringe man's infirmity, that cannot healpe it self,
not from the dangers of the body as of the power and good will of god that can
and will save, boeth from the dangers of body and soul. Al me^ confess him
to be ye true God, that can and will help al dyseases, the Jews, the Turks,
the Gentiles, the good, the bad. But therein stands the danger, lest for the
true God we call and inuocat a false god: and under the name of god we honor,
and worship the dyuel, as these mariners did, when each of them called to a
sundry god. And as the Gentiles does that David speaks of. Psalm. cvi. that
they sacrificed their children to the devil, and not to God. Dauyd says they
offered to the devil that they thought was offered to God. And Paul. i.
Corinthians. x. calls the religion of the heathen the table of the devil:

So did the Jews before us, and so do they in these days now, that for eueri
disease, they have a so^dry god and patron. For the pestilence S, Roch, for
the war S. Barbara, In this danger of Idololatrye be all they that call upon
God, and pray unto him otherwise then he has appointid by his word And here we
be admonished of two things. The first, that we offer none other obsequie and
relygion unto god, the^ he himself by his word requires. If we do, we offer
an ydol of our own head, and honor the dyuel, under the parso^, and name of
god. As those does that erect and build up Images, and aulters to say mass
upon, in the honor of god, which God never commanded. Exodus xxii Deutrono. v.
The next we be here admonished of, is that we call upon God only in the name
of Christ, for he is the door, the way, and the truth. John. x. And he alone
shows us the father. John.i.vi. Hear be condemned not only the Jews and
Gentiles but also as many as would know, and come to the father by
inuocacion of the saynctes departed, by Bulls, Pardons Peregrinacions, Mass
and other. Let this error, be corrected, And let us leave calling every man
to his own God, and call only upon the only God that can and will in Christ
hear us, as he heard the Patriarchs, Prophets, and the Apostles. And y^
this be done it is the office of the kings majesty, his council, and al his
Magistrates to se ye true book of God the holy Bible to be tawghte and
received of his magesties subjects, after the example of Moses, Joshua, David,
Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias, the Noble Princes of gods people. There was,
and is one doctrine more, in that y^ Mariners did not only pray but also
lightened the ship. That they prayed and were not heard, ye learn what a
vanity it is, to pray after the opinion of man. Nothing at all it avails.
It never comes before God, nor caseth the conscience of him that prays.
Further, y^ they do not only pray but also labor: we se our duetye, that
as GOD freelye gives healpe, so we must trayuell, and do the best we can
with prayer, not only to receive, and obtain the free help of God, but also
to keep it. Thus I thought it good, to speak before the second danger which
is this. Jonas sin is detected by lotts, so says the text.

They said one to the other: come let us cast lottes, that we may know, for
whose cause we are thus troubled, and so they cast lottes, and the lot fell
upon Jonas.

When they perceived the tempest ceased not with prayer and devotion every
manne unto his God, they understood that such desperate danger could not come,
but only from the Ire and displeasure of god for some notable and wonderful
crime. And the more was the fear because the crime was not known, nor no man
would be seen coulpable of it. They thought it good therefore, to search the
gyltye and offender by lottes. And missed not of their purpose adele, but found
Jonas the rebellion of God to be the occacion of their troble.

Of this text we be learned that the cause of all trouble in public and
private persons is syn, as we read Deu. xxviii. Leuiti. xxvi. That understood
the Marinars. And in case we be wise, we will understand the same, and amend
it, and not to attribute our adversities to sun, or moan, sterre, or planet
as fools do.

Of this text we learn again how so ever sin be hyd for the time, yet at
length it will be known, some by one means, some by the other. By lotts as
our Jonas, and Ahab Iudicum. i. Samuel.xiiii. by their own confession, as
Dauyd.ii. Samuel. Let no man therefore thyncke to keep always his sin hyd.

Farther here we learn how every kyngedome and commune wealth may be
apesed, when it is troubled. If ye chief captains and principal occasions of
the trouble be known and removed, then shall peace, joy, and quietness follow
in the commune wealth else never, except the Scripture of God be false. Men of
the best judgment in Civil matters many times under the name and similitude
of a ship, understand the commune wealth, in case the ship which is the
commune wealth be troubled, the master of the ship that is the King with his
counsel inquire deligentelye of the authors of the trouble, or else the
tempeste of trouble shall never cease. At this day gracious King, the ship
of the commune wealth is sore moved with wyndes and tempests. Here your
Majesty and your most honorable Counsel may not cease if ye would the
ship to come to rest, but take the pain to find out the authors of these
troubles.

In case ye will, (as in deed ye must) by some means find out the occasions
of these troubles and unquietness within your Magisties Realm: ye shall not
find (as many report) the Gospel to be the cause thereof. For it is the word
of peace, and the Dysciples thereof be assured of all grace and gods favor.
Deutronomye the eight and tewentye and Christ apesed with his presence the
troublous waves of the sea. John. vi. Upon who^ then will the lot of unquietness
and trouble fall? Upon Jonas, that is to say upon every man that neglects his
vocacion, and does not as he is bid, as when he that should stir the rother
in a ship, leaves her to waves, he yt should stricke the sails, stretches
the^ to more wind, and so to conclude none takes head of that he should. My
gracious Lord and King, and ye my Lords of his most honorable council, how
many Ionasses should there be found in England? doubtless to many in every
condition and sort of people with in this realm among the nobles, lawers,
Bishops, priests, and the commune people. Examyne al a part and prove: the
nobilitye make unprofitable expenses, more then their habilitye can or is able
to sustain. They feed a sort of Idle, and never commended sort of people,
neither by gods laws neither by man's laws: they them selves live Idle, and
will not labor neither with hand neither with wit. What must follow but
trouble of the ship, that is to say oppression of the pore. Esai. v.

The lawers in all causes has more respect to luere and vantage then to
justice, in somuche they rejoice, and of other foles be reioysed at when they
can overcome in a false cause, and so there theuerye catches up the labors
and swet of the poor.

The Bishops and priests unquiet the ship of this realm two manner ways.
One by the neglecting of their true duty, the other by a defense of a false
and damnable supersticion. In the primative and Apostolical church the office
of a Bishop and priest was to teach in the congregation of the faythfulles
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles according to the commandment of
Christ Mathewe.xxviii. Mark.xvi. Ephesians.ii. Now is this integritye turned
into false Idololatrye, and deuyllyshe supersticion, to sing, and say Mass
in the congregation of God. Thus like thieves and murderers they do the
abominacion commaundid by man with massyng, conjuring the holy water, bucket
and such like, and leave the preaching of gods word as God comaundeth, and
as the Prophets and Apostelles has left us example. And say when godly
kings and magistrates require and command a refourmacion of their iuells, the
ministry of the church is contemned with such false sclaunders as the Ignorant
people will do more for the Bishops and priests of Ball, then for God,
gods word, or his anointed magistrate as it appeared this last somer.

The people and commonnaltye of this realm trouble the ship of this common
wealth. For do the King and Magistrate what he can, the people will never be
content. Many of them live in yldenes, and will not labor: and in case they
cannot have that they would they convert them selves to sedicion and treson,
and care no more to kill and oppress their lawefull king and magistrates, then
the devil cared to kyl Adam in Paradise. Gene. iii. They should call unto the
lord for redress of their things, and not to redress it them selves.

Psalm. l. How is it possible where every sort offends in the commune wealth,
but that the Ire and vengaunce of God should send unto our ship wyndes of
aduersitye. I know that Jonas was never better known to be the occasion of
this tempeste in the sea, then I know these four sorts of people to be the
trouble, and will be the dystruccion of this commune wealth if they be not
found out by lotte and wisdom be time. But a man might ask what should the
kings magestie do in such a case with all these four sorts of Ionasses? Let
his majesty learn of these mariners, then shall he do well: and as they did
with Jonas, so the kings magestie must do with these four sorts of people.
What they did, the Prophet shall tell his own tale, and declare the third
danger he fell into which is the examinacio^ of Jonas in this form.

They said unto him: show us I pray the, how this trouble happens unto us?
What is thine occupacion? whence come thou? what country man art thou? Of
what nation art thou?

In these Ethnicall Mariners we se a singular discrecion wit, and humanity.
What if our Mariners Christians had suffered the like danger and detriment for
any man's sake with in their ship, Doubtless they would have sworn, and out
of hand without examinacion have cast him into the sea. But these men be wise
that they do not only search to know his fault by lottes, but diligently
seeks to know all the circumstances how he fell into this danger, lest
Jonas should account him self unjustly condemned. Ot this doing of the
Mariners we learn two things, one humanity toward the aflicted persons.
The other that all kings and magistrates ought to condemn this law as a
thing pestiferous and damned by gods laws, to execute sentence against any
man before his cause and matter be heard, for it is contrary to the law of
god, the law of nature, and the law of man. Yea God commands that noma^
should be condemned with the testimony of one man. deu. xvii.

Here is for the kings majesty and his counsel one more doctrine to be
learned of these Mariners. I said that four sorts of people were the
occasion of the trouble of his Magisties ship this Realm of England, but I
said not that every man of these four sorts was giltye of the tempest,
therefore there must be lottes, and examinacion of every deorce and of each
person in his degree that the innocente be not punyshed, neither the
transgressoure favored. And these must be examined by the master and his
shyppemen: that is, to our purpose, of the Kings majesty and his Counsel. So
that in case the godly without respect of persons, seek to know and upon
truth, and knoweledge, punyshe as they know, the ship of this commune
wealth shall rest in peace and quyetnes: if it be not serched for, and
amended, the ship of the commune wealth shall at last be burste in pieces,
which the Lord defend. Amen.

The third Sermon upon Jonas, made by John Hoper the.v. of March.
The Preface.
WE never read in any writers whether they be holy or propha^e of any
kyngedome or comune wealth that continually endured without tumultes, sedicion
or war, either by foreyn and outward enemies, either among it self by
conspiracye, treason, and disobedience of subjects of the same realm, and the
same evil not being in time taken head of, and redressed, brought always the
kingdom or commune wealth from trouble and sedicion unto utter ruin, and
confusion. We will omit and pass over to speak of the kingdom of the
Assirians, the Persians, Greeks, and Romans (although of their original,
continuau^ce and distruccion, the holy Bible makes in Daniell the prophet,
and other places of the Scripture, much mention of) we will speak but of two
kingdoms, of Judah, and Israel. What troublers, contencion, wars, sedicion,
and rebellion they suffered, and at last came clean to naught, the books of
the Kings, and Chronicles does record, and the Prophet Ieremye. What the
causes of these troubles and dystruccion were, the godly readers of the
scriptures he not ignoraunte: But the men of that time, the Princes, the
kings, neither the priests would understand, but assigned false causes, the
preaching of gods word.iii. Regum. xviii. For thus says Ahab unto Elias
the prophet: art not thou he that trobleth Israel? and so says the people.
Hiere. xiiii. The word of god yt thou have spoken unto us in the name of the
lord, we will not receive it, but we will do whatsoever seem unto us good, yt
we may do sacrifice unto the Queen of heaven, and offer our offerynges unto
her, as we have done and our fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the
cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem. The^ had we abou^daunce of al
things, and well was it with us, and we felt no yuell. As Soon as we left
offering to the Queen of heaven, and sacrificed no more sacrifyce unto her, we
lacked al things, and be consumed with war, and hungre. But the true
Prophets of GOD showed the true causes of these evils, to be the contempt of
gods word, as Elias said unto Ahab: I trouble not Israel, but thou and thy
fathers house, troubles it. For ye have forsaken the commau^demente of the
Lord, and thou go after Baalim. But the princes and the people continually
defended ye fall causes and accounted ye prophets of god yt would have
corrected their error, to be sedicious, and trayterus persons, and even so
persecuted and killed them for there true preaching: Till at the last they
perished and their realm with them, as ye may read.iiii. Regu. xvii. and in
the last book of the Cronicles in the last Chapter. Unto the lesson of those
two Chapters I exhort the wise, and godly hearer. For ye shall gather of those
places that the contempt of gods word was the occasion of the loss of
these realms.

The same evil vexes us at this present day. The ship of this commune
wealth of England is tossed vpsyde down, and the occacion thereof is imputed
and laid unto Christ and his holy word, though falsely, for Christ's nature
is to apeace and quiet all troubles and tempests with his presence. John.vi.
Therefore this false and preposterous cause of trouble must be taken head of,
if we wyshe the ship of this kingdom to come to rest. We shall never bring it to
pass until such time as we agree and confess that Jonas is the occasion
why the realm is thus unquieted, that is to say, as many as be in this
realm, that neglect, or peruerte their appointed vocacyon.

I said O King that Jonas might be found among four sorts of people with
in your maiestyes Realm, among the priests, noble men, lawers, and the
commune people. But lest any man should think I condemned every man within
the ship of your commune wealth, we will follow the wisdom and comendable
doings of these shippemen which were not only content to have found out Jonas
(the cause of their trouble) by Lottes, but also diligently they examine him. So
ye same thing most gracious king we must do. But before we take upon us their
examination, we will pray unto almightye god for his holy spirit of wisdom,
lest in this necessary and profitable examination we err and be deceived. And
also that they upon whom the Lottes do fall, and can not iustelye excuse their
faults, may learn to amend them, and turn unto the Lord, and from
hensforth may live in purity and in nocencye of truth and virtue all the
days of their lives. So be it.

The end of the Preface.
YE have heard how Jonas for the contempt and disobeyinge of his vocacyon,
to have fallen into six great dawngers. Of two we have spoken, and now we be
come to the third, where as he and his factes be deligentlye examined, which
doutles was agreate cross and trouble unto him. For there is nothing that
dyspleaseth man more the^ to have his faults hidden, to be brought unto light
and knowledge. God notwythstandynge suffers that many times for our good,
and profit, that we being brought unto acknowledge of our sins, might hate
the same and pray for the remission thereof, and so is it better (how so ever
the blind flesh judges) to have our sins (if God will) opened for our
salvation, then hyd to our loss and damnacion. In this examinacion we se not
only the danger of Jonas, but also the office of every good maiestrate that
means to quiet and rest his commune wealth, being in trouble.

Those should be examined, that by any sign, or probable suspicion seem to be
the authors of tumultes. And this using moderacion in examininge the innocente
and good, shall be fre from pain, and punyshmente: and the Culpable and gyltye,
found worthy of correccio^. First therefore let us examyne the Bishops and
priests, whether those yt know the will of God by his holy word, diligently
teach and preach the same unto other. Then whether any man of that vocacion,
teach false doctrine in the church of Christ. If the one do to little in the
first, and the other to much in the second, or the one neglect the first, and
the other to diligente in the second, both these be Jonas, and occasion ye the
ship is moved. Against the negligente sort speaks Ezechiell.iii.xxxiii. and
Agge. i. with vehement words. and threteneth eternal dampnacion to such as
preaches not, nor builds up the temple of gods congregation: likewise
Saint Paul.i. Cor. ix. Against those that teach false doctrine speaks
Christ Io. x. and Paull.i. Timo. iiii. Hier. xiiii. Among the noble men,
Jonas that troubles the commune wealth may be found among two sorts of them.
The one of them has inoughe given him from God, yet is not content there
withal, but for avarice, and love of him self and his insaciable covetousness
scrapethe, and gathers to gether whither with ye law, or against the law it
makes no forse so he have it. So this Jonas and trobler of the ship with all
injuries and wrongs, rather would ad somewhat where in dead is to much, the^
to depart a little where as is nothing at al. And in vain glory and pride of
the manmon of ye world, they will condemn and disdain ye very Image of God
in the poor, against whom speaks Solomon. Prouerv. xiiii. he yt
calumniateth the pore, abraydeth his creatoure. Take example hereof. Out of
the. ix. of John how the general counsel of the Phariseis laid to the pore
blind man his blindness. Their reproach of gods work was reprehended: and the
insaciable and covetous hearts of them be condemned by Esaye the Prophet:
Chapter.v. cursed be ye that Join house to house, and feld to feld. The
experyence of this curse had Ahab, that ungodly took from Naboth his vineyard.
If these men that has Inoughe will not move the ship of your highness
commune wealth, let them leave their rauenynge, and give god thanks for that
they have, and to their abilitye healpe, and not rob the pore. The other sort
of noble or gentlemen that make more expe^ce then their revenues and condition
is able to bear and lives by dysse, Cards, whordome, fraud, gile, deceit,
theft and such like: Indifferent examinacio^ not only by gods laws, but also
by man's laws will prove the^ not only to be disobedient Jonas, but also
stark thieves. The lawiers if they be examined diligently, there will be so many
found among the^ to unquiet the ship of this commune wealth, that few or
none will be found clear. And among the lawyers I put Judges, and Justices the
one for gain, cares not to defend the faulsest cause and most unjust matter
yt can be brought unto him, and promises (like a theyfe) ye cause to be good,
till he have emptied his poor Clientes pourse. Then washes he his hands,
with as much foul honesty, as he can, and refers the doutfull cause above
his lerning, to the ignorant men of yt shire, to be judged at home like a
fool, where as his pourse can no longer cause his pratler and ignorant lawer to
keep his cause aloof and out of the shire. And in deed such a subject as can
not find in his heart after gods laws to end his contencion without strife
by the arbitreme^t of those that be his neighbors, is worthy to find such a
Jonas as will never leave blowinge at his pourse, till he have vnladed it even
to the bottom, and have caused him to spend as much in recouerye of twenty
shillinges by lease, as he might have purchased twenty shilinges in feel
simple. I da^pne not the law yt is good, but these thieves yt abuse ye law: for
their doings is nothing but gile and deceate, and a noble kind of theuery.
Against ye which speaks zachari in his v. Chapi. And God. Exodus xx. Deuteronomy. v.
Thou shall commit no theft. Thou shall give no false testimonye against thy
neighbor. These Ionasses does not only give false testimony, but also for
lutre defends y^ same. And not for a day but for a year, and years. The more
shame it is to be suffered. The justices be also Jonas, for they receive
rewards and Bribes, which blinds the eyes, De. xvi. and makes them to
corrupt justice to their eternal damnacion if they amend not. Against whom
speaks Solomon, Proverbs.vii. He that quiteth the evil doer, and condemns
the innocent, be both execreable and damned before God.

Among the common people ye shall also find many Ionasses, but yt we may the
better espy the^ out, we will divide them into the rustikes or people of the
contrye: and into the Citizens. Al and every contry or housba^d man that lives
not of his labor, and gives him self to Idleness, and so moves sedition and
treason against their lawful king and Magestrate, or privily in their
conuenticles, and assemblyes speak evil, curse, or provoke any thing agaiust
their magestrates, they can nor will learn, nether to know god, nether to
obey there prince: these be those among this sort of people ye be Ionasses, and
trobleth the state of this realm. Among the Citizens be a great number that
trouble the ship also, as adulterous unpunished, the fraud and gyle of the
marchaundise, ydlenes the Mother of all myscheyfe, theft, murder, blasphemous
oaths, conspiracye and treason with open slander and rebuke of gods most
holy word. These things and such like tosseth the poor ship ye hardly she
ca^ sail above the water. And so dyspleaseth the Majesty of God, that he will
never cease from sending of tempests, till those Ionasses be amended, or
cast into the sea.

But before I come to Jonas answer upon his examinacion, because I know this
saying to be true: obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. That is, flatterye
obtayneth friendship and the truth displesure, lest any man should for my truth
and liberty be offended, I will briefly purge my self. Doutles it were pleasure
to me to speak nothing at al, in case the necessity of my vocation, the
danger of these Ionasses, and the salvation of this ship of our commune
wealth forced me not thereunto. As touching myself I am called unto this place
to cry, in case I do not I know all the blood of these Ionasses shall be required
at my hand: which god forbid. It were better I should call so hard as heaven and
earth might sound again of my voice.

The salvation of these wicked Ionasses moves also to speak in this matter and
with the trompe of gods word to wake the^ out of their sleep, lest they
slu^ber and rest so long in their wickedness, yt they go slepyng to eternal
da^nacio^. These therefore I call upon for the amendment of their knowledge
and liefe.

Farther the love I bear unto the Kings Majesty and to this comune wealth of
England compels me to speak, seeing I se the angry hand of God all redye
streached forth to punysh us, if we awake not out of sin. Last of all be
it known to all men that I speak in the condemnacion of the evil, and
commendacion of the good. And that all men may easlye find out and know among
these four sorts of people, the Ionasses, and troublers of this ship and
commune wealth of England, I give you one most true and general rule,
which is this. Whosoever ever, or of what so ever degree he be, that is or shows
him self to be offended with this my free and indifferente speaking of Gods
word, he or they be they what they be may, arre the very Ionasses and
troublers of this commune wealth. And these men love more darckenes the^
light, moreto trouble the ship then to rest her. But now to the text
wherein is contained Aonas answer upon his examinacion.

He answered them: I am an Ebrew, and fear the lord God of heaven, that made
the sea and the dry land. When as Jonas perseaued he could no longer clooke
and hyde his offense, he does not only confess his fault, but also makes
them priuye, and utters his fayeth and religion he has in GOD, unto them.
In that he confesses his fault, we learn that the first gree and procedynge
to mercy and remyssion, is the knowledge of the sin, which is a thing
most difficile and hard to the flesh to say: I have offended the Lord, and
will amend. For either we deny our syn with Cain, or extenuate and excuse it
with Saul. Would to God our Ionasses would acknowledge their faures, and not
excuse it nor extenuate it. It is but a mockeri once in a year to acknowledge,
and murmoure our faults in the priests ear. But we should from the heart
repent the neglectyng of our bounden duties, and unfeignedly amend it, which
is not only paynefull to the flesh, but also grateful unto God. I exhort
all men therefore that knows them selves gyltye, as in dead there is none
of us of all parts innocente, we say with Dauyd: we have offended the Lord.

Yet is not this inoughe to confess our faults, but therewythall we must
make a confession of our fayeth, but not such a confession as most men
use, but such as may most be like unto Ionasses. And let them embrace only
Christ and his doctrine, and worship god in sprite and veritye as his word
teaches. This I mean, let the preistes teach according to the word of God,
the noble me^ govern and rule thereby, the lawers conform their law to gods
law, and such laws as be contrary to gods laws abrogate and abolishe. The
people should hear the word of God, give faith unto it, and follow it. And so
say every man of us with Jonas, I am an Ebrew, that is to say, I am a
christian man, and will from henceforthe forsake my sin, that disquieteth
not only mine own conscience, but also the hole common wealth. It follows
how the mariners took Jonas answer.

Then were the me^ exceadyngelye afraid, and said unto him. Why dydest thou
so (for they knew that he was fled from the presence of the lord because he
had told them) and said more over unto him: what shall we do unto the, y^ the
sea may cease from trobling of us: for the sea wrought and was troblous. In
these mariners we see three things: fear, rebuke of disobedience, and taking
of council how to save the ship. This fear it is most like sprange of this
that the mariners had heard Jonas say how he was commanded by God to
preach unto the Ninevites their destruction, and the cities also for their
sin. The mariners knowing them selfs giltye of the same, them selfs being
both Idolaters, infidels, and of corrupt condition and living, fered the like
punishment. Who is it that will not tremble at the angry countenance of gods
dyspleasure? But now a days our stonye and indurate hearts be paste al
fear, and turns the threatenings of God to a laughter, saying in their
hearts: there is no God.

That these gentilyshe Mariners rebuke Jonas of dysobedience, it declares the
fault to be so great when any man leueth his vocacion and specially the
vocacion of preching, that it meriteth and is worthy to be rebuked of all men.
But such is now the proud minds of Bishops and pastors that it will suffer
no rebuke, or Christian admonicion, but will be lauded and praised yea in euel
doing and omissio^ of their vocacion, as it is to be seen in that horrible and
wicked decre: Si papa. And not only, the Pope but also every man that
slepeth, and delitethin his sin, refuses all manner of admonicions. If Jonas
took well at worth the reprehension of the heathen, it is more then ashame one
Christian to forsake the admonicion of an other.

In that they ask counsel of Jonas, how to save the ship, they declare a
syngulare humanitye toward a stranger: that although by the means of him
they stood in danger both of life and goods, yet would they leave no means
they could, to save him, though it were with their great loss, and danger.

Thus we be bound to do as occacion shall serve: not cruelly without
discression to revenge, but cheritabli with patience to bear with the weke,
until such time as the law requires execucion of the evil. Now follows
the answer of Jonas, wherwyth al he conde^neth him self as it is plain in
the text, and is the fourth danger he fell into.

Take me and cast me into the sea, so shall it let you be in rest, for I wot it
is for my sake that this great tempest is come upon you. In this answer we
learn and know what is the nature and condicyon of every penitente manne, to
Judge him self worthy pain and punyshemente. And that is so true in case we
Judge not so of our selves (and say: heretofore I was accounted and took my
self for a christian man, but in dead I was the contrary, wherefore I am
worthy of punyshmente) we be but Hipocrites and dese^blers. Thus should the
Nobleman say, the Lawer, the priest, and the commune sort of men as David
techeth.ii. Sam. xxiiii. When he saw the commune wealth punyshed and in
danger of dystruccion for his offense, he said unto the Lord as Jonas did.

I have sinned, I have done yuel, what has these sheep offended? let thine ire
and dyspleasure be against me and my fathers house.

But O my gracious Lord and King, such penitent and sorrowful Ionasses be
far out of your realm, for none will confess their faults. They will
rather say: let the Bible in English, and the preacher of gods word be cast
into the sea, and so shall follow quietness, for it was never well sith
preaching began. But these be, most gracious king and honorable cou^selloures,
Caiphas fellows that said: ye understand not Io. xiii. Chap. But what
followed? It happened unto the wicked as he feared. They lost their
communewealth as their fathers did before, and came in to bondage both of body
and soul.

Now follows the fifth danger that Jonas fell into. The mariners can not save
him, as the text says.

Nevertheless, the me^ assaide with rowing to bring the ship to la^d: but it
would not be, because the sea wrought so and was so troblus against the^. In
these Mariners y^ holy ghost teaches us two things, the one how they would
have saved the troubler of the ship, the other that they could not save him.
In the first is noted the nature and condition of every godly Magistrate yt
would if god would and the law, al men to be saved: as Moses did prai for the
people yt rebelled, for Aron and Marye, his brother and sister. Joshua called
disobediente Ahab son. Here is the percial and corrupt judgment of Kings,
Magistrates, judges and such as bear office in the commune wealth horribly
condemned: that serve not the law but master the law, and for lucre or
affeccio^ damneth him the law quytteth, and saves him the law condemns,
contrary to the doctrine of Solomon. Proverb.xvii. Deuteronomy. xix. Luke. xxii. Romans
xiii. Iac. iiii. That they could not save Jonas, we learn that no common
wealth ca^ be quieted except the tra^sgressors be punished. Ios. vii. God
gives no victory to y^ children of Israel till Ahab be punished. The plage
cessed not from y^ Israelits, til Phinees had slain the adulterous, Nu. xxv
And the Lord says in Ezechiell. xxxiii: ye lift up your eyes to your Idols,
and shede blood: and thyncke ye, ye shall posses this land? Ye pollute each
another wife, and should ye inhabit this land? Nether unto alludeth sayncte
Paul. Ephesians. v. Let no man seduce you with profane words, for these
things comes the ire of God upon the children of distruste.

Generallye we learn that there is no more pestiferous hurt ca^ come unto a
commune wealth, then over much lenity and preposterous petye to suffer the
laws of a realm to be broken and neglected, without punyshement of the
transgressoure: as it shall be more declared here after. Now to the text,
which contains the prayer of the shypmen in this wise.

Wherefore they cried unto the lord and said O Lord let us not perish for this
man's death, neither lay thou innocent blood to our charge: for thou oh lord
have done, even as thy pleasure was.

Of this oracion first we learn that the Mariners were converted unto God by
y^ preaching of one Jonas. Before each man called upon a su^drye god, now al
call up on one god. They excuse not their old Idololatrie for their old
customs sake, nor yet for the authority of their forefathers, but symplie
they embrace the truth. The same should we follow, and for our doctrine it
is written, as says Saint Paul in the fyftenth chapter of his Epistle to the
Romay. Whatsoever things are written, are written for our learning: that we
through patience and comfort of the scriptures should have hope. Casting away
al Idololatrye and false honorynges of God, we should in Christ imbrase and
receive the everlasting God and his infalliable word, seeing we be not moved
there unto by one Jonas but by many: by King, by counsel, and many other
men of God.

The second thing we learn out of this prayer is how they desire GOD, not
to Impute unto them the death of, Jonas which had not hurt them but
himself, in dysobeyinge the Lords commandment: wherein we may see how
the Gentiles and Ethnyckes abhorred murder, land Manslaughter, and accounted it
horrible and a thing damned by the law of nature*

They were in the sea, and no man could have accused them of murder, yet
perceived they well that the eyes of God could marcke them where so ever they
were, and would punyshe the fact. And wisely they judged: for so teaches us
all the Scripture of God as it shall now apere: for I will somewhat touch this
horrible crime of murder more at large. Murder is commit two manner of ways,
by chance and ignorauntelye, or of malice and wetingelye. Ignorant when
against his will doing and meaning nothing less then murder, against his
will kills. Such a murderer by the law should not die, for God absolueth and
quitteth him, and prepared in the commune wealth of the Israelites,
sanctuaries, and refuges for them, whyther as they might flee for their
sauegarde. Exodus xxi. Nu. xxxv. Ios. xx. lest their blood should be shed
again.

He that of malice, and willingly kills a man should no ways be saved, for
unto such the lord commands death again. Exo. xxi. Leui. xxiiii. And also
in the time of the law of nature this was the commandment of God for murder.
Genesis ix. he that sheddeth a man's blood, shall have his blood shed again:
and so says Christ Math. xxvi. he that strikes with the swearde, shall peryshe
with the sweard. This sin is so horrible, that no indulge^ce or pardon should
pity the offense, nor pardon the fault: but the murderer incase he fled to the
high altar, he should be fet fourth: as ye may see the experyence in Ioab
at the commandment of Solomon. iii. Regum. ii. and read. Nume. xxxv. If the
gistrate dyspense either for fere of him that should suffer exequution, or for
any profit or gain, and punysh it not, what both he other the^ provoke their
of God against him self and the hole realm? For the Lord says, he will not
dwell in the earth till it be pourged with the blood of him that shed the
blood. Nume. xxxv. Let all men therefore in the commune wealth know and fear
this doctrine of Paul. To. xiii. The magistrate bears not a sweed in vain.
Let the Maiestrate take heed of two things: first yt under the pretexte and
cloak of the law to serve his affeccion or gain, he punyshe not y^ innocent.
In this offended the kings and magistrates of the Israelites that for the
maintenance of their supersticion, false religion and corrupt manners, killed
and put to death the Prophets, and the Apostles. So Iesabell caused Naboth to
be slain. iii. Reg. xxi.

The second let ye magestrate take head he absolve not him that God
condemns, and commands to be punyshed, for gain, affection, good
intencior else for any folyshe and preposterus pety: for so doing Saul lost his
kingdom.i. Samu. xv. read the place. And Ahab the king of Israel for
dimissyng of Bennaud as god said: they soul shall be for his soul.iii. Regum.
fourtene. Even as here is occacion to admonish of justice toward evil doers,
so is it to speak of war, and how it may be used lawfulli by magestrates.
The magestrate offends when he begins or continues any unjust battle, or
of affeccion punishes any innocent person: So Iosyas offended although he was
a good man in making war with the Egypcians, where as honest conditions of
peace was offered, and was slain for his labor. The magestrate of the other
part may offend if he in case he see his subjects oppressed and will not
defend the^ as Abraham did his neuie Loath and other. Again, this battle he is
daily bound unto, to war against vice and to punyshe, sin and incase he
see any rebellion to resist the just execusion of justice, not to fear: for
God will help his procedinges. Deuteronomy. xiii. And it may be seen that God will
favor the magestrate that fights against his own brother, if it be to
amend vice and to kill sin. For in manner the hole tribe of Benjamin was
destroyed for the defense of adultery. Farther a maiestrate fights justly,
when he resists unjust forse, whether it be of foren enemies, or of his own
rebellious subjects. Of such laws as should be kept in the time of war it
is written Deuteronomy. xx. xxiii. Luke. iii. Our warryers have made of war a menes
and way to all robberye and spoil. The captain by his faith is bound to have
as many as his allowau^ce charge him with all, but like a thief he deceyueth
the King both of his noumber of men, and robs him of his goods: and for
lack of true paymente to the half number that he is appoyneted unto, he
weryeth the good will of the poor Soldiers, that extreme pouertye with
syckenes for lack of paymente of their wages, causes them to pass neither
of the King, neither of the commune wealth.

And as these unjust and already dampened Capytaynes (except they repent)
with receyuers, pay Masters, vitaylers, and other, destroy not only the
law and Magesty of Arms, but also deceive the King by pyllyng and polling
the poor and needye souldyours: so decay and undo they the hole commune
weal. For they come to serve the common wealth of little or no valewe at all:
in seruyng of the commune wealth they enryche them selves unjustly to the
utter impouerysshynge, and beggerynge both of the common wealth and the heads
thereof.

And well both Magistrate and Soldier meriteth the same. For the one trusts
he knows not whom, other then upon report: the other prepares him self to
the war for defense of his country, with horedome, theft, and all
abhominacyon.

And by false and theuish means brings more to the war then is his own: no
marvel then though God set such a thief over him as will give him less the^
is his dew. True men were wount to go to batel, and such as prepared them
selves with the fear of god to live and die for their Magistrate and country:
now the veryer thief, and blasphemoure of the God of batel, the better
soldiour. Well God may give the vyctorye to such blasphemours for a time, but
doutles it will not nor cannot continue. Look upon all the wars that Moses
wrytteth of in his five books, and then shall ye know the same. Wherefore I
humbly require all Magistrates both in peace and war to punyshe chiefly
these two vices adulterye and blasphemye, incase they would have either
vyctorie in war, or quietness in peace.

As touching swearyng and blasphemye, it is known unto al men of God, how the
law condemns it in the first table. Exodi. xx. Deutronomi. v. Thou shall not
take the name of the Lord in vain: for God will not leave unpunished, such as
abuse his name. Of an oath I thyncke it therefore convenient to speak sumwhat.
There is two manner of oaths, the one of custom or of sport, the other serious
and grave, required and taken before the Maiestrate or Judge. The First is
deuyllyshe, damnable and naught of every part, and forbidden by god to all
christian me^. The other that is taken for the glory of God, the defense of
the truth, or help of a man's neighbor, as necessitye shall require is
laweful and godly. But in this lawful oath a man may offend two manner of ways.
First if his heart and mind be not according to his words, but that his
mouth speaks one thing and the heart thyncketh an other thing: the second
if he that swears, swear by any creatures. Both these be blasphemous before
God.

And in case it be damnable in a noughty matter to swear by creatures, is it
not the same trow ye, daily and folyshly of custom to swear by a man's hand,
his head, by the mass, and such like? The more vile the thing is we swear
by, the more is the oath detestable before God. Wherefore in things not
necessary, and required lawfully, to swear by any thing, is sin. In
wayghtye matters to swear by any thing except by god, is no less offense.
That may we see.iiii. manner of ways. By reason, y^ holy scripture, examples,
and the Canon law. By reason thus: to swear is to protest and promise the
thing we swear to be true before him y^ knows the thoughts and cogitacions
of the heart, that knows only and solye God: therefore is it blasphemye to
swear or attribute ye same to a creature as they do that swears by creatures.

Again every oath has annexed with it, an inuocacion, and execracion. An
execracion, that he by whom we swear may punyshe and curse us if we swear
false. An inuocacion, that he by whom we swear, would help us if we swear
true. But only God can save and lose, reason would then him only to be sworn
by.

The authority of the scripture. This also is double: the one techeth by whom
we should swear, the other by whom we should not swear: that is by God, and
by no creatures. Deuteronomy. vi. x. Thou shall fear the lord thy God, and worship
him, and also swear by his name. Esai. xlv. unto me shall every kne bow, and
every tongue swear. In the.lxv. speaking of the calling of the Gentiles he
says: He that will swear shall swear by the true God. And Iere. xii. they
shall swear the Lord lives.

That no man should swear by creatures, ye have. Exodi. xxiii. Ye shall not
thyncke upon the name of strange gods: neither shall it be heard out of
your mouths. Iosue. xxiii. The people be admonished not to swear by the
names of the gods that the people used, whither they were going. Hierem. v.
It is said that the people offended because they sweared by the gods that were
not God. And ye people think it is no sin to annex a creature with god,
hear what Sophonie the prophet says. Cap. i. I will says the Lord,
destroy them that worship and swear by Malchon, that is to say by there
patron. Where as the Prophet means, they that swear by god and creatures,
matcheth and sets God and the devil in one chair, and sete. Examples out of
ye scriptures: Abraham swear by the most high god. God swereth by him self.

Policarpus would rather suffer the flames of fire, then to swear by Ceasars
fortune. Eusebius, libro.iiii. Chap. xv.

The Canon law Causa.xxii. Q. i. clericum per creaturas. and Et si quis per
creaturas, and si aliqua causa, also Mouet te iterum.

Thus the laws begin, and the gloss upon the same places requires us to
swear only by god. I have tarried the longer in this matter, because I
happened to se of late a certain book for the making of Deacons, priests, and
Bishops, wherein is required an oath by Saints: where at I did not a little
wonder. And how it is suffered, or who is the authoure of that book, I well
know not. I am led to think it to be the fault of the correctoure in the
printynge, for two causes. One is because in the oath for the Bishop is no
mention made of any saints.

The other cause is, that in y^ same book the minister must confess at the
receiuyng of his vocacion, yt the book of God, ye holy scriptur to be perfet,
and sufficient for the salvation of man.

Yet do I much marvel that in the same book it is appointed that he yt will
be admitted to the ministry of gods word or his sacraments must come in
white vestime^tes, which seems to repugne playnelye with the former doctrine
that co^sessed the only word of God to be sufficient. And sure I am they have
not in ye word of god, yt thus a minister should be apperelled, nor yet in the
primative and best church.

It is rather the habit and vesture of Aton and the gentiles, then of the
ministers of Christ. Farther where and of whom, and when have they learned,
that he that is called to the ministry of gods word, should houlde the bread
and chalice in one hand, and the book in the other hand? Why do they not as
well give him in his hand the founte and the water? For the one is a
sacrament as well as the other. If the founte be to great, take him a basynne
with water or such like vessel. But in this matter and in other, as tolerable
things be to be borne with for the weakes sake awhyle, so I thyncke it not mete
before the Kings Majesty and his most honorable Council to halte in any
part, but to say the truth: that they knowing ye same, may redress it as soon
as may be, as my part is and al other private persons to pray the^ to do the
same, and beseech god to restore us to the primative church, which never yet had
nor shall have any match or like. Before all things beware of an oath by any
creatures, except ye will be glad to have gods displeasure, Now follows ye
sixth danger of Jonas, how he is cast into the sea.

So they took Jonas and cast him into the sea, and y^ sea left raging. And ye
me^ fered ye lord exceadinglye, doing sacrifices, and making vows unto the
lord.

Here se we two things: Jonas cast into the sea, and how the sea left there
upon his ragynge. Out of the first learneth every Magistrate and king their
office to cast out of their common wealth, as many Ionasses as they find
stoborne, and will not amend their lives. If Jonas in the sea could not be
saved, that offended but in neglectyng of his dewtie, and yet confessed his
fault, and converted ye mariners, what may we thyncke: is it possible to
sail or live quyetlye with so mani obstinate Ionasses: Nay doutles: what
remedy the^? Let the^ be cast all into the sea. But lest me^ should be to much
offe^did with this severe punishment as though I would al to be cast in to ye sea,
I will bring ye examinacio^ of ye matter to the.iiii. sorts of people yt I spoke
of before, and so appoint of every sort who^ the kings magestie must cast
into the sea, or send to the Galleys.

First Let us speak of the Bishops and priests. Their office was in the
primative and first church, to be preachers of gods word, and ministers of
Christ's Sacraments. Not to sacrifyce for ded nor live, not to sing, or mass
or any souche like. Unto the first original must al these me^ as they be
called, of the holy church, be called: else by they no shepherdes, but
rauenynge woulfes, to devour the sheep of God. And that this may the better
be done your majesty must begin with your Chapel and Chapellanes: make
them to serve the same souls that laboreth for their livings. If your Grace
do it not, ye shall put your own self in danger of God. And from henceforth
make your Chapel laynes men of the church, and let the Chapel go. And when
your magesty has done this, your self cause all noble men of your realm to
do the same. The^ reform your Coleges in the Uniuersities, and se honest men
to have the leadynge and ouersyghte of the youth: such as will amend, let
them tarry still in their offices, such as will no^ your magestie must remove,
if ever ye bring the ship to quyetnes. Unto the clarcke from henceforth as ye
will answer unto it, give no benifice, or spiritual promocions to none, but
to such a one as can and will preach true doctrine, or else teach unto the
youth the Cathechisme, and healpe the people with some good council, Or else
cast the^ all into the seaithat is, put the^ out of their office, and put
better in their places. And beware of this un godly pitye wherewith al men for
the most part be very much now adays combred wythal, which will for pitye
rather let a fool or an evil man to enjoy his benefice, then a thousand
souls to be brought to know ledge? this in no pitye but rather a crueltye and
kylling of the soul. Therefore if it should please the Magistrates to make a
law that no man should have Byshoprycke, benefyce, prebend, or other
ecclesiastical vocacion longer then he used him self according to his
vocacion, it were wonderful well

The noble men that byeth their offices, and sells again the justice and the
law, yt is a pointed to the office, must be admonyshed: in case they will not
amend, into the sea with them. Put them out of their offices and put better
in. These Gentlemen that lives upon dycynge, cardynge, ydlenes, or with other
me^nes gooddes must be also admonyshed: if they will not repent, altogether
cast them in to the sea. Folysh and preposterous pitye has brought both king
and the Laws not only of this realm, but also of God into contempt, and
daily will more and more if it be not fore seen. Now ye laws that justly
should be executed upon thieves, and murderers, is of folyshe pitye dyspensed
with al, and many judge it were better to save after his opinion, then to
damn after the commandment of God. For they say: O he is a tall fellow, and
can do the king good service, it were pitye he should be hanged. But in case
they knew or gods laws or man's laws, and knew what maintains best a
commune wealth they would say: such a thief or murderer can never do the
Kings Majesty better service then when he is hanged for his fault, that other
men may fear to offend the law, by his example. Mark where unto this
preposterous and sinistre pity has brought the realm, to be pestered with more
thieves then half Europe beside. In so much that a man can not travel
suerlye by the way with twentye pound in his pourse, though twentye men be
together in a company: as it was seen by experience of late days to y^ great
shame of all the justices of the country and to the slander of the hole law
and the realm.

The fraud, gyle, and Covetousness of the lawers must either be amended, other
they themselves to be cast into the sea: For unto this has their craft and
filthy lucre brought the enter your graces Court, may se ye majesty of a
godly house and perceive by the order of y^ familye that God dwells in the
court and realm. But (the more to be pitied) it is so now that who so ever
enter and marcke the conditions of many men in the court, he shall find in
the most part of the house hangyngs of gods wou^des, his flesh and his
blood, with such blasphemous oaths as the devil him self if he were incarnate
would tremble to speak. And great wounder it is there falls not fire from
heaven to burn them and the house they tarry in. Like wise where as gods
laws forbyddeth dise, and Cards, and also the commune statutes of this realm
(the more shame it is) it is used daily and hourly in the Kings Magestyes
house, where as only the majesty of GOD is offended but many an honest man
undone in the year. That dise house must be cast into the sea if it be not, God
will cast the maynteyners thereof at length into hell. What and if all men
follow this godly counsel of Jonas what will follow? this that is in the text.

The sea shall leave his ragynge. As long as Jonas was in the ship there was no
quyetnes: now being in the sea all is at peace: so shall it be with us if we
amend and cease from evil doings, as it is written. Hieremy.ii.vi.vii. And
this is easy to be proved by example, that no common wealth can be pacified
except evil doers be punished.ii. Par. xvii. Iosaphat before he could bring
his commune wealth to any good point, restored good judges to ye civil state
of his Realm, and true doctors to the ecclesiastical state of his realm.
Chap. xix. The same may we see in Dauyd ii. Samuel.viii.ii. Para. xxii.xxiii.
So did Artaxerses that sent Esdras to the Jews; Esdras. vii.

The same order took Cambises Cyrus son, though he was and idell manne, he
caused the skin of a corrupt Judge to be pulled over his head, and to be
nailed in the place of Judgment, to put other men in fear how they
corrupted justice. For the keeping of all men in an order it were well if men
would thyncke upon the law of the Corinthes: which men may read in the
Adagyes of Erasmus. The Adage is: Proteruiam fecit.

Where as every manne was bound to give account how he lived, and
maynetayned him self. And the same law had Solon at Athenes.

When the Magystrate by negligence or Proposterous pytye, will not punyshe for
syn, then God strikethe, as ye may se by the universal flowd, by the fire in
Sodom, and Gomor. Give head therefore most gracious Lords, to punyshe these
Ionasses, and to put better into their place, or else God will punysh either with
an evil beast, either with swerd either with famyne, either with pestilence, as
it is written Ezechiell.xiiii. But in case ye will do it the sea will cease. As I
pray God it may. Amen.

The fourth Sermon upon Jonas, made by John Hoper the.v. of March.
The Preface.
Saint Paul says: it is a most true saying, and worthy to be received of
every part, that Christ Jesus came into this world to save sinners.i. Timo.
i. Unto the which saying agrees the words of our Savior Christ.
Luke.xix. The son of man came to seek, and save that which was lost, Who is
it among us all that would not joyfully at the hearing of so amiable and sweet
a saying, rejoice? seeing we be all miserable and cursed sinners by nature, and
yet would (as full of miserye and blyndenes as we be) be saved, wyshe ever to
be out of pain. But in this is all the head to be taken, lest we sinisterlye
understand these confortable promises, which the devil aue^turth to swad us
unto. Where as he ca^ not al together beriue and rob us of the promises he would
us to construe and understand the promises amiss. And where as these promises
apertayneth to none but unto repe^taunte sinners, he dazeth, and deceyueth our
affeccion and love we bear to our selves, that he will bear us in hand Gods
promise appertains as well to the impenitent and never minding sinner to
amend, as unto the sorrowful afflycted beleuyng sinner, and he that will study
the amendeme^t of life. Against the which illusion and craft of the devil,
Christ speaks. Mat. ix. Luc. v. I came not to call the just, but sinners to
repentance. Of the which repentance if we be destitute, nothing avails us
the promises of God. Luc. xiii. Except ye repent, all shall peryshe. And the
former promyses were not so sweet, but these threatenings be as bitter: Not
unto all men, but unto such as be obstynatelye yuel or desperate. Against who^
cries Ihon Baptyste: Even now is the axe put unto the root of the tree:

Every tree that brings forth no good fruit, is cut down and put into the
fire. Luke.iii.

But a man might ask to what purpose this thing is spoken of by me? doutles to
this end to prosequute and follow my matter begone. I said that the authors of
this unquietness in the realm in the church, and in every household, were
very Ionasses, and those that troubled the ship: which ought either to be
amended or removed out of their office, or else the ship may never come to
rest. But because these that be cast into the sea should not despair, there
must be some remedy found to solace and conforte such as be fallen into
danger of drownyng.

This is the way: if they take the admonicions and the admonitours ge^tly and
rail not against them, neither wynke at their own faults: but with a true
repentance of the heart follow this our Prophet Jonas, who confessed his
fault, and humblye asked remyssion and pardon for the same. So shall every
si^ner be saved as he was according to the oath of God Eze. xviii. As truly as
I live says the Lord, I will not the death of a sinner, but that he be
converted and live. This counsel of the Lord except our troblous Ionasses
follow they shall be drowned in the water of eternal damnacion, with Pharao. But
as heretofore ye have heard how Jonas for his disobedience was punyshed: so
now out of the text ye shall hear how he repenting his mysbehauiour and
offenses, is preserved in his dangers: how he prays, and at last how he is
delivered. And that I may the better and more plainly teach and open the
same, I will deuyde the text that follows into four parts. The first part
contains the behavior and doyngs of the shyppemen, after they had cast
Jonas into the sea. The second part conteyneth how Jonas being cast into the
sea was received into the belly of the whale. The third conteyneth the
behauioure and doings of Jonas in the whales belly.

The fourth conteyneth the deliverance, and casting out of Jonas from the
bellye of the whale. The first. The text says those men feared
wounderfullye the Lord, and sacrificed unto him and made their vows.

The ship men did these three things: they fered, they sacrificed, and vowed.

After they perceived upon the execucion of Jonas the sea to leave his trouble,
they neglected not the true religion which they learned in their trouble, but
are better and more strengthened in the same, for they feared the Lord, and
hohoured him only. Of these ship men let us learn constancye, and
perseueraunce in the true knowledge of god: and when we be delivered out of
danger, let us (...) give our selves to (...) and folly of life, as
naturally we be inclined and propen^^ to do.

Thus admonyshed Moses diligently the children. Deutro. vi. and.viii. yt when
they had received the aboundante benefits of the Lord, they should not in
their saturitie and abundance be unmindful of the Lord that brought them
out of the land of Egypt, and the penury and scarcity of the deserte.

The thankefulnes of these Mariners shall be laid against us at the day of our
examinacion for our unthankfulness: for God has not only quyeted the sea
for us but also aboundantlye given us the use and commoditye booeth of sea and
land: and not only that for the rest and quyetnes of the body, but also he
has apeaced the sea of great displeasure and damnacion eternal by casting
of his only beloved son Christ Jesus upon the cross, to cesse and apeace
their and displeasure between us and him: and yet we neither fere nor love
him, but with continual hatred, and despyte, contemn both him, and his holy
word.

They do sacrifice.
THey thought it not inoughe inwardlye to honor the Lord, but did outward
sacrifice, to proprotest and declare unto the world the good judgment,
fayeth, and knowledge they had in the Lord. So should we do: not only know god
and fear him inwardly, but also outewardly, with prayer thanks geuyng and
other good works commanded by God to declare the same, as they did by their
sacrifices before y^ cu^minge of Christ into our flesh. The which were
tipes, and significacions of Christ to come, that could not take away the
sin of the world as Saint Paul says: Hebru.x. It is impossible that the
blood of Calves should take away sin. Christ's sacrifice once offered for
all, by that once satisfied for all sins. Hebrews.ix. And where as is
remission of sin, there needs no more sacrifice. It is therefore an ungodly
doctrine that in this time of the new Testamente, teachethe any other
sacrifyce for sin, then the only death of Christ.

If question now be asked, is there then no Sacrifices now left to be done of
Christian people? Yes truly, but none other then such as ought to be done
without aulters. And they be of three sorts. The first is the Sacrifyces of
thanckes gyuynge. Psalm.li. Amos the fourth, and fifte. Hebrews the thirtene.
Oseas.xiiii. The second is benevolence, and liberalitye to the pore. Mich.
vi.i. Corin. xvi.li. Corinthia. viii. and ix.

The third kind of sacrifice is the mortifiyng of our own bodies, and to dye
from sin Rome. xii. Mat. xi. Luke. xiiii. If we study not daily to offer
these sacrifices to God, we be no christian men.

Seeing Christian men have none other sacrifices the^ these which may and
ought to be done without Aulters, there should among Christians be no
Aulters. And therefore it was not without the great wisdom and knowledge of
God, that Christ, his Apostels, and the primatyue church, lacked Aulters: for
they knew that the use of aulters was taken away. It were well then that it
might please the magistrates to turn the aulters into tables, according to
the first institucio^ of Christ, to take away the false persuasion of the
people they have of sacrifices to be done upon the aulters. For as long as the
aulters remain boeth the ignoraunte people, and the ignoraunte, and evil
persuaded priest, will dream always of sacrifice. Therefore were it best that
the Magistrates removed all the monume^tes and tokens of Idololatrye and
supersticion. Then should the true relegion of god the sooner take place.

They Uowe.
Tossed like they vowed to goo to Jerusalem, there to manifest the mighty
power of God to the people, and to give thanks unto the Lord according to
the law and manner of Moses decrees. Lest we should err in the nature and
condition of a vow, there be three things to be noted. To whom the vow is
made, what is vowed, and who it is that makes the vow.

The vow should be made unto the Lord, as Esaye the Prophet says,
Chapter.xix. they shall make their vows to the Lord. The thing vowed may not
be contrary to any of the two tables within. Exodus xx. Deuteronomy. v. He that
voweth must be such a one as is able to pay and satysfye his vow. So Saint
Paul advised the younger wydowes to marye, perceiving how vntuly and vehement
the passions of young age was, that they were not apt to live sole, nor to keep
their vow, if they should vow so to do.

Now follows the second member of the oracion, how Jonas being cast into the
sea, was received of the whale: and it be ginneth the second chapter of the
Prophet in this wise.

But the Lord prepared a great fyshe that should deueur Jonas. And Jonas was
in the fyshes bealy three days, and three nyghtes.

The text conteyneth two things. First that the fyshe prepared by the Lord,
swalowed up Jonas.

The second, how long time Jonas was in the fyshes belie. The things to be
noted in the first member, be also two in number. First is declared the
wonderful pitye, and mercy of God, that can and will healpe the afflicte in
the days of their affliccions. Jonas thought none other but to die, and so did
the Mariners: for they besought God not to require the innocents blood at
their hands. But the Lord that is redye to help as many as call upon him.
Psalm. viii. and.ix. left not his penitente and afflicted servant Jonas but
preserved his life though it were with trouble. Thus will he do with all those
that be the Ionasses of this realm in case they repent, though they should be
cast from all the honor, and offices they have: better it were to lose them
with the favor of GOD, then to keep them with gods dyspleasure, as zacheus
did. Lu. ix. Jacob. Genesis xxviii.

The means how God saves the afflicted be unknown unto man, and manne
should not be curiouse to search to much for the knoweledge of them, but
commend them to God. For many times God uses those for life, that man
judges should lead unto death. So was Jonas saved by the deuoutynge mouth of
the whale, which seemed unto Jonas reason rather a present means unto death.
So used he the cribbe of Moses, And the wounderfull passage of the children of
Israel through the read sea. If we pourge and cleanse our knoweledge,
religion, and manners, the lord will find means sufficyente to save us: which
we may not appoynte to our selves but commend them to the prouydence of God.
For by the same ways yt we seake many times the favor of God, and our
commoditye, we find his dyspleasure, and our own dystruccion. As Saul did.i.
Regum.xv. that sacriificed without the commandment of God, purchased the
severe, and just ire of God. The Israelites that of good meaning and
intencion fasted, zacha.vii. and sought by that means gods good will, they
found his dyspleasure. Cayp has sought by council Iho. xi. to have oppressed
the procedinges of Christ, and oppressed him self, and the whole state of the
common wealth also. C^cero Rome, Demostenes Athens, each put their common
wealth in danger, by their best advised counsel, for the preseruacion
thereof. And so shall all the Ionasses, extorcioners, oppressors, deceivers,
flatterers, and other of this Realm, come into extreme poverty by the same
means they seek riches: for the curse of God can not suffer evil gotten
goods, and possessions long to prosper.

Now Jonas says that he was in the belie of y^ whale three days and three
nyghtes. Of this we learn that God healpeth not by and by the afflicted but
exercises them in their troubles. First because he may the better humble
the^ and bring the^ to a true knowledge of their faults, whose greatness is so
bygge that it cannot be perceived where as the pain for it is easy and light.
But the Lord would us the better to judge of the fault by the greatness of the
pain, and therefore the Lord is said to explorate and try his in affliccion
as the gold is tried by the fire. Farther his mighty power is the better
declared, where as he helps such as be plain desperate of al other remedies
and helps.

Last of all this time of Jonas being in the whales body, was a type and
fygute of Christ's being in the heart of the earth three days and three
mightes. Mat. xxii.

Now follows it how this man behaved him self in the time of his trouble.
When he perceived in the fyshes belie some hope and sparcle of life, he fell
unto prayer. But because prayer conteyneth in it self two things, the
knoweledge of the fault, and hope of forgyuenes, I admonyshe all the Ionasses
of this realm that they acknowledge and leave of from their faults, and beg
pardone for them, except they will dye eternallye. The Bishops and the
priests that has either with false doctrine destroyed the church, either by
negligence not builded it with the true word of God, let them acknoweledge
their faults, amend it, and ask remission betyme if they will not dye in
their sin. The noble men and the Lawers that are secretelye touched with the
word of God, and their conscience condempneth them of wrongs, frauds,
Injuries, and deceites let them not indurate and harde^ their hearts, but
pray to the Lord to take from them pride, arrogancye blindness, and
couetousenesse, lest they dye in their sin, as Saul did. The people let them
pray unto God for knowledge and patience, that they may know and suffer all
things as true subjects ought to do. And that from hense forth they hate
discord, dissencion, treason, conspiracy, whoredom, adultery, idleness,
hatred, envy, disdain, and such like as provoke gods Ite, and leads to
the destruction of a common wealth. But this prayer of Jonas is so
acceptable, it might be thought of some men, that the place where Jonas
prayed in should have bettered it, as the folyshe opinion of the world is at
this time: that judges the prayer said at the high altar to be better then
that which is said in the Quier, that in the quere better then it that is
said in the body of the church: that in the body of the church better then
the prayer said in the fyelde, or in a man's chamber. But our Prophet says:
the lord has no respect to the place, but unto ye heart and faith of him that
prays: and that apereth: for penitente Jonas prays out of the whales velly,
and miserable Job upon y^ doung heap, Daniell in the Cave of the Lions,
Hieremye in the clay pyt, the thief upon the cross, Saint Stephin under the
stones. Wherefore the grace of God is to be prayed for in every place and every
where as our necessitye shall have need and wants solace. Although I
commend the prayer made to God in the name of Christ, to be like in every
place, because that our necessity requires help in every place: yet I do
not condemn the public place of prayer where as gods word is preached, his
holy sacraments used, and commune prayer made unto God, but allow the same,
and sorye, it is no more frequented and haunted: but this I would wyshe that
the magistrates should put both the preacher, minister, and the people in one
place and shut up the particion called the chauncell, that separateth the
congregation of Christ one from the other, as though the vele and particion of
the temple in the old law, yet should remain in the church: where in dead
al fygures, and tipes, ended in Christ. And incase this were done, it should
not only express the dignity and grace of the new testamente, but also
cause y^ people the better to understand the things red there by the
mynyster, and also provoke the minyster to a more study of the things that he
reads, lest he should be found by the judgment of the congregation not
worthy neither to read, nor to minister in the church: farther that such as
would receive the holy communion of the precious body and blood of Christ,
might both hear and se plainly what is done, as it was used in the prymatyue
church, when as the abhomynation done upon aulters was not known, nor y^
sacryfyce of Christ's precious blood so co^culcated and trode^ under foot.

The third thing in this prayer is to be noted (lest in the port it self we
make shyppewracke, and offend God in praying) to whom we pray. Unto him that
only sees the cogitacions of out heart, and can and will do al things for us
accordyngly, help at need, and punish in due season, which only god ca^ do:
and unto him should we direct, and make our prayer, after the examples of the
Patryarckes, Prophets, and the Apostels, who called always upon their God:
for such as direct otherwise their prayers, they fail and err all the heavens
wide. Against whom speaks Esaias. lxiii. Iere. ii.xv. Each. xiiii. And the
Lord is angry with his people as Esaye says, Chap. ix. because they turned
not unto him that struck the^, nor unto the God of armoure. And in the Prophet
Ose. Chap vii. They called not to me (says the Lord) in their hearts. And
in the same place a little after says the Prophet: they be returned, but not
unto ye highest. So likewise are they no less to be blamed that deuyde their
hearts part unto God, and part unto creatures: of whom speaks Osee, in the
x. Chapter. If these three things yt Jonas used in ye whales bellye, were used
of the people that profess Christ's name in our temples, blessed were we. But
it is al to the contrary: we know not what prayer is, nor yet will take the
pains to lern it, The more is the petye, and the more is God stirred to
vengeance and punishment, and the more cruel shall the pain be when it is
executed by God. As we know by the text, he prayed, so may we know by the
same how he prayed, and what was the form and manner of his prayer. That is
very requisite to be known, marked and borne away. The effect and su^me
thereof consysteth in three points. In two of y^ first verses he puts forth
bryefly the abridgement and Epitome of his prayer. Then declares he the
greatenes of his danger and ieopardy. Thyrdly he sets forth the pitye, and
mercy of God. The first part.

From my troubles I have called upon the Lord, and he herd me: from the depnes
of the depest I cried, and thou herdest my voice.

Out of this first part we learn two doctrines: the one that we should not
despair, nor clean cast of God in adversity. The other, that in adversity
we should not fly, nor seek any forbidden, or unlawful means of help. And
these two things observed Jonas in this his trouble: and we should do the same,
according to the commandment of God.

Psalm. rcix. Call upon me in the day of thy troubles, and I shall hear the,
as he did at all times. Psalm. xcix. And this cry of Jonas to the Lord was
rather the cry of his heart, then the noise or sound of his mouth, as Moses
was. Exodus xiiii. and the good woman's. i. Samuel. i.

The circumstances of true prayer observed, the Lord hears this faithful
prayer according to his promises. Whereof all Idololatricall Bishops and
priests may learn, if they will forsake their Idololatrye, and call unto the
Lord, mercy is ready for them. And if the lascivious, auaricious, or couetouse
gentleman, or lawyer will acknowledge his fault, and ask remission for it, it
will be forgeuen him. And so shall it be to the commen sort of people if they
acknowledge their disobedience, rebellion, treason, pride, conte^pte of the
superior powers, and ask mercy for it.

The second part of his prayer conteyneth a descripcion of his dangers that he
was in, after this sort.

Thou have cast me down deep in the midst of the sea, and the fludde
compassed me about: yea all the waves and rolls of water went over me, I
thought I had been cast away out of thy sight: but I will yet again look toward
thy holy temple. The waters compassed me even to my very life: the deep lay
about me, and the wedes were wrapped about my head. I went down to the botom of
the hills, and was barred in with earth for ever.

It is the common sort of al holy men, for the most part in the holy
scripture, to make mention in their prayers of their dangers, and to amplify
the^, that their greatness may be the vetter marked and known: and this is done
for three causes.

The one, because with the numbrynge, and rehearsal of their great dangers,
they may the more inflame them selves to ardente and earnest prayer. For the
more a man feleth his own grief, the more diligente he will be to seek a
remedy. The other is to bring a man the more to a contempt and hatred of him
self: for the greatness of the pain, declares the enormitie, and filthiness of
the transgression, and sin.

The third is to set forth the power and good will of God, that can, and
will help in extreme and desperate euylles, and save with sup^rabundaunt
mercy where as he finds iniquitye and sin to abound. Romans.v. and so
many times the slavery, and miserable state of the afflicted, sets forth
the majesty and rychenesse of Gods mercy. Math. viii.ix. Ihon. iiii.ix.

This manne of God noted and knew the dyspleasure of God against sin: but
our Ionasses sleep quietly in both ears, and feleth not the pain of sin.
And this security and insensiblenes under the wrath of God, comes by the
ignorauncie that the whole world is lapte in almooste, as touching the
danger of their vocations.

If the cleargye, the Bishops and pryestes, would think upon this pain
annexed unto their vocacyon, if they do it not truly, faithfully, and as
they be commanded of God: Sanguinem illorum de manu tua requira^. That is to
say: I will requiere their blood at thy hand. Ezechiel. iii.xxxiii, they would
serve the Lord, and use more diligence in their vocatyon then they do. If the
Noble men would think upon this text: the Lord resysteth the proud, and
this text Esaias. v: woo be unto you that join house to house, and field to
feld. etc. and the lawers and judges that is written Proverb. xvii. and Math.
xxiii, they would not sleep in great rest, nor use the place they be in with
such parcialitie and false head as they do: incase the commune people would
think upon the.iii. of Gene. where as labor is commanded, and also.i.
These. iiii.ii. Tess. iii. they would not forsake labor, and seek weapon and
strength to turn and altar the state and order that God has appointed
upon the earth. But this I say to every man of each of those degrees
mencionated of, the less they feel the danger of eternal damnation, the
nerer they be unto eternal pain, and have already one foot in hell, which shall
never come again, but the hole bodi and soul shall follow except they repent:
for no man is farther from heaven, then he that fears not hell: Nor no man
farther from grace, the^ he that feleth not ye danger of sin, as we se no
man in more dangerous disease, then he that knows not him self to be lycke,
as those men be that are fallen into fre^sie, and madness. Let us learn with
Jonas to know in what danger we be.

Yet is there an other thing to be noted in Jonas words, where as he says:
thou haste cast me down. Of these words should those that be damned by the
Magistrates, acknoweledge that it is not the Magistrate that puts them to
execucion, but God whose ministers they be, and ought to save such as gods
word saves, and dampne those that gods words dampneth. It is God that
sends to hell, that hangs for transgressyon upon the Gallows. As Jonas
knew in this his prayer. He accused not the mariners that cast him into the
sea, but confessed the execution of the evil to be from God.

Let therefore from henceforth the Bishop and person that is depryued of their
vocatyons for their misbehaueour, and false or neglygente preaching in them,
say: the Lord has cast me down. So let the Noble men and the lawers say
whe^n their Rauyne, couetuousnes, fraud and deceyte cries vengeance before
God till they be dysplaced: the Lord has cast me down. And the same let
the trayterousse subject, the thyeffe, the murderer, and idle man say: the
Lord brought me to the galowes: The Lord would I should trouble the common
wealth no longer.

And I do here appele and burden every subjects conscience of this realm of
England. First those that have the doings, receiuinges, occupyinges, and
custody, ouersyght, rule, and office of the kings majesty's goods or lands.
The^ their conscience to whom the king and his counsel has commended the
teaching and instruction of his people in the knowledge and fear both of God
and man: finally I apele all the conscyences of the subjects of this realm
which me riteth some for deceit, falshed, and deceyuynge of the king, loss
both of body and goods some for preaching erroneous, seditious, and false
doctrine, or for neclectinge the preaching of the true doctrine, deserve most
cruel punishment. Some for false judgment merit the loss of their lives.
The rest for rebellion, sedicion, and treason, deserve the sword and the
galowes, whether in sufferynge the pain appointed for such transgression they
ca^ from their hearts say: this suffer I worthily, and will the vengeance of
God, because I have sinned against him, and the law of my co^munwealth. No no
y^ Lord knows: every man extenuateth, yea excuses al things done against
God and his order. But I will said the (y^ thief and robber of the king and
of the commune wealth) to be king, and the king thy offycer and receiver:
would thou thy offycer should deceive the? Or you traitorous and false subject
if thou were king and the king thy subject, would you be contented that thy
subject should conspyre and imagine how to pluck the out of thy realm?
What if mi Lord Bishop and master person were kings, trowye their Majesty's
would be contented that their Bishops and priests should whyster a tale of
treason and sedycyon in aurycul^r confession or other pryueye conuentycles to
their subjects?

Speak all ye that be feigned kings, and speak of your conscyences, I dare
say ye would not be thus handled. Wht then do ye handell an other so^ remember
ye not in this law of nature. Quod tibi non vis fieri alieni ne facias. That
is to say: do not to an other, that thou would not an other should do unto
the. Amend therefore every man, and be true and faithful unto the realm, to
the king and laws of him and his realm. And for ye love of God ye noble men,
Gentelmen, justices, and lawers, the wholesome laws of the realm, that
statut^s, and co^missio^s that has been made by the king and the counsel for
the preseruacion of the commune wealth, and the help of the poor, which be
boothe afflicted with your insaciable and never contented covetousness. Let them
be faithfully executed, and vpryghtly interpretated, according to y^ mind and
meaning of those that made them. For the evil construing, and sinister
taking of good laws, and godly, meaning of godly maiestrates, does not only
afflicte the pore of this realm, but will sure at length cast the whole realm
under the water. It comes now into my mind a practice of evil taking the
gouerners word and commandment, how perilous, and dangerous thing it is. I
was once in the raze of Britain with a fore wind, and contrary fludde, the
seas in that place going both holowe, and that by reason of a multitude of
Rocks in the same place. The master of the ship to conduite her the better,
sat upon the main yerde to see the seas aforehande, and cried to him that
styrred the stern always, upon which side he should stir the ship, to
break best the danger of the sea. The wind blowynge high, where as the
master cried a larde board, he that styrred mystoke it, and styrred a stare
board, and the once mistakyng of the masters law, had almost cast us under
the water. Then thought I, it is not without cause that wysemen compare a
common wealth to a ship, for one thing loses and saves them both.

For incase the masters officer in the ship obey not his law, the ship will of
force drown. So shall this common wealth, and every other that when the king
and his council shall make laws to help, and save the pore, such as stir
the hinder part of the ship behind the kings back, follow not that he is bid
to do, but that, that he lysteth himself, and his own private commodity to
do, And thus puts both the ship, the master, and all the mariners in danger
of drowning. Amend therefore every man betyme: If ye do not, the Lord at
length will cast ye our from all ye have, to the destruction of you and
youres.

But of one thing I pray you all that be true, and faithful subjects and
friends unto the kingdom, and the kings majesty, that ye will not im^pute,
nor burden the kings majesty, nor his council with the oppression,
extorcion, theft, iniuryes, deceites, falseheades, defraudes, cautelles,
violences, and other wrongs that those thieues and destroiers use toward you
and the commen wealth: if their vsyng might come to their knoweledge, I doubt
not but that your wrongs should be redressed by the^. And this I know my self
vi experience in weighty matters, the kings maiestyes council has not only
heard, but given accordynglye sentence with the truth, and used me rather
like fathers, then like judges in such matters: if they had taken things
spoken by me honestlye, evil construed by mine accusers, there could have
followed no less then my great undoing, and hynderaunce to all my labors and
pains in the vineyarde of the Lord. Therefore pray to him that all good
laws may be justly executed, and all other amended, which God grant.

There is one word more in the text which must not be neglected, where
Jonas says he shall se again the holy temple of the Lord. In the which
words, note two things. The one, how that in the most obscure and dark
troubles of adversity, God suffers some spark of consolacion to shine.

The other, to what end a man being in trouble, should desire to be
delivered: to extolle, and praise for ever the name of the Lord, Esaias thirtye
and eight. But how this end of deliverance is practiced in our days, the
Lord knows. We use not to desire the Lord to be delivered to gloryfye and
laud his holy name as this Jonas did, and Dauyd Psalm. fyftye and one, an
hundred and.xviii. But from sickness and aduersytye we turn our self to
al ungodliness, and lyberty of life. And where we were euel before trouble and
sickness, we be worse after. Therefore when God has wasted one rod upon us in
punyshemente, he begins to make another more sharper then the first. And
even as the fall again into a disease, before the first be quite paste and
overcome, brings the more danger unto the paciente: even so the relapse, and
fall again into the displeasure and judgment of God, not only doubleth the
grief and pain of the punishment, but also endaungereth the afflicted person
with the horror and damnacion of hell fire: for every relapse agrauateth the
pain for sin. After this follows the third part of Jonas prayer, in the
which is contained a co^mendacio^ of gods mercy.

But thou, O Lord my God, have brought my life again out or corrupcion. when
my soul faynted within me, I thought upon the Lord and mi prayer came in unto
the, even into thy holy temple.

In these verses is declared both the power of God, and the truth of God. His
power that saved his life, where was no likelihode but of death, yea death it
self. For he it is alone that brings to hell, and saves from thence. i. Sam.
i. His truth is declared yt where as he says: call upon me in the days of thy
trouble, and I will hear the. Psalm nienty and nine. here he performs it in
this afflycted Jonas: of whom we should learn both to fear his threatnynge
justice, and to trust unto his promised mercy, for he can do boothe. Punyshe
the evil that will not repent: and save the afflycted that flees unto his
mercy.

They that hold of vain vanities, will forsake his mercy.

The people of God have a custom in their prayers, as they behold the true
and sauinge health of the living God, so of the contrary part to consider
the false and deceit full help of the false gods, as David does many times,
and here also our Jonas. So do the true Christians at this day in beholdynge
the mercy of God in Christ: they behold and wounder at the fond and false
hope, help, and trust that me^ put in vanity, error, and for bodden help
of the Mass, water, bread, salt, bow, candell, pardones and such like. And
this note chrystian Reader, that the Prophet calls false and vain relygyon,
vanity: so judge thou of every relygyon that is not contained within the word
of God, to be nothing else then vanity, from whence soever it comes: though
the world would bear the in hand it were as true as the Gospel. But ask y^
true judge ye word of God, and it will shewethe it is supersticion, beggerye,
and treachery unto the soul. And those do lose y^ beneuole^ce and mercy that
God has promised in Christ to as many as seek him in truth, and in verity.
Out of this text ye se the doctrine of Christ true, that is written Mat. vi.
no man ca^seru^ two masters, the true relygion of God, and the supersticion of
man. Nor he ca^ be saved that trusts in Christ hanged upon the Cross and
Christ offered in the Mass: for the one is contrary plain unto the other.
Therefore Jonas confesses what he will do: follow the one and forsake the other,
as the text of his oration says. But I will do the sacrifice with the voice of
thanks giving, and will pai that I have voued.

Here Jonas ef^^ones tells what he will do being delivered from his trouble.
He will extolle, magnify, and set forth the goodness of God.

Then he will perform his vow made, that is to say: live obedyentlye unto
the commandment of god. The same must we do, and not use health and quyetnes
as an occasyon to syn, liberty, and filthiness of life. Jonas also amendeth the
folish opinion of the Jews that trusted to have obtained remission of their
si^nes by the offering up of the calves and other brute beasts. But Jonas
declares that ye Lord deliteth in no sacrifice y^ man ca^ do, fauinge in ye
sacrifice of tha^kesgeuing. For only Christ is the sacrifyce propycyatorye,
and he that alone meriteth before god the remission of sin. If then in the
time of the shadow, Jonas knew the Lord to accept the sacrifyce of the heart
and mouth, that was indewed with faith, above the sacryfyce of the blouddy
calves, how much more now of us will he do the same above the Idololatricall
sacrifice of the Mass? Jonas well trusting of gods mercy and promyses,
shows a reason wherefore he will laud and praise the Lord when he comes
out of trouble: and says.

For salvation comes of the Lord.

As though he had said: man can give health of body or soul except God, as
David says almost in every Psalm, and Esa. xliii.xliiii. If this doctrine were
well prynted into our heads, we would not god astraye to every strange God
and supersticion of man, as the world does now adays more like Heathens, then
Christians. Farther, we would the better sustain and endure adversity seeing
it can neither good nor come, without the provision of God. Gracious king
and my lords of the council, remember this doctrine of Jonas, and the^ ye
need not to fear to refourme this Church of England unto the primative state,
and apostolical doctrine. Let the devil with al his ministers do what they will:
if the judges remembered this doctrine, they would not fear to punish evil
doers. If ye people knew this doctrine, they would not take Armoure and weapon
against the Magistrates, but seek help from God. Before all men, let the
preacher comfort himself with this word, for he is in danger of most
displeasure, if he preach not truly. Also let ye persecutours of Gods word,
take heed of this doctrine: for in the Lord shall be their health, let them
persecute what and how they will: though they burn, ye Lord will quench: If
they kill, the lord will make alive: if they curse, the Lord will bless: if they
damn to hell, the Lord will save in heaven. Blessed is the^ the man yt trusts
in ye Lord. Now follows the conclusyon of the chapter. And ye lord spoke unto
the fish, and it cast out Jonas again upon the dry land.

Here ye may se the effect of a godly and ernest prayer, that it obtayneth
deliverance from the danger.

Of this in the hole we learn that there is none so great danger, but that we
may escape, if with penyte^ce we return unto the Lord, and ask him mercy. As
mani Ionasses therefore as be in this realm, that has, and does, or falsli
use, or neglige^tly conte^ne their vocacio^, let the^ acknowledge their offense
and beg pardon, or else doutles where penitent Jonas was cast a dry land, they
shall remain for ever in the pains of hell, as Saul does. Let them se therefore
that be bishops and priests, in what danger they be that neglect or abuse
their vocation: if they amend, health comes, as unto this miserable and
penitent man. This I speak to the noble me^ and to the lawers, and also to the
common people: I pray God al Ionasses of this realm, thus repent. Incase al do
not, yet yt some follow this godly man, that they may be saved as he is. So be
it.

The fifte Sermon upon Jonas, made by John Hoper.
The Preface.
THere is no man that has any respect or care at al of his heal the, that
would not gladly his faith, knowledge, and faults should be aproued and well
taken of God. For he knows all labors and pains to be in vain, and lost,
that are not co^me^ded by him. Yet in this behalf me^ greuosly offend and goo
out of the way, when the thing that god most estemeth, is of our parts most
neglected, and the thing that god hates and is displeased wythal, we most
diligently do and exercise our selves in. Men be brought to this ignorauncie
and contempt of god, and his word, that they judge every thing done of a good
in tencio^, and well meaning, should please the Lord. From whence spronge this
infinite, dangerous, and supersticious nombre of sacrifices, and other
seruings of god. But what thing after the tyght judgment of the scripture
chieflye pleases God? Obedience: that is to say, when every man in his state
and his vocacion does the thing he is commanded to do. As it is written.i. Sa.
xiii. I desire obedience and not sacrifice. Let noma^ therefore think he can do
any thing acceptable unto the lord if he neglect the works necessary
appointed unto his vocacion. Here may princes take heed they go not about with
liberality to make other men good for them, learned for the^, virtuous for
the^, wise for the^, and they them selves neglecte study, prayer, pains, and
labor, but to know and do al things the^ selves that is required to a princely
office, by the expres word of God. Study, wysedo^, knowledge, and exercise is
required in the prince him self. Let the bishops and prestes beware they goo
not about to please God with Mass, Dirige, Pardons, Rytes, and ceremonies
invented by men. But let them do the works of their vocacion, gravely study,
dilygently and truly preach the word of God, Christianely minister the
sacraments, and severely use discipline and correccion of indurate men's
fautes. So let the counceloure see what equity byndeth him to do, the honor
of god, the obedyence unto his prince, and the love of his country, and so
judge and council for the glory of God, and wealth of the realm, and not for
his own affeccion or profit: and think that the person, bishop or priest is
able to sing or sai the remission or pardon for the neglectyng of his duty,
but he must do the works thereof him self. The common sort of people, let them
learn to know and obey both god and man, and not trust to the pardon and
remission of their ignorauncie and disobedient treason and sedicion, at the
Persons or Uycars hand, but they must know and fear both God and gods
magistrate them selves.

How feyre and relygyous, good, and Godly, so ever the good intencion of man
appear and show it self to men, it is plain iniquity before God, as ye
may see by Saul: that though God would be pleased with the well meant fat
sacrifice of king Agag. i. Samu. xiii. And also that he fought with the
heathen before Samuels coming.i. Sam. xv. he was not only rebuked greuouslye
for his fault, but disherited also of his kingdom for ever. I dare pronounce yt
al these mischeues and troubles that happen in this ship and common wealth of
England, spring out of this fountain.

No man labors to do the works that God has appointed to his vocacio^. And
an example hereof we have seen in Jonas, whose disobedience and want of doing
his vocacion, moved the wyndes in the air, the waters of the sea, so that it
had like to have drowned him self, the ship, and as many as were within
board. And seeing there is none of us but is culpable from the highest to the
lowest in neglecting the works of out vocacion, and thereby inobedyent to the
good will and commandment of God, let us repent, and return to a better
mind. He that erreth shall not perish, if being admonished he return home
again. Eze. xviii. Mat. xi. Io. x. Let this glass and myrroure of Jonas suffyce
us to behold an other man's yuel in, before we feel the like our selves: we have
seen the disobedience of Jonas, and the pain thereof, we have seen his
amendment and pensiveness, and the fruit thereof, his delyueraunce and salvation.

Let us also now see how much he has profited, and learned in Gods schole
under the rod of aduersitye, and let us learn to do the same. But before
we come to the obedyence that this man learned in aduersytie, we will pray unto
God.

WE be come so far, as ye text has made mencio^ of ye restitucion of Jonas in
life upon the dry ground. And now follows his second legacion and embassage to
Niniue. But for the better understanding of al things that follow, I will deuyde
the chapter into his parts, which are. iiii.

The first conteyneth the commandment of god to Jonas. The second, Jonas
obedience. The third, the repentance of the Ninevites. The fourth, the mercy
and compassyon of God toward the penitent and sorrowful Ninevites.

The first part.
The word of God came the second time to Jonas after this sort: Rise, go to
Niniue that great city and preach in it the preaching that I have spoken unto
the of.

That Jonas goes not to the city to preach of his own head, but tarieth to
be called unto it by God, we learn no man should wysh, or desire for any office
or vocacion to a private commodity, and his own lucre, but to tarry till God
call him to it, chiefly the office of a bishop or preacher.

For that office has so many difficulties, labors, and dangers, that incase
the man that is in it, be not well persuaded ye he came to it by ye calling of
god, he shall never be able to endure the troubles anexed to the vocacio^: as
the perfect man's tidyousnes and werines therein declares. Iere. xx. who decreed
with him self to have preached no more, because of the malice of the people, and
for the contempt that followed him in doing of his vocacion. Even so is the
office of a good counceler and good magistrate that incase he look not to come
to his dignity and honor for ambicion, pride, and private lucre, but comes
when he is called of God, he shall find so many labors and unquietness in his
vocacion, that doubtless were it not for God, he could be glad to leave it to an
other man. For incase the magistrate do any thing contrary unto God, doutles
he shall fall into two yuels, first into Gods displeasure, and then the thing he
does shall never prosper, as it is to be scene by the Israelites that warred
before they were commanded by God. Number. xiiii. Let noma^ therefore run into an
office before the time god call him, neither bye him self into y^ office as is
now adays commonly used: for I know surely he that byeth will sell, and never
do God, the king, neither the subjects good service, but dyshonoure the first,
and rob the other.

That Jonas is bid to rise and go to Niniue, in that is declared, that of al
things in every vocacion, idleness and sloth must be chieflye avoided, and
labors exercysed: the which if we leave undone (being works annexed with our
vocacion) we declare our selves unmeet for the room and vocacio^ we be
appointed unto. Incase any man had a servant appointed to dreasse his meat in
the kytchen, or to keep his horse in the stable, and yet would neglect the
labors and pains that the offices ordinarily and of deuty required, who
gladly would be contented with such a servant, or desire he should be
preferred to any office in his house? Therefore commands S. Paul yt he yt
will not labor, should not eat. i. tes. iiii.

The third doctrine of this first part declared for as much as it behooves
every man, to avoid idleness in his vocation, It might be demanded what should
a man do to satysfye his vocation. It is told Jonas in this place. Preach
says the text. He says not: take ye regimente and governance of the
common wealth, but preach. Of these words we learn that every man is bound
to do the works of the vocation he bears the name of: and not to meddle with
other men's labors. It is not the office of the Bishop to play the king
and Lord, nor the kings part to play the Bishop. For the kings office is
inoughe for a king, and the Bishops office inoughe for a Bishop, let them do
the best they can, and study each of them in their office. But let the king
take heed he be able to judge whether the Bishop do true service to God in his
vocacion by the word of God, and let the Bishop do the same, take heed whether
the king or council would command him to do any thing contrary to the
works of his vocacion, which is to preach gods word: incase he do, with
knowledge and sobernes to admonyshe him, and to bring him to a better mind.
If you be a judge, remember thy name, and do the works of right judgment. If
a justice, do according to thy name: if a merchant, bye and sell truly: if
any other subject, do according to the name thou bear, as our subjects
of England of late did never awhyt. For master person, and an old wife
taught them to forget the duties of true and godly subjects, and would have
made them all kings, but the Lord cast them in to the sea. This duty of each
man is handsomely set forth by terteyne pictures in the town house at Basyll in
this verse. In supplex ora, tu regna, tuque labora There be three images, the
one of the Pope, the other of the Emperor, the third of a plough manne, and
the verse teaches all three their duties. He bids the Pope pray, the
Emperor to raygne, and the plougheman to labor. Let therefore al Bishops and
priests know their office is to preach and pray. This I say, God to record,
of no hatred but of love, for I am afraied of gods threteninges and ve^geaunce
toward them, if they amend not. For God says he will require the blood of
the people at the Bishops hand. Eze. iii.xxxiii. And Paul says: woe be
unto me if I preach not.i. Cor. ix.

Here might the Bishop or the person paraduenture partlye excuse them selfs
and say: I know my fault, and would gladlye amend it if I could, but I am
so old I can not preach, nor never used miselfe there unto. I would advise him
then to follow the doings of Ualerius the Bishop of Hipponensis, that in his
old and latter days perceiuinge his age could not satysfye the labors dew
unto his vocation, associated to himself a coumpanion and coadiutor Saint
Augustine, as he testifies Epist. cxlviii. In the beginning of that Epistle
thus he writes. Before al things I would your godly prudence should think in
this our time nothing to be more acceptable, facile, or more desired of me^
the^ the office of a Bishop, priest, or deco^, if their office be slightly and
sle^derly used, but with God no thing is more dampnable, miserable, or
sorrowful. The same knew Samuel: for in his age he instituted his sons to
help and ease the intollerancye and importance of his offyce^ so I would
every Bishop and person that for age or lack of learning cannot do his
office, should institute and take unto him some wise and learned preacher to
help him, and not a synger as now is used. If this counsel and doings of the
godly men rehearsed before like the^ not, let the^ devise some other like, and
all is one to me, so they exchue the Ire of God. For doutles it is horrible to
fall in this part, into the hands of God. For what shall it avail them to win all the world, and lose their own souls? I would likewise pray and
admonysh the Magistrates to se the schools better maintained: for the lack of
them shall bring blindness into this church of England again. And such as be
the patro^es and geuers of benefyces, let them take heed they give and
bestow them upon worthy men, and sell them not to Asses and blind block
headed fellows: For if they bestow their benefices for lucre or affection, to
such as can not or will not feed with the word of God, the people of his cure,
the patron shall dye eternallye for it as well as his blind and naughtye
curate, person, or vicar. The forth doctrine of this first part is very
necessary: for when the Bishops and priests hear their office is to
preach, then think they: but what we prech it is no matter: it lies in our
arbitrament and pleasure. Nay says the text. Preach that I bid the: and so
says Saint Peter.i Pet. iiii. Math. xxviii.

In this vocation of preaching, the preacher should so use him self as he
might say all ways: my doctrine is not my doctrine, but his that has send
me. For it is gods word and his law that turns the hearts of people to
repentance. Psalm. xix. cxix. For the word of God written is as perfect as God
him self: and is in dead hable to make a man perfect in all things.ii. Timo.
iii. Wherefore it needs not that blasphemous and stinkinge help of the
Bishop of Rome, that durst say the law of God is not of it self, but by his
interpretacion, wholesome and sufficient. But by this means he got authority
over the scripture to bury it, and to stablyshe what he would were it never so
deuilishe, and heretical. Therefore let such as be of God do as they have in
commission from him, and not as they please them selfs: for if they do, they
be of the deuell and not of Christ.

The obedience of Jonas.
Then Jonas arose and went to Niniue at the commandment of the Lord.

Jonas now being an obediente servant, looks no more for a ship to fly,
but goes the next way whether he is commanded, though the iournye was
paynefull and dangerous to the flesh. But the Cross of trouble is not
unprofitable to the Chrystyans, it mortyfyeth the flesh, so that in the
afflicted dwells the spirit of God, it excersiseth the faith and proves
obedience. As David says: well it is with me that thou haste chastened me Lord,
that I may learn thy commau^deme^ts. Both good and bad are afflicted in this
world: but y^ good thereby is amended, and the euel is appeyred, and so they
peryshe in their trouble. David was amended herewith. ii. Regum. xii. xxiiii.
So was Ezechias, esa. xxxviii. So was Daniel. Dani. ix. These and like unto
them be chastened in the world, because they should not be dampened with the
world. The evil with affliction be not amended, but indurated and hardened
through their own malice and obstynacie as Saul. and Pharao. And the pains
and torments here, be the beginning of the pains eternal. This diversity and
contrary effect of persecution godly, sets forth the holy prophet David,
Psa. lxxv. wonderful godly. The which Psalm I would all Byshopppes should
read, that knows the truth, and yet will take no pains to set it forth,
but live idle: and such as have no living to set it forth, or of malice
whister, and secretlye hyndreth the setting forth of it, for doutles at
length, they shall not only drink of the wine of adversity, but be compelled
to drink dragges and all. So shall al these rauenyng, and couetouse noble men
that with injuries and wrongs now afflicte the poor, at length they shall be
most afflicted them selves: so shall the auaricyous judge, the Covetous
marcha^t, and the traitorous and sedicious subject. But I red you be wise in
time, and as ye have followed this rebel Jonas in evil, so follow him in the
good and amend: if not, the kings majesty must cast you in to the sea.

The obedience of Jonas is set forth and commended with many circumstaunces,
and should therefore the better be noted. First, because he went the next way
to Niniue, and hired none other, nor substituted his suffragane, nor went not
into Samaria to ask counsel at his fryndes what was best to do, but went
streighte way him self. The second circumstance is worthy annotacio^, that he
did all things as the Lord bad him. Wherein we are taught to be diligente,
we see all our doings, acts, and obedience to be according, and as the word
of God bids. There is put in, as though it were by a parentesis, the
descripcion of Niniue.

And Niniue was a great city to the Lord of three days journey.

This dyscryption settethe forth the obedyence of Jonas, that diligentelye
preached the roughe the hole city the pleasure of God, that it should be
destroyed within.xl. days.

The city is called great unto God, that is to say every great city, as
the Cedre of God, the mount of God. etc. Or else it is called the city of
God, for the wonderful respect and pitye that the Lord had in the sauinge of
it. Whether the city were three days Iournye about, or else three days space
to vysytte all the streates thereof, it is not agreed yet upon among al
writers: but this we know it was a notable city, and among al cytyes in the
East of most famous report.

Now it follows what Jonas did after he entrede into the city.

When Jonas had entered the city one days iournye, he cried and saved:
within this xl. days Niniue shall be destroyed.

Of this text we learn that Jonas lived not idle after he came to the place
whether he was sent by God, but that he walked abroad and cried.

So should every man that is called to the office of a Bishop or pastor: it is
not inoughe he go to his dioces or personage, but that he must walk abroad
there and cry out the comau^demente of the Lord. Or else they be with al
their titel, glory, pomp and name, dome dogs, subject unto the vengeance
and plage of God. And this is the mark thoushuldest know a Bishop, and
priest by: by his tongue that sounds the word of the Lord, and not by his
cap or vtward vesture. So should the judge go abroad in his country, and
speak and declare every where justice. So should the provost, heads of
Colleges, masters of schools, go and teach the thing apertayneth to their
place and vocacion.

The text makes mention of the sum and pryncypall state of his sermon, that
is, that the city should be destroyed wtin.xl. days, and yt spoke he simple
and plainly without condition or gloss. Yet may we easily gather of y^ long
time of x^. days, that was given unto it, that it was reuersed unto penance
and amendment of life. And god would rather at this time fraye them to make
them amend, then to punyshe them, and lose the^ for ever: and would perce thus
their minds and bring them to a knowledge of their sins. And as subuercion
and destruction was threatened unto this Niniue, so is it to this hole realm:
for there is among us as great, and as many syns (God give grace there be no
greater, nor no more) as were among them. We must then amend or else we shall
peryshe euerychone. Luke.xiii. but what time the Lord knows, and not I. Now
it follows how the preaching of Jonas was accepted.

And the people of Niniue believed God, and preclaymed fasting, and arrayed them
selves in sack clothe, as well the great as the small of them.

Out of this text is first to be noted how that ye Niniuits resisted not the
preaching of Jonas, when they had yet if they would have excused their evil,
mani refuges and pretexts. There obedience to the word of god co^de^neth both
the Jews and us of obstynacie, and malice. i. They might have pretended this
Jonas is but one man, therefore not to be credited. ii. He is a stranger and
speaks it of hatred unto us, and of affeccio^ toward his own country.iii.
He is of a contrary relygion to ours, and wuld deceive as from our fathers
faith. iiii. He is no king but a man that seems to have little wir and less
experience. v. He is one contemned of his own country men and can not be
heard of them, and should we credit his words? vi. He is a noughty liver an^
one that God hates and has punyshed, and should we pass of his sayings? But
they remembered their own faults, at the preaching of one day they amended, they
never looked for miracle: They pretended not the antiquity and auncie^tnes of
their city, that had stood almost from the time of the flud Genesis x. They that
heard him, never desired their amendment, until such time as the king, the
priests and the other elders of the City, had agreed whether Jonas doctrine
were true or not. Of this facility and quycknes of belyfe in the Ninevites, we
may se yt sooner believes the very infydels the word of god, then such as
bears the name of God, and be brought up in supersticion. And that I think
were easy to be seen, if experience should be taken to preach at Babylon or
Constantinople, he should rather convert those cities, then Rome. Farther their
promptnes condemns our obstinacy and hardness of heart, that daily hear the
word of god preached, and yet nothing the better, nor nerer to salvation. It
follows what the Ninevites do when they be converted.

First they believe in the Lord, second they fast. A man ignorant of God,
offends two manner of ways, in bodi and in soul, and both these offenses
must be amended, if we will be reconciled unto god. By faith the mind is
reconcyled unto god, and by abstine^ce the body is kept in subieccion, and the
wantones of concupiscence kept in obedience. But in this our miserable and
cursed time of God (for sin) is great question, and controversy moved, not
only concerning faith, but also fasting: of which two things I judge it mete
somewhat to be spoken of. As touching faith it is not an opinion and knowledge
only, but a vehement, ernest, and certain persuasion of Gods promises in
Christ: and out of this faith spryngeth all Godlynes and virtuous works: and
what soever spryngeth not hereof, is sin.

And this faith the almighty god confirms in his true and virtuous people
two manner of ways: Inwardly and outwardly. Inwardlye by the holy ghost, who
testifies by his spirit with our spirit, that we be the children of God.
Outwardly by preaching of gods word, and ministracion of the sacraments. The
preaching conteyne the innumerable benefits and promyses of God made in the
new testament and ye old, unto us in Christ, who is ye seed that should and
does tread and break the head of the serpent. Gene. iii. Io. iii.

The Sacraments be as visyble words, offered unto the Eyes and other Senses,
as the sweet sound of the word to the ear, and the holy ghost to the heart.
The number of these sacraments in y^ publycke ministry of the church, be
two. One of baptism and the other of the lords supper, and both these teach
and confyrme none other thing then that the mercy of God saves the faithful
and beleuers.

Therefore is the bread in ye holy supper called the body of Christ, and the
wine the blud of Christ, because they be sacraments and seals of gods promises
in Christ. This plain and simple doctrine of the sacraments were sufficient,
if fraud, gile, treason, heresy, supersticion, papistrie, ignorancie,
arrogancy, misery, and the malice of men would suffer it. But these iuels
before rehearsed, have called into question and controversy, whether carnally,
corporally, and reallye, the precious body of Christ be present, and how the
communion and sacrament of his body should be ministered and used. For the
resolucion, and answering unto the which questions, I will sincerlye and
playnelye show my mind, according to the word of God.

Of the presence of Christ's body in the sacrament.
I Will not in this question say as much as I would or could, because of late
days in this place it was godly and learnedly touched. But yet somewhat must
I say because the ignorance of it, brings idololatrye: Idololatry brings
eternal damnacio^, eternal da^nacion comes not only to the ygnoraunte, but
also unto him that should in his vocacion, remove (or do his good will to remove)
the ygnorauncie. I am appointed to remove ygnorauncye: thus therefore I pray
you hear how ye may remove it. I will keep this order. First I will show by many
arguments that there is no corporal presence of Christ's body in the sacrament.
The^ will I answer to the arguments of y^ adversaries yt would have it here.

The first argument.
THis I take of ye name of christ's body, which is like unto ours in all things
except syn. Heb. ii. Esa. liii. And incase it were not in all things like unto
ours (except sin, and immortality) Sayncte Paul's Argument would prove
nothing. i. Cor. xv. But our bodies be one to each one, measured certaynelye
with quantity and quality, and occupye at one time, one place: therefore so
does, and ever has done Christ's body. And thus would Paul prove our
resurreccion because our bodies be as Christ's is yt is risen, except sin
and immortality. After that they sat Christ has now a glorified body, and so
we have not, it makes nothing for their purpose: for when Christ made his
supper, and instituted ye sacrament of his death, he was a mortal and passible
man, subject unto the tyrany and violence of his adversaries. Yea after his
immortality, he showed manifest tokens and arguments of his pure, true and
sensible humanity. Io. xxi. i. Io. i. For y^ apostles fyngers touched him.
Farther saint Paul says, he shall. Phil. iii. that Christ shall make our
bodies like unto his glorious body. Therefore they do destroy ye true and very
humanity of Christ's body, that say his body is in many places at one time,
which robs his body of all the qualyties, qua^tities, and properties of a
true body. For y^ scripture of god confesses that Christ's body is but in one
place. And many of the Popes Canones confyrme the same. Thus it is written.

De co^secrat. Distinct.ij. prima quidem. Donec seculum finiatur, sursum
dominus est: Sed tame hic nobiscum est viritas domini. Corpus enim in quo
resurrexit in vno loco esse oportet, veritas aute^ eius vbique diffusa est.

That is to say: Till y^ world be ended, the lord is above: but notwythstandynge
his truth is here with us. The body, in which he rysse, must be in one place,
and his verity is dyspersed every where.

The second reason.
THis is taken out of ye nature and condition of a sacrament, which is this,
that the thing that is remembered by the sacrament be it self absent, and yet
the signs or sacraments take the name and nominacion of y^ thing represented
and signified by the signs, for a declaracio^ of the thing that is done with
the signs.

So is it in all the sacraments of the old testament and the new: therefore also
in this sacrament. The thing it self in this sacrament, y^ is to wit, ye
precious body of Christ broken, and his innocent blood shed, be abse^t: yet
be the bread and the wine called the body broken, and the blud shedding,
according to y^ nature of a sacrament, to setforth the better the thing done
and signified by the sacrament. There is done in the sacrament the memory and
remembrance of Christ's death, which was done on the Cross, when his precious
body and blood was re^t and torn, shed and poured out for our sins.

With this agrees y^ mind of S. Augustine. Ad Bonifacium. Epist. xxiii.
Sienum sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum quarum sacramenta sunt, non
haberent, ommno sacramenta no^ esse^t* That is to say: if Sacraments had not
some proporcion and lykenes of the things whereof they be sacraments, they
were no sacraments at al. And thus rather of the symilitude and sygnification
of the thing they represent and signifye, they take the name, and not that in
deed they be as they be named.

So after this manner is the sacrament of Christ's body called Christ's body:
and the sacraments of Christ's blood, called Christ's blood: and the
sacrament of fayeth is called fayeth. As Saint Augustine learnedly, and godly
says in the same argument. Accedat verbum ad elementum, vt fit sacramentu^,
non ait tollat elementum, vt fit sacramentum. That is to say: let the word
come unto the Element and then is made the Sacrament. He says not let the
word channge, or transubstanciate the Elemente (that is to say the substance
and matter of the sacrament) and then is made the sacrament.

The third reason.
IF he were here in ye sacrament bodily, and corporally he should every day
suffer and shed his precious blood. For the scripture says: this is my body
y^ is broken for you, and my blud that is shed for you. Luke. xxii. i. Cor.
xi. but this is not true, that he daily suffers pain and passion. Romans vi.
no more is it true that he is in the sacrament bodily: for heaven keeps him
till the last day. Act. iii. Neither yet is ye bread after consecration his
very body, i. Cor. xi. nor the wine his blud. Math. xxvi. But the bread
remains still bread, and the wine still wine after the word spoken, as they
were before concerning their substance, but the use of the^ be changed.

The fourth reason.
THe scripture makes no mention but of one ascension, and of two commynges,
one paste, and the other we look for in the end of the world at the latter
judgment.

If their doctrine were true, there should be infinite asce^sio^s and infinite
descencions. Farther they cannot tell the^ selves what is become of the body
they feign to have in the sacrament, when the accidents and qualities corrupt
and be consumed.

Their gloss upon the Canone. Tribus gradibus, ait auolare in Celum. that is to
say: it flies into heaven, but we say he was there before. They darre not say
it corrupts, nor yt it is turned into the substance of our bodies and
sowles: what is there then become of this body?

The fyfth reason.
GOd had made by this mean his church in danger and subject unto
Idololatrie. For there be many chances and cases happen that may let the
Priest to consecrate, and then should the people worship an Idol for lack
of the presence of Christ's body.

These dangers may chance three manner of ways: in the priest, in the
words, and in the matter.

The priest if he be not lawfully consecrated, if he be an herityke, one
excommunicated, or a simoniache, he consecrateth not. Magister sententiarum.
Lib. iiii. did. xiii. Se the gloss De consecra. did. ii. cap. Quid sit
sanguis. In the words of consecracion, there is no less danger and dout.
First many of their writers be ignoraunte with what words Christ consecrated.
Ioha^nes Duns, and Pope Innocent the third libro de officio Miss. part.iii.
cap. vi. xiiii. Do say the consecracion to be comprehended in this word,
Benedixt.

Comesta douteth the gloss upon this Canon: Vtrum sub figura, where as the
glossator interprets these words in y^ Canone of the Mass (Iube hec
perferri) that is to sai: Command these things to be carried. As though they
were the words of consecracion. The which opinion, the Master of the sentence
seems to favor in the place before named. If an heritike, says he, would
take upon him to usurp this misterye, would God send an angel from heaven to
consecrate his oblacion? But how so ever they agree upon the words of
consecracio^, there is yet an other rule in their mass books, that the words
must be perfectly pronounced, or else they do nothing. How should this be
known when they speak them in syle^ce? Well, grant they would cry or sing
them out, yet so might they else be vain, for there is also required the
intencion of him that will consecrate. The matter must be such bread and such
wine as the gloss speaks of. de conse. did. ii. Sicut de^ sanctificando. the
which properties, if they be absent, nothing is consecrated.

The syxt reason.
IF Christ be present corporallye, then shall their sacrifyces cease, as saint
Paul says.i. Corin. xi. Ye shall show the Lords death till he come. He
comes after their belyue and learning: then should they cease from
sacrifisynge.

The seventh reason.
IN case they could dyssolue and answer to every one of these reasons, yet
could not Christ's body be in the Mass, for it lacks the word of God, that
is to say the showing of Christ's death. Farther the Mass destroieth, and
dyshonoreth ye institucion of Christ.

Solucions of their arguments
THese I will comprehend all in three points. First they contend by the
authoriti of the fathers. The second by these words of Christ: this is my
body. The third by the omnipotencye of God.

Of the fathers authority.
When they be beten by the authority of Gods word, they ^^e for help at the
fathers authority. Let them make answer: Is this their opinion? when the
priest has spoken these words: This is my body, by and by the substance of
the bread to be changed, or the substance thereof to vanish away (I ask the
question, because yet they be not fully agreed there upon) and for it comes
the corporal body of Christ, with the same quality and quantity he was
borne, lived and died in: so that there hangs in the air in the priests hands
y^ accide^tes and qualities of bread, without any substance, and so thus to
be honored there of the people. In what apostles writings find they this
doctrine? Or in what man's writings that followed the Apostles within.c.cc.ccc.
cccc.ccccc.cccccc. yea. ccccccc. years. If they can show this in any
autenticall writer in any work that has not been doubted of, I will believe as
they do. But that it may be known unto you that the fathers were not of their
opinion, I will propounde unto you certain conjectures.

First we read not where there was ever any contencio^ about the words of
consecracio^, where they began, and where they ended, neither any thing of the
ministers intencion, to be of such virtue they speak of. The second: the
Elders neue^ answered the Arrian that denied the equality between go^ the
father, and God the son with this: Christ is God and equal with the father,
for we so honor him in the sacrament. If the Catholic church had so judged of
Christ's bodily presence in the sacrament, as the new vpstart church does,
and has done of late years, there could not have been a stronger argument
against Arrius and his heresye.

The third. Niether did the Marcionistes ever make such a reason: though Christ
seemed to have the qualities and conditions of a natural man, yet he had not
them in deed: For in the Sacrament of his bo^^e there seems to be the very
^ualities and conditions of ^eade and wine, yet is there ^eyther bread nor
wine in ^eede.

If this opinion of the ac^idents, qualities and sensual judgment of the
bread, had been aproued and taken in those hates for Christianity and
Christian religyon, how would this illusion and wytchcrafte have defended I
pray you, the Marcionist opynion? doutles nothing more.

But Tertullian against the Marcionistes does reason another wise, and says:
Christ of y^ bread, that he took, made his body, saying: this is my body, that
is to say a, figure of my body.

They fourth.
They used chalices of wood and glass. De co^secrat. did. i. vasa in quibus,
the wooden chalices could soke in the wine consecrated, the glassen chalices
might sone have been broken: if any of them both had contained the precious
blood of Christ, they would not so temerously have used it.

The fyfte.
The sacrament was given to the children in their hands to bear it home with
them. Eccle. hist. Lib. vii. cap. xxxiiii,

The syxte.
No scripture of god, neither doctor of y^ Catholic faith, taught ever
Christ to be honored here in earth with candels and bowynges of knees.

The seventh.
In celebratynge the supper they said: lift up your hearts, meaning not to have
ye mind affyxed in the signs and elements of the sacraments, but in heaven.
Whereof it may be easly gathered that they never thought of a corporal presence
here in the earth.

The eight.
Origene upon the book of Leuit. declateth that y^ remanentes and relics of
the sacraments were not kept to be honored, but they were burned: who would
handle his god so cruellye I pray you, as to burn him like an heretycke?

Also there is a decre in y^ Canone law, Tribus gradibus, the which
commands the ministers t^ receive all the relics of the sacrament: and it
is the rule of Clement.iii. that lived. Anno. M.C.lxxxx.

In ye mean time I speak no word of that follows (I should say wicked
question) mete for Iuggelours, inchau^tours, and wytches, and not for
Christian men, much less for Deuines and teachers of gods people: in what
moment of time the bread is turned in to the body, and the wine into the blud?
when the priest speaks these words (This is my body) if they grant at lest
these to be the words of consecracion.

Gabriel Biel. lect. xlviii* says that the body is not present, whiles this
oracion is a speaking (This is my body) Sed tota oracio est referenda, ad
vltimum iusta^s ipsius orationis, that is to say: the hole oracion must be
referred unto ye last insta^ce of it. And with this opinion agrees ye gloss upon
ye canone law. De consecracione. distinct.ii. Sum omne, says that the
consecracion is made only in the last letter.

And in an other Canone. Ante benedictione^, thus he says: licet verba
successiue proferantur, no^^ tamen successiue consecratio fit, sed in vno
insta^ti corru^pitur panis, scilicet in vltimo fustanti prelationis verborum.

That is to say: although the words be spoken one after an other, yet is
not the consecracion made by a little and little, but in one instante (or punet
of time) the bread is altered, to sai, in the last moment of the words
spoken. After this their wicked and Idololatrical doctrine, this lillable (^m)
in this oracion: Hoc est corpus meum* to say, this is my body, has all the
strength and virtue to change and deifye the bread. But I pray you, what
syllable is it that changes, and deifieth the wine? for even with them these
words seem to have more dyffycultie then the other. But let these illustons
and eraftes go, and let us cleave to the truth of Gods word, and we shall be
out of al danger.

A Question.
THus they say now: if this opinion be neither of the Apostles, neither from
the ancient doctors, how chances it to be so universally taken, and for so
infallyble and indoubted truth, yea such a truth as incase men forsake al
truth, and yet not contrary this truth, is accounted a man most christian and
true?

Answer.
NOthing is more expedient to answer directlye unto the question, then to
consider the time of our fathers. They thought it best to name the sacraments
by y^ name of the thing was represented by the sacraments. Yet in many places
of their wryryngs, they so interpretate the^ selves, that no man except he will
be wylfully blind, can say but they understood the sacrament to sygnifie, and
not to be the thing signified: to confirm, and not to exhibit grace, to help,
and not to give faith: to seal, and not to win the promise of God. To.
iiii: to show what we be before the use of the^, and not to make us the thing
we declare to be after the^: to show we are Christ's, to show we be in grace,
and not by the^ to be received into grace: to show we be saved, and not yet to
be saved by them: to show we be regenerated, and not to be regenerated by
them, thus the old doctors meant.

But when all good learning, and the lesson of the holy scripture were
drowned by the Gotthes, and Uandales, in Europe, Asia, and Africa, and yet
somewhat rescued and caughte again by Charles the great. Anno. viii C. men
not acquaynted with the frases and vein of the scripture, accustomed them
selves to the readyng of doctors, and leaft the word of God.

Whereof followed among other euyls, that in France by certain Italio^s this
question to be very much and many times reasoned upon, as touching the
corporal presence of Christ's body in the sacrament. Against the which ertour
one Ihon Scot and one Bertram wrote a book of the sam matter to Charles y^ great
But the monks and the priests declyned most unto ye opinion of the carnal
and corporal presence: where upon in y^ time of Leo the nynth, a bishop of
Rome. Anno. M.L. being a monk, called a council named Uercellence: y^ which
tuled as chief president and great master, one La^cfranck a monk and
afterward bishop of Cant. He damned Berengarius: but after that the same
Berengatius had reca^ted, one Nicolaus Pope, assembled a council of the monks
of Italy, and priests, and so compelled Berengarius to a recantacion, which
ye may read. De consecrat. did. ii. Ego Berengarius.

But here we will pause and deliberat a while upon this reca^tacion, and scanne
it a little. In this reca^tacion (mark it) is no mention made of
tra^substanciacion, but the bread and the wine are called the body and blud of
Christ, and that the same are touched with the hands of the priest, broken,
and torn with ye teth of ye faithful. This sentence is not admitted now a
days among our scholastical divines. Yea the gloss upon the same Canone,
says: (read the place) There is more danger of heresy in Berengatius words,
the^ was in Berengarius him self.

That recantacion of Berengarius sent the Pope into all the cities of Italy,
Germany, and France. But this relygyon could not be well accepted, nor judged
to be good of al m^ though Hildebrand the monk and sorceroure confyrmed it.
Anno. m.lxxix. Wherefore they excogitated, and dremed out tra^ssubsta^ciacio^,
the which opinion help forth the monks of Benedictes order, in their Sermons.
And because this new and wicked doctrine of transubstanciacio^ could not be
received and admitted of al me^, After two hundred years almost, Innocentius
the third confyrmed it in the council of Laterane. Anno. M.CC.xv. some time
being a doctor of Parise. And that this wicked doctrine might take the sooner
place, he bound me^ to auriculer confession, wherein they persuaded men to what
they pleased. Immediately afterward began the beggyng friars the self
soldiers of Antichrist, and mete pe^sonnes to setforth such abhominacion. At
the beginning of these monsters, Honorius.iii. bishop of Rome, commanded this
new bready god to be honored. Anno. M.CC.xxvi. libr. ii. Decretal. Tit. de
celebra. Missaru^. And then began the pyndfooles and cloisters to be made in
the churches to reserve their new god in. And when the monks had farther
entered into the consciences of the people, and when they had more inculcated
and bete^ to men's heads more this new article of faith, for transubstanciacion,
then all the other of our belyfe in Christ,

The Pope began to excogitate more yet for the honor of this new god. For when
they had brought Christ from heaven to earth again, and so concluded he should
be honored in the sacrament, he thought it injury to let him be without some
solemn fest and dai, wherein people might honor him according to their
decrees: whereupon Urbanus the.iiii. instituted the feast that is called Corpus
Christi. M.CC.lxii. Then increased the rabble and Idololatrical nombre of
pryuate Masses: and ye honoryng of this bread then was defended with swerd and
fire.

In the mean time many godly men were sore afflycted in their conscience, yet
durst not declare their grief, partly for fear, partli because that
sophistry had blinded part of their judgments. At length the Lord reised up
godly men, yea here in England Iho^ Wi^lefe that resisted this new heretical
doctrine. M.CCC.lx.viii. And now ye Lord be praised, children know the
ungodliness thereof, and may se it plainly to be naught, if they will not be
wylfully blind. How childyshly they brag of the doctors, now ye may see.
And even the same do they with the words: this is my body, and with the
omnipotency of God, as ye shall hear in the next sermon.

The sixte Sermon upon Jonas, made by John Hoper.
THey obiecte against the truth as co^cerni^g the absence of christ's body in
the sacrament, the words of Christ: This is my body. Unto the which we
answer briefly. The words should be understood according to the matter
and purpose they be spoken for: But every man knows, ye matter and purpose yt
Christ entreats of, is to make, and institute a sacrament: therefore ought
every word to be taken sacramentallye: which is to attribute unto the
sacrament, ye name of ye thing signified and represented by the sacrament.

Therefore they should not force nor co^straine y^ sound of the words used in
the sacrament to make of y^ sacrament on ydole by false interpretacio^, where
as the true se^ce of ye word makes but a necessary ceremony, and help to our
infirm faith. In the Canon law, Decretalib.li. de verbor. significat. Tit.
xl. cap. vi. No^ sermom res, sed reiest sermo subiectus, that is to say: the
matter should not be co^straiued to y^ word, but ye word to serve the matter. Et
cap. viii. dum proprietas verboru^ attenditur, sensus veritatis amittitur, yt
is to say: when the nature of y^ word is forced, the meani^g of ye verity is
lost. Farther what should move the^ to deny us one trope in these words, when
they them selves use a great many of tropes and fygures: where as we use but
one, and the same one to be in the open word of God: and all theyrs to be
without, and contrary to y^ word of God. Note the words of Christ, Hoc est
corpus meum. That is to say: This is my body. what they should make of this
word (This,) they cannot tell: and hither unto they have dysputed of it: and
yet not agreed. Read I pray the Gabriel Biel. Ser. xliiii. et Glossam super
Canone^. Timorem docet. Is, they interpretate, Is made. The bread they say is
the accidents of bread. But in the Cup they be constrained to use with us a
sign. This Cup is the new Testament in my blud: for they say y^ wine in the
Cup and not the Cup. They know them selves how fo^dly they interpretate
these words, rather maliciously, obstinately, and falsely, then truly: we
therefore thus take them (This is my body) that is to say: the Sacrament of my
body broken and given for you: Either this is y^ new testamente, that is to
say: the sign of the new testament, or the remission of syn obtained in the
body of Christ broken and torn for us. S. August. lib. xx. contra Faustu^.
cap. xxi. has these words. Huius sacrifi^^ caro et sarguis ante aduentu^
Christi, per victimas similitudinum promittebatur. In passione Christi per
ipsam veritatem reddebatur. Post asce^sum Christi per sacrame^tum memory
celebratur. That is to say: the flesh and blud of this sacrifice before the
coming of Christ, was promised by the sacrifices of similitude. In the
passion of Christ they were given in deed: after the ascencion of Christ, they
be celebrated by a sacrament of memory. And the gloss did. ii. Tribus
gradibus, says: Certum est, quod species quam cito dentibus teruntur, tam cito
in celum rapitur corpus Christi, that is to say: It is certain that as soon as the accidens and qualities of bread be broken with y^ teeth, straightway ye
body of Christ is taken into heaven: so y^ their own doctors do not belyue yt
ye very bodi of Christ is received in the sacrament. If a man should the^ ask:
what faith and opinion should y^ christian have concerning ye presence or
abs^ce of Christ's bodi in y^ sacrame^t^

Answer.
The body of Christ should be co^sidred.ii. manner of ways, first as it was
borne of yt blessed virgin, being in deed our very natural brother: The as it
was offered upon the cross for the rede^pcion of the world. And thus offered
and put to his passion upon y^ cross, we consider him in the sacrament: for
the bread there used is called the body of Christ broken: and y^ wine the blood
sheding. But the presence of christ's natural body, or y^ opinion of his
presence, they so little profit, yt in very deed it does rather hurt, and
harm, as Christ said.

The flesh profits nothing. Io. vi. and again: it is expedient that I go
away. We must therefore lift up our minds into heaven when we feel our
selves oppressed with the burden of sin, and there by faith apprehend and
receive the body of Christ slain and killed, and his precious blud shed for
our offenses: and so by faith apply the virtue, efficacy, and strength of ye
merits of Christ to our souls, and by that means quit our selves from the
danger, damnacio^, and curse of God. And thus to be partaker of the worthynes
and deseruyngs of Christ's passion, is to eat the body and to drink ye blud.
Therefore does Christ in the.v. of John, take eat, for believe, and believe for
eat, so many times. And S. Augustine says, vt quid paras de^tem et ventre^,
creed et manducasti, why preparest thou the teeth and belly, believe and thou
have eaten. And whosoever ever eats after this sort the body of Christ, and
drink his blud, has everlasting life. Then obiecte they: if we may thus eat
the body and blud of Christ without the sacrament, what avails it to have
any Sacrament?

Answer.
Against these temptacions of the devil the use of the sacraments were
instituted in the church.

The first temptacion of the devil is, he would bear the Christian in hand the
promises of Gods mercy to be false: Therefore does God confyrme the^ unto us by
his sacraments.

The second te^ptacion when ye devil perceaueth we belyue the promises ^f god
to be true universally, yet would he make us doubt of them perticularli, as
though they appertayned not unto the private or singular conscience afflycted.
That dout would God remove in us by his sacraments, and says, they appertain
to the private and particular conscience afflycted, even as every private man
receaueth the sacraments of the promyses.

The third temptacion. The devil labors to take from us the knowledge of
the means of our salvation, and how the promyses of God be made ours, by ye
free grace of God or by our merytes.

The Sacraments therefore which behold and represent only Christ, do teach
us that the means of our salvation, is only in Christ. And to put us out of
doubt wherewythall Christ has meryted for us the promyses of God, and this
grace of our salvation, the sacrament shows us it was with and by his death
and blud sheddyng: and therefore has he given the name of his body and blood
to the signs and elements of the sacrament. So the bread is called the
body broken, and the wine the blood shedden: Admonyshyng the that in the
receiving of ye sacrament, thou should not tarry* nor occupye thy meditacions
and contemplacions in the bread and wine, but in the merits of the body
broken, and the blud shed. Who so ever mark and understand these things,
eats Christ: if he be ignorant here of he is in danger of eternal
damnacion.

An other objection.
THey say: God can do all things, therefore it is not impossyble for him to
make his body present in the Sacrament.

We be not so addicte and given unto humane ration, that we will believe
nothing more then reason is able to account and give answer for. But we
believe many things that directly reason says we should not beliue: As the
incarnacion of Christ, our resurreccion, the making of the world, three persons
in one godheade and one essence: and these things we belyue because the
express word of God commands to believe it. But the tra^selementacion and
alteracio^ of the bread, no place of y^ scripture commands us to believe,
but many places forbid we should believe it. Nether do the Papists agree among
the^ selves what should be the words of consecracion: and if we had but that
auantage of the^ only, it were enough to declare their transubstanciacion to be
no part of Gods word.

It is a folly to obiecte the omnipotencye of God without Gods word. God nor
does, nor can not do more the^ he will do: and as foolyshly do they, making
mention of a miraculous presence of Christ's body, and do declare them selves
to be of Antichriste by the same means. For he shall deceive the world (ye
the very electes, if it were possible) with new miracles. Math. xxii. i. ii.
these. ii. The miracle of Christ's visible ascencion and other expressed in the
scryptures of God, are sufficient for the Catholycke church. And the miracle
of ye inuisyble and miraculous presence, we leave to them that be deceived with
the spirit of error. For they would have now Christ present, but in any
case dumme and without speech: and whiles he lived and could speak, the
members of the devil hanged him upon the cross.

Thus was the malice of the devil always great against our Savior. Before
he came into the flesh, he ^ave many believe he was come, before the time
appointed by the Prophets was exspired: when he was come in deed, then went
he about to persuade he was not come, nor was not the Savior of the world,
and never left till he had killed him, because he would not deny but that the
very true savior of the world was come. And now that in dead he is
ascended and departed from us according to the scriptures, he goes about all
he can to prove him now to be here: so that neither before his cummyng into
the world, nor at his being corporally in the world, nor yet being out of
the world, he can not be in peace, sure, and safe from the assaults and
temptacions of his and our mortal enemy Satan. But I know how the
adversaries of the truth, persuade the people maliouslye to give no credit to
such as preach, and teach the truth. They say we condemn the holy
sacrament, and make it of no estimacion. But beliue not their slanders and
lies, but hear or read our opinion, knowledge, and godly estimacion we have of
the sacrament, and then Judge, and give sentence afterward. And here receive
mine opinion as touching the form and manner to celebrate and use the
Sacraments.

The form and manner how to celebrate the sacraments.
IT were expediente to entreat this matter at length if time would serve. But
yet in few words I will say somewhat of the sacrament of the Lords Supper and
also of Baptism.

Baptism consists in two parts. In the word and the elemente. The word is
the preaching of the good and merciful promyses of Gods goodness, acceptyng us
into his favor and grace for the merits of Christ.

The which promyses be brefely comprehended in these words. Math. xxviii. I
baptyse the in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost.
These words shows ye form of Baptism, and also that only men, reasonable
creatures, should be baptized. Mat. xvi. So is condemned the gentilitie, and
supersticion that has been used in the Christenyng of bells. The matter and
Elemente of this sacrament, is pure water: what so ever is added, Oil, salt,
Cross, lyghtes, and such other be the inuencions of men, and better it were
they were aboly^^^ed, then kept in the Church. For they obscure the
simplicity, and perfectnes of Christ our sauioures institucion. I pray the
kings majesty and his most honorable counsel to prepare a ship as soon as
may be, to send them home again to their mother church, the bosom, and
breast of man.

The form how to celebrate the Lords supper.
HEre must be marked two persons: ye minister, and he that communicates with
the minister. These must come and assemble together as saint Paul says.i.
Corin. xi.

The duty, and office of the minister.
HE does best his office, and is best instructed to minister y^ sacrament, if
he in the ministracion thereof go as nere as is possible to the first
institucion of Christ, and the Apostles. For Christ was and is the wisdom of
the father, and the Apostles had received the holy ghost that brought them into
all truth: therefore it must needs follow, their doyngs, and ministracion to be
most perfect, holy, and religious.

How the minister should prepare him self.
INwardly and outwardly. The inward preparacion is if his mind and soul be
instructed and furnished with godly doctrine, and a fervent spirit and zeal
to teach his audience, to stablysh them in the truth, and to exhort them to
perpende and mark well the merits and deservings of Christ.

The outward preparacion, the more simple it is the better it is, and the nerer
unto the institucion of Christ and his Apostles. If he have bred, wine, a
table, and a fair table cloth, let him not be solicitous nor careful for the
rest, seeing they be no things brought in by Christ, but by Popes: unto whom
if the kings majesty and his honorable Counsel (have good conscience) they
must be restored again: and great shame it is for a noble king, Emperor or
Magistrate, contrary unto Gods word, to detayne and keep from the devil or
his minister, any of their goods or treasure, As the Candels, Uestiments,
(...): for if they be kept in the church as things indifferent, at length they
will be mayntayned as things necessary. When the minister is (...) well prepared
with sound (...) Godly doctrine, let him (...) him self to the distru^^^^ of
the bread and wine: (...) as he g^ueth the bread, (...) him break it after
the ^^ample of Christ the should ^eue the bread, and not thrust (...) into the
receauers mouth. For the breaking of the bread has a great mystery in it of
y^ passion of Christ, in the which his body was broken for us, and that is
sygnyfyed in the breakyng of y^ bread, which in no case should be admitted:
therefore let the minister break the round bread, for broken it serves as a
sacrament and not hole. Christ did break ^^. mat. x^ vi. Mar. xiiii. Luc.
x^ii. And saint Paul ^ayth: the bread that we break, is it not y^ communion
of Christ's ^odye? i. Cor. x. Thus should the perfeccio^ of Christ's institucion
be had in honor, and the memory of the dead left out, and nothing done in
this sacrament, y^ had not gods word to bear it. But alas God is accounted a
fool, for men can use the sacrament more religiously, devoutly, godly, and
christianly, then Christ Gods son, as it appears: for his form and manner
is put out, and man's deuyse, and wisdom is accepted for it.

The dewty and office of the people.
THe dewti of the receauer rests in three parts. To say: what he should do
before the receauyng of the Sacrament, what he should do in y^ receiving of it,
and what after the receauyng of it. Before the receiving he should prepare and
make ready his mind, as the commandment of S. Paul is, i. Cor. xi. let the
man prove and search himself, and so forth. And this may be done two
manner of ways. First toward God, then toward man.

Toward God he should from the botome of his heart, confess his faults and
sins, and acknowledge his just co^demnacion: then should he persuade him self
by true and lively faith, that God would be mercyful unto him for y^ death of
his dear beloved so^n Jesus Christ, done in his body torn, and in his blud
shed.

He should prepare him self toward his neighbor also. First incase he has
hurt his neighbor in fame or goods, he should reconcile him self again, with
restitucion of the^ both again. He that thus prepares him self, does eat
worthelye the body of Christ, and he that does not thus prepare him self,
eats nothing but the sacrament to his everlasting damnacio^. I make no
mention here of auriculer confession, as though that were a thing necessary to
be done before or after the receauynge of the Sacrament.

For this confession is not of God, as their law does record. The gloss upon
the decre of penance. Distinct.v. in penitencia.

In the receauynge of this sacrament, there be things required both in the
inward man and also in the outward man. The inward preparacion is when the man
receauynge the bread and the wine, being subjects and matters under the
judgment and censure of the senses, the mind is elevated and lift up into
heaven: perswadyng him self by faith, that as truly appertains unto him y^
promyses and grace of God through the merits and death of Christ, as he
sensibly, and outwardly receives the sacrament and wytnes of gods promyses.
And doubt no more of an inward frendshyp, familiarity, concord, peace, love
atonement, and fatherly petye and compassyon, through Christ by the means of
faith, then he douteth yt his mouth outwardly does receive y^ signs and
sacraments of gods mercies. To excitat in us this faith and believe in the
merytes of Christ: the bread is called the body, and the wine his blud, after
ye manner and frase of the scripture.

The vtward behauour and gesture of the receauer, should want al kind of
suspicio^, show, or inclinacion of Idololatrye. Wherefore seeing knelyng is a
show and external sign of honoryng, and worshipping, and heretofore has
grievous and damnable Idololatry ben committed by the honoryng of the sacrament,
I would wyshe it were commanded by the Magistrates, that y^ communicatours,
and receauers should do it, standing or sitting. But syttyng in mine opinion
were best, for many consideracions. The Paschal lamb was eaten standing,
which sygnifyed Christ yet not to be come, that should give rest, peace, and
quietness. Christ with his Apostles used this Sacrament at the first, syttyng:
Declaring that he was come that should quiet and put at rest both body and
soul, and that the figure of the Passover from thenceforth should be no more
necessary, nor that men should travel no more to Jerusalem once in the year, to
seek and use a sacrament of the Lamb to come, that should take away the
sins of the world.

After the receauinge of it, there should be thanks geuynge of all the
church, for y^ benefits of Christ's death. There should be prayer made unto
god, that they might persevere, and continue in the grace of God received. They
should help the poor with their alms. This form me thinks is most like
unto the form of Christ, and the Apostles. How far the mass differs
from this, al men know.

I pray God the best may be taken, and the wurste left, through out all the
world. And al such as be yet infyrme by reason of long custom, and lack of
knowledge, let them pray God, and search the scriptures, without
affeccion. Such as be perverse and obstinate, and will admyt no reason, for
them the ire and dyspleasure of God is ready and pressed to punish them when he
sees time. As it is to be seen by the Corinthes.i. Cor. xi. that for the abuse
of ye supper, many of them fell sick, and into dyseases. So will he do with
us, if we neglecte his most perfect, and Godly institucion.

Let us repent therefore with the Ninevites from our foremer sins, and
believe the remyssyon of them for Gods mercy in the deservings of Christ.
Farther let us submytte our selves, all our wisdom, and learning unto
his word: and think that Christ and his Apostles have instituted and used,
it can in no ways be bettered by us.

And you my gracious Lord and king restore the right use of the supper of the
Lord, as Josias did the right use of the Paschal Lamb.iiii. Reg. xxiii. ii.
Para. xxxv. after the word of God. The text now follows of the fast of the
Ninevites.

Of fasting.
There was a fasting proclaimed, and weryng of sackecloth, from the greatest to
the smallest.

Here be two things to be noted in the fruits, and signs of penitence. First
concerning the fast, and vileness of the apparel, The second how they fasted
from the greatest to the smallest.

Of fasting and sack cloth.
THe hypocrites of the world when they hear of this fasting and puttyng on of
sackecloth, damn strayghtwayes the doctrine of faith, and teach that God
saves not only for Christ's sake which only faith apprehe^deth: as though
faith could not only apprehend the mercy of god, and yet have fasting anexed
with her. But this present text confounds this error: for it says the
Ninevites first believed the Lord, and then fasted. But lest we should here err,
I will speak a little of fasting, that we may love rather to fast well, then
obstinately to defend a false fast.

What is fasting.
Fasting is a moderat use and taking of meat and drink, lest the flesh
should by abundance and to much of it, rebel and overcome the spirit. And
this fast either it is continually, or at certain times used.

Continuallye, when as a Christian man moderatelye fedeth his body with
thanks geuyng, for necessary nutriment, and not for to abou^de or surfeit. This
fasting, and abstine^ce, the scripture calls sobriety.i. Petri. v.

The fast done at certain times, is also either pryuate, or publycke. Private
when any man considering and waiynge his own infyrmyties, binds him self
from meats, and drynkes, to tame and overcome the vehemente, and lascivious
inclinacions thereof, to the obedyence and rule of the spirit.i. Corin. vii.

A publycke fast is, when for a publycke and commune calamity, trouble, or
aduersytie, the Magistrates command a solemn and publycke abstynence and
fast.

But in both these fastes there must be used a circumspecte and godly
dylygence, least in the abuse of fasting we offend and provoke the Ire and
dyspleasure of God the more against us: we may offend, first if we fast
for any other purpose then to keep the body in subjection to the spirit.
Therefore it is to be taken head of, we fast not for merit or for custom.

The second is, we offend if we fast in the honor of any creature. The
third, if for one fasting day we make three gloto^ festes, as the fashion is
for the most part. I would wyshe therefore that the true fast and abstinence
wet brought in again, and then the lord would be pleased I dout not.

That they amend from the greatest to ye smallest we learn two things.
First of what great effycacye the sermon of Jonas was, that pleased all
people both great and small. The like has not been seen. For it is easier
for a Cook to please an hundredth mouths, with one mete, then a preacher to
order one sermon or oracion to please ten heads. It were well in our time if
at every sermon were one of the magistrates and of the people converted: and at
ten Sermones one Bishop and one priest. The second, the faciliti and promptnes
of these Ninevites to believe and amend their religion, and co^uersacio^, does
condemn the ungodly obstinacye and frowardnes of such, as detract and prolong
their amendeme^t, and say they will belyue when the king comes to age. Thus
the devil gives the^ one occasion or other to defer their belefe. If the kings
magesty, and his Nobles should hate the truth, they would say: how can we
believe the doctrine, yt our learned, and wise Magystrates detesteth? If the
kings majesty and his nobles love and favor the best part, they excuse
themselves upon the tender and young age of the king: as though his
Magesties young age or old age could make any religion of God true or false:
when in deed all ages and powers be or ought to be subject unto the
religion, and law made allredye, and given to be observed of and by all men,
of what sort condition, or state so ever they be of.

This thing came to the King of Niniue, who arose from his seat, doing of
his apparel, clothed him self in sack cloth.

It is not without a synguler council of the holy ghost that this king is
mencionated of so copiously.

Nether that his behauoure and doings after his conuercion, is so diligently
manyfested.

First the Text sets forth the manner of his conversion, and says: he
returned unto God upon the fame and rumoure of Jonas preaching.

Wherefore we learn how much the truth is wurthye to be esteemed, seeing that a
king upon the brute thereof made by his people, embrased, and resisted not (as
now we se many times done by the greatest part of the world.) Eue^ so did
Josias: as soon as he being yet but a child, heard of the true book of God,
embraced it.iiii. Reg. xxii. So did David and Iosaphat hear and grant to the
admonicions of ye Prophets. All kings therefore and magistrates should harken
unto the truth, and learn it them selves out of the law Deuteronomy. xvii. But
this study and knowledge of gods law in Princes and kings, the Bishops,
Priests, and other do let: bearyng them in hand that it appertains nothing
to their office to study and labor in the word of God, but the judgment and
study thereof to be committed unto them: and so by y^ same means they persuade
and cause princes many times to persecute the truth and verity by ignorance,
as the kings of Israel did that burned the wrytynges of the Prophets.

But most gracious king, and ye my lords of his most honorable counsel, Ye
have not only heard the rumor and fame of Gods word, but with your own ears
have heard your self the truth, and ye do credit, and believe the same:
therefore in all things express and declare it in fact.

And most gracious king take ye head that the virtues ye learn and be brought
up in in youth, ye practyse and exercise them in age. And incase your Magesty
will so do, beware of one thing: y^ poison of flaterie. The which your
Majesty may use as a good medycine, and not a poiso^ if ye take heed of it. Yt
will be poison, if your grace thynk your self to be at al times, as flaterers
will bear your hyghnes in hand to be. It shall be a medicine, if your Majesty
study to be the same in deed, that flaterie commends.

Your Majesty may see an Example hereof in king Iehoas, that in his youth
favored, and set forth the truth, but in his elder days he fell from it,
by the means of flatteroures that deceived him.

But your Majesty shall do best to follow this Godly King of the Ninevites,
and embrace contynually the word of the living God. And thus shall your grace
be the better able to do, incase your highness would have before you every
Sundaye one sermon, which should bring much knowledge and grace into your
hyghnes court.

Now follows the fruit of this Godly kings penitence. First he ryseth from
his seat, and puts on sackclothe.

Of this we learn that infayth and true repentance, is no diversity between
the king and a mean subject. And thus shall it be at ye later judgment. The
rych, the poor, the king, the subject, y^ bishop, ye priest, al shall apere
naked before the trone of Christ: and be help nothing there by any title or
name of glory. Here the honor and riches have their estimacion and glory. Let
all men therefore look to amend their faith and living, here in this world.

As for this external doing on of sackeclothe, it was the manner at that time so
to do, and declared their repentance and amendment: And so I would it were
now. He that offends in apparel, he would remove the pride thereof and goo
soberlye: he that in meat, would use more sobryetie, Yet noman should thyncke
any holiness to be in the external vestiment, nor yet any hurt or da^nacion in
the meat: but the abuse of both, displeases God. As for the vestimentes of
the priest in ye ministry, I would wyshe the Magistrate to remove the^, for
they either show, or not show virtue. If they show not, they use them in
vain: If they do declare and show virtue, either the virtue is with them in
deed; or absent. If he that wears them have the virtue, why shows it he to
the world? If he have not the virtue, then is he an hypocrite, whom God hates.

The other fruit of penance of the king with his counsel, being converted to
God.
THere was as the text says, a proclamacion made through all the City of
Niniue, by the commandment of the king and his council.

In this proclamacyon first must be marked who be the authors of this
proclamacion. Then, what is contained in the proclamacion. The persons be the
king, and the Nobles of his realm. In these persons first, note that it is the
Kings offices, and the Peers of the realm, to pourge their common wealth
from false relygyon, by Publycke, and open proclamacions.

So did Nabuchadnezer, Darius, and Cirus, kings of most notable fame:
therefore Christ calls the Princes, the Nurces of the church.

And so I doubt not most Gracious king, but your hyghnes will according to
your title and style, pourge this Church of England to the purity and
synceritie of gods word.

Farther we learn how that the Princes and councillors of a realm, should
help forth the Godly purposes and statutes made for the glory of God within
a Realm.

So was this kings Godly purpose help by his council, so David, so Josias.
In that the king and his nobles do confyrme the doings of his people, we
learn that Godly magistrates should not let, but further and confyrme al godly
purposes and virtuous study of their people, when they study amendment of
false relygion: so did Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias.

The su^me of the proclamacion.
IT contains the true and right form of repentance that pleases God,
which is contained in four parts.

First in outward signs of heaviness. Then in calling upon the Lord. Thirdlye
in leaving the wicked and accustomed yuel life. Forthly in the trust and
confydence of Gods mercy. Of these parts we will speak somewhat by order.

Of the external signs of a penitent heart.
TWo notes of penance are here described: the one abstynence from meat, the
other sorditie and vylenes of apparel: for after such sort, as natural men
say, contraries are cured by co^traries. He that is given to his body, cannot
please God by penitence, except he come to a sobernes: Neither the proud and
arrogant appareled, except he remove the excess and abuse thereof.

I would, and exhort therefore as many as do excede and offend in these two,
to return to penytence with the king and people of Niniue: if they would so
do, they should not only find grace at Gods hand, but also more health
and sobernes of body, more riches in the cofer, more plentye in the Realm,
more grace, wit, and sobernes in their household.

That the beasts be tied up also from their meat, it declares that the king
and people had to much a delight in wa^ton and over much gainesse of their
beasts, which being kept out of their accustomed pride, should not alure
them from their penitence, nor give them occasyon to return again to the
former evil.

Farther it pleases so the Lord to punysh y^ thing that allureth man's
frail nature to sin, because the syn of man should the better be known:
as we see, by the killing of the leuiticall beasts that never offended, God
would preach unto manne that his sin deserved none other the^ present and
sudden death: so did the Lord punyshe and curse the earth that Adam and his
posterity might know it was not a light thing the transgression of Gods
commandment, Genes. iii. so do all creatures weep and mourn until the
time of the reuelacion of the children of of God. Roma. viii. And thus peryshed
he the beasts with man in the fludde. Gene. viii.

The second sign.
LEst men should think that the abstinence from meats, or the castinge of of
gay apparel for certain days, should deserve and meryt this favor and
mercy of God, it stands in the proclamacion, that they called continually
upon the Lord. That is to say: they asked feruentlye and contynuallye healpe
and favor of God.

Note in the conversion of this King, how that he comcommaundeth not now to
call upon strange gods, but upon on true and living god, Even so should we
do in the days of our trouble, according to the commandment of God and the
example of all the Patriarckes, Prophets, and the Apostles. But this is to be
noted that the text says, they should call strongly upon the Lord: that is
to say with a penitente heart, that is sorye for the evil, and wylling to study
for ever after to do good. We call ^arnestly upon the Lord two ways: the one,
when we ask of God to turn and keep from us his ire and dyspleasure. The
other when we desire him to take from us, and give us grace to prepreserue
away from us, the sins that provoked and merited his dyspleasure and wrath.

But we offend in this behalf, two manner of ways. First me^ call upon
creatures. The second they call coldly, and unfaithfully, without an earnest
mind to amend, and faith upon the promises of God, for Christ's sake. So did
Saul rather call to God to auaide pain, the^ for any love he had to virtue.
For some as soon as the pain is removed, they return again to their old
iniquitye, as Pharao. Exodus

The third note of penance.
Every man turned from his wicked ways, and from fraud and gyle which they
used before.

This is the third propertye of penance, without the which we be rather
hypocrites, then penitente Christians. And the propertye is this, to forsake al
evil, and fleshelye studyes, and apply him self to virtue and godlynes.

Note first that the text says: Every man turned. If the King offended,
the Counsel, the Bishop, the person the paryshe priest, every one amended: so
let us except we will peryshe.

And what shall we do to turn from us the Ire of God, kyndeled, and
inflamede Shall we by any man's merits and deservings? No says the text, but
every man amend for him self. And so concludes. Esa. lviii. chap. Ier. vii.
And because Avarice as S. Paul says, is the mother and rote of evil, the
Proclamacion of the King of Ninevites is, that they should leave their force,
vyolence, and oppression: and so make restitucion of the false gotten goods.
Here let al men learn how to be saved, that have gathered together they care
not whether with or against the law, with or against charity. Let them leave
doing of this vyolence, and oppresion, and restore again all false gotton
goods, or else sure they will peryshe. So did zacheus. Luke.xix. And other
Godly men, and rich men that repented. Let men look upon that wise saying of
Salomo^. Pro. xxii. Spoil not ye poor, because he is poor, neither oppress
not the afflycted in the port. For the Lord will take upon him the defense of
his cause.

The fourth fruit of penitence.
Who can tell whether God will be converted, and moved with petye, turn from
the fury of his wrath that we peryshe not.

In this text we se to turn and bow the anger and dyspleasure of God is a
great matter, and that to afflicte the body with fasting, to pray, and to
change the old wicked life is very expediente to win his favor: but all
these things be in vain except there be likewise a confidence, and true
fayeth in the mercy of God. And this is the thing that God most deliteth in
when the sinner confesses that he is mercyful for his promises sake in
Christ, and not for the worthynes of his penance. So does this King in the
end of his proclamacion set forth the mercy of GOD to his people, whereby
boeth he and they by saved.

That it seems his oracion to have a doubt in it, truly notwythstandynge that
he was very well persuaded of gods mercy. For as Jonas proponed nothing
but Gods Ice, he makes mention of his mercy.

The doubt he puts: either to put away the slugerdnes of his people, either
to declare in him self the fight and battle that is always between the
spyrite, and the flesh about Gods promises. We may say also that in
desirynge worldelye things of GOD, we should ask them with a condicyon.
Mat. viii.

We may learn hear to put away despair, and trust to the Lords mercy,
although he threaten never so much our distruccion.

Also here Princes may learn what proclamacio^s they should make in setting
forth of religion: such as only exte^d to ye glory and mercy of God in Christ.
How the people accepted this proclamacion, I will show in the next sermon.

FINIS.
The Seventh Sermon upon Jonas, made by Ihon Hoper.
The text.
ANd when God saw their works, how they turned from their wicked ways, he
repented of the yuel which he said he would do unto the^: and did it not.


Ye have heard how this mighty king at the preaching of Jonas, corrected
both his faith, and manners. And how by publycke proclamacion, he wylled al his
subjects to do the same. Of this fact of the Ninevites, we may learn how
that it is our office to obei unto al godly and virtuous commaundeme^ts,
proclamacio^s, and decrees of princes, as many times as they command
amendment of relygyon and manners. But our people, and especially the
multitude of Priests be otherwise affected: for they do dysobeye both God and
their king. It were a charytable way if they have any thing to object against
this reformacion, that the kings Magestie and the counsel godly inte^deth, to
bring forth arguments, and not force, and violence of armoure.

God therefore sees, that is to say: approves their works, not because they
were clothed in sackcloth, but because they turned from their wicked ways, that
they had changed their falls religion, and restored ye goods again, they had
by vyolence and extorcion taken from their neighbors, and every man walked in
his vocacion. And even as the Lord pityed them, so will he do us if we amend
our faith, and conversation, and live in our vocacion, accordyngly. Esaias.
lviii. Ezech. xviii. But and if we hate not from the bottom of our hearts, ye
yuel we have committed, we tarry still in death.

That God repents on the yuel he purposed to do unto ye Ninevites: we learn
that al y^ threatni^gs of god be co^dicionally, yt is to say: to fall upon us if
we repent not of our iuel deds That is Godly showed. Iere. xviii. in these
words. Repent lo quar aduersum gente^* et aduersus regnum, ut eradicem et
destruam, et disper dam illud: Si penitencia^ ege^it geus illa a malo suo, quod
locutus sum aduersus eam, ago et ego penitenciam super malo, quod cogitaui ut
facere^ ei. That is to say: I will speak quickly against the people or
kingdom, to wast and destroy them. If that people (against whom I have
devised) convert from their wyckednes, immediately I repent of the plage, that
I devised to bring upon them. The same may ye se. Esech. xviii. zach. i. Turn
unto me says the Lord, and I will turn unto you: yet should not God be
accoumpted inconsta^t though he punyshe not as he threatened, for this is his
nature that can not be changed, to receive penitent sinners into grace. Esech.
xviii. Mat. xi. Io. iii.v. The heresy and false doctrine of the Catharones,
that deny mercy and remission of sin to sinners, is damnable and naught.

The fourth Chapter of Jonas.
The Argument.
THe su^me of this chapter is: that God will show mercy unto penitent and
sorrowful sinners, yea though all the world would say nay. This mercy god
declares in this chapter, not only with words, but also with a metaphor and
similitude of a tree.

The division of y^ chapter.
IT is divided into two parts. The one contains how Jonas was angri for y^
merci and co^passio^ god took upon y^ penitent Niniuits, wherefore he is
reprehended of god.

The second part co^tayneth how Jonas being in the fields, is taught of the
Lords by a tree that suddenly growed up, and suddenly peryshed again, that he
did naught to be angrye with gods doings toward the Ninevites, and declares
farther that he could do none other then save them.

Therefore Jonas was sore dyscontente and angry, and he prayed unto the Lord,
and said: O Lord was not this my saying (I pray the) when I was yet in my
Country? Therefore I hasted to fly rather to Tharsis. For I know well enough
that thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long suffering, and of
great kindness, and repentest when thou should take punyshmente.

Of this text we learn, first how horrible and wicked the peruersenes of our
nature is, seeing Jonas (I can not tell upon what love toward him self,) is
angrye: and not with man, but with God, that would favor of mercy, the
sorrowful Ninevites. Seeing there was such imperfeccion and infyrmities in the
holy Saints, how much need have we to see what lies in us miserable and
wr^tched sinners?

Out of this text also we learn what difficulty and hardness is in ye
office of preaching, if it be truly and well done: continually whether it
happen and come to pass yt he speaks, or it come not to pass, the preacher
stands in danger of obloquie and contempt: We may se an example hereof in
Jonas that preached by the word of God, the destruction of Niniue: which if it
had come so to pass, they would have called Jonas a cruel tyraunte, and
seker of blud. And now that he sees the citi spared, he fears least he
should be accomted a false prophet: not only among his own countrymen the
Israelites, but also among the Gentiles, and then al his preaching should be
taken for a mockery. This contempt so sore fears Jonas, and is therwythal so
troubled, that he offe^deth God grievously. I may accommodate y^ same fortune
unto my self and others right well. When we speak for a reformacion of the
church, schools, and polycyes, In to the church we wyshe to be put such
ministers as can and would teach the doctrine of the apostles, and that they
should not be known by their vestimentes, and shauings, but by their doctrine:
The^, such as would minister the sacraments gravely, relygyouslie, and simply,
as Christ and his Apostles did. In Baptism, nothing to be used but the
word and the simple and bare water. In the supper of the Lord, to use the
Ceremonies and Rites of Christ and his Apostles, and al occacions of
supersticion to be auoidid. But although this doctryn be as true as Christ and
his Apostles be, yet I perceive displeasure, and great ennimitie rise here
upon to me and to other: yea, not only unto us that be subjects, but also to
ye kings magesty and his most honorable council. But the lord keep us out of
te^ptacion, and give grace and strength to do all things to y^ glory of God,
and to pray for our enemies. And as touching schools, specially y^
universities, they must be amended, and good heads and rulers appointed in the
Colleges, or else ye word of god should be hindered always by such as ought most
to set it forth. Such godly me^ as have wherwtal should help and provide to
have schols to bring up youth in every where, through this realm: and the^
should godli and learned children occupy ye place of supersticious and ignorant
men, wherwithal this realm of England is sore, and to much (god amend it)
pestered and hurt withal: this might bishops in their dioceses help well if they
intended as much good as they bear the world in hand they do: and bestow
some part o^ their exces upon the towardly youth of their dyoceses. So might y^
Nobility, and our worshipful men of the shyre do: yea so might every person
and curat do, either with his goods help forth the truth and old catholycke
faith of Christ, either with their goodwyls animate them to learn the
doctrine of y^ Patriarchs, Prophets, and the apostles: and such as have the
talent of teaching, might rather teach, then play: help, then hyndre: build,
then pull down: help forth, then drawbacke: promote God, rather then the
devil, favor Christ, then Antichrist: agree with the king, then conspire with
the Pope. As concerning the polic^e, and reformacion thereof, I have said my
mind before: the which God give grace it may be accepted and followed. If it be
not, yet I have delivered my soul, and God shall require your bluddes at your
own hand. And incase any man be offended with me for my true saying, I had
rather have dyspleasure of all the world, then of God, that is able to damn
^ath my body and my soul. In y^ third place Jonas puts an excellent
description of God, the which we should well keep in mind: that he is a pitiful
and mercyful God, long suffering and of much clemency. This descripcion of
God agrees with Gods own words spoken to Moses.cx.xxxiiii the which encoraged
Iustes and should do the same to us if we were of god. Great (doubtless) was the
sin of Jonas, that took an occasion to be angry by gods favor and goodness
toward this sorrowful City. Even thus did the Pharisees, that were angry at
Christ, because he kept company with sinners. Jonas was then, as many me^ be
now adays, that thyncke wretched Sinners should never find pardon for their
sins before God. Now follows a farther description of Jonas fault and
impaciencye.

And now O Lord take my life from me, (I beseech thee) for I had rather die
the^ live.

Of this text we learn two things, first how sore and haynously this Jonas
offended, that rather desired to die, the^ god should have pitye upon th^se
penytente people, by whose preseruacio^, he thought some shame and rebuke should
happen unto him: because he did before speak, and threaten their perdicion and
loss.

Much better and more Godly did Moses and Paul, that wyshed rather their own
harm, the^ ye loss of yt people. Also this text declares the werynes and
impaciencye of the flesh, that will not suffer the troubles annexed unto the
vocacio^, but rather wishes to dye, then to live. So did Elias desire
death.iii. Reg. xix. so that the text and experience* daily shows the best
day that ever a true preacher shall see, is the day of his death. But as the
devil has used the vocacion of Bishops and Priests in this present time,
there is no day so terrible nor fearful to them, as the dai of death. The
cause thereof, me thinks S. Augustine. Episto. cxlviii. ad Ualerium shows
right well. Ante omnia inquam, peto ut cogitet religiose prudentia tua, nihil
esse in hac vita, et maxim hoc tempore fac^^i^s et letius, et hominibus
acceptabilius, Episcopi, aut Presbiteri, aut Diaconi officio, si perfunctorie
atque ad^^^atorie res agatur: sed nihil apud deum miserius et tristius, et
damnabilius. That is to say: Before al things, I desire that your Godly
prudence would think nothing to be more light, facile, or joyful in this
life, chiefly now this time, then the office of a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon,
if the thing be done lyghtlye, or hypocriticallye: but before God there is
nothing more miserable, sorrowful, and damnable. Now follows the answer of
god to this angry man.

God makes answer to angry Jonas.
Then said the lord: art thou so angry?

Of this demand and question of the Lord, we learn how he in a fume or hastye
passion (if a man may speak so of god) will not cast away this infirm and
weak Jonas: but with sufferaunce trained him to a better and more advised
judgment.

So does Esaye report of Gods nature. chap. xlii. He will not put out the towe
kindled. He did not only consider the weakness of the man, but also the
dangers and trouble of his pastoral vocacion. Pyty^ully therefore does god bear
with him, and scholeth him to a farther and better knowledge. Of this man we
may learn how to be ware of hasty and rash passions of Ire* for if there be not
in all our acts a moderacion thereof. we shall never do, nor judge things up
ryghtly according to knowledge. If me^ would remember this demand of God
toward Jonas, they would not be so angrye when they be rebuked for their
faults, but rather thank y^ admonitoure for his good admonicion and warning
of gods displeasure. Now follows the second part of the chapter.

And Jonas gat him out of the City, and sat down on the East side thereof,
and there made him a Boothe, and satte under it in the shadow, till he might
see what should Chance unto the city.

When Jonas had no excuse to make, why he was angrye, nor would not confess
his fault (for he answers now nothing to the questyon God demands of
him) he goes him self out of the Cit^e to se the end: whether ye Niniui^es
would persevere in their penance begone or not. Of this we learn if we be
wrongfully angrye, and admonyshed, if we will not confess the fault, yet should
we consider, and way it the more deepelye. In that he made him self a boothe,
we see with what symplycitie the good man was contented with al, and likewise
how he him self was content to labor to make his own couch. Our Bishops,
and Priests have all things prepared to their hands, God give them grace
better to deserve it. The text says.

The Lord God prepared a wild vine, which sprang up over Jonas, that he might
have shadow above his head, to deliver him out of his pain.

The Lord here purposes to help the infirmities of Jonas, and remove the
sinistre and and false judgment he had of Gods mercy, by the image of a young
tree. He brings forth a young tree that may give shadow to Jonas, whereof Jonas
rejoices very much. But the Lord queeleth it a again straight way, and that
makes Jonas eftsoon angri. In the myddest of his fumes comes the Lord, and
by a collacion and similitude between and simple tree, and the woorthye City
of Niniue: he shows Jonas his fault that was angry for the mercy showed wnto
the City. But in these things be things to be marked. First in Jonas, then
in God, thyrdly in the (...).

In Jonas may be seen the image of a^^an that laboreth and is oppressed with
many affeccions, and never contented with y^ doings of god. We should not
follow this fault, but submyt our judgments to his will. Saing always and in all gods works, thy wylbe done, whether thou send us mirth or sorrow, joy or pain
for every thing shall be to ye best unto those that love the lord. Jonas also in
this his perverse and froward opinion to wtdraw the mercy of god from the
Niniuits, expresses ye noughty opinion that says, that sinners can never be
received into grace after they fall once from the Lord. They would abrogate ye
greatest work of god to say his mercy that it should not work where it
pleases him: but where as it pleases man's fancies to appoynte it. The Lord
does not only favor and bear with Jonas infirmityes, but also covers him
from the burning and heat of the sun, and also teaches him by the tree,
that he is offended without cause. what tree this was it is not agreed upon yet
among writers, but it makes no matter thereof, it is enough we know it was a
tree with broad leaves, whereby the lord would succor both the body and
knowledge of the infirm Jonas. That it grew up suddenly, and wythered away
suddenly, it bears therein the image and property of such honors, riches,
and treasures as be in this world: which suddenly rise, and suddenly fall again.
Noman therefore should hasard or danger his soul for so britle and frail
things.

And by the withering away of this little tree, God would show Jonas how
uncharitable he was: angry that y^ great City of Niniue was saved: as though
he had said, if it grieve the so much for the loss of this little tree, should it
not be a greater grefe unto the, to se the destruction of so great a City?
For the tree sprang up in one night, and the City had stand many hundred
years. Again for the tree, Jonas labored never a dele, but God builded
Niniue. The tree is but one thing, the City had great nombre both of men and
catel. And least Jonas might have said: yea, but al men of the city be evil,
therefore worthy to perysh: but God adds to the matter and says: there were in
the city above a hundred and twentye thousand persons that knew not between
the right hand and the left: that is to say, children, and fowls.

Of this dialoge between God and Jonas, we may gather this general, and
universal doctrine, that god will save al penitente sinners.i. Timo. ii. for
seeing he gave his only son for us, whiles we were yet his enemies, how should
it be, he would not in him give us al things. Romans.viii. Mathe. xi. But
here of comes our loss and perdicion, that we repent not from our evil,
as the Proclamacion of the king of Niniue commanded the people, and subjects
thereof, that would not only men to amend their yuel lives: but also they
should restore again all false gotten goods, and make restitucio^ thereof, as
well to god as to man.

Restitucion toward God is, when al honor and glory is given unto him, as
saint Paul says.i. Timotheus.i. But this glory is, and has been taken
from God by men of every sort, as well by those of the Ecclesiastical
polycye, as those of the Civil policy.

Those of the Ecclesiastical Policye take away this honor and praise from
God two ways. One by neglecting the true doctrine, the other by defe^dynge of
false doctrine. By negligence offend such as know God and his ministry by the
holy word of god, yet for private respects, either for lucre, or for fear of
them selves, suffer many tokens, monume^tes and ceremonies of supersticion: as
is the dyuersitie of meats for religions sake, (yet I aproue the commandment
of the Magistrates, that for a Civil Policy, cause certain days appointed to
eat fish in) images, forbyddyng of marriage in the lent, the use of such
vestimentes or apparel as obscure the mynysterie of Christ's church, and
represents the form and fasshyon of the Aaronicall ministry of the old
law, abrogated, and ended in Christ: either else seldom, or never teach the
people, neither procure them to be taught. Al those I exhort to restitucio^, or
else doubtless their theft will bring them to damnacio^. Let them preach truly
the word of God, and minister his Sacraments, after the institucio^ of
Christ, and the^ their harm done in time past, shall not be thought upon.

There be an other sort, that refuse not only to mock this satisfaccion, but
also obstinatly maintain and defend false doctrine, and study to oppress the
true doctrine. Of this sort is no small number. But those I exhort also to
leave their yuel sayings, and to make restitucion.

As many as be of the laytie, as they be called, that is to sai: not of the
public ministry of the church robs also god of his glory and honor.
They seek remedy for sin by another means then through the death of Christ,
as by the marchaundies of Masses, Indulgences. Inuocacio^ of saints, the
peines of Purgatory, but I advise them to give God that for it appertains
only unto him. Harken unto the word of God, and call upon his name as he
teaches through Christ in spirit and verity. And thancke him for all his
gifts he gives both to your body and soul.

At your death commend your souls to him, for Christ that dyed under Pontius
Pilate as Saint Steauen did Act.vii. And do not dout of y^ dead, for they be
at rest al ready either in heaven either in hell Io. iii.v.i. Cor. xv.i. Tess.
iiii. Apoca. iiii: Wherefore rather give thanks to God for the^, then pray
from them.

Of restitucion to be made to man.
IN external goods may a man offend three manner of ways. In yuel getting of
the^. An evil keeping of the^. And in evil spendyng of the^.

They be yuel gotten many ways. First when they be taken from an other, by
murder, Rape, Uyolencie, Craft, or Theft.

Thus offe^did quen Iesabel in taking away Nabothes vineyard.iii. Reg. xxi. at
length she was torn with dogs, for her labor. Then be they iue^ gotten by
subtylties, frauds, corrupcion of laws, by lying, flattery, and such other.
Let every man make restitucion of goods thus gotten, or else he shall sure
perish. Let the sedicious, hurtful, and dangerous traytoure, that contrary
unto Gods laws, takes weapon against his leage Lord and king, restore both
his heart and his goods again, to the Kings pleasure and commandment. Let
al men cease from gettyng of their goods by this unlawful means: and the
goods so gotten, let them restore again. As zacheus did. Luc. xix. And that
they may be ye better fensed against this unlawful and ungodly getti^g to
gether of goods, I prai the^ to read the Canon of saint Paul.i. Tim. vi. Such
as will be rich. et cetera.

Goods be yuel kept, First if they exalt the^ unto arrogancy and pride,
which brings the contempt of other: and the^ if in the aboundau^ce of goods
thou forget God: Thyrdly if having goods, thou cease from labor, and put thy
self to ease, so that thou make thy self profitable neither to god, neither
to y^ commune wealth thou dwell in. Here offend very sore and
daungerouslye such as possess the goods of the Church, and preach not, such
as have stipe^des to teach and teach not, wages to war and war not,
received for a thousand soldiers, and serves not with five hundredth. Such as
enjoy hospitales, almoshouses, and the prouisyon of the poor to there own
private commodity. To al these I say repent ye, and make restytucion.

Goods be evil spente. First, if they be consumed in an yuell case. As when
they be applied to pride and excess in apparel or meat and drink, to the
oppressyon and hurt of the poor. Either to find a great company of idle
and loyterynge men.

Then if they be not used to a good use, to the edifiyng of Christ's Church,
the help of the poor, the prisoners, and such like.

For in the latter judgment, the Lord shall ask what care and charge we had of
the poor. Math. xxv. And we see the rych man damned, because he gave not to
Lazarus, Luc. xvi. Unto those also I say: repent ye, and spend the gifts of
God after knowledge and virtue, if ye will not, ye shall all peryshe, Luke.
xiii. God sleeps not but sees all our acts, and notes our doings.

Incase any of these men (whether they be of the Ecclesiastical Policy, or
the Civil policy of this your realm, most Gracious King, and you my
Lords of his most honorable counsel) detract and will not make restitucion, nor
use their goods well, for the office ye have taken from God, ye be bound to
compel them to do it. And first of all (because there is no man but sins)
look first unto your selves, and the^ with ye king of Niniue, and the Nobles of
his realm, repent ye, and restore unto God that is Gods, and unto man, that
which is for the comfort of your subjects: good laws, and dilygent execucion
and usage of the same. Then compel both the spiritualtye as they be called,
and also the temporaltie to make restitucio^ both to God and man accordingly.
And now the lord has given you peace, because ye might have leisure to do
these things, as Paul says.i. Tim. ii. Do therefore as Solomon did.iii. Re.
viii. Abuse not the peace in playing sportes, and pastyme, but in the buildynge
of Gods temple, which has a long time layne desolate: Ye have an example.
Number. v, and in any case let that example be followed. There be the gestes of
Iosaphat the king written ii. Para. xvii. in the which are three notable
things. First he took away and removed from his people, Idololatrie.

The second, he gave them true judges, whose godly conditions are written in
the same book. cap. xix. that feared the Lord, accepted in judgment no
persons, third. They received no brybes, nor rewards.

The third he placed and appointed Priests not in one place but in all the
Cytyes of Judah: and not to the end they should play and pastyme, but to
teach, and not every thing, but the law of God. Al these things must ye
do, most Gracious King and you my honorable Lords of his high and
wysecouncel, if ye will live in peace, and quyetnes. I do not exhort your
Majesty nor your most honorable Counsel lyghtlye, but upon great, and
wayghtye consideracion to remove al these things, that be either the Deuyl^,
either man's inuincion.

For in the scripture I find that God many times is offended when we give ^ym
but half honor.

How well began Hiiu the king of Israel.iiii. Regum. x. But because he
remained in the sins of Hieroboam, his kingdom was not only afflycted, but
at length distroied also. Abolyshe therefore godly king all iniquytye, and
permit not Mass nor such abhominacion to any man with in your hyghnes realm:
no not to the strangers, which doubtless should be an occacyon of slander to
your realm, and subjects. For Asa the king of Judah.iii. Regum. xv. removed
his mother from the rule, and governance of of the realm, because she had an
Idol in a grove, the which her son the king brent. The^ your magestie must
institute true, faithful, and judges of good conscience. Then send such
priests through your realm, that have these two condycions. First that
they teach, the^ yt thie teach the word of God. If your majesty do these
things, then shall God sed peace and quietness to his pleasure. Farther, God
shall make you a fear and terror to fo^en and strange nations that know not
the living god.

And this your magesty shall auoeyde the better, if ye beware of flaterers, and
thynk as Ioada in his youth favored the truth of God, and in his age by
flattery departed from it iiii. Reg. xii. so the same yuell and danger may
corrupt your hyghnes. Then if it may please you to command more sundry times
to have sermons before your magestie, it will not be a little healpe to you if
they be well made, well borne away, and well practiced. And seeing there is in the
year.viii. M.vii.C.lx. hours, it shall not be much for your highness no nor
for all your household, to bestow of the^.lii. in the year to hear the Sermon
of God. If your magesty do these things, the blud of your people shall not be
required at your hands. But I read both king and counsel to be admonished, and
to amend things amysse. If not, the king of Niniue with his people, shall
rise a^ the later day, and condemn both king and counsel to death. For
they converted at the preaching of one man: yea at the preaching of a
stranger, we have not only heard yt same by the mouth of strangers, but also
by the mouth of our own country men, and that many times. Let us therefore
believe and amend, or else we must peryshe.

God preserve for ye death of Christ, the Kings magestie, al his honorable
council with the hole realm. Amen.

Faults eskaped in the pryntyng.
Foli. iiii fac. i. linea. viii. read. Mat. xvii Fol. viii. faci. ii. lini. xx.
lacks a word was. The consideracion thereof was. Fol. xx. faci. i lini. i.
Deuteronomy. v.li.xxxii. faci. ii. lini. xxi. they. Fol. xli. faci. i. lini. (...).
Fol. xliiii. faci, i. lini. viii. Jonas. Fol. xlix. faci. i. lini. xiii. Iho.
xi. Fol. liii. faci. ii. lini. ii. Magistrate. Fol. liii. fa. i. ii. lini. e^.
serve not. Fol. li^i. fa. ii.li.xxi. nor punish y^ innocent. Fol. liiii. faci.
i. lini. xii. intencion. Fol. liiii. faci. i lini. xviii. as abounds. Fol.
liiii. faci. i. lini. xix. thy. Fol. lxiii. faci. ii. lini. xvi. is. Fol.
lxvii. faci. i. lini. iii^i. not. Fol. lxxv. faci. i. lini. xix. Most. Fol.
lxxvii. faci. i. lini. viii.xix. Fol. lxx^. faci. i. lini. xii. seeing. Fol.
xc. faci. i. lini. v^alteri. Fol, xcvii. faci, (...) xii. prea^he truly. Fol.
cxiii. faci. i. l^ni. xii. reserved, Fol. cxiiii. faci. li. lin. xiii.
deferred. Fol. cxvii. faci. ii. lini. xxi. nature Fol. c^viii. faci. ii. lini.
putforth he shall. Fol. cxx. faci. ii. lini. vi^i. et. lini. ix. et. Fol. cix.
faci. ii. lini. xiii. chance. Fol cxxii. faci. ii. lini. xix. Comes^^^. Fol.
cxx^iiii. faci. ii. lini. xxii. fygur. Fol. cxx^vi. faci. i. lini. xxii. vi.
Fol. cxliiii. faci. i. lini. vi. omitted. Fol. clxix. faci. ii. lin^. i. Jonas.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, and Wylliam Se^es
dwellinge in Peter College.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


