The Myrrour or Glass of Christ's Passion,





HH





The Preface.
To the honorable lord Husey.
My lord / accordyngly unto your desire: I have translated your book and put
it into our natyue and mother tongue as my simple wit and power lernyng would
suffer me, And though it be not so well done as (I surely know) many other
might and can have done it, if it would have pleased your lordship to have
de^yred the^, and if also it would have lyked them to have taken that labor:
yet I trust I have so done, that it may be comforth to the readers and hearers
/ or at the least: I have given occasion to order to amend and perform that I
rudely and barbarously, set forward. Surely (my lord) the chyefe cause of this
my labor was: for that I thought this book should be much profitable to the
readers and edefyeng to all that would diligently hear it, And to say the
treuth: I know no thing more comfortable to man, For among all the exercyses
that help the spirit to obtain the love of god / and specially to him yt
would begin and use a spiritual life: no thing is thought always more frutful,
tha^ the continnal meditacion of the passion of our lord god Jesus Christ, for
the exercyses of all other spiritual meditacions may be reduced and brought
unto this. As by an example, If a man desire to bewayll and weape for his vices
and sins for his unkindness and vileness / if he couit to purge and amend his
negligence and defautes: he shall find none more vehement and ready mean to
prick him forward to his intent: than to remember the most innocent death and
passion of his redeamer: that is to consider what bitter pains he suffered for
man: to spare and keep man from pain eternal wherafter Justice he should have
rather dampened man for his sins, And here man may see both the Justice and
also the mercy of god. Man may consider in him self the great mercy of god: in
that god would forgive and perdon him of his sins. He may also perceive the
justice of god: in his own sins, which god did correct and punysshe
according to justice in him self, because he would not suffer the^ unpunished,
And thus in this meditacion man may find how to weape and mourn for his
sins: for the which the son of god was bet / wou^dyd and crucified, and all
that god suffered: to cure man of his sins and keep him from eternal pain.
Here may also man bewail his own unkindness, consyderyng how unkindly he
renders to so faithful a lover: so many yuell deeds contrary to gods
pleasure, and also daily contemptes and despysynges: for his tender love and
kyndnes and for his manyfolde gifts which man daily receives of him. Morouer
this co^templacion of the death of Christ indureth man both to hope and to
fear, whereby he may be releaued of two temptacyons, ^or if the enormitie of his
sins move any man to despair: he has here in this exercise whereby to put
away his sins, and to make satisfaction for them, he has here whereof to
redeem himself yt is ye blood and death of his lord god, and therefore he need
not to fear his sins, if he so order him self yt he dye with Christ, dye (I
say) from sin and rise in a new life. And on the other part, it man be vexed
by presumpcion or vain lyghtnes and mirth without the fear of god: he has
here how to abate his vain mirth, co^syderyng how that heaven was shyt from the
most holy friends of god by many years ye above.iiii. thousand years, and how
that the glory of god was denied to man or at the least differred, by so many
years unto the time that our lord and savior Jesus which never did sin:
suffered death for our sin, so that no man may come to that glory but by
pain, and thus shall man's vain mirth be put down. If peradventure man be
dull and slothful to all goodness: where shall he have a more spedy remedy to
prick forward his dulnes: than to co^sydre how his lord god most pure and
innocent man, suffered so greuouse pains for him. Some man would peradventure
exercise him self in his own knowledge and so to come to meknes. But I pray
you where shall he have a better occasion thereunto, tha^ to ponder and way the
difformite and great difference of his own study and labor and shortly the
order of his hole life: and of the labor and life of Jesus Christ, that is,
remember man how contrary thy life is to his will and p^ceptes / how unlike to
his virtues / how far from his ensa^ples, remember man how frail thou art
and ready to fall, how unstable in all thy good purposes, how unready or rather
loath to follow thy lord, how unapt to all goodness, As every man may daily se
in him self. Forthermore, if man would be enflamed to love god where may he
have better help than by this exercise, for if it be natural to render love for
love, and the love of god was never more openly showed to man than in his
redemption, that is in the passion and death of our redeamer Christ Jesus: it
is than manifest that by this remembrance of his passion: a man is most
strongly excited and moved to love god. And if man desire to be pricked forward
in that love: let him remember the benefits of god which be as signs and
tokens of his love, And these benefits most evidently appear in his passion,
as ye shall more clearly se in this book. At last, if man desire that all his
life be continual and perpetual prayer / and that he would have his heart ever
lyfted up to god, and his devotion or fervor ever renewed: he shall never get
it more easly than by the remembrance of the life and passion of his lord
god, for there he may have in every word / act / behavior and pain that
Christ spoke / did / used / and suffered: how to be compuncte and sorry in heart /
and how to be conforted in spirit. For in the consyderation of them, now he
may weep by compassion, Now by gyuyng thanks: he may have sweet affections,
Now he may desire to be confourmed unto him, and to his will, Now he may labor
and wysshe to be holly transfourmed into him. Thus may man go from one exercise
unto an other to avoid tediousnes / and so ever to be i^ prayer. And shortly
to conclude, there is no kind of spiritual exercise: but that it may be
found in the life and passion of Christ, or else by most pleantuouse fruit it
may be reduced and applied to it. And this shall better appear in the first
part of this book the third pertycle. Now my lord I have showed what was
the pryncypall cause mouyng me to acco^plysh your desire / and if I may
perceive that ye or any other take profyt thereby: I shall give praises to god
from whom all goodness comes / and I beseache iour lorship to pray with me
that much profyt and comforth might come to them that shall read this book and
follow the exercices thereof. And thus I commend you and all youres to the
passion of our lord.

From Syon the.vi. day of Decembre. 1533. your daily orator Johan Fewterer.

The Prologue.
Inspice et fac secundum exemplar quod tibi monstratum est in monte. Exodi. 25.
D.
Behold and work accordyngly to the examplar that is showed unto the i^ the
moun^, Christ although oftymes in scripture be compared to a mount or so
called for the excellency of his most high perfection: yet most specially in
that he was exalted on the cross in the mount of Caluary, he may be called a
mount, or the excellent merit of his most bitter and sacrate passion. In this
mount (that is in Christ crucified) is this day (that is by all the time of our
life) showed unto us a glass or an examplar, whom we should not only behold:
but also with most deligence follow his steps / for it is not sufficient to
a christian to behold Christ crucified. For so did the Iues and also the
gentyls his crucifiers, But it is required of a Christian yt he live and work
accordyngly to the exa^plar showed to him in ye mount that is Christ
crucified. And that is the intent of our first words spoken to every faithful
person. Behold and work accordyngly to the example of Christ crucified.
Beho^de (I say) him incorporatyng or depely knittyng his paynfull passion unto
thy heart by inward compassion, And work accordyngly unto his example,
unfeignedly following him. For so saint Petre teachethe us sayng, 1. Pe. 2. D.
Christus passus est pro nobis. Christ suffered for us. This is the first thing,
that we should diligently behold with the inward ey of our soul: Christ
crucified. And it follows. Nobis relinquens exemplum vt sequamur vestigia
eius, Leuyng to us an example that we might follow his steps, In ordryng our
life accordyngly to his will and example, And this is the second thing
belongyng to a christian, unfeignedly and truly to follow his saviors example.
And in these two things shall stand the hole su^me of our purpose and of this
treatise, which be necessary to be often remembered unto the Christian. For if
the lives passions of holy saints and martyrs be recounted to man, to induce
him into devotion of heart, to contricion for his sins, to the love of god /
despisyng of the world and patient sufferance or bearyng of tribulations and
pains: how much more than should the passion of Christ be remembered and
preached / which is most holy of al saints ye the sanctifier, of al saints,
lord and god over al, the judge of quick, and the resurrection or reasex of
the deed? This passion (I say) should be remembered, that men hearing it might
know how much god the father hated sin, for the destruction whereof: he would
have the preciouse blood of his most dear beloved only son shed upon the
earth with most greuouse torments and wounds, and also that man might know,
how much he loved mankind, for whose salvation he would give his only son to
so cruel torments and paynfull death. Thyrdly that we should know how
preciouse and dear a thing is the kingdom of heaven which he would not open and
give unto mankind but by the preciouse blood and death of his natural son
Jesus Christ. And fourthly to declare unto us how much he soueth and
rejoices in the penance of man for the declaration and example whereof, he
would his dear byloued son to be nailed fast unto the cross and spread abroad
on ye same as a book open wherein we might read and learn how to do penance.
What other thing do signify unto us, his tears or weeping / his sorrow / his
wounds / his arms spread abroad / and his most sweet and godly words: but
mocio^s and callynges unto penaunce^ He has called us unto penance by his
word / by his Euangely / and most of all by his holy life and example.
Therefore behold and look upon this examplar and glass look upon the face of
thy savior Christ / and work accordyngly to the exemplar that is showed / to
the in the mount of Caluarye. Psalm. 83.
And if this spectacle or glass ought to be beholden at all times: much more
than it should be co^sydered this time wha^ the church remembers the passion
of our savior Christ that by the consyderyng thereof: our soul might be
excited and moved to give thanks to god for it / and also to have compassion
in our soul of Christ crucified. For as almighty god says by his prophet
Moises. Anima que non fuerit afflicta die hac: Leui. 23. E.
peribit de populo suo. That soul or person which will not take upon him some
pain / affliction or compassion this day or time of the passion of our lord:
shall peryshe from his people / that is, shall not be accounted or taken for a
christian. Therefore let us say in sign and token of compassion that which
saint Bernard said in his mournyng. Quis dabit capiti meo aquam. In lib. de la
mentatione virginis.
etc. Who shall grant or give water unto me head or the fountain and well of
tears unto mine yen that I might weep both day and night unto the time my lord
appear unto his servant and comfort him either slepyng or wakyng. O ye sweet
tears / by whom comes the plentuouse ryuers of graces. O ye deuote tears
the aboundaunt fountain of my health / come into my heart / flow out of mine
yen / fall upon my chekes / and make my mournyng bitter. Also in an other place
saint Bernard mouethe us to the beholding of this exa^plar / our savior
crusified: saying in the person of Christ. O thou man behold what I suffered
for the Se the cross on the which for thy love I dyed, Behold the nails
wherewith my hands and my fete ware persed and fas^ened to the cross for thy
sin, Is this no sorrow and pain that I suffered for the? And though this
outward sorrow and pain be much greuouse: yet much more paynfull it is to me
inwardly / to se the so unkind, for whom I suffered all these greuouse
torments and pains. Wherefore o thou christian behold Christ crucified and
give him thanks for his kyndnes, less peradventure thou may hear the
rebuke that was spoken unto.ix. leprose cured by our savior Jesus, Luc. 17. D.
to whose rebuke he said. Nonne december mundati sunt et noue^ vbi sunt, Was there
not.x. persons cured, and but one (that was a stranger) yt gives thanks for
his benefyt received, where be ye other.ix. Behold I say Christ crucified and
remember his kindness according to ye counsel of ye wise man sayng. Eccl. 29. C.
Gratiam fide iussoris tui ne obliuiscaris dedit enim pro te animam suam.
Forget not ye kyndnes of thy suerte or friend for he has given his life for
the / this should be diligently remembered.

Here ends the prologue.
The division of this treatisse or mirror.
THis book or treatise of the passion is divided into the.iii. parts, that is
into a prohem beginning or preface / the execution or declaracio^ of the said
passion, and into ye conclusion. In the first part is declared the fruteful
meditacion of Christ's passion. In the second part be declared the acts and
articles of the said passion, And in the conclusion be declared certain
miracles wrought at the same passion / with certain chapitres of the
Resurrection / appeyryng / Ascension / of our lord / sendyng of the holy
ghost. etc.

The prohem / preface or beginning co^teyneth.x. particles / of the which su^me
of them be divided into diverse chapitres.
An example of the same exhortation. Ca. secundo. Fo. iii. THe second particle
is of the mean and manner of the remembrance
THe third pertycle is, how we should feale in our selfs Christ's passion.
And this particle is divided into.v. Chapitres.
How we should feale in our understanding Christ's passion. How we should
feale and perceive the same in our will / love and affection. Ca. ii. Fo. vi.
How we should feel the same in our acts and operations or deeds. Ca. iii^.
Fo. vii. How we should feel the same in our poverty and necessities.
Capitulo.iiii. Fo. viii. How we should feel Christ's passion in our rebukes
and despisynges. Ca. v. Fo. viii.
The.iiii. particle is of diverse manners and ways to remember Christ's passion.
And this particle is divided into.vi. Chapitres.
How we may consydre Christ's passion with a mind to How we may consydre the
same with a mind to have compassion thereof. Ca. ii. Fo. x. How we may
co^sydre Christ's passion with a mind to maruayll thereof. Ca. iii. Fo. xi.
How we may consydre the same / to rejoice or joy thereof. Capitulo.iiii. Fo.
xii. How we may consydre Christ's passion to resolve or relent out hertes into
it. Ca. v. Fo. xiii. How we should consydre Christ's passion: to reast swetely
there in. Ca. vi. Fo. xiiii. THe.v. perticle is divided into.xix. Chapitres, of
the which How in the passion of Christ is contained all perfection of all the
ordres of angels. Ca. ii. Fo. xxii. How in the passion of Christ is
contained all the beatitude or bliss of men. Ca iii. Fo. xxiii. How in
Christ's pa^sion do shine ye virtues theological / the gifts of the holy
ghost / the beatitudes of the gospel / and also the fruytes of the spirit.
Ca. iiii. Fo. xxiiii. How by the passion of Christ: we have the efficacite and
virtue of all spiritual goodness. Ca. v. Fo. xxv. How the.vii. gifts of the
holy ghost ar contained in Christ's passion, and how through the fervent
remembrance thereof: they may be optayned, And first of the gift of fear. Ca.
vi. Fo. xxvi. An example of this gift of the fear of god. Ca. vii. Fo. xxviii.
How the gift of pity is opteyned by the fervent remembrance of Christ's
passion. Ca. viii. Fo. xxix. An example of the gift of the spirit of pity.
Ca. ix. Fo. xxxi. How the gift of science is optayned by Christ's passion.
Capitulo. x. Fo. xxxii. An example of this gift of science or knowledge. Ca.
xi. Fo. xxxv. How the gift of strenght is optayned by Christ's passion.
Capitulo. xii. Fo. xxxvi. An example of this gift of gostly strenght. Ca.
xiii. Fo. xxxviii. How the gift of council is given to man by Christ's
passion. Capitulo. xiiii. Fo. xxxix. An example of the same gift of godly
council. Ca. xv. Fo. xli. How the gift of understanding is gotten by Christ's
passion Capitulo. xvi. Fo. xli. An example of ye gift of gostly vndsta^dyng.
Ca. xvii. fo. xliiii. How the gift of wisdom is gotten by Christ's passion.
Capitulo. xviii. Fo. xlv. An example of the same gift of godly wysdom. Capitu.
xix. Folio. xlviii. THe.vii. particle is of the eiection or castyng out of the
buyers and THe.viii. particle is of the sorrowful depertyng of our lord from
THe.x. and last particle is of the washyng of his disciples fete. Folio. lv.
The third part, that is the conclusion: is divided into.xi. Chapitres.
THe first is of.x. miracles done before / at the death, and after Christ's
death. Ca. primo. C. xlii. Why Christ would suffer so many and such greuouse
pains for us. Ca. ii. Fo. Cxlvi. How Christ descended unto the helles. Ca.
iii. Fo. C.xlvii. Of Christ's Resurrection. Ca. iiii. Fo. C.xlix. How Christ
appeared to his mother Mary. Ca. v. Fo. C.l. How Christ appeared to Mary
Magdalen. Ca. vi. Fo. C.li. How Christ appeared to his Apostles, Thomas being
present. Capitulo. vii. Fo. C.liii. Of Christ's Ascension. Ca. viii. Fo.
C.liiii. Of the sendyng of the holy ghost. Ca. ix. Fo. C.lvi. Of the Assumption
and praise of our glorious lady. Capi. x. Folio. C.lvii. Of the last judgment
and coming of the judge to the same. Capitulo. xi. Fo. C.lviii.
FINIS. TABVLE.
woodcut of Crucifixion

The Myrrour of Christ's passion.
Of the first perticle that is an exortation / mouyng men unto the meditation
of the passion of Christ.
The First Chapitre.
OYe people that walk and wander in vanitees, Bon^ue^tura in S^^mulo amoris in
principio.
come hither and behold in this Glass / Christ crucified / and inwardly
consider the great charity of god to you. And on the other part behold your
own blyndnes and malice toward him. Since it has pleased the son of god to
be joined unto the nature of man / and never to be departed from it: how
much more gladly should ye desire that your soul should be unite and joined
unto him unseperably. And since the son of god would through the great feruoure
of his charity / join to his godheed in one person / so vile ashes and dust
as the nature of man is. How much more desirous should each one of you be /
to open your heart and dilate it or sprede it abroad to receive him in to it?
What folysshenes or rather madness is it / that ye dispisynge or little
regarding this inestimable charity / will rather open your heart unto the
filthy pleasures of the body / or vanytes of the world / and to be joined unto
them by love / rather than to god. The son of god took not a mortal body to
the intent yt man should love bodily or carnal pleasures: but that as Christ
having a mortal body / did by continual penance subdue his body / co^tempne
all carnal worldly pleasures: and was ever joined to god by love: so in like
manner should mortal man mortifye his body by continual penance despise all
vain pleasures / and ever erecte or lift up his soul to god and heavenly
things. O the meruaylous blyndnes of man made of two substaunces / that is the
soul and the body / and all though the soul without comparison be much more
noble than the body: yet he will spend and occupy all his time in a manner about
the prouisyon of his body / or in such things as the flesh desires / and
in nothing regard his soul / as if he had none / or that it were of no
value. For he will neither feed nor norysshe it / nor yet labor to quiet or
rest it in the love of god / though he might so do with much more ease /
swetnes and also pleasure without comparison / than to content and saciat the
body. For god is pressed and ready to every man: ye he offers him self to man /
if man he will receive him. Ecce sto ad ostium et pulso. etc. Apo^. 3. D.
Behold (he says) I stand at thy door (that is thy heart or soul) and knock
if any person will here my voice / and open the door of his soul unto me: I
shall enter therein and suppe with him / and he with me. Se thou unkind man /
how our lord offers himself unto the / and requires none other price of
the / but the death of his son with thine obedient heart: therefore gladly
receive him to thy spiritual comfort. All corporal and temporal things fle
from man / and forsake him / and though with great study / anguysshe / and
pain / he labor to get and keep them: yet he shall never have ye full
possession of them to his quietness / except he would say / that he has the
full possession of them: the which holly and fully contempneth and dispiseth
them all: for that person is saciate and content with the want of them. But
will ye se a more meruaylous blyndnes of this wretched man. The soul of man
which is made to thymage of god / and the which shall never be saciate and
content but only with god: that same soul / not constrained (though partly
enclyned and moved by the flesh) wylfully subdeweth her self unto the
flesh ready to fulfill the vain pleasures and desires of the flesh. But she
co^tempneth or dispiseth to subdue her self to god / though she be continually
moved thereunto by daily exhortatyon or preaching / continual receyuynge of
his benefytes and graces and also by inward inspirations. Ye more over she
will not do the will of god in his own gifts that he gives to her. Truly if
the soul were not worse or more bestial than any brut best / she would love
god above all things / unto whose image she is made. And so: little or
nothing regard all creatures in comparison of god. Wherefore thou soul / if
thou wylt love the flesh or the body / love none other but the flesh and
the body of Christ / which was offered for the and for the health of mankind
/ on the auter of the cross. Therefore daily remember in thy heart his passion.
For it so remembered in the soul of man: is continually offered and presented
to the sight of the father omnipotent for our consolation and comfort. A
natural example.
It is comenly said that if any man kyl or slay another man: if that mansleer
come afterward in the presence of that deed corpse or body so that he se it: it
will incontinent blede / or void at the wound fresshe blood. So if we would
behold with the devout eyes of our soul the blood and passion of Christ /
whom we have slain or were the occasyon of his death / not only by our
original sin / but also by our manyfolde actual sins: we should feel or
perceive by spiritual grace of devotion in our souls / how that by our
compassion of his passion / his blood flowethe plentuously out of his body /
and is offered and presented unto his father for our salvation and
sanctification. For if the nails that persed his hands and feet were
sanctified and called holy by the tochyng of his blessed me^bres / how much
more then should our reasonable thoughts which cleue fast to Christ
crucified by continual or often remembrance of his passion be called holy. O
most delectable passion. O most meruaylous death. Meruaylous? Ye what may be
more meruaylous / for this death does give life / it cures our wounds / it
makes blood white / that is / it purifieth and cleanses our soul from the
blood of sin. Great bitterness and sorrow / is often times turned to much
swetenes and pleasure. The openyng of the side of Christ / joins his heart to
our heart. The son hyd from us by the clouds / when the clouds be gone and
paste: it shines more clearly. The fire quenched: is shortlyer or sooner
kyndeled and makes the greater flame. The ignominious and shamfull death of
Christ: glorifieth both him and us. Christ thristyng upon the cross does
inebriate and saciate us with the drink and liquore of grace. Christ hangyng
naked on the cross: clotheth ye ryghtuous persons with the garments of
virtue. His hands nailed to the cross: does vnknytte or loose our hands /
his feet nailed does make us run to virtue. Christ yeldynge his spyryte in
to the hands of his father: does inspyre and give life of grace. And he also
spread abroad upon the cross: does call us to heavenly things. O the wonderful
passion of Christ / the which does alyenate and change the heart and mind
of him that has remembrance and compassion of it. For it not only makes him
angelical: but also divine and godly. For he that continues by meditation in
the torments and passion of Christ: sees not him self / because he always
and only beholds his savior Christ crucified. This person would bear the
cross of Christ with him / and he also bears in his heart him: which
susteynethe both heaven and earth / with whom he may easily sustain and bear
all heavy burdens and pains. This person also that thus continues in the
mediation of Christ crucified / would be crowned with thorns with Christ and
for Christ / and he is crowned with the sure hope and trust of the crown of
glory. He would hynge naked on the cross with Christ / and so shake for cold
/ and he is heated in his soul with the fervent fire of love. He would taste
of the bitter and sharp vynacre and gall with Christ / and he drynkethe the
wine of unspeakable swetenes. He would be mocked and scorned with Christ on
the cross / and he is honored of aungelles. He would be dispysed and forsaken
with Christ / and our lady has chosen him to her son. He would be heavy with
Christ / and he is conforted. He would be tormented and scourged with Christ
/ and he is relyued with great joy and gladness. He would hynge with Christ on
the cross / and Christ most swetely does embrace and halse him. He would be
pale in face and inclyne his heed down for feebleness with Christ / and Christ
co^fortably lyftynge up his heed / does most swetly kiss him. And therefore
saint Barnarde says: O good Jesus we believe / and so it is / that who so bears
thy cross / he bears thy glory. And he that bears thy glory / he bears the.
And him yt bears the / thou bears upon thy sholdre. Thy sholdre is strong
and very high / for it recheth unto the fete of the father in heaven above all
the orders of angels / above all principates / potestates / and virtues.
Thither thou reducest or bryngest again the wandering sheep that did err
from the flock / that is mankind / the which by his sin was put out of
Paradyse. Good lord, I may compass, go about, and search both heaven and earth
/ the sea, and the land / and no where shall I find the but in the cross.
There thou slepest / there thou fedest / there thou restest in the hete of the
day. In this cross my soul is lyfted up from the earth / and there it
gathers the sweet apples upon the tree of life. In this cross the soul
cleuynge fast to her lord god / does swetely sing and say: Psalm. 3.
Susceptor meus es tu, gloria mea, et exaltans caput meum. Thou art my
defe^dour my glory / and thou exalts up my heed: that is my soul from the
consideration of all vain and transitory things / unto the meditacion of thyn
unspeakable goodness showed unto man upon the cross. O most amyable death. O
most delectable death of the most noble body of our lord Jesus Christ / from
whom I would never be separate / but in him to make three tabernacles / one in
his hands / another in his fete / and the third in the wound of his side.
There I will rest and sleep / eat and drink / read and pray / and there I
will perform all my besynes that I have to do. There I shall speak unto his
heart / and obtain of him what so ever is nedeful for me. Thus doing) I may
follow ye steps of his most sweet mother Marie / whose soul: ye sword of
sorrow did thyrle and perse at the death of her sone. If I be thus wounded with
Christ / I may from hensforth suerly speak to her and move her in all my
necessites / and she will not deny me / because she sees me crucified with her
son Christ.

Here follows an example of this exhortation.
WE may take an example of this exhortation to remember the passion of Christ
(in the book called: Libro. xxxi.
Speculum hystoriale Vincentij) of certain singular persons which had this
special grace. Capi. x. et xiiii.
We read there that in the parts of the Dioces called Leodin^: a noble and
devout priest called: Iacobus de Vitriaco / the which afterward was the
bishop of Tusculane and cardinal / and this holy man se there diverse women
of so meruaylous affection and so fervent in the love of god / through the
continual remembrance of the passion of Christ / that by that fervent love
and desire / they were so seek that by many years they could not rise out of
their beds but very seldom / having none other cause of sekenes or disease
but only the said fervent love. For their hertes (by ye continual
remembrance of the infinite charity of god showed in the passion of Christ)
were so relented by that meditation / that the more that they were comforted in
soul / the more seek and weyke they were in their bodies: saying and cryeng in
heart / though for shame they durst not speak in words / the sayng of the
spouse in the canticles: Canti. 1. A.
Fulcite me floribus, stipate me malis, quia amore langueo. Comfort me with
flowers / strength me with apples or other fruits / for I am seek or languysshe
for love. And in some of these women (a meruaylous thing) it might be perceived
sensibly / how that when their soul in a manner melted through the vehemence
of love / their chekes and the color of them sensibly fayded and fell away. In
other of them through the sweet consolations that they received in their
souls / there redou^ded in to their mouths a pleasant taste / as if it had been of honey or other sweet meat / and that they felt sensibly. And so it
retresshed them both corporally and spiritually / and this taste also moved
them to sweet tears / and preserved or kept their hertes in devotion. Some of
them also received so great grace of weeping in devotion / that as often as god
was in their heart by remembrance of his goodness / so often the ryuers of
tears flowed from their eyes by inward devotion / so that the steps or
pryntes of the tears / did afterward appear in their chekes thorough the
custom of weeping. And here note a meruaylous thing / that the weeping or
tears did not hurt their brain or heed / as it does comenly in all other
persons / but rather in them it comforted their minds / with a full and
plentuous devotion. It made sweet or pleasant their spirits with a sweet
unction of grace. It meruaylously refresshed their bodies / and it gladded al
ye hole congregation of ye servants of god there. More over we read in the
same book of an holy and devout woman called Maria de Ogines / of whom the
forsayde master Iacobus de Vitriaco / being in great feruoure of devotion
cried with a loud voice unto almighty god sayng: Vbi supra.
O lord god thou art very good to them that trusts in the / thou art
faithful to thy servants that trust and abide thy promises. Capi. xviii.
Thy hand maid good lord has despised and forsaken for thy love / thonour of
the world with all the pleasures of the same / and thou accordyngly unto thy
promise in scripture has rendered and given to her an hundredth times more in
this world / and also everlasting life in the kingdom of glory. Mt. 19. D.
The first fruits or beginning of her love to the / was the remembrance of
thy cross / passion / and death. For on a certain day when she (prevented with
thy grace and mercyfully visited by the) considered the great benefits /
which thou of thyn unspeakable goodness showed unto man kind in workynge our
redemption / she found or opteyned so great grace of compunction / and such
abundaunce or copye of tears in thy cross and passion / that we might have
traced or followed her through the church by her tears that fell on ye ground
from her. And of a long time after that she had this sweet visitation and
grace of tears / she might neither see nor behold the image of the crucifix /
nor yet speak or here other speak of the passion of Christ / but forthwith she
fell in swowne. Wherefore that she might somewhat tempre and abate that great
passion and sorrow / and restrain thaboundaunce of her weeping, she left the
consideration of thumanite or manheed of Christ, and turned her mind holly
to the meditation of the majesty) and godheed of Christ / that in his
eternitye and inpassibilytye she might find some consolation and comforth. But
where she thought and labored to have stopped and restrained the floode of her
tears / there rose and sprang maruailously greater abundau^ce of tears. For
when she considered of what glory and dignity he was that would suffer so
vile and shamfull death for our redemption / then her sorrow was renewed in her
/ and her soul so relented for devout compu^ction / that much more plentye of
tears departed from her / and much more ye may see in the said book / if it
please you.

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living god, for thyn unspeakable pitye /
and the most excellent life of the most holy mother Marie / and for the
merits of saint Francisce / and of al thy saints / grant (we beseech the)
unto us most wretched sinners unworthy any of thy benefits / that we might
love the alone / and ever be burning or feruente in thy love / and that we
might continually magnify the work of our redemption / that we might ever
desire thy honor / and daily bear and remember in our heart the benefyte of
thy passion / that we might know and consydre our miserye / and continually
desire to be despised and rebuked for thy love / so that nothing should
comforth us and abide in our hertes / but thy death and passion / and nothing
displease or trouble us / but our own sin and wretchedness Amen.

Of the mean and manner of the remembrance of the passion of Christ. The
second particle.
How I shall show unto you how we should use and exercise our self in the
passion of Christ. In the which vii. times in the day at the leeste: every
christian should exercise him self accordyngly to the sentence or mind of
saint Barnard sayng: The continual or daily lesson of a christi ane / should be
the remembrance of the passion of Christ. For there is nothing that so much
kyndeleth the heart of man / as the manheed of Christ / and the often and devout
remembrance of his passion. How this may be / we shall perceive it in this
manner, That is this / who so ever will profit in the meditation of Christ's
passion / let him order him self / as if Christ were put to all the pains of
his death and passion in his presence / and so let him considre depely /
diligently and with deliberation all the points of his passion / thereunto fix
his hole mind perseuerantly leuynge and setting a part all other cures and
business / with drawinge him self with as great diligence as he can from all
superfluouse meats and drynkes / and from all dilycates / from al fine
garments and soft beds / from all vain sportes and lyghtnes / from vain
joy / and from all vain and idle speech. For all these and such other like
ben clean contrary to the fruitful remembrance of Christ's passion / as we
shall she we more clerly herafter. And therefore it is necessary that if a man
will profyt herein / that he think him self as if he were present at the
passion of Christ / and so order and behave him self in his speech / in his
sight / in his sorowyng / and in all his other outward acts / as if he saw
before his face / Christ hyngynge on the cross. If a man thus order him self
Christ crucified shall be spiritually with him and in his presence as he
thinks in his own mind / and so shall gladly behold his deeds and thoughts
/ and also graciously accept his vows and promysses. But take heed that this
remembrance be not soon lost and shortly put away / specially when devotion
and time will serve with convenient oportunitye / and se that this remembrance
be with a faithful and herty manner and with a mournyng compassion. For suerly
if this most sweet and pleasant tree of the cross be not affectuously and
louyngly chewed with the teethe of fervent devotion: the savor thereof (though
in it self it be very delicious) shall never move the. And if thou can not weep
with Christ that wept for the / and sorrow with him / that sorowed for the /
at the leest thou ought to joy in him and to render thanks to him with a
devout heart for his manifold benefytes given to the without any thing
deseruynge. And if thou felest thy self noder moved unto compassion / nor yet
to give thanks with a fervent desire unto god for his benefits / but rather
depressed with an hard heart in the said remembrance / never the less with
that same hard heart run unto the wholesome remembrance of Christ's passion
and give such thanks to god as thou may for that time. And that which thou
can not have nor felyst not in thy self / commit in to the hands of his
most merciful goodness. And if yet thou continue in thy stubbernes and hard
heart / for perauenture thy heart is turned in to the hardness of a Dyamant /
which can never be broken but with the hot blood of a got / as Plinius says
in his natural history: Lib. xxxvii. Cap. iiii.
here I offer and show unto the the great copy and plenty of blood of the
got and also of a lamb incontaminate / unspotted or undefiled Jesus Christ /
which is very hot and burning with an incomparable fervent love and charity
/ which thorough the strength of his heet / has broken and dissolved that
hard and Dyamant wall of enmity / which the sin of our first parents and
also our actual sins has made and put bytwyxte god and man. Wasshe or
drown thy self in the copiouse blood of this got and lamb / O thou Adamant
heart / and lie in it that thou may be made warm / and thou so heated or made
warm / may be molifyed or made soft / and so molified: may shed plentiously
ryuers of tears. Num^. xx. B
Moses smote twyse on the stone and brought such plentye of water / so smite
thy hard stony heart twyse that is with the inward hertye remembrance of
Christ passion / and with the outward labor of thy body / as
exexercysynge thy self in lyftynge up thy hands or thy sight / unto the
crucifixe in often knocking on thy breast / in devout genuflexions / knelynges
/ or pain takynges / or in exercysyng thy self in taking disciplines or
scurgynges / or in other like outward exercise / and so continue unto thou
have gotten the grace of tears. Whereby thy reasonable soul shall drink the
waters of devotion. And thy sensual or bestly body by thexperie^ce thereof
shall be humbled and subdued unto the reasonable soul.

The third particle, how we should feel in our self the passion of Christ /
and this perticle is divided in to.v. chapitres / first is how we should feel
the passion of Christ in our understanding and reason.
Saint Poule says: Phili. 2. A.
Hoc sentite invobis quod et in Christo Jesus. Feel and perceive in your self
that Christ Jesus ^elt / that ye might suck and draw watres from the
fountayns of our savior. For who so ever exercise them self faithfully in
this passion / they shall suck and draw from thens al manner of graces / as we
said before. In the first particle.
For suerly this exercise has his diverse degrees / whereby we may come to the
perfeccion of all sanctitye or holiness. Wherefore we ought (accordyngly to
thadmonicion of saint Poule) feel in our self ye passion of Christ. And that
v. manner of wise. First in our understanding / secondly in our will / love and
affection / thirdly in our acts and operation / fourtly in our poverty and
necessityes / fyftly in our reprouynges or dispisinges. First I say we should
feel the passion of Christ in our understanding or reason / so that we
dilygenly and with attencion form our thoughts accordyngly unto the pains
and passion of Christ. Hereunto we be moved by the words of the prophet sayng
in the person of Christ crucified: Tren^. 1. D.
O vos omnes qui transitis per viam attendite et videte si est dolor sicut
dolor meus. O all ye that pass thorough the way of this world: take heed
(that is: think with a dilligent and attent mind) and depely consider if there
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. And this is done truly and faithfully /
when the passion of Christ is remembered rather with an attent mind and
cogitation / than with devotion. For cogitation has his signification and name
of abidyng / tarieng / or else co^straynynge after some doctors. For asmoche
as in such cogitatyons when reason and understanding has not that gift and
grace of knowledge that it would have / it is constrained to abide / tarry and
reuolue it in his cogitation / unto the time yt he has gote^ some perceyuyng
thereof. And of this co^straynyng speaks saint Barnarde saying: let the
outward senses be gathered to gether in one / and constrained or subdewed
under the discipline and rule of the good will. And so kept under with the
burden of good works / and made obedient to the service of the spirit / that
in no means they be suffered to come at large at their sensual pleasure. Of
this diligent keeping of our thoughts / speaks also our lord in his law
saying: Deuter. vi. C.
Cave ne vnquam obliuiscaris domini dei tui qui eduxit te de terra Egipti.
Beware that thou never forget thy lord god / which has delivered the from
the thraldom that thou had in the land of Egipte (that is from the thraldom
of the deule) by the merits of his glorious passion. We may always think of
this benefit / though we can not at al times devoutly remember it. And
therefore to remember or think ever of god / we be constrained by his
commandment. But to remember him with devotion we be not bound / for
devotion is only of the special grace of god which is not in our power. And
therefore we be exhorted and taught to continue the remembrance of god and of
his co^maundmentes saying: Deutet. 6. B.
Meditaberis ea sedens in domo tua, et ambulans in itinere, dormiens, atque
consurgens, er ligabis ea quasi signum in manu tua, et mouebunt ante oculos
tuos, scribesque ea in limine et in ostijs domus tue. Thou shall (says Moses
in the name of our lord) remember them (that is the co^maundmentes and
benefytes of god) sittynge in thy house and walking in thy journey / slepynge
and rysyng / or at thy down lyenge and up risynge / and thou shall tie and
fasten them unto the as a sign or a mark in thy hand / and they shall be ever
before thyn eyne or sight / and thou shall writ them in the posts and doors
of thy house. And though these words in the litterall sense ben spoken of
the.x. co^maundmentes of god / yet we may so much the more conveniently apply
them to the remembrance of the passion of our lord / for asmoche as it was
more to our profit and comforth that our lord god would suffer death and
passion for our rede^pcion / than yt he gave to us his commau^dme^tes. And also
that is the law and order of ye benefits of god that more that they be
profitable to us: the more we should remember them. Therefore all the articles or
particular pains of the passion of our lord should be diligently gadred to
geder and commend to memory / according to the words of our savior sayng:
Iohi^s. 6. B
Colligite fragmenta ne pereant. Gather up to gether the fragme^tes) that is
the particular pains of his passion) and put the^ to gider as it were in a
litel faggot / and so co^me^de them to memory less they perisshe from your
herttes by forgetfulness / i^ this manner did ye spouse as we read in the
canticles / where as she said. Ca^ti^. 1. D.
Fasciculus mi^re dilectus meus michi inter vbera mea commorabitur. My dear
beloved spouse is to me as a little faggot of myrre / he shall abide in my heart
and memory. Super cantica sermon. 43.
Saint Barnarde declarynge this same text says in this manner / Brethern this
has been mine accustomable manner fro my first conversion. I have been diligent
to gather a little faggot of myrre / the which I put in to my bosom as a
tresure to recompense for the great hepe of merits that I should have had /
but my unkindness to god is such that I want such merits / and therefore I say
I was dilygent to gather to me a little faggot of mirre of all the pains and
affliccions of my lord and savior Jesus / first of his great pouertye /
necessitye and affliccion or pains that he suffered in his young and tender age:
after that of his great labors that he had in preaching his fatigation and
werynes in going about from cite to cite / from town to town / from
cuntrye to cuntrye / his continual watch in prayer / his temptacions in his
fasting his wepynges and tears in compassion of the miserable people / the
disceites and crafts of the scribes and phariseys that lie in a wayt of him to
take him in a trype with some defaute in his co^municacyon or speech / and
last of the parylles and dangers that he was in among his own nation and
friends / of his rebukes / mockes / scorns / dispises / spittynges /
buffetynges / betinges / scurgynges / with all other that he suffered for our
salvation. Of all the which is there / plentuously made mention in the four
euangelystes / these things to remember says saint Barnarde) I recounted for
wisdom, Vbi supra.
In these things I set the perfeccion of my justice / in these stood all my
cunning and knowledge / in these I put the riches of my health and thaboundaunce
of my merits / of these sometime I drank a draught of wholesome bytternes or
peynaunce / in these again I received the sweet unction of consolacyon. These
things done strength me and also erecte me in aduersityes / they repress me
and keep me meke in prosperityes / and they gyde me and led me by a sure way
in this life / where as is now sorrow / now joy / now pleasure / now pain
/ so that Ider not go out of the right way aslonge as I follow them.

How we should feel Christ's passion in our love / will and affeccion. The
second Chapitre.
SEcondly we should feel (I said) the passion of Christ in our only remembered
in our thoughts / but that also the devotion of the reme^berer be enflamed by
love in his will. And suerly if our understanding do his diligence in the
remembrance of the said passion / it shall shortly move our affection. And so
the passion of our lord shall not only in our cogitacions be remembered / but
also it shall inflame your will by compassion and pitye. Whereunto we be
admonysshed by our lord saying. Ca^ti^. viii. S.
Pone me vt signaculum super cor tuum. Put me (says our lord) as a seal upon
thy heart. A seal (as ye know) if it be i^prynted in to wax / it leaves in
it his image. So our lord would that his passion should be so imprinted in our
hertes / not only be often remembrance / but also by devout compassion / that
the prynt and image thereof abide in our affection and fervent desire: so that
as Jesus Christ was made reed and blody on the cross / so our devotion in us
may be made reed and fervent by the virtue of compassion. And hereunto we be
counseled by the words of Moses saing. Leuiti^. xxix. B.
Sumes de sanguine vituli et pones super co^nua altaris. That thou shall take of
the blood of the calf signifieng the blood of Christ / and thou shall put it
upon the corners of the altar that is upon thy thoughts and affections / with
fervent remembrance of the blood of Christ. And so we shall fulfill the
admonition of saint Paul: saying as I said before. Hoc sentite in vobis quod
et in Christo Jesus. Philip. ii. A
Feale in your self that Christ Jesus felt. And thus we may feel him in our
soul.ii. manner of ways. First by the bitter affection of compassion / and
that is when we remember the passion of Christ with so great compassion: that
it brings forth of us most bitter tears / so yt such a devout soul may
say with the wise man. Eccli. 41. A
O mors quam amara est me moria tua. O death how bitter and sorrowful is thy
remembrance and specially the remembrance of the death of Christ. Secondly we
may feel him in our hertes or souls by the most sweet and pleasant
affection of devotion / and that is when we remember most inwardly and depely
the great love and charity of Christ that would suffer so grievous pains and
shameful death for so vile wretches and unkind as we be. And so this devout
remembrance brings forth of us most sweet tears of devotion: So that we may
say that is written in the book of Judith. Judith.v. B.
Fontes aquarum ob dulcorati sunt. That is the bitter fountayns ben made sweet
and delectable. A figure hereof we read in scripture where as our lord
commanded to Moses to put a tree (that was both long and bitter) in to the
water that was so bitter that no man culde drynk thereof / and so thereby the
waters were made swet and delectable. Exodus xv. D.
What is signified by this water but the passion of our lord which is so bitter
and paynful that no man may taste thereof. And by this long and bitter tree / is
signified the long and continual remembrance. Which if it be joined and put
to the passion of our lord / it shall make it sweet and pleasant / so that the
more we taste of it by devout remembrance / the more delectable it shall be to
us. And therefore our holy mother the church says in a certain hympne: Dulce
lignum, Cru^ fide^.
dulces clauos, dulce pondus sustinet. That is: The sweet tree of the cross
susteyneth and bears a sweet burden / nailed fast with sweet nails. For that
which was most bitter and paynfull to our savior Jesus in his passion /
sometime is most delectable and comfortable to us in our devout meditations.
These two manners of tears that is bitter and sweet / spring out of this
devout affection of the passion of our lord. Super canti^ sermon^. 43
And hereunto speaks saint Barnarde as we said a fore. In the remembrance of
the pains that my savior Jesus sufferd for me / I drink sometime a draught of
wholesome bitterness. And sometime again I receive the pleasant unction or
ointment of devout consolation.

How we should feel Christ's passion in our acts and deeds. The third
Chapitre.
THyrdly we should feel the pains of Christ in our effects Prouer. 24. D.
Prepara foris opus tuum. That is to say: Such devotion as thou haste inwardly
conceived by affection and love / let it be showed outwardly in thy deeds. For
as saint Gregore says: Omel. 30.
the deed outwardly done / is a sufficient argument or prove of the inward
love. So by the inward love of man is showed or known his inward compassion.
Also it is written in the second book of the kings: Cap. vii. A.
Omnia que habes in cord tuo, fac quoniam dominus tecum est. As if he should
say: what so ever good thing thou have conceived in thy heart / show it
outward in thy deeds. Cap. 25. D.
Also it is written in Exodo. Fac secundum exemplar quod tibi monstratum est in
monte. Perform in thy living that goodness / which thou received of god in
thy soul. And therefore our lord says to us in his gospel: Luce. 9. C.
Si quis vult venire post me, abneget semetipsum et tollat crucem suam
quotidie. If any man will be my disciple and cum after me / let him deny him
self / that is forsake his own will and pleasure / and take his own cross /
that is: put his own body to pain and that daily. For we must continue in
penance / and so follow Christ in our living outwardly and not only inwardly
/ and hereto says saint Paul: 2. Corin. 8. D.
Ostentionem caritatis vestre ostendite in faciem ecclesie. That is / show
your good will and charity openly in the face of the church / that is in our
works and in our deeds. Pri. Pet. 2. D.
And saint Peter says: Christus passus est pro nobis relinquens exemplum vt s
equamini eum. Christ has suffered pains and death for us / gyuynge us example
to follow him / he does not say that we should have a will and desire only to
follow him / but he says plainly that Christ has left unto us an example
that we should follow him in our deeds in sufferynge pains as he did. And then
it might be truly said of us / that we feel in our self that Christ felt /
when he suffere like pains as Christ suffered / so that by such sharp
penance and hard labors our bodies be subdued and our blood minysshed. And
so the sayng of scripture may be verifyed in us: 3. reg. 2. A.
Effudit sanguinem belli in pace. He has shed the blood of battle in the time
of peace. They do shed the blood of battle in the time of peace / which by
sharp penance and great bodyly labors so subdue their bodies / that their
blood is much minisshed / and their face made pale. Such manner of exercises
of the body done for god / is reputed as a martyrdom / and thereby somewhat we
reanswere unto the passion of our lord. Ser. xxx. super Cantic.
Herunto speaks saint Barnard sayng: this daily penance and affliction of
the body / is a certain kind of very martyrdom and effusion of blood / it is
a litel more gentyl and not so hugsome as is torments and death by the swerd or
other like / but it is more paynfull for the continuance thereof / the other is
sone done / but this lasts long. This is necessary and profitable for
imperfect persons that be weyke in spirit and not strong in faith / and
therefore dare not adventure to suffer martyrdom and death for Christ / but they
be content to supply it by this martyrdom / that is daily and continual
penance / which by the continuance is more paynfull. And thus the devout
persons do feel in them self by their outward penance the passion of our
lord / As when by sharp penance they subdue their bodies over come vice and
all sensual passions / and so continue in this cross of penance with Christ.

How we should feel Christ's passion in our poverty and other necessites. The
fourth Chapitre.
FOurthly we should feel the pains of Christ in our penury / poverty and
other necessities / so that reme^brynge the passion of Christ / we should
gladly suffer all poverty and penury / and never to desire that thing that
is pleasant to the body / for the pleasure thereof or taking any thing more
then very necessity requires / saying with holy Job: Donec deficiam non
recedam ab innocentia mea. Job.xxvii. A.
As long as I live I shall not forsake mine innocence. And though we be in a
manner consumed and lost thoroughe hunger and penurye / so that we may say with
the prophet David: Defecit in dolor vita mea. My life is consumed thorough
sorrow / my body and my heart also. Psalm. xxx.
And surely this manner of penury and necessity / not only of meat and
drink / but also of all things that may be delectable to man / is accounted
to good men in this life / as a kind of martyrdom. By which necessityes if
we strongly and gladly bear them for god / we satisfye partly to our lord for
his passion. And herunto speaks saint Barnard saying: Wylfull poverty is a
certain kind of martyrdom. Almighty god descendyng from thinestimable riches
of heaven / and coming in to this world / would not any of these riches of
this world / but came in so great poverty / that anon as he was borne for his
credell / he was laid in to a crybbe in a vile stable with out the town / for
his mother culde have no lodgyng in the city. In flor. lib. v. Cap. xxx.
Of his poverty also appears by his answer that he made to one the which
said that he would follow him where so ever he went. And our lord answered and
said: Math. 8. C.
Vulpes foueas habent, et volucres celi nidos, filius autem hominis non habet
vbi caput suum recli net. Foxis have cauys / or dennys / and birds of the air
have nestes / but the son of the virgin has no place wherein to hyde or
rest his heed. In this necessity was thapostle Paul / as it appears by his
words saying: I was in many labors / often in prison / bette and scourged
above good order / very often in peril of death / in perils of flodes / in
perils of thieves / in perils of gentyles / in dangers within the city /
in great dangers also in wyldernes / and also in the sea / in perils of the
false Iues. 2. Corin. xi. E. F.
I was also in labor and great misery / in great watch / in hunger and thrist
/ in much abstine^ce / in cold and in nakedness. These and many mo did
thapostle suffer. And the mo yt we patiently suffer of these or such like / the
more shall we feel the passion of Christ in our self.

How we should feel Christ's passion in our rebukes and dispisynges. The.v. Chap
FYftly we ought to feel the passion of Christ in our rebukes and reproues /
that is with most profou^d mekenes / we should utterly dispyse our self and
think our self the warst of all other: sayng ever in our hertes with
mourning: I am gyltye of Christ's death / for I am the cause of his death. He
suffered for me / and I in no thing reanswere to his benefytes. And therefore
it is convenient that we somewhat recompense with a contrite and meke spirit /
that which we can not or do not in our warkes or deeds outward / that as
Christ did meke him self for us unto the death / yea to the most vile and
shamfull death of the cross / so we should meke our self as gyltie and
culpable for his death. These manner of ways we should feel that Christ suffered
for us / for these manner of ways we were in him. First Esa. 49. D.
Nunquid potest obliuisci matter infantem suum vt non misereatur filio vteri
sui, Et si illa oblita fuerit: ego tamen non obliuiscar tui. May a natural
mother (says our lord by the prophet) forget her young child borne of her
own body? and so forget him that she will not have any pity of him? as he
might say / Nay. And though it so be that she forget him / yet I assure the I
will never forget the. Secondly In charitate perpetua dilexi te, ideo attraxi
te, miserans tui. Hier. 31. A.
I have (says our lord) loved the in a perpetual charity / and therefore
having great compassion on the / I have drawn Ser. feri^. 4. ^bdomade pe^ose.
And herunto saint Barnarde (after that he had recou^ted or noumbred all the
labors and pains that Christ suffered in this life) said: Who is he that
knows whether the fruit and profyt of all these labors and pains redounde
or come to my profyt or not / And he answers and says: It is all done and
given to my profit and comforth. For it could be given to none other. Not to
angel / for he had no need thereof. Not to the devil / for he might take no
profit thereof / for he shall never rise from dampnation. Also our savior took
not of him the nature and similitude of angel / nor yet the similitude of the
devil / but he took the nature of man / and that to redeem man. Fourthly 2.
Corin. 8. B.
Christus cum dives esset factus est pro nobis pauper: vt illius inopia nos
diuites essemus. Christ being most rich / became poor for us / that by his
poverty and necessity we may be made rich. Fyftly we were in Christ / that

The.iiii. particle.
Of diverse manners and ways to remember Christ's passion and it is divided in
to.vi. Chapitres how we may considre Christ's passion with a mind to follow
it. Chap. i.
ANd that thou may the better bear in mind our lords passion / thou ought to
know that a man may behave him self in remembrance thereof.vi. manner of ways
First he may considre this passion with a mind to follow it. Secondly to have
compassion thereof. Thyrdly to merueyl thereof. Fourtly to joy thereof. Fyftly to
resolve or rele^t his heart in to that passion. And sextly surely to rest
therein so that this imitation or following / shall be to the purgation and
direction of his soul. The compassion: to the union and love / thadmiration or
merueylyng: shall be to the leuation or lyftyng up of his mind / the joy and
gladness: to the opening and dilatation of his heart / the relentynge shall be to
his perfect conformation / and the rest or quietness: shall be to the perfection
of his devotion. Of each one of these seuene we shall write a lityll / so that
the paynful passion of our most loving savior Jesus / might the more rather
inflame and kyndle our dull affection and love / illumyne and lyghten our
blind reason or understanding / and also that it might be the more strongly
inprinted in to our sliper meo^ries. First I say we should consider the passion
of our savior Christ with a mind to follow it. For the imitation and
following of Christ is the most high and perfect religion and rule of a
perfect person. To follow Christ (I say) in his passion and death by a
continual remembrance / a loving and affectuous compassion and by virtuous
operation: is thexemplar of perfection of all life and treuth / so that this
passion be our rule and thordre of our living in all our meritorious deeds.
For Christ is as a book laid open on the pulpyt of the cross / where as he
taught obedience / patience / mekenes and charity / for the which: if we
daily use and perform them / we shall be crowned in eternal felicity. And
specially we should learn here / how our savior Christ behaved him self in the
chapitre / which was holden and kept for him. Of the which saint Barnarde
speaks sayng: Jesus stood before the president: inclynynge or bowynge down
his heed / speaking but few words with a soft voice / a quiet chere or
countenance / lokynge downwarde to the earth / and ready to receive or bear
patiently all rebukes and beatynges / which things / when we do not: or else
be negligent to do and suffer them how can or may we say that we follow Christ.
Truly somoche the more be we desolate of goodness: in how much we be separate
or departed for this exemplar and rule / our savior Jesus. We should have a will
and mind (as much as is in us) to be despised of all men / deiect / trodden
under foot / set at naught / mocked and scorned / to be scourged / whipped /
bet / and to suffer persecution for Christ / and also to be rebuked in our good
deeds or works for Christ. Also we should have a desire to be poor or naked
with Christ / nothing couetyng or desiryng / and that namely inordinatly / but
to be fully content with such poverty as god sends us. And more over it
should be a grievous pain to us / and much sharp sorrow to our heart / to have
any thing and that superfluous. We should abhor to taste of any delectable
and sweet thing / rather desiryng to be fed with vile and bitter meats or
drynkes / reme^bryng that our savior Jesus was so fed at this passion. And
shortly to conclude / we should remember and depely considre what our savior
Jesus suffered for us / and how he ordered him self in his passion and pains /
that we might conform our self to him in asmoche as we may. For his passion
shall not save us sinners that have use of reason / except we enforce our self
to follow him / and to conform our self unto his patience in some manner / or
at leest / have a full will and desire thereunto / according to the sayng of the
prophet Esaias / where as the son of god complaynethe to his father of such as
will not follow him saying: Esa. xlix. A.
In vacuum laboraui, sine causa et vane fortitudinem meam consumpsi. I have
labored in vain / without fruit or vaynly I have consumed or wasted my
strength / for few take heed to follow me. Also the prophet Hieremy says:
Hiere. vi. G.
Frustra conflauit conflator. malicie enim illorum non sunt consumpte. That is
the trier or goldsmyth has tried / blown and labored in vain / for the rust
of their malice or sin is not consumed. Of the which text the gloss says:
the only passion of Christ shall not save them / except they follow it in
good living. And herto saint Gregory says: If we search and labor to have
here pleasant and delectable things. What trust we to have in the life to
come? he that will not mourn here where as he is as a pilgrem: he shall not
joy in heaven as a cytezen or as of the household of heaven. Therefore the more
thou perceive thy self to abound in temporal goods / in worldly honor and
corporal pleasure or consolation here in this life / the more cause have thou
to be heavy and sad / for asmoch as thou art far from the true conformity and
following of Christ / and so far from the consolation of god. wherefore if we
will reign with Christ / it is necessary that we suffer for Christ. For
there is no disciple above his maysster. Since therefore we be put in this world
as in a field to feight / where as our master Christ faught strongly unto ye
death / that sowdiour or person the which here suffers no beatynges or
wou^des for Christ / shall ryghtuously appear in ye world to come vnglorious
and without glory or unworthy reward. And therefore saint Gregory expou^dyng
these words of our lord: Math. vii. B.
Angusta est via que ducit ad vitam. It is a narowe or streit way yt ledeth man
to everlasting life: says thus. It is a strait way yt ledeth to heaven for if
we will come thider / we must live here in this world / and yet nothing to have
or to follow of the concupiscence of the world / to couit nothing that
apperteineth to any other man / to give and forsak our own goods / to despise
the lauds and praisynges of the world / to honor them that despise us / to
forgive hertly injuries done to us / and also to love them with heart and
continually that does such wrongs unto us / and to do good to them which all
our savior Christ fulfilled here in this life / leaving example unto us to
follow his steps / which steps and examples the more narowe and paynfull
or strayt they be in this life / the more they shall be ampliate / comfortable
and joyful in this life to come. And therefore the prophet David says. Psalm.
iiii*
In tribulatione dilatasti mihi. In time of tribulation thou have opened and
spread abroad to me thy consolations and comfortes. And therefore the holy
servants of god / when they perceive them self to abound in the
prosperities of this world / then they be very ferefull suspectynge lest that
they should receive here in this life the fruit and reward of their labors /
fearyng lest that the justice of god should se in them any privy or lorkynge
wound of sin. For the which of the ryghtuousnes of god they ought to be
dampened. And therefore he rewardynge their good deeds here in this life with
temporal pleasures will expel them from ye true inward and eternal pleasures.

How we may consider the passion of Christ with a mind to have compassion
thereof. The.ii.. Chaptre.
SEcondly we should considre the passion of our lord fervently we love him /
the more shall we have compassion of his passion / and so this fervent love and
compassion shall so much increase to gether and be augmented / that they shall
bring us to the perfection of love / and to the fruition of our lover.
Wherefore let us be sorry with him / trusting verily / and that without any
doubt / that if we be found here to be partakers of his sorrow in sorowynge
for his death and passion / we shall be made his fellows and companyons or
partakers of his joy and consolation. For surely he that would not hyde his
resurrection from Marie Magdalene that with sorrow sought him / he will not
deny his glory to us / that religiously and devoutly do mourn with him for
his passion. Rom^. 8. C.
And therefore saint Paul says: Si tamen compatimur vt et simul glorificemur.
If we here suffer with Christ / we shall be glorified with Christ. Also our
savior Christ says: Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iusticiam:
quoniam ipsorum est regnum celorum. Math. 5. A.
Blessed be they that suffer persecution for justice (that is for Christ) for
they shall have the kingdom of heaven. Ser. C. lxv. de t^. ca. 6.
And contrary wise saint Austen says: If thou be except from passion and
pain / that is if thou suffer not here some pain / thou shall be exempte from
the nombre of the chylderne of god. Hebre. xii. B.
For as saint Paul says: Quem dominus diligit: corrigit: castigat: flagellat
autem ^^ominem filium quem recipit. Whom our lord loves / him he does
chastyse / he correcth every one of them whom he receives to his mercy and
favor. Therefore if ye be not under correction as all the chyldern of god be /
ye be not the childerne of god / but of the devil. Hereby ye may perceive that
good life does not stand principally in good fare or well living / but rather
in patiently sufferyng wrongs for Christ / though it be a comen proverb /
that he lives well / that feadeth well / Sed mentita est iniquitas sibi / but
carnal men speak carnally / and so deceive them self with lies / for as
Gerson says: the more that sensual nature is oppressed and overcome for god /
the more grace we receive / and our inward man is daily reformed unto thimage
of god with new visitations of grace. And therefore I may say that man is
conformed / unit and incorporate to god by werynge that most noble and
precious garment of pain and passion / which our savior Jesus lord and
maker of all creatures / did were and suffer in his own body in this life.
Hereunto says saint Gregore: The torment and pain that our lord suffered /
gloryfyeth him both inwardelye and outwardelye. In us also / it compels him
to come to grace that would not come. It teaches and enformeth the ignorant /
it keeps virtue / it defends from sekenes of sin / it quyckeneth the dull
person / it meketh the proud person / it crowns and rewards thinnocent /
and it stirs or moves man to suffer gladly death / whereby he may come to
everlasting life. Pri. Corin. xv. G.
Praises and thanks be to god the father / which has given unto us the
victory / through the death and passion of his son Jesus Christ Amen.

How we may consydre the passion of Christ with a mind to meruayl thereof.
The.iii. Chap
exhibit and showed before that time all signs and tokens of benignitye and
goodness. Was not this a wondrous and meruaylous thing? Who may sufficiently
meruayl of this thing / to considre and se the most wise / pure / myghtie /
holy / and the everlasting beauty of glory of god / to suffer so shamfull
death for so stynkyng carrion. In all these things we may well wonder and
meruayl of the great goodness and charity of god. For he of his infinite
charity made (of his own flesh and body / made reed with his own blood) a
reclamatorie or a lewer to call unto his mercy and grace / those wild hawks
and unkind people / the which by inordinate love to the flesh and the
world / had taken their flight from the hand and favor of the noble fawconer
our savior Jesus. Of the which hawks / speaks the prophet Osee saying: Osee.
ix. C.
Effraim quasi anis auolauit. Effraym has flowen away or taken her flight as a
wild hawke. Effraym is as much to say by interpretation as augmenta
encreasinges / and it may well signifye such people as here have their pleasure
in worldly honors and pastymes / and increase in them. Such people like unto
ungentle or wild hawks fly from the hand and favor or love of god / unto
the caryon of the body or of the world / and feed thereof. And if they will not
be reclaymed unto ye hand of this fawconer / neither by his calling or cryenge
/ nor yet by the showing of his lewre / that is by the remembrance of his
passion and death / they shall be left unto the power and hands of the rauenar
of hell the devil. Herunto our lord speaks by the wise man saying: Pro^^.
1. C.
Vocaui et renuistis, extendi manum meam, et non fuit qui aspiceret. etc. I
have called you (says our lord) and ye would not come. I have extended my hand
showing my lewre / that is gyuynge my benefytes unto you and specially mine
own precious body and blood / but there is none that will behold or regard
it and give to me due thanks therefore. And it follows: Ego quoque in interitu
vestro ridebo. And I shall laughe at you / when ye shall be devoured by the
deuyles of hell. We might here also show many other occasions of meruaylynge /
which be written in diverse places of this treatys / and specially in the
first particle of this part.

How we should consydre Christ's passion to rejoice and joy therein. The.iiii.
Chap.
Deu^. 32. C.
And therefore scripture says: Inundationes maris quasi lac sugent, et
thesauros altissimos arenarum. They shall suck as it were milk the swellynges
or inundations and tempests of the sea, and also the deep and hyd treasoures
of the sand or gravel. By this suckynge is signified the confortable swetnes
that we have in the receyuynge of the precious body of our lord / the which
we receive in the remembrance of the passion of our lord / and of the great
treasure that was hyd in the manyfolde pains and sorrows that he suffered
before his death / whereby we were redeemed / which we ought at all times to
remember. And therefore the prophet David says: Psalm. 136.
Adhereat lingua mea faucibus meis si non meminero tui. I would my tunge should
cleue fast to my jaws if I do not remember the. Then does the tunge cleue
fast to the jaws / when a man nothing regarding spiritual pleasures /
enforces himself to follow worldly or carnal pleasures. The swetnes that
comes in to the soul by receyuynge of the sacrament redoundeth in to the
jaws or chekes that be well disposed / that is to say: it is not only comforth
to a good soul / but also to all the poures of the body / as the suckynge of
the salt water of the sea / whereby is signified the bitter pains of Christ's
passion. And these spiritual consolations be the treasures more precious then
gold and precious stone. Also they be hyd treasures / for no man knows them
/ but he that receives them. And as the prophet David says: Psalm. 18.
they be much more to be desired then gold or precious stone / and more
pleasant or swetter then honey or any honey comb. For they that be replenysshed
with this hyd treasure / that is / with thabundau^t remembrance of the passion
of Christ through the plentuousnes thereof: they speak words of swetnes and
comforth / and joy in a great justice / for they have the great plentuousnes of
graces. Esa. lvi. D.
And herunto the prophet Esaias says: Gaudete super eam gaud^o vniuersi qui
lugebatis super eam: et vt sugatis et repleamini ab vberibus consolationis
eius. etc. All ye that in time past mourned or wept in the consideration of the
passion of Christ: joy now thereof in co^siderynge the great profits that
comes thereof / suck them / that is / depely and inwardly considre them / that
ye may be replenisshed with the teates or pappes of his consolations. And also
ye shall milk those pappys that ye may abou^de in all spiritual pleasure by
the consideration of his great glory. In the remembrance of the passion of
Christ when we considre his most grievous pains / and how yt we were the cause
of them / through our unkindness and sins / then we suck out of it sorrow and
heaviness. And when we considre what profit comethe thereof unto mankind / then
we suck out of it great comforth and joy. And these two be the teetes or pappys
of the which the prophet Esaias speaks: and of the which the faithful people
suck great comforth in receyuynge the sacrament of the body of our lord.
From these pappys when they be sucked comes the milk of chastity and purity
of life / and also the swetnes of all virtue. And when they be milked with our
hands / that is / when not only we considre the passion of Christ as is
before said / but also in our lyung and works we conform our self thereunto
and work thereafter. Then we milk and draw them and so shall we flow in
thaboundaunce of spiritual pleasures thorough the consolation of the holy
ghost. We might also here for our purpose bring in the saying of our lord in
the gospel / where as he says: Lu^. 15. B.
Gaudium erit angelis dei in celo super vno peccatore penitentiam agente: quam
super nonaginta nouem justice. There is more joy in heaven unto the aungelles of
god upon one sinner converted from sin and doing true penance / then of
nynety and nine just and ryghtuous men that need no penance. Who is this one
sinner but our savior Jesus Christ / which though he were no sinner in deed:
yet he was reputed as the most great sinner / and so he would be reputed and
taken / for he came to bear our sins / and to do penance and to suffer for
all our sins.

How we may consider Christ's passion to resolve or relent our hertes in to
Christ and his passion. Chaptre. v.
FYftly we should consider the most blessed passion of our savior Li. 2. de
generatione and corruptio^^.
For as the philosopher says / that nothing noryssheth / but that which is
like unto the thing norysshed. Wherefore since this heavenly and spiritual food
that is the body of our lord does much norysshe / it folowethe that it must
be much like unto the person norysshed. The digestion or norysshyng is then /
when the meat is altered and converted in to the thing norisshed. And therefore
for that the material and corporal food or meat is converted in to that
body that is fed / it follows that the digestion must be both of the meat
and of the drink. Herunto it is written in the first book of the kings. Digere
paulisper vinum quo mades. 1. reg^. 1. C.
Digest that wine that thou have drunk. But in this spiritual meat: for
asmoche as it is not turned in to us / but contrary wise we be converted in
to it / it follows that the digestion must be in us unto the similitude of
this heavenly and wholesome meat. And this similitude or congruite of this
spiritual meat unto the person fed / stands in.v. things / that is in our
digestion or conversion in to this heavenly meat / in the similitude of image /
in the co^formitie of nature / in the fayrnes or good order of our conversation
/ and in the taking of our misery / by pains in a manner intolerable. And
these.v. been more largely declared by the great clerk and noble doctor called
Albertus Magnus: Distine^. 3. tract. 1. Ca. vi.
in his book de Eucharistia / that he wrote of the sacrament in a chapitre of
these same.v. things.

How we may considre Christ's passion to rest our selfs swetely therein.
Chaptre.vi.
SExtly we should considre this most blessed passion to rest Canti. 8. A.
Adiuro vos filie sion: ne euigilare faciatis dilectam donec ipsa velit. I
adjure and charge you: o you daughters of syon that ye do not vnreste /
unquiet or wake my dearebeloued spousesse / unto such time it shall please
her. This penetration and inward entering of our hertes in to our lord god /
and there restyng as we said before / is perceived and vnderstandyd by the
foresaid congruitie or conueniency taken of a similitude as we declared in the
fyfte consideration as ye may more clearly perceive by the declaration of the
noble foresaid doctor Albert in his said book de Eucharistia distinctione tertis
tractatu primo. Vbi supra.
Capi. vi.

The.v. particle is divided in to.xix. Chaptres.
The first is of.xx. profits and fruits that comes to man by the medytation
of Christ's passion / and that by thordre of the letters of the Alphabete or A.
B. C. First Chapitre.
THese profits been written by a devout father of thordre of saint Austen / a
reder of divinity or holy scripture / called Richard of Laudenburge in his
passionarie or book yt he wrote of the passion of our lord Jesus Christ and
for your comforthe we write them here.

The first profit. Animorum purgat feditatem.
Sanguis Jesus Christi emundat nos ab omni peccato. 1. Ioh. 1. C.
The blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse and make us clean from all sin. And in
his Apocalipse he says: Apoc. 1. B.
Lauit nos a peccatis nostris in sanguine suo. He has washed us from our
sins in his blood. And therefore Christ in his gospel called his passion a
baptism / because it purges us from our sins / sayng thus: Luce. 12. F.
Baptismo habeo baptisari et quomodo coartor vsque dum perficiatur. I must be
baptized with a certain baptism / and I am in great anguisshe unto it be
performed and done. And therefore the sinners that be in good will and mind to
cleanse their consciences from the spots of vices and sins / should often
remember the passion of Christ. Every mortal and dampnable sin / is as it
were a buckler or shield to defend the devil that he be not expelled from the
soul of the sinner / but Christ brake this buckler and shield by his passion
and death that he suffered on the cross. And therefore the prophet David said
of Christ. Arcum conteret et confringet arma et scuta comburet igne. Psalm. xlv.
He shall break the bow and the armor / and he shall burn in the fire the
sheldes or bucklers: that is / he shall burn and consume our sins (which be
the bucklers of the devil) with the fervent fire of charity / which he had
in his glorious passion that he suffered on the cross. And therefore we may say
that he burned.vii. bucklers / that is the.vii. deedly sins with the foresaid
fire of charity. First pride / by the inclynation and bowynge down of his
heed / for by that bowynge down of his heed: it seamed as that he would have
fled from the solemn title that was written above his cross: Iohis. xix. D.
Jesus naza renus rex iudeorum. This is / Jesus of Nazareth ye king of Iues.
Secondly he consumed envy by thextention and castyng abroad of his arms / as
ready to receive and half his enemies for the great love he had unto them.
Thyrdly / he burned the bukler of avarice or couitice / in his large gifts
that he gave in his passion. And hereto sath saint Barnarde: Learn thou
christian how much thou ought to love thy savior Christ / which gave him
self unto the death for our redemption / he gave his flesh unto us in meat /
his blood to our drink / the water of his side / to wasshe us / his garments
/ to his crucifiers / his body / to his disciples / and his mother / to his
disciple Johan. Fourtly he burned sloth by his wylfull and spedy coming to
his passion. Fyftly he consumed wroth / by his silence and soft or gentle
speech. Sextly he distroyed glotony / by the drynkyng of asel and gall. And
seuently / he overcame lychery / by the opening and woundynge of his side. And
therefore we may say well that the meditation and remembrance of the passion of
Christ / does purge and cleanse the fylthynes of our souls.

The.ii. profit. Bellatorum roborat pusillanimitatem.
THe remembrance of the passion of Christ does conforte and strength
warryours or fyghters / and that as well in just corporal batel / as in
spirittuall. Of corporal batell it appeared in the noble emperor Constantine /
which caused the sign of the cross to be borne before his host or army / to
the intent that the passion of Christ should give strength unto his knights
and sawdiours that faught under that baner of the cross / and so it did. Li.
1. Ca. v.
For as we read in Historia tripertita / when their enemies came against them /
he that bare the baner of the cross was sore afraid / and for that fear / he
would not bear that banar but took it unto an other man / and so fled from ye
field / but or that he could convey him self away / he was wounded and slain
/ where as the other person that bare the baner of ye cross / through the
virtue of the passion of Christ / was saved from all hurt / though often times
he were in great danger of his enemies / and many darts shot at him which
all did light in the baner and cleued fast therein. The passion of Christ does
also strength us in our spiritual battle / for thereby only we opteyne
victory. Herunto speaks saint Paul: Pri. corin. xv. G.
Deo gratias qui ded it nobis victoriam per dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.
Praised and thanked be god that has given to us the victory by the merits
of our lord Jesus Christ.

The.iii. profit. Christianorum excitat tepiditatem.
IT also exciteth and stirs the dulnes and coldness of christians unto
devotion. And herunto saint Paul says: Recogitate eum qui talem sustinuit a
peccatoribus contradictionem. Heb. 12. A.
etc. Remember him that suffered such co^tradiction of sinners against him
self / that is / such rebukes / dispisynges and shameful death that ye by
such remembrance should not faint or wax dull in your minds. As if he
said: If ye have in mind the passion of Christ / ye shall have no tediousnes
or dulnes in your good and meritorious works.

The.iiii. profit. Diabolorum fugat potestatem.
IT chaseth away the power of the deuyles. Ser. 19. de s^tis i^ fine.
And therefore saint Austen says: The sign of the cross chaseth away from us
our gostly enemy / if so be that god inhabit our hertes by often remembrance of
his passion. Pri. reg. 16. D.
We read that David with playenge on his harp / chased away the evil spirit
from king Saul. Not yt there was so great virtue in the herpe / but in the
sign of the cross figured and signified by the tree of the herpe and
thextention or streynynge of the strings. And therefore at every suggestion or
temptation of the devil / it is expedient for us to have recours unto the
meditation of ye passion of Christ and to the sign of the cross / of the
which the devil is afraid / and by it he is chased away like as the dog is
afraid and fleith away when he seith a staff lyfted up. And no meruayll / for
through the virtue of the passion of Christ the which he suffered on the
cross / the devil was smyten down and overcome.

Herunto speaks the prophet Esaias / saying: Esa. 30. B.
A voce domini pauebit Assure virga percussus. Assure smyten with the rod of
god / shall fear the voice of god. 1. Pe^. 5. C.
Assure is asmoche to say by interpretation / as Negotiator / a merchant that
labors in many places or labors / and it signifies the devil / the which
laboryng and ronnynge about the world / searches whom he might devour / he
is never idle / but for as much as he was ons smyten with the rod of the
cross in the passion of Christ. Therefore he is greatly afraid when so ever he
sees the sign of the cross made of that person that faithfully calls on
the father / on the son / and on the holy ghost / saying: In nomine patris: et
filij: et spiritus sancti. Moreover like as a knight or any other valiant man
overcome in battle / would be ashamed to abide in that chamber or place / where
as his fall or vaynquesshynge were painted so the devil overcome through the
passion of Christ / will in no meanys abide in that soul / where as he sees
the passion of Christ lively painted by diligent remembrance thereof.

The.v. profit. Erroneorum reuocat pusilla nimitatem.
THe meditation of the passion of Christ does call again those that been in
error. For Christ has made a caller or a lewer of his own body / dyed /
made reed with his own precious blood, to call again his hawks / the which
has flowen away from the hand of the noble man / that is / the soul of them
that have forsaken Christ by sin or error. Osee. 9. C.
Of whom the prophet Osee says: Effraim quasi auis auolauit. Effraim has
taken his flight like unto a wild hawke. Effraim is asmoche to say by
interpretation as fat or increased / and it signifies those persons that be
increased and made fat in worldly and carnal pleasures / or in following of
their own froward wylles and sensual reasons. Such persons have taken their
flight from the love of god / and if they will not return and come again to
the voice of the caller or preacher / or at the showing of his lewer / that is
/ at the remembrance of the passion of Christ / he will dimysse them / leave
them to the rauynous faucououre of hell / to the devil. It is written by the
prophet Hyeremye / that our lord says thus. Heir. 3. A.
Reuertere ad me: et ego suscipiam te. Though thou haste done never so many
sins / or followed all hereses / yet return to me / and I shall receive the.
Also our lord says by the prophet Esaias. Esa. xliiii. D.
Reuertere ad me quod redemi te. Return to me thou sinner or erroneous
person / for I have redeemed the and bought the again with my precious blood
and passion. Take heed unto this calling / and obey thereunto / for I assure
you it is much perilous and dangerous to withstand it. And it apereth well by
the words of our lord spoken by the wise man saying: Prouer. 1.
Vocaui et renuistis: extendi manum meam: et non erat qui aspiceret: ego quoque
in interitu vestro ridebo. I have called you and ye refused to come to me. I
have extendyd my hand with great gifts and benefits. I have showed unto you
my lewer / shed my precious blood for you / and ye would not regard these
things / and therefore I shall be glad and joyful of your perdicion.

The.vi. profit. Flagiciorum dibilitat pronitatem.
THis meditation of the passion of Christ does enfeble / make weyke and subdue
our pronitie and redynes unto vice. In manual Cap. xxii.
And therefore saint Austen says: When so ever my foul cogitation does move
me: then I ru^ne to the wounds of Christ. When the flesh or the sensualytie
thereof does oppress me: I rise again thoroughe the remembrance of the
wounds of my lord god. If the fire of carnal co^cupisce^ce inflame my me^bres
/ it is quenchyd by the remembrance of the son of god. Also Origene says:
Such is the virtue of the cross / that if it be in the sight of man / and
faithfully holden and kept in his heart / so that fervently and devoutly that
man behold and remember the death and passion of Christ / there shall no
concupiscence / no carnal motion / no fury or anger / nor any envy overcome
that person / but suddenly at the presence and sight of that passion / all vice
and sin shall be chased and driven away.

The.vii. profit. Gaudiorum donat vbertatem.
IT gives unto man great plenty of spiritual joy. Esa. 12. B.
Hereunto speaks the prophet Esaias / saying: Haurietis aquas in gaudio de
fontibus saluatoris. Ye shall draw from the profound and deep mystery of the
pity and mercy of god / waters / that is / abundaunce of tears / in joy of
devotion / from the wellys and fountayns / that is / from the wounds of our
savior Christ / the which at one time did shed forth blood in great
abundaunce / but now daily and continually they bring forth the incessable
waters of grace. Wherefore the devout soul resting in this meditation says in
the canticles: Sub vmbra illius quem desideraueram sedi: et fructus eius duicis
gutturi meo. Canti. 2* A.
I have sitten and rested me under the shadow of him whom I desired / and his
fruit is pleasant to my mouth and tastynge. And therefore Celestine says:
those holy saints and servants of god been dyed in the blood of the most
holy that shed his blood for them when they be crucified with Christ crucified
/ that is when they have compassion of his sorrowful pains of death / and joy
in his love and with his joyful love drinking his blood / and eating his
flesh / embrasynge or halsynge with great pleasure his cross and paynfull
death / lyekynge and suckyng his wounds / entryng in to his most loving heart
that was opened with a spear / and naylynge them self fast to him unseparably
with the nails of true and faithful love. These persons I say ben dyed and
colored with the blood of Christ.

The.viii. profit. Horrorum vitat perpetuitatem.
THis meditation of the passion of Christ often remembered / does deliver us from
the pains of hell. And herunto saint Paul says: Colos. 2. C.
Expolians principatus et potestates. glosa (...). inferni. Our savior Christ
spoilynge the principates and powers of hell of their pray / that is of Adam /
Noe / Abraham / and all other ryghtuous persons brought them to heaven with
great power. And therefore who so will not occupy his mind with the meditation
of the passion of Christ / it is to be feared of his dampnation. Omelia. 15.
For as saint Gregory says: The word of god / and specially of the passion of
Christ / is the meat and food of ye soul / and as a quasye or seek stomach
casts up the meat that it receives: so that soul is seek that forgets
the word of god / herd of the preacher. But as that person is in peril of
death that can not receive or keep his meat / so he is in peril of eternal
death that does not remember and live accordyngly to the spiritual food of the
soul. Also saint Barnarde says: It may be thought that that person shall be
eternally dampened by the ryghtuous judgment of god / that in this time of grace
is unkind unto Christ's passion / and therefore unworthy the fruit thereof.

The.ix. profit. Ingeniorum illuminat ceci^atem.
IT is also an ointment to oynt the blind yen of our soul* and herunto says
John^ in his Apocalipse: Apoc. 3. D.
Collirio ^^^unge oculos tuos vt videas. Anoynte the yene of thy soul with the
blood of Christ that thou myghtest se. Super canti^ sermo. lxii.
And saint Barnarde says / There is nothing of so great efficacitie and
virtue to purge and quycken the sight of our soul / as is the continual and
diligent remembrance of the wounds and passion of Christ. Pri. Cor. 2. A.
And therefore said saint Paul: Non iudicaui me scire aliquid inter vos: nisi
Iesum Christum et hunc crucifixum. I judged and thought my self to know
nothing but Jesus Christ crucified. So saint Laurence by the sign of ye
cross did give sight unto them that were blind / and so converted them unto
the light of the faith. In legenda ^ius.
The meditation of the passion of Christ does give unto the remembrer three
manner of knowledges. First is the knowledge of god / for thereby we know what
mercy and charity he has to us, Secondly: thereby we know ourselfe / for by
it we se manifestly of what dignytie and how precious our souls be in the
sight of god sith that our savior Jesus god and man would put him self to the
death for to redeem our souls. The third knowledge is of sin / for thereby we
know most manifestly how much god the father did hate sin / sith for the
destruction thereof he would not spare his natural and only son / but gave
him to the death for to destroy sin.

The.x. profit. Iustorum letificat mortalitatem.
IT makes a man ready and glade to dye. Salath. vi. D.
And therefore saint Paul bearing the signs and tokens of the wounds of our
lord Jesus Christ in his body said: Cupio dissolui et esse cum Christo: mihi
viuire Christus est et mori lucrum. Philip. 1. C. D.
I couit to be dissolved and separate from this body / and so to be with
Christ. I live here in Christ / and for to magnify Christ / and to dye / it
should be great advantage and profit to me. In legenda ^ius.
So saint Andrew went gladly to the death of the cross / saying: Hayle holy
cross take me from the compaigney of mortal men / and render or give me to my
master Christ that he by the / might receive me / that by the bought and
redeemed me. Also I read how that a certain pagane and tyrante meruaylynge how
that the Christians might suffer so great torments and pains and why they
went so gladly unto the death? It was answered to him by the brother of saint
Victor / how that they have the remembrance of the passion of Christ
imprinted in their heart / and therefore reme^bryng what he suffered for them /
they with great gladness suffer all pains and death for his name and love. And
the judge heryng this answer / commanded to put him to death / and after that
his body to be opened and his heart drawn out / and so to be kut and divided /
and therein they found the form and shappe of the cross and the crucifix most
subtilie and curiously made of synewes and veins.

The.xi. profit. Lesorum reconsiliat contrarietatem.
THe meditation of the passion of Christ reconsileth enemis and induces a man
to the love of god and of his neghbor. Iohi^s. xii. E.
And so our lord said in the gospel: Si exaltatus ^ue^o a terra: omnia
traham ad meipsum. If I be exalted from the earth (signifienge thereby his
crucifieng) I shall draw all things unto me by my love. Colos. 1. C.
Also saint Paul says: Pacificans per sanguinem crucis: sieve que in terris:
sieve que in celis sunt. He did reconsile and pacify by his blood that he
shed on the cross / both those things that were in earth and those that were
in heuens. He that fervently reme^breth the passion of Christ / is all drawn
in to the love of god and in to the love of his neighbor. And therefore saint
Barnard says: Ser. xx. super cautica.
O sweet Jesus / the cup of passion that thou drank for us / does cause the
to be loved of us above all things. There is nothing that moves us so much
to the love of god / as the passion of Christ / in the which he more labored
and suffered more pain / and had more contradiction then in the creation of all
the world. For in his passion and the act of our redemption some did
contrary him in his words / some did ley in a wayt to take him with a defaut
in his acts and deeds / some did scorn and mock him in his torments and
pains / and some did rebuke him on the cross at his death. Wherefore who so
ever fervently does remember this passion of Christ / is drawn and reuysshed
unto the love of Christ god and man / and so consequently he is drawn unto
the love of his neighbor / for ye one can not be had without ye other.

The.xii. profit. Meritorum recompensat exiguitatem.
IT also increases our merits / herunto speaks saint Austen saying: In
manuali. ca. xxi.
What so ever grace of merits or goodness that I want / I do usurp and take it
unto my comforth of the wounds of my savior Jesus Christ / for great mercy
flowethe from him / nor their wants no conduites: by the which they may
flow unto me. Those py^pes and conduites ben the wounds of my savior Christ
/ which be full of mercy / full of pity / swetnes and charity. And hereof we
may perceive first / that this meditation suppleyth in us that grace and those
good meritorious deeds / which other wise we be negligent to labor for.
Secondely it may appear that there is no penance / that may be compared to
this inward and feruente meditation. And therefore says that great learned
doctor Albertus Magnus: that this meditation is more profitable / than that a
man should fast one hole year in bread and water / or that every day by one
hole year he should say one hole David psalter / or if he should discipline and
scourge him self every day unto the effusion of his blood. And no meruayll /
for without the passion of Christ / all our acts and deeds ben unprofitable /
as says the master of the sentence: Distinc. 16. libro tertio.

The.xiii. profit. Nocume^torum fugat inopinabilitatem.
THis meditation of the passion of Christ does preserve a man from many
perils that may come suddenly before we have any consideration or knowledge of
them. Herunto it is written in the Apocalipse: that our lord commanded by his
angel to certain aungelles / to whom he had given in co^maundme^t to trouble
and punisshe the people of the world / saying: Apoc^. 4. A.
Nolite nocere terre et mari neque arboribus: quoadusque signemus seruos dei
nostri in frontibus eorum. Noy not nor hurt the earth nor the sea / ne yet the
trees / unto such time we have marked the servants of our lord god in their
forheedes: that is with the sign of the cross / and that we do by the
meditation of the passion of Christ. In figure hereof the angel that did kyl
and sley the first gotten both of man and of be thoroughout all Egipte / did
spare and save hermles the Iues: Exodi. xii. D.
whose houses or posts of their doors were sprynkeled with the blood of the
lamb. Capi. iii.
Also saint Gregory in his second book of his Dialoges shows yt when one
certain malicious person purposing to poison saint Benedict: did give unto him
wine mixted with poison / he made the sign of the cross and anon the cup
brake in to pecys / and so escaped the peril of death / thoroughe the virtue of
the cross.

The.xiiii. profit. Orthodoxorum speificat timiditatem.
IT also gives great hope and trust unto faithful people And herunto saint
Barnarde expounynge these words of the canticle: Ser. lx. super canti^ canti
little. 2. D.
In foraminibus petre. says thus: I shall speak these things / I shall sure
abide and rest in the hooles of the stone / that is in the wounds of my
savior / for I have set my feet surevpon that stone / though the world frown
and be troubled with me / and the flesh or sensuality strive against me /
and also the devil ley in await of me: I shall not fall / for I have set my
fete and affection or love upon a sure stone / I have offendyd in a greuouse
and dampnable sin / my soul thereby shall be troubled or vexed / but it shall
not be utterly cast down by despair: for I shall remember the wou^des of my
savior Jesus / for he was wounded for my sins. In manuali. ca. xxiii.
Also saint Austin says / Longius opened the side and heart of my savior
Jesus for me / that I might enter therein. And I have entered therein and do rest
there surely and quietly. The nails and the spear do call and cry unto me /
that I may be truly reconsiled unto Christ: if that I will love him.

The.xv. profit. Peccatorum aduocat viuacitatem.
THis meditacion induces and brings to man the grace of god / which is the
life of the soul / and therefore saint Bernard says. As often as that person
that deuoutely reme^breth the passion of Christ bre^^eth and receives brethe
again: so often he receives a new gift of grace / and grace is the life of the
soul. Phisiciens don say that when a sick man wepyth: it is a sign and token
of life. So when a sinner wepyth for compassion of the passion of our lord: it
is a sign of the life of grace and quickenes of the soul. And therefore says
the prophet Hieremy in his lamentacions. Tren^. 4. D.
Spiritus oris nostri x^s dominus captus est in pecatis nostris, cui dicimus.
In vmbra tua viuemus. Our lord Christ the spirit of our mouth (that is to
say / the spirit whereby our soul lives / like as the body lives by the
air or brethe received at the mouth) This spirit Christ (I say) giuynge
life unto the soul: is taken in our sins / that is / he suffered pain and
death for our sins. We shall live in his shadow / that is / we shall have the
life of grace thrughe the devout and fervent remembrance of that his death and
passion. Mat. 27. F.
And so Christ by his blessid passion does give the life of nature / the life
of grace / and the life of glory. First I say he gives the life of nature /
for deed men after his passion and resurrection did rise unto life again / and
appeared unto many in Jerusalem. Secondly he gives the life of grace / for
many after his passion were converted unto the faith. And he gives also the
life of glory / as it well appeared in the thief / to whom he said (wha^ he was
fast nailed on the cross) Hodie mecu^ eris i^ paradiso, Luce. 23. F.
This day shall thou be with me in glory. In ser. pri. in die sanc^ Andree.
Also hereunto speaks saint Bernarde / saying. The tree of the cross (if
there be any man that will gader it by fervent meditacion) does burgyn and
bring forth life / it fructifieth joy and gladness / it droppeth oil of
confort / and it sweteth the balm of spiritual graces. This tree of life is no
wild and unfruitful tree, Ser. lxxiiii. de tpere. E.
to them yt will gader it. Also saint Austin says: Ite^ ser. xix. de (...). H.
The blood of the phisicien is shed to make a medecin for the mad and sick
soul. The soul and spouse of Christ, says in the canticles: Canti. 2. A.
Sub vmbra illius que^ desideraui: sedi et fructus eius dulcis gutturi meo. I
have sittten and restyd under ye shadow of him in whom is all my desire and
confort / and his fruit is sweet and pleasant unto my taste. For who so ever
does sauourly taste of the fruit of the cross: all carnal pleasure shall be
unsavory to him.

The.xvi. profit. Quassatorum mitigat aduersitatem.
THis meditacion of the passion of Christ, does mitigate and swage all
tribulacions / and does give patience in all adversities / and so makes us
quiet. Hebr. 12. A.
Herunto speaks saint Paul / sayng: Recogitate eu^ qui tale^ sustinuit a
p^to^ribus co^tradictione^ aduersus semetipsu^, vt non fatige mini animis
vestris deficie^tes. Remember him that suffered great contradiction of sinners
against him self / that is / such rebukes / slanderous words / and at last
most painful death / that ye by such remembrance should not faint in your
minds when ye suffer adversities. As if he should say; ye can not faynte or
be ouercom in your tribulacions, if ye have the devout remembrance of his
pains and passion. Au. 1. lib. de co^flu. virtu tu^ et vitiotu^ ca. ix.
And this approves saint Austin / saying: There is nothing so hard or
painful: but yt it may be easily borne, if the passion of Christ be quick
and fervent in our minds. And this is ye reason hereof (for the less passion
or pain is not perceived, or at leest it is not regarded: where as ye more
grievous pain or passion is felt, or does occupy the mind of man. And
therefore Auicenna says / that such persons as be in fervent agues or axes,
does not feel or perceive the apostume. And so the passion of Christ, if it
be ferue^tly remembered: it puts away all worldly tribulacion. For like as
wine (though it be sumwhat strong and sharp of it self) if it be myxte with
sugar and other spyces / or be put in the potecarye spiced bag, and so go
through it: it is made most dulce and pleasant: So the tribulacio^s of this
world / if they be joined and mixte with the remembrance of the passion of
Christ, they be much pleasant and confortable to the soul. And therefore our
lord says unto his spouse the soul in his canticles: Ca^tic. ^. A.
Dabo tibi poculum ex vino condito. I shall give to the Ipocras for thy drink
/ that is wine made pleasant with spices. And this signifies ye wine of
worldly tribulacio^ or adversity / wha^ it is joined and mixte with the
meditacion of ye passion of Christ. Primo macha^. 6. D.
Also we read in ye book of ye Machabeis / how that king Antiochus, when he
should fight against the Iues: he showed unto his Olephantes and put in their
sight the blood / that is the red color and licour of the grape and of ye
molbery / to the intent yt those Olephantes should be provoked to fight, and to
be the more quick in bataile. In like manner the knights of Christ, according
to thexample of these Olephantes, should be animate and quickened to suffer
patiently all tribulacio^s and adversities, when so ever they here, se, or
remember the blood and passion of Christ / which was pressed out of his body
at his passion: as ye wine is pressed out of the grape. Moreover the prophet
Hieremy says: Tren^. 3. G.
Dabis eis scutum cordis laborem tuum. Thou (good lord) shall give unto them a
buckeler or a shield for their heart or soul / yt is thy labor, passion, or
death. This buckler or shield receives without any peril unto ye soul, al
manner of darts / and specially.iii. manner of darts / that is, loss of
goods, infirmities of the body, and contumeliouse or rebukyng word, with this
buckeler (that is with the fervent meditacion of ye labor and pain or passion
of Christ) a man ouercu^meth almighty god in patiently suffryng his
corrections and loving visitatio^s. He also ouercu^meth the devil, in auoidyng
his snares and temptacio^s. And thyrdly he ouercu^meth him self in resistyng
all carnal mocio^s and passions of ire or wrath / and in patiently suffering
all infirmities of the body. And thus the remembrance of the passion of Christ
does mitigate thaduersities and troubles of such as be troubled therewith. And
as ye se yt a little floode or river does lose his name wha^ he is entered into
ye see or into a greater water: so I like manner al labors, pains, and
passions, compared to ye labors, pains and passion of Christ, lose their
name, and be not to be called pains.

The.xviii. profit. Rectoru^ confirmat stabilitatem.
THe meditacion of ye passion of Christ, makes rightuouse and good men stable
in faith and in good works. In poli^ro. li. ^o. ca. 35.
We read that there is a certain well in England of this nature / that if a
tree be put therein, and continue there any long space or time: it is turned
into a stone: So spiritually, if a christian continue long in this well yt is
in the remembrance of the wou^des and death of christ, he shall be turned
into a stone / that is / he shall be constant and stable in all virtue and
goodness, for tha^ he shall abide fastened with christ unto ye cross by
patience. In stimulo amoris lib. pri. Capi. 1.
Herunto says saint Bonauenture: O marvelous death and passion of Christ,
which does allienate and seclude the remembrer from death spu^all and also
eternal / and not only that: but also it makes him angelical: and nothing
else to consider and think, but Jesus Christ crucified. He will bear his cross
with Christ: and so he bears in his heart Jesus Christ, who co^teineth in his
hand and power both heuyn and earth. And so for ye love of Christ he shall
bear most easily and suffer pacie^tly al troubles and pains. He would be
crowned with thorns with Christ and for christ: and christ shall crown him
with the crown of glory / and so, as ye may perceive, such a fervent
meditacion of the passion of Christ, does greatly stable us in goodness.

The.xviii. profit. Supernovum Placat displicentiam.
THis meditacion does strongly swage and pacify ye wrath and displeasure of
god and al his saints. Super cantie^ sermon. 43.
Herunto says saint Bernard: The remembrance of ye labors and pains of my
savior Jesus does erect and strength me in all adversities / it does repress
me and keep me i^ al prosperites / and it also gydeth or ledeth me by a sure
way in this life / where as is now joy, now sorrow, now pleasur, now pain. etc.
This meditacion puts away all peryls. It reconsileth me to ye high judge of
ye world, whiles it declares unto me him to be very meke and mylde here in
earth / to whose majesty all angels in heaven do reverence, and have him in
reverent fear. Also the same saint entraytyng these words of Job. Job. vi. A.
Vtina^ appe^deren tur peta^ mea quibus ira^ merui* etc, In sermon de passd^^.
says thus: Good lord, behold ye face of thy son christ / which was
obedient to thy will unto his death / and (good lord) let never ye printes of
his wou^des depart from thy sight and remembrance. Consider (good lord) what
satisfaction he has done for our sins to reconsyle us unto the. I would that
thou (god lord) would wey and pondre our sins in a balance with the pains
that thy innocent son Jesus suffered for them. And then (good lord) it
should well appear that his pains excedeth our sins / so that thou rather
show thy mercy unto us for the merytes of his passion / then to keep our
sins in thy remembrance to revenge and punysshe them.

The.xix, profit. Terrenorum pessundat vanitatem.
IT also makes man to contempne and set at naught the world with all the
pleasures thereof. Gal. vi. D.
And therefore saint Paul said. Mihi mundus crucifixus est et ego mundo. The
world is crucified to me: and I to the world / as if he said: I despise the
world and the world dispiseth me. Auicen recites how that a certain man by
strong ymaginacion that he had ymaginynge him self to be a leprouse man:
thereby he was made a leprouse man: So in like manner, if a man fervently and
devoutly continue in the remembrance of the passion of Christ: he may so have
a great sorrow in his heart, and true compassion of ye passion of Christ, and so
suffer pain with him / and so consequently al Worldly pleasure shall be bitter
and paynfull unto him. In stimulo amoris lib. ^mo. ca. 9.
Herunto says saint Bonauenture. Who so fervently reme^breth the passion of
Christ, he desires to be crucified with Christ Jesus / he reputeth and
thinks him self to be in servitude, bondage, and misery / he does sygh and
sorrow / and is in continual heaviness, unto ye time he be all to washed or
drowned in the blood of Christ / and so tra^sfourmed into his lord crucified /
and if he be not kept in the blood of his savior, he thinks him self no man
/ yea worse tha^ a beast, if he be not clad with the passion of Christ.
Therefore, who so ever does often and fervently remember the passion of
Christ, he shall little regard the vanities of this world, and set them at
naught.

The.xx. profit. Viatorum gubernat prosperitate^.
THe meditacion of the passion of Christ does govern and direct men living
in this world, unto the life of eternal felicity. For the passion of
Christ, is the kings high way / the right and compendiouse way to cum to
the kingdom of god in heuyn. And therefore our lord says: Ego sum via,
veritas, et vita. I am the way, Ioh. 14. A.
the truth, and the life eternal. And in an other place he says: As Moses
did exalt and set up a brazen serpent in ye wilderness, Ioh. 3. B.
to the intent yt who so beheld that serpent, should be delivered from the
venimons stingyng of ye burning serpent: Num^. 21. C
so it was convenient and necessary for our salvation, yt the son of a vyrgin
should be exalted upon the cross / yt who so ever would behold him with true
formed faith, should not peryssh: but have everlasting life / and that this
life should be given to us: Christ suffered his passion. And saint Austin
says: Super Job. tractat. 12.
As thoo persons that beheld the brazen serpent set upon a pole in the
wilderness by Moses, were delivered from peril of death (as we said before) so
now, who so ever be stynged or bytten by the suggestion or craft of the devil:
let him behold (with a faithful affection) Christ hanging upon the cross
/ and he shall have comfort / for there death was ouercum and slain / but our
savior Christ does live, and ever shall live. But that he might ouercum
death, he was clad with death for a little time. Death might never be ouercum,
but by life. And who is this life, but our savior Christ? And so by his
death we all have life. Numer. 35. D.
This was well fygured in the old testament: where as it is said, that such
as were banysshed from their cities: should return again to their
inheritance after the death of the high priest or Bishop / and not before: So
the faithful people of god, banysshed from their inheritance, the kingdom of
glory: might not cum thereunto again, unto the death of Christ our high
Bishop. But now by the merits of his passion, and the remembrance thereof: we
that been exyled in this vale of misery and tears, may freely enter into the
kyngedome of heuyn / and possess that glory promised unto us. And hereunto
says saint Austin: We be called by the merytes of the death and passion of
our redemer Jesus Christ, from the darkness, unto light / from death, unto life
/ from corrupcion, to incorrupcion / from our exyle and banysshement, unto our
country and inherytaunce / from sorrow, to joy / and from this world, unto
heuyn. And therefore our savior Christ / for that he might exalte and lift
us up to the glory of heuyn: he in a manner put him in one scale or one part of
the balaunce, and us in the other. He put him self to most paynefull and
shameful death / and us in the merits of his virtuous life and death. And so
he drew his balaunce so low / that is, by mekenes and pains sufferyng, he
descended so low, that he lyfted up all his elect people unto heuyn. And
hereunto our lord says: Ioh. 12. E.
Ego si exaltatus fuero a terra: omnia traham ad me ipsum. If I be exalted from
the earth, from all worldly pleasures, and put unto the pain of the cross /
ascendynge it as my chief palfray to fight against mine enemies / and so as a
valiant knight subduynge them under my fete, and ouercummynge all their might
and power: I shall draw unto me by my charity and patience, all mine elect
people from all the parts of the world / where so ever they be, to reign
with me in glory for evermore.

In the passion of Christ is contained all perfection of all the orders of
angels. Second Chapter.
IN the most blessed passion of Christ is contained all perfection, fayrnes,
and beauty of all the blessed spirits and angels in heuyn. First and above
all other Esa. 66. A.
and upon them that reverently feryth and kepyth his commandments: So it may
be said that almighty god sytteth and restyth in this most blessed passion, as
in his Throne / for therein appeared the most excellent humility, humanity,
veneracion, and reverence of Christ, unto the divine and eterne majesty.
Fourthly in this blessed passion Phil. 2. B.
Fyftely, in this Job. 41. D.
that there is no power upon the earth, yt may be compared unto his power / but
Christ by his passion and death ouercam Ioh. 12. E.
And therefore he said: If I be exalted from the earth upon the cross: I shall
draw unto me all things / that is, all his elect people. Wherefore if any
person have true faith into god, and love god: let him not ascribe that to his
own merits: but rather to the merits of the passion of Christ. Ioh. 6. E.
For no man may cum to him by true faith and love, except he be drawn by
almighty god / by his grace / and this grace we have by the merits of the
passion of Christ.

Factus est principatus super humerum eius: Esaias. 9. B.
His principality and kingdom is made upon his sholder / that is, in that he
bare the cross and suffered the pains and death of the cross: he gat his
kingdom / and so bought Date eleemosina^, Luce. 11. F.
and ecce oi^a mu^da su^t vobis: Give almose, and all Ma. 27. F.
and opening of his heart with the spear. And in token hereof, at the passion
of Christ, the veil of the temple was broken or divided into two parts /
that all the things that before were secret and hyd in the inner sacrate
temple, might be open and manifestly seen. And thus by these foresaid
conformities which the passion of Christ has with the orders of angels, it
is done most conveniently yt not only Christ should redeem mankind: but also
that he should most ordinately order, dispose, and repare the ruin and fall
of angels. For by the great love and charity which he had in the cross, he
kindled the fire of love in the hertes of his elect people toward god and
their neighbors / that such as followed and duly executed that fervent love:
were made and yet be made apt to repare the most high order called Seraphin.
By the true knowledge expressed in that blessed passion were his elect people
illuminate to the high contemplacyon of the knowledge of god and high
misteryes / that so they may be apt to the reparacyon of the second order:
called Cherubym.

Again for his great meaknes and reverence that Christ had in his blyssed
passion toward the high majesty of god / his elect people were provoked to
like meaknes and reverence and due honor to be rendered to the high majesty
of god / as far^e fourth as their frail nature would serve them / and so to
be apt to ye reparcyon of thordre called: Thrones. Morouer thorough the
example of his great pacyence and obedience unto the death of the cross / for
the which he was exalted of god, as we said before / he provoked his elect
people to overcome all vices and concupiscence by labor / abstinence and
affliccions / and to subdue all inordinate appetites unto reason / that no
vain / or inordinate thing should have any domynacyon in them / that so they
might be made apt to the reparation of the order called: Dominationes. And so
who so ever humbles himself: shall be exalted. And so truly to pass over all
the residue of thordres of aungelles / our savior Christ in his blyssed
passion gave example unto his servants to resist and overcome the suggestyons
and temptacyons of the devil: that they might be apt to the reparacion of the
Potestates. Also he gave unto them example of good conversation and virtuous
operacions / that they might ascend to the order of Virtues. He gave them also
example so to direct and govern their outward senses and inward mocyons /
and all other things that be under their cure that they might ascend unto the
Principates. Morouer he gave them example so to releue and comforthe the need
and necessities of other persons that be in need / that they might ascend unto
the Archau^gelles. And lest he gave them example so to instruct and teach the
ignorant / that they might be apt to ascend unto the order of Au^gelles.

In the passion of Christ is also contained the beatitude of men. Chaptre.iii.
IT may be declayrede that the true beatytude and bliss or joy of men is
contained in the passion of Christ: by the same reasons whereby we have now
declared that the beautye and perfeccyon of aungelles done shine in the said
passion. For to that clear knoweledge of treuthe which appeared in that
blissed passion, as we said before in thorder of Cherubin: correspondeth ye open
and clear vision of ye godhed, yt thelect people of god shall have in heuyn to
saciate and beatitie the reasonable or intellectable power of the soul.
Secondly to yt profou^de mekenes and reverence, whereby we said that the passion
of Christ has the perfection of the order of the thrones: correspondeth the
surety of bliss / wherewith the wrathful power of ye soul (commonly called
Vis irascibilis) is saciate. For on whom shall rest and continue ye spirit and
glory of god: but upon the meke person? Thyrdely to that excellent charity yt
was showed at the passion of Christ: correspondeth theternall fruicion and
love of the deity / wherewith ye will and reasonable appetite of man shall be
fulfilled / and this for the beatitude of the soul. Now for the.iiii. dowries
of the glorified body. First to that high dignity of presidencie yt our lord
had by his sufferau^ce and obedience unto ye death / for ye which he was exalted
to high dignity: correspondeth in ye glorified body agility / whereby he may do
what he will. Secondly, to yt great power and strength whereby our savior
ouercam death: correspondeth impassibilitie / that is, yt the glorified body
shall suffer no pain. Thyrdly, to that mighty operacion of virtue, whereby he
drew all things to him self: correspondeth subtility / whereby the glorified
body may penetrate all things. Fourthly, to that noblenes or principality for
ye which the prophet said of Christ: Esaias. 9. B.
Factus est pricipatus super humeru^ eius. His principality or noblenes is
made upon his shulder / and also of this noblenes or clerenes is said in the
gospel / where as christ said to his father: Ioh. 17. A.
Pater clarifica filiu^ tuu^. Father clarify thy son / or make known the
noblenes of thy son. To this noblenes (I say) correspo^deth ye fourth dowry of
thy glorified body, called clerenes / for tha^ our bodies shall be clear, and
shine as ye son / and so says our lord in ye gospel: Mat. 13. F.
Tu^c iusti fulgebu^t sicut sol i^ regno patris eoru^. Than after ye general
resurrection, ye rightuouse me^ shall be clear, and shine as ye son in ye
kyngedom of their father. Furthermore to the office and perfection of
archaugels and angels / which (as we said before) were showed in ye passion of
criste: correspo^deth the beauty or accide^tall glory called i^ latin Aureola /
a circle or a little crown / which is a special joy of ye soul given to man
for sum excellent act don i^ this life / and it is only given to martirs for
their martirdo^ / to virgins, for virginite kept for ye love of god / and to
doctors or prechers, for their tethyng ye truth of god. And thus it apereth
manifestly how yt in the blessed passion of Christ does shine (as in a most
pure glass) all the beatitude of man / and all the plentiousnes of grace and
glory. All glory (I say) that is both thessenciall glory of the soul that
consists in the vision / tencion / or surety / and fruicion of the deity that been called the.iii. dowries of the soul. And also the consubstanciall glory /
that is the.iiii. dowries of the body, and also the accidental glory. Wherefore
sith in Christ's passion is thexcellent manifestacion or declaracion of his
most high power / most high wisdom / and most high goodness: therefore this
passion is to all ye servants of god, a matter and cause of most excellent
joy and gladness. And therefore though men joy considering them self to be
redeemed by this glorious passion, and have great profit thereby / and also
angels joy, knowing their ruin repared by the same passion / considering
this thing as to their own joy and profit: Yet I believe, and so it is, that
both angels and men do more joy and be glad without comparison / referryng
all these things to god / and hoolly or all to gyder extendynge their
cogitacions and minds to the glory of god: than they did considering their
own glory and profit that they have by the said passion. Moreover, as here
appears the most high and inestimable charity and showing of the goodness of
god outwardely, to the great confort of angel and man: so I believe, and so it
is, that both angel and man in their most excellent and full manner don show
their love with great joy and gladness, glorifieng and praysyng and loving god
for that excellent gift eternally without end in glory.

In this passion also does shine the virtues theological / the gifts of the
holy ghost / the beatitudes of the gospel / and also the fruits of the
spirit. The.iiii. Chapter.
First in this passion appear the virtues theological. For this passion of our
lord is ye strength and fou^dacio^ of all christen faith. It is therection and
reysynge up of our hope / and also it is thinflamacion and kyndelynge of our
love and charity / for here he did offer him self for us. Secondly in this
passion don shine as in a glass the gifts of the holy ghost / the gift of
wisdom and understanding / ye gift of counsel and strength / of science / of
pity / and also of the fear of god / of the which we shall speak herafter in
diverse and singular chapiters.

Thirdly, in this passion don appear ye.viii. beatitudes / for this passion is
their fou^tayn and beginning / their allectiue and exemplar.

Who may be called so pore in spirit as Christ yt hyng naked upon Hebr. 5. C.
But than he more mourned our sins: than his own pain / as we shall show
hereafter. He had more compassion of us, than of him Ioh. 19. F.
And in token hereof he said, hanging upon the cross Sitio / I thyrste, and
desire the Luce. 10. F.
the which (where as the priest and Leuite passed by the wounded men, not
regarding him) washed his wounds with wine, and anointed them with oil /
byndyng up his wounds / and layeng the wounded man upon his b^est / that is
upon his own body / suffryng death for our sins / and so led him Apoca. 1. B
as in Christ, which as an innocent lamb was offered upon the cross for us /
wasshyng and clensynge our unclean and sinful hertes with his precious blood?
Ephe. 2. D.
ioynynge into one people of god / the Iues and the Gentiles / which also by
his passion did pacify us unto god Math. 5. A
Fourthely in the passion of Christ don clearly appear the.xii. fruits of the
spirit: Of the which saint Paul says. Gala. 5. D
Fructus spiritus est charitas, gaudium. etc. The fruits of the spirit, ben
these / charity, joy, peace, patience, lo^ganimitie, goodness, benignity,
mildenes or gentilnes, faith. For in this passion restyth the foundation and
strength of our faith, as concerning his obiecte or subject. It follows in
the words of saint Paul / continence, good manners, and chastity. All these
do manifestly shine in this passion, death, and cross of Christ / as we shall
declare more at large hereafter. And therefore it conveniently follows in
saint Paul. Ibidem.
Qui christi sunt: carnem suam crufixerunt cu^ viciis et concupiscentiis. Who
so be the childeren of Christ: they do cru^isy and subdue their bodies, and
also all vices and inordinate concupiscence. This said saint Paul, to show
manifestly unto us that these.xii. fruits do hang upon the most holy tree of
the cross / and such persons do take and gader them there: which conform
them self unto Christ crucified: For by virtuous operacions in following the
life and patience of our savior Jesus Christ: men be made virtuous / for
such behold the life and death of our lord with diligence / remember it by
often and fervent meditacion / and also have pleasure therein / and follow it as
their frailty will suffer them. And so they be made apt to the reparacion of
thorder of virtues / as we said before / and shall say more hereafter.

By the passion of Christ we have the efficacitie and virtue of all spiritual
goodness. The fyfte Chapter.
BY the fruitful and gloryouse passion of Christ, there is ministered unto us
habundantly the matter of all spiritual goods. For where is or should be our
gloriacion or reioicynge / our hope and gladness, but in one Christ, most high
and true goodness, and in the most preciouse treasure of his passion / from the
which all the sacraments of the Christ receive their virtue and efficacitie
/ which be to us as a most holsum medicyn against all our spiritual sekenes.
Also this most blessed passion is to us as a key that opens to us the
secrets of holy scripture / which opens: Apoc. 3. B.
and no man may than shyt it / and when it shitteth: no man may than open it.
Without Christ crucified and this key of his passion: it is impossible to
understand holy scripture. And this key fervently imprynted in our mind: all
things be manifest / as if they were in the clear light. For who so ever
desires to cum or attain unto the knowledge of the godhed: he must ascend
thereunto by the manhood and passion of Christ, as by the kings high way /
for by it he shall ascend by little and little unto higher things / as I
shall show unto you more plainly hereafter. For no man may attain to the high
knowledge of the godhed / and to the great swetenes and pleasure therein
contained: except he be first drawn up with a fervent and godly affection of
faith and love by the bytternes of the humanity of Christ, that he suffered
in his passion / as ye shall perceive hereafter. And the more that any man
presumes to ascend without this passion: the more deper shall he fall. For
this is the only way by the which we should ascend. This is the only yate
or entrance unto our most desired end. And briefly to speak / who so ever
desires to have eternal health, and the high crown of glory / or would
ascend to the perfection and high toure of virtues / or would obtain
knowledge and wisdom / or by pacyence / to stand strongely and euynly, as
well in aduersytie as in prosperytie / or to walk the sure way / or else
desires to taste of the bytternes of the passion of Christ / and drink the
most pleasant drink of his consolacion: he must bear Jesus Christ / I say
Jesus Christ crucified in his soul and body, by continual remembrance of his
passion, and pacyent sufferaunce of all adversities both corporal and
spiritual / and also absteyne from all other delectacion and consolacion. For
surely, carnal consolacion, and the contemplacyon of Christ's passion, do
never well accord in one person / for they be as contrary both in name and
in effect.

Nor the flesh or sensuality can have pleasure in that thing that deliteth
the spirit. Gala. 5. C.
For as saint Paul says / they be adversaries, and at continual war. But
halas, there be many that when they can not find or get heavenly or spiritual
consolacion: anon they search and labor for carnal or worldly conforte /
and so they shytte their souls from the consolacion of god / and they
rightuously want it. For it is very delicate / and not given unto such
persons as will receive any vain consolacion. For if the mind or soul have
any thing wherein it has pleasure outwardely: it shall remain without
inward pleasure. And contrary wise / if the spiritual delectacion be ones
perfectly tasted: all carnal pleasure is made unsavory to that soul.
Wherefore, if thou would have spiritual conforte: labor not therefore with
a double affection or desire / for so thou make thy self unworthy to receive
that godly and spiritual conforte. And hereunto says saint Bernarde: In
declamatio^ super eua^g. Ecce nos reliquimus omnia in fine.
He is unworthy the heavenly benediction and conforte, that labors therefore
with a double affection or desire. He labors with a double affection: that
purposes (if he can not get spiritual conforte) to labor for vain and
transitorye pleasures or conforte. And so therefore he is unworthy to receive
spiritual delectacion. Iosue. 5. C.


An example or figure hereof we read in scripture / how that after the
chylderen of Israel had ones tasted of the corn and fruytes of the land of
promission: the food of angels, Sapi. 16. C
called Manna / and given to them by god, was taken from them. By this Manna,
which was very delycate, and had in it self all delectacion and pleasant
taste of all manner of meats: is signified the swetenes and conforte of Christ
/ which is taken from religiouse persons, and from all Christians, after
that they begin to eat of the fruytes of the earth / that is, after that they
give them self to worldly and erthely delectacions or pleasures. And therefore
the true servant of god ought to say with the prophet David: Renuit consolari
anima mea, Psalm. 76.
scilicet exterius. That is, my soul has refused all outward and vain
consolacion. And it follows: Richard^.
Memor fui dei, et delectatus sum. I remembered god, and I had great delectacion
therein in all the powers of my soul.

And hereunto says one devout Doctor: The understanding of man is never
drawn perfitely unto the contemplacion of heavenly things: except the body be
first strongely drawn from all superfluouse things, and all his pleasures.
And hereunto accords saint Gregory / saying: If we cut and take away from
the body that which is to it pleasant: we shall shortly find that is
delectable to the spyryte. And that shall well appear in them that conform
their life unto our sauyoure Jesus Christ / whose life was all bitter and
paynefull from the beginning unto his death. And therefore our lord did not
give unto the Iues Manna: but in the deserte or wilderness / where as was no
delectable meat to be had for their refresshynge and conforte. And so in like
manner, the swetenes of grace and the taste of spiritual delectacion, is not
felt or perceived but of them yt transpose and put them self into the deserte
of their heart / that is, to repute the^ self forsaken of all creatures, that
they should not feel or receive any worldly or vain delectacions. And
therefore it is written by the prophet: Psalm. 64.
Pinguescent speciosa deserti et exultatione colles accingentur. The pleasant
places of ye deserte shall wax fat / and the hills shall be compassed with joy
/ yt is to say / those speciouse and pleasant places of desert / yt is, those
persons that make the^ self deserte and forsaken of the world, so that the
world cum not till them / that is, move them to any carnal, worldly, or vain
pleasure and delectacio^ / those persons (I say) wax fat in godly devotion and
consolacion / and those hills / yt is the hertes of them yt be fyxed in god:
be compassed and set about with great joy of heavenly confortes. And yt we
should cum unto this deserte: Mar. 6. D.
our lord moves us in ye gospel / saying Venite seorsum in desertu^ locu^,
et requiescite pusillu^: Cum ye into the desert or wilderness, and rest a little
/ that is, leave ye the pleasures of the world, and forsake them / and rest a
little / that is, fervently and deuoutely remember our lords pain and passion:
and ye shall find rest and confort to your souls. For as our lord says in
an other place: Ioh. 16. G.
In mundo, pressuram habebitis: in me autem pacem: Ye shall have trouble and
oppression in the world: but in me ye shall have peace and rest. Mat. 14. B et.
15. D.
Our lord fed the people twice in ye wyldernes / and not in any other place.
Also the Iues eat Manna in the wilderness, to signify that we can not have ye
consolacion of god, but in the desert / that is, when we forsake all worldly
pleasures. Of this wilderness it is written by the prophet Esaias / saying: Erit
desertum Libanus in Charmel: Esaias. 29. F
et Charmel in saltum reputabitur.

The desert or wood of Libane shall be as the mount of Charmeli / and Charmel
shall be reputed as a grene wood. Charmelus or Charmel, is as much to say by
interpretacion as a la^be / or tenderness. And it signifies, that who so ever
be in the spiritual deserte (of the which we spoke of before) he shall
perceive the tenderness and pains of our spiritual lamb Christ / and also
receive his delites and heavenly confortes / and so shall be grene and
flourisshyng in all virtues and spiritual consolations.

The seven gifts of the holy ghost are contained in this passion / and through
the fervent remembrance thereof, they may be opteyned. And first of the gift
of fear of god. The syxte Chapitre.
O My most dear beloved brother / thou may behold in this most glorious
passion of Christ (the which I am unworthy to mean) seven ascencions /
correspondynge to the seven fold grace or gifts of the holy ghost / that is,
the gift of wisdom and of understanding / of science, and goostly strength
/ of council, and of pity / and the gift of the fear of god. First (I say)
by the often, continual, and devout remembrance of the passion of our lord,
is given to man the gift of the fear of god / and that against the false
surety of this present life, and his most wicked promise / whereby many men be^
withdrawn from the love of god / and let from their true couersion unto
him. For this fere constreyneth men to do well, and with all their heart to
despise all worldly pleasures. And therefore a devout doctor says, yt fere is
ye auoidaunce of evil, and the prosecucion or winning of goodness. It is the
beginning of godly wisdom, and thexpulsion of ignorance. By fere, all the
perfection of actyue life, and also of contemplatyue is preserved and kept / so
that all bondage or servile fere be excluded: For who so ever through the
fervent and devout remembrance of this passion is crucified with Christ, to
thauoidaunce of evil, and gettyng of goodness / to the stablisshment of his
mind, and mekyng of his heart: thereunto he is prepared and induced by the gift
of ye fere of god / and that in this manner. A man seeing and considering that
the son of god and our lord god in the nature of man suffered so great pains
for our sins / and how he punisshed our sin so grievously in him self,
most innocent judge, and most pure and very god: More over, what pains,
rebukes, and turmentes he is worthy, which did yt wickedness and most
abominable syn / for which, the most innocent and amorous or lovely Jesus so
grievously was turme^ted. Thinking also herby, how much this his syn did
displease the high majesty of god / and how much god did abhor it: so much
I say he abhorred it, yt he would rather suffer his son / his own natural and
only son to dye, than that syn should reign in man / and it was more pleasure
to him to give his dear beloved son to the most shamfull death of the cross:
than yt he would suffer any longer time ye shamefastnes of our syn. Furthermore,
a man seeing and considering how much he offe^deth the high majesty of god, by
his continuau^ce in actually synnyng and offendyng his high goodness /
conte^pnynge or little regardyng the passion of Christ / and thereby his
redemption: but daily offendynge and doing as much as lies in him to crucify
Christ again, and put him to those most shameful and cruel turmentes. A
man (I say) considering all these things, no marvel though in such
consideracion he tremble and quake before the presence of god, whom he has so
grievously offended / and be ferefull, and shake as the aspen lefe yt is
continually blown and moved by the wind / and so by fere, think him self
worthy of him self, nothing else but destruction or da^pnacion / and so he may
in such consideracions utterly despise him self, and opteyne the fear of
god. Wherefore good devout brethern, let us have a recourse, and consider depely
our own vanities and sins / and also the high majesty and goodness of god,
whom we have so grievously offended. And so let us meke our self before him
as much as we may. For all that we can do, is to little / considering his
majesty and our wickedness. Let us therefore fere and be asshamed to lift up our
iyes unto heaven. Luce. 18. C.
But knock upon our breasts / and pray with ye Publican / yt he of infinite
goodness would be merciful to us sinners. It is a great mercy, if it would
please him to behold or look upon us, which have contempned and despised him
for a tryfle or a little vain pleasure of the flesh or of the world.
Wherefore (as is said) let us through the consideracion and fere of his majesty,
repute our self as naught / and herafter thynk our self most vile and
unworthy any goodness / and so let us arm our self against our wyckednes and
sin / and so be our own proper Iuges. Let us revenge and punysshe in our
self thiniury and offense that we have done against god / and subdue our
self as much as we may. And let every one of us say thus in him self, or to
him self: If my lord god be thus despised and tourmented for my sake and for
my sin, how may I spare my self from punysshment and pain, that has
sinned? or how may I desire or look for any pleasure here? God forbid that I
should at any time presume to desire any thing of pleasure or dignity: but
rather despise my self, and repute my self as most vile, detestable, and
abominable stynkynge carayn or dunge / whose stynche, I in my self can not
sustayn or bear / for I have despised my lord god. For my wretchydnes he
suffered death. Now mine own raymentes abhor me / and all creatures despise me
/ for I have contempned the creatoure and maker of all things. What if all
creatures now might have voice and should speak / would not they (think you)
speak on this manner: This is he most wicked and abominable that have
contempned our lord god / he has loved vanity more than god / he has abused
all us, the creatures of god / wyllyng rather to serve the devil, than our
lord: He has derided and contempned by his abominable vices, the power,
wisdom, and goodness of god: He has feryd or drad more man, than god: He has
more desired the mucke of this world, than the most high and pure goodness: He
would neither be drawn to goodness by the sweet gifts of god, ne yet feryd by
his terrible and ferefull judgments / for he was not affrayde to do his most
abominable sins in the presence and sight of god. Cum ye all the creatures
of god, and let us utterly distroy this person that is holly and fully given to
do injury unto our lord. O thou earth, why do thou bear up so wicked a
person? Thou water, why do you not drown him? Thou air, why do you not
withdraw thy self from him? Thou fire, why do thou not burn him? Thou
wild and ravenous be, why do thou not devour him? Thou stone, why do
thou not stone him to death? O thou hell, why do thou not swalow up this
most unkind and wretched creature? And so forth we might imagine of all the
creatures of god / and meue them to revenge the injury of their creator and
maker. All this well considered, than we shall think or say: Alas, wretch
that I am / what shall I do? for I have armed and provoked against me all
things. To whom shall I go? To whom shall I make my moan? I have done contrary
to all things / I have contempned and offended my lord god / I have provoked
his angels / I have dishonored his saints / I have in many ways displeased
my neighbors: And shortly (to say the truth) I have offended all the
creatures of god, in that that I have done injury, and contempned god the
creator and maker of them all. To whom shall I go for socour, that has made
my self enemy to god and to all his creatures? I know / I know what I shall
do. I shall enter into the wounds of my lord god / and I shall transfourme my
/ self / or take upon me his pains, sorrows, and rebukes / knowing for a
surety that no creature shall be displeasant or heavy unto me, if they perceive
that I bear the pryntes of the wounds and sorrows of my lord Jesus in my soul
and body. And good brother, let us reduce all these to.iii. points / that is
to thonour of god / to the passion of Christ, and to our own direction and
good order / and that both in soul and body. Nothing wyllyng / non other
desyryng but Jesus Christ / and that crucified / as saint Paul said. 1. Co^.
2. A.
Yet in all these things so order we our fere, that we ever trust in the
infinite goodness of god. For his infinite mercy far excedeth all our malice
and iniquity. This godly fere, is the occasion and beginning of humility and
reverence / of a marvelous ascencion unto god / and of contemplacion. For by
this fear, man is specially led and brought unto the superabundaunce of grace
/ whereby he may avoid all evil / and get goodness / and may live modestly /
with good manners / continently / temperatly / and chastely. These.iii. fruits
of the holy ghost / that is modestia / that is gentle behauour in words and
deeds. Continence, that is to absteyne from things unlawful: And chastity /
that is, rightely to use things lawful. These three fruits (I say) accord
and perteyne to ye gift of fere. Wherefore I may call this fere a Paradise of
delites / from whence does proceed abundaunce of all swetenes and pleasure.
There man is inebriate with a pure swetenes / and with a marvelous gladness he
is (as it were) allienate from him self. With an high fervent devotion he
slepeth and slumbereth in our lord.

And thus, to have the spirit of the fere of god* is to be converted into god,
to do well, and with all the desire and affection of the heart, to dispyse all
vayn and transitory things. And therefore to this gift of fear, correspondeth
the first beatitude / that is, the poverty of spirit. Libro. 1. de sermon. d^i
in monte. C.
For as saint Austine says: The fear of god pertains to meke men. Of the
which it is written: Beati pauperes spiritu: Mat. 5. A.
Blessed be the pore in spirit: that is, meke persons. For sith it
apperteineth to the fear of god to give due reverence unto god, and to be
subdued unto him: that thing that follows of this subjection, pertains to
the gift of fear. And in that that a man subdueth himself to god: he does
not labor to be magnified for any thing in him self, or for that he does to
any other person / nor yet will be magnified therefore: but refers all to
god. For otherwise he should do contrary unto the perfect subjection unto god.
And therefore the prophet David says: Hii in curribus, and hii in equis,
Psalm. 19.
nos autem in nomine domini dei nostri inuocabimus: These men do trust or
rejoice in their chariots / and other rejoice in their horses: But we rejoice
in ye name of our lord god. And therefore it soloweth yt the gift offere is
finally given to man for this intent / that the holy ghost, therewith entering
into the soul, should give to us the virtue of mekenes, which cures our
wound of pride / so that the meke person may thereby ascend unto glory of
heuyn / which the proud angel lost by his pride.

And this is it that we said before / that by the great mekenes and reverence
that our savior Jesus had toward the high majesty of god the father, in his
most blessed passion: men, beholdynge and remembrynge the same, should be
provoked unto like mekenes, reverence, and honor toward god, according to
their power, as their frailty would suffer them / that thereby they might be
made apt to repare the order of the thronys.

Example of this gift of the fear of god. The seventh Chapitre.
ANd that this gift of fear is often times given unto such persons as do
fervently remember the passion of Christ: we have example of the blessed woman
of whom we spoke before, Capitu^. 2.
Maria de Ogines. It is written in the foresaid book of thistories of Vincent /
that this blessed woman Marie had the chaste and loving fear of god / and
that without doubt, Li. 31. ca. 29
through the often and fervent remembrance of the passion of Christ / as we
showed before. Capitu. 2.
And this godly fear was in her heart, as an ornamente of her breast, or a
stomacher / wherewith she represseth her heart from all vain thoughts.

It was in her mouth as a brydell to restrain her tongue. This fear of god
was in his work, as a prick or brod to drive her to labor, and keep her from
slouthe and sluggysshnes. And in all things it was to her as a squyre or rule
to order her, that she should not excede a due mean. This godly fere was in
her, as a be^ome to make clean her heart from all doublenes / her mouth from
all falshed / and her works from all vanity: By the which spirit of fear,
at length she conceived so great love unto poverty, yt scarcely she would keep
or reteyne to her use those things that were very necessary for her. And for
the love that she had unto poverty, she was fully purposed in her mind, to
have departed from her friends, and gone into a strange country / and there as
a vile and abiecte person, to have beggyd her living from door to door for
gods sake. And for the same purpose she had prepared a bag, wherein she would
put such things as she should receive of almose / and a little cup, wherewith
to drink water or else potage / if she had any given to her / and also she
prepared for her werynge, old clothes and patched garments / and so would
have performed these things in deed, ne had been the great instance of her
friends / the which with many tears and diligent desires might scarcely
withholde her from that purpose. Not withstandyng her good will did appear in
the premises / for she did that she might. Also she continued in this love of
poverty / which appeared in that that she cut her table clothes or napkyns / and
also her shetes / and gave the one part to the pore / reserving the residue
for her self. And not only by this fear of god she contempned all worldly
riches: but also she despised all worldly honor and glory / and all vain
praise of man / and that for the great swetenes and pleasure that she had in
heavenly things. And not only she would not admyt or look toward these
vanities: but also she refused them with abhominacion of heart, and utterly
abhorred them. The love of Christ was so fervent in her heart, that nothing
else was pleasant or sauory to her, but Christ. And much more ye may se of
her mekenes and poverty in the said book of Vincent historiall.

The gift of pity is also given to man by the fervent remembrance of
Christ's passion. The.viii. Chapitre.
THe gift of pity is given to man by the continual and fervent meditacion of
the passion of Christ / wherewith a man orders and behaueth him self justly
and devoutly in the due honor and worshyppynge of god / in due reverence and
intreatynge of holy scripture / and in the love and due confortynge of his
neighbor. In the which three things consists and stands the gift of
pity: Prima Timoth. 4. C.
Which pity (as saint Paul says (is profitable to all things / and
specially against the hardness and malice of the heart. For that person which
is crucified with Christ through the fervent remembrance of his most blessed
passion: is kyndled with this gift of pity unto the high compassion,
benignity, and mercy of his neighbor / and that on this manner. When a person
devoutly and fervently beholds in his remembrance the compassion and mercy
that our savior Jesus Christ showed unto mankind / and specially at his death
and passion (as we declared before in the gift of fear) anon he is moved and
kyndeled / and his heart is opened toward his neighbor, Ca. vi. huius
particule.
bought and redemyd with the blood of Christ, as we all be. I say this man
thus considering, is so kyndeled unto the love of his neighbor / and that
for the love of his lord god: that he is ready to give all that he has, and
him self also with glad mind for the health and salvation of his neighbor /
for he considers that his lord god suffered death with most greuouse pains
for his said neighbor. And moreover, as he has compassion upon his savior
Christ hanging upon the cross, and that with all his heart: so he has as
great inward sorrow in his heart upon his neighbor / which by his sinful
living forsakes the conforte that he might have by Christ's wounds and
passion / and so in his manner dispiseth the blood and death of Christ. I say
he has inwardly as great compassion of this person, as he would have upon him
self. First he is wounded and grieved in his heart, for the contempt of his
lord god. Secondly, for the hurt and damage of his neighbor which has
forsaken life and glory everlasting, and has chosen voluntarily or wylfully
eternal death and dampnacion. This good man sees and considers the contempt
of god, the blood of Christ despised / and the most noble creature made to
the image of god, wylfully to go to eternal pains / and therefore his heart
melts through pity, and is relented or resolved by compassion. And in like
manner as he has compassion of the hurt of his neighbor: so by the same gift
of pity, he has great rejoice and gladness in his soul, of the goodness and
spiritual profit of other persons / when he perceives that they order the^
self to receive the fruit and profit of the wou^des of Christ / with whom
he enters into the same wou^des / and is made one with the^. He ioyeth with
them that be joyful of any goodness. He is sorry with the^ that be sorrowful for
their hurt and damage. He reputeth every one of his neighbors, as him self /
seeing and considering yt both he and his neighbors be create and made of our
lord god / marked and dignified with his image / redemyd and bought with the
same blood of Christ / and ordered to cum to one and the same glory. And most
specially he opens his heart unto his neighbor, by this gift of pity: for
that he sees and considers his lord god to be crucified for all people /
and therefore he sees and co^sidereth his lord god in all people* He requires
and sercheth his savior crucified in all his neighbors. He beholds him in
the^ all after his pore manner. He is all given to his neighbor: for he is
hoolly and fully given to his savior crucified. O what joy is it unto his
heart, wha^ he sees his neighbor do due honor unto his savior crucified? He
has non envy thereat / he is not displeased therewith / he does not detract him
or speak evil of him / he will not let him nor hinder him from yt honor / by
sign, word, or deed / nor give him any occasion to withdraw him from yt
honor: but hoolly he desires his neighbors profit / and abhors his hurt
or peril / reputyng and accepting both his neighbors hurt or profit, as
his own profit or hurt. And yt is specially for the love yt he has to our
lord Jesus Christ / the which for the great love that he had unto the health of
man's souls / and to the honor of his father: he suffered most paynfull and
shameful death of the cross. Wherefore the zele and thonour of god / the
compassion of Christ / and the inflamacion or kyndelynge of his own heart
hereunto: be most properly to be attended and beholden in ye wou^des of Christ
/ for there they be had and gote^. And by this gift of pity, ye heart of man
is in a marvelous manner eleuate and lift up unto his lord god. For when a man
does enforce him self as much as he may, to conform him self unto the pity
and compassion that Christ god and man had and showed unto us when he suffered
the death of the cross / than that soul pleases god singulerly / in so much
that Christ will take that soul so comformable to his godly pity, unto his
singular love and favor, unto his sweet enbracynges and halsynges / and keep
yt soul as his dear beloved spouse / and induce and bring that soul to
perceive his sweet consolations / such a soul our savior loves: as much as
she loves him / that soul our lord draws to him: for as much as that
soul has one felyng with Christ, in having compassion of Christ, and of his
neighbor with Christ. Also it has one sauory knowledge with Christ: in duly
honoring god / one zele and fervent desire to the salvation of man's soul
with Christ / and so that soul is in a manner transfourmed into Christ, through
this gift of pity / which (as we said before) is profitable to all things.
It couetyth thonour of god / it expels sorrows and troubles from man's
soul / it fervently they steth and desires the fruit and profit of souls /
it labors that the blood of Christ might take effect in other persons /
and it kyndeleth the soul in fervent love to god and his neighbor. Wherefore
dear beloved friends, let us approach hereunto, and labor diligently for this
gift. For doubtless this one, among all other (and peradventure before all
other gifts) does most please god. I pray you therefore let us labor to do
the will and pleasure of god / and let us draw or suck out of his wounds and
side this gift of pity. Let us be all one in our lord Jesus Christ crucified
/ and let us require, se, or desire non other thing in our neighbor, but Jesus
Christ crucified. So loving our neighbor, that with him we run at all times
into the wounds of Christ: Not beholdynge or loving him as fair,
beautiful, strong, or wise / or any other such like vain and transitory
things which may hinder or withdraw our soul from the love of god: but only
beholdynge and loving our neighbor, as redemyd and bought by the precyouse
blood and death of our lord, as anointed and washed with his blood / and
applied or put to the wounds of Christ by receiuyng the fruit of them. Let it
not be seen or thought hard and painful to us to suffer great pains / or (if
need should require) most shameful death for our neighbor: for who^ Christ
(the only son of god) suffered most grievous pains, and the most shameful
death of the cross. Let us all covet and desire for the profit and health of
souls, all manner of rebukes and dispisynges / all afflictions, and tourmentes
/ and also to suffer most vile or shamfull death. Let every man be to us, as
our own heart: for whom the heart of Christ was perced with a spear. Let us
multiply our preachynges and exhortacions, good examples, prayers, fastings,
knelynges, watch, labors / and also suffer mockes or scorns for the health
of souls. Let this be our office and daily exercise / our glory and joy /
and our consolacion, ever to offer sum thing to almighty god for the profit of
souls. Let not the river and fountain of tears cease from our iyen: for our
own sins and also for the sins of other. Let us be content to be saciat
and fulfilled with such wepynges and sorrows in this vale of myserye and
tears. Let our sins and also the sins of our ueighbours hynge ever in our
sight / not to judge or condemn our neighbors, but to lament and weep for
them at all times / and not only let them be in our sight: but also let them
enter and perce the ynner parts of our hertes. Let us at all times and in all
places have our savior Christ crucified in our presence. Let us always be
fervent and devout in all honor due to god, in the reverence of holy
scripture, and in the love and compassion of our neighbors. In the which three
consysteth the gift of pity.

This order and ascencion in our soul does molifie all our heart, and sprede
it abrood, and make it apt to receive the spyryte of pity / which does
quiet us and set us in great pleasure and favor of Christ / where as we shall
find spiritual food, both within and outward / that is our most tender
lover our lord Jesus Christ, the rest or our souls, and the reward of our
good deeds that we do through this gift of pity. And to this gift of pity
does corresponde the second beatitude: Beati mites. Blessed the mylde.

And hereunto saint Austin says: Li. 1. de (...) in monte. C.
Pity accords and is convenient unto mylde persons. And as concerning the
fruits of the holy ghost: these.ii. that is, goodness and benignity, ben
directly attributed and appropriate unto this gift of pity / but the third,
yt is called Mansuetudo / that is, myldenes or ge^tilnes, pertains to this
gift of pity indyrectly / for it takes away the lettes and impedimentes of
the acts of pity. And the spirit of pity is given to man, for that his heart
should be moved and kyndled unto be^ignitie / so that man vsyng duly this gift
should cum to the same eternal possession and heritage yt he would have other
men cum to. And this is it that we said before, yt by the great compassion,
pity, and mercy yt our savior Jesus Christ showed upon us and unto us on ye
cross, we should be styred, moved, and kyndled to like works of pity
according to our power and ability unto our neighbor / yt thereby we might
be made apt to the restauracion of thorder of archau^gels.

Example of this gift of the spirit of pity. Cha. ix.
OF this gift of pity we have example in the foresaid blessed woman Maria de
Ogines, in the said book of the histories of Vincent. Li. 31. ca. 3^
Where as it is written that not only she avoided all manner of evil by the
gift of the fear of god: but also by the spyryte of pytye (which she had
without doubt) by the often and feruente remembrance of the passion of
Christ) she was made very feruente and prone or redye to all goodness. She
labored and enforced her self as far as her power would stretche, to
fulfill all the works of mercy, of a great and aboundaunte pytye that was in
her. And above all other works of pity, she had a fervent desire to vysyte
the sick, and to assyste them in their infirmities, and also to be present at
the death and sepulture or buryenge of the ded folks, where she very often
times received from god great spyrytuall conforte / and also thrughe the
reuelacion of god knew many secret and heavenly mysteryes. And this well
appeared in this history following.

Upon a certain day when one of the systers of Ogines labored in the extreme
panges of death: this blessed woman Maria being in her celle, se in spyryte a
great multitude of deuylles about the bed of the sick sister. And as the
covent did say co^mendacions for the soul of the said sick sister, who^ they
thought to have be ded: this holy Mary (in a manner forgetting her mylde
gravity and sad shamfastnes) ran with have unto the bed of the sick syster^
and stryuynge with those wicked spirits, not only did resist the^ with her
fervent prayers: but also did chase and drive the^ away with her mantell or
pall, as a man would chase away the flies.

And when these wicked spyrytes did terrybly resyst her, and alledgyd reasons
for them yt this soul should perteyn to them: than she not content with their
importunity, cried and called upon Christ, and upon the blood of Christ
that he shed for man's salvation / and continually with a fervent mind
remembered the death of Christ that he suffered for us. And yet these wood
raungynge fendes, not ceasyng of their importunity, but ever busy to devour
this soul by many craftye and deceytfull reasons: than this blessed woman
Maris, conceyuynge in her soul a great trust and confidence in god by the
grace of the holy gooste. 2. Cori^. 3 A.
(For as Paul says, where as is the spyryte of god) there is lyberty and
great confidence) she I say, having great trust in god, said with a free
spirit and great boldenes: Good lord, I will be pledge and surety for this
soul. And tha^ furthwith the dampened spirits fled and utterly avoided / and
the good angels came and took the soul. And so this blessed woman gyuyng
thanks to god, went to her own cell / and prayed for ye said soul. And
afterward as she was i^ devout prayer in ye day of ye feast of saint Peter and
Paul for ye said soul: saint Peter appeared to her, and showed unto her how
the soul of the foresaid woman was in greuouse pains of purgatory, for as
much as she in her life had much inordinat love to ye world and to the
pleasures thereof, though at her death she had very contricion thereof. And than
this blessed woman, moved of pity (as she was always full of pity, and
specially toward the souls in purgatory) did pray much fervently and
deuoutely for that soul. And not content with her only and own prayers:
required instantly, and opteyned the prayers of many other devout persons / and
also caused many masses to be said for the said soul, unto the time she was
delivered from pain, and taken unto joy and glory eternal. Many other
examples of her pity and compassion ye may read in the said.xxxi. book of
the hystoryes of Vincent.

The gift of science or knowledge is opteyned by the fervent remembrance of
the passion of Christ. The.x. Chapitre.
THe gift also of science and kuowledge of spyrytuall and godly things is
given to man by the continual and devout remembrance of the passion of
Christ / thorughe the which gift, man may duly and justly live in this
wretched world, where as flourysshe many froward and wicked persons. And yet
that man that has this gift shall live godly, though he be among them / for
he shall continue in his faith, and defend it / and have true compunction in
his heart. He shall absteyne from evil, and wisely admynystre or use these
temporal goods. He shall dyrecte and order all his works to right reason /
and apply his will to the will of god.

Or we may say that this gift of science does teach us to behold as in a
most pure glass, all manner of contemplacion, and all manner of pacyence. And
that is, if we take this gift knowledge as a science or knowledge of these
inferior things, in that that they be helping and inducynge to the
contemplacion and knowledge of spyrytuall and heavenly things. As be the
knowledge of our sins that we have done, of the benefytes that we have
received of god, and of the pains that we have deserved for our sins. For
the first, that is for the knowledge of Hier. 2. D.
it is said by the prophet: Arguet te malicia tua, and auersio tua increpabit
te scito. etc. Thy malice and sin shall reprove the / and thy tournynge from
god shall rebuke the / therefore know thou and dilygently consider that it is
bitter and paynefull to the to have forsaken thy lord god / and to want his
fear in the. This manner of science is a very true knowledge and much
necessary for us / that is to know our self, and so to Non enim iudicaui me
aliquid seire inter vos nisi Iesum Christum et hu^c crucisixum. 1. Cori. 2. A.
I have judged and thought in my self that I have non other knowledge among
you, but the knowledge of Jesus Christ crucified.



Sitis and esuries, ^rigus, ignis, fetor, et horror. Tenebre, desperantes,
victi, vermesque rodentes. That is: Thyrste and hunger, cold, fire, stynche
and vgsomnes or lothesomnes. Darkness, desperacion, subjection, and gnastynge
or gnawynge worms. These three manner of sciences with many other we may most
specially find and get in the meditacion of the passion of our lord. And
most of all we shall get much knowledge: if ye diligently search the fygures
of the old law, correspondynge or signifienge this said passion of our lord.
For there is innumerable treasure hyd under those fygures, which may be found
with diligent search. In ye which fygures be hyd a meruelouse swetenes of
devotion / all manner of science and sacietie or full contentacion of the soul
for this life.

For he that is crucified with Christ by the continual and fervent meditacion
of his passion: shall se how these fygures and the scripture of god do shine in
the said passion / and so by the gift of science he shall be eleuate and
lyfted up unto a meruelouse swetenes of devotion, and unto an high perfection
of contemplacion / and that on this manner. For first to such a person that
fervently remembers this passion, and depely sercheth these figures, shall
appear how that the most high goodness of god the father has ordryd all
things much diligently unto our profit. Secondly it shall appear how the
only son of god the father, our lord Jesus Christ: much godly and
faithfully has showed unto us all things necessary unto our health and
salvation. Not only by his words: but also by his examples. Thirdly, it shall
appear how the passion of our savior Jesus was figured and signified from the
beginning of the world / as it clearly appears in holy scripture. What inward
joy and pleasure shall this be (think you) to that person that fears these
things and knows them? All these great and meruelouse things were done for
us. And to declare unto you how all these things do figure and signify our
savior Jesus crucified: let us begin at the beginning of the Bible / and so
proceed. Genes. 1. A.
First, where it is said: In principio creauit deus celu^ et terram. In the
beginning god has creat heaven and earth. That is to say: In his son Jesus
crucified, god has restaured and repared the nature of angels / and the
nature of man. It follows Dixit deus: Ibidem.
Fiat lux, et facta est lux. God said, I will that light be made / and
furthwith it was made. That is to say / god would that his son Jesus should
be as a light, set upon the cross / to expel and put away all darkness of
sin / and it was don. And this light also divided the night from the day.
That is, sin from virtue and grace. Also this light by his presence, causes
the day of grace and virtue. And by his absence, it is night of sin. Also
Jesus Christ crucified, Ibidem.
was as the firmament in the midst of the waters / diuidynge the waters of
temporal and worldly consolacion, from the waters of eternal and spiritual
consolacion. Or else diuidynge the waters of man's wisdom, from the waters of
godly wisdom. Or diuidynge the waters of vice, from the waters of grace. Or
else diuidynge the waters of worldly tribulacion, from the waters of heavenly
consolacion. In Jesus also crucified, were gaderyd to gyder all the waters that
were under the heaven / that is, he bare all our iniquities / and suffered pain
for all our sin: Therefore in him were gadered to gyder all the waters / so
that in him was a great flode of tribulacions / that is, of afflictions,
dispisinges, and many other pains. And so by his grace and goodness: was our
etrhe made dry. For before his blessed passion: we were worthily deputed to
all pains and eternal tribulacions / but now we be delivered from those
eternal pains by the merytes of his most holy passion. Also he was that
great, deep, large, and brood see, of the which speaks the Prophet David /
and that well appeared in his passion.

Note well here, how clearly and manifestly these figures done signify our
lords passion. In like manner we may search through the hole scripture / and
take what so ever figure we will / though it appear very far and diverse
from this passion. And yet not withstanding we shall perceive a meruelouse
correspondence or a concord unto this passion / which shall cause a sweet
melody in our souls / whereby our hertes shall be meruelously conforted / and
it shall make us to enter into the contemplacion of god and godly scriptures /
if we diligently search these figures. Gene. 18. A
Let us consider the figure, when Abraham prepared a fat calfe and most tender
/ and gave it unto the three angels that came to him / that they should eat and
feed thereof. This figure in the utter appearance of the letter, seems very
baren and of little fruit / but yet inwardly, it contains great swetenes of
contemplacion. In like manner this saying: Gene. 2. B.
Est lignum vite in medio paradisi. There is the tree of life in the middle of
paradise / that is, Christ hanging upon the cross in the middle of the
church / or Christ in the vyrgyn womb / which vyrgyn is as a paradise of
pleasure. Also this figure: Ibidem.
Eluuius egrediebatur de loco voluptatis. A flode or river ran out of the
place of pleasure / that is, the flode or river of mercy and grace from the
side of Christ. And so the foresaid figure that Abraham did give that most
tender calfe to the three men to eat: does signify that god the father of
heuyn, did give his only begotten son, most tender and most innocent, and
full of all virtues and grace, to the death of the cross for our sins. And
that three men did feed thereof, does signify that the holy trinity, the
father, the son, and the holy ghost were fed and satisfied for our
transgression by the passion of Christ: which before that passion were hungry
and ready to take vengeance / and to punysshe us for our sins. And here now
we may se the great swetenes and pleasant confort of this figure. Here by
Abraham is understood god the father / and by the most tender calfe, is
signified the son of god / and by these three men, is signified the holy
trinity / and yet the father and the son be not diverse gods: but one god.
For though they be distinct persons, and each of them is god: yet the three
persons ben but one god in trinity of persons. And so I say, in this figure
appears the meruelouse and inestimable swetenes that is given unto the soul
that diligently sercheth this figure. For where as god in him self was hungry
and desirouse to do justice upon us for our sins: he of his infinite
benignity and goodness, did and showed that justice into him self, or upon him
self / for else surely that judgment of justice had devoured and distroyed us
/ if it had fallen upon us / for there was no pure man that might saciate and
satisfy that hu^gry appetite of god: but only the son of god and man / that
most tender calfe, whom god the father did make ready to meat. That is, he put
him to suffer all affliction, dispisinges, mockes, beatynges, and most cruel
death: to satisfy his hungry appetite / for the great injury and inobedience
that we did unto god. What is that? Because we offended him: should he so judge
and conde^pne him self / and so suffer pain for our sin? He was offended by
us / and that not withstandyng, he was judged by us, in us, and for us. And so
Christ, being one person in two natures / that is, both god and man. He was
offended in his godly nature, as god / and judged or condemned for our sins
in his manhood: So that the godhede was offended / and he in his manhood
suffered. And because in one person he was both god and man: therefore we may
truly say that we did offend him / and yet he suffered for us / and so he was
both offended, and also judged and condemned. And that is more to be
marueiled / after the death of this calfe / the son of god, where as we were
worthy to want all his confort and goodness / for as much as we had condemned
him and put him to most shameful death: this most benign and merciful
lord, forgetting in a manner the time past, and also all our malice, did
conforte us and daily does with his manifold graces. We did evil to him, and
he does good to us. We slew him, and he gives spiritual life to us. We put
him to the death, and gives to us him self to our spiritual food. Herein we
may se the great merueiles of god hyd and covered in the holy scripture. Here
in this calfe of Abraham we may receive marvelous refection of spiritual
science, if we search diligently the same. And so in like manner of many other
figures in holy scripture. wherein the soul and mind of man ought to be
eleuate and lyfted up by this gift of science / and knowledge of such
figures, correspondynge or signifienge the most blessed passion of our
savior Jesus Christ / that by the fervent remembrance of the said passion he
might enter into these most deep treasures of the goodness of god / unto the
time that soul or mind be depely entered into Christ crucified / and in a
manner absorpte and drowned through or in the fervent love of Christ crucified.
And than that soul shall receive the gift of science / and know how to order
his works accordyngly unto right reason / and apply him self unto the
conformity of Christ. And this is it that we said in the beginning of this
chapter / that the gift of science moves a man to live justly and truly in
this wretched world / where as flourysshe many froward and wicked persons /
and among them to defend his faith / and to have true compunction in his
heart. The spirit of science or knowledge is for that intent given unto man,
that that spirit, entering into the heart or soul of man: should instruct
him in things necessary for his salvation / and should move him to true
compunction and sorrow for his offenses / that man should know, that what so
ever pain or tribulacion he has: it is for his sins / and if he be pacient:
for his great profit. And what so ever goodness he has: it is of the mercy
and grace of god. And so thereby he should learn to be ever subject to god /
and to praise him in all works / and never to murmr against him: but in all
things and at all times to show mekenes and patience / and ever confess god
to be just and true in all his works / and so follow thexample of Christ,
which is the myrroure of patience / and also the reward eternal of the true
and meke pacie^t. Moreover, by the true compunction of heart (which springs
of mekenes through thoperacion and help of this godly science) is swaged the
wrath and indignacion of the mind. And contrary ways / wrath does ouercum
and spiritually slay the unwise person that wants this gift of science. As
when in adversity he is moved or styred / and also blinded by the vice of
impacience / in so much that he does not know that such pains and
tribulacions as he suffers: cummeth to him by his own demerites and sins.
Or else when he is lyfted up in prosperity / he is so blinded by pride / that
he will not know how that all the goodness that he has, cummeth of god. And
like as we se in daily experience, that after rain cummeth fair wedder: so
after the virtue of true compunction and sorrow for our sins, follows the
reward of consolacion. For who so ever will freely punyssh him self in this
life for the love of god: he shall find hereafter a true joy and gladness
without end. And therefore our savior says: Math. 5. A
Bea^i qui lugent, quoniam consolabuntur. Blessed be they that weep and mourn
in this life for the love of god: for they shall be conforted. And this is the
third beatitude / which correspondeth to the gift of science. Li. 1. de ser.
(...) in monte. C.
For as saint Austin says / science is according to mourners. Right
judgment of creatures / or to judge truly of creatures: pertains unto the
gift of science. For oftymes men, through thoccasion of creatures, turn them
self from god, and so commyt greuouse sin / as the wise man says: Sapi.
14. B
Creature fact sunt in odium, and muscipulam pedibus insipientium. Creatures
made of man to the service of god / through the sin of man, ben made to the
hatred of man / and as a trap or a snare to the fete of unwise men / for
as much as such men, wantynge right judgment and knowledge of the creatures,
do put their full confidence and trust in them / which they should have and
put in god / and so consequently they do sin and lose the true and infinite
goodness. And this great damage of man, is made known to man by the right
judgment of creatures / which he has by this gift of science. And therefore
co^ueni^^tly is the beatitude of mourning assigned to reaunswere unto the
gift of science. Which grant unto us that most tender calfe that hynge upon
the cross for us. Amen.

An example of this gift of the spirit of science. Chapitre.xi.
OF this gift of discrecion and of science, we may have example in the
foresaid blessed woman Maria de Ogines. Li. 31. ca. 3^
Of who^ it is written in ye histories of Vincent / as follows. For as much as
to this blessed woman (in auoidyng all evil by the spirit of the fear of god
/ and in doing good by the spirit of pity) was also necessary a warenes and
a circumspection of discretion / therefore almighty god, 1. Ioh. 2. ^
the father of light and knowledge / whose unction and spirit teaches us in
all things necessary, did illuminate and lyghten his daughter Marie with the
spirit of godly science. (And that without doubt was through her continual and
fervent remembrance of Christ's passion). God I said gave to her the gift of
knowledge / that thereby she might know what was to be done / and wha^ / and
what was to be avoided / and that all her sacr^fices and pains taken for god,
she might order with discrecion. For oftymes vice will show him self to be
virtue / and evil oftymes is taken under the color of goodness. And when we
would avoid one vice: oftimes we fall into the contrary vice / and therefore
this spirit of godly knowledge is necessary for us. Sumtyme this blessed woman
when she was made one spirit with god, and was joined unto him with the glue
of fervent love to her great pleasure and swetenes. If she herd of the
cummynge of strangers to speak with her: she would (I say sumtyme) with great
violence withdraw her self from that great pleasure of contemplacion / from
the sweet halsynges of her spouse Christ, less that she should slaundre those
strangers. I say she would withdraw her mind from that contemplacion with so
great vehemence of sorrow, that sumtyme she voyded or spytted pure blood / and
that in great quantity, to her great pain and affliction. Wyllyng rather so
to punisshe her self with that great martyrdom, than to trouble or unquiet the
peace and quyetnes of her systeren and brethren / and specially of pilgrims
or strangers. Yet su^tyme when she knew (thrughe the reuelacion of the holy
ghost) the cummynge of sum strangers: a good time before they came, she would
go pryuely into the feldes or woods nygh unto her cell, and there would she
hyde her self, that uneath or scarcely her own company might find her, all
though they searched for her all the day. And sumtyme contrary ways, when
she was in sleep, if there came to her pore and simple persons for their
necessity or conforte, she was suddenly awaked and compellyd to rise, only by
thoperacion and mouynge of the holy ghost, which than said unto her: Speed
the, there is one that abides for the to speak with the / not for any
curiosity: but for very necessity. Moreover though this blessed woman with a
meruelouse discrecion kept always peace with her neighbors, and not only
with them that were good and virtuous: but also with them that appeared not so
virtuous: yet toward her self she was meruelously indiscreet / much
abiectynge and dispisynge her self / and (as it seemed to her company)
punysshynge her self sumtyme above measure. But certeynly, so much the more
she was dyscrete to her self: for as much as she did not presume to do any
thing unto her self, but as she was famylyarely taught^of the holy ghost. For
she durst not absteyne one hole day from her refection: except that she were
most surely rauysshed and rapte up above her self, and from all her sensys.
And yet sumtyme when she was rapte, she did attempt and prove to take her
refection, to avoid thoccasion and murmr of other persons that were in her
company, but in no means she might receive it into her stomach / and for pain
thereof, she was sumtyme almoost ouercum. And therefore afterward she had that
lyberty to absteyne when she would, and non occasion taken thereof / nor any man
durst ask of her, Ibid. ca. 37
why she did so. Also oftentimes when the priest lyfted up the blessed
sacrament of the body of our lord above his head: she se bytwyxte the hands of
the priest, the form and shap of a most fair child. Also she se a great
multitude of angels / descendyng from heuyn with a great light. And after the
using or receyuynge of the sacrament, she se in spirit our lord remaining
in the soul of the priest, and lightening it with a meruelouse clerenes. Or
else, if the priest receyuyd the body of our lord unworthily, she se than our
lord departed from that soul with indignacion, leuynge it in a great darkness,
and void of all goodness.

The gift of strength is given to man by the fervent remembrance of Christ's
passion. The.xii. Chapitre.
BY the devout and often remembrance of the passion of our lord, is also
given unto man the gift of gostly strength against our spyrytuall enemies and
the multitude of temptacions. And by this gift, inordinate fear is put away.
Hardy and inordynate boldness is reduced to a due measure / and all adversities
ben strongly borne and suffered. For who so ever be crucified with Christ
through the fervent remembrance of his blessed passion* is animated and
strengthed to entrepryse great and hard things / to contempne and set at
naught all worldly pleasures / to suffer patiently and gladly all tribulacions,
and to expugne or ouercum all vices.

That faythefull servant which doeth^feruently remember his lords passion,
and to whom his lord has given many graces, that person I say does consydre
and se the meruelouse and incomprehensible strength of Christ in his
interprysyng great battles, in his sufferaunce, and in the vanquesshynge or
subduynge of the devil. I say in his entreprysynge of great and hard things
/ for he faught great and terryble battelles for the salvation of his enemy,
unkind man. Also the meruelouse strength of Christ does appear in his
patience, where as he suffered most obprobriouse, sharp, and greuouse
tourmentes / and that of his creatures. And thyrdely his incomprehensible
strength was showed in subduynge so mighty and strong a lord (or rather I may
say a tyraunte / the devil that usurped the dominion over all the world /
whom our lord by the death of the cross strongely did ouercum / and so by
his death destrued the author and cause of death. These things well considered,
it is no marvel if the faythefull knight of Christ, and follower of his lord,
moved by these examples of Christ, entrepryse and go^ about to do great and
hard things. And the more hard, vile or paynefull the things be, the more
gladly, diligently, and more fervently will he attempt them. And that
specially if it be to the laud and honor of god, and the health and conforte
of souls. For than there can be nothing to hard, to vile, nor to paynfull for
him to do or suffer for god / which did so great things for him so vile a
wretch. Yea also he thinks all things (though they be never so paynefull)
to be sweet, pleasant, delectable, commendable, and much to be desired: if
thereby he may be assimulate or made like unto the most shameful and
paynefull death of Christ his lord god. Those things this faithful servant
does more gladly, in those he occupies him self more aiudiously, those
things he sercheth and often remembers / those he desires to fulfill with a
fervent mind / not grudgynge nor saying, why put you me to this vile office,
to this shame, to this labor and pain? But rather thinking, why shall I not
do these things with a glad mind? Nor he does not repute or think him self
to be of any reputacion for that he serves god: but he thinks it a great
thing, that it would please almighty god of his only goodness to accept unto
his service so vile, unworthy, and most miserable wretch as he is.

Wherefore in all these things, his heart is only pleased in that, that he
may be conformable to his lord god, and that he does follow him in sufferaunce
of troubles, as much as he may for his frailty. And that he suffers: he
knowledgeth it to be for his sins. And all his joy is, that his lord is
honored by his glad patience and sufferaunce of tribulacions. This faithful
servant has so strongly subdued and tied his appetyte under the yocke and
captivity of right reason: that it shall not have his wanton pleasure in any
carnal or worldly desire / nor yet in any vain or unprofitable thing. Also
he keeps his heart with all diligence as a castle of great strength / so
that he will not suffer any sinful thought to rest therein / nor yet any vain
or unfruitful imaginacions to wandre therein. He is ever thinking or
considering those things that been spyrytuall and godly, or inducyng unto god
/ and with great joy he desires those things / and fervently labors to
bring them to effect. But for as much as in this life evermore or for the
most part the chafe is myxt with the corn: therefore this faithful servant
takes the rydell or wyndose of discrecion in his hand, and so wyndeth and
purges the chafe from the corn: in the door of his heart. He takes into
his hand the burning and sharp sword to keep diligently his heart, as the
paradyse of god / so that what so ever in his heart desires to eat of the
tree of life (that is, all such thoughts as be godly, spiritual, and
lively) such he diligentely does cheryssh and nourysshe. And if any thought
do only look unto the fruit forboden / that is to any thing contrary to the
commandments or pleasure of god: such thoughts he will shortly expel
from his heart / so that they shall have no pleasant abiding there. The
dysceytfull serpent shall have none entrance into that heart. Ne yet the
flattering persuacion of the woman.

And if peradventure he perceive any such appear in his heart: anon he will
remove it with indignacion and sharp rebukes / for there only been nourysshed
manly / godly / and virtuous thoughts. And therefore such a person that is
thus puryfyed in soul and body: may trewly order him self to the
contemplacyon of god. For he never lyfteth up his sight or iyes unto vain
things. Ne his ears to hear noisome or unprofitable things. Nor his nose to
smell sweet odours nor smelles. Nor his mouth, to taste delycate things. Ne
yet his touching, to feel soft things / and that inordynately: But with all
dylygence he keeps him self both inwardely and outwardly / so that now he
should not be called a servant or bound: but rather a lord and free. For
he has domynyon over him self by subdewynge of all inordynate and sensual
appetytes / as much as a man may have lordeshyppe over him self in this life.
And so (I say) such a person for his purity, is most apt to receive the
godly influencys and spyrytuall illustracions. For the son of Justice does
inhabyte such a pure and clean soul, shynynge in every corner thereof / and
lightening the inward parts of the same. That is, the three powers of the
soul / so that he may do all things necessary for his salvation by the power
of the father almighty. He knows all things, by the wisdom of the son our
sauyoure Christ Jesus / and will all goodthynges, by the goodness of the holy ghost.

These be the three mansyons or tabernacles that god makes in the soul of the
just and pure person / for there he fyndeth nothing that should let or
resyste contrary to him. And so our lord does shine so long in that soul:
unto such time that soul thorughe that bryghte light and clearenes be
absorpte / and (in a manner) as it were drowned or swalowed up into god. And
than the soul so rauysshed and lyfted up above it self: Psalm. ^38.
does enter in to the godly cloud / after this manner cryenge and saying
thus. Et nox illumininatio mea in delitiis meis. This night or cloud is my
light, to my great conforte and pleasure. And thus ye may se that the soul by
the gift or spyryte of strength is lyfted up above all fear of perils of
our enemies / it fears nothing but sin that displeases god / it is not
subdued to any passion / and is ready to excercyse all works of strength. It
is not ouercum by any (conflyete or battle in temptacion. And all this is
opteyned and gotten by the continual and fervent remembrance of Christ's
passion. And here unto saint Paul says: Ephe. 6. B.
Confortamini in domino, et in potentia virtutis eius. Ye be conforted in our
lord, and in the power of his virtue / that is in his passion where as his
great power and virtue was showed, Psalm. 67.
Also the prophet David says: Ipse dabit virtutem et fortitudine^ plebi sue.
He shall give virtue, power, and strength to his people. And by his power we
have the vyctorye our over enemies / as saint Paul says: 1. cori^. 15. G
Deo gratias qui fecit nos vincere per dominum nostrum Iesum Christum. Thanks
and praysynges be to god that has given to us the vyctory over all our
enemies, by the merytes of our lord Jesus Christ. And in an other place saint
Paul says thus: Ephe. 6. B.
Indu^te vos armatura dei, vt possitis stare aduersus in^idias diaboli. Put
upon you the armoure of god, that ye may stand strongly against the disceites
and pryuy assautes of the devil. These be the armours of god: and also under
him our armoure. Let us take his crown of thorn, for our salet or helmet. For
our sword, the nails of his hands. For our spurs, the nails that persed
his fete. For our Jack or haubergyn, the betynges of his body with scourges.
For our sheld, the cross as our lord bare it to the mount of Caluary. For
our horse, the same cross / as Christ did hynge and dye thereon. With this
armoure we shall ouercum the devil / for thereunto we shall have strength
through the fervent meditacion of the passion of Christ. To this gift of
goostly strength, correspondeth the fourth beatitude / that is: Math. 5. A.
Li. 1. de ser. d^i in monte. C.
Beati qui esuriunt et sitiunt iustitiam. Blessed be they that hunger and
thyrste justice. For as saint Austyn says: Strength is convenient to them
that hunger and thyrst justice. for they labor diligently desiring to have
joy and pleasure in and of things that be very good / and also labourynge to
turn their love from all worldly and vain things. And this conueniency
does also appear in that, that this gift of strength consysteth and stands
in hard things and of great difficulty (as we said before). It is a great
and an hard thing that a man should not only do virtuous works which commonly
be^ called the works of justice: but also that he should do them with a
fervent, and (in a manner) an insaciable desire of justice / which is signified
by this hungre and thyrst of justice.

To this gift also of goostly strength, correspondeth and accords among
the fruits of the spyryte, these two fruits. Patience, which concerns the
sufferaunce of evil or pain. And longanimitie, which consysteth in the
taryenge or continual abiding for the good promyses of god / that is eternal
glory, the reward of virtuous works. And so this spyryte of strength is
given to man, that it should arise and lift up the tedyouse and weary soul
which was almoost deiect and cast down by the daily sufferaunce of evil and
pains / and for beholdynge or abiding of the good promyses of god. And this
gift so does lift up this soul, that it (opteynynge his formar virtue and
strength) does put away all such dulnes and werynes, and also waxes strong
to the desire of inward swetenes / and so consequently to the desire of
eternal pleasure. Also this spyryte of strength does cause in man's soul
the hunger and desire of justice / so that the soul here in this life
fervently desyryng the works of justice, may herafter be full saciate with
consolacion eternal for his reward. And to this we said before, Capitul. 2.
huius part.
that by thexample of the mekenes and patience of Christ in his passion, for
the which he was exalted and had a name above above all names / as saint Paul
says: Phill. 2. B.
Men should be provoked and moved to the following of Christ in corporal
pains and afflictions. In subduynge all vice and inordinate concupiscencys or
desires. In hungerynge and thrystynge the works of justice / and in having
dominion over all his appetytes / and rewlyng them by right reason / that they
so doing, may be made apt to the reparacion of thorder of the dominacions /
angels or heavenly spyrytes so called.

Example of this spyryte of strength. The.xiii. Chapter.
VIncent in his hystories shows an example of this gift of strength, Li.
31. ca. 3^
of the blessed woman Maria de Ogines / thus saying: For as much as it but
little avails to avoid evil by the spyryte of fear / and to do good by the
spirit of pity / and thyrdely, by the spyryte of knowledge to have discrecio^
in all things / except also by ye spirit of strength we resyst all evil /
and keep our goodness by patience / and also by fyrme constancye and stablenes
persevere and so continue unto the death / and so at length (by our long
abydyng) receive therernall reward promised unto us / this (I say) our lord
and father omnipotent considering, did open his infinite treasures, and did
adourne and beautify his dear beloved daughter Marie (no dout for her fervent
and continual remembrance of Christ's passion) with the fourth precyouse
stone / yt is, with the gift of goostly strength / and so did arm her
against all adversities or darts of the enemy / that neither she was deiecte
and cast down by any trouble or adversity: nor yet lift up in pride by any
false and flattering prosperity. One time when she was grievously vexed with
the paralisie or palsy / in so much that for great pain she was constreyned
to cry and knock upon her breast: there was one of her familiar friends, a
devout person in a secret place nyghe / the which herynge and perceiving her
greuouse pains: with great compassion and devotion prayed for her / and she by
the spirit of god, perceyuyng that by his prayers her pains were minisshed,
said unto her serving maid: Go and say unto that man, that he cease of his
prayers for me / for though by his prayers mine infirmity is releuyd: yet
thereby I lose the merit^ that I might have by pacient sufferau^ce. An other
time when she was vexed with greuouse pains or troubles, there was one of her
devout lovers which secretly in his heart was very sorry and heavy for her
vexacion and grefe / the which she knowing by the reuelacion of god: sent her
maid unto him, saying: Bid him sorrow no more for me. For she was more grieved
or heavy for the sorrows of other persons, than of her own infirmities or
troubles. And not only by the spyryte of strength she had power to resyste
all adversaries: but also to absteyne for all carnal and wanton desires. This
blyssed young woman had so subdued and dried her body betwyxt the two trees of
the cross / that is betwyxt the remembrance of the passion of Christ / and
beryng her own cross by continual penance: that by many years before her
death, she never felt the mocions of uncleanness first styrynges in her body.
And thereby she had a great confydence or boldenes to be in the cumpany of men
/ for she of her abundaunt innocence and pure simplicitte, supposed and thought
that all other persons had been as she was. And therefore one time when one of
her famylyare friends of a feruente spyrytuall affection that he had to her,
did hold her fast or wrynge her by the hand / though for his chaste mind
he thought no sin: yet as a frail man thorughe such touching, he felt a
little pleasure sensual.

But she nothing feeling in her self, nor knowing of his mocions: herd a
voice from heaven, saying in latin thus: Noli me tangere. Touch me not. Yet
she knew not what what those words meant or signified. For our lord god very
merciful and benygne, having compassion of our frailty, would not rebuke or
confound that man in the presence of that holy woman. Yet he would as a true
and faithful lover, keep the chastity of his friend. Than the blessed woman
said to that man: I herd a voice, saying Noli me tangere. But what it
means, I know not. And than that man considering the goodness of god
toward him, made an honest excuse, seeing that our lord would not confound
him openly / and so departed, gyuynge thanks to god, and kept him self more
warely afterward.

The gift of council is given to man by the remembrance of Christ's passion.
The.xiiii. Chapitre.
BY the feruente and contynuall remembrance of the passion of Christ, is
given to man the spyryte and gift of godly council against our inaduertence
and neclygence. Whereby in this miserable and daungerouse world we may beware
of all perils and dangers / we may entrepryse and take on hand hard
things / and also do things of most dyffyculty. For that person which is
crucyfyed with Christ thorughe the fervent meditacion of his gloryouse
passion, is styred and rauysshed to do the works of supererogacion. Whereunto
he is not bound by the preceptys and commandments of god / and thereunto he
is lyfted up, and louyngely drawn by the spyryte of council / on this manner
following. First he remembers how our lord Jesus Christ was obedient to
his father, and so continued unto the death of the cross / subdued unto all
vilitie, subjection, derision, and manyfolde sorrows and pains for us. And in
all these, only requyrynge and searching his heavenly father honor and glory
/ and so at last, subdued to the most shameful death for our redemption.
Secondly he reme^breth how Christ, though he were always pore, yet he was most
pore when he, ^poiled and robbed of all his clothes, was put naked upon the
cross for our sins. And thyrdely he remembers how he that was most sweet,
pleasant, and solace of angels: was replenisshed and filled with all
bytternes, sorrow, and pain when he honge upon the cross. This very true vyn^^
our savior Jesus Christ, was often times cut. First in his incarnacion, when as
he was in our nature made of less perfection than angels / though by his
godly nature: he was the creator, maker, and glory of angels / and so was in
a manner his glory cut from him with the knyfe or cultre of ignominy / for to
the fight of the world he was not gloryouse: but rather he appeared vile and
ignominiouse. His power was cut with the cultre of derection. His pleasure,
with the knyfe of sorrow. His richesse, with he knife of poverty. And at last
there was cut from him with the cultre of fear, all his friends and
acquaintau^ce / so that of all his dear lovers, there was not one man to
conforte him in his tribulacions. And therefore the prophet said in his
person: Torcular calcaui solus, Esaias. 63. A
and de gentibus non est vir mecum. I alone have trode^ or labored in the
press of tribulacion: and there was not one man that would conforte and help
me. Also the prophet Dauyd says in the person of Christ: Psalm. 68.
Improperium expectauit cor meum and miseriam, et sustinui qui simul
contristaretur, et non erat, et qui consolaretur: et non inueni. My heart has
sustained and suffered rebuke and mysery. And I looked if that any man would
suffer or be heavy with me: and there was none. Also I looked if that any man
would conforte me: and I found non. Moreover he in whom was all treasures of
wisdom and knowledge hyd / he that was king of all kings / and so rich that
he had no need of any other man's goods but of his pleantie gives to every
man: This wise and rich emperor (I say) was made so pore, that there might
none be found more pore. No, not among the foxes of the earth: ne yet
among the birds of the air. And therefore he says of him self: Math. 8. C
Vulpes foueas habent, et volucres celi nidos, filius autem hominis non habet
vbi caput suum reclinet. The foxes have their caves or dens, and the birds
of the air have their nestys / but the son of a vyrgyn has not where to hyde
or lay his head. He was pore in his nativity or birth: Porer in his life, or
process of his life. And most pore upon the cross at his death. At his birth
he was fed with the vyrgyns milk, and lapped in vile or pore clothes. In the
process of his life he had pore clothing. But often times he wanted meat and
drink for his necessary sustenaunce. But at his death thou shall find him
naked and in extreme thyrste or dryenes / except thou say that he had vynegre
myxte with bitter myrre and gall to quench his thyrste. These things well
considered, the soul of the person beholdynge and depely remembrynge them: is
shortly and easily persuaded and moved to follow our savior Jesus in like
things / so that he may now gladly withdraw him self from all worldly honors
and desires of the same / from all possession of temporal goods / and from
all corporal consolacion and pleasure / desiring with his lord god all
vylenes, abiection, and derision / and to suffer pain in all his hole body /
that thereby he might in sum thing be made conformable to his lord god, and so
do to him sum thankful service. His appetite and desire is not now to please
men: but rather for the love and honor of his lord god, to be mocked,
scorned, despised, and to be rather hated of them, than honored. And therefore
all vain praise and lauds given to him, ben abhominacion and as stynkynge
caryon unto him / for he only requires and desires the lauds and praises of
god. Unto that, is all his study, labor, and pain. That, he desires with an
insatiable thyrst. In all things he only desires thonour of god. Nothing
lokynge to him self, nor regarding any thing perteynynge to him self, ne
yet will be bound to do any thing / but all to gyder with heart and mind
lokynge unto heaven, where as is most his pleasure. And also he desires that
by his rebukes his lord god might be honored / greatly and continually
desiring thrughe this gift of council, both to be pore and also despised
and abiecte for the love of god, for as much as he perceived both these to be
in his lord god crucified. And truly he would now and ever be naked with
Christ upon the cross / being very heavy or sorry yt he should have any thing
that might help the pore / or else that perteyneth to thonour of god. Therefore
he, forsakynge all superfluity, uses as few things as his necessity will
suffer him / so that his pleasure is much more set to despise and cast away
richesse, than to get or multyply it. And to speak of corporal delectacions,
consolations and pleasures: we may truly say, that from al these, and also
from all other consolacion that is not in god, of god, or for god: he utterly
refuses them as much as it is possible for him / ever asking and desiring
to be saciate and fulfilled with bytternes, sorrow, and pain or affliction with
his lord and master Christ. Wherefore, what so ever he perceived to be
pleasant unto his body, or yet unto his heart, by the which he may not be
made conformable unto the most blessed wounds and passion of Christ: that
thing he abhors / withdrawynge him self from all things (through this
gift of council) wherein he sees any peril or danger like to cum to him.
And therefore he does all things with great deliberacion. And also thrughe
the said gift of counsel, he applies him self to do all tho things whereby
thonour of god, ye charity of his neighbor, and the health of souls may be in
any thing increased. And for these causes he is often times solitary, depely
considering the passion of Christ, therein lerchynge the high honors of god,
theternall riches, and heavenly pleasures / that the devout soul therein
resting, may have great joy. Also thereby the bitter soul for the compassion
of Christ's passion, is made sweet and pleasant. And the mind eleuate and
lyfted above it self: is made dronken or is drowned in love. And ^o the soul
full of pleasure and lenyng upon her dear beloved: restyth hoolly in her lord
god. And this is it that we said before, how through the spyryte of council we
avoid all perils and dangers / make our selfs sure in the holes of the
stone / that is in the wounds of Christ to entrepryse great, herd, and
paynefull things / and also to excercyse the works of supererogacio^ / as is
to love our enemies, and to forgive them for Christ / to give all our goods
to pore people for the love of Christ / to the which works don by the spirit
of counsel, correspondeth the fyfte beatitude / of the which Christ says:
Math. 5. A
Beati misericordes quoniam ipsi misericordiam consequentur. Blessed be ye
merciful / for they shall have mercy. Li. 1. de ser. (...) in monte. C.
For as saint Austyn says: Council is according to merciful persons / for
there is but one remedy or mean to be delivered from all the perils of this
world / and that is this / to forgive and to give. Council is properly and
specially to be taken of these things that be to cum, and that be profitable
unto our end / that is, to do the works of mercy / which most of all
corresponde or accord to the gift of council.

And therefore saint Paul says: 1. Timoth. 4. C.
Pietas ad omnia vtilis est. Pytye and mercy is profitable to all things. And
thus ye may perceive that the beatitude of mercy correspondeth to the gift of
council. Not that this gift of council does produce and bring furthe the
works of mercy as his effect and operacion: but that it dyrecteth and
orderyth the doer and werker. For the spyryte of council is specially given to
man, to that intent that he should learn thereby to forgive freely and gladly /
and also to show mercy unto those persons that have offe^dyd against him,
knowing that if he so do: he shall find like mercy in our lord, in
forgyuynge his sins done against god / as our lord says in the gospel.
Mat. 6. B.
And this is it that we spoke before, that men consyderyng and beholdynge the
unspeakable pity and mercy of our lord, that he showed when he prayed for
them that put him to death: should be moved and styrred to like pity and
mercy, and so made apt to the restauracion of the order of aungelles, called
virtues. O says the prophet David in the person of Christ: Calix-meus
inebrians quam peclarus est. Psalm. 22.
That is, as the gloss of saint Austyn says, the cup of the blood of our
lord which inebritynge the mind and making it dronken in god, does so cure
and heal it, that it makes it forget all vain delectacion and pleasure. This
dronkennes makes men sobre. This fulness and plenteousnes makes men empty and
void of evil manners and vices. And therefore the prophet says, that it is
preclarus / that is much worthy and noble. For beside the premises, it
brings a man to the kyngedom of heuens.

Example of this spyryte and gift of council. The.xv. Chapitre.
OF this gift of godly council which is given to such as fervently remember
the passion of Christ, we may se an example in the foresaid blessed woman Maria
de Ogines, Li. 31. ca. 39
in the foresaid histories of Vincent / which speaking of this holy woman,
says thus. She, endued with the spirit of council, would do nothing
hedlynges, nothing inordinately: but she did all things diligently, wisely,
discretely, and with great deliberacion. And all though she was inwardely
vysyted with the familiar council of the holy ghost, and also sufficiently
instruct in the holy scripture of god, and all by the feruente and continual
remembrance of the passion of Christ: yet for thabundaunt mekenes that was in
her, and that she would not trust to much to her own wit, and so seem wise in
her own sight: she utterly forsook her own will and reason, and dysdayned not
to submyt her will freely and gladly to the will and council of other, taking
and following their mind and council. This not withstanding, many of her
famylyar friends the which had often experience of her godly wysdom: would take
no great thing upon them without her council. And that she could not know by
man's wit or reason: after her devout and fervent prayer, she had the
knowledge thereof by the inspiracion of god. One time when one of her dear
spiritual friends which had a competent pore living, wherewith he was well
content / and so much the better content, for that he lived quyetly from the
turmoiles and troubles of the world / abstracte and separate from the cumpany
of worldly people, and all worldly pomp or vanity. This person (I say) so
content and seruyng god in mekenes and devout spyryte* was desired of a noble
and great man to be with him as his master, instructour, and counselor / and
he should have all things plenteously at his pleasure / as meat, drink,
raiment, horse, and servants. This person (after this large offer made) asked
council of this blessed woman Mary what he should do. Than she (in no thing
presumynge of her own wit) made her herty prayer to god secretly / and after
her devout prayers, she answered to him and said: I saw a great horse
prepared for you / which went or ran straight way toward hell / and I did
also se a great company of deuylles ioyenge and showing great gladness
thereof. Therefore after my council, forsake that offer and continue in that
calling that god has called you unto / less by such ambicion and worldly
pomp, ye give occasion to the devil to draw you further unto your eterne
perdicion.

By the fervent remembrance of the passion of Christ, the gift of
understanding is given to man. The.xvi. Chapter.
THere is also given unto man (thrughe the fervent and continual remembrance
of the passion of our lord, the gift and spyryte of understanding / whereby
we know god / not effe^cially as he is in him self: but by collacion and
comparyson unto his creatures, as by his effects, operacions, and creatures /
as it were by signs and tokens. Also by this gift we receive a light and
knowledge of those things which we se or here of the scripture of god. And
this knowledge is contrary to that brute and sensual knowledge whereby man
only knows and cleueth fast to these outward and vain things / nothing
regardyng, considering, or knowing his own honor and dignity / for he
only consyderyth these visyble and transitory things / and will not search to
read or know inward things / that is, what he is / not in substance: but in
grace. What is his living, vycyouse or virtuous. How great he is in merytes
or in the favor of god / and where he is, that is in this exyle and vale of
mysery. All these things considers the spiritual person / and that by the
fervent meditacion of Christ's passion. For he that is crucified with Christ
Jesus by the remembrance of his most blessed passion* does ascend unto the
clerenes of knowledge by the spyryte of understanding / on this manner. When a
man does fervently and devoutly remember and consider how that the son of
god would suffer so great pains for to redeem him: anon he consydereth of
what dignity and noblenes his soul is / that it is of an excellent and great
dignity / seeing that the son of god would suffer so shameful a death for
the redemption thereof. And by this consideracion he is animated and moved to
consider and think of high and noble things. For when he depely considers
that that most precyouse blood of Jesus Christ was shed to wasshe his soul
from the fylthynes of sin / and also that by that most blessed passion, the
ruin and fall of angels should be repared and restored with mankind: anon he
dysdayneth to remember or ones to think of these vile and transitorye things
/ but rather he is provoked and moved to behold and consydre spiritual and
heavenly things. And if he consydre or behold these visible things: it is for
that intent that thereby he would ascend to the co^sideracion of heavenly
things / so that his co^uersacion is principally in heuyn. And tha^ also for
asmoche as he sees Christ crucified and so subdued unto manyfolde
tribulacions and pains / he in this consideracion, only willing to please
god: recounteth and thinks all tribulacio^s and pains to be very light and
easy for him to bear. Remembrynge also how much Christ loved him that would
be so cruelly and shamefully entreated and slain for his redemption: he,
feruentely kyndeled in the love of Christ, labors to enter in that most
blyssed side and heart of Christ, which he knew was opened with a spear for
his love. His soul is burning in love as a fire. And therefore with all his
heart he desires to be crucified with Christ. Hereunto he sygheth and wepyth
/ and fervently desires that he might be all washed or drowned in that
passion / and so, hoolly to be transfourmed into his lord god crucified.

He reputeth and thinks him self to be in bondage and mysery / except he be
preserved and kept by the blood of his redemer. He judges him self to be
rather more like a beeste than a man: except he be clad with his lords
passion. It is abhominacion to him to be negligent in the consideracion and
remembrance of so noble a benefit as is the mercyful work of our redemption
/ and therefore he is ever, or at leest has a will to be ever occupied in the
meditacion of the said passion. For as he would ever continue in the favor of
god, which he gate by that passion and redemption: so he would have ever in his
heart and mind the passion of Christ, the price of our redemption. He reputeth
Christ crucified, as his life and all his confort or pleasure / and therefore
he would be ever conuersaunt with him. O what sorrow, what heaviness is it to that
person which is inebriate and drowned in the blood of Christ: if he se his
heart enclyned to any other thing tha^ to Christ crucified? Therefore such a
person disdeyneth to use any other potion or drynk with pleasure, but the blood
of Christ / which has washed him clean, and greatly beautified and made him
like unto Christ. He knows that through the openyng of the side or heart of
Christ, his soul is married unto Christ / and therefore he will ever stand
nygh unto that wound / touching and feeling his spouse wounded for his love /
and so, he fervently desires that he might be wounded in his heart / and
therefore he often times lays his heart unto those wounds by continual
remembrance of them / and also joins and byndeth him self unto his spouse
wounded, with the indissoluble and continual or sure bond of charity / for
the wou^des of Christ be as a cellar of wynes new broched, whereby our souls
may be inebriate or made drunk in charity. And hereunto it is written in the
canticles: Ca^tic. 2. A.
Introduxit me ^ex in cellam vinariam, ordinauit in me charitatem. The king
has brought me into his wine cellar / that is, into the fervent love and
remembrance of his wounds. He has made me drunk in his love and charity.
Ca^tic. 1. A.
Also it is said, Canticorum. 1. Introduxit me rex in cellaria sua. The king
has brought me into his cellers. There shall we suck honey out of the stone /
and drink the most purest blood of ye grape. Christ crucified is this stone
/ and also this grape / whereof we all may plenteously drink. And therefore he
says to his lovers: Ca^tic. 5. A.
Bibite amici, et inebriamini. Cum drink friends hereof at your will / and be
drunk thereof my most dear friends. Also the spouse Christ says to his
spousesse our soul: Ca^tic. 4. C.
Vulnerasti cor meum soror mea sponsa, vulnerasti cor meum. Thou haste wounded
my heart for thy love, my sister, my spouse / thou haste wounded my heart.
Ibide^. 2. A. sermon. 70.
And she again wounded with his love, says in like manner: Vulnerata
charitate ego sum, ideoque filis Jerusalem nunciate dilecto quia amore langueo.
I am wounded with charity / and therefore ye daughters of Jerusalem show unto
my dear beloved spouse Christ that I languysshe and am sick Ca^tic. 5. C.
for love. And so the wounded spouses is joined to Christ crucified her
wounded spouse / and wound is coupled to wound / that is love to love. And
than also the columbyne blood of the spouse / that is of Christ / which is
simple as the down / by the which blood our soul (the spousesse of god)
receives her spiritual sight. This blood I say does flow into the wou^des of
the spousesse / which is so wounded by compassion that she has of her spouse
Christ crucified: that in a manner she faints and swowneth for sorrow / and
mylteth or waxes sick for the love of his spouse / and so than she swetely
rests in our sauiuor Jesus / where she redeth and sees / understands and
fyndeth what she is / and of what merit or dignitye in the love and favor of
god / for whose love the son of god would suffer so great and greuouse
tourmentes. Hereunto speaks saint Bernarde: O good Jesus / thou haste made
thy body, as a glass unto my soul. That which thou did suare openly: I
suffered pryuely. That which thou suffered of the ministers of Cayphas openly: I
suffered of the ministers of wickedness of Sathanas inwardely. Thy face was
covered, and also smyten or buffeted in the house of the prince of prestes /
and that was to put away the confusion of our ignorance and spiritual
blyndenes. We were sumtyme darkness / that was before our baptism / but now we
walk in the light that was set or hanged up on height upon the altar or
candelstycke of the cross / and from thence shyneth very bright unto our
conforte. And so Christ by his passion does illuminate or lyghten our reason
and understanding. Apoc. 3. D.
This is the ointement, wherewith (as saint John^ says) our iyen should be
anointed, that we might se clearly. This is also the rod, 1. Regu^. 14. D.
wherewith Ionathas took of the honey and ate thereof: and so his iyen were
lyghtenyd. This is more over the gall of the fysshe wherewith Thobie anointed
his iyen: Thob. 6. B 11. C.
and so received his sight again. And so Longyne being blind, and washed
with the blood of Christ: received his sight, and was also converted to the
faith. And so ye may perceive how the passion of Christ does illuminate our
understanding, and gives knowledge to meke persons, faithfully and devoutly
reme^bryng his passion. And this is through the gift of understanding to know
god by his creatures / or in comparyng him to his creatures / as we said
before. And also to be illuminat or lyghtened by the wrytynges and saynges of
prophets in the manner of contemplacion or knowledge of those things that be
written of our lord Jesus Christ / whereby man begins to return to his own
self / for by this gift of understanding, he recouereth his spiritual sight
/ whereby he may se and know his own honor and dignity / and so return to
his lord god and se him as it is possible for man in this life. And therefore
to this gift correspondeth the.vi. beatitude / that is, Beati mundo cord:
quoniam ipsi deum videbunt. Mat. 5. A.
Blessed be the pure and clean in heart: for they shall se god. And saint Austen
says that the syxt operacion or gift of the holy ghost / that is the gift of
understanding, is convenient and according to them that be pure in heart. For
they so cleansed and made pure: may know and se that, which the corporal iye
or sight can not se. And here note, that there be two manners of clennes of the
heart. One is as a disposicion to the sight of god / which is a clensyng of the
will or affecte from all mordinate affections / and this clennes is made or
gotten by the gifts and virtues that perteyn to the will / commonly called Vis
anime appetitiua. The desyrouse power of the soul. There is an other clennes
of the heart, which is as a complete and perfyce clennes / whereby god is seen.
And this is the clennes of the mind or understanding purified and cleansed
from all fantasyes and errors / so that the soul so purified, perceyueth the
more clearly and truly those things that be written or spoken of god / and not
only perceyueth them by corporal fantasies, ne yet understands them as the
perverse and obstinate heretykes done declare them. And this clennes is
opteyned or gotten by the gift of understanding / whereunto correspondeth (as I
said before) the.vi. beatitude / that is, Blessed be the clean in heart: for
they shall se god. And faith or fidelity / one of the fruytes of the spyryt,
accords also hereunto. And as ye se that the fruit of the tree is the last
thing and most delectable or pleasant that we have of the fruitful tree: so
be the fruits of ye holy ghost the most pleasant and delectable things that
cummeth to man by the virtue and operacion of the holy gooste. And so the
spirit of understanding, cummynge to the soul of man through the devout and
often remembrance of Christ's passion: cleanses it and purifieth the inward
and spiritual sight of man / which was derked and blinded by the sin of our
first parent Adam / and also does cure and heal it with the knowledge of the
word of god / as it were with an holsum ointement / and does make it so pure
and lyghtsum, that it is apt to receive or to behold the clearenes of the
deytie. Mat. 5. A.
Clennes does spring of the gift of understanding. And this clennes
brings in the vision or sight of god / and therefore Christ says: Blessed
be the clean in heart: for they shall se And therefore we said before, that by
the truth expressed and declared in the most blessed passion of Christ: men
be illuminate through the fervent remembrance of the said passion, unto the
knowledge of the heavenly and godly truths / that so they may be made apt unto
the reparacion of thorder of Cherubyn. For man in his first creacion was so
made of god, that if he had not sinned: he should ever have been present in the
contemplacion of his creatoure and maker / that man, so seeing his lord god:
should ever have louyd him / and so loving him: should ever have cleued fast
unto him. And in so cleuyng fast to him, which is immortal: he also should
have had life euerlastyngly. But man, for his inobedience, was cast from the
face and favor of god. And by his sin, he was blinded with ignorance. And
he was put from that inward light of co^templacion / because he inclined his
mind and gave it to erthly desires. And the more depely he gave him self to
the desire of these vain and transitory things: the more he forgot the
swetenes of heavenly desires, whose taste and knowledge he had lost by his syn.
And so he was exiled and banisshed from Paradise, for his sinful conscience /
and wandered about here in this vale of misery, by inordinate concupiscence. And
also the heart of man which first, fyxed in the love of god, was than stable
and permane^t, and in loving only one thing, that is god, was at all times
one: after that it began to slide unto vain and worldly desires, it was
divided into as many things, as thoo things that he desired were diverse and
many. And so it follows consequently, that yt mind which can not or will not
love yt one thing, yt is very good and one in it self: yt mind (I say) can
never be stable. For ye mind, not fyndyng the end of his desire and his
purpose in those things yt he loves / and so ever labouryng in vain, and
desyryng that thing which he can not opteyn: can never rest stably and quietly.
And hereof follows continual mouyng without stabilitie, labor without rest,
runnyng without any end of his runnyng. And so the heart is ever unquiet, unto
the time it cleue fast by love unto one thing, in the which his desire shall be
saciate and fully content with pleasure / and also he shall have a sure
confidence and trust, that that thing which he so loves, shall never be
taken from him / and this shall be by our lord Jesus Christ / which is the way,
Ioh. 14. A.
truth and life eternal.

And therefore he says: Ioh. 12. E.
Cum exaltatus fuero a terra omnia traham ad meipsum. When I shall be exalted
upon the cross: I shall draw all my elect people to my self. And this his
eternal father promised unto him by the prophet, Esaias. 43. A
saying: Ab orient adducam semen tuum. etc. That is, I shall bring thy sede
and faithful children or servants from the Eest, by one part of the cross.
And I shall gader to the from the west, by an other arm or part of the
cross. And I shall say unto North: Give to my son his servants by the
third part of the cross. And I shall say to the Southe part of the world:
Let not my sons servants to cum to him, by the fourth arm or part of the
cross. Bring my sons or children from far countries / and my daughters
from thextreme and vtttermoost parts of the earth.

Example of this gift or spyryte of understanding. The.xvii. Chapter
OF this spirit of understanding, which is often times given to those that
devoutly remember the passion of Christ: we have example in the said hystoryes
of Vincent, Li. 31. ca. 41
of the often named holy woman Maria de Ogines. Of whom he says thus* This
blessed daughter of Jerusalem, adourned by the fervent remembrance of
Christ's passion with manyfolde virtues, and illustrate or lyghtenyd with the
foresaid gifts of the holy ghost, and also her heart purified and cleansed with
the gift of understanding: she was conversant in and with heavenly things. For
she, utterly excludynge from her heart all vain, transitory, and sensual
fa^tasies: gat into her mind uniform, unvariable, and heavenly imaginacio^s.
And the more she approached and drew nigh unto thimmutable majesty of god: the
more purely these heavenly imaginacions shone in her soul. And wha^ her spirit
so purified was kyndled and burning in the fire of fervent love of god: she
ascended into heaven by contemplacion, as the fume or smoke of insence or other
sweet spices does ascend / and so walkyng in heaven as it were from place to
place ever ascendynge, sought about to find him whom she loved, god
omnipotent. And so searching, she was su^tyme comforted with ye lilies of
vyrgins. Now refresshed with thodiferouse and sweet smellyng roses of the holy
martyrs. And su^tyme she is venerably or worshipfully received of thonorable
cu^pany of the ap^^les / and sumtyme she is associate to the cu^pany of
angels. When she had thus ascendyd from degree to degree, and walked with
ioyouse and glad mind thrughe many places of heavenly paradise: when she was a
little past all these cu^panies: she found him who^ her heart most fervently
desired / and there she perfitely restyd. And when she was in this quietness: it
pleased our lord to show unto her the book of life / wherein when she looked:
she perceived many things by the spirit of understanding / which afterward
wha^ she was cum to her self, she showed by the spirit of prophecy. And so
upon a time, when the heretics called Albigenses were greatly multiplied, three
years before that the people were marked with the sign of the cross to go and
fight against them: she said that she se many crosses descend from heaven upon
a great multitude of people / which people moved of god, and fervent zele that
they had to our savior crucified, and intendyng to revenge the great dishonor
of god, don by those heretykes: came from far countries. And when they came to a
place called Mons gaudii, the mount of joy: there were many of them slain by
the heretics. And than this blyssed woman, though she were in a far country
from yt place: yet she se holy angels making great joy, and bearing the
souls of those holy martyrs that were slain in that battle, unto heuyn,
without any other purgatory. And so this blessed woman seeing this: conceived
so fervent desire to go unto that place, yt no thing should have withholde her
from that journey: if she might have gone without slander of her neighbors.
And wha^ we with smiling countenance asked of her, what she would do if she
were there: she answered and said: Though I can not fight: yet at leest I would
there honor and glorify my lord god, and there confess his name, where as
those wicked heretics has blasphemyd him and denied him. Other examples ye
may se in the said histories. Ca. xlii.

The gift of wisdom is given to man by the devout remembrance of Christ's
passion. The.xviii. Chapitre.
THere is also given to man by the devout and often remembrance of Christ's
passion: the spyryte or gift of godly wysdom. Wherewith god is known
absolutely without respect unto his creatures / or else by experience. As when
we taste of the swetenes of god. And therefore Sapientia is not only called a
knowledge: but it is a sauoury knowledge, thrughe the taste of virtues. And this
gift is given to man, against all chyldely or vain knowledge or pleasure /
so that hereby a man lerneth to despise all wantonness, and milk of temporal
delectacion or pleasure, and all such folysshnes / and begins to savor
heavenly things, and to pondre them as things very pleasant, true, and stable,
or permanent. And erthly things he reputeth as vain and transitory / and also
hereby he judges the truth of every thing as it is in deed / and intermedleth
no more than needs. And of this wysdom saint Paul says: Colo. 1 B.
Impleamini cognitione voluntatis dei in omni sapientia, et intellectu
spirituali. I pray (says saint Paul) yt ye may be replenisshed and
fulfilled with the knowledge of ye will of god in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding. And saint Bernarde says, Ser. 15. de diuersis.
that there be.iii. manners of wysdom. One is the wysdom of the heart. An other
is ye wisdom of ye mouth. And the third is of the outward work or deed. The
wysdom of the heart stands in the weeping and sorowyng for our sins past /
in dispisyng of all wordly pleasures or profits, and in the desire of heavenly
things and eternal glory. The wysdom of the mouth consists in ye confession
of our sins / in the laud and praysynges of god, and in thedi^ienge of our
neighbor by godly speech and exhortacion. The wysdom of outward works
stands in this yt a man live and be conversant with other men patiently,
obediently, and innocently or continently / so that faithful and true
obedience do mortify and subdue his own proper will. Meke contine^ce do cut
away all carnal and worldly concupiscence. And glad patience do sustayn and
bear manly and strongly all corporal and worldly adversity. Capi. 10. A.
Of the wysdom of the heart, we may declare unto you a figure or example
written in the third book of the kings / that is, how the queen Saba, hearing
the great fame of Solomon: came from ye extreme parts of the earth to here his
wysdom / and she came to him with a great cumpany. And king Solomon taught her
in all things that required of him. And so she seeing and considering the
wysdom, his house that he had builded, his ministers and servants, and
thorder of them, their raiment, his buttelers, and thostes or oblacions that he
daily offered: she (I say) considering all these, her spirit in a manner failed
her, for great marvel and wonder she had thereof. Morally or spiritually by
this queen Saba is understand our sinful soul / which heryng of the fame of
Solomon / that is, by inward inspiracion or outward prechynge or redynge,
perceiving thinfinite goodness, love, and mercy of our peaceful Solomon
Christ, by the which mercy and love he has prevented our sinful soul with
his grace / and reconsyled it to his heavenly father. And where our soul by our
first parents was condemned unto eternal death: he has restored and called
it again unto life. Our queen Saba and sinful soul (I say) perceyuyng this
great fame, is incited and moved to cum with all her heart and mind, with a
great and much cumpany / that is, with many sighynges and sobbynges, and great
desires unto our true Solomon Christ, from thextreme parts of the earth / that
is, from sin / that is very far from god. As the prophet David says:
Long a peccato ^ibus salus. Psalm. 118.
Health or salvation / that is Christ, is far from sinners. And therefore
sin is called thextreme part of the earth: for as much as it separateth and
makes man far from god / yea nothing so much / and also because sin
commonly does inhabit the souls of erthly and worldly people. This sinful
queen I say came fro far to here the wysdom of our Solomon Christ. And his
wysdom is this / that we should be (...) and sorry for our sins, despise the
world with all his pleasures, and covet or desire heavenly things / that all
things should savor unto us / that is, that we should judge and take every
thing as it is in it self / after right reason. Also our Solomon Christ does
teache unto us, that if we will avoid eternal tourmentes and pains: we must
fear the justice of god, remember oftymes the surety of death, and the
uncertainty of the hour of death / and to be asshamed to cum to everlasting
infamy and rebuke. Also he techeth us to have discrecion in our elections,
acts, and debes / that is to prefer spiritual things before corporal /
eternal, before temporal / heavenly, before erthly / and honest things,
before vile and dishonest things. This is the wysdom of our Solomon Christ /
this is far from the wysdom of the world. 1. Cor. 1. C.
And therefore saint Paul says: Vbi sapiens (...) vbi scriba? etc. Where is
the wise man of the world? where is the scrybe and learned man? Where is the
buylder and purchaser of this world? Has not god also showed and declared the
wysdom of this world to be a folysshnes? Surely that wysdom may well be called a
folysshnes, whereby the world is loved, and god despised. Worldly honors ben
coueted and desired: and good manners lost and distroyed / whereby riches is
gote^: but good conscience is lost and blinded. But now let us se how this true
wysdom of the heart may be gotten by the remembrance of Christ's passion. For
who so ever be crucified with Christ through ye devout and continual
remembrance of his passion: he may asce^de unto high conte^placion by the gift
of wysdo^ / on this manner, following thistory and example of queen Saba. First
our queen Saba, our sinful soul, does here ye fame of ye wysdo^ and goodness
of Christ our Solomon, when she reme^breth how ye son of god was incarnat and
becum man, and also suffered manifold pains, and was offered upon ye cross for
our sins / and how yt he suffered most greuouse pains and shameful death for
our redemption. And therefore she thinks that no wise man would gladlye or
lyghtely lose that thing which he bought so derely with his own preciouse
blood, if he might with any justice or ryghtfully keep it.

And so considering these: she conceyueth in her self a hope and trust of
forgiveness. And tha^ she makes her supplicacion and prayer to god for his
favor and grace / and promyseth to make amends for her offenses and sins,
as far as it is possible for her to do. Tha^ she beholds and considers
his house that our Solomon has made / that is, her own body and soul / and
how her soul is made to that intent, that it should be the house and temple of
the holy ghost. Also she co^sidereth how glorious and goodly this house was
made / that is, to thimage and similitude of god. And how vylely and shamefully
she has defoiled it by her own sin. And so she begins to have wonder and
marvel of the great mercy of god, that so mercyfully would spare the sinful
soul. Secondly, she beholds ye meats of his table or board / that is, she
co^sidereth how mercifully he does nouryssh and feed sinners with his
benefits / though indede they be not worthy to have the bread that they eat.
Thyrdly, our sinful Saba considers his ministers and servants / that is,
she sees how all creatures were create and made of god for to do service unto
man / and how they continue they obedience and service unto man, though man be
inobedient unto his lord god creator and maker / and so for his inobedience
and sin: unworthy the service of any creature. Fourthely she considers
their vestures and garments / that is, how mercyfully our lord hitherto has
hyd and covered the privy sins of our sinful soul / though all things ben
open to his sight and knowledge. Fyftely, she seeing his buttlers: does
consider how benignely our lord god does byrle and give to us the wine of
contricion and devotion. Psalm. 59.
And therefore the prophet David says: Potasti nos vino compunctionis. Thou
haste given us to drink the wine of compunction and sorrow for our sins.
Syxtely, she beholds the oblacions that our Solomon does daily offer / that
is, how Christ offered him self freely upon the altar of the cross for our
sins / and how the same body and blood is daily offered in the church for
our spiritual conforte. And this oblacion excedeth all the other benefits of
god given to man. And thus our queen Saba, our synnefull soul, having the
iyen of her wisdom in her head Christ / that is, beholdynge and depely
considering all the premises: she faynted, and her spyryte failed her. She
had no spyryte / that is of sin and iniquity / for that has now left her.
And because now the holy spirit of god has entered into that soul: the wicked
and unclean spirit is expelled and put away. And now finally, as Solomon gave
to the queen of Saba many great and precyouse gifts: so our king that has
wrought our salvation in the myddest of the earth, does give unto the soul
depely reme^bryng the premises, great treasures of knowledge and wysdom of
virtue and grace / and that much more tha^ she deserves or asks. For when a
man inwardly considers how he yt was most mighty of power, was so
dispiteously trodden under foot for our sins. He that was most wise, was
deluded and mocked as a fool. He that was best and all full of goodness, was
replenisshed with the bytternes of sorrow. And he that was most rightuouse, to
be condemned to the most shameful death. When a man (I say) co^sidereth all
these things: anon the mind aryseth into a great meruell and admiracion of
ye worthynes and noblenes of god / wonderynge and meruelynge of the great
benignity and charity of god toward us most wretched and unworthy
servants. And than begins the mind with a ferue^ent desire and burning
love to be kyndled toward our lord god. And the spiritual taste of our
affection in a meruelouse manner is made much pleasant and sweet / and our
appetyte is wonderfully refresshed. And so all our inward man is in a manner
alienate and lift up from himself / and quietly does rest in our lord Jesus.
O, a meruelouse thing and never herd or seen before / that is, that
unspeakable swetenes should be found in the most bytternes. The most bitter
bytternes of our dear beloved savior Jesus is meruelously turned in our
loving mind / into a swetenes yt can not be expressed / rauysshyng and
taking into it the hole spirit of man / so that that swetenes ones tasted:
all carnal and worldly pleasure waxes all unsavory, and is excluded. And in
this swetenes is the speculacion or wysdom of the person, contemplatynge and
beholdynge our lords passion, made perfect. For herin he joins and puts
to gydre the high and inenarrable swetenes that he feleth in the consideracion
and beholding of that infinite goodness of god / that it would please him to
suffer so vile a death for us, with that inestimable bytternes that he felt or
feleth in having compassion of the pains and sorrows of his lord Jesus
crucified. And note here that that bytternes of compassion of Christ's passion,
does gader in and vnyt the mind of man. And thadmiracion or wonderful
consideracion of the great goodness of god in the same passion: does eleuate
and lift up the mind so unit and gadred in, and offer it holly unto god. And
for asmoche as therein is found and perceived an unspeakable bytternes with an
unspeakable swetenes: therefore the mind of the person that beholds and
considers this, wondereth at it / and so is alienated from him self, and
rauisshed above him self / and like as if he were all drunk, he falls unto
his lord god / where than the soul melted with love / thrughe the beholdynge
of thinestimable charity and love of god, is made as most pure gold,
purified in the hoar furneys. And in the consideracion of ye most excellent
benignity and goodness of god, the soul is anointed and made fat with the
most pleasant oil of grace. It also obumbrate and shadowed with that (...) of
justice: is made most shynynge. The soul also cleansed and gadred in with that
great bytternes: is abstract and withdrawe^ from all bytternes and sorrow. That
soul beholden and received of god all good: is made all godly / and so at
last, it is absorpt and rauysshed with an unspeakable joy and meruelouse
swetenes. And the spousesse does rest swetely with her spouse / and among
those pleasant and sweet enbracynges, she may than suck and drink of the
fountaynes of our savior, the lively waters and true wisdom. And here note
that it perteyneth to this gift of wysdom, not only to behold and consider
godly and heavenly things: but also to rule and order the acts and operacions
of man. In the which direction and order, first it aperteyneth to avoid all
evil and vice / that be contrary unto true wisdom. And therefore the fear of
god is called the beginning of wysdom: for as much as it causes a man to
avoid all evil and sin. The last thing perteynynge to wysdom, or the end
of wysdom: is to reduce all things to a due order and end / and this
perteyneth to peace. Li. 19. de ciuitate dei. capit. 13.
For as saint Austyn says: Peace is a tranquillity of order / that is, when
all things ben brought to a quiet and due order. And therefore conveniently
correspondeth to this gift of wysdom the.vii. beatitude that Christ speaks
of, Mat. 5. A.
saying: Beati pacifici: quoniam filii dei vocabu^tur. Blessed be the
peaceful that make peace: for they shall be called the chylderen of god. And
saint Austyn says, Li. 1. de ser. d^i in monte. C.
wisdom is agreynge and acordynge to the peaceful. In whom is no contrary
mouyng or rebellyng / but his mouinges ben subdued and obedient to reason.
Sapientia is called a sauory science / and so he has his name a sapore of ye
sapour / savor or taste / as when the mind is touched with the taste of
inward swetenes: he does gader in, him self all hole, by desire to rest
therein / less if ye mind should wandre in ye co^sideracio^ of outward things,
it should shortly be dissolved by inordinat pleasure of ye body or of ye world /
and therefore he gadreth him self all inward / for within he has that thing in
whom is all his delectacion and pleasure. And therefore the spyryte of wysdom,
when he touches the heart with his swetenes, he tempereth outwardly the
fervor and hete of concupiscence / and so the concupiscence subdued: he makes
peace inwardly / to the intent that the mind of man so hoolly gadred into that
inward joy: might fully and perfitely be reformed unto thymage of god. Mat.
5, A.
And therefore it is written: Blessed be the peaceful: for they shall be called
the chylderen of god. And that, for as much as they have the similitude of the
natural and only son of god. Romans 8. F.
As saint Paul says: Quos presciuit conformes fieri imaginis filii sui. Our
lord has predestinate and known before, his children here in earth, to be
conform or made like unto thymage of his natural son / which is called
Sapientia generata. The eternally begotten wisdom of the father. And so herby
ye may perceive that those persons which receive the gift of wysdom by the
devout and continual meditacion of Christ's passion: attain to be the
children of god. Capitul. 2. huius part.
And this is it that we said before, that the great charity of god that apered
in the passion of Christ, should kyndle the fire of love to wards god and
their neighbors, in the hertes of all them that devoutly remember the same
passion / that thereby they might be made apt unto the reparacion of the order
of aungelles called Seraphin.

Here follows an example of this spirit of wysdom. The.xix. Chapter.
EXample of this spyryte or gift of wisdom we read in the hystoryes of
Vincente / which writing the life of the often named Maris de Ogines, Li. 31.
ca. 43
says in this manner. Her heart (thrughe the remembrance of Christ's passion)
was inwardely fulfilled with the spyryte of wisdom / whereby her words were
very sweet and confortable / and all her works were made fat or pleasant
with a meruelouse swetenes of the spiritual unction or ointement.

She was meke in heart, mylde in her countenance, sweet in her words,
pleasant in all her works, and drunken in charity. One time, when she had
lain three days continually in her bed, there resting most swetely with her
spouse Jesus Christ: her joy and sweatenes was so vehemente, that she knew
not how the time passed / and so she supposed that she had scarcely lain the
tenthe part of one quarter of an hour.

She had many me^uelouse and diverse affections unto our lord. Sumtyme she was
very hungery for god / and sumtyme meruelouse thyrsty and dry for god. And the
more she had him or felt him: the more her desire did increase. And when he
would depart from her: than she was sorrowful / than she cried and desired him
to remain and continue with her / and sumtyme she would enbrace and hold him
fast in her arms, that he should not depart from her / and with many tears
beseched him that he would show him self more often times to her. Sumtyme by
three days or more (as it was seen to her) he appeared to her as a little child
lyenge betwyxt her brestys / whom she enbraced and halsed / and hyd him that he
should not be seen of other persons / and so she lay kyssyng and playenge with
him as with a child. Sumtyme he appeared as a mylde lamb / layeng his head in
her lap. Sumtyme our savior appeared to her as a dowue to conforte her.
Sumtyme she se him as a sheep or a wedder with a bright sterre in his forehed /
going about the church to vysyte and conforte his servants / as she
thought. And in diverse solemn festes of our lord he appeared in diverse
manners, accordyngly unto the feast. As on Christe^masse day, he appeared to her
as a child, suckyng his mothers breasts / or lyenge in ye cradell / and than
her affections was ordered to him as to a child / and so according to diverse
apparicions, she had diverse affections / and so thrughout all the festes of
the year. In the feeste of the Purificacion of our lady, commonly called
Candylmas day: she se our blyssed lady offer her son in the Temple / and how
Simeon took him in his arms. And in this vision she had no less joy than if
she had been present at the said oblacion when it was actually don in the Temple
of Jerusalem. And in the procession of this same feast, when her candell was
extyncte and without light by a long space of time: suddenly there came a great
and most clear light from heaven, and did light her taper or candell. On good
friday he appeared to her as crucified and hanging upon the cross / but very
seldom he appeared to her on this manner, because she could not behold it /
her sorrow was so great: Capit. 44.
that she was often thereby in peril of death. And when any solemn feast by
the course of the year drew nygh: su^tyme. viii. days before that feast, she
felt in her soul a great joy. And so she had diversities of affections,
according to the diversity of feestes after the course of the year. Capit. 45.
She se also sumtyme as it were bright beams cummynge from thymage of the
crucifixe dyrectly unto her / and so entered into her heart. And in all these
things she had great delectacion and pleasure / and her spirit was meruelously
comforted therewith. Capi. 46.
This blessed woman also was much weary of this miserable life / and also was
in a manner continually sick for ye fervent love that she had to god, and
continual desire to be in his presence, with him in eternal felicity. But
yet in all these desires, werynes of this exyle or world: she had one singular
and special confort and remedy to refressh her in this vale of misery, unto
such time she might cum unto that she most desired / that is, she had the
heavenly Manna / angels food / the sacrament of the auter / the very body and
blood of her dear beloved spouse Jesus Christ. This was her continual confort
in all her troubles. She learned by experience in this world that which
Christ said in his gospel: Nisi manducaueritis carnem filii hominis et
biberitis eius saguine^: Ioha^. 6. F.
non habebitis vitam in vobis. That is, Except yt ye eat the flessh of the
son of a vyrgyn, and drink his blood: ye shall not have life in you. Nor this
saying was seen to her very hard or unreasonable, as it was to the Iues: but
rather very sweet and pleasant. For in this holy Ma^na she found all pleasure
and all delectable savor and taste by ye receyuyng thereof / not only in her
soul: but also it was to her mouth as sweet as honey. And not only she had
this great confort in the receyuyng of this most blyssed sacrament: but also in
the sight thereof. And therefore, after the time that ye priest had said ma^se:
she desired him to leave the chaleys bare and uncovered upon the auter / to
the intent that she, seeing it: might have more perfyte mind of the blood and
passion of Christ. Many other examples ye may se in the foresaid book of this
blessed woman.

The.vi. particle. Of the setting of our lord upon the ass, and upon her
fool or colte
MAny mysteries and prophecies were spoken and written by the holy prophets
which were fulfilled by our savior Jesus Christ. One of them we shall show
unto you in this chapitre / and how it was fulfilled in Christ. When ye time
drew nigh that our savior Jesus had determined to redeem the world with his
precyouse blood: that was the feast of Pasche / at which feast the Paschall
lamb should be offered according to thordinau^ce of god: our savior Jesus as
the very true lamb, signified by the other la^be, would also voluntarily
approach and cum nigh unto ye place of his passion, where as he would be offered
for the redemption of man. In that deed showing that he was most ready to obey
unto the will of his father, and to meke him to the most shameful and most
painful death for our salvation. And what time it pleased his goodness to take
this journey: we may mekely believe, that our lady moved of her motherly
affection: would have withdrawn him and retained him from that journey. And in
like manner his disciples (as we may suppose) persuaded him to the same / but he
had other wise disposed for all our salvation. Mat. 21. A.
Wherefore in going toward Jerusalem, he went by the mount of Oliuet / to
signify yt only of pity and mercy, and not of necessity, Super Mat. 26.
he came to his passion. This mount (as saint Hierom says) is called the mount
of Oliuet: for asmoche as there did grow many Olives / of the which is made
both creme and oil / and by yt oil ye light of ye lamp is norisshed. And so
it may be called ye mount of oil, creme, and of light / and that to signify
the.iii. effects of Christ's passion / ye is. In ye oil, is signified mercy
and forgyuenes. In creme is signified ye unction of grace. And by the light, is
noted ye light of eternal glory. And these effects we have by ye merits of
Christ's passion. From this mount he sent.ii. of his apostles, signifieng
the.ii. general commandments of love, whereby all mankind is absolved from
syn / yt is, thou shall love thy lord god with all thy heart. etc. The second
is, you shall love thy neighbor as thy self. By these.ii. precepts, if they
be^ truly kept: all syn is expelled / and all justice is performed. And he
said unto his.ii. apostles, go unto yt castle that is against you / that is
before your face at ye foot of ye mount of Sion. He said yt that castle was
against them or contrary to the^ / and that was true / for there they suffered
much co^tradiction and many rebukes and also betynges / as it is written in
thactes of thapostles. Act. 5. D. G.
And there ye shall find an ass tied, and her fool or colt with her / the
which colt was never ryden / lawse the^, and bring the^ to me. Spiritually,
this castle signifies ye world. The disciples signifies the preachers. For
the world is ever contrary to ye prechers. The world loves and follows
riches, honors, and vain pleasures. Contrary, the prechers do preche poverty,
abiection, and penance. The ass for her folisshnes, signifies ye people of
ye Iues. And ye colte yt was wild and wanton, signifies ye gentiles for their
pronitie to syn and custom of ye same. The ass is a be unclean, rude,
folyssh, and weike in her former parts / though she be strong behynd. These
bestes were bound. So was all mankind before ye cummynge of Christ, bound in
the evil custom of syn / which bond is most strong of all other. For
where as other bonds when they be old: they putrify and so cum to naught /
but this bond of sin / the longer it continues: the stronger it is.

There was never man that sat upon this colte / for the gentyles were never
subdued to any reasonable law given by god. Lawse them by your godly and
heavenly doctrine, from their errors and sins: and bring them to me /
informed in true faith and virtuous manners / that they, lawsed from the
bonds of their sins: might follow me in godly living. And when our lord
should have rydden upon this ass or her colte: his disciples cast or put their
garments upon these beestes / signifienge that our savior Jesus would not
rest or sytte upon the naked soul: except it first be clad and coueryd
with the doctrine and virtuous manners of thexaposles. Morally by this ass may
be signified our body / which is dull or rude, folysshe, unclean, weak before
/ yt is to spiritual and heavenly things / and strong behind / that is, to
temporal and vain things. And by the colte, may be signified our carnal
affection and vayn desire. And these bestes ben tied with inordinate pleasures.
But we must lawse them by the fear of god / and prepare them with moral
virtues and worthy fruits of penance: Psalm. 72.
that our lord may rest and sit upon them / so that each one of us might say
with the Prophet: Vt iumentu^ factus sum apud te. I am made as a be unto
the, ready to bear ye / therefore lay upon us what bourden it shall please the:
and we shall bear it. And contrary wise, let us here what saint Paul says to
us: 1. Cor. 6. D.
Empti estis precio magno, portate Christum in corpore vestro. Ye be bought
with a great and dear price / therefore bear Christ in (...) bodies, patiently
sufferynge his visitacion in authynges. By those that brought this ass and her
colt unto Christ: may be signified those penitentes which do offer and bring
their bodies to god by due mortificacion / and their souls by true contricion.
As the body is signified by the ass: so may the sinful soul be signified by
the colte. Our lord and savior Jesus, for to declare and show his myldenes and
mekenes, would not ride upon a proud and high horse: but as he was mylde and
meke: so would he ride upon a mylde and homely be, upon an ass / to
signify also that he will not rest in proud and wrathefull souls: Mat. 21. A.
but in the meke and quyete souls. All this was done (as the Euangelyst
says) to fulfill the Prophecy of Zachary / that is to say / by this act of
our lord, not only he showed his mekenes: Zacha. 9. B
but also the prophecy of Zachary was fulfilled / which said: Dicite filie
sion, exulta satis filia sion. etc. Say ye to the daughter of Syon / that is,
to men dwelling in Jerusalem / which is the daughter of Syon: Be not afraid:
but rather be glad and joyful. Here he excludes all fear of man, and seruyle
fear / and gives to them a surety of joy. Behold (says the Prophet
Zachary) thy king (Christ) cummeth to the, mylde and gentle, sitting upon an
ass and upon the colte of the ass. He cummeth not with great pomp and pride
in chariottes or high horses, nor yet with his armed men or yomen of his guard
about him: but in most mekenes and lowlynes that might be, to give unto us
all an example / that if we desire to follow Christ: we must avoid all pride,
and show mekenes also in our outward acts. Our lord and savior Jesus would
be honored before his passion / not only to show how that he was that self
person of whom the Prophets did speak: but also to declare him self to be
very god, which might change and turn the hertes of men, his creatures, at
his will and pleasure. For though the Iues had a mind to slay him, as they did
shortly after: yet at this time he moved their hertes to laud and praise him.
The Iues showed them self much contrary in this act and in his passion. On
Palm sunday they cried and sange: Mat. 21. A.
Blessed be he that is cum to us in the name of god. Ioh. 19. C.
On good frydaye they cried: Toll toll crucifige ^um. Away with him / hence
with him / crucify him. On Palm sunday, they called him the king of Israhell:
But on good friday they said, We have no king, but the Emperor. On Palm
sunday, they cast grene leuys, flowers, and their garments in the way before
him for great honor: But on good friday they prepared to him a great and heavy
cross / and made him bear it / and afterward nailed him thereon. For the
flowers: they crowned him with thorns. And at last they took all his arayme^t
and clothes from him. Here was a meruelouse contrariety in the Iues.

Here follows a prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which freely and with thine own will came unto thy
passion: cum also to me a wretch, by thy grace in to my heart and soul. And
thou that than did repare me by thy death on the cross: repare me again that
am fallen to sin. Repare me (I say) by the merytes of that same most
blessed passion. Grant to me (lord) that in all things I might keep
myldenes and mekenes / and to subdue my flesh and my spyryt hoolly unto the /
and that I may be made as a be unto the / yt thou syttyng upon me, and
ruelyng me as thy be: may led me now unto ye taste of inward peace, and
desire of heavenly peace / and at last may bring me into the vysyon and sight
of the same eternal peace, Amen.

The.vii particle. Of theiection and casting out of the buyers and sellers in
the Temple.
AFter that our lord Jesus was thus gloryously received of the Iues: furthwith
he went into the temple / teaching unto us a form and manner of good religion,
that we all should follow / that is, to what so ever town or place we go:
first, when we be cum thither: let us go unto the church or other place of
prayer, if there be any there / and so commending our self by devout prayers
unto our lords mercy: go and do such busynes as we came to do. Our lord entered
into the temple, and cast out from thens the buyers and sellers / signifienge
thereby that the priests of the Iues, as unworthy ministers of god: should be
eiecte and cast out of ye temple. O^elia. 54. super Ioh.
And note here as Crisostome says: A man to be pacient in his own injuries
or wrongs done against him self, is much laudable. But it is a great sin
and much reprouable, to dissemble or leave vncorrecte the offenses and injuries
done against god. And therefore Christ suffered patiently his own injuries /
but the injuries of his father, he would in no means dyssemble or leave
unpunished. Morally for our instruction, The feast of Pasce of the Iues (that
is, of them that confess the name of god, or else mekely confess their sins)
drawing nygh: our lord Jesus ascended unto Jerusalem / that is, unto the
holy and devout soul of man, eleuate or lift up by grace. Jerusalem was
builded upon a mount / and therefore it is written that Christ did ascend unto
Jerusalem. Mat. 20. B
The temple in Jerusalem was builded in the highest part of the city / and it
signifies the most excellent and highest part of the soul / that is, Luce.
19. C
the superior or higher part of reason / whose office is to only consydre god
and eternal things. Unto this temple our lord does ascend by the effect
of his sacraments / so visitynge it with his spiritual presence. And take
good head that there be four things specially / which our lord Jesus will
not suffer to be in this his temple / signified by four things that he found
in the material temple / that is, the money of the chaungers / oxen / sheep,
and dow^es / the which he would not suff^e to be in the temple. And also by
these same four, be signified four vices that commonly be found now in these
days among many religiouse persons. The first is, ouermoche solicitude or
busy study in getting and keeping of temporal goods / and this is noted by
the money that our lord cast abroode in the temple. The only study or busynes
of temporal goods is not forbidden: but over much study, and that it be not
in the temple / that is in the superior part of our reason / which only ought
to intend to god and eternal things. Wherefore when so ever any temporal
busynes is exercysed in that temple: it is a great sin and dysorder. For the
creature is put in the place of god / and temporal things, in the place of
eternal things.

The second is, the inordinate use of temporal goods, and thin-circumspecte
consideracion, or the want of a due warenes to avoid peryls and dangers. And
this is noted by the oxen / for the ox does very gredely feed of the herbys
or grass of the ground / and therefore sumtyme for his gredynes or hastynes,
he deuoureth and swaloweth up that thing that is noysum and hurtefull unto him
/ which lyrketh and is hyd among the herbs. So oftymes it happens that
when men will use these temporal goods inordinately, and unwisely or gredyly
/ though he would take that is necessary: yet sumtyme he takes that is noysum
to him. For superfluity and also corporal pleasure, is oftymes lyrkyng and
hyd under necessity. The third vice or defaute is a dulnes and slouthefulnes
to do good and virtuous works / and this is signified by the dowue / which
before she takes her flight: she has great deliberacion and taryeng / turnyng
her head on every side and lokyng round about to co^sydre whether she shall fly
/ but oftymes in ye mean time she is smytten with a byrdbolt / or else taken
with the hawke. So it fortunyth oftymes unto idle and slouthful or dull
persons. The fourth is, a folysshe and inordinate fear / that is signified
by the sheep / which is more folyssh than other bestes. In so much that if in
the time of thunderynge she be left alone from the flock, and be great with
lamb: for folysshe fear she will cast up her lamb. So folysshe fearful
men, for fear of hurtyng of the body, or for fear of displeasure of sum
persons: will cast up the fruit of spyrytuall profit / that is, leave undone
virtuous and merytoryouse works. Where as Christ enters into the temple:
all such vices ben expelled / and that on this manner. He makes a scourge or a
whyppe of three cords. The first, is corporal syckenes. The second, is
trouble of mind. And the third, is spyrytuall admonicion, by the instyncte
and mocyon of the holy ghost. With this whyppe our lord does cast out all
theyse four vices from our souls. And more over he tourneth over their
chayres or stools, and also all their bordes or tables whereon they did rest /
for that they should not lyghtely or easily cum there in again. So our lord
cast out of the soul all the help and mouers unto sin. Esaias. 56. ^.
And our lord said unto them whom he drove out of the Temple. It is
written by the Prophet Esaye: Domus mea, domus orationis vocabitur. etc. My
house / that is dedycate unto my honor and name: shall be called the house of
prayer / and not the house of rape or theft / nor of marchaundyse / vain
speech, or vain beholdynge. Hereof is given unto us a great confydence or
trust that our prayers shall be herd. Wherefore else would he move us to
pray in his temple: excopte he would there here our prayers? Hier. 7. B.
It follows: Vos ^ecist^s illam spelumcam latronum. Mat. 21. B
But ye have made my Temple a den of theuys. The theuys have none other sorrow
or care: but only to get temporal goods / and how so ever they may have
or get them: they regard ne care not / so that they may have them. And
therefore they hyde them selfs in pryuye caves or dennys, because that they
would not be taken or perceived. Mat. 21. B
It follows: Et accesserunt ad eum ceci et claudi in templum, et sanauit eos.
After this act or deed done: there came unto our sauyoure Jesus Christ into
the Temple many blind men and la^e men / and incontinently he cured and healed
them. And so they were as witnesses of the voice and praysynge of the
chylderen that with loud voice cried in the Temple, and said unto our
sauyoure Christ Jesus: Hoshiah^^. That is as much to say: Save us, or make us
safe now.

And our sauyoure Jesus answered unto them / not by words: but by his
deeds / in curing and gyuynge health unto the blind and the lame men. As if
he should say, ye call me a savior / and desire health of me. Loo, I as a very
sauyoure, give unto you health. The princes of the priests and the scrybes
that is, the learned men in the law of god / seeing these great miracles and
meruayles / and hearing the chylderen tryenge / in the Temple / and praysyng
him as god: they had great indignacion thereat / and so were greatly moved
against him with envy, (...), and malice. For commonly evil and enuyouse men
can not pacyently here the praise of good men. And where as they durst not lay
vyolent hands upon him for fear of the people that than favored him, nor
yet impugn his manifest and open miracles: yet they rebuked him for yt he
suffered the people so to rejoice in him / and the chylderen also to praise and
laud him as god so openly in the temple. Ibidem.
And so they said unto him: Audis quid isti dicuntur? Do thou here and
perceive what these people do say? As if they said, thou should not suffer
such laud and praise to be given to the, which is only due to god /
therefore if thou were an holy, just, and good man: thou would refuse or
declyne from such glory and praise. And Jesus answered, saying: Vtique. I
here their praysynges, and ought to here them / for this praysyng was
preordinate of god long before this time to be given unto me / for so it is
written by the Prophet David: Psalmo. 8.
Ex ore infantium et lactentium perfecisti laudem. That is, Thou good lord
have performed the praysyng (that thou ordered for thy son) to be fulfilled by
the mouth or voice of infantes and young suckynge children.

A prayer.
O Lord, thou made a general sign or token of thy terrible judgment when
thou cast out of the temple all buyers and sellers with a whyppe made of three
cords / showing in thy face or iyen the flame of thy divinity: I pray and
beseech the lord to grant me to remember and so to consydre thy terryble
presence, yt I might fear the with an holy fear. For thy judgments be
great and not to be serched / which when I consydre: all my bones quake for
fear / for there is no man living upon the earth / that is sure of thy glory
/ but all things be reserved as uncertain unto the time hereafter to cum /
that we should ever serve the devoutly and virtuously in fear / and also joy
in the with dread. Amen.

The.viii. particle. Of the dolorouse or sorrowful departing of our savior
Jesus from his mother Mary.
ALthough theuangelystes write little or no thing of the heavy departing of our
savior Jesus from his mother: yet diverse holy doctors, moved of the holy
ghost, have showed the same. And in especial these saints. Austyn, Bernarde,
Anselme, and Ioha^nes de Capistrano. And that in this manner. The wednysdaye,
after that Judas had made promise to the Iues that he would betraye Christ,
and deliver him into their hands: he came into Bethany, where as Jesus was with
his disciples. Christ knew very well that Judas had sold him / and that not
withstanding, he took Judas in his arms and kyssed him, when he came to
Bethany / thereby secretly mouynge him to forsake and leave his maliciouse
mind. Also our lady the vyrgyn Mary, louyngely and frendely bad him welcome /
and asked of him, what he herd of her son. And Judas said, every man speaks
good by him. Mary much louyd Judas, because she knew that he was known and
in favor with the princes of the prestes. But if she had known what he had
done: I suppose her virginal heart would have broken for sorrow. But because she
knew it not: they went quietly to supper. At the which supper Judas set him
bytwyxte Jesus and his mother Mary, for a token or sign that shortly by his
treason: he would divide them a sunder. And at this supper, Christ declared
ordinately the mysteries of his passion. And in his preaching, when he
beholdynge Judas remembered his falsnes and dampnacion: 2. 2. questi. 136.
quest. 1.
Christ waxed very pale. For as saint Thomas says: Among all the passions
of the soul: heaviness does most noy and hurt the body, and altre the body.
And when supper was done: the vyrgyn Mary said to her son Jesus: My sweet
son, I would speak with the secretly. And than she said, O my confort and my
light / say to me the troth, why wast thou so pale at supper / and what meant
thy weeping and deep syghynges? My heart was almoost broken thereby. And than
Jesus said to his mother, O my blessed mother / thou reme^brest for what cause
I was incarnate and made man in thy womb / therefore since thou would know
the cause of my heaviness: this is it. The time is cum and the hour is at hand,
that I shall be departed from the by my most bitter passion that I shall
suffer for the redemption of man. Therefore when I actually remember this: it
causes such heaviness in me. Than when the vyrgyn Mary herd for a certeinty
that the death of her son was so nyghe at hand: Ah good lord, how much
did she sorrow? What wepynges, sobbynges, and syghynges had she? Every motherly
heart may imagyn. And than after her wepynges, she wyllyng to move her son to
sum other manner and way of redemption for the salvation of man: said. My dear
son, I know that thy heavenly father has decreed with his mercy to redeem
mankind / but all things be possible to thy father and to the. Wherefore if it
would please thy father and the: thou might redeem mankind by an other way,
than by thy passion. Sith therefore thou may so do: I beseech the it may so
be. Hereunto Jesus answered, O my most sweet mother, I know thy love and
charity toward me / but (good mother) I must needs more obey to god my
father, of whom I have my godhed: than to the, of whom only I have my
manhood.

This same wednysday Mary Magdalene sent a messanger unto Jerusalem, to here
and know what was there spoken of Jesus. And this messanger said that it was
decreed by the council of the Phariseis, that Jesus should dye / and how that
they would crucify him. And than the virgyn Mary, with Mary Magdalene and
Martha, came unto Jesus and said, O most pitiouse confortour, go not into
Jerusalem: for they have concluded against the / they will slay the. Abide
here / we shall prepare the Paschall lamb for the. Hereunto Jesus said, O my
dear mother, O Magdalene, O Martha, The time determined by my father, is cum,
that I should redeem mankind. It is necessary that my fathers will be
fulfyllyd. Than the virgyn Mary said to him, O my most dear beloved son, O
my life and light of mine iyen / if thou will needs go into Jerusalem, and
dye: suffer me to dye with the, or else before the. Jesus answered and said, O
my most kind mother, all my disciples shall forsake me, and the faith shall
perysshe and cease in them for the time of my passion / therefore it is
necessary that thou abide with them / both to confyrme them in faith, and
also to conforte them. O my sweet mother, I thank the with all my heart for
all thy benefytes and kyndenes that thou haste done to me. Here friends, look
upon her motherly heart, and consydre what heaviness and sorrow she had, herynge
these words of her dear son Jesus.

Erly on the thursday in the morning, they both kneled down / and kissing to
gyther: took their leave with many tears and wepynges. And as saint Austen
says, Libro de verbis domini: When they went to gyther: the virgyn mary said:
O my most sweet son, I shall no more here the. O joy, full of the pleasure
of paradyse. I shall no more touch the. O thou consolacion of the world. I
will never leave the. If thou go: I will go. If thou stand: I will stand. And
than Jesus answered with a weeping and mourning voice. O my dear mother, why
do thou trouble me with thy weeping: sith the heaviness that I have for my
passion is sufficient for me? So often does the sword of sorrow perce my heart:
as often as I se the weep, or any tear fall from thine iyen. Wherefore I
beseech the most natural and loving mother to go with my welbelouyd
Magdalene into her house / to who^ I commend the / and so with great sorrow
departed. And at this most heavy departing, she said unto Judas, O Judas, I
commend my most dear beloved son unto the. If thou here any thing contrary
to him: show him of it, that he may be the more ware. And hereof says saint
Bernarde, O blyssed vyrgyn Mary, thou did not know that thou commended thy
most innocent son to a fox most false and subtle. Thy most mekest lamb,
to a wolf. Thy son, very truth: to a crafty liar. And so the sorrowful
mother departed from her son / seeing that it would be non otherwise. O, what
(suppose you) said than Magdalene, Martha, and other women there present, unto
our lady? Let every man think as his devotion seruyth him. I think they might
say, Ca^ti. 5. D.
as it is written in the Canticles, O most goodly of all women / whyther is thy
most dear beloved gone? Where has he hyd him self? We will go search him
with the. And the sorrowful vyrgyn might answer, My conforte, my life, my
son does go in a strayt and hard way / byset round about with his enemies.
etc.

The.ix. particle. Of the supper or maundie of our lord.
When the time of the miseracions and mercies of our lord was cum, in the
which he had disposed to save his people: and to redeem them / not with
corruptyble gold or silver: but with his own preciouse blood, before he
should depart from his disciples by his corporal death: he would make unto
them a supper, for a sign and memorial of things past, and also to fulfill
the mysteries that were to be fulfilled. Therefore our lord Jesus, required of
his disciples, where and in what place he would have the Paschall lamb
prepared for him and them: ^uce. 2^. A.
He sent Peter and John^ to one of his lovers in the mount of Syon, where as
was a goodly and a great chamber strewed and made ready for him / and there they
prepared the Paschall lamb for him. By Peter is signified good operacion or
actyue life. And by John^ is noted devout contemplacion. These.ii. prepare the
Pascall lamb / that is, they dispose a man duly and reuere^tly to receive the
holy body of our lord, signified by the Paschall lamb. They prepare this
spiritual lamb in a great lofte or chamber / that is, in the soul of man,
eleuate and lift up by fervent devotion / and great by longanimitie / brood,
by the bread of charity / and strawed by the diversity of virtues. And when
all things were prepared in this chamber: Jesus did enter with his disciples /
to whom the Pascall lamb roasted, was brought furthe. And grace said, or
blyssyng made by our lord: they eat it with the iuse of wild letu^e. And note
that in this sole^pnitie of Pasce, there were toure things / that is, the
Pascall lamb, pure wheat bread without leuyn / wine, and the iuse of wild
letuse / to signify that no man might cum worthily to eat of the true lamb,
the body of Christ: without bytternes and compunction of heart for their
sins. This refection also does signify theternall refection of glory that
shall be in the end of the world. Than Jesus rysynge from supper / his
disciples sitting and eating: he said, I have with a great desire desired to
eat this Pascall lamb with you before my passion. This word desire, twyse
spoken: does signify a mind of two desires. One was, yt the old testament
should be finished: and the new should be begun. And this was most his desire.
For all the days of his life he ran after us with a most fervent desire of
our health. And we* if we can not at sumtyme have good minds and desires: at
the leest let us have a will to have yt good desire, Psalm. 118. D
according to the saying of David: Concupiuit anima mea deside rare
iustificationes tuas. My soul has couetyd or desired to desire thy
iustificacions. After this, Christ took bread and wine / and gyuynge thanks
to god: blyssed them / and so converted the bread into his own body / and the
wine into his blood / and gave it unto them / saying, take and eat / this is
my body / and drink of my blood. And here he showed his great desire yt was
to cum / that is, to shede his blood for our redemption / that after the
immolacion and offering of the figurative and Pascall lamb: should follow the
oblacion of the very true lamb Jesus Christ. And so the old figures ceased
/ and all things were made new: when that Christ conuertyd and turned bread
and wine into his precyouse body and blood. Exodus 12. B
And here note that in the book called Exodus, there were determined many
things that were required to the eating of the figurative and Pascall lamb /
which also spiritually be required to theatynge of the very true lamb should
have shoes upon their fete / betokenynge that our affections should be
separate from all erthely things. In a sign also or token hereof, our lord
first washed the fete of his disciples, before that he gave to them his body
and blood. Sixtely, they should

Secondly, that we take or eat it with our neighbors, as many

Fourthly, it should be eaten hastily: betokenyng our fervent desire

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which in the even tide made thy last supper with thy
disciples in a great and large chaumbre strawed and made redye for the / and
there fed them with thy most sacrate body and blood: make my heart (I
beseech the) a great and large chamber prepared for the. Enlarge in it true
faith, hope, and charity. Magnify or make it great, with longanimitie,
patience, and mekenes / and straw it with all manner of virtues. Grant me lord
that my heart contrite and thus prepared: may take and receive the after my
pore manner / whom heuyn and earth are not able to take and conteyne: that by
thy grace inhabytance in me, I may think and perform in deed all things
pleasyng to the / and declyne or avoid all vice and sin by perfyte hace of
them / and so continuynge unto the end: I may worthily receive thy preciouse
body and blood in the sacrament of the altar. AMEN.

The.x. and last particle of this first part. Of the washing of his
disciples fete.
When this supper was done, and the Paschall lamb eaten, and when the devil
had put into the heart and will of Judas to betraye Christ, not dyrec^y
mouynge his will, as the soul moves the body: but only indyrectly by
suggestion mouynge and perswadynge him to betray Christ / and he consented
thereunto. And here note that the devil can not put evil thoughts into ye
heart of man: but only offer them unto man / which if the man receive them /
and that appear to the devil by sum outewarde sign or token: than the devil
blows at this cool to kyn^^e and make the fire burn / that is, he ceasseth
not to persuade and move that man to consent unto that sin. And so it
apperech that the devil can not cast a man down and ouercum him: except the
man cast him self first down, and render his armor unto his enemy / that
is, except he consent to the suggestyon and mocion of the devil. Ioh. 13. A.
This supper (I say) done, and the Paschall lamb eaten / when the devil had
moved Judas to betraye Christ, and he consented to the same: than Jesus
knowing as god, that his father had given and taken into his hands and power
all things / also his enemy and traitor Judas, and the Iues his persuers: yet
to show and declare his great pytie / and to leave to us an example of his
perfyte mekenes: he would not fulfill or take upon him the power or might of
god, or office of a lord, but rather the office and room of a servant. He
did meke him self to be a servant / for he came to do service: and not to
receive the service of other. And therefore he arose from his supper of the
Paschall lamb, willing than to wasshe the fete of his dyscyples there being
/ and so causyng water to be brought unto him: he put of his outward garments
/ and gyrdyd him self with a lynen clothe. Than he put the water into a basen
with his own hands / and so charitably, so honestly, and so seruiceably
prepared: he came to wasshe his disciples fete that were defoiled with the claye
and durte of the earth / for they went bare fo^ed. And so he washed their
fete, and wyped them with the clothe wherewith he was gyrte: and thus he
fulfilled the office of mekenes. And when he came to Petre / he would not
suffer him to wasshe his fete, but said / thou ^hal^e never wasshe my fete. And
Jesus said, If I wasshe not thy fete: thou shalt have no part of my bliss
with me. Than Petre, fearing this sentence: said* Wasshe (good lord) not
only my fete: but also my hands and my head. And Jesus said: He that is
washed, he needs no more to wasshe but his fete / for than he is all clean.
What this signifies: ye shall know afterward. Ioh. 13. B.
It follows in the gospel of John: Ye be now clean, for I have washed you /
but ye all be not clean. This he spoke for Judas, that should betray him that
same night / and therefore he was not clean. There be two things specially,
whereby a man is made clean from sin / that is, almose deed, and charity.
Judas had not the first: for he was a thief, and took unto his own use such
things as should have be given to the pore. Also he betrayed his innocent
master, contrary unto charity / and so Judas was not clean. O thou chrystyan
/ consider here dylygentely every point of this washing: for they be full of
mekenes and love. Behold what is done: for it is very devout. Here the high
majesty of god, and mekenes of the master, did enclyne and bow him self
down to the fete of pore fysshers. He knelyd on his knees, and bowed his head
before his disciples sitting / and so washed their fete with his own hands
/ did also dry them and kiss them all.

Behold here the exemplar of all myldenes and mekenes, the creatoure and maker
of all creatures, the fearful judge of both quycke and dead: knelynge here
before the fete, not only of his loving disciples: but also before the fete
of the false traytoure Judas. O thou man / learn here of thy lord / for he is
both meke in heart, and gentle in his conversation. Be thou confounded of thy
high mind. Art thou not asshamed of thy pride and impacience? He that is
sitting above the high order of angels, called Cherubyn, wassheth the fete of
his enemy and traitor: and thou earth and dust, ashes and cley, exaltest thy
self, and thynkest great things of thy self. Consider diligently how our
lord inciteth and moves us by his examples and also by his words unto
mekenes. Therefore, after that he washed his disciples fete, showing there^^ to
us an example of great mekenes: Ioh. 13. B.
he said to us: Exemp^um dedi vobis vt quemadmodum ego feci vobis: ita et vos
faciatis. I have given to you an example, that as I have done to you: so ye
should do. Mat. 11. D.
And also he said in an other place: Discite a me, quia mitis sum et humilis
cord. Learn of me / for I am mylde in conversation and meke in heart. And in
this, he kept a convenient manner of teaching. For as saint Luke says: Cepit
lesus facere et docere. Jesus began first to live and do well / and after
that, Act. 1. A.
he did teach other to do the same. Spiritually, by this outward washing of
the fete, our lord did note the inward clennes of our spiritual fete, which
be our love and a^^ections. For these spiritual fete do bear us where so ever
we go from our self / or without us. And as our bodyly fete has often times
need of washing: so our spiritual fete. For though we be hoolly and clean
washed by the sacrament of Baptym, in so much that if we keep that innocence
and clennes that we by that sacrament receive, unto our death: we be sure to go
to heuyn without any other wasshyng: Yet, for asmoche as there is very few or
non that keep that purity of their baptysme after that they cum to the years
of discrecion, but yt oftymes they fall in one thing or other and that thrughe
the frail condition of our mortal nature, so that they defoile their fete
with worldly, vain, or carnal affections: therefore it is necessary yt they
often wassh their fete with confession and teres of co^tricion. For who so ever
after his baptym do fall to syn, and be not washed with ye water of penance:
he shall have no part with Jesus in his glory. By this wasshyng of ye fete, our
lord also does note the clennes of our spiritual fete / which specially is
required in the receiving of the blessed body of our lord. And therefore he did
wasshe the fete of his disciples before he gave to them his gloriouse body and
blood: to signify yt spiritual clennes is required in the due receyuynge of
the sacrament of the altar.

A prayer.
O Mylde Jesus, and the exemplar of very mekenes / which washed the fete of
thy disciples / I ask and also beseech the lord, purge and cleanse thou mine
affections / that I so purified in both fete, and kyndled with a double
charity / that is, with the love of god and of my neighbor, I might surely
cum to the my puryfyer and clenser. Keep me clean good lord unto the end of
my days / and cleanse me from all spots of sins, that all my negligencys
and also sins forgotten: mine enemies, confounded and rebuked, might go fro
me at the hour of my death / which specially will lie in awayte of me at that
hour. Direct and order my fete lord in to the way of peace / that I
delivered from the hands and power of all mine enemies: might bless and
praise the with all they elect servants world without end.

AMEN.
Here ends the Proheme or first part of this treatise. And here begins
the second part, called the execucion.
THexecucion of this glass, shall be asentenciouse declaracion of our lords
passion, approbate and taken of many holy doctors. As of saint Hierom,
saints Augustine, Bernarde, Simon de Cassia, Reynarde de Laudenburg / and for
the more part, taken of Ludolphe carthusience. And we shall follow the process
of the gospel / beginning this declaracion of the passion, where as saint John
theua^gelist begins the passion of Christ / that is, in the.xviii. chapitre
of his euangely. And we shall divide this part into.lxv. articles. And every
article shall show sum notable point or pain that Christ suffered. And to every
article shall we add a document or lesson with a prayer / which prayers may
serve unto us for two purposes or causes. First, it is as a summary and breue
or short recollection or declarynge of all that was written in tharticle and
also document going before. Secondly, to kyndle the devotion of the reders /
which devotion, that it may be more increased: all thoo things that Christ
did than suffer, should be so much imprynted in our heart, and so pleasant to
us: as if he had only suffered them for us, and our only salvation. And for
this cause also, all the prayers be fourmed and made in the singular nombre /
to the intent that we may apply them to our self. As it shall appear
hereafter in the same prayers.

The first article. Of the fear and heaviness of Christ.
THe first article of our lords passion, is the voluntary taking of fear
and heaviness. For as the euangelyst says: Hymno dicto: exierunt in montem
Oliueti. Mat. 26. C.
For shortly after that the supper was ended, and the devout sermon the which
he spoke, was done: than he said grace / and so they went unto the mount of
Oliuete. This sermon is written by the Euangelyst John^. And immediately after
that sermon: it follows in the beginning of the.xviii. Chapter. Hec cum
dixisset Jesus: Egressus est cum discipulis suis trans torrentem Cedron.

When Jesus had spoken that long and devout sermon: Capitul. 13. D. 14. 15.
16. et. 17.
he went from that house where as he made his supper / not taryenge or abiding
there for Judas, which was gone to get a great company of the Iues, for to
take his master Christ. Our lord (I say) would not abide the cummyng of
Judas in his host house / less paraduenture his host, or sum of his family
or servants should have been evil entreated by the cruel Iues or their
ministers and servants / and therefore he went thence over the river of
Cedron. To signify also to us, that no man may attain and cum to the
pleasures and joy of heavenly paradise: except he, first pass over the river
and water of penance. And so, he passing over that river of Cedron: came unto a
little vyllage that was at the fore of the mount of Oliuet, called Gethsemany /
where as was a garden or orcharde / into the which he entered with his
disciples. Gethsemani is as much to say by interpretacion as Villa
pinguedinis. The town of fatnes / signifienge thereby that by the mekenes of
his passion, he would replenyssh us with the fatnes of grace and unction of the
holy ghost. And that he went into the gardeyn: does signify that he would by
his passion induce us and bring us into the orcharde of virtues and spiritual
richesse. And also that the manner of our curacion and redemption should
corresponde and reaunswere unto the manner of our first transgression and
perdition, which took beginning of the sin of our first father Adam in
the orcharde of Paradyse: so in like manner our reparacion that should be made
by the passion of Christ, should have his beginning also in the orcharde. And
when they were in this orcharde or garden: our lord said to his disciples:
Mat. 26. ^.
Sedete hic donec vadam illuc et orem, orateque ne intretis in temptationem.
Luce. 2^. ^
Sy^ here unto the time I go and pray / and pray you that ye be not ouercum
by temptacion. It follows: (...)
Et assumpsit secum Petrum, Iacobum, et Iohannem. And he took with him Peter,
Libro. (...).
James, and John^.

And here notes Simon de Cassia / that a person, put in great agonyes or
troubles, has need to have a certain trynytye of virtues / without the
which trynytye, he fyghteth in vain / his prayer is frustrate / and his
contemplacion of little profit. First, he must have a knowledge of those
things that he ought to do / that is, the light of true faith / whereby he
knows all things necessary for his salvation. The second, is a debellacyon
and true supplantynge or subduynge of vices. The third, is the assystante
grace of the holy ghost* This trynytie of virtues is noted by these three
appostles, Petre, James, and John^. And that appears by the interpretacion of
their names. For Petre is as much to say (by interpretacion) as knowing /
and so signifies the stable knowledge of the faith. James is interpreted a
supplantoure or a subduer. And by John^ is sygnyfyed the grace of god. And
without this trinity of virtues, all our labor is in a manner but lost.
Mat. 26. D
It follows in the gospel: Cepit Jesus contristar^ et mest^^ esse. Jesus
began to be heuye and sad. Mark says: Marc. 14. D.
Cepit pauere et tedere. He began to fear and to be yrkesom or heuye. And here
is the first point or article of the passion of our lord / that is, fear
and heaviness / which he voluntaryly took for us / and that in the most
intense and highest degree / and this is to be understand in like manner of all
other artycles. And note here the words of the Euangelystes / which says:
Cepit Jesus contrista^^, etc. Jesus began to be heuye. They say^ not that he
was heuye / for than that passion of fear or heaviness, should have had
dominion in his soul. Which was not true / for he took that fear or
heaviness of his own voluntarye will / and that for many causes. As for the
ruin or fall of his dyscyples. For the blyndenes, envy, and perdycyon of the
Iues. For the desperacyon and dampnacion of Judas. For the destruction of the
city and temple of Jerusalem. And also for the bytternes of his greuouse
pains / and of the most shameful death / that by the virtue of his godhed, he
knew before, that he should suffer it afterward. And therefore he said:
Tristis est anima mea vsque ad mortem. Mat. 26. D
My soul is heuye unto the death / that is. My heaviness is so intense and so
great, that if it were any more: death should follow. Or else, My heuines is
such, that it shall not cea^se or leave me unto the death. And note how he
says, unto the death / and not thus, My soul is heuye for my death. For he
took this sorrow and heaviness wylfully for thobedience of his father, Libro. 13.
and salvation of mankind. And here Simon de Cassia notes a good lesson /
that it is much profitable to prevent heaviness by heaviness / that is, eternal
pain and heuines, by temporal heaviness. This heaviness in Christ did excede all
the sorrows and heuynesses of all the men of this world / for he suffered for
all the sins of all mankind. Psalm. 21.
And therefore he says by the prophet: My god, my god, why have thou forsaken
me? This is the cause. The words of my sins has put me tar from my
health and conforte. De Geues^ ad littera^.li. 4. ca. 9.
Heaviness is than (for a truth) a laudable and commendable passion (as saint
Austyn says) when it proceeds of a right love or good cause. As when a man
is heavy for his own sins, or for the sins of other persons.

Also heaviness is taken profitably, 2. Cor. 7. C
when it is taken for the satisfaction of our sins. And therefore saint Paul
says: Que secundum deum est tristitia: penite^tiam in salutem stabilem
operatur. That heaviness which is according to the will of god: does work
penance into our stable and sure health. And therefore Christ, to do
satisfaction for the sins of all men: took upon him the most heaviness that
might be / and yet it excedyd not the order and rule of right reason. Also he
suffered pain in his body for the sins of all mankind. Which pain and
sorrow excedyd the sorrows of every person contrite. And no marvel that his
sorrow was so great / for it procedyd of a more deep or inward knowledge and
wysdom / and also of a more perfyte charity and love, than the sorrow of any
otherman. And these be the causes whereby the sorrow of contricion is increased.
Also he suffered and sorowed for all our sins / as the prophet says: Vere
dolores nostros ipse portauit. Esaias. 53. B
Truly he bare our sorrows, and suffered for us. Also Christ took all the
causes of our heuines / and therefore his heaviness and sorrow was the most. It
follows in the text: Mat. 26. D
Vigilate et orate ne intretis in temptationem. He said unto his three disciples
whom he found slepynge, watch and pray: that ye be not ouercum by
temptacion. He watches, that does good works, and that keeps him self
diligently that he fall not into any heresy or derke and erroniouse opinion.
Spirius quide^ promptus est, caro autem infirma. The spyryte is prompte and
ready to do well and to promise great things / but the flesh is infyrme and
frail to do good, or to suffer pain. And Christ spoke this for the proud
folysshe persons which think that they may do what so ever they will. Super
Man. 26.
And hereunto saint Hierom says: As much as we trust of the fervor and
redynes of our mind and spyryte: so much we should fear of the infirmity
and frailty of our flesh. Luce. 22. ^
It follows: Et positis genibus orabat dicens: Pater si vis: transfer calicem
istum a me. Jesus knelynge, prayed to his father / saying: Father, if thou
will: thou may take this pain and passion from me. Our lord here prayed after
his sensual will, to that that the reason of Christ did here express the
affect and desire of his sensuality as the advocate of sensuality for this
time. And therefore when he added in his prayer: Verumtamen non mea voluntas,
sed tua fiat. This not withstandyng, thy will be fulfilled / and not mine: He
did express that this affection in him was subdued to right reason / that is,
to his reasonable and godly will / by the which he would the same thing that
god his father would / from whom by this will, he was not divided.

It follows: Luce. 22. ^
Et cum surrexisset ab oratione et venisset ad discipulos suos: inuenit eos
dormientes. And when he rose from his prayer and came to his disciples: he
found them slepynge. This corporal sleep was a figure and sign of the sleep
of infidelity / wherewith they should be shortly grieved and oppressed.
Peradventure sum person may marvel how that they might sleep, heryng of the
death of their master Christ? We may answer thus.

They were very heavy for his death / and heuines will induce and move a man to
sleep. Also it was than well forward in ye night. And though they all did
sleep: yet he blamed Petre rather than the other. First, for because he boosted
and said, Though all other forsake the: I will never forsake the. Therefore he
was worthy more to be rebuked. Also because he was the captain and chief of
thapostles / and therefore Christ rebuked him for them all / saying to Peter
thus: Mat. 26. D
Sic? non potuisti vna hora vigilare mecum? What Petre? may thou not watch
one hour with me? As if he had said, How wylt thou dye with me, that can not
watch one hour with me? And in that that he says, one hour: he signifies
to us, that the burden and time of temptacion, is very short in the respect
of the remuneracion or reward in glory.

And note, how that Christ did pray three times one and the same prayer / and
after every time he came to his disciples, and found them slepynge. He did
thryse pray the same prayer: to signify to us (as saint Bernarde says) that
we should dyrect all our prayers to the father, to the son, and to the holy
ghost, that we might have spiritual strength of the father, wysdom of the
son, and a good will, of the holy ghost. Or therefore he prayed thryse, that
we should exercise the three powers of our soul in prayer / that is, that our
reasonable power should be diligent in meditacion / our affection and
concupiscible power, should be fervent in desiring / and our wrathful power
should be strong in avoiding all evil. Christ also, after every time of his
prayer, came to his disciples, and found them slepynge. At the first time, he
rebuked them, as we said before. At the second time, he suffered the^. And at
the third time, he commanded them to sleep / saying: Dormite iam, et
requiescite. Sleep now, and rest. And this was to signify three manner of
slepys. And that the first, which is the sleep of sin, correspondynge to
the first sleep of the disciples: is to be reproved. The second, that is
natural sleep: is tolerable, and to be suffered. And the third, which is
the sleep of contemplacion and glory: is to be desired of all people.

Here follows a lesson or instruction.
OF this article we may take this lesson / that when we would pray devoutly:
that we should go to sum secret place from the noise or cumpany of men. Also
that we commyt all our tribulacions, heaviness, pains, and infirmities unto the
will of god, as Christ did after his prayer / though it so be yt we pray and
desire to be delivered from them, as Christ did: yet let us submyt our will
to the will of god. Also let us put all our tribulacions and pains, as it were
into the heart of Christ: desiring and prayenge him that he would perform
and make our patience perfect in the union of his passion / and so offer them
to ye laud and glory of his father. For hereby our tribulacions and pains
shall be greatly dignified. For as the passion of Christ brought great fruit
and conforte both in heuyn and in earth: so our pains and tribulacions, what
so ever they be, if they be in the foresaid manner committed and commendyd in
the union of Christ's passion: they shall be so frutyfull, that they shall
bring joy, to the angels in heuyn / merit, to the good persons living in
earth / forgyuenes, to the sinners / and great refresshyng and conforte, to the
souls in purgatory. And this is because Christ reputeth and accompteth all
things done to any of his servants, whether it be good or evil: as done to
him self.

And therefore he says in the gospel: Mat. 25. D
Quod vni ex minimis meis fecistis: mihi fecistis. What so ever ye have done to
one of the leest of mine: ye have done it to me. And in an other place he said
to his disciples: Mat. 10. D and Luc. 10. C
Qui vos recipit: me recipit, et qui vos spernit: me spernit. He that receives
you: receives me / and he that dispiseth you: dispiseth me. And so our savior
Christ takes all our pains and tribulacions committed to him (as I said
before) as his own / and o^^rech them to his father as his own with like
effect and fruit, as is said before. Therefore every good and faithful person
ought much to joy in his tribulacions and pains. For what so ever he suffer:
Christ does confess that he suffers the same in him and with him.

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, son of the living god, which at mydnyght thy
passion drawing nygh, would take upon the, fear and heaviness for me most
wretchyd sinner: grant me continually and faithfully to refer all my
tribubulacions, heaviness, and pains unto the, the god of my heart / and yt thou
would vouchesafe to bear them with me in the union of thy passion and heaviness.
That so by the merits of thy most holy passion, they might be made to me
fruitful and profitable. Amen.

Of the blody swet of Christ. The second article.
THe second article is the flowynge of the blood of Christ into the earth by
the manner of swet, or of the blody swet of Christ, flowynge from his body
into the earth. For the second time that Christ prayed: for anguysshe he swet
blood / and the angel, descendynge from heuyn: a^^ered to him and conforted
him. It follows therefore in the gospel: Luc^. 22. ^
Factus in agonia prolixius orabat et factus est sudor eius sicut gutte
sanguinis decurrentis in terram. Christ was in a great agony / and therefore he
prolonged his prayer. And in this prayer for his great agony: his swet was as
drops of blood runnynge down from his body into the earth. Here do our
doctors say, that when our lord Jesus Christ did so prolong his prayer: his
most holy heart was greatly enflamed / and so consequently all his hole body
most holy and most innocent. In so much, that thrughe that great fervor of
prayer, and his excessyue love and most fervent desire that he had to suffer
and to dye for our health. And of the other part, through the vehement angwyssh
and agony that he had in his manhood in the remembrance of his most greuouse
pains and shameful death that he should suffer / and through the strong
reluctacion and stryuynge of sensuality, naturally abhorrynge that death, and
therefore myghtely fighting against it: for these causes (I say) the poorys of
his body were open, and so flowed out the blood for his swet. That vehement
angwysshe and excessyue love constreyned the blood to cum out of the veins
against nature (as Bede says) in so much that many drops of blood ran
down by his clothes and fell upon the earth. Super Luca^ li. 6. ca. 89.
The love of god in the heart of Christ, did ouercum in that agony his natural
fear and the fear of his manhood / and so the blood of Christ so quyckened
and conforted by this love: was styrred and moved, as if it would have cum all
furthe of the body at that time, through that excessyue love / as if he would
not or might not have abyden the time of his death appointed when all that
blood should be utterly sheddyd. And so (I say) thrughe this vehement love: the
drops of blood did issue and fall from the veins of his body. And as the
inward cause of swet (after natural phisiciens) is the natural hete,
dissoluynge that is hot and moist in the body: so the supernatural cause of
this bloody swet might be the fervent hete and burning of his excessyue love
redowndyng from the heart of Christ into al his hole body there dissoluynge
the vaporouse moisture. Phisiciens also say, that it is possible that a man may
swet naturally through the veheme^ce of love. In like manner, as our doctors
say, Christ swet blood above nature through his vehement fervor of charity /
for tha^ the more he approached to his death: the more he burned in love for the
feruente desire of our health. O, how bitter and paynefull was this death of
Christ in it self: sithe the only imaginacion thereof did so greatly change
thorder of nature: for it drew from all the parts of his body, drops of
blood: as if he had swet / which blody swet should signify and note to us
the health of his mystical body / that is, the catholicall church. Hereto
says saint Bernarde: By the earth moisted with the bloody swet of Christ: is
signified that erthely men should be redemyd by the blood of Christ. By the
which blood also he should reduce unto life, all the world ded in sin. Woo
be to that wretchyd heart, that will not be moisted and made soft with this
blood or swet. Behold thou wretch the great tribulacion of this most mylde,
gentle, and loving heart, in what angwyssh it was: when all his body on
every part swet blood. O thou my stony heart, quake and tremble, and break in
pecys, and moist thine iyen with blody teres / for as thou may se, thy
creator and maker is all wet in blood for the / and that with such plenty:
that it ran down upon the earth. And surely, his body outwardly would never
have been so wet with blood: if his heart inwardly had not ben broken with
sorrow and heaviness. Therefore the prophet says in the person of Christ:
Psalm. 37. It Hier. 23. B.
Contritum est cor meum in meipso. My heart is broken within me. The heart of
our most loving Jesus thus inwardly broken or cut: the outward skin also
was broken / so that his blood might abundantly flow out upon the earth. And
this bloody swette was very natural and true blood of the most purest body
of Christ. But as we said before, it was not shed naturally / for it is
against nature, to swet blood. () ()

Doctrines or holsom lessons.
IN this article we may take three holsum and profitable lessons. First, by the
apparicion of the angel. etc. We be enfourmed that the holy aungelles of god
do assyst us and also conforte us in our prayers. Psalm. 67.
Hereunto says the prophet Dauyd: Preuenerunt principes coniuncti
psallentibus. The princes or holy aungelles do prevent them that praise god or
pray to him with their help, and also be joined unto them in their praysynges.

And in an other place he says: Psalm. 137.
In conspectu angelorum psallam tibi. I shall sing to the, or praise the
lord, in the syghte or cumpaignie of aungelles. The second lesson. In that
that our lord in his age went unto prayer, and also continued longer time in
the same: we be instruct in all our trouble or necessytye: to run unto
prayer. And the more that our necessytye is: the more to continue our prayer.
The third doctrine, is taken of this pryncypall article / and is this / that
in our prayer we should be so fervent and intent thereunto, that through the
vehemence of our intencion and fervor of our devotion: we should swet as it
were blood, by conformynge our self to the passion of Christ, and by the
fervor of our love unto god. Glosa ordina^ia.
Hereunto says the gloss, Ad Romanos. 8. That that charity which is in us
by the grace of the holy ghost: that same does mourn / that same charity
does pray for us. And against this charity, he that gave it: can not shyt his
ears. Moreover that charity does mourn and pray, unto it drop blood. And
that is, when devotion is so fervently kyndeled in the heart: that for the love
of god (if need required) he would not be afraid to shed his blood. And
therefore pray ye devoutly and hertely in the manner following / or in any other
like manner after your devotion.

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, son of the living god, which in thy long prayer
would be conforted of the angel / and in thy agony swet meruelously drops
of blood: grant to me by the virtue of thy prayer, that thy holy angel
might ever assyst me in my prayer, and conforte me / that I resting in the
sweet remembrance of thy most bitter passion: might devoutly swet the drops
of tears for thy blood in thy syghte and knowledge. Amen.

Of the vendition or selling of our lord. The third article.
THe third article is the selling of our lord. Which selling, though it
began and was promised before the other two articles that we have spoken of: as
wha^ Judas went to the princes of the priests / saying to them: What will ye
give to me, and I shall give him in to your hands? Which was done upon the
wednysday as we said before in the first part of this book. Particle. 8.
At which time this contracte was than begun and promised. Luce. 22. A.
As saint Luke says: Pacti sunt ei pecuniam dare, et ipse Judas spopondit.
The Iues did couenaunde and promise to give him money / and Judas promised to
fulfill his saying. Though (I say) this selling was begun upon the
wednysdaye: yet it was not performed unto the time that Judas went from our
lord and his apostles after supper upon the thurseday in the night, unto the
princes of the Iues, and there received his money / that is, thyrty pennys of
silver / and so was that selling performed / and this article appeared in
effect. And it is convenient that this selling be numbered among the points
of Christ's passion: for thereby he suffered great dispisynge. What is not a
great rebuke and dispisynge to Christ, that he which is most noble and good,
and of infinite goodness, in whom be all treasures of wysdom and knowledge hyd /
which is also lord of all lords, and king above all kings: to be esteemed
and sold for so vile a price? Also the sorrow of Christ was much increased,
in that that he was sold so vilely of his own disciple / of one of those
twelve whom he did chose singulerly among all the world to be his apostels
and messangers. And of this the prophet greatly complains in the person of
Christ, Psalm. 54.
saying: Si inimicus meus maledixisset mihi: sustinuissem vtique. If mine
enemy had despised me: I should quietely have suffered and borne it. Psalm. 40.
And in an other psalm: Etenim homo pacis me in quo speraui qui edebat panes
meos magnificauit super me supplantationem. O, or truly the man of my peace
(that pretended love and peace to me) in whom I trusted / (for he kept all the
money that we had for the necessities of me and mine apostles / and also for to
releue the pore people) which eat my bread and meat (sat at the meat with me)
This man (and pretense friend I say) has magnyfyed against me his
supplantacion / his pryuye and most craftye treason. He craftily and
deceytefully has traitorously betrayed me and sold me. O unwise and most
wretchyd and unhappy merchant / who has learned or taught the such
marchaundyse: that thou should put the price of thy marchaundyse to the will
of the buyers / that the byer should make the price thereof. When a thing is
fold (if it be thought precyouse, or of any great valor: the marchaunte
that sellyth it, will not put the price of the same in the arbytremente or will
of the byer, that he should make the price at his pleasure. But if the seller
or merchant set little or naught by the thing that he sells: than he
regards not if the byer make the price. And so did Judas, when he sold our
savior Jesus Christ. For he said to the Iues: Quid vultis mihi dare, et ego
eum vobis tradam? What will ye give to me, and I shall betray him and give him
into your hands and power. As if he said: Make what price ye will: and I shall
fulfill your will. O most wicked cruelty. O most craftye wyckednes. The
creature sellyth his creatoure and maker. The dyscyple, his master / the
servant, his lord / the famylyar, his most dear friend. There be many now a
days like unto Judas / which will sell and forsake justice for temporal lucre
/ and so they sell god, that is very justice. So do all they that commyt symony
/ which sell the grace of god, or ye sacraments of the church / or else
spiritual things: for temporal things. As thoo prelates and judges that
sell the true and just sentence / that is, which will not give the just and
true sentence without rewards. Also thoo religiouse persons and prestes yt
will not pray, say mass, or ministre the sacraments without money. All these
with such other, be like unto Judas / and say with him (though not in words,
yet in deeds) what will ye give to me: and I shall betray Christ and give him to
you? Micheas 3. D.
Of these manner of persons, it is written by the Prophet Micheas: Principes
eius in muneribus iudicabant, et sacerdotes eius in mercede docebant. The
princes and judges did judge for gifts / and the prestes taught for rewards.

And note that the syn of simony is not only in the seller: but also in the
byer or receyuer. And so not only Judas did sin in the sellyng of Christ:
but also the Iues in byeng of him. That person does bye Christ of me, which
gyuyng to me any temporal thing: takes Christ from me. As if a flaterer would
falsely commend and praise me, where as I am not worthy / by the which laud
and praise, my heart is exalted in pride: he takes Christ fro me / and I,
consenting to yt praise: do sell and betray Christ for a little vain glory or
praise. In like manner, a man gyuynge to me money or any other thing so mouyng
me to mortal sin: he would take Christ from me. And I consenting to the
same: do betray and sell Christ. And yet neither he by his byenge may reteyne
and keep Christ / neither I with my selling, may keep Christ with my self,
nor with the byer. And so neither Judas nor the Iues had Christ to their
salvation / but by that bargayne he was purchased and gotten to us christians
that truly serve Christ. Many people in the remembrance of this sellyng,
that was made on the wednisday: do fast or absteyn from flesh for the love of
Christ.

Two doctrynes or holsom lessons.
THe first lesson is, that we should be well ware that we never commytt so
abhomynable syn / that is, to sell our lord / as to bear false wytnes for
rewards or gifts / or in judgment to deny the truth / that is, to selle
Christ, which is very Justice and truth. And generally to speak: that we
never sell spiritual things for temporal lucre. The second doctrine is,
that we patiently suffer to be sold, despised and set at naught for the love
and laud of god / saying with the prophet. Psalm. 68.
Quoniam propter te sustinui obprobrium. I have suffered and borne rebuke for
the good lord. In considering this article: let a man remember his own
vylenes / and whether he has sold Christ, omyttynge or brekyng his
commandments for any temporal thing or vain love. Remember also how that
when he has sold Christ: he has recovered and gotten him again freely of
the mere goodness of god. Remember furthermore, yt Christ is yet to be boughte
/ and that is with charity or good works.

Therefore bye thou him with alms. And if thou have no money or goods to give:
give to him than thy heart / for yt is the thing which he loves and desires
above all the things in the world / and therefore he says by the wise man:
Proverb. 23. C.
Fili prebe mihi cor tuum. Son, give to me thy heart / and if thou love me: I
will love the. And than pray thus as follows.

A prayer.
O Jesus, which would be set at naught, and sold of one of thy disciples for
a vile price: grant to me that I never change the my god and creator for
any transitory things / and also that I may patiently bear al rebukes and
dispisynges for the glory of thy holy name. Amen.

Of the betrayenge of our lord. The.iiii. article.
THe.iiii. article is, of the treason of Judas / how traitorously he betrayed
our lord. When the vendition or sellyng was consumate and put in effect. In
the mean time our lord being in his prayers, and than thryse cummynge to his
disciples: Mat. 26. E
at the last time he said to them: Surgite, eamus, ecce appropinquauit qui me
tradet. Arise, go we / he that shall betray me, is nigh at hand. In these few
words, our lord does first enfourme us to speed us to spiritual battle or
temptacion, in this word arise. Secondly he moves us to profit in good
works, in this word, go we. Thyrdely, in the other words following: he
moves us to awayte at all times and hours for temptacion / for our enemies be
ever redye to tempte us. Mat. 26. E
It follows in the gospel: Et adhuc eo loquente. Ecce Judas vnus de duodecim
cum accepisset cohortem venit. etc. Ioh. 18. A.
Our savior Christ, yet speaking to his disciples: Loo, Judas, one of
the.xii. apostles of Christ, after that he had taken his money and a great
cumpany of soldiers (to the number of five hundredth, as Papias says) he came,
and with him a great number of people with lanternes and burning brondes /
with armor, swerdes, battes, and clubbes, sent from the princes of the prestes
and pharisees from the scrybes and the seignours of the people.

Whereof saint Austin says: Marc. 14. E.
What should such a great people do to seche one person? What should tho armed
men do, to seche one man without armor or weapon? What should they seche him
in the night, that was daily teaching, and that openly in their temple? Cap.
24. A.
This act was fygured in the first book of the kings / where as Saul took
three thousand armed men to seche for Dauyd. Super. Ioh. 18.
And note here (as master Lira says) that Judas did arm and defend him
self first with a great cumpany / strong, and of authority / and that was
against the multitude of the common people, that they should not let him in his
purpose. Secondly, he came with great lyghtes / that Christ should not escape
from him in the darkness of the night. And thyrdly, he defendyd him self with
armor / that if any body would resyst them: they would defend them self,
and also put the other people a back. And Judas that promised to betraye
Christ: gave to his cumpany a pryuy token or sign / saying: Quemcumque
osculatus fuero, Marc. 14. E.
ipse est: tenete eum et ducite caute. Whom so ever I kiss: that same is
Christ. (This he spoke, that they should not take James the less for Christ /
for he was very like in face unto Christ). And furthermore Judas said / whom I
kiss: hold him, and led him warely. For sum of them thought that he
wroughte by nygromancie or wytchecrafte. Luce. 11. C.
For they said an other time of him / that he cast out deuylles in the power
of Beelzebub, the prince of the deuylles. Ioh. 18. A.
It follows in the gospel of saint John^: Sciens Jesus omnia que ventura
erant super eum processit. Jesus knowing all things and adventures that
should cum unto him: went toward them and met with them, that all men
might know that he was taken voluntarily with his own will. And anon Judas
approchynge toward him, said: Aue rabi. Mat. 26. E
Hayle master. Et appropinquauit vt oscularetur eum. Judas drew nygh, Luce.
22. E
to the intent that he might kiss Christ / and so he did. In this point
there be three things expressed: that made this betrayenge much paynefull or
sorrowful unto Christ. One is, that it was done by one of his own disciples.
The second is, that he so falsely and trayterousely betrayed Christ with the
sign or token of peace, Super Luca^ li. 10* ca. 95.
and kiss of love or frendeshyppe. Of the which saint Ambrose says: O
Judas, thou woundest thy master and lord with the token or pledge of love /
and thou bryngest him to death with the kiss of familiarity and frendeshyppe.
The third, was not less paynefull, that the false traytoure with his
stynkynge mouth durst touch or kiss that most lovely and mellifluouse
mouth of Christ, the eterne son of god. If it be paynefull to a man to
kiss the mouth of him that has a stynkynge brethe: how much more was it
than paynefull to our fauyour Christ, to take a kiss of that most sinful
and stynkynge mouth of Judas / whose heart was replenysshed with the devil
and all wyckednes. And than Jesus said unto him: Luc. 22. E.
Judah, osculo filium hominis tradis* Judas, will thou betraye the son of a
vyrgyn, thy master unto the death with a kiss or token of peace? All
traitors unto truth, feynynge the truth: do use this same token of
frendeshyppe, a kiss. Mat. 26. E
Also Christ said unto Judas: Amice, ad quid venisti? Friend, for what
intent cummest thou? He called Judas friend, only to rebuke him for his false
dissimulacion. I do not remember that this word Amice in the vocatyfe case:
that is, O friend: is spoken to any one good person / but to evil persons,
it is diverse and many times spoken.

As is said in the gospel of saint Matthew: Mat. 22. B
Amice, quomodo huc intrasti?. etc. O friend, how dyddest thou enter unto this
feast, not having a convenient garment? And also in an other place is said
thus: Mat. 20. B
Amice, non facso tibi iniuriam. O friend, I do unto the non injury or wrong.
And here now at this time. O friend, wherefore cummest thou? As he might say:
Thou kyssest me, to the end to betraye me unto the death. To give a kiss: it
is a sign or token of a friend / but thou cummest not therefore, ne to that
intent. And not withstanding that thou haste done cruelly and traitorously
against me: yet return to me, and I shall gladly receive the, as a friend to
the. And so would Christ have don (after all doctors) if he had returned and
been sorye for his sin and wretchydnes. But he was so indurate and so
obstinate of heart, that none of all these things could call or revoke him
again, or make him to leave his false and trayterouse purpose / and so he
kyssed him.

A figure hereof we have in ye second book of kings. Cap. 20. C.
Where as ye the false traytoure Ioab took his cosyn Anasa by the chynne /
kissing him, and saying Salve mi frater. Hail my brother / and so slew him
with that word. Our lord called Judas by his propre name, to the intent to
provoke him to grace, and not to myschief / but he would not receive grace. O
thou innocent lamb Jesus, what do thou in cumpany with that wolf Judas,
that will devour the. Morally, Judas betokens the world / which does
smyle or laugh upon us: when he gives to us riches at our pleasure. Than he
kisseth us: when he gives to us solace and worldly pleasure. But than does he
halse us: when he gives to us honors and dignities. And in all these he
deceives us, and betrayeth us into eternal death. As witnesses Job, saying:
Ducunt in bonis dies suos: Job. 21. B.
et in pu^cto ad inferna desce^dunt. These worldly people led their life here
in pleasure: and in an instant they descend down to hell.

Here follows two lessons.
THe first lesson. Who so ever fayneth to love his neighbor, and secretly
works evil against him: he betrayeth his neighbor. Which false
dissimulacion: our lord takes as done to him self / for so he says: What
so ever ye do to one of my leest servants: Mat. 25. D
I take it as done to my self. The second is, that we should not hate our
adversaries: but louyngly and charitably correct them / as Christ did Judas.

A Prayer.
O Jesus that suffered thy self to be betrayed by a kiss of Judas: grant to
me that I never betray the in my self, nor in my neighbor. And also, that I
never deny to mine adversaries thoffice of love / that is, charity / to love
them, and to correct them with charity. Amen.

Of the taking of Christ. The.v. article.
THe.v. article, is the taking of Christ. Which was done in this manner. What
time the wicked Judas had kyssed our lord / Jesus knowing what should cum
upon him self: went unto the cumpanye of the soldiers and of the Iues that
came with Judas, and said unto them: Ioh. 18. A.
Quem queritis?. etc. Whom seche you? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth. And
Jesus said to the^, I am. At which word, they went backewarde, and so fell
unto the ground backewarde. And here note that they that fall backewarde: do
not se where they fall. Signifienge thereby, that they fall from grace, Super.
Ioh. tra^^. 112. B.
into sin / from god, unto the devil / from heuym, into hell. And here also
saint Austyn says: If he that came to be judged, cast his adversaries down
with one word: what shall he do when he shall cum to judge all the world? If
he did thus when he came to dye: what shall he do to his enemies when he shall
cum with great power and majesty to reign in glory for ever? Surely he shall
than cast his enemies backward into everlasting pains with this terryble
word: Mat. 25. D
Go ye cursed in to everlasting fire. And when his adversaries the Iues were
risen again, Jesus said / again unto them: whom seche you? whom would ye
have? And they answered, Jesus of Nazareth. Here was a meruelouse thing /
they knew him not / nor yet his own disciple Judas which came to betray him.
And this is as great a sign or token that may be: that he was not taken, but
at his own will / and therefore he gave them license to take him, Ioh. 18. B.
wha^ he said: Si ergo me queritis: sinite hos abire. If ye seche me, or would
have me: suffer these that be with me, to depart without hurt or trouble. Our
lord was diligent to help his disciples, that they should not be taken / that
his words which he said the same night after supper: Ioh. 17. B.
should be true / that is: Quos dedisti mihi: Ioh. 18. B.
non perdidi ex eis quemquam. Father, I have not lost any of them, whom thou
haste given to me. And so his disciples escaped through the goodness and power of
Christ / that afterward by them might be showed the word of health, the
gospel of Christ, thrughout the hole world. The disciples of Christ, seeing
and perceyuyng what was like to cum to their master Christ, said unto
Christ: Luce. 22. E
Domine si percutimus gladio. Master, shall we smite with the sword? Ioh. 18.
B.
Petre being hasty, and not abiding the answer of our lord: drew out his
sword, and smote at one of the bishop servants called Malchus / and cut of
his right ear. Super Mat.
To signify (as Origene says) that though it be seen or thought that they
here the law of god: Omel. 35.
that is only with the left ear / for they only here the shadow and the
lettre of the law: and not the truth and mystery thereof. Also Petre that cut
of this right ear: may signify to us the faithful people of the gentiles /
the which in that that they believed in Christ: were the cause by occasion,
that the right herynge of the Iues was cut away. But yet that same right ear
was restored again by the goodness of god, Luce. 22. F.
unto those Iues that believed in Christ / and therefore he touched the ear of
that servant: and cured him / showing there in deed, Mat. 5. G.
that which he taught before / saying: Been facite his qui oderunt vos. Do
good to them that hate you. And this he did as well for the conversion of the
people that were there present, or that should here thereof: as for our
instruction. He cured him, that shortly after should buffet him and smite him
/ for our example / that we should do good against evil. Super Luca^.
And hereof says Bid: Capitu. 89.
Our merciful lord will never forget his pity / which also would not suffer
his enemies to be wounded. And therefore he said to Petre and his disciples:
Luce. 22. F.
Sinite vsque adhuc. Suffer yet. As if he had said: Suffer the Iues to cum and
take me. Who so ever takes the sword and smyteth without authority: they
shall peryssh with the sword. In these words also he thretened and monisshed
the people / which had no authority to slay him. He said furthermore to
Petre: Mat. 26. E
An putas quia non possum rogare patre^ meum, etc. Thynkest thou that I may not
desire my father for help if I would / and he would send to my help
above.xii. legions of au^gelles. Ioh. 18. B.
Every legion contains.vi.M.vi.C.lx.vi. Will not thou that I should be obedient
to my father, and drink of the cup / that is, to suffer pain and death /
the which my father will that I should drink or suffer / If not, how shall the
scriptures be fulfilled, that says, that these things must be done?
Therefore now set all vengeance a part / and let us be pacient. And than our
lord said to the people that came to take him: Mat. 26. F
Tanquam ad latronem existis cum gladiis et fustibus comprehendere me. Ye cum
with swords and clubbes, to take me as if I were a thief. As if he said: Why
do ye not cum to take me quyetly and without such violence / for I was daily
in your temple among you teaching. If ye would have had me: ye might than
have taken me quietly at your pleasure. But this is your hour and time granted
unto you to take me. This is the power of the prince of darkness, that has
styrred you to do thus. O what myldenes was in our savior Jesus Christ / that
so gentylly spoke unto his adversaries / and so louyngely rebuked them, to
swage their malice and iniquity / and also to move us to follow his benignity
and gentylnes.

This not withstanding, the souldyers and the mynysters of the Iues laid
vyolent hands upon our lord Jesus, and so took him. And though he was taken
of his own free will: yet that captivity and taking was much paynefull to
him.

For sithe it is paynfull to every man that is put in captivity / for as much
as thereby his liberty is taken from him, and he put in to thraldom / his
liberty (I say) is taken from him / as well the liberty of condition, as of
operacion and werkynge. The liberty of condition is taken from him. For after
the Civil law: he is in bondage and thraldom. Also his liberty of operacion
is taken from him. For he that is so taken, can not work and do what he will:
but as it shall please him that has him in captivity.

For these causes (as ye may perceive) it is much paynefull for a man to be
put in captivity: much more than it was paynefull to our lord Jesus (which is
the lord and maker of heuyn and earth / and whom heuyn or earth can not
comprehend nor take) to be taken and holden in captivity with the violent
hands of so cruel persons. And in this act was verified the saying of
Dauyd / which said of Christ many years before: Psalm. 58.
Ecce ceperunt animam meam, irruerunt in me fortes. Behold (says Christ by
the prophet) strong and cruel persons has fallen upon me, and they have
taken me. Psalm. 93.
And in an other psalm: Captabunt in animam iusti, et sanguinem innocentem
condemnabunt, They shall take into captivity the rightuouse person / and they
shall condemn the innocent blood. Tren^. 3. F.
Also the prophet Hieremie says: Venatione ceperunt me quasi auem inimici
me^. Mine enemies has taken me with their hunting, as a bird in a snare or
with an hawke.

Thus our true Joseph (Jesus Christ) was taken of his brethren and led into
Egipte / that is, into angwyssh and tribulacion. And so I say they took him and
bound him / as we shall declare in the next article.

A lesson.
OF this article we may take a moral lesson / that as Christ for our love did
suffer him self wylfully to be taken of the Iues: so we for his love should
subdue our self and all our sencys unto the obsequye and service of Christ:
according to the saying of the apostle / subduynge our wit and reason to the
faith and service of Christ. 2. Cor. x. B


A prayer.
O Jesus Christ, the son of the living god, which would be wylfully taken and
holden of the Iues: grant to me that I may continually subdue all my sencys
and understanding unto thy service / that by thy infinite goodness, I may be
delivered from eternal death and captivity. Amen.

Of the byndynge of our lord. The.vi. article.
THe syxt article, is the byndynge of our lord. For the Iues, after that they
had taken Christ: they bound him so hard and strayte: that (after saint
Anselme) the blood sprange out of every finger end under the nails. They
bound his blessed hands behynd him / they cast him down upon the earth, as
he before had cast them down by his godly power. Moreover they did trede upon
his breast / and spued or spytted in his face. Also they so hard bound him by
the neck and throat: that he was nygh strangled, if god had not preserved him
for a time, that he should suffer more and greater pains after this time. They
bound him for three causes. First, that he should not escape their hands. For
Judas bad them hold him fast, and led him warely. Secondely, for they
intendyd to sley him. For it was a custom among the Iues, that whom they
judged worthy death: he should be bound and so presented to the president and
judge. Thyrdly, he would be bound for a mystery, for because he came to lawse
and deliver them that were bound with the bonds of sin, and also those that
were bound as prisoners in Limbo patrum: therefore he would be wylfully bound
as a thief, though he were all innocent and without spot of sin. Our first
father Adam did commyt theft, what time he ate of thapple that was forbidden
him / for whose syn all mankind was taken and holden by the devil as theuys.
For whose satisfaction Jesus Christ would be taken as a thief / though in him
self he be incomprehensible. Also he would be bound: which came to lawse them
that were bound.

And they bound him with three ropes or bonds. One about his hands. The
second, about his neck. And sum do say that that was a chain of iron. And
the third, about his myddell. And these be^ represented in the ornaments of
the priest at his mass.

The first, by the maniple upon his arm. The second, by the stole in his
neck. And the third by the gyrdell. O my most dear beloved Jesus, the very
true vine. Who is he that does not se and consider the bonds wherewith this
our vine tree was bound? He was bound with seven bonds. The first (says
saint Bernarde) I trow, was his obedience, whereby he was obedient to his
father, unto the death of the cross. He did also obey to his mother Marie, and
to his father putatiue Joseph. As saint Luke says: Luce. 2. G.
Venit Nazareth: et erat subditus illis. Jesus came to Nazareth with mary and
Joseph, and was obedient to them. He was also obedient unto the emperor,
paynge tribute unto him. Mat. 17. D and 22. C.
The second bond was the womb of the virgyn Marie. Hereunto the church
syngeth of our lady in a certain respond, whom the heuens could not take: thou
virgyn has contained him in thy womb. Luc. 2.
The third bond was his cradell bonds or the cryb, wherein he was laid / as
saint Luke says. The.iiii. bond was this bond, wherewith he was bound when
he was taken. O how rughe and hard were these bonds of these most cruel
Iues, wherewith they bond that most mylde lamb Jesus Christ. O good Jesus, I
considre and se with the eyes of my soul, the sweet lord bound with most
hard ropes and drawn as a thief, to the house of the prince of priests. I se
this good lord, and I abhor it, and also much marvel thereat, and so
meruaylynge / I should faynte and also dye for sorrow, but that manifestly I
know that thou was first bound in thy heart with the bonds of love and
charity, which louyngly did draw the to suffer gladely these outward
bonds. The first bond was that wherewith he was fastyned to the pyllar when
he was scourged, of the which we shall speak hereafter. The syxte bond, was
the crown of thorns wherewith his heed was fast bound, as we shall declare
hereafter. The seuenthe bond were the nails that nailed his hands and feet
fast unto the cross. Li. 1. ca. 10. G. and Li. 4. cap^. 70. B.
Or else we may say after saint Birgitte in her revelations, that this
seuenthe bond, was that cord and rope wherewith they drew his arm and his
feet, so that all the joints of his body were dissolved, Ancelmus in dialogo
passionis. M.
for first they nailed his right hand and then they drew the left hand with
a rope unto the hoole that was made before for that hand. And in like manner
they drew his feet, so that al his veins and synewes brast, and all his
joints loosed, so that a man might nombre all his bones, as the prophet David
says. Psalm. 21.
And this pain was so great and grievous that the life might not continue with
it in any other man, but Christ preserved his life unto such time it pleased
him to yield up his spirit into ye hands of his father, Ioha^. 10 D.
and therefore he said: Potestate^ habeo pone^di a^am mea^ and nemo tollit ea^ a
me. I have power to give up my soul at my pleasure. Also no man may take my
life from me, but I shall forsake it at my will, and at my will take it again.
Our savior Jesus thus taken and bounden, al his disciples forsakynge him for
fear fled from him, as we shall declare in the next article.

Here follows.iii. lessons.
THe first lesson is our lord would be bound, because that he would loose the
bo^des of our sins. Secondly he would be bound, for that he would bind us to
him with the bond of charity. He is the same bond of charity wherewith our
soul is bounden to god. He is signified by the reed coorde or line, which
Raab tied in the wyndowe of her house for a sure sign or token that she and al
hyrs, should be saved at the destruction of Hiericho. So surely every faithful
soul corrupt by the old sin of Adam, and so signified by Raab that is
commonly noted for a comen woman, Iosue. 2. C. ^. 6. D.
if this soul be regenerate by the faith of Christ, and have this reed cord
tied in the wyndowe of her inward house, by the which the light of god
entrethe in to her soul, without doubt such a soul has a sure token of her
health, for such a soul is so tied unto god, and god unto her: that she can
not lightly be separat from god. This is also the cord or rope wherewith our
lord was tied unto the pillar, which without doubt was reed, for it was made
reed with the holy blood of Christ. Romans 8. B.
This is also that line or cord wherewith Paul was so surely fastened to
Christ, that nothing might depart him from Christ. Another tribulation / ne
anguish nor hungre / nor nakedness / persecution nor sword / and shortly to
speak, no creature might depart him from the charity of Christ The third
lesson is that we should so bind all our members, and specially our tongue /
with the cords of the precepts of god, that she should not be loosed unto any
thing contrary to the will of god or his commandments.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would be bound with the hands of wicked men. I beseech the
loose the bonds of my sins, and so bind me to the with the bonds of thy
precepts, that never the members of my body, nor the powers of my soul be
loosed and at liberty to do any thing contrary to thy will. Amen.

Of the fleing or departing away of the disciples of Christ. The.vii.
article.
THe.vii. article is of the departing away or fleyng of the disciples of
Christ. Of the which it is written in the gospel thus: Mat. 26. F
Tunc omnes relicto eo fugerunt. When Jesus was taken, then all his disciples
left him and fled from him. This fleing and departing was no little pain to
Christ. And therefore this article is nombred with the other articles of his
passion, for specially he was sorry for this manner of departing. And of this
departing speaks Job in the person of Christ saying. Job. 19. B.
Fratres mei elongauerunt a me et no ti mei quasi aliem recesserunt a me. My
brethren have gone far from me and mine aquayntance or known disciples as
strangers has forsaken me. And in a token or remembrance of this forsakyng:
the aulters on shire thursday be bared, for all their ornaments be taken
away, and the altar left naked and bare. Christ is this altar. and the
apostles be the ornaments, which fled from Christ, and left him alone in the
hands of his enemies. Our lord was heavy and sorry of this departing of his
discyples, not for him self: but for them, that they were so sclaundered in
him. Of this sorrow saint Jerome says: It is not to be believed that this
departing was without great anguysshe and heaviness of the heart of Christ,
and also it was not without great morning and weeping of the apostles. For I
can not think that after they se that cruel compeigney take and bind our
savior Jesus their most loving master: but that they wept and said with
great sorrow. O most benygne maystre / more sweet or pleasant than all
hoony. It is much sorrowful to us to se the so cruelly entreated of the
malycyous Iues. Alas, we wretches, what shall we do, leaving so gracious a
father, we forsake all our goods and follow the, and now we perceive for a
suerty that we shall be pryued of thy presence / and want thy confortable words
and deeds, for we be assured now that the Pharyseys will sley the. O how often
(suppose you) did they look back toward their most merciful master,
seeing and beholding with bitter sorrow their lord so cruelly led of the
malicyouse Iues, as we shall declare in the next article.

Here follows.vi. causes of the fleyng or departing of Christ's disciples.
OF these disciples: Psalm. 21.
the prophet speaks in the person of our lord saying: Dispersa sunt omnia
ossa mea. All my boones are disperpled or divided, that is all my apostles,
which / as bonys in a man's body should have been most strong, and yet they
are Psalm. 21.
and therefore the prophet David says: Factum est cor meum tanquam cera
liquescens so medio ventris mei, My heart is made as wax meltynge in the mydle
of my body, that is. My doctrine is vanysshed through the heete and fire of my
passion, and that in the myddle of my belly, that is, in my apostles that be
Aruit tanquam testa virtus mea. My virtue and power is as dry as a shell. And
that was because he suffered him self to be taken, and so put to most cruel
and shameful death, and would not help him self and show his power as he
had done diverse times before. But now he would not so do / and therefore his
power of in showing of miracles seemed to be consumed and dried by the heete
and fyere of his passion, and hereunto speakethe the prophet, Abacuch. 3. A.
saying: Ibi abscondita est fortitudo eius. There was hyd his power or strength
that is in his cross or passion. And note / that the said not, his power was
lost, but his strength was hyd in his passion, as we shall declare in the
third part of this Psalm. 21.
Adhesit lingua mea faucibus meis. My tongue cleuyd fast to my jaws or chekes,
for he would not speak to his own excuse, and therefore the prophet Esaias long
before this time said of him: Cap. 53. C.
Quasi agnus coram tondente se obmutescet et non ape riet os suum. He shall be as
domme as a lamb when he is shorn, and he shall not open his mouth. And this
prophycie was verifyed in Christ as it is plainly written in the gospel: Mat.
17. B
Et non respondit e^ ad vllum verbum, ita vt miraretur preses. Christ answered
not one word unto Pylate, which meruayled much Et in puluerem mortis
deduxisti me. Psalm. 21.
Thou have brought me in to ashes, or in to the dust of death. And this he
spoke after the opinyon of the Iues. Psalm. 87.
As it appears in an other psalm: Estimatus sum cum descendentibus in lacum.
I am esteemed and accounted by the Iues with them that descend in to the lake
and pytte of eternal perdition, and never to return again. The.v. cause
Psalmo. 21.
Circumdederunt me canes multi. Many dogs have compassed me, that is the Iues
barkynge and bytynge by detraction as dogs. The.vi. cause was the
congregation Consilium malignantium obfedit me. Psalm. 21.
The congregation and counsel of evil persons have obsessed and beseaged
me. and that very obstinately and fro wardely unto my death. Of this
compeigney and counsel speaks the prophet David in an other psalm saying:
Psalm. 2.
Astiterunt reges terre et principes conuenerunt in vnum aduersus dominum et
aduersus Christum eius. Rewlers of the world and princes ben cume to gyther in
counsel against our lord and against his son Christ. And for these
causes the apostles flodde and forsook our lord. Whereat wonderynge and
meruaylynge the prophet Hieremy says: Tren^. 4. A.
Quomodo disper si sunt lapides fanctuarij: How is this / that the holy
stoones ben disperpled? that is the apostles of Christ which should have been
as holy stones strong / stable and firm in the faith and love of Christ, but
they fled. Zach. 13. C.
Percutiam pasto rem et dispergentur oues gregis. Mat. 26. C
I shall smite or take the herdeman, and the sheep of the flock shall be
disperpled abroad.

Here folowethe.ii. lessons.
THe first lesson is that we should be well ware that we

A prayer.
O Jesus that did suffer all thine elect and chosen disciples to fly from the:
receive thou me thy fugitive servant for thy great virtue and omnipotent
power. And suffer me not to wandre from the, thorughe the liberty of my
froward wi^^. Amen.

Of the leadynge of Christ. The.viii. article.
THe.viii. article, is of his leadynge. For after that they had taken and
bound him, and after that his disciples fled: the Iues led Christ toward
the house of Annas. Capi. 18. E.
As it is in the gospel of John^. And this ledynge was much laborouse and
paynefull to Christ. Also it was rebukefull and violent. It was violent: for
he was led with a great cumpanye of armed men and their captain with them. It
was also rebukefull to Christ, for he was led with his hands bound as a
thief or an evil person. Ioh. 18. C.
And so the Iues said to Pilate: If this person (that is Christ) were not a
malifactour or an evil doer and a myslyuer: we would not have delivered him to
thy hands and power. This ledynge was also laborouse, paynfull, and sorrowful
to him. And that both to the heart inwardely, and also to the body
outwardely. First, it was sorrowful inwardely. For where ever herd you of any
man, that would not be heavy in heart, and inwardly sorry, to be lad with the
hands of his enemies, so cruelly, with so great a cumpany of armed men, with
such and so many rebukes and reprouynges, both in word and in deed, as those
most cruel Iues did unto Christ at that time and ledynge. That ledyng was
also paynfull to his body. For though he went wylfully with them: yet they
drew him with a rope, they thrust him and drove him forward / and often times
they thrust him down and ran over him / and so drew him thorughe the vale
of Iosaphat, from the flood or river of Cedron, up toward Jerusalem /
ledynge him with great haste and violence, he going bare foted / and therefore
they grievously hurted and wounded his most holy fete in that stony and most
hard way. In so much, that the steppys of his most holy fete were dyed and
wet with blood. For cruelly those Iues (whose fete were swyfte and ready to shed
the innocent blood) those Iues (I say) most cruelly thrusted him from the one
part of the way, unto the other part or side. But wherefore did Christ
suffer all these pains and rebukes, but only to cure the wounds of our fete,
which have gone to do many a sinful deed / and specially the wounds of our
spiritual fete and inordinate affections. Ca^tic. 3. A. 5. C
Christ ran through thorns and breres, sechynge for his sheep that was lost.
He sought him by the brood stretys and narow lanes / and so the watchemen of
the city found him / they smote him, they wounded him and took from him his
pall and garments. So that it may be well verified of Christ, that is written
in the first book of Paralipomenon: Cap. 21. B.
Ex omni part angustie me premunt. Anguyssh, troubles, and pains oppress me
on every part. Sum doctors don say, that what time the Iues led Christ
toward Jerusalem: thy came by the river and water of Cedron, the ministres
and the people went over the bridge / but they drew Christ bounden through the
water, so that the watre entered into his mouth and body. At which time, what
for the coldness of the water, and also for his long prayenge in the garden or
orcharde: all his body was so cold, that all his tethe did quyuer and shake in
his head for cold. Psalm. 68.
Herein were fulfilled the sayenges of David: Saluum me fac deus quoniam
intrauerunt aque vsque ad animam meam. Save me my lord god / for the waters
have entered into me.

And in an other Psalm: Psalm. 109.
De torrente in via bibet propterea exaltabit caput. He shall drink of the
river in the way, and therefore he shall exalte his head. And when they came to
Jerusalem, they did not bring him in by the same gate that he went furthe
at, when he went to Bethany: but by an other gate, called the golden gate. And
it was so called: because all the gold that was given to Solomon, was brought
in by that gate and all other things yt were of great valor. By this gate
also was brought in all such sacrifices as were offered in the temple. And for
as much as Christ, when he entered into this world, he came in by the golden
gate / that is by the virgyns womb: it was convenient that when he should
depart from this world unto his father by his death and passion: that he
should goo to his death by this golden gate. And the Iues brought him in by
this gate: because there sat at that time many Scribes and Phariseis, for the
more surety that the common people should not take Christ from them. And one
doctoure says, Britsch. in 40. lib. Alphabet. 44. B.
that in that golden gate were graven and painted the images of Patriarchs and
Prophets in stone work. And at the entryng of Christ by this gate: all thoo
images did reverently inclyne to Christ, as to their creator and maker.

Also this same doctoure says, that the multitude of the prestes and scribes
went with a great compaigney unto the foresaid gate cryenge and saying: Behold
the these is taken, the deulisshe person, the deceyuer of the people, the
breaker of the law, and so they cast durte and clay against him. Also it is
said / that from the place where as they took and bound him, unto the house or
palace of Annas, ware.iii. M. passys save.xv. And here note, that Christ this
day in the process of his passion, was.ix. times led from place to place, as
we may plainly se in the gospelles. First as soon as he was taken and bound,
Ioh. 18. C.
he was led unto the house of Annas. Ibid. D.
Secondly from Annas, unto Caiphas, Thirdly from Caiphas, Ibid. C.
unto Pylate. Fourthly from pilate, unto Herod. Fyftly from Herod, Lu. 23. A.
b.
unto pylate again. Sextly the soudiours led him in to the court of the comen
haulle, Mar. 15. B
motehaule or judgment house, where as they mocked him and put a crown of
thorns upon his heed. Ioh. 19. A.
Seventhly Pilate led him from that place out unto the Iues, cladde in an old
purpure garment, and the crown of thorns upon his heed. Ioh. 19. C.
Eyghtly / Pilate led him from the motehaule unto a place called Lichostratos,
where as he judged him to be crucified. Ioha^. 19 D.
Neyntly / they led him from thense unto the mownte of Caluarie where as they
did crucify Christ.

Here follows a lesson.
IN diverse contreis it is a laudable custom among faith full christianes,
that on good frydaye they go about from the morning unto the.ix. hour of the
day, that is from.vi. of the clock unto.iii. of the clock at after noone, and
visyte.ix. churches, in the remembrance that Christ that day was.ix. times
led from place to place as we said before. And now for a lesson / they that so
visit.ix. churches / I would they remembered what Christ suffered in every
place. First what he suffered when he was led to the house of Annas / and
also what he suffered there. Secondly what he suffered in Caiphas house and so
forth of al other, as ye shall se declared herafter in diuerses articles. And
also that a man might conform him self to this article, he should remember
how obprobriously and shamefully Christ was led like a thief and a rober, and
in this consideration: he should have a full purpose, that he will, with the
help and grace of god, be applyable to all virtue / and also to suffer / or to
do all things that shall be to the will and pleasure of god. And let him pray as
follows / or in like manner, Psalm. 14. 2.
Spiritus tuus bonus deducet me in terram rectam. Thy good spirit shall guide
and led me in to a ryghtful country. Psalm. 118.
Or thus: Deduc me domine in semita mandatorum tuorum. Lead me good lord in
the pathe of thy co^maundmentes or any other prayer as god shall put in to your
mind.

A prayer.
O Jesus which bound as a thief and an evil doer, would be led by the armed
hands of wicked men from place to place with great rebuke and shame: grant to
me that grace / that I never be led unto any sin, through the persuasion of
the deule / or counsel of any wicked person, but that I may be lead by the
holy spirit unto all things that shall be pleasant unto the. Amen.

How Christ was presented unto Annas. The.ix. article.
THe.ix. article is of the presentynge of Christ unto Annas. For after they
had brought Christ unto the golden gate of Jerusalem, not without his great
pain, for one drew him by his garment / another by the neck and the third
by the heir of his heed / they brought him first unto Annas because his house
was in the way, and they thought that they should have been rebuked: if they had
ouerpassed him, for as much as he was father in law unto Caiphas, which was
the high bishop for that year. And therefore they first presented Christ unto
Annas / willing thereby to honor Annas, and also to rejoice of that great act
which they had done in taking of Christ, Prouer. 2. C.
for as the wise man says, Letantur impij cum malefecerint. etc. Wicked men be
glad when they do evil, and they rejoice in their most mischeuous deeds. Also
they first presented Christ unto Annas, because that less defaut should be
found and put in Caiphas for the condempnation of Christ saying that Christ
was also conde^pned of such a wise / sage and also high bishop as Annas was.
In this house of Annas, our lord suffered.iii. things much paynfull to him.
The first was the horrible denyenge of Petre. The second was the indiscrete
question of the bishop. And the third was the mighty stroke that the
servant gave to him upon his face. First he suffered the denyenge of Petre,
which was horrible and also paynful to Christ for.vi. causes, that is for the
multitude of people that were present at that denyenge, second was because
Petre was so slack to follow his master. etc. these causes and the
other.iiii. shall be declared in the next article.

Here follows a lesson.
IN this article we may take this lesson, that we should not be much afraid to
be presented before a seculer judge for the love and faith of Christ, and to
^u^re for Christ, for thereby comes great grace to man. Therefore our lord
said to his disciples: When your enemies shall betray you and present you unto
ye great judges of the world, Mat. 10. C.
be not afraid / nor to studiouse what ye shall say, it shall be given to you
at that time by the spirit of god what ye shall say. And this is noted in
this article, in that that Annas is as much to say by interpretation: as
devotion. Not that Annas nor any temporal judge may give to that person whom
he iudgethe any grace or devotion: but for as much as those holy persons
suffer great wrongs of such judges: the goodness of god gives to those that
patiently suffer iniuryes: his grace, for all grace is of god. Eccl. 32. B.
And hereunto the wise man says: Audi tacens, et pro reuerentia accidet tibi
bona gratia. Here thou and obey patiently, and for thy reverence, good grace
shall come to the. And that a man might conform him self unto this article: he
should remember how reverently and patiently our lord and savior Jesus stood
then before Annas and the Iues. And then pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would be first led and presented unto the bishop Annas: grant
to me that I never fear to be led or presented for thy name and faith,
before any tiraunte or seculer judge of this world. And also that thy grace
and right reason have ever the dominion in me, that I may learn to present all
mine acts / wills and desires unto the examination of right reason before
that I do them in deed, thy grace at all times being assistant unto me. Amen.

Of the denyenge of Petre. The.x. article.
THe.x. article is of ye denyeng of Petre, what time Jesus was led to the house
of Annas, Petre followed a far of to se the end what they would do with
Christ. There followed also Johan which was well aquaynted with the bysshopes
servants, and known to the bishop, and therefore he entered in with the other
Iues into the bysshopes palace, but Petre abode without. And then John^ spoke
to the maid that kept the door, to let Petre come in. And when she se Petre:
she said to him: Ioh. 18. C.
Nu^ quid et tu ex discipulis es hominibus istius? Art thou not of the
disciples of this man? that is of Christ. And Petre said: I am not. The words
of this maiden might seem more to be spoken for compassyon of Christ, and to
admonysshe Petre to bewarre of such compeigney as was then within in the
court, rather then to betraye Petre, for she se him very fearful, he was so
afraid that he denied Christ to be his master. The ministres and servants
stood at the coolys or fire and warmed themself, and Peter stood among them.
And then a another maiden said: This felawe was with Jesus, and the compeigney
that was there said / truly he is one of them, Mat. 26. G
for he is a Galilee, that is a man of the contreth of Galilee. Then Petre
denied it with an oath, and said: Luce. 22. F.
I know not that man. After that by the space of one hour the compeigney said
to Petre again: verily / thou art one of them, Ioh. 19. E.
and specially one person cosen to Malchus / whose ear Petre smote of: said
to Petre: Did not I se the in the garthen or orcharde with Jesus? And than Peter
began to swear / to curse and banne and said: I never knew this man of whom
ye speak and furthwith the cock did sing or crawe. Luc. 22. G.
And then our lord turned him and beheld Petre. And Petre remembrynge the
sayenges of Christ before, how that he should thryse deny him before the
cock craw, he went forth of the bisshopes palace or court and wept full
bytterly. Super Mat 26.
And here says saint Hierome: Petre might no longer abide in derknes, for the
light of the mercyes of god did shine upon him, and therefore he wept. And
Petre after this had ever in use and custom to stand in prayer and weep from
the first cock crawe: unto the son rysynge, in the remembrance of his
thryse denyenge of Christ. Also he bare always with him a sudarie, to wype
away the tears that continually fell from his eyes for his sin. And for the
same sin he wept so much, that his face seamed to be aduste and burned with
the tears. And therefore he deserved to have forgyuenes both of his sin and
of the pain due for his sin. This threfolde negation of Petre, was no little
pain unto our savior Jesus, for it grieved him very much to hear and se how
his own chief apostle, whom he had ordered to be called a stone, whereupon he
would found and build his church, to se him (I say) so openly and so
shamefully thryse to deny his own master Christ, and that at the voice of one
maiden or woman. And note here that as a woman was the first mouer of man unto
sin, so a woman compelled the first prince and prelate of Christ's church to
deny Christ openly, so that by this exemple the infirmite of Petre might more
clearly appear to him self. And this is it that we said in the.ix. article,
that Christ suffered in the house of Annas, the denyeng of Petre which was
shameful to Petre and much paynfull to Christ, and that for.vi. causes.
First for the multitude of people that were then present, for he denied
Christ in the bysshopes palace, where as was at that time, much people
gathered, and therefore this sin was much more grievous, than if it had been
done in a pryuate and secret place. Secondly, it was the more shameful to
Petre / for his slaknes in following Christ, for he followed a far of /
though before he had spoken and made his boste that he would rather dye then
deny him. The third cause was the vylenes of the person that moved the
question unto Petre, for it was a woman, not a noble woman, but a servant, and
other vile servants, which was so much the more to ye rebuke of Petre, that
he would deny his lord god, at their questions. Fourthly for Petre shortly
and lightly denied Christ at one word of a pore and vile servant. The.v.
cause is the perjury and cursynge of Petre, for this made his sin much
grievous. Libro. 13.
And therefore says Simon de Cassia: Petre in his words and his threfold
negation, did greatly rebuke Christ, which had chosen so inconstant and
vnkyn^e a person to his disciple and to his chief apostle. etc. And sextly the
greuousnes of Petre sin did appear by his great and continual weeping, for a
great sin requires great co^trition and penance There be.iii. things in
this gospel that moved and induced Petre unto penance. Luc. 22. G.
The first is singing or crawynge of the cock. Luc. 22. G.
The second was ye respect and beholdynge of Christ. And the third was ye
remembrance of the words that our lord said to Petre at the supper the same
night, that was that Petre should deny Christ thryse that night before the
cock crawe. Our lord suffered Petre to fall for our example, that no man should
presume of him self, seeing that the prince of thapostles did fall. And also
that no man should dispeyre, sith that Petre after so grievous a syn, was made ye
porter of heuyn. And thyrdly that Petre should learn to have compassion of his
subjects. For shortly after he was to be made the chief prelate of the
church. But where did Petre deny his master Christ? Not in ye mount, nor in
the temple, nor yet in his own house, but in the bysshopes palace standing and
warmyng him self by the fire with the ministres and servants of the
bysshoppes. What signifies this palace or court of the bisshoppe but worldly
couuersacyon and manners. These ministers signify deuylysshe persons. The fear
signifies carnal concupiscence and desire / who so ever abide with these
companyes: he can not weep and do penance for his sins. And therefore it is
very dangerous and perilouse to be conversant in the courts of princes, for
Peter did but ones enter in to the palace of (...) bishop / and anon he lost
the virtue and strength of his soul / and also denied Christ. What suppose you
would he have done if he had long continued there? I fear that he would have
then ben as our priests be now in great men's houses, that is worse in all
points than lay men. But Peter went thens to do penau^s for there he could do
none. In like manner the sterre that appeared to the.iii. kings in the Est, when
they entered in to Jerusalem in to thepalace and court of Herod: the sterre
vaynysshed from their syghte / and when they were departed from thens: it
appeared to them again.

Here follow.vi. lessons.
THe first lesson is this / that the prelate of the church Math. 26. G.
And the second time / he denied him with an oath. Marci. 14. G.
And at the third time he cursed / he swear and also he denied Christ. Here
ye may se how one sin brings in an other sin more grievous than the
first. The.iiii. lesson is / that if we fall in to Eccl. 19. A.
For as the wise man also says: He that dispyseth or little regards small
sins / by little and little / he shall fall to much more greuouse sins.

A prayer.
O Jesus which suffered thy self to be denied thrice of ye prince of thy
apostles, whom also thou mercyfully beholdynge / made him to weep bytterly for
his sin: I beseech the behold me with the eye of thy mercy that I may
worthelye weep in thy sight for my sins / and that I never deny the my lord
god neither in word nor in deed. Amen.

How our lord was smyten upon the cheke. The.xi. article.
THe.xi. article of the smiting of our lord, for in mean time that Peter
outward in the court denied our lord iii. times our savior Jesus was in the
house: present before the bishop Annas, where as Annas moved unto Christ an
unwise and folisshe question before and in the audience of all the people that
were there present that was of his discyples and of his doctrine, Ioh. 18. C.
and Jesus answered not one word of his discyples, for as at that time he
could speak no good of the^ for they all had forsaken him that night /
teaching us thereby, that when we can not truly speak any good of our
neighbors then we should keep silence and speak none evil of them, though we
know it. But to the other question of his doctrine Jesus answered showing
that it was not evil nor suspecte: but good and holy, and that he proves by
the place and the compeyney where and among whom he spoke it saying: Ioh. 18.
D.
Ego palam locutus sum mundo. etc. I spoke openly to the people, I ever taught
in the sinagoges and in the temple where as the Iues ben gathered together /
and I spaketh nothing in priuye corners / therefore inquere of them that hard
me / for they can tell what I have said and taught, and here our lord did so
moderate his answer that another he would hyde the treuthe nor yet be seen to
defend him self / gyuynge to us a form and a manner how to answer
moderately unto our adversaries, so that we another hyde the treuth nor yet
provoke or move them against us with our words. Then one of the mynysters
smote Christ upon the cheke saying. Sic respondes pontifici? Ibidem.
Is this a good answer unto the bishop This stroke was so mighty and great /
that the sownde thereof was herd over all the palace / and it was so strongly
given that the prynte of his fyngurs remained in Christ's cheke, which prynte
we may well se and perceive in the image of his face that he gave to the
blessed woman called Veronica. This image was lately in Rome, and it should
seame that he might not give ^o sore a stroke with his bare hand, and
therefore it is much lykly that he smote Christ with his gawntlette sayng: Is
this a good answer unto a bishop? this he spoke with great arrogance and
prowdly without any reverence unto Christ, and this he did to please and
flatter the bishop. Of this stroke saint Ambrose says That it was so paynfull
that it had been sufficyent for man's redemption. It was so vehement / that
thereby all his teeth in his head were moved or lowsed, and also his nose and his
mouth gusshed out of blood. Our lord would abu^dantly and plentuously satisfye
for our sins. And therefore he most high in noblenes / was smyten of a vile
wretch, god was smyten of a sinner, the lord of his servant, the creature of
his creature, the gouerner of the hole world of a vile porcyon of the same
world, the most mercyful redemer was smyten of him whom he came to redeem, if
he would receive it. This co^tumely with many other that follows our lord
suffered for us with all patience and mildnes, so that with great myldnes he
answered to him that smote him: Ibidem.
Si male locutus sum testimonium perhibe de malo. etc. If I have spoken evil
bear witness against me of that evil. But if I have answered well / truly and
conveniently / wherefore do thou smite me? Super John^ trac^. Cxiii
This answer of Christ as saint Austen says / was not spoken of any
impacyence / but gentely and swetely he did reprove that servant / and called
unto his mind his unkindness. And herunto saint Barnarde says. O merueylous
great unkindness / this same Malchus whom our lord but a lytyl before did cure
and heal his right hear the which Peter did smite of. He now was bold to
smite so cruelly his lord god and curer. O good Jesus in what compaigney art
thou now, how much was thy pacyence. How great was their crueltye and
inpacyence. But will they / nyll they / thy pacyence ouercometh their malice /
thy love their envy / and thy pitye / their crueltye. And thus ye may se that
this smytyng is conveniently no^bred among the articles of Christ's passion,
also therein was fulfilled the sayng of ye prophet: Tren^. 3. D.
Dabit percutie^ti se maxilla^: he shall offer his cheke to the smyter. Mich.
5. A.
And an other prophet says: Percutient maxillam iudicis Israel: they shall
smite the cheke of the judge of Israel. This stroke was fygured in Michea /
which was smyten upon the cheke: Cap. vlt. D
because he said the treuthe unto Achab the king of Israel / as it is written
in the third book of the kings.

Here follows a lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson, sithe that Christ would be buffeted
and smyten for us: it is convenient that we stop our mouths that we speak
no thing contrary the honor of god, and also that we excite and move our self
to speak and do that is good. And in all injuries and contumelies done unto
us: that we have pacyence by the example of Christ, which did vouchsafe to
give us specially in this point an example of great pacyence. And also a man
to conform him self unto this article: may to remember the great stroke of
Christ, gyfe him self a moderate clappe or stroke for all his lies / evil
and vain words, and then pray on this manner.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would be smytten for me most unworthy, of the vile minister and
servant of Annas: grant to me I beseech the thy grace / that I may stop my
mouth from all evil and vain speech / and that I never cease from thy
laud and praysynges. Amen.

How Jesus was presented unto Cayphas. The.xii. article.
THe.xii. article of the presentacyon of Christ unto Cayphas / when our lord
had taken that great stroke in the house of Annas, shortly after / Annas sent
Christ bound as gyltye and worthy death and thereunto condemned by him, he sent
him (I say) unto Caiphas / gyuyng thanks unto the ministres that it would so
please them to bring Christ first unto him. Ioh. 18. D.
Annas (I say) sent Christ to Cayphas, for he was the chief bishop for that
year, and so to him it apperteyneth principally to entreat of the condemnacyon
and death of Christ, and for the same cause there were gathered a great
company of priests and scribes in the forsayde house of Cayphas to counsel
herin. In this house of Caiphas Christ did abide unto the moornynge, at the
which time he was led unto Pylate. And in this house he suffered.iii. things
that were much paynfull to him / that is: the false witneshyng / the crafty
adiuracyon and the most dispitefull confutacyon / as it shall appear in the
articles following. And here note that this presentacyon was more grievous unto
Christ, than the first that was to Annas, for this Cayphas was the cheyfe
bishop for that year. And also he was more crafty and more malicyous than
Annas / and that well appears by the interpretacyon of his name. Cayphas is as
much to say by interpretacyon as a crafty or wyly searcher, for he more
craftily did search for false witneshes against Christ, and when he could
find no convenient testimonye against him: then he malicyously and craftily by
him self took occasyon in our lords words of his dampnacyon as we shall
declare hereafter in the xiiii. article. O how payneful is it to a good man to
be presented before such a judge / so crafty / so captious / so malicyous /
and replete with all envy. It is said that from the house of Annas unto Cayphas
house were an hundredth neynty and.iiii. passes by the which space about.xxx.
times they condemned him / and spued or spyt upon him / bisydes many other
torments and pains.

Here follow.ii. lesson.
OF this article we may note.ii. lessons. The first that the servants of god
should not be much afraid to be presented before evil and wicked judges. For
the more wicked the judge is / the more grace thereby comes to the servants
of god. Exemples hereof we have in the glorious apostles Peter and Poule which
suffered death under the most cruel Judge Nero. Also in saint Laurence /
which by the most wicked tyrant Decyus was put to death, and so of many other
holy saints. The second lesson is this / that we should depely remember al our
euylles that we have done / and so present our conscience before the hye Judge
Christ / and also before his vycar here in earth our curate to be duly examyned
/ for our savior Christ disdeyned not to be examined before the pryncys of
the priests / the scribes and the seniours of the Iues. And pray as follows.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me most unkind wretch would be sent from Annas unto Caiphas
and also would be examined before him grant to me I beseech the for ye love of
thy name that I fear not the judgment of evil persons / and also that I may
appear in thy sight with a good and pure conscience. Amen.

Of the bringing forth of false testimony against Christ. The.xiii. article.
THe.xiii. article is of the saynges of.ii. falls witnesses. For when Christ
stood before Caiphas the high prince of prestes, and all the counsel there
gathered did search to have false testimony against Jesus that by some color
they might put him to death, and yet they could find none convenient wytnes,
though many false witneshes were brought forth, Libro. xiii.
then at last there came two false witneshes / of the which Simon de cassia
says: The counsel of the Iues saughte for testimony against Christ that
under the color of justice they might put him to death, whom they persued of
pure envy / but they labored to cloak the crueltye and envy of their minds
with ye cloak of justice / and therefore they saught for false witness. And here
note that it is to the high laud and praise of Christ that they could not
find the least thing that he was culpable in / or to be reproved / and note
well that it is written: Falsum testimonium. They saughte for false testimony
for they might never find true witness against him. Marci. 14. F.
But at last two false wytnes came forth and said: we herd him say, I may
distroy this temple of god that is here made and in.iii. days buyld an other
temple. By this testimony they intended to prove that Christ would usurp unto
him the power of god as if he were god / but these two were false witneshes for
they changed the words of Christ and also his sense and understanding. The
words of Christ were these: John^. 2. D.
Soluite templum hoc: et in tribus diebus excitabo illud / That is / dissolve
this temple (that is kill or sley this body of mine) and in three days I shall
raise it up again. He meant of the temple of his body and they spoke of the
material temple in Jerusalem / and therefore they added in their testimony:
Templum hoc manufactum: This temple made by the hand of man / which words
Christ spoke not / and therefore they bare false witneshe against him / and that
did not a little hurt or grieve Christ. Psalm. Cxv.
What man is he that will not be sorry to be falsely accused / though he (as every
man is) be mutable and many things do offend? How much more then should
Christ be sorye to be falsely accused / sith he in nothing can offend, for he
is the essencyal treuth of god and the self god in substance. Here saint
Anselme in his book called Cur deus homo / merueylynge of the mischeuouse mind
that the Iues had, so to procure the death of Christ: answereh to him self
instruct by the spirit of god / and says: I think that there is none other
cause of their malice toward Christ, but that he continually and stably
keapt truth and justice both in his daily speech / in his teaching and also
in his living. And contrary wise / the Iues were evil / false / unjust and
craftye or disceytefull, for the which Christ sharplye rebuked them, and
therefore they procured his death for they would have none to live that should be
better than they: less that they should then be reputed as sinful men / and
so suffer great shame and rebuke. This counsel was spoken of by the holy
patriarche Jacob sainge: Genes. 49. A.
Simeon et Leui fratres: vasa iniquitatis bellantia. etc. Symeon and Leny
brretherne / armed or feyghtynge vessels of iniquity, I would that my soul
or life came not in to their hands / power or counsel. And of this text the
ordinerye gloss says / that the bysshoppes and priests were of the tribue or
stock of Leni, and the scribes for the more party were of the stock of
Symeon.

Here follow a lesson.
OF this article we may take this doctrine, that we should hate and abhor all
false testimony / also all falsnesse and lies / for Christ / by false
testimonye and by lies was condemned to death, and as often as we speak false
witness against our neighbor we condemn Christ unto the death / asmoche as
is in us. Libro. iii.
And how abominable this sin is: Isydore in his book De summo bono shows
saying: Capi. lix.
He that bears false witness: offends against three persons, that is against
god, whom he contemns by his swearynge and breaking of his commandment.
Also against the judge, whom by his lyeng he disceyueth. And thyrdly against
the innocent, whom he hurts by his false testimony.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would for me be blamed of the Iues / and by their false
testimony accused: grant to me that I never blame or rebuke man for the, nor
falsely that I accuse any person and also that I pacyently suffer all false
accusacyons for thy honor and glory. Amen.

Of the blasphemy imputed to Christ. The.xiiii. article.
THe.xiiii. article is the false imposicyon of blasphemy unto Christ. Cayphas
the cheyfe prince of the priests and the high bishop for that year, seeing
that Christ would not speak or answer to their false accusacyons And that
such testimonies as was spoken against him / were not sufficyent for his
condempnacyon: He was greatly troubled because I say he could find no cause
wherein he might accuse him and justly condemn him, and then he so kyndled
with wroth in a great furye of mind he arose up with great inpacyence from his
seat of dignity and said unto Jesus: Math. 26. F.
Nihil respondes ad eaque isti aduersum te testifica^tur? Will thou not answer
unto such causes as these persons lay against the? By the inordinate mouynge of
his body he made known the furye of his mind / as Bede says where as
temperance and grauitye beseameth a prelate and a judge both in his words /
deeds and gesture. Super Mat. 15.
And as Simon de Cassia says: Libro. 13.
Cayphas rose up for vnquyetenes of mind and so by his cruel mind he was
made higher then him self / for a man standing is higher than when he is
syttyng, he provoked Christ to answer / nor for the intent that he would
beleaue his answer or take his excuse: but hearing his answer he might
pervert it and take thereof occasyon to accuse him, but Jesus would not answer /
he held his speech meakly / for he knew that Cayphas would take sum occasion
of his answer / whereby he would accuse him, therefore Jesus would not speak, and
that was not of any displeasure or fear: but for a mystery, as knowing that
he which moved him to speak: did it of a craft and fraud, and not to know
the truth. Also he kept silence to give us example to contempne the false
crafts and disceytes of our adversaries / and therefore he would rather
strongly keape his silence than to defend his cause without any profit. And
of this silence was spoken long before that time, by the prophet Esaias: Esaie.
53. C
Quasi agnus coram tondente se obmutescet. etc. He shall be as dumb as a lamb
when he is shorn / and he shall not open his mouth to give answer. Psalm. 37.
And the prophet David says in the person of Christ: I as a deaf man hard
not: and I was as a dumb man not opening his mouth. And the more that our
sauyoure Jesus kept silence to them that were not worthy his answer: the more
Cayphas the bishop being in great furye / provoked Christ to answer. Math.
26. F.
And therefore with great indignacyon and inpacyence he said to Christ Adiuro te
per deum viuum vt dicas no bis si tu es Christus filius dei: I adjure the by
the living god / or charge and command the by the virtue of the living god
/ that thou say unto us if thou be Christ the son of god living. This
adiuracyon Cayphas spoke of a false crafty and disceytful mind and not for to
know the truth. Super Mat. 26.
And therefore saint Hierom says: Cayphas did adjure Christ by the living god,
that for the reverence of the name of god: he should answer and speak unto
them not intendyng thereby to know the truth, but to take occasion of his
words to falsely accuse Christ. O what madness and wickedness was this, first
they sent to take him and so they bound him as a thief worthy death. And now
they examyn him not to know the truth / but rather to find some occasion in
him whereby they might accuse him unto Pylate as worthy death. And this
adiuracyon was a grievous sin in Caiphas, for it perteyneth not to the
inferior so to conjure the superior without a reasonable cause / to say the
treuthe. This notwithstanding Christ for the reverence of the name of god
wherewith he was adjured: he answered and spoke the truth first that they
should not excuse them self but that they herd him say the treuth, and also
that he would not be noted to conte^pne the name of god, for these causes Jesus
answered and said: Math. 26. F.
Tu dixisti, ego sum. etc. Thou have said the truth, I am the son of god
notwithstanding, Marci. 14. G.
I say unto you that from hensforth or herafter ye shall se the son of man,
that is, ye shall se me, whom you now contempne and shamefully entreat, sit
on the right hand of the virtue of god, that is in majesty and power equal /
and one with god the father and ye shall se me cume at the day of judgment in
my manhood with great power and majesty in the clouds of heaven. Super Mar.
Than Cayphas which before rose up in a great furye hearing this answer was
more mad, Libro. iiii.
and so cut or rent his garments, Libro. 13.
for as Bede says whom that fury made rise from his seat: this madness
provoked him to cut and rent his vestiment. and as Simon de Cassia says, this
cuttynge of his garment does show a folysshe diuisyon in his manners / and also
the want of the bond of Charity. And in this act Cayphas did also prophicye /
showing and signifyenge by the cuttynge of his garment, that the Iues should
shortly lose their dignitye of preesthod which began in Aaron, for when he cut
his garment or clothyng he made that openly to be seen, which before was
secreat, and so consequently he cut and put from him the covering of the law,
though he knew it not: nor yet intended yt, for he only cut his clothing:
that he mygh: make his accusacyon against Christ, more grievous, and to show
that thing by his doing: which he spoke in his words, for he said that
Christ did blaspheme god. It was a custom and a manner among the Iues yt
when they herd any blasphemye spoken against god: they would cut and rent
their clothing or garments in token of sorrow and detestacyon of so great a
crime. This grievous sin of blasphemy the prince of priests Cayphas did
impute to Christ saying: Blasphemauit: He has blasphemed god attributynge
and gyuynge that thing to him self: which is only propre to god. What need
we of any other witness as he might say we labor in vain to search for
witness against him, for he has spoken openly and before al your presence,
ye have hard him speak blasphemye. O wreche and prince full of wickedness, he
spoke no blasphemye but the treuth thou do blaspheme the son of god, for
thou will not gyfe that thing to god that apperteynethe to god, thou reputest
the essencyall son of god to be a pure creature, and therefore thy blasphemye
shall be with the evermore to thy eternal perdicyon and dampnacyon.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson, that we should be pure and clean from
all blasphemye both in our self and also to other persons, in our selfs: that
we another do nor say any thing whereby the name of god should be blasphemed in
us or by us. And also that we move not any other persons to blaspheme god. And
a man to conform him self to this article let him in a contrary manner bliss
or praise god in this or like manner. Sit nomen domini benedictum. etc. Blessed
be the name of god now and ever. Amen. And also pray as follows.

A prayer.
O Jesus which did suffer the abominable sin of blasphemy to be put upon
the: keep me that thy name be never blasphemed by me in word nor in deed / and
that never any blasphemy / or any other evil word be spoken or uttered with my
mouth.

Of the Condempnacyon of Christ. The.xv. article.
THe.xv. article is the condempnacyon of Christ unto the death. When Cayphas
the prince of priests had said to his compaigney that were there gathered in
counsel, ye all have now herd him speak blasphemy, he asked of them what they
thought, and then they al answering said: Math. 10. G.
Reus est mortis: He is worthy death / he has deserved death. This they said
that their malice should be openly known, and though they did not so intend:
yet it was so done by the permissyon and suffrance of god, as many other
things here spoken and done in these articles. Libro. (...).
And behold here (says Simon de Cassia) how justice is oppressed / virtue put
under foot / and reason utterly subdued to their malice, in so much that all
the princes / wise men and seniours did agree in one sentence to condemn to
death the rightuous person. And there was not one that would speak for the
innocent / that would defend him / excuse him / or require respyt of that he
might answer or defend him self / but all they condemned him as worthy death
/ where as Christ spoke only the treuth. Marci. 14. G.
And note here the merueylouse folysshenes or rather madness of this bishop /
how he sitting in the place of a judge / did peruerte the order of justice
and of the law. First he gave sentence of blasphemy against Christ / and
after that he asked counsel of such as satte in examinacyon with him saying
what think you in this cause, and they said: Reus est mortis: He is worthy
death. Such a judge has such counselors, they were the accusers of Christ,
they discussed and examined his cause and they also gave sentence and all
contrary to the order of the law. They said he is gyltye and worthy death. It
Christ had blasphemed as they said that he did: Leui^. 24. C.
they had then said treuthe, for who so ever did blaspheme the name of god, by
the law he should suffer death, for he should be stoned to death. But for
asmoche as Christ did not so in deed as they said: therefore their sentence was
false and wicked. And therefore this condempnacion of Christ unto the death: is
conveniently nombred among the articles of Christ's passion, for what man is
there that will not be heavy and sorry to be falsely conde^pned unto death, how
much then should Christ be sorry being most innocent, and the life of all
living creatures, to be condemned unto so shameful a death of the cross /
and that by those persons: whom he came to save and help.

Here follow, ii. lessons.
OF this article we may take.ii. lessons. First that this voice Reus est
mortis: He is worthy death / which was spoken of Christ most innocent, that
this voice (I say) never rest or be found in our hertes and mouths. Nor that
it at any time be truly veryfyed in us: as it may be of every person that
commits deedly sin, for of every such person it may Math. 5. B


A prayer.
O Jesus which feared not the Wicked voice of the most cruel Iues when they
said of the: Reus est mortis: He is worthy death, and pacyently did suffer the
same for me most wretch: keep and preserve me / that I never be found worthy
eternal death in thy sight. Amen.

Of the buffetynge or smytyng in the neck of Christ. The.xvi. article.
THe.xvi. article is the beatynge or smiting of christ in the neck with their
fystes / for when Jesus had confessed him self to be the son of god /
which the Iues took for the most blasphemy that might be: then all the
compeyney that were present fell upon him like mad men rebukynge and mocking
him / some did spytte in his face and some did smite him in the neck with
their fystes as saint Mathewe says: Math. 26. G.
Commonly such persons as be taken for foolys or vile persons and dispysed be
so smyten in the neck. Therefore in that / that the Iues bet Christ with their
fystes in the neck there is not so much intended in this article / the pain
that then he suffered, as the co^tumely and dispisynge, for that, they that time
reputed him as a fool and a vile person, for thereby he was mocked / scorned
and blasphemed / and therefore they also pinched / nipped him and pulled him by
the chekes and by the heir of his berde, which all he suffered pacyently / and
so was fulfilled the saying of the prophyt which said in the person of
Christ: Esaie. l. C.
Corpus meum dedi percutientibus: et genas meas vellentibus: I offer my body
pacyently to them that smote it / and my chekes to them that pynched them. And
these last words some men expound them / of the rentynge and tearing of
Christ's chekes with the sharp nails of the most cruel Iues, Lira super.
and some doctors declare them of the pulling of Christ's heir out from his
berde, Esa. l. capi.
and whether of these be true or that both be true (which I rather suppose) I
may well se and perceive that the cursed hands of the most cruel Iues were
not saciate with smytyng / beatyng and spyttyng in that most sweet face of our
savior Jesus, but also they rent his beauteous face with their nails and
pluckyng out the heir from his berde, Libro. xiii.
and as Simon de Cassia says: This smytyng in ye neck may signifye under a
mystery the obstinate malice of the Iues, whereby they continually curse our
faith / which joins us unto god, and also it signifies the cruelty of the
paganes which continually labored by their tyranny to distroy and cut away our
faith. For the pagans before yt they were converted to the faith: they put to
death as many faithful people as they might get. Colaphus is properly called a
beetyng in the neck with ye fyst. Now spu^ally our faith is called the neck
of the church for asmoch as it joins the head and the body together that is:
christians be joined to christ by faith / and this faith should be strong as
the neck / and therefore in the canticles it is compared to the tower of David
which was very strong. Cant. 4. G.
Our savior Jesus was smyten in the neck.xl. times in the house of Cayphas,
and there were gathered in this counsel of the Iues against Christ. lxxvii.
Iues.

A Lesson.
IN this article we may take this lesson / that we be well ware that we never
beat Christ in the neck: as saint Bid says: Super Mar. cap. 14.
All false christians that confess Christ in word and deny him in their
living: they beat Christ in the neck / for Colaphus is that stroke that is
given byhynde a man. They also do beat Christ in the neck: that prefer their
own honor and glory before the glory of Christ. And also they that sclaunder
their neighbor byhynde his back. And a man to conform him self to this
article he may give him self a clap in the neck / in the remembrance of all
Christ's strokes, and then pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would be smytten by the cruel Iues in the neck for my love:
grant to me that I may so confess the my lord god with my mouth: that I
never do contrary thy precepts in my deeds. Amen.

Of the spittyng in Christ's face. The.xvii. article.
THe.xvii. article is of ye spittyng in Christ's face, when all the Iues had
accused Christ as worthy to dye / then they did spytte in his face / as in a
person most vile / abiecte and to be dispysed / a person cursed and reproved
of god, Mat. 15. G
and therefore as the gospel says: Ceperunt quidam conspuere eum: Some be
ganne to spytte upon him / and that in his most amiable face as Mathewe says:
Mat. 26. G.
This spyttynge was done and suffered of Christ for many causes. First to note
their great unkindness: Libro. xiii.
as Simon de Cassia says: Our lord did spytte on the earth and made clay /
and therewith anointed the eyes of him that was borne blind and so gave to him
his sight / which he had not by nature. Ioh. 9. A.
And now the Iues to show their unkindness / did defoyle the face of our
lord with their soul spyttynges. Secondely they spyte in his face to his
great shame and despection, for it was the property of the Iues to spytte in
the face of him whom they dispysed and reputed as a vile and abject person. O
abominable manner of the Iues which abhorred not to defoyle that most amiable
and louly face / the which angels have great desire to behold whichens full
of grace and favor and desired of all good people for it is ye life conforth
and health of al yt be holds it / and not only they did spyt in his face / but
also they coght and retched and so cast ye foul stynkyng phlegm into his fair
face. Therefore Matthew says: Expueru^t, that is / they retching and coughyng /
did spyt it into his face. And Marchus says Conspueru^t: that is not only one
person but many together did spue in his face, in somoch that yt most blessed
and amiable face was made so abominable to behold as if it had been full of
lepre / and yt was thorough their spittynges / scratchynges and betaynges* as
we shall declare in the next article. And so was fulfilled in christ ye
prophecy of Esaias sayng of christ: Esa. liii. A.
Non erat ei species. etc. There was another beautye nor favor in his face, we
se him and we might not se his face it was so covered with blood and spyttynges,
we reputed him as a lepre and smyten of god as ye most wretched / but he was
wounded for our iniquites and oppressed for our sins and not for his own.
And herunto saint Barnard says. In se^mo^e de passione domini.
O good Jesus these most wretched and cruel Iues have with their stynkyng
spuynges defoyled thy face so beauteous and amiable yt angels desire to
behold it which fulfylleth all heuyns with joy and gladness / which both rich and
pore in ye world do worship / and yet good lord thy wretched creatours did
smite ye and despise ye as a vile servant / thou being the lord of all
creatours.

Here follows a lesson.
OF this article we may take this doctrine, that we ought diligently to be
war that we never spytte in the face of god as the Iues did, which we do when
we defoyle our soul and conscience with any fylthy thoughts or deeds, for
Christ does rest in the soul and conscience in the which his face or image is
hole and perfyt. And therefore who so ever defoyleth his conscience with deedly
sin: he spytteth in the face of Christ, saint Hierom says that our lord
Jesus would suffer pacyently such spyttynges in his face: Super Man. 14.
that thereby he might wasshe our conscience which is as the face of our soul.
And that a man might conform him self to this article, he should form and
ymagyne in his mind: Christ horribly in his face deformed and defoyled with
the spyttynges of the Iues, and then he should thank him with all his heart
for his great pacyence, and so glorifye Christ for that rebuke and shame. Also
we should remember how often we have defoyled the most beautiful face of
Christ in our conscience by mortal sin. Also how oftentimes we have
received unworthily the blessed body of our lord and defoyled it with our
fylthy spotyll, and then pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would suffer thy most fair and amyable face to be defoyled for
my love which the fylthy spyttynges of the Iues: grant to me that I never
defyle the face of thy image in my soul / by my sinful acts or fylthy
cogitacyons. Amen.

Of the smiting of Christ in the face. The.xviii. article.
THe.xviii. article is the smiting of Christ in the face. Of the which
saint Mathewe says thus: Et palms ei in faciem dederu^t, Math. 26. G.
And they smote him in the face with the palm of their hands, as the hand
when it is closed it is called the fyste / so when it is open and spredde
abroad it is called the palm. Isydorus.
As papias and Isydore says. Libro. xi.
So now they smote Christ with their open hands upon the face. Ethicorum
cap. 14.
And this smiting makes a special article of the passyone of Christ / for
asmoche as a man does suffer more pain by such smiting in the face:
Papias super ha^c dictionem palma.
then by smiting in the neck, for in the face of man ar all ye senses or
wits, and also the face is much ten^er and soon hurt. And therefore it is
very like that by such swytynge in the face the blood ran out from his noose
and also from his mouth though it be not written by the evangelists. Libro.
xiii.
For as Simon de Cassya says: That the evangelists did omit many things
declarynge the bytternes of Christ's passion, which yet we meakly believe, and
that was because the evangelists wrote only for the truth of the history to
be had / and not pryncypally to excite and move the effect of compassyon in
us. O what enorme and grievous sin of the most wicked Iues was this, yt they
would so cruelly smite so pleasant a face? Snper marc. 14. in fine.
But as saint Hierom says: He would pacyently suffer so to be smyten with
their palms: that we with our hands and lyppes, that is with our works and
words might laud and praise him. Also we may say that he is smytten in the
face: which is rebuked and reuyled to his own face. And in this manner also
was Christ smyten in the face for he suffered many rebukes / contumelies and
dispysynges openly to his own face spoken. Esaie. l. C.
And of the prophet Esaias in the person of Christ / Faciem meam non auerti* ab
increpantibus et conspuentibus in me. I have not turned my face from them
that reuyled and rebuked me and spytted upon me, for the Iues did not only
smite Christ upon the face: but also they reuyled him to his face with many
opprobrious and blasphemous words, which all the evangelists do not express.
But yet Lucas touchethe them in a generaltie saying: Luc. 22. G.
Et multa alia blasphemantes: dicebant in eum: The Iues blasphemyng Christ:
spoke many other opprobrious words to him.

Here follows.ii. lessons.
auerte and turn away his face from such rebukes / blasphemies dispysynges /
persecucyons and spyttynges, but rather gladlye and pacyently did offer his
face to them for our love: so should we in time convenient not refuse / but
rather gladlye suffer like things for the love of Christ. And then let us
worship him and pray we as follows.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would suffer for my love thy most lovely face to be smyten with
the hands of the most wicked Iues: grant to me that I may ever keep the face
of thine image pure and vndefoyled in my soul / that it never be spotted or
hurt by the sinful hands and works of my iniquityes or sins. Ame^.

Of the covering and blyndfyldynge of Christ's face. The.xix. article,
THe.xix. Marc. 14. G.
article is the covering of Christ's face / for as the Gospel says:
Velauerunt faciem eius: They covered his face, who so ever covers the face of
an other person: he hydeth that face from him, and so the Iues hydd the face of
god from them. And this covering yet continues unto this day upon the hertes
of the Iues / for they will not se and know god as they should do. O mad
blyndnes and blind madness of these unhappy Iues, that most pleasant face
which the holy patriarchs and prophetys and their formar fathers greatly
desired to come and with contynuall and long syghenges desired to se it, but
these wicked Iues / when they had it present and might have seen it / they
would not, but covered it and hyde it from them. Moses desired to se this face
when he said: Exodus 33. C.
Ostende mihi faciem tuam: Lord show to me thy face, Also David said: show
to us thy face and we / shall be safe. Cant. 2. D.
Psalm. lxxix. Also in the canticles it is written / show to me thy face for it
is very fair. Psalm. lxxix.
All the fathers also in Limbo patrum did cry and say: Come and show to us
thy face lord that syttest above Cherubyn. And at last: He that was thus
desired of all good men: came and showed his face to the Iues, and they as most
wretched covered his face, Super. Mar. 14.
not for that he should not se their sins but to hyde his face from them self
as Bede sayethe: Exo. 34. D.
for their soore and blind ey ene might not behold the face of Moses:
Except that it were first covered, but this person Christ is much more of
dignity then Moses. And therefore his face is much more glorious and shinynge
then Moses face was, though Christ's glory were al inwardly and outwardly
covered with a cloud of a mortal body / yet there was a little spark of
glory shynynge in his face, that did so glymer and beat in the eyes of the
Iues: that they could or would not pacyently behold his face / but covered it
and hyd^d it from them self, signifyenge thereby (though they so did not
intend) that no infidele and sinful person turned from god: might se and
behold the face of Christ, for it is hyd from them, A figure of this
covering and blyndfyldyng we may take in Sampson which for the love he had
unto the synful woman Dalida: Iudi^. 16. E. F.
he lost his strength / he was taken of his enemies / his eyes were put out /
and also he was fatigate and weryed with manifold illusyons and scorns. So
our strong Sampson Christ Jesus was served in like manner as it appears in the
articles of his passion, and all that was for ye love of our sinful soul, to
whom he spoke by the prophet, Hie^. 3. A.
Thou have done fornicacyon with many strange lovers, yet return and come
again to me and I shall receive the.

A lesson.
OF this article we may learn this lesson that we ought to be well ware that we
never blyndfylde Christ or cover his face. But alas many Christyans now a
days do cover Christ's face, which do sin privily / thinking that god does
not se them. Also they do cover Christ's face which sees all things that do
change / give or sell craftelye / that thing which is evil or naught: for a
good thing. Also they cover Christ's face which do derke or cover the Image of
god in their souls with the cloak of wylfull ignorans or sin. And therefore
saint Hierom says, Super Man. 14.
that Christ would have his face covered, because that he would take away the
cover and cloak of ignorance and sin from our hertes.

A prayer.
O Jesus which did suffer for my love thy most gracyous face (the which
angels desire to behold) to be covered of the wicked Iues to thy great
rebuke: I beseech the make thy face to shine upon me thy most wretched servant
/ that thy godly image in me be never derked or covered and that mercyfully
thou would take away the cloak of sin and the derknes of ignorance from my
heart with the light of thy heuenlye grace. Amen.

Of the mocking of Christ when they bad him prophicye, who is this that
smyteth the. The.xx. article.
THe.xx. article is the scornful questyon of the Iues unto Christ, For when
they had covered his face: they smote him on the heed saying: Arede or
prophicye unto us Christ, who is he that smyteth the now. But in what part
they then did smite him: the evangelists spoke diversely. For Marcus says that
then they smote him with their fystes in the neck. Math. 20. G.
But Matthew and Luke say that they smote him upon the face with the palms of
their hands. Luce. 22. G
Therefore we may say conveniently, that after they had covered his face: every
man smote him as he would, and so some smote him in the neck / some in the face
and some on the chekes: and so smiting they said. Arede or prophicye to us
thou Christ / who smote the now? Math. 26. G.
And this they spoke to mock and scorn him as the gloss says, Glosa
ordinaria Ibid
because he would be taken as a prophet among his apostles and comen people,
and whom the people also took for a great prophet But the Iues now because he
would not say who smote him: they took him for a false prophet. Our savior
Jesus would not answer to their folisshe and mad questyon / because he knew
that they mocked him, and so surely it had been but a folysshenes to answer
unto their madness. Saint Hierom says: that they ware without mercy and full of
cruelty / and therefore they did all the evil and derysyon that they could do
to him. Some smote him of an evil froward will, and some to please ye great
princes, which were most cruel and full of malice. And as saint Hierome
says: this pain and passion that he suffered that night: shall never be
manyfestly and hollye known unto ye day of judgment, for from the beginning
of the night unto the morning, he was left in the hands and custody of the
vile servants which did then exercise and prove in him all manner of torments
and pains that they could ymagyne: Now drawing him by the heir of the heed
now smytyng him on the face, now spyttyng in his face and mouth, now
pynchynge his chekes and so of other pains as we said before and shall say
more hereafter: they vexed and grieved our savior Christ both in soul and in
body.

Of the Compassyon of our Lady.
But where art thou now O thou blessed virgyn Marie mother of Christ? Doyst
not thou know now what things be done about thy dearbeloued son Jesus?
Some do say that Johan the Euangeliste, leaving Christ in the house of Cayphas
/ ran to Bethanie to the house of Marie Magdalen where as our lady remaned
when Jesus went with his disciples to Jerusalem to make his supper and to eat
the paschal lamb, and when Johan was come to bethany he knocked and rapt upon
the door / and the blessed virgyn being in her prayers / hearing him was
greatly astonisshed and called unto Magdalene and said: Arise my daughter and
know what is become of my son. Anon the door was opened and Johan came in
cryenge / weeping and saying / Alas reverent mother, I bring heavy tythynges to
the / and for sobbing and weeping he could scarsely speak, then the vyrgyn
with great heaviness and also weapyng asked of Johan, where is my son: where is
my Jesus: what is done with him? is he yet on live or the most cruel Iues has
slain him? and Johan as he might speak said: He is yet living / but as I can
perceive: they will this day put him to death. The ministers and the Iues took
him this night / and now they keep him fast bound in the house of Cayphas /
and those wicked scrybes and phariseys do say that he ought to be judged to
death. O how cold then was the vyrgins heart, with how much sorrow was she
then replete? And then forth with she went with Johan hastily to Jerusalem,
and Magdalene with other diverse women went with her / and when she came in to
the city she saughte her son by the broad streets and narrow laynes /
asking of them she met, where is my dearbeloued son / and so forth as ye
shall se in the next article, and also in the.xliiii. and.lviii. articles.

A devout Contemplacyon for a lesson.
FOr an holsom lesson in this article we shall set before you a breue
contemplacyon of the most shamful mockinges and derisions that the Iues did
unto ye most innocent lamb our savior Jesus. O my devout soul / awayke /
rise and depely consider how thy savior Jesus which is the sovereign lord
and glory of angels is now made the mocking stock of the Iues, and as it
were a tenyse ball of derysyon wherewith the priests and the scribes and
phariseys done play together casting and sendynge him from one to an other to
his great rebuke and heaviness. As Annas sent him to Cayphas, Cayphas to Pylate,
Pylate to Herod and Herod to Pylate again. And in all these places and in
going also thither he suffered many dispytes and grievous pains / as we said
before and shall say more herafter. Of this the prophet David speaks in the
person of Christ saying: Omnes videntes me deriserunt me: Psalm. 21.
All that se me^ did mock me, and that.iii. manner of ways, with-false words,
with signs and with scornful sentences. Of the first the prophet says: Lo
cuti sunt labiis: They have spoken with their lyppes / without good
consideracyon or aduysement. Now false things imputynge to me and sometime
making false promyses to me. For the first they said: Math. 27. E.
Alios saluos fecit: seipsum non potest sa luum fa cere^ He made other safe /
but he can not save him self. Here they imputed a false thing to him / that
he could not save him self, and that is false. Also they made to him a false
promise when they said. Ibidem.
Si rex Israel est: descenda^ hunc de cru^^ et credimus ei. If Christ be the
king of Israel let him discende now and come down from the cross and we
will believe to him. There was a false promise for they thought not as they
said. The second derisyon was with signs. Psalm. 21.
And of this also speaks David: Et mouerunt capita sua / They did move and
shake their heedes at him. Mat. 27. G
And so says Mathewe: Prete^eunt^^ autem blasphemabat eum mouentes capita sua.
etc. They that passed by the mount of Caluarie where as Christ was crucified
did blaspheme him / mouynge their heedes and saying (Hoy) This is he that will
distroy the temple of god and in.iii. days buyld it again. The third
derisyon was with scornful and mocking or ironyous sentences. Psalm. 21.
And of this it follows in David: Sperauit in domino eripiat eum. etc. He
trusted in god the father, let him now deliver him from our hands, let him
save Christ / by reysyng him again. For as Christ says* His father loves
him and will save him. Mat. 27. G
On this manner the Iues said: Confidit in deum: liberet nunc eum si vult: dixit
enim, filius dei ego sum* Christ trusts in to god the father, let him deliver
him now if he may and will, for he said that he was the son of god. Thus
they mocked him also they covered his face and smote him with other things as
we said before. Also of these things the prophet David speaks in an other
psalm in the person of Christ: Confortati sunt qui persecuti sunt me inimici
mei unjust. etc. My enemies that have persecuted me wrongfully have now the
higher hand and dominyon ouerme / and therefore I now pay and suffer pains
for that thing which I had not. Adam and Eve did eat the apple: but now I
pay for it and suffer pain for their sin. And that a man might conform him
self to this article: let him remember what irrisyon and shame Christ suffered
in this act / and how the Iues made him their laughing and mocking stock:
and as it were a chylderne game at him / and then pray as follows / or in any
like manner.

A prayer.
O Jesus which with scornful mockes of the Iues was smyten upon the heed and
bydden to arede and prophycye who smote the: I beseech the good Jesus prophicye
and show to me, that I might know what a wreche and sinner I am, which so
often (alas for sorrow) have smytten the with the hand of mine evil and sinful
deeds. Amen.

How Christ was presented before Pylate. The xxi. article.
THe.xxi. article is the presentacyon of Christ before Pylate. For what time
it was clear day / that is the first hour of the day / at.vi. of the clock
at the son rysyng. A great multitude of Iues came to Cayphas house / and
from thens they led Jesus bound unto the mote halle or judgment house as a
mylde lamb that is borne to his death. O my soul behold here how thy savior
Jesus enters unto his judgment bound thurst and many other ways vexed / and
all men beheld him and mockyng him said: O Jesus thou art here now, if thou
had been a prophet: thou would have preuyded for this before, with many other
like words that those cursed Iues spoke then to him. And thus they brought him
bound and delivered him to ponce Pylate the president and high judge of Jury
under the emperor of Rome. Mat. 17. A
This presentynge unto Pylate was most grievous of all other unto Christ,
first because he was presented before that judge, which had full power under
the emperor to condemn him unto the death. Secondly because the Iues that
presented him to Pylate did present him / not as to be examyned by Pylate: but
they delivered him unto Pylate as conuicte and found gylty by their
examinacyon / and so to be put to ye death without any other examinacion or
taryeng. For they said to Pylate: Ioh. 1^. C.
If this man were not a mislyuer and so worthy death / we would not have
delivered him to the. Of this we shall speak more in the next article. Thyrdly
this presentyng to Pylate was most grievous to Christ because he had been faty
gate and weryed the night before, many ways by the crueltye of the Iues, and
therefore it was much more pain to him now to be brought to the judgment of a
pagane and infidele, for they brought him bound to Pylate to be slain and
devoured by him which was reputed as a dog among the Iues because he was a
gentyle and not circumcysed as they were.

A remembrance of the morning of our Lady.
WHen it was publysshed thoroughe out all the city of Jerusalem that Jesus
was taken, and how that the Iues would crucifye him: his most sorrowful
mother the virgin Marye herd thereof / and so almost deed for sorrow: was led
by her systers and other women with unspeakable lamentynges / wepynges /
mornings and syghynges, to se her most derebeloued son, and so weeping
without ceasyng / she sawght him thorough ye broad streets and narowe lanes of
Jerusalem cryenge / and saying: where is my most derebeloued son, where
art thou my most sweet Jesus, where shall I find the / who has taken the from
me? why may not I dye for the? These words with other like might this most
sorowefull mother of Jesus say. And when they came to that place where as they
might se Jesus, they seeing him so bound / so tormented / so deformed with
their spyttynges, forsaken of all his disciples / dispysed / mocked and
destitute of all help and solace, so shamfully and paynfully with a great
multitude of armed men cruelly led to the tribunal of the wicked Judge, and
there to be condemned to the death, our lady with her systers and the other
women I say seeing and considering these things: what heaviness / what sorrow
and bytternesse were they then fulfilled with: it can not be spoken nor
expressed by any sentence. Also our lord Jesus seeing and knowing his mother
with the other women in so great sorrow: greatly sorowed thereof, for without
doubt he had great compassyon of them / and so was greatly grieved of this
compassyon / and most specially for his most kind mother, for he knew that her
sorrow was almost to the death, as it shall appear in the.lviii. article. And as
some doctors say: there were.xl. servants that led Christ from Cayphas house
unto Pylate besides the great multitude of people that went with them: and
there were a thousand passes from Cayphas house unto the house of Pylate.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson, that the secular power is not to be
despised but to be honored. For as saint Poule says: Ro^^. 13. A.
there is no power but of god, and therefore who so resists the power: he
resists the ordinauns of god. And therefore as saint Austen says: Our lord
god stood before Pylate a gentyle and pagane judge / and spoke never one word
irreverently unto him. So should we with reverence stand before our prelates
and judges though they be not good: but evil and vicyous.

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ son of the living god, which in the first hour of
the day for our health would be presented by the Iues unto Pylate a pagane
judge: grant to me for the love of thy name that I dispyse no manner of power
/ but that I may give due and worthy honor to my superiors and to all
judges. Amen.

How the Iues falsely accused Christ before Pylate. The.xxii. article.
THe.xxii. article is the false accusacyon that the Iues made of Christ, for
when Christ was brought in to the mote hal and there stood bound before Pylate
the judge: the Iues would not come in to the mote hall because they would not
be defoyled and made unclean, for that day was their Pasch day, wherein all the
Iues that were clean should eat the pure bread that is made of pure where
without leuyn, and the Iues had this opinyon, that if they came in the house of
any gentyle or stranger which was not circumcided as they were: by that
entrance they were made unclean and so might not eat of those pure breades:
unto such time they were first purifyed. Super John^ trac. Cxiiii
And here says saint Austen. O wicked blyndnes, the Iues feared to enter the
house of a stranger, because they would not be contaminate / but they feared
not to sley their innocent brother and also lord. O thou christian note here
how the Iues kept them self from all uncleanness that they might eat the
pure bread of wheat which gave to them no grace of god for the self
eating, much more then should thou keape thy self clenne, which receyuest
the blessed body of Christ / the heuenlye bread which gives to the / the
eternal life. The Iues would not enter in to ye judgment house: and thou wylt
not avoid evil compaigny and tauernes / where as oftentimes been spoken
temerary ungodly judgments, Libro. xiii.
and also much blood shed by false de^xaccyons and other ways. Simon de
Cassia also says here: That the Iues of an old tradycyon and ordinance /
avoided and shunned the houses of strangers in such high solempnytyes. And
so they ever intending to such light and vain ceremonies and little
regarding greatter things: fell in to the deape pytte of great sins, Ioh.
18. E.
and Pylate seeing that they would not enter in to him: he went forth to them
and said: what accusacyon bring you against this man. And here says Simon de
Cassya: Libro. xiii.
It apperteyneth to the wisdom and justice of every judge and president not to
judge after the mind of the accusers / except their accusacyon be probable
and true. Therefore Pylate wisely did inquyre, and ordinarylye did proceed in
this cause / when he said: what accusacyon show you against this man. For
also by the laws of the Romans / no man should be condemned to death,
Except he be first accused and that proved, Also Pylate merueylynge and also
moved with displeasure against the Iues, that they of their own auctoritye
would bind Christ / nor yet conuicte before the judge: thought that they
had some great cause against Christ, and therefore he asked of them / what
cause they laid agynste him. Ioh. 18. E.
And then they answered: Si non esset hic malefactor: non tibi tradidissemus
eum: If this person were not a mysordred liver: we would not have delivered
him to the, As if they had said / after Simon de Cassya we be not moved of
envy / nor yet styrrede of haytred, Libro. xiii.
Nor yet we have been hastye in this deed, before that we delivered him to the:
we dyscussed his cause, we se his evil deeds, we know his myscheuous tongue /
there is nothing that compellethe us to deliver him unto the / to be judged
and condemned by the: but his evil deeds. Also addyng this we have examined
him in our wise and learned counsel / and there we have found him worthy to
dye / wherefore it is not nedeful to have any further examinacyon. Thus these
malicyous Iues did justify them self before the judge that they might the more
spedely co^dempne the innocent. Pilate so^what moved or despleased with their
answer because he knew that they accused Christ for envy only that they had
to Christ, and therefore thynkyng that they would not show what cause they had
against him: for because he had offended against their law, therefore I (said
Pilate) would not punish him but remitted him to their punisshme^t, which was
only to be beaten and not to inner death. Ioh. 18. F.
And so Pylate said to them: Accipite eum vos: et secu^dum legem vestram
iudicate eum, Take you christ and judge him after your law, as if he should
say, If your examinacyon be sufficient then judge you him and condemn him for
I will condemn no man without a cause proved before me. And this also he
spoke mocking them, Ibidem.
for he knew well that they might condemn no man to death. then the Iues said
to him: Nobis non licet interficere quemquam: we may sley no man / for that
authority was taken from them by the emperor of Rome. And here says saint
Austen: Super John^ trac. Cxiiii.
If he be so a mischeuous person as ye say: why may ye not sley him, if ye may
not sley him for your solemn feeste of pasche: why do ye cry and say:
crucifye him / crucifye him / Pylate perceiving by their words that they would
not be content with any small punisshement of Christ / but that they would
have him slain: he would needs hear the cause why he should dye. And then
they perceived that Pylate was angrye: began to accuse Christ falsely in many
things, of the which only three we read in Luke. Luc. 23. A.
And so the Iues said, Hunc inuenimus subuertentem gentem nostram. etc. we
found this person subuertynge our people from our law. Also forbyddyng the
people to pay tribute to the emperor. And saying him self to be Christ and
our king. But these accusacyons were al false. And therefore they said:
Inuenimus: we have found him, for that was only in their own malicyous
hearts, for it was not truth in deed: but only their own ymagynacyon and
inuencyon. For he which came to fulfill the law and not to break it: did not
subvert the people from ye law. Nor he did not subvert them: but rather
converted them to goodness whom he taught ye truth, nor he did forbid ye people
to pay tribute to ye emperor / for he said openly: Mat. 22. C
pay or render tho things to ye emperor which be his, Mat. 17. D
and give to god that apperteyneth to him* And also he paid tribute for him
self and also for Peter, and where he said him self to be Christ the king:
he said truth, but yet he would not take upon him his kingdom in this world,
and so he was falsely accused and that not withstanding: he would not answer
one word for his excuse. Mat. 27. D
And therefore Pylate said to him: Non audis quanta aduersum te dicunt
testimonia? Doyst not thou hear what and how many accusacyons they bring
against the? And Jesus answered^ not one word in the presence of the Iues, in
so much that Pylate much merueyled thereat: And specially seeing that the Iues
vnresonably and with great turmoyle and with importunitye / required his death
but Christ for all that would not answer, remembrynge the saying of the
wyseman. Eccl. 32. A.
Vbi non est auditus: non effundes sermonem: Speak not where as is no
convenient audience. Then Pylate entered in to the motehall, because he might
more quietely examyn him from the turmoyle and noise of the people, and there
lityll regarding the first accusacyon which was concerning their law, nor
yet the second accusacyon, for he reputed that to be false, for parauenture he
had hard before how Christ said / give to the emperor that is his, therefore
he only examined him in the third cause saying: Ioh. 18. F.
Tu es ^ex iudeorum? Art thou the king of Iues? as if he should say / is it
true that the Iues say of the / that thou would usurp and take upon the the
name of a king contrary to the decree and statute of the emperor of Rome /
for the emperor had taken from the Iues ye name of a kingdom that they should
have no king / and that was to break their pride and to take from them all
occasyon of rebellyon. Then Jesus said to Pylate A temetipso hoc dicis: Ibidem.
an alii tibi dixeru^t de me? Spekes thou this of thine own mind: or other
persons have spoken this to the of me, showing by these words yt Pylate did
not follow the order of ye law, as if he should say / if thou know yt I have
taken upon me the name of a king show openly ye signs or acts of my rebellyon
/ if only thou herest this of oder persons / make ordynary inquisition and
cause the^ to bring in witness. Then pylate answered, I am no Iue / and therefore
I speak it not of my self / thy people and thy bisshoppes have delivered ye
unto me / which should defense the, but it seems that you have greatly
offended the^: that they so obstinatly do accuse the, Ibidem.
what have you done? Jesus answered: Regnu^ meu^ no^ est de hoc mu^do: Apoc. 1^.
C
my kingdom is not of this world and so he denies not to be a king for he is ye
king of kings and lord of lords, if my kingdom were of this world: my
ministres and servants would feyght for me and defend me then Pylate said:
Ergo thou art a king. Ioh. 18. G.
And Jesus answered: Tu dicis: Thou say so / as if he said it is as thou
say, for I am a king, and that thou should know the condicyon of my
kingdom, for that cause I was borne temporally into this world / and for that
cause I came into this world: that I might bear testimony and witness to the
truth, and who so ever is the child or lover of truth: he hereth my voice, Of
these words we may take that there be.ii. things required to the kingdom of
Christ, the first is truth yt it be hard, and the second is obedience: that is
yt the truth herd be fulfilled. Ioh. 18. G.
Then Pylate said: Quid est veritas: what is truth? Pilate did not here inquire
the diffinition of truth / but what is that virtue of truth: thorough whose
perticipation and virtue men be taken and made of the kingdom of god. The
solution of this question Pylate would not abide to here, for seeing that he was
not of the kingdom of christ / nor would intricate him self with spu^all
things: therefore he had no cure or desire to here it; and also he cared not
for it / because he should shortly co^dempne the truth. And also because he herd
a great murmur and trouble of the people without forth feryng some busynes or
insureccyon because he differred ye death of Christ so long, Ibidem.
and for these causes: he hasted him to the Iues and said to them: Ego nullam
causam inuenio in homine isto: Super John^ omel. 83.
I find no cause of death in this man. Here as Chrisostom says: Pylate did
substancyally allege for christ that he another knew or could find any cause
of malice in him. And then the Iues for asmoche as they failed in their prove
for want of reasonable causes: would have prevailed by their multitude and
cryeng, Luc. 23. A.
and at last they brought against him this accusacyon, He has troubled all the
people from Galilee unto this city, willing so to aggrauate their accusacyon
/ because it appared contrary to the peace of the emperor under whom Pylate
was the high judge in Jerusalem, that thereby Pylate should be the more moved
against Christ. But you wicked Iues / how did he move the people to sedicyon
and war: that ever preached and taught peace / and came to make peace
bytwixte god and man? But spyrytually we may say that he moved the people and
troubled them from their sinful life / by his wholesome monicyon teaching them
the way of virtue and truth. Of the which mocyon and also trouble: the
prophet David sayethe: Psalm. lix.
Commouisti terram: et conturbasti eam: Thou have thou have moved the earth that
is erthly persons / and thou have trobled it, that is / put them from their
erthly and sinful life / cure / and heal (good lord) his wounds / for he is
moved to goodness and virtue. And Pylate then herynge them speak of Galilee
and knowing that Jesus was of Galilee he sent him to Herod, as ye shall se in
the next article.

A Lesson.
IN this article we may learn this lesson that we should beware that we accuse
not our savior Christ falsely or of false-thynges. They accuse Christ of false
things / which impute or put any false thing upon him, as the Iues / paganes
and heretykes do. For the Iues put upon Christ that he was the natural son
of Joseph the carpenter, and that he was a gloton and a drynker of wine, that
the devil was in him and that he subverted the people which all were false.
The paynyms impute to him that he was a pure man and not god, and that it was
inpossible that god should be incarnate. The heritykes put to christ that he had
no true body / but only a fantastical body, and that he was no very true
man: but only apparent. etc. There be other yt accuse god falsely, as these
evil and false christians / which accuse god, as the cause of their sins,
saying: God has made me of that compleccyon: that I must needs sin, the
constellation or coniunccyon of such planetes or sterres made me to sin, and
god made the sterres, therefore he made me to sin. Thou do falsely impute thy
sin to god. True it is that god made the sterres and also the of that
compleccyon / for he create all things and they were good. But all these can
not compel the to sin, for it is only the malice and frowardnes of thy
will. etc. Also a man to conform him self to this article: should remember
how he that is the very truth did pacyently suffer to be falsely accused for us,
that he might found and ground us in the truth.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would for me be falsely accused in many false things before the
judge Pylate: teach me to avoid the disceyres of wicked men and truly to
profess thy faith with good works. Amen.

How Christ was sent to Herod. The.xxiii. article.
THe.xxiii. article is the sendynge of Christ to Herod. For when Pylate herd
that Jesus was a man of the country of Galilee and so under the power of
Herod which was the captain and the reuler of Galilee under the emperor
having this occasyon to deliver his hands of Christ: sent him to herod /
which was the ruler of Galilee and at that time he was also in Jerusalem,
Pylate willing herby to do honor unto Herod that he being the capteyne of
Galilee: should deliver or condemn Christ being a man of his country / so
wyllyng that every man should be examined and judged of his own judge /
according to the laws of the Romans, and when Jesus was thus sent / there was
a great co^curse of people following him. O blessed lady Marie how went thou
in such a multitude? who helped the in that great thronge of people? Surely
thou was then the example of sorrow and heaviness to all that loves the or
Christ thy son, Luc. 23. B.
and when Herod did se Jesus he had great joy thereof, not that he thought to win any thing thereby: but for that he was curious to se a strange man and
such a man / whom he had long desired to se / that is from the decollacyon or
behedyng of saint John^ the Baptiste, for that time Christ began to preach
openly and to do many miracles, which al Herod herynge: was much desirous to
se him / and to se him show some wondrous sign or miracle, not for any
devotion: but for curiosity and to prove him what he could do: for he thought
that Christ had been a iugler or any gromancyer, and for this cause he desired
to se no miracle of our savior Jesus. This sendynge is conveniently accounted
among the articles of Christ's passion, for it is a great displeasure for any
man to be sent from one judge to an other, how much more then was it paynfull
to this most sweet and innocent lamb our savior Jesus? Herod asked of Christ
many questyons / as we shall se in the next article. Also there were.CC. passes
from Pylates house unto Herodes house / by the which space / both going and
coming he suffered many despytes and rebukes.

A Lesson.
IN this article we may learn this lesson: that is to suffer pacye^tly if we be
shamfully sent from one judge to an other for the love of Christ, seeing that
our savior Jesus was so served. And specially religyous persons which should be
the folowers of Christ should not be troubled / if sometime for obedience they
be sent from one place to an other, and now under this prelate / and now
under that. etc.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for my love did not fear to be sent from Pylate unto Herod:
grant to me I beseech the that I with a glad mind for thy love may obey to the
commandments of my superiors though they be wicked, and to do my obedyence
promtly and redylye without any grudgynge. Amen.

How Herod derided and mocked Christ. The.xxiiii. article.
THe.xxiiii. article is the derisyon or mocking that Herod did to Christ,
Luc. 23. B.
for after that he was presented to him: he moved to Christ many questyons and
proved him in them, as parauenture he asked him whether he was that child / at
whose birth a new star did appear to the.iii. kings? and whether he did give
sight to that man which was borne blind, And if he did reyse Lazar that
was.iiii. days dead? and such other questyons. Some persons do move questyons
only for curiosity to here new things, some to know the truth / and some
only to tempte and prove how the other person can answer, and some to take
the answer in a trippe or defaute. And Herod here asked Christ many
questions / not as a studious person to learn or know the truth: but rather to
rebuke Christ, not as a lover of the truth: but to tempte him, not to win
or get any truth or virtue thereby: but for curiosity to here news. And for
these causes Christ would show no token or miracle, nor yet answer unto him.
Also Herod in his questions behaved him self scornfully unto Christ, and as
mockyng him said: If thou will do any miracle in my presence / I shall quyte
the and deliver the, and if thou wylt not honor me with some thing I shall
condemn the at the will and desire of thy adversaries these malicyous Iues.
But for all this our savior Jesus which does all things ordinately. Psalm. C.
xi.
And as david says: Disposes his words and sentences in right reason and
judgment: He (I say) would not answer to any one questyon, for he judged it
most godly to keep silence at that time, for one word spoken without prophet:
may be sometime the cause of the condempnacyon of the speaker. And at that time
all the princes of the Iues stood styfly accusynge Christ, as we shall declare
in the next article.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson after saint Gregorye that as often as
our audience would here our preaching / sentence / or mind, not for to amend
thereby their perverse and vicyous life: but only to commend our saynges: then
so often we should keep silence and speak not as they would, for if we should
for that purpose follow their desire: we should offend god in so doing, and
their vicyous life should be in no thing amended thereby. There be many things
whereby we may know and perceive the mind of the herer and desyrer, and
specially if they ever praise that thing which they here, and yet never
follow that thing which they so praise.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would suffer Herod scornfully to demand many questions
of the, to the which thou would not answer one word: grant to me for thy love,
yt I may patiently here and bear scornful questyons and mocking words, and
that I may declyne and avoid my vain praise by my silence.

How Christ was accused before Herod. The.xxv, article.
THe.xxv. article is the accusacyon of Christ before Herod. Luc. 23. B.
For as Luke says: Stabant principes facer dotum et scribe constanter
accusantes eum. The princes of the priests and the scribes stood styfely
accusynge Christ before Herod. Libro. xiii.
And here Simon de Cassia says: I would that the euangeliste or the
interpreter that translated the euangelie of Luke out of Greek in to Latyne had
used this term or word pertinaciter: rather than this word constanter, for
constantia is a name of virtue: and such a virtue as it is not convenient and
agreynge to enuyous or hateful persons and all given to mischeyfe. But this
word pertinatia, that is frowardnes: is convenient to such evil persons, for
it is the name of a vice / and that such a vice which will not give over or
cease unto the time his malicyous mind be brought to purpose. These malicyous
Iues stood obstinatlye and styfelye accusynge Christ that he might be shortly
put to death, and they as the chylderne of death: would not suffer the life to
live upon the earth, they accused Christ before Herod specyallye saying that
Christ had troubled and moved all the people beginning in Galilee / which was
under the rule of Herod yt thereby they might the more rather move him against
Christ, because he had troubled and moved the people in his dominion. And
notwithstanding the accusacyons of Christ before Herod were the same that were
spoken before Pylate: yet for asmoche as that they were spoken before an other
judge, and so a new pain and sorrow was thereby unto Christ: therefore this
article is put here as diverse or an other from the.xxii. article. And as
Christ in no thing would answer unto Herod: so he in no thing answered to
his accusers. Super Luca^. Cap. 98.
But as saint Ambrose says: He kept silence because their unfaithfulness
deserved not to here the truth of god, and our lord also declyned then or would
avoid iactance and vain praise, for he would do no miracle before Herod as
he then would gladly have seen. Also he would not then show any miracle
because he would not let his passion. Super. 23. Luce.
And as Albert says: The pride and curiosity of Herod did not deserve it.
And her to our lord commanded in his gospel sayng Nolite sanctum dare
canibus: Mat. 7. A.
Give no holy thing to dogs, do no miracles before such as will not prophet
by them. Also ye know that a word can not be spoken or formed without a
voice, so because our savior Jesus is the eternal word of god, and saint
Johan the Baptist is called the voice of that same word, and Herod slew that
voice Johan Baptiste the Eester last passed the year before, therefore he was
not worthy to here yt eternal word of god that is Christ / speak. And
furthermore he was not worthy to hear Christ speak / for his manyfolde
scornynge words, and also to give us example / that we may better overcome
vain and mocking words / by silence then by speaking.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn this lesson, that truth is not to be spoken or
showed / in all places / in all times / nor to all persons, for oftymes it is
better to keep silence as we said before.

A prayer.
O Jesus which presented before Herod would for my love suffer the false
accusacyons of the Iues, and thou would not excuse thy self / or deny in any
word their iniust sayenges: grant to me that I be not overcome by the
injuries of wicked men / nor that I show thy holy mysteries to the unworthy
persons.

How Christ was despised of Herod. The.xxvi. article.
THe.xxvi. article is of the despeccyon that Herod and his servants did to
Christ / for Herod seeing Christ would not show any sign or miracle before
him, nor speak one word to all his questions, nor yet answer to the
accusacyons of the Iues for his own defense: He reputed him to be a fool and
to have no wit or reason, Luc. 23. B.
And therefore he despised him and so did all his compeigney and servants.
First because Christ kept so stably his silence in no thing moved to speak
though the Iues did so falsely accuse him. Secondly Herod despised Christ,
because he reputed him a fool or ferefull of the death that the Iues labored to
bring him unto, or else for that he thought Christ to be presumptuous in his
living and manners / and now kept silence: because he could not defend his
own cause for want of good reason and justice in his cause. And thyrdly he
would be despised of Herod for a great mystery, it is a profounde mystery
and gives to us a matter of high contemplacyon, to consider how the eterne
wisdom of god: would be reputed folisshnes, and the infinite power of god would
be taken for infirmity as of little or of no power, so that Christ the son
of god very god and man would be made the obprobry or rebuke of men, the
abiection and out cast of the people / and the mocking stock of kings and
great men. And in like manner now a days the folowers of Christ be dispysed of
evil men and reputed as foles, and that specially when such evil persons have a
wicked reuler or heed, for commonly such persons shortly consent unto such a
captayn or reuler. A comen proverb / Such a king has such counselors and
like servants, and therefore it was so much ye more to the obprobry and rebuke
of Christ / that not only Herod despised Christ: but also al his compaigney
and servants. And in these days there be many that dispyse Jesus as Herod
did: lokynge to se signs and miracles now / when it is not time to show
signs / but rather to do good works / our lord said of the Iues: Luc. 16. G.
Habent moisen et prophetas: They have moysen that is the law of moses and
the prophets, let them here them and follow them. And we have morouer the
gospelles and the apostles with the acts and apocalipse / and yet we would se
signs, we do not fulfill the gospel and in living thereafter: but rather we
desppyse it. This despysynge of Christ is conuenie^tly taken for an article of
Christ's passion, for sith it would grieve any man to se him self despised of
other men and specially of great men though he were but simple and an ideote:
much more it should grieve our savior Christ which was all good / omnipotent
and most wise, to be mocked and taken as omnipotent because he would do no
miracle before Herod / to be reputed an ideote without knowledge: because he
would not answer to his questions, to be accounted as a fool / because he would
not defend him self against his accusers, and not only they despised him in
words: but also in deed, putting a folys cote upon Christ / as ye shall se in
the next article.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson / that we should rather will to be
despised of evil persons: then to be commended of flaterers. As our lord
(after saint Gregory) did chose rather to be openly despised of proud
persons: then vaynly to be lauded of unfaithful persons.

A prayer.
O Jesus which was content to be despised for me of Herod and his compaignye
or servants: grant me to despise all worldly pomp for the / and not to
regard the despysynge of wicked men for thy love and for justice. Amen.

How Christ was cladde with a white garment to his despysyng. The.xxvii.
article.
THe.xxvii. article is the mocking of Christ with a white garment / which
was put upon him to his great confusyon and shame. Libro. xiii.
And here says Simon de Cassia that this word albedo / that is to say /
whitnes, is not taken at all times in scripture for virtue / or to the best
part, for sometime it signifies the want of virtues, and so this whyt vestment
wherewith Herod did mock Christ does show what was Herod and his servants
or folowers, for he and all they were void of all the multiplicacitye or
variety and diversity of virtues, and so their mocking of Christ / turned
to their own prejudice / and to their everlasting despeccyon and rebuke. It
is ever known to be a great illusion and mocking of Christ: when his virtues
are forsaken for worldly pomp, when his teachynges be despised and all his
deeds that he did and pains that he suffered for our love: be no thing
regarded. And so did Herod here / for not only he despised him: but also as
Luke says: Cap. (...). B.
Illusit indutum vest alba, He cladde him in a white cote (which was taken
for a folys cote) and so mocked him in deed / to the great derisyon of Christ,
for Herod would have him known of all people for a fool. For it is like that
that time to have or wear a white garment: was a sign or token of a fool /
and it is also very like that that white garment was lengar than the stature of
Christ, and so thereby through the thurstyng and throng of the cruel Iues: he
was oftymes thrawen down to the ground. But though Herod did thus array
Christ to his rebuke: yet this white garment was not without great mystery:
as were all the other acts and deeds about the passion of Christ. Therefore as
saint Ambrose says: Super Luca^. Cap. 98.
This white garment does signify the immaculate and innocent passion of
Christ, for he without spotte of sin: did bear and suffer pain for all
sins of the world, which white garment is signified by the albe of the
preeste wherein he says mass, for the vestmentes that the bishop or priest
uses at mass: does represe^t the hole passion of Christ. For our high bishop
Christ was cladde in his passion with all the ornaments of a bishop. First
he took his amysse when the Iues covered his face / he took his albe: when
Herod cladde him in this white garment / he took his manyple when the Iues or
saugiours bond his hands, but what time they lowsed his hands and put a read
in his right hand: then the cord or bond did remain upon his left hand,
and in token hereof / the priest uses the maniple upon the left hand or arm
/ he took his gyrdle: when he was bound about the myddle to the pyller, he
took his stole: when he was bound by the neck to the pyller, he took his
chesyble: when the saugiours of Pylate put an old purpur garment upon him, he
had a crown of thorns for his mytour, he had a read in his hand for his
cross, he had his glouys for his hands and his sandalles for his feet: when
they were made all red with blood. The sandalles have a reed hole above
wrought with red sylke, and the glouys have an vche or a red precious stone,
or otherwise wrought with red: to signifye the wounds of Christ in his hands
and feet. These be the ornaments of a bishop when he does consecrate any
thing. Also many of these the priest does use at his mass, to signify that he
should have in his understanding the meditacyon of Christ's passion / in his
memory the remembrance thereof. The compassion there of in his affection and
will, so that as he is like to Christ in his vestmentes: so he may be like in
his heart and mind and also living, for who so ever has these outward
tokens of Christ's passion / nothing fealyng inwardly by meditacyon and
compassyon: does not serve or love Christ: but rather mock him with Herod,
which in that white garment sent him to Pilate again, As it shall appear in
the next article.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn this lesson, all they that will live godly and
innocently after the example of our new man Christ: shall be mocked and be had
as folys of other persons yt live after the old synful manner. But for all this,
the true spiritual servants of god / should not be troubled: but rather
joyful / for the new man our savior Christ clad in a white garment which
signifies (to us christians) his innoce^tie was mocked and (...) of the
chylderne of this world, to whom that white garmente was a sign of
folisshenes. Also a man in his garments or arayment should only look for
profyt and his necessity, and nothing for vanity or curiosity, for our
savior was reputed as a fool for his array. And that a man might conform him
self to this article: he should thank god: that it would please him to give to
us the garment of innocentie: for the derision that he suffered of his white
cote. And a man should also oftymes think how often he has defoyled by his
sins, that white vestment of innocentie which our lord gave to us at our
baptism, and pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would be for me clad in a white garment and mocked as a fool of
Herod and his servants: grant me warely to declyne or avoid the wisdom of
this world which in thy sight is but a folisshenes, and with a pure heart to
come to the, which art the very true wisdom. Amen.

How Christ was sent again to Pylate. The.xxviii.
THe.xxviii. article is the sendyng again of Christ from Herod unto Pilate,
for Herod when he fond no cause of death in christ: he dispysed and mocked him
and sent him again to Pilate in a white cote, and in this it apereth that he
did consent unto ye death of Christ / for since Christ was sent to Herod as one
of his jurisdiction and under his power, when he se no cause worthy death proved
of Christ: he should have absolved him and delivered him from ye hands of the
Iues, and not to have sent again unto a strange judge ye which had no power
over him. And so Herod offended in that yt he sent Christ again unto Pylate,
Luc. 23. B.
which se^dyng again is conveniently taken for a special article, for thereby
Christ had a new pain and labor. Also for that he returned again to Pylate
clad in a white cote: to his great shame and rebuke. Thyrdly by cause also he
brought with him, Herodes consent of his own death, which appeared both in sign
or token and also in deed, In sign: because he was sent in a folys cote,
Ibidem.
In deed: that is in the co^federation of their frendshyp / for that same day
Herod and Pylate by this sendynge of Christ were made friends where as before
they were enemies, which frendshyp of Herod and Pylate was a figure and sign
that the Iues and gentyles should agree to gether in the persecucyon of
christians, Or else we may take this frendshyp for a good sign: saying that the
Iues and gentiles which before ye death of Christ were enemies, by his death were
made friends and agreynge in one faith of Jesus Christ. For he is the peace or
corner stone that joins the two diverse peoples in one. And when Pylate se
that Herod sent Christ again unto him: he was very sorye thereof. And so
cast in his mind how he might deliver Christ from death. And therefore he
called together the princes of the priests / the great men of the Iues / and
the comen people, and going forth to them: said / ye have brought and
presented to me this man. etc. As in the next article.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson, that the nature of goodness has
such strength and virtue that it agreithe evil persons and makes them
friends / and specyallye in the persecucyon of goodness / and therefore the evil
persons may be well signified by the foxes that Sampson took and tied their
tails together, Iudic. 15. A
to distroye the corn and fruit of his adversaries. So evil persons ben
confedered and tied together to pursue good men, Psalm. 2.
and so Herod and Pylate, the Iues and the gentiles agreed to gyther against
our lord and his son Christ. And herto says Theophilus: The devil in all
places co^ioyneth and agrees enemies to conspyre the death of Christ. Therefore
the iu^te person should not be afraid / though he se evil persons copled
against him, for that is a sign yt there is some goodness in him, and thereby
also he is co^formed and made like unto Christ / against whom all evil persons
agreed in one, and also those persons as were enemies before. Also a man to
conform him self to this article should remember what pain it was to Christ
to be so shamfully led from one judge to an other, and if a man have any hatred
in his heart against any person: let him forgive it with all his heart, and
that for the love of Christ, the which for us in his blessed passion would
also agree wicked persons and make them friends, and pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be sent again from Herod unto Pylate, and thereby
would make them friends: grant me that I feere not the frenshyp of wicked men
against me, but rather that I may so profit by their exercise: that I may
deserve to be conformed and made like unto the. Amen.

How Christ was forsaken of the Iues / and Barrabas by them was delivered.
The.xxix. article.
THe.xxix. article is the reproving or forsakyng of Christ for when Christ was
brought again to Pilate he called together the princes of the priests / the
great men of the Iues and the comen people / and going forth unto them said:
Luce. 23. BC.
Obtulisti mihi hu^c hoiem quasi auerte^tem populum. etc. Ye have ^sented this
man unto me as a subuerter of the people, and behold said Pylate / I examynyng
him before you / can not find him gylty in any such cause as ye accuse him of /
nor yet Herod, for I sent you unto him / and loo nothing worthy death is done
unto him. Pylate went forth of ye motehall to ye Iues that stood without / and
that he did to excuse christ / and to show ye blyndnes or maliciousnes of the
accusers. Libro. xiii.
And here says Simon de Cassia: The Iues stood without for they knew not the
inward secrets and mysteries of the law / they were put without from the
light of truth / and from al shynynge and operation of virtue* Pylate went
forth to confound the Iues, he went forth to them: Not as moved to
consent unto their malice: but to declare and show unto them in what euyls /
peryls / and dangers that people standethe: which is excluded from all
goodness. And therefore openly before all that were present he would reprove and
show to be vain all such accusacyons as they had spoken against Christ, whom
after due examinacyon: he found innocent. And also he went forth to the Iues
to signifye spiritually that they should be cast out of their kingdom and
also from the kingdom of god. And ferthermore Pylate said to the Iues, ye
have a custom that I should dimi^se at your denomination one prisoner every
paschall time / to his liberty, which of these.ii will ye have delivered from
prysone to liberty, Jesus / or Barrabas. In this eleccyon: the Iues did chose
Barrabas, Libro. xiii.
and yt was to show their perverse / obstinate and malicyous mind. And here
says Simon de Cassia: Pylate put to the eleccyon of the Iues whither they
would deliver Barrabas / or Christ, Barrabas was a strong thief / a sedicyous
person / and a manquellar, Christ was al good / Pylate joined these.ii.
together / that they considering the mischeuous life of the one and the
goodness of the other though there be no comperison between good and evil) they
should condemn the evil person and deliver ye good. Luc. 23. C.
And after that Pylate had granted to them a space and time to consider whom
they would chose: the princes of the priests and the seniours of the people did
per^wade and move the people to ask Barrabas. And then Pylate inquiryng which
of these.ii. they would have delivered: they asked that Barrabas might be put
to liberty: and that Christ should be condemned unto most cruel death. And
therefore it follows in the gospel: Tunc vniuersa exclamauit turba: toll
hunc: et dimitte no his Barraban: All the people cried away with Christ: and
deliver Barrabas unto us, as if these malicyous Iues should say: sley him yt
did raise deed folks and delyuere that thief and mansleyar Barrabas, that he
may sley them that be on life. And therefore unto this day the Iues can have no
peace, because they would rather chose the sedicyous thief Barrabas, and so in
him the se dicyous prince and captain of all sin the devil / which unto
this day does reign in them (rather I say) than Christ. Their example done
follow now a days such persons that will rather help and promote evil men:
then good men. And so in many elections and provisions of benefices or offices
t^orall and spu^all / Jesus / that is ye good person ye friend of god which has
a good will to help and save him self and also other / and therefore worthy to be
chose^ and promoted: is reproved and put away. And contrary wise / Barrabas /
the evil and unworthy person / and the enemy of Christ, which will slay him
self and also other in soul: is chosen and promoted. And this article of
Christ's passion: is not the least, or of little pain, for sith any man will
be sorry to se him self reproved / and also an other not so worthy: promoted:
how much more then might Christ be ^ory / seeing that so vile and dampnable
a person was preferred before him, and that the Iues did ask the life of the
manslayer, Mat. 27. C
and the life of the son of god. And then Pylate asked of them: Quid faciam
de Jesus qui dicitur Christus? What shall I do with Jesus which is called
Christ your king and Messiah? Pylate spoke this to make them ashamed of their
iniquity and also showing the mesure of their wickedness, but the Iues were
another ashamed of that Pylate confessed Jesus to be their messiah: Ibidem.
nor yet kept the mesure of their wickedness. For they all cried with one voice
crucifigatur: crucifye him, Omel. 35. super Math.
in the which saying (as Origene says) they multyplyed the measure of their
wickedness. For before Cayphas they said: he is worthy death, and now before
the judge they determine the kind and manner of death sayng: Crucifye him.

A Lesson.
IN this article we may learn this lesson / that we quietly and pacyently
suffer if any person of vile condicyon and evil manners be preferred before
us, considering that a strong thief and a manqueller was preferred before
Christ god and man.

A prayer.
O Jesus Christ the son of the living god, which for man's salvation
disdeyned not in the third hour of the day to be reproved and forsaken of the
Iues that did ask the sedicyous thief Barrabas, to be delivered from death unto
his liberty. And would have the the auctor and gyuer of life to be crucified:
grant to me that I may ever chose the my creator and maker before all other,
and never to reprove or forsake the: for any creature. Amen.

The pulling of the garments of Christ. The.xxx. article.
THe.xxx. article is the puttyng of Christ's garments. For when Pylate hero
that the Iues did ask Barrabas to be dimy^^ed: and Jesus to be crucified: he
said unto them: Luc. 23. C.
Quid enim mali fecit: Nullam causam mortis inuen^o in eo: Corripiam ergo illum
et dimittam. What euel has Jesus done / I find no cause of death in him,
therefore if he committed any trespass against your ^awe or ceremonies / I shall
correct and amend him and so dimisse him. In these words Pylate began to
swerue from the justice of the law / he said that he would correct and
amend the innocent. Luc. 23. C.
O Pylate if he be innocent: Mat. 27. C
how may thou amend him or correct him. except thou decline from justice?
and so furthwith he took Christ and began to rebuke him. And first they put of
his garments, and this was no little injury and rebuke to Christ to be
strypt naked before all the compaigney. And though Christ was not borne of
that infecte and corrupt stock of Adam, whereby our nakedness was made
shamfull (for before that Adam did sin / he was naked and in nothing abashed
thereof / but after that he had sinned: he was ashamed of his nakedness, and
therefore he said: Timui eo quod nudus essem: et abscondi me: Gene. 3. B.
I was afraid or ashamed because (said Adam) that I was naked / and therefore I
did hyde me) though I say Christ was not borne by the sede of man: yet because
he came to take our infirmities and to suffer for our ^ynnes: therefore he was
abashed to be seen naked / and so much the more ashamed then all other chaste
virgyns be: in how much that his honesty and chastitye excelled without
comparison the clennes of all other virgyns. And when Jesus was thus naked /
Pylate took him to the saugiours to be scourged as ye shall se in the next
article. And note here that one doctor says that Christ was thryes scourged.
First with rods: because he did trouble and move the people / and there he
had.xl. strokes save one, according to the commandment of the law. Deuteronomy.
25. A
Secondly with rushys of the sea, which be more sharp than thorns, and this
beatynge was because he had preached and taught a new doctrine. And here he
was scourged as Heliodore was by the angels of whom we read in the second
book of the Machabeis. Thyrdlye they scourged him with whyppes. Cap. 3. E.


A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson that as Christ had his garments
pulled of his bdye and was stryped naked: so should we put of our old sinful
cote and life, and make open and naked our conscience before god and his
minister our curate, by pure and plain confession of all our sins, avoid
all cloak and color of excusacyon / for all things ben open and naked before
the sight of god. And a man to conform him self unto this article: should
remember how miserably / and with how much injury and shame Christ was
strypt naked and his clothes violentlye pulled of him. And pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would have thy clothes pulled violentlye of thy back and
would be strypt naked to be scourged: grant to me that I may cast of from me
mine old sinful cote or life with all his operations by true / pure and plain
confession of all my sins and that I never apere in thy sight naked from
virtues. Amen.

How Christ was scourged. The.xxxi. article.
THe.xxxi. article is the scourgynge of Christ. For when Jesus was so strypt
naked: Pylate delivered him to the saugiours. Ioh. 19. A.
The gospel says: Apprehendit illum Pilatus et flagellauit: Pylate took
Christ and scourged him, that is, Pliate made him to be scourged of his
saugiours, that the Iues (as saint Austen says) sacyate and content with those
his pains and rebukes: Super John^ tract. cxvi.
should desire no more his death. And so he that did lowse them that were
bound / our savior Jesus was bound fast to a pyllar, which was so great and
thycke that his arms and his hands might not compass it. And therefore the
saugiours corrupt by money drew out his arms with hard cords: that all the
veins of his arms appeared out to the extremity. And then those saugiours
called in all their compaigney and our savior Jesus so bound and naked / they
bette so cruelly with rods / knotted whyppes and thorny rushes of the sea:
that they did tear the flesh and drew it away / so that his bones ware seen
bare, and also great gobettes and pecys of the flesh hang upon the scourges
and whyppes. There stood naked before all the people: the most lovely young man
/ eligant and sham fast, beauteous above all other men, speaking not one word
/ but as meake as a lamb did suffer pacyently the hard / sharppe and paynfull
beatynges of those most vile and cruel tormentours. That most innocent and
tender flesh, most pure and most fair the flower of all mankind was replete
and full of strokes / blomes / wounds and brosers / he was wounded through out
all his most holy body, so that fro the top of the head unto the sole of
his foot: there was none hole skin. That noble and precious blood of his:
ran from every part of his body, the cruel tormentours added plage upon
plage and heped wound upon wound / brosynge upon brosynge / blood upon blood
/ unto the time that both the cruel tormentours and also the beholders, were
weary of smi^ynge and seeing, and so he was commanded to be lowsed from the
pyllar. And here says saint Barnarde: that the tormentours did ons lowse
Jesus, and bound him again / turnynge his back to the pyllar and bound his
hands above his heed, that they might scourge him upon belly and breast and
also his face, and so they spared no place of his most tender body whose
crueltye co^syderynge some of the pagans there standing and beholdynge this
sorrowful scourgynge: ran to our lord and bracke the ropes and so did lowse
him, and those cruel torme^tours not saciate with that scourgyng: pulled the
heir of his most blessed berde and also of his heed, wherein was fulfilled the
prophecye of Esaias: Esaie. 1. C.
Corpus meum dedi percutientibus: et genas meas vellentibus: which authority
we declared before in the.xvi. article. But how many plages or wounds our
savior Jesus had at this scourgynge, it can not be known but by reuelacyon,
for they were in a manner innumerable, forsythe scripture says Pro mensura
peccati: Deuteronomy. 25. A
erit plagarum modus: After the measure of the sin: shall be the measure of the
beatynges or plages: and Christ was scourged for our sins / which be
innumerable: therefore his plages and wounds must be innumerable. And that
noted, Esaie. 1. B.
the prophet when he said of Christ, A planta pedis vsque ad verticem
capitis: non est in eo sanitas: From the top of his head unto the sole of his
foot: there was no hoole part in him. Super Mat. 27.
As saint Hierom says: Christ would be scourged that thereby he might deliver
us from perpetual scourgynges. As a loving mother seeing the father beatynge
her son: will run bytwixt the rod and her son with her arms spread
abroad and receive the strokes to defend her son from that beatynge / so did
Christ for us, and therein was verifyed the saying of the prophet that he spoke
of Christ saying: Esae. 53. B
Disciplina pacis nostre super eum: et liuore eius sanati sumus: The disciplyne
of our peace did light upon him: that is: the beatynges which we deserved for
our sins / and were not punysshed for them. but lived in peace and pleasure /
these beatynges (I say) did fall upon Christ and so by his wounds we were made
hole. And after that Jesus was thus scurged: they mocked him in many things /
as it shall appear in diverse articles following.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson that we should gladly suffer ye
scourges of god / so that every one of us might say truly with the prophet:
Psalm. 37.
Ego in flagella paratus sum: I am prepared and ready to receive beatynges. And
that is convenient. For sith the only son of god was redye to receive upon
his own body beatynges and scourgynges for our sins, and that at the
obedience of god his father: much more then should we that be but the adoptyue
chylderne of god: be ready to suffer gladly the scourges of our father in heaven,
which he by him self or by his ministres, does mercyfully send to us for our
amendment.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would for me be bound to a pyllar and grievously scourged:
grant to me that I may patiently and gladly bear the scourges of thy
fatherly correccyon, and never to scourge the again with my sins. Amen.

How they put an old purpur cote upon Christ. The.xxxii. article.
THe.xxxii. article is the putting on of an old purpull cote, for after that
Christ was scourged and lowsed from the pyllar: they led him so naked and
scourged about the house to gather up his clothes / which were cast about the
house in diverse places by those cruel tormentours, and when he had found
them and would have put them upon him: those most wicked saugiours said to
Pylate: Sir / this lewd fellow called him self a king, therefore (if it
please you we shall array him like unto a king, and so much scornfullye they
brought before him all the ornaments convenient for a king, and then these
wretches called in all their compaigney / that they might mock Christ asmoche
as any of them would, before that they would put him unto the death, Pylate
paraduenture / commaundynge / or at least sufferynge that it should so be and
that he did to mitigate and swage the fury and malicyous mind of the Iues.
Super John^ Omel. 83.
Or else as Crisostom says: The saugiours did thus to please the Iues of whom
they received money. First they put upon him a robe of purpull / a kings
garment / but it was old / to the more confusyon of Christ, Mat. 17. B
this garment was convenient for the body of Christ so scurged, for it was of
red color and all his body was red with his own blood. And herin was
fulfilled the question that the prophet moved in the persons of the angels
saying: Esae. 63. A.
Quare rubrum est indume^tum tuum: et vestimen ta tua sicut calcantium in
torculari: Why is thy clothyng red / and thy garments as of them that treyd in
the press, to the which Christ answers by the same prophet saying:
Torcular calcaui solus: I alone have trodden in the press, I alone have suffered
the pressure and pain of the cross of scourgynges and beatynges for the sin
of Adam and all mankind, and therefore my body (which is as the garment of my
godhed) is all red. Also this purpull vestment was much convenient to Christ,
for purpull color is made of the blood or lyquor of a certain fysshe of the sea
that is called in latin Murex or conchilium, some men call it a Whelke, it is a
shell fysshe. Our savior Christ was cladde on good Friday with.iii. manner of
garments, that is / a white garment / a scarlet robe / and a purpull robe, to
signify that who so ever wylbe of the household of Christ: he must were the
white garment of innocentie, the reed or scarlet of charity and obedyence, and
the purpull of penance.

A Lesson.
IN this article we may take this lesson, that we should hyde and cover our
sins with the works of charity, for like as Christ scourged and wounded for
our sins would be covered and clad with a robe of purpull: so we should cover
and hyde our blody works / that is our sins with the purple of florisshynge
charity, Iaco. 5. D.
For as saint James says: Charity covers and hydeth the multitude of
sins. Or else by the purpull may be noted the remembrance of the passion of
Christ. Herunto it is written in the canticles of the spouse of god, that is the
faithful soul: Come capitis eius: sicut purpura regis, The heir of her head:
Cant. 7. B.
be as the purpull of a king, for the cogitations of our mind which be
signified by the heir of our head: should be diligently and continually
occupied in the remembrance of the pa^syon of Christ, or else about other
works of charity. And a man to conform him self to this article and to
the.vii. other following: should diligently remember the act of every article
with the circumstances of the same. And pray thus or in like manner.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be clad in an old purpull robe to thy dispysynge:
grant me continuallye to have in my mind or to be clad with the remembrance
of thy passion, and to hyde and cover my sins with the purpul of charity.
Amen.

How Christ was crowned with thorns. The.xxxiii. article.
THe.xxxiii. article is the putting of the crown of thorns upon the head of
Christ. Ioh. 19. A.
A king should have a deademe or a crown, and for this crown, the saugiours
writhed a crown of thorns and thurst it hard upon his head as a man should put
a garlande upon an other man's head. And this crown was of the sharp russhes
of the sea, which has sharp corners and pricks, more sharp and persynge
than thorns. This crown they put upon his head with the pricks dounwarde unto
his head: not so much to hurt him: as to mock him therewith, though they did
both mock him and also most grievously pain and hurt him, and herunto says
saint Barnarde, That godly head of Christ was persed unto the brain with those
thorns, in so much that the blood that ran from his head: did wasshe his
forhed / chekes / all his face and neck. In this crown was.lxxvii. sharp
thorns, of these thorns it was spoken to Adam: Gene. 3. D.
Terra spinas et tribulos germinabit tibi: The earth shall bring forth or burgen
to the / thorns and breers / for the earth of our body does burgen and bring
forth many sins, which with their pricks does prycke and wound our
conscience / as thorns the body. Christ took these thorn and bare them as a
crown of victory. These warryours that have overcome their enemies / are
wont to bear or wear the armoure of their adversaries subdued / in a sign
or token of victory, and do greatly rejoice therein. So Christ the lamb of
god which has overcome the devil and taken away the sins of the world:
and would wear a crown of thorns upon his head, in token of his victory. For
as I said before these thorns were our fruit and the badge of our arms, and
therefore Christ would wear them. It is much pleasant and also desirous to
every loving soul / to se our king with this crown. And herunto the spousesse
in her canticles callethe all faithful souls sayng: Cant. 3. D.
Egredimini filie sion et videte regem salomonem in diademate. etc. O ye
daughters of syon / or faithful souls / come forth and se your true king
Solomon Jesus Christ in his diadem or crown with the which his mother the
sinagoge of the^ Iues has crowned him, or else spiritually: his mother charity
has thus crowned him. For as saint Barnarde says: Thy love (O blessed Jesus)
and our iniquity: made the to be scourged and crowned and nailed to the
cross. Genesis 22. C.
A figure of this crownyng we read, that Abraham se a sheep or a wether fastened
by his horns among the thorns, in the which visyon, he spyrytuallye did se
Christ crowned with thorns.

Here follow.ii. Lessons.
THe first lesson of this article is, that we ever bear our sins by
remembrance in our mind, puttyng upon our head a crown of thorns, that is /
not to differ / but spedely to take upon us with a pure conscience, an hard and
paynfull life, as in abstinence / watch / labor / and other works of
penance for god, as Christ would bear upon his head the thorns of our sins
for our love. Second is that we should labor to be crowned with the thorns of
temptations. For every temptacyon that does impugn us: is as a thorn
prickynge the head of our soul, which temptation if a man overcome: he
prepares and byeth a precious gemme to his crown / and as many temptacyons as
he ouercummeth: so many precious stones he adds to his own crown of glory.
And therefore the spouse says in his canticles: Cap. 2. A.
Sicut lilium inter spinas: sic amica mea inter filias: As the lylye
florissheth among the thorns / so does my faithful friend among the
daughters of this world by pacyence / meaknes / and charity.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be crowned with thorns: make me so worthily to be
compuncte by the thorns of penance / that I may deserve to be crowned of ye in
thy heavenly kingdom.

How the saugiours put a read in Christ's right hand. The.xxxiiii. article.
THe.xxxiiii. article is the puttyng of a read in Christ's right hand for his
regal scepter, Mat. 27. D
signifyenge thereby that his kingdom (which he usurped calling him self a
king) was void and weyke as a read, but they did not remember that Christ
said: Ioh. 1^. F.
My kingdom is not of this world / that is transitory, and this was the
third act of their scornful illusyon. These.iii. that is / a purpull robe /
a crown or a deademe / and a scepter be the ornaments of a king, the which
three / these cruel saugiours gave unto Christ to his great contumely and
illusyon, and thereby, they would show that Christ was a false treytour
against the emperor / because he would have usurped and taken upon him (as
they said) to be a king against the ordinance of the emperor. But that they
did to the confusion and rebuke of Christ: he turned it to his own glory and
excellency, super Math. 27.
and herunto saint Hierom says: Christ held the read in his hand to write
the sacrilege of the Iues / and to show him self to be that person that should
write his elect people in the book of life. Super Mat. canone. 33.
And saint Hillary says: Therefore our lord would hold the read in his right
hand: that thereby he might show / that he will keep and maynteyne his
servants though they be frail and weyke / and he will replenyssh them with all
goodness.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson that we should diligently remember
that we of our self be frail / weyke and void of all goodness / except we be
sustained and maynteyned with the right hand of god / even like as a read which
is in it self void and weyke or shortly broken but holden in the hand of
Christ: it is strengthed.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would have a read to be put in thy right hand scornfullye for a
royal scepter: I beseech the so to strength mine imbecillitie and fraylty with
the right hand of thy power that thy kingdom may be continually confirmed
and stablisshed in me. Amen.

How the saugiours scornfully saluted Christ. The.xxxv. article.
THe.xxv. article is the scornful worshippyng and salutynge of Christ, for
after that the saugiours had arrayed Christ with the ornaments of a king:
they kneled down before him and mocked him saying: Mat. 27. D.
Aue rex iudeorum: Hayle king of the Iues, as if they should say / thou would
have been a king but thou might not. Super Mar. 15.
And here says Bid: They worshypped him scornfullye as god: because he said
falslye him self to be god as they thought. Also they saluted him scornfully
as a king because he said him self to be a king, and this they did that
their illusyon might reanswere to the accusacyon of the Iues, for the Iues
accused Christ in both these.ii. Also these saugiours did these things to
Christ of a detestable and dampnable mind, for they crowned him with sharp
thorns and afterward scornfully worshypped and saluted him, and that to the
great confusyon of Christ And therefore says Simon de Cassia: Libro. xiii.
The ministers of Pylate to aggrauate and multiplye the vylenes and shame put
upon christ: did knele before him, and besides that: that they mocked him after
the manner of children / they illuded him with great threttes, so that nothing
wanted to the despysyng and the shame of christ, and in the remembrance of this
despisyng, upon good Friday we do not knele down when we pray for the Iues,
and though the gentyles did thus mock Christ: yet it is imputed to the Iues
for they were the autours and the cause of this illusion. After this scornful
salutacyon: they smote him / as ye shall se in the next article. Genesis 9. D.
This fourth act of the mocking of Christ was figured in Noe when he slepte
in his tabernacle: his son Cham did laughe him to scorn. Noe does signyfye
Christ / whom the Iues his own children did mock and scorn. Also it is
figured in Heliseus the prophet / which ascendynge unto the hill of Bethell,
Quarto regum. 2. D.
the children that did se him: did say and cry mocking him: Ascend calue
ascend calue: Ascend or come up thou balde man: ascend thou balde man. And
of this mockyng speaks the prophet David sayng: Psalm. 21.
Omnes videntes me de riserunt me: All that se me did mock me / also ye prophet
Esaias says: Blasphemaueru^t sanctum Israel: They have blasphemed the holy of
Israel / that is the Messiah and savior of the world.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn this lesson, that we should be ware yt we do not
falsely worship or salute Christ / which we do (as Bede says) when we believe in
him, Super Mar. 15.
but yet we despise him with our evil and froward deeds, when we confess
Christ with our mouth and deny him in our deeds as sait Paul says. Titu^. 1.
D.
Also they falsely worship or salute Christ: which when they pray or be in the
service of god: occupye their mind wylfullye with any thing contrary to the
honor of god. Also they which in the church she we signs of great devotion
/ and afterward do grievous injuries to Christ in his members.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be scornfully worshypped and saluted of the
saugiours knelyng and saying: Hail king of the Iues: grant to me that I may
worship the (my very lord and god) in spirit and treuth, and reuerentlye to
salute the / the only king of all kings. Amen.

How the saugiours smote Christ with their hands. The.xxxvi. article.
THe.xxxvi. article is the smiting of Christ / for these saugiours willing
to mock Christ as well in deeds: as in signs and words, Ioh. 19. A.
Dabantei alapas: they smote him with their palms or hands, and that was to
show in deed: that ye honor which they had done to him before: was only to
mock him, and in this they made their mockyng / more to the despisyng of
Christ, for before where as they did worship and reverence to him as to god /
and did salute him as a king / now they smote him to his dispite and shame.
And this smytyng is not that of which we spoke before in ye.xi. article, for
that was in the house of Annas / and this was in the motehall of Pylate, also
that was but one stroke which one of the ministers called Malcus did give to
Christ / here were many strokes given by diverse men to Christ. Thyrdly a Ie^e
did give that stroke, but the saugiours and gentiles did give these. Fourthly
yt stroke was given to revenge ye answer yt Christ made to ye bishop Annas,
but these were given only to mock Christ. And therefore this smytyng does
conveniently make a special article, diverse from the other, and after this
they did spyr in his face as ye shall se in in the next article. The lessone we
may take as in ye.xi. article.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would be smyten of the saugiours for me: make me ever to land and
praise the both in word and deed / and also that the deeds of other men
(though they be evil) may ever torn to my good and profit. Amen.

How the saugiours did spytte in the face of Christ. The.xxxvii. article.
THe.xxxvii. article is the spyttynge of the saugiours in the face of Christ,
which did much aggrauate all their acts done before, Mat. 27. D.
for what can be more vylanye to man: than to spyt in his face as did the
saugiours in Christ's face, like vile and lewd persons. And herby ye may
perceive that though these persons ben called in laten / milites, which
commonly in english we call knights / yet they were not knights / that is
gentle and noble men / that be called also in laten: Equites aurati, and that
is for their golden spurs, for such gentle men and noble persons would mock
no good man nor spytte in his face, nor yet crucifye him and take his garments
/ which properly perteyneth to hangmen and tormentours. But these be called
Milites, after the old custom, servants / fotemen or saugiours / as it
appears in the life / acts and gestes of Julius Caesar / where as Milites ben
called fotemen / serving or hired men that feyght on foot / and the knights
ben called horsemen These been called / Milites, Vide Calepinum et Suetoniu^ i^
vita cesat^.
not for their noblenes: but for their strength. For commonly those saugiours
were strong in body and redye to all evil. Sanctus Thomas.
And of these speaks Theophilus saying: Super Mar. 15.
The vain glory of these saugyours in these mockynges / ever reioysynge in
the inordynate rebukynges of other: done show what they be / that is vile and
lewd persons for the more part of them, and this article is distinct from
the.xvii. article, for that was done in the house of Cayphas before the Iues
and of the Iues, but this spyttynge was in the motehall of Pylate, done by the
saugiours before Pylate and all the compaygney. Those were the spyttynges of
the Iues, but these ware of the gentiles, and after this they smote Christ
upon the head with a read / as ye shall se in the next article. The lesson as in
the.xvii. article.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me did suffer the vile saugiours to spyt in thy most
beauteous face: grant to me that I never polute or defoyle thy face in the
sacrament of the aulte^ by my unworthy receyuynge thereof, and that I never
defoyle my conscience with vnciene thoughts. Amen.

How the saugiours smote Christ upon the head with a read. The.xxxviii. article.
THe.xxxviii. article is the smiting upon Christ's head with a read, for his
more pain and confusion / for vile and stoborne persons are wont to be smyten
with a staff as bestes be. And also they smote Christ upon the head with a
read: to make ye crown of thorns to go farther into his head. And here note
that ye redes in those parts ben great and gross / as bygge or great as a
staff wherewith we beat dogs. Mar. 15. ^.
The cruel saugiours smote Christ upon the head with a read to his more rebuke
and shame / as if they should say: O thou vile and lewed fellow why would
thou make thy self a king / and here they ordered Christ as thieves and
mansleyers be ordered with us / for oftymes they be manycled to show and
confess what they have done / and the harder they thirst the manycles ye more
it is to their pain, and in like manner here they smote Christ's head that was
crowned with thorns / and yt to put him to more pain. They smote with a read
that head which is ferefull to all deuyls, reverent to all the virtues and
angels of heaven, the most blessed head of Christ which is to be worshypped of
all saints for ever, from ye which head comes all blessyng and grace / not
only into our berde but also into the hem of our garments, that is / not
only in to ye holy apostles and martyrs which be as the berde of Christ. But
also his blessing and grace descends in to all the members of the church
though they be but of very small perfeccyon / all they that be the chylderne
of god: receive this influens. O ye wretches how fereful and terrible shall
that head apere to you at the day of judgment: which now ye be not afraid to
smite? And with that smytyng the blood ran down from his head: upon his neck
/ forehed and face, and so he appeared like unto a lepre, for the ^pyttynges
mixted with that blood: made him like unto a lepre. And then Pylate went forth
to the Iues. etc. as in the next article.

A Lesson.
IN this article we may take this lesson, that we be well ware that we smite
not Christ's head with a read, as they do which impugn or deny his godhed,
saying that Christ is not god. Also they smite Christ upon the head: which by
their vain and idle life offend Christ that is our head, from whom comes (as
we said before) the influence of grace in to al his members / whereby his
members have their liuelye operations / and this head has given to us example
of al our works. Wherefore in every time that we have any opportunity to do any
good: the idle person that will not do that good work does in a manner smite
Christ upon the head, so that by that smiting and the prickynge of the
thorns: the blood runs from his head / and nothing to their comforth. And
this it is yt Christ now soroweth / and is pricked unto the sheddynge of blood
for our ydylnes, for he sees that his examples do not fructifye in us for we
will take no pain for Christ / nor do good works after his examples.

A prayer.
O Jesus which would have thy noble and precious head smyten with a read for me:
grant to me that I never offend the our head with my vain and idle life / but
that I may ever please the with my good and quyete manners and living. Amen.

How Pylate did show Christ scourged unto the Iues. The.xxxix. article.
THe.xxxix. article is the showing of Christ so pitiouslye arrayed / unto the
Iues, Ioh. 19. A.
for after that the saugiours had so miserably entreated our savior Christ:
Pylate took Jesus and went forth unto the people of the Iues and said to the^:
Ecce adduco eu^ vobis for as vt cognoscatis quia nulla^ i^ eo inuenio causa^.
Behold (said Pilate) I bring him forth to you thus punisshed for your words
and to certifye you that I find no manner of cause of death in him, therefore he
thus correct and punisshed: Libro. xiii.
I shall dimisse him. And here says Simon de Cassia: Pylate said that he found
no cause of death in Christ, whereby he excludes all crimes from Christ, for
he brings in an universal negation / that is no crime I find in Christ, and
this he did for to show his diligence for the deliverance of Christ. And
morouer Pylate did bring forth Christ in the same habyt and array: as he was
illuded and mocked of the saugiours / and that was for the intent that the Iues
seeing him so miserably and shamfully arrayed: should cease of their malice
toward Christ. And also Pylate showed Christ to the Iues on that manner:
knowing that they would be very glad to se Christ thus dispysed and
punisshed, and also supposyng yt thereby they content / would no more speak of
his death, and for this cause Pylate did scourge Christ and showed him to the
Iues, and therefore the evangelist says: Ioh. 19. A.
Exiuit ergo Jesus portans spineam coronam et purpureum vestimentum: Jesus came
forth having a crown of thorns and a purpull robe and also a read in his
hand for a scepter. Behold here a lamentable spectacle / Jesus went forth (as
saint Austen says) in a kings ornaments not glorious and shynyng in his
apparel: Super John^ tract. cxvi.
but full of obprobry and confusyon. Vbi. supra.
And therefore Pylate said to the Iues: Ecce homo: Behold this is a man / as if
he should have said (after saint Austen) If ye have envy to him because he
called him self a king: now spare him / have pytie upon him, for ye now se
him like to no king but shamefullye and miserably deiecte like a most
miserable wretch, for he scourged / crowned with thorns / mocked in a kings
ornaments / despised with many rebukes / and bet or smyten with many strokes /
therefore since ye se him thus despised: let (...) envy wax cold or cease. But
for all these their envy nothing decreased: but rather increased and waxed
more hot and fervent. Se how great is the malice of the Iues / that hereby
would not cease of the procuring of the death of Christ, their obstinate
wickedness would not be relented with mercy. And among all the other illusions:
this was more pain to Christ, that is / that his deedly enemies should se him
so dispytefully arrayed of the saugiours, of ye which sight: they had no lytyl
joy, and yet they were not content with this sight: knowing that Pilate would
have so delivered Christ to his liberty / but they having no compassion of
Christ / nor yet content with the excusacyon of Pylate: cried out with a loud
voice and also moved other to cry sayng: Crucify him: crucifye him. etc. as in
the next article.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn to have Christ thus illuded and mocked evermore
in our remembrance so that we never vaynly rejoice in our outward garment /
habit / or apparel / for our lord god was mocked and scorned in his apparel.
And specially religious persons ought to follow Christ in this thing / for
they represent Christ thus illuded and mocked in their habyt and tonsure, for
the habyt of a religiouse person is a vile thing despised and mocked of the
worldly people. The tonsure or crown of the religious person: does represent
ye crown of thorns. And also in old time religious men as monks were wont
to bear staves or styckes in their hands which did represente the read that
Christ had in his hand, and as Christ disdeyned not to be brought forth and
showed to the Iues in that scornful habit: so religious persons should not be
ashamed of their vile habit nor to follow Christ which was despised in this
kings array. And herunto saint Paul says, Pri^^^ little. 4. B.
Spectaculum facti sumus mu^do: We that despise the world: be made a mocken
stock unto the world / and never so much as in these days / our lord send
us pacyence, and lyghten the souls of the dispysers.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be showed and presented unto the Iues in so
scornful and dispitefull array: grant me to avoid all ostentation of vain
glory / and to appear before the at thy judgment in such array as shall
stand with thy favor.

How the Iues did cry / Crucifye him / crucifye him. The.xl. article.
THe.xl. article is the cryenge of the Iues to have Christ crucified, for when
the bisshoppes and the other Iues had seen Christ so scornfully arrayed / so
miserably scourged / bet and mocked / not content therewith / nor yet alowynge
the excusacyon of Pylate: Ioh. 19. A.
did cry: Crucifige eum crucifige eum: Crucifye him / crucifye him, they said
twyse: Crucify and that was to show their fervent desire that they had to
crucifye Christ, and also for that they crucified him both in will and in
work. Psalm. 56.
And as Rabanus says: It had been more profitable to their souls to have
said: Miserere mei deus miserere mei: Have mercy upon me (O thou god) have
mercy upon me, or else these words of the prophet Iohel: Iohel. 2. D
Parce domine parce populo tuo: Spare lord / spare thy people / give not thine
inheritance in to rebukes and confusion, let not the gentiles have dominion
upon thy people the Iues, these prayers had been more convenient for them: but
they were so malicyous that they cried / crucify crucifye him, and when they
cried thus: it was the third hour of the day / that is.ix. of the clock after
our computation. At that hour the Iues did crucifye Christ with their tongues.
As saint Austen says: Super psalm. 63. D
and after this exposycyon the words of the euangeliste Marcus are to be
understood where as he says: Mar. 15. C
Erat autem hora tertia et crucifixerunt eum: It was ye third hour of the day
and the Iues did crucifye him / that is with their tongues. etc. openly
showing thereby that the tongues of the Iues were more to be said or called the
sleyers of Christ than the hands of the saugiours. And therefore this cry is
conveniently assigned a special article of the passion of Christ. They asked
and cried to have Christ crucified, which manner of death was at that time of
such shame and confusion: that after a person ware put to such a death: he
should never be remembered and spoken of again: but to his evil and despisyng,
and in a manner no man durst speak (specially any good) of him that was hanged
upon the cross after his death. Psalm. 21.
And of this complayneth Christ in the psalm saying: Sicut aqua effusus sum:
I am put out of mind / as the water out of the vessel. Of all other liquores
that be in a vessel, when they be put out of that vessel: there remains
color or smell, that shows / what liquor was before in that vessel, but when
water is put out of a vessel there remaynethe nothing, whereby we might know
what liquor was in that vessel, Sapien. 2. D.
so Christ says, that he is clearly forgoten. Also ye wise man says in the
person of the Iues: Morte turpissima condempnemus eum: Let us condemn Christ
to the most shameful death. And the prophet Hieremy says in the person of our
lord Christ: Hier. 11. D.
Cogitauerunt super me consilia dicentes: venite mittamus lignum in panem eius:
The malicyous Iues have counseled against me saying: Let us put a tree in to
his bread, that is / let us crucifye him / and so he shall be forgoten and
dispysed of all people.

O thou faithful soul / behold here thy savior Jesus how miserably and
scornfully clad and crowned: he is brought forth with a read for his scepter in
his hand, and how shamefastly he stands now with his heed downwarde, before
such a great multitude cryenge and saying: Crucifye / crucify him / and also
deridyng and mocking him, that he would be taken for a prophet and a wise man
saying: Where is now thy wisdom / thy prophicye and miracles. etc. and so he
not only suffered pain and sorrow: but also rebukes and thretnynges of the
Iues. Then Pylate said to the Iues: Luc. 23. C.
Quid enim mali fecit: What evil has he done, I find no cause of death in
him. These words of Pylate done / instruct and teach all judges to proceed
in all causes / and specially in causes of death: wisely and diligently. But
alas where shall we find a judge that will labor so diligently for the
delyuerance of an innocent: as Pylate did for Christ, and surely if Pylate
were living in these days: I suppose he would excel in right judgment many
of our judges both temporal and also spiritual. At that time the bisshoppes
and seniours / and priests and the religious / and all the people of the Iues
were against Christ, and Pylate lytyl regarded all their words, for he of a
long seasone* and oftymes labored to deliver Christ from them, Ioh. 19. A.
and therefore he said: Accipite eum vos et cru cifigite: Take you him and
crucify him: for I find no cause in him. These words Pylate said for diverse
causes. First / after Simon de Cassia, Libro. xiii.
to rebuke the pride of the Iues which so far did excede: that they
determined and assigned unto the president and high Judge under the emperor,
what death Christ should suffer / that is the most detestable and shameful
death of the cross. Secondly Pylate spoke these words / for to deliver and
acquyte the innocent Christ. Ome^. 83. Super John^
Herunto says Crisostome: The Iues brought christ to Pilate: yt he should be
put and conde^pned to death by the sentence of the judge, but it happed ye
contrary for the judge declared Christ to be innocent, and oftymes he delivered
and excused him from their accusacyons. And that Pylate said to the Iues: Take
you him and crucifye him: was spoken in abhorryng their words, for that they
would have com compelled him to a thing against his mind and also against
right. Thyrdly he spoke so for the declaracyon of his power and authority /
for he would gladly have been delivered from the judgment of Christ, Ioh. 19.
B.
the which the Iues perceyuyng: added the third accusacyon besides the
other.ii. spoken in the.xxii. article saying: Nos legem habemus: et secu^dum
legem debet mori: quia filium dei se fecit: We have a law after the which he
ought to dye / for he has made him self the son of god. Libro. xiii.
And here as Simon de Cassia says: It apereth manifestly the falsenes of their
accusacyon, for if the words should be referred to their intent, or contrary
wise if their intent should agree to their words, both ways: the Iues do lie
and their iniquity does lie and speak false to themselfes, for Christ did
never make him self god, another in this world: nor yet eternally, for he was
god euerlastyngly / not made / but eternally generate and gotten of the father,
but the Iues thought Christ to be only a man and not god, nor Christ at any
time as man / did affirm him self to be made the son of god but for asmoche
as he being the eterne son of god / was made man for us / his godhed in no
thing changed, but taking for our salvation / our nature: therefore he called
him self the son of god / for he was both god and man in one person, but
Pilate when he had herd this sayng of ye Iues: Ioh. 19. B.
he was more afraid than he was before, not for that he feared their law: but
that he was afraid to condemn the son of god. And also he was afraid
hearing such a high sentence / that was above his wit and understanding /
that is that a man should be or make him self the son of god, and whether it
were true or not: he was afraid to give sentence of death. Super John^ 19.
And herto says Alquine: He did not fear for that he hard them speak of
their law, for he being a stranger and a gentill / regarded not that / but
he was afraid to co^dempne the son of god, and therefore he entered in again
in to the motehall and calling Jesus unto him said: Vnde es tu? Ioh. 19. B.
Of what stock or kyndred art thou? Pylate would have known if he were the
son of god / or if he were of the kind or stock of ye gods. And this last
point might have been easily or lyghtlye persuaded unto Pylate, for he was a
gentill: which do suppose and believe that many men may be of the stock of
gods / and so the son of gods. But Jesus did not answer one word to his
question, and that was because Pylate was not sufficient to receive or
understand the solution of his own question. Esae. 53. C
For the prophet says: Generationem eius quis enerrabit? Who is able to
declare and show his eterne generation? and though Christ was able to declare
it: yet there is no mortal man able to understand it. Secondly Jesus would
not answer to Pylates question: that Pylates sin should not be aggrauate and
made more grievous. And thirdly that the passion of Christ should not be
let. Pri^^ little. 2. B.
For as saint Paul says, Si cog nouissent: nunquam dominum glory
crucifixissent: If they had known (how Christ was the son of god) they
would never have crucified the lord of glory, and this is to be understand of
Pylate and ye gentyles and not of the Iues, for they might have known
sufficiently if they had would. Ioh. 19. B.
Then Pylate said to Christ: Mihi non loqueris, Nescis quia potestatem habeo
crucifigere te. etc Why wylt not thou speak to me? do thou not know yt I
have power to crucifye the / or to dimisse and deliver the? In these words
Pylate co^dempneth him self. Omel. 83. Super John^
And therefore Chrisostom says: O Pylate in this word thou condempnest thy
self, If thou have this power: wherefore then do not thou deliver him thou
knowing and so oftymes openly sayng that he is innocent? If thou rejoice or
bost thy self of thy power that thou haste to kill Christ or to deliver him:
may not Christ then laufully say unto the: Luc. 19. D.
De ore tuo te iudico serve nequam: I judge the by thine own words / thou
wicked servant? and then Jesus to reprove the bostynge and pride of Pylate
said: Ioh. 19. B.
Non haberes aduersu^ me potestatem vllam: nisi datum tibi esset de super: Thou
should have no power over me: except it were given to ye from above or from an
higher power. First from god: of whom is all power, as saint Paul says.
Rom^. 13. A.
And secondly from the emperor, which at that time had the dominion over the
Iues. And in these words Christ reproves covertly or secretly the sin of
Pylate, for another god, nor yet the emperor had ordered Pylate there a judge to
condemn or punisshe the innocents / but rather to defend and deliver them.
And notwithstanding the sin of Pylate was great: yet it was not so grievous as
the sin of the Iues or of Judas. And this our lord shows in the words
following: Propteria qui tradidit me tibi: Ioh. 19. B.
maius peccatum habet: Therefore he that did betray or deliver me unto the: his
sin is the more great and grievous, and that well apereth, for Judas did sin
moved of a couityse mind, the Iues sinned: moved of malice and envy, but
Pylate: only for fear of the emperor and favor of ye Iues. It is more
grievous offense to sin of a couetyse mind and of rancor and envy: than only
of fear, for fear accusethe the sin in a part / though not in the hole,
and here Pylate considering that he was reasonably in a manner conuicte of sin
in this cause: for he (as a wytty person) perceiving that he should be noted of
sin / if he should condemn the innocent: therefore he sought opportunity and
occasion to dimisse and let him go, as he did before / in sendyng Christ to
Herod, and also in sayng that he found no cause of death in him. But the Iues
anon perceyuyng the mind of Pylate: returned to their first accusacyon and
cried saying: Si hunc dimittis non es amicus cesaris: If thou dimisse this man
thou art not true to the emperor. etc. as in the next article shall apere. And
here note that there ware about. lxxx. M. people that cried: Crucifige:
crucifige: Of the which Peter converted in one day.iii. M. and shortly
after.v. M. unto ye faith.

Here follow.ii. Lessons
IN this article we may take first this lesson, it is no difference Psalm. 56.
Lingua eorum gladius acu tus: Their tongue is a sharp sword, and this was
spoken of the Iues that did cry: Ioh. 19. A.
Crucifige crucifige: And of this text saint Austen says: Super John^ trac.
114. and super psalm. 63.
Look not unto the unarmed hands of the Iues: but to their armed mouth, for
from thens came yt sharp sword that slew Christ. Therefore let all
bacbyters and sclaunderers of their neighbors beware that they do not make
their tongues sharp as a sword / for as a sword kylleth the body: so the
sclau^derer tongue sleyeth the fame and good name of a man. Prouer. 18. D.
And herto says Solomon: Mors et vita in manibus lingue: Death and life be in
the hands or power of the tongue. The second lessone

A prayer:
O Jesus which for me was not afraid to here the terrible and fearful voices
of the Iues cryenge: Crucifige: crucifige: That is crucifye him / crucifye him:
grant to me that I be not afraid of the cursed and malicyous words of mine
enemies / and that I never hurt my neighbor with my speech. Amen.

How Christ was brought unto his judgment. The.xli. article.
THe.xli. Ioh. 19. B.
article is the bringing of Christ before the judge / for when the Iues did
perceive yt Pylate would have delivered Christ: they returned to their first
accusacyon and cryenge said: Si hunc dimittis: non es amicus cesaris: If thou
deliver this person thou art not the friend of the emperor nor true to him,
for who so ever makes him self a king: he is a traitor to the emperor. This
they spoke to make Pylate afraid, Libro. xiii.
and here says Simon de Cassia that the Iues serched all the false crafts and
deuyses that they could ymagyne, Super John^ trac. C.xvi.
and all to put Christ unto the death. And then Pylate hearing these words
began to be more afraid, for he might not contempne the emperor that gave
him his power and authority as says saint Austen. Ioh. 19. C.
And therefore he brought Jesus forth and sat down to give sentence / openly,
and this he did that the sentence of Christ's does should not be imputed to him
/ but to the Iues. And when Pylate sat down to give sentence: it was the syxte
hour of the day that is.xii. Mat. 27. B
of the clock. And then his wife sent to him saying: Nihil tibi et iusto illi,
Mel not thou with the death of that rightuous man, Glos ordin^ Super Mat. 27.
this night I have suffered many things in my sleep about him, for as the gloss
says there: the devil perceiving that he should lose his kingdom and power by
the death of Christ: was sorry that he made Christ to be taken, and therefore he
showed certain visions to Pylates wife, that by her the death of Christ should
be let, as in the beginning he brought death in to the world by a woman.
Then Pylate commanded that Jesus should be presented before him where as he
sat in judgment and then he said to the Iues: Ioh. 19. C.
Ecce rex vester: Behold your king / before he said: Behold a man, thereby
showing how shamefullye and miserably Christ was arrayed, and that Pylate
spoke to move the Iues to compassion. And now to move them again: he said
scornfully mocking them: behold your king / as if he should say: ye awght to
be ashamed / that any wise man should perceive that ye be afraid that this
simple person, so vylely abiecte and despised / should be your king / but the
Iues in nothing ashamed nor yet moved to pity: Ibidem.
cried, Toll toll crucifige eum: Away with him hens with him / take him from
our sight, it is death for us to look upon him, away with him / crucify him. And
note here that they did cry thrice: Crucify him and in the remembrance thereof
we say thryce / Agnus dei / in the mass. Ibidem.
Then Pylate scornfully said to them: Regem vestrum cru cifigam? Shall I
crucifye your king? willing thereby to rebuke them and make them ashamed to
speak any more thereof, whom he could not move by the despysynges of Christ /
but the Iues past all shame answered saying: Ibidem.
Non habemus regem nisi cesarem: We have no king but the emperor. And herby ye
may se how much the unkind Iues desired the death of Christ / for they to
procure his death wylfully submitted them self under the subieccyon of the
Romans, the which before that time they would never gladly do, but rather
they were always in a mind and purpose to rebelle against the emperor for
to have their liberty. And here note that this article was more grievous to
Christ / then any of the other before: for here he was brought to his
judgment and his accusars most cruelly did cry / away with him / hang him
upon the gallows. etc. where as all the other were done and spoken, the judge
not sitting in judgment. And then Pylate seeing that that he might in no
thing profit to the delyueraunce of Chrste called for water. etc. as shall
appear in the next article.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn how to judge our self in our own soul and
conscience / as Christ was judged for us, that thereby we might avoid the
strayte judgment of god. For as saint Paul says: Prim^ co^. 11. G.
If we here judge our self: we shall not be Judged.

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living god which in the syxte hour of
the day would for me most wretched sinner / be presented before the judge
syttyng in judgment: grant to me so to judge my self in my self of all my
sins / by the testymonie or witness of mine own conscience / and also
pacyentlye to suffer thy judgment in all adversities: that I may in suerty
appear in thy last and terrible judgment. Amen.

How Christ was condemned. The.xlii. article.
THe.xlii. article is the condempnacyon of Christ by the sentence of the judge,
Super John^ 19.
for Pylate seeing that he in nothing profyted for the delyuerance of Christ,
but that more business was made / for as the gloss says: The Iues reputed to
Pylate treason and rebellion against the emperor, he was anon overcome by
fear / and swerued from the way of treuth and justice. Mat. 27. C
But first he took water and washed his hands sayng: Innocens ego sum a
sanguine iusti huius: vos videritis: Psalm. 25.
I am innocent of the blood and death of this just person / Pylate took water
and washed his hands according to the saying of the prophet: Lauabo inter
innocents manus meas: I shall wassh my hands among the innocents, but he said
to the Iues: Vos videritis: Look you to your part / consider what shall be your
syn. I am the minister of the law, take good head whom ye offer to me to be
slain, for I must give sentence after your saynges / and not after my knoledge
and mind / and therefore this sin shall be imputed to you and not to me. Mat.
27. C
And then all the people of the Iues answered and said: Sanguis eius super nos
et super filios nostros, His blood fall upon us and upon our childern. This
sayng / for the words is very good and most profitable to man salvation / for
it is greatly to be desired that the blood of Christ fall upon us to wassh us
from all fylth of sin / according to the sayng of saint Johan Dilexit nos et
lauit nos a peccatis nostris in sanguine suo: Apoc. 1. B.
Christ has loved us and washed us from our sins in his blood. But the
Iues spoke these words with an other intent, for they desired yt the vengeance
of his blood and death should fall upon them and upon their children, Super Mat.
27.
and so it does unto this day yt is almost xv, hundredth years and so shall
continue (as saint Hierom says) nygh unto the end of the world. And so
pylate thought he had said before and declared Christ to be innocent / and so
to be delivered, yet now wyllyng to please the Iues / and sacysfye their
cryenges and fulfill their will / did yt thing which was not plesyng to god and
according to justice. Also fearing that he should have been accused of
treason against the emperor. Also supposing no great peril or danger /
though he condemned to death this pore innocent person, specially considering
that no man spoke or entreated for him, all this considered (I say) Pylate gave
sentence and judged Christ, for that he would have been a king contrary to the
precepte of the emperor: to be hanged upon ye cross or crucified, and this
sentence was against all justice, and also against his own knowledge, for he
knew Christ to be innocent in this cause and all other. And thus he gave most
cruel sentence against the innocent in whom was no cause of death. And so by
his judgment and power of the emperor: he betoke Jesus unto the Iues that he
should be crucified. And note here that the evangelist says not ( Vt
crucifigere^t eu^: Mat. 27. C
sed vt crucifigeretur) That the Iues should crucifye Christ, but that he
should be crucified by the authority of the judge, but he says that Pylate
betoke Jesus unto the Iues: to show that they were the cause of his death /
though they would not have had it so taken, for Pylate would not have given this
sentence / but only for that he se that he could none otherwise please and
content the Iues. But what was the form and the words of the sentence: it is
not showed in the gospelles: but in the euangely of Nichodeme it is written how
that Pylate gave sentence in these words following / Gens tua comprobauit te
regem: propterea precipio te primum flagellari secundum principum statuta
deinde (...) cruce leuari: Thy people have affermed the to be a king, therefore
I command the first to be scourged accordyngly to the ordynau^ces and
statutes of the princes of Rome and after that to be hanged upon the cross.
Behold here how the most innocente lamb Christ did chose to be dampened for
the with an unjust and false sentence to deliver the from the judgment of
justice and pain of eternal dampnacyon, he paid for that he never had he
suffered pain for our sin. And here remember what lamentacyon his friends
then made, when they herd this horrible and most untrue sentence given
against Christ. And in the remembrance of that sentence and death of Christ
/ which in scripture is called Alpha and Oo, Apoc. 1. B.
the beginning and the ending, and because that Christ was that day taken
from us by his death. Therefore the church every year in that day uses to
omit and leave the beginning and ending of the hours of the service. After
this condempnacyon: the saugiours took our sauyoure Jesus. etc. as in the
next article.

A Lesson.
BY this article we may learn to be ware that we never worthily deserve the
just sentence of death / another of the soul / nor of the body. And also as
Christ suffered for us a false and a wicked sentence to be given against him by
a frail man: so in like manner we should not fear the wicked judgments of
men given or spoken against us, Prim^ co^. 4. A.
but pacye^tly suffer them for the love of god. And herunto says saint Poule,
Mihi autem pro minimo est vt a vobis iudicer: aut ab humano die, I do little
regard to be judged of you or of any man's day.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would pacyently and innocently suffer the unjust sentence
of death: and that of the most shameful death of the cross: grant to me that I
never deserve the just sentence of death in soul or in body / and that for thy
love I fear not the wicked judgments of men, and also that I never judge any
person wrongfullye. Amen.

How Christ bare his cross. The.xliii. article.
THe.xliii. article is the bearing of his cross, for after that Pylate had
given sentence of death against the innocent Christ Jesus: Mat. 27. D.
then the saugiours took him and pulled of the purpull or scarlet robe, and put
on him his own garments. And here says Simon de Cassia: Libro. xiii.
When Christ should be crucified then the saugiours took from him that garment
wherein they had derided and mocked him, and now they began (not mockyngly or
in sport / but in very deed) to put him to the pain and death of the cross /
and therefore they put upon him his own garments / that thereby he might be the
more known, and so going to his death in his own clothes: it should be the
more to his confusyon and shame. And at this time without any doubt Christ
suffered a new pain and that was most grievous / for that old purpull robe
was hard baken and cleued fast to his back, in the wou^des which he suffered
before at his scourgynge, and therefore this robe might not be pulled of his
back: but to his most grievous pain, for they rent and pulled the flesh
from his body with that cote, and so put Christ, to a new and intolerable
pain again. Then they byndynge his hands and neck with a rope: thereby showed
that he was condemned unto the death, and so drew him out of his propre city
as a misdoer, and they laid the great / heavy and gross tree of the cross /
upon his most soore and tender sholders, that he should bear it unto the
place where as he should be crucified. And for asmoche as that tree was reputed
and thought of the Iues to be a profane and unclean thing: and also that death
of the cross shameful / for the scripture says: Deuteronomy. 21. D
Ma ledictus omnis qui pendit in ligno: He is a cursed that is hanged upon a
tree, therefore no man durst bear that tree not yet touch it. And for this
cause: they leyde it upon Christ, that he dampened: should bear his own
cross. Ioh. 19. D.
This was a great joy and sporre to the wicked men, but it was a great
mystery to us christians. And therefore saint Barnarde says: O here is
spectacle or thing done that was never seen before / never herd nor done
before, that a thief or a malefactor should be compelled to bear the gallows
or tree whereupon he should be hanged / but only now in Christ? And here says
saint Austen: The mylde lamb Jesus takes and bears his own cross upon his
sholders going with great pain and sorrow unto the place of his passion,
Esaie. 9. B.
and herin was fulfilled the saying of the prophet: Factus est ptin cipatus
super humeum eius: His dignity and power is made upon his shoulder, his
cross: is his dignity and power, whereby he did overcome the power of the
deule, and for his obedience unto the death: Philip 2. B
god did exalte him as saint Poule says. And as great men bear diverse
things in token of their diverse dignities, As kings: a crown, bisshoppes a
myter, other men a gartar. etc. so Christ in the remembrance of his dignity:
bare the cross, and so thou searching: shall not find or perceive that Jesus
reigns in any person: but by pain and herdnes / and therefore these delicates
and carnal persons which will suffer no pain but follow all pleasure: ben the
enemies of the cross of Christ as saint Austen says. Genesis 22. B
In this act was fulfilled ye figure of Isaac which bare the sticks wherewith
he should have been offered to god in sacrifice. Tertio regum. 17. B.
Also this act was figured in the wydowe of Sareptha that gatherd.ii. sticks.
Nu^^. 13. C.
Also our savior Christ is signified by that clustre of grapes that was borne
upon a tree bytwixte. ii. men, for Christ was hanged upon a tree bytwixt two
theuys. Also this Christ is signified by Helyseus which kut down a tree and
went with it to search for the yren which was fallen in to the watre, and at
that searchynge: the yren swame above the water / where as the tree was, so our
savior Christ saught for man kind which was fallen in to the deape water of
troubles and drowned sin / and in hell, but by the tree of the cross of
Christ: it swame up again and so was recovered again. Of this article saint
Anselme says: O my soul behold and se how thy lord god is in all things
here despised and compelled to bow his back under the heuye burden of the
cross / and so to bear his own confusion and shame. O merueylouse spectacle
to behold doste thou not se him? behold his dignity and power is showed upon
his sholder, Psalm. 44.
this is the rod or tree of equity, the tree of his kingdom and power. And
thus when Jesus had gone a little forth bearing his heavy cross: he was so
feynt and weary, partly for feebleness and tenderness of his body, and partly for
the great afflicacyon and pain that he had suffered all the same day and night
before: that he was feign to go softly and also to lay down the cross from
him, or else (as some says) he fell down under the cross there to re^t him and
ease him self. But those most cruel tormentours not willing to differ his
death, and also fearing less that Pylate should revoke his sentence because he
showed him self to have a good will to deliver Christ from death, therefore they
constrained a strange man that passed by them called Simon Cireneus to bear
the cross after Jesus. Mar. 15. B
Not moved (as the gloss says) of any pitye or mercy toward Christ: Glosa
ordi Ibidem.
but that he might the sooner come to his death. And also that it might appear
that Jesus was not god / seeing that he was so feeble and weyke a man that he
was not able to bear that cross as says saint Austen. And this Simon was not
a Iue or of the chylderne of Israel: but a pilgrim a stranger of the Sirenys
that is a city in the country of Libia. And in this man was veryfyed the
saying of the prophet David: Psalm. 17.
Popu lus que^ non cognoui: seruiuit mihi: The people that I have not known:
has done service to me. And though the iues put this labor (that is to bear
the cross after Jesus) unto this Simon as to a vile person and despised
among them: yet it was not done without great mystery, Glos ordi^ Super Mar.
15. and. Mat. 27.
for as the gloss says: Behold and note here / that no Iue or Ebrewe: but a
stranger / a gentyle is subdued to the obprobry and cross of Christ, to
show that the plentuousnes of grace and of the sacraments or mysteries of the
law should depart from the Iues unto the gentyles. Simon is as much to say
by interpretation as obedient, Beda. Super Luca^. 23.
and Cireneus is interpreted: here is / that is an heir. And therefore by this
man may be well noted all good christians converted from the error of
gentilitie unto Christ: which sometime ware as pylgryms or strangers unto the
law and precepts of god, but by their faith and obedyence unto the
commandments of god: they were made of the household of god and his heirs /
and also coenheritours with Christ. And thus bearing his cross: they brought
him to Golgotha. etc. as in the next article.

A Lesson.
IN this article we christians may learn to bear the cross after Jesus for
(as the gloss says) First Christ bears the cross / for he suffered first,
Super Mat. 27. and. Mar. 15.
afterward it was put to Simon Cireneus to bear it after Christ / for we
ought to follow the steps of Christ, for Simon did follow we and not go
before Christ. And herunto our lord says in the gospel: Luce. 9. C.
Si quis vult venire post me: tollat crucem suam quotidie et sequatur me: If
any man will come after me: let him take his own cross daily and follow me.
And here be noted three things, necessary for him that will follow Christ. First
that he bear it voluntarylye and not compelled against his will, and therefore
he says: If any man will come after me: notynge thereby that it must be of his
own will. Second that he bear his own propre cross / and therefore / he
says let him take his own cross. Third that it be done for the glory of
god / and not for vain glory, and therefore he says and follow me / do it to
my honor and for my love. And by this cross here is noted the purpose of
godly and virtuous life, so that the hole life of a christian which lives
after the gospel of Christ may be called a cross and a martyrdom. And this
cross is to be daily borne after Christ, and for the love of Christ. First
in our heart by remembrance and compassion. In our mouth by often and devout
thanks. And in our body by discreate / chastysyng and subduynge of the same,
that so we might reanswere and give thanks unto our savior in heart / word /
and deed. Herby ye may se that love without this cross / nor yet this cross
without love: may deserve any laud or praise in thought / word / nor deed.
But that cross is hyghely to be praised which is joined with love / which
love also the same cross does bring in. In this state was saint Paul which
said of himself: Gala. 2. D.
Christo con fixus sum cruci: I am fastened to the cross for the love of
Christ. In this cross first our flesh or body is fastened with the nails of
fear and hexunto the prophet David says: Psalm. C. 18.
Co^fige timore tu^o carnes meas: Fasten or nail fast my flesh with thy
fear. Secondly our spirit must be fastened with the nails of love. And
thyrdly our outward senses: with the nails of disciplyne and rigor or pain.
Eccl. 12. D.
And herunto the wise man says: Verba sapien cium quasi stimuli: et quasi
claui in altum confixi: The words of wise men be as pryckes or broddes, and as
nails fastened in the profunditie of our senses. Fourthly our hands must be
nailed with the nails of labor. And therefore the wise man says: Quodcunque
potest manus tua: Eccle. 9. C.
instanter operare: Work diligently what so ever good thy hands may work.
Herby it does clearly appear: that that person shows him self manifestly to
have no true love: which will not prepare and give him self to hard and
paynfull things for his lover. O how gladlye ought the christians to take and
bear his cross, sith he is taught and moved thereunto by nature and also by
craft. Naturally the birds when they fly in the air: they use the sign of
the cross / for their head and their tail and their wings abroad: make a
cross, and so in their flyenge they take their cross. In like manner a man
swymmynge takes his cross. The ship going upon the sea: makes the sign of
the cross. Also a man to conform him self to this article should remember
with how great charity Christ bare his cross for us, and of what heaviness it
was to him, seeing that all the sins of the world was put upon his cross,
which all: this sweet and mylde lamb whom he went to be offered: did bear
upon his shoulders. Also a man may ymagyne in him self as if he bare the
cross of Christ with him as Simon Cireneus did, and so pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me a wretch would bear thy heavy cross upon thine own
shulders: make me wilfully and gladlye to take the cross of penance and
streyter life / and to bear it daily after the and for thy love. Amen.

How Christ was led unto Golgoltha that is the mount of Caluarie. The.xliiii.
article.
THe.xliiii. article is the ledynge of Christ unto Golgotha, there to be
crucified, for after that they had laid the cross upon Christ's shulders and
there tied it fast. As saint Johan says: Ioh. 19. D.
Eduxerunt eum: They led him out of the city. First to fulfill the fygures of
the law. For it was commanded in the law that the calfe and the got /
which were o^red in the most solemn sacrifice for the expiation and
purifyeng of the people: Leui. 9 and 10.
that they should be buried without the castelles or the habitacyons of men. So
Christ which is the sacrifice for the expiation and redemption of all man
kind: should suffer death without the castles or cities. And also he would
suffer without ye city to declare and show unto us how yt the virtue of his
passion should not be included within the coostes or bounds of the Iues: but
that it should be known to be a common sacrifice for all the world. And thyrdly
to signifye and show to us / that who so would have the effect and virtue of
this passion: he must go forth / or go from the world / at lest in desire /
affection / or love that is: that he have no inordinate love to the world, the
gooddes or pleasure thereof. Wherefore let us follow Christ and go unto him
from our carnal friends and worldly conuersacyon bearing with him and for
his love rebukes and sharp pains. And herunto saint Bernarde says: Christ
suffered his passion and death without the city, therefore let us go to him from
the city, that is by the contempt of worldly conuersacyon, and that may be
done by.iii. manner of ways. In affection or love / that we love not
inordinatly the world. In effect and deed: that we utterly forsake the world
both in will and also body. And thyrdlye by profytynge: that we desire and
labor to be made one spirit with god. For as saint Gregory says: The more
that a man is separate from the love of the world: the more nygh he is to god.
This ledyng above all the other.viii. of which we spoke in the.viii. article:
was most paynfull and shameful to Christ and that for many causes, and
therefore conveniently it makes a special article. First by reason of his
rebuke and shame / for it Luc. 23. D.
But they all did not follow him of one intent and one mind / for some were
much joyful of that sight / as the most part of the Iues. And it is no
small pain to a man to behold and se other men, and specially his enemies
glad and joyful of his affliccyon and rebuke. There were also some that did
weep and were sorye for that sight, as the blessed woman. And also this was
much paynfull to Christ to se his friends and lovers in sorrow and heaviness for
him. In libro de planctu virginis.
Saint Bernarde describes this ledynge and procession in this manner following.
When Christ (says he) was brought forth to be led unto his passion: there
was gathered about him a great multitude of people, as ye commonly se: when
thieves and murderars be had to hanging. Some went saughynge / and some cast
clay or durte upon his most blessed head and face. If Christ looked before him /
he saw them cast durte upon him. If he looked above him: he saw the heavy tree
of the cross lyenge upon his neck and grievously oppressed him. If he look
behynd him he saw his mother with a great number of men and women weeping and
lamenting for him. And as some doctors do say / his most sorowefull mother
would have come to him to have helpen him: and might not be suffered / the
which her sweet Jesus seeing and consederynge her great heaviness: fell down
for sorrow and werynes under the cross. And that seeing his most loving
mother: for sorrow she fell to the earth as dead. And in the remembrance of
this swonyng there was afterward a chapel builded by the faithful people in
the same place in the honor of our lady which is called: sancta Maria de
Spa^mo. and after this: Luc. 23. D.
Jesus turnynge him self to the women that wept: said, Filie Jerusalem
nolite flere super me: sed super vosipsas flete et super filios vestros: O ye
daughters of Jerusalem weep not upon me for I take these pains and death with
my good will, for it is the will and ordinance of god my father / that I
should thus dye, and also for the great profet yt shall come thereof to
mankind, for by my death I will overcome everlasting death, but weep for the
cause of my passion and death, that is: the sins of the people which cause me
to suffer death by the order of justice. And thus to weep: it is necessary for
you, and therefore it follows: Sed super vosipsas flete: et super filios
vestros: But weape for your selfs and for your chylderne. Herin Christ does
not rebuke their affection and compassyon that they had to him: but he does
teache them an order how to weep, that is first to weep for them self and
theyrs, for it is a vain thing and of no profyt to weep for the passion of
Christ: and therewith to despise him with our evil deeds and living. Also he
byddes them that weep for him: to consider what pains be like to fall upon them
self, And therefore they should weep for them self and for their childern, and
therefore Christ says: Luc. 23. D.
Quoniam ecce venient dies in quibus dicent: Luc. 23. D.
beat steriles. etc. For the days shall come (says Christ) when they shall
say: Blessed and happy be the baren and tho that brought forth no fruit, and
those pappes or teates be happy that never gave suck or milk, then they
shall begin to say to the mowntes: Fall upon us, and to the hills: Cover us.
And thsi he spoke for the time of the seage of Jerusalem by the emperors
Vaspasyan and Titus his son, for then the Iues were in great distress as it
appears by the histories of Josephus and Egesippus, or else we may say that
Christ spoke this for the extreme and last day of judgment. And the cause or
reason of both these he adds and says: Quia si in viridi ligno faciunt: in
arido quid fiet? For sith so grievous pains and shameful despites be done to
me which am a grene tree florisshyng and quick in the root of my divinity /
in the charity of my manhood / in the branches of my virtues / in the leeses
of good words / and the fruit of my good deeds, if (I say) they do these
things to me, that is: condemn me to the shameful death of the cross /
without all justice: what shall they do to the dry tree or stock / that is to
the sinner / which wants the moisture of grace / the fruit of justice / the
grenisse or florisshynge of the conscience, what pain (think you) be they
worthy to have. O Jesus, thou grene tree. O our head. O thou glory of all meake
persons. O thou cedre of clenlynes, Palm of pacyence, Olyue of mercy, Vine of
gladness, show to us what was done to the? And he answering says this grene
tree is pilled or the bark pulled of, it is shred / lopte / it is cut down and
cast upon the earth. Mark this well friends since he that came in to this world
without sin: departed not hens without most grievous pains and passion: what
pains then be they worthy to have / which were conceived and borne in sin,
and all their life have continued in sin? Herunto says saint Gregory. As
often as I remember the death of our savior / the pacyence of Job / and the
death of Johan the Baptiste. I say to the (O sinner) thereby I consider what
pains shall they suffer when god reproves: sith tho whom he loves Iocus
Caluarie, The place of the skull, for Caluaria is called ye skull of a man's
head when the skin / flesh and the heir is all gone, this place was so
called because all they that were condemned to death were headed or hanged
there. To that place they brought him: because men should suppose that he was
a misordred person. There was also many boones of dead men's bodies / and
specyallye the skulles of the heedes spredde abroad over all that place / and
that made it abominable to behold and also stynkyng. And for this cause this
leadynge was much paynfull to Christ, and the space that Christ went
bearing his cross: was.vi.C.lxvi. passes. And from the foot of the mount of
Caluary unto the top where as the cross was fixed in the earth: were fyfty
passes. And in this ledynge Christ fell. v. times under the cross unto the
earth, and when they had brought him to that place: the saugiours pulled of his
clothes. etc. as in the next article.

Here follow.iii. Lessons.
Deduc me in semita mandatorum tuorum. etc. Psalm. C. 18.
Led me lord in the path of thy commandments: for that I have desired. The

A prayer.
O Jesus which form would be led unto Golgoltha to be there crucified: led me
in the pathe of thy commandments, that I may follow the steps of thy
passion with the holy women / and weep upon my self the misery of my frail
co^dicyon.

How Christ was spoiled of his clothes before the cross. The.xlv. article.
THe.xlv. article is the pullyng of Christ's clothes before yt he was
crucified, for when Jesus was come to ye place where as he should be crucified:
the saugiours pulled of his clothes before the cross. Mar. 15. B
And as Mark says: Dabant ei bibere vinum mirrhatum: They gave him to drink:
bitter wine for it was mixte with gall / as Matthew says, Cap. 27. D
and when Jesus had tasted of it: he would not drink, for he would not
mortifye or hurt his tongue, wherewith he intended to pray for his enemies and
to make his testament. And in this was fulfilled the saying of the prophet.
Psalm. 68.
Dederunt in escam meam fell. etc. They put gall in to my meat, and they gave
me to drink asell or vynacre. This point of the pullyng of Christ's clothes
does conveniently make a special article: for it is no lityll pain for a man
to be stripte naked before all the people, for so they did to Christ, for he
was all naked without any cloth / the which thing was never done before to the
most vile persons, for commonly at the lest they left their shyrtes to hyde
their nakedness. And in this pullyng of his clothes his wou^des that he had
before with their beatynges and scourgynges: ware renewed to his great sorrow
and pain, for his inner garment did cleue fast unto his back. And herunto
says the prophet: Psalm. 68.
Super dolorem vulnerum meorum addiderunt: They added wound upon wound and so
sorrow or pain upon pain unto me. Ancel i^ dialog passion^.
O blessed mother / what sorrow was this to the when thou se him so cruelly
handled, thou went to him with speed and tied thy veyle about his body. This
most lovely lord Jesus would be naked: that thou sinner might behold how
pitiously that most pure body of his was arrayed for the, he was naked for the
/ which did create the, and being eterne god: was cladde with beauty and
strength, he was naked to whom we sing and say with the prophet: Psalm. C. 3.
Confessionem et decorem induisti: amictus lumine sicut vestimento: Thou art
cladde with praysynges and beauty, thou art cladde with light as with a
garmente. This lord god is made a spectacle to all the world / a wonder to
many persons and a mocking stock to the people / for at him they shoke their
head. Thou our head / our joy and our honor and glory good Jesus: art thus
despised. this article is different from the.xxx. article for there he was
naked before Pylate and his ministers, and here it was openly before all the
people. There they took from him the white garment that herod put upon him to
mock him: here they spoiled him of his own clothes, there he was stripte
naked to be scourged, here to be crucified, there he was clad again: here they
took all his clothes from him. Li. x. super Luc. ca. C.
Of this nakedness saint Ambrose says: Christ naked ascended his cross, and
there he showed him self unto us that we might know / how we were made by
god and nature, he hang upon the cross: as Adam was in paradise / for as our
first Adam did inhabyte paradise naked: so the second Adam our savior Jesus
did enter in to paradise naked. And as some say: there was a stone upon the
which our savior Jesus sat naked unto such time the cross was prepared and
made ready, and there sittyng: he suffered many rebukes both by spyttynges /
smytynges / and many blasphemouse words speaking to him. And when the cross
was made ready: then most furiouslye they took Christ. etc. as in the next
article. A lesson as in ye. xxx. article.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be spoiled of thy clothes and sit naked before ye
cross: make me to be spoiled or naked from all worldly things that be
hynderaunce to my salvation that I naked might follow thy naked cross. Amen.

How Christ was laid or spread upon the Cross. The.xlvi. article.
THe.xlvi. article is the extensyon of Christ upon the cross, for after they
had taken his clothes from him and the cross was made ready: they with great
fury took Christ from his mother Marie / not without her great sorrow /
weeping and sobbyng: they cast him very hard naked as he was upon the hard
cross lyeng upon the earth / and so cruelly they spread him abroad upon the
cross / and drew out his arms and legs as a cloth is stretched and drawn
out upon tenters, in somoche they drew him so that all his me^bres and joints
were in a manner out of their proper places. Of this speaks the prophet sayng:
Psalm. C 39.
Funes extenderunt in laqueum: These most cruel tormentours have extended
their ropes to make a snare for me. Psalm. C. 18.
And in an other psalm: Funes peccatorum circumplexi sunt me: The roopes of
sinners have compassed me about, and that so sharplye: that all his bones
might be nombred: and therefore the same prophet says of these tormentours in
the person of Christ: Psalm. 21.
Dinumerauerunt omnia ossa mea: They have nombred all my bones, for they did
prepare the cross without aduyseme^t or any mesure taking of the length and
bread of Christ's body, or else they did it of pure malice / that is to make the
holes so far distance: to put Christ to the more pain. And when Jesus
wyllingly prepared him self to lie down upon ye cross: those most wicked and
cruel tormentours took him by the arms violently and cast his most holy and
tender body upon the hard cross, in so much that thereby the crown of
thorns was thirst more fast and farther in to his head and so put him to
extreme pain. O thou christen soul behold the face of thy sauyoure Christ,
but how can thou lift up thine eyne unto his face to behold his torments
without tears? And how can thou think in thy heart of his most grievous
pains without sorrow and syghyng? And consider what tribulation and sorrow he
found when he saught the. And herby ye may perceive that this extension does
conveniently make a special article, for thereby Christ suffered a great and
grievous pain. Lustra. se^ qui tam per acta.
And therefore the church does say and sing in a certain hympne: Flecte ramos
arbor alta tensa laxa viscera. etc. O thou high tree of the cross bow down
thy branches / lawce the bowels that be stretched upon the. etc. This extension
or stretchynge forth of the body of Christ does also show and declare unto
us the great effusyon of the goodness of Christ toward us which proceeds
from his high and infinite charity that he has to us. By this extension of
his arms and members upon the cross, he does show yt he loved us asmoche as
he might / gyuynge to us / to get our love all that he was in him self / and
all that he might do. And that which he could not express by word (for his
charity in unspeakable) he did express it with this sign and token of his
body, that is in this extensyon and stretchynge out of his body upon the
cross. And hereunto saint Bernarde says: Verylye our savior Jesus is a
large and a liberal dispenser / steward / or prouysoure, which has given to
us his own flesh to our meat / and his blood to our drink, his soul:
for the price of our redemption, his wounds: for our remedy against
temptacyons, his arms: for our refuge and comforth, his cross: for our
shield, his heart: for a token of love to us, his water: to bathe and wasshe
us, his swette: for a medicine to us, his nails: for our sauce, his crown of
thorns: to our ournament, his words to our instruccyon, both his life and
death: to our example. These be the.xii. Apoc. 22. A
fruytes of the tree of life of which saint Johan speaks in his apocalipse:
Exodus 25. C
These also be signified by the.xii. breades or looues that were daily set
upon the table in the temple of god / called mensa propositionis.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson that we should extend and streche
forth all our members and parts of our body in to the obsequy and service of
Christ that is our hands and arms to good works, our fete in going to good
and godly places, our kneys to knele in prayer, and all our senses: to holy
exercise of their acts and operacyons, so that we may say with the prophet:
Psalm. 34.
Omnia ossa mea dicent domine quis similis tui: Al my bones shall say: O lord
who is like to the? there is none so loving to us as thou art, therefore we
aught to serve the with all the parts of our body. Rom^. 12. A.
And herunto saint Paul exhorts us saying: Obsecro vos vt exhibeatis corpora
vestra hostiam viue^tem sanctam. etc. I beseech you that ye so order your
bodies that they may be a quick or living host / holy / pleasant to god
and a reasonable obsequie / that all things be done reasonably. Of this
extencyon we may take example in the strings of a harp or lute / which will
make no sown good and pleasant: except they be extended and writhed up. And a
man to conform him self unto this article: he may extend all his members and
specially his arms in the manner of a cross, and that outher standing or
lyenge as his devotion moves him / and also extend all the powers of his
saul to the laud and praise of god / and pray as follows or in like manner.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be extended upon the cross and that so cruelly that
all thy bones might be nombred: make me to extend all my members and powers
both of soul and body unto thy laud and praysynge. Amen.

How Christ was crucified. The.xlvii. article.
THe.xlvii. article is the crucifienge of Christ, for our savior Jesus would
not only be extended upon the cross, but also would be fastened and nailed to
the cross to commend unto us his indissoluble charity whereby he did
stablysshe our health. Therefore after that those cruel tormentours had so
stretched Christ upon the cross that the veins and synnouse were greatly and
above mesure extended and also the joints of the bo^es out of order: Luc. 23.
E.
then did they crucify him and nail him fast to the cross / both his hands
and fete / and that with great / hard and gross nails which were so blunte
and gross: that they bracke both skyn and flesh / synnouse and veins, and
also put the joints of the bones out of order. And the cause why he would be
crucified: is this, for asmoche as our first parent Adam extendynge his hands
to the tree that was forbodden to him and with his fete going to taste of the
fruit of the said tree did consent to the deuyle and so make an obligacyon
of his own dampnacyon: therefore our savior Jesus that he might cancel and
distroye the said obligacion and writynge, would be fast nailed both in hands
and fete to the tree of the cross with the nails of vnsuperable charity,
thereby cancelynge and destroyeng that decre and writing that was contrary to
our salvation, Colos. 2. C.
for our savior Jesus took it from the devil and fastened it to the cross as
saint Paul says O how gladlye did Christ ascend upon this cross, with what
love did he suffer al these pains for us, with what pacye^ce was he obedient
unto the death? how great pleasure had his father omnipotent in that
obedience? O what sorrows / wepynges and mornings ware there hard among his
friends and lovers, and specially of his most sorrowful mother: when he was so
cruelly extended / fastened / nailed / and in all his holy body vexed? O most
wonder. O the depenes of pity. O the great fire of love. O the meruaylous
pity of god toward us. O the inestimable charity of god. Beside this reason
we may assign.iii. other reasons why christ would be crucified. First that he
hanging upon the cross might show him self to be a mediator and mean
bitwixt god and man, and this is taken of the gloss, Pri^ ad Timoth. scdo. Pri.
Timo. 2. B.
Second reason is / that as the deuyle did overcome Adam by the tree: so he
should be overcome by the tree of the cross. The third is that he might
euidentlye show that he suffered death for to repair the ruin and decay of the
aungelles in heaven, also to bring out and delivered his friends from hell that
is called Lymbus patrum: to gather together his lovers and to reconsyle his
enemies. It is commonly said that the cross was made of.iiii. diverse treeys,
that is / the stock or foot was of Cedre, the straight long tree: was a
Palm, the arms or tree ouerwharte: was a Cipresse, and the table above the
cross wherein the title was written and fixed: was of Olyue. The cedre
signifies the profou^dnes of contemplacyon. The Cipresse: fame of good
opinyon. The Palm signifies ye fruit of justice And the Olyue: the
plentuousnes of mercy. Therefore the cross of Christ is worthily called the
tree of life, Mat. 27. F
for of it we may gather threfolde life or three manner of lives. First the life
of nature in token hereof, Luc. 23. G.
When Christ was Crucified: dead men roose again to life of nature. Secondly
the life of grace and in sign hereof: when Christ did pray upon the cross
there were many converted to grace and knocked upon their breasts. Luc. 23. F.
Thyrdly the life of glory: in token hereof: Christ hyngynge upon the cross
said to the thief: This day thou shall be with me in paradise.

Here follow.ii. Lessons.


A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be nailed with most hard nails unto the cross:
and thereby would fasten the obligation and writynge of our sins and death unto
thy cross: nail fast I beseech the my flesh with thy fear / that I surely
cleuyng fast to thy commandments, may evermore be fastened to the and to thy
holy cross. Amen.

How Christ's hands and fete were nailed and specially of the first or left
hand. The.xlviii. article.
THe.xlviii. article is the diggynge / borynge or naylynge of Christ's hands
and fete, which caused a special and grievous pain to Christ, and therefore
they make a special article, and hereof speaks the prophet in the person of
Christ: Psalm. 21.
Foderunt manus meas et pedes meos. They have dug and bored my hands and my
fete. But for asmoche as by such cruel boryng and naylyng Christ suffered or
had.iiii. greuouse wounds, of the which every one of them caused a specyal and
distinct pain: therefore conveniently this article conteyneth in it
self.iiii. distinct and diverse articles / that is for every hand and foot
one distinct article so that this.xlviii. article is of the naylynge of the
first hand. The next. of the naylynge of the second hand, the.l. article is
of the borynge of the first foot. And the.li. article is of the boorynge or
naylynge of the right foot. And note here that we say not the right hand and
the left hand, for commonly in scripture by the right hand is noted virtue and
goodness, and by the left hand vice and evil, and in Christ is no sinistrall
thing or evil. And as saint Hierom says: Super Mar. cap. 15.
The extension of the first hand unto the cross: did take and nail fast
death unto the cross. And the extension of the second hand: did find life
that was perisshed and lost. And the first hand may be here called that hand
which they first nailed, which paraduenture might be that hand that we call in
us the left hand because it is more nigh to the heart. Or else for a mystery
(the which those crucifiers did not intend) that is this. For first the
evil / vice or sin is to be removed which is signified by the left hand,
and afterward is virtue and goodness brought in, which is noted by the right
hand. Therefore the first wound was in the first or left hand. In scripture
commonly by ye hands ar understood works. And so these hands of him that
wrought in the beginning or made ye world, did now perform in the cross the
work of our redemption, which work stands in.ii. things, that is in the
destruction of death and reparacyon of life. But first he destroyed death,
whereby is understood sin / and all that follows thereof. And therefore we
said before that the extension of the first hand / unto the tree of the
cross: did take death / and so fast nail it unto the cross. And morouer he
wrote with his own blood in the same hand / as it were in velym or parchment
a writynge of his victory that he had upon or over death. And that this writing
should ever continue: he graued it very deep in to his hand, yea it persed
through his hand. And of this saint Bernarde says: Christ is exalted upon
the cross / the hands and fete of the most benign Jesus be fast nailed to
that cross, his blood is drawn out / our mediator and mean stands before
his father / as Moses did before god in the breaking of the golden calfe / to
turn away the wrath of his father from us: Psalm. C. 5.
that he should not destroy us. And truly our savior Jesus stood in
co^fraccyon / in breakyng* for though he were brosed and broken in all his
body, yet he did not fall down in soul and mind, but stood steadfastly in
perseverance of good will. O blessed Jesus in what state do I se the? O most
sweet and amiable Jesus / who has put the to so bitter / cruel and odiouse
death. O only savior of our old rotten wou^des, who has brought the: not
only to most paynfull: but also to suffer most shameful wounds. O most dulce
and sweet vine tree. Psalm. 76.
O good Jesus is this the fruit that thy vyneyarde does bring forth to the,
which thou translated out of Egipte in to a most pleasant and fruytefull
soil and ground, Esac. 5. A.
and has most patiently tarried unto this day of thy marriage / and looked that
it should have brought to the sweet grapes, but it brought forth thorns, for
it has crowned the with thorns / these Iues thy vyneyarde have compassed the
about with the thorns of their sins Behold to what bitterness and sharpnes
this vine is turned, not now thy vineyarde: but rather a stranger to the, for
it denied the cryenge and saying Non habemus regem nisi cesarem: Ioh. 19. C.
We have no king but the emperor. Therefore these cursed and cruel tylmen
have cast the out of the vyneyarde of the city of Jerusalem / or else out of
their compaigney and there have slain the, Mat. 21. D
not suddenly or out of hand: but with a long torment and pain of the cross,
and have given to the many greuouse wounds with whippings / beatynges /
scourgynges, and at last: naylynge the hands and fete to the cross where as
thou suffered.xxvi. strokes with the hamer upon thy hands, and.xxxvi. up on thy
fete in dryuynge in the nails.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn how to put and hyde all our troubles /
adversities / temptacyons / infirmities / our sins and al our pains dew for
sin: in this most sweet wound of the first hand of our savior Jesus wherewith
he took death and al our misery / and nailed it fast to the cross. In that
manner did saint Austen sayng: In manua li. cap. 22.
When any fylthy cogitacyons does inpugne me: I run to the wounds of
Christ: and I am helped, when the flesh oppresses me: I rise through the
remembrance of the wounds of my lord god, when the devil does lie in a
wait of me: I fly to the wounds of our lord and he flies from me. If
carnal concupiscence do move my body: that fire of carnal pleasure is
extincte by the remembrance of the passion of my lord god. And this in all
mine adversities and temptacyons, I find none so sure remedy: as the wounds
of Christ, in these I sleep surely / in these I rest without fere and though
saint Austen speak here indifferently of all the wounds of Christ, yet
properlye we may say that this sure remedy is found in the wound of this
first or left hand of Christ. Also it apperteyneth to this wound, that we
should avoid all evil works for the love of god crucified for us. And a man
to conform him self to this article may often kiss this wound of Christ and
often remember the forsayde wounds of saint Austen. And pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me most wretched would have thy left hand dug or boored
with a nail / and fastened to the cross: grant to me that I may ever put and
hyde al mine adversities / and temptacyons in the most sweet wound of that
left hand and that I may find in it a sure and wholesome remedy against all
manner of tribulacyons. Amen.

The boorynge or naylynge of the second or right hand. The.xlix. article.
THe.xlix. article is the naylynge of Christ's second or right hand, Super
Mar. 15.
wherewith (as saint Hierome says) he found life: that was lost and
perisshed. And here by life: may be taken and understood all things that
perteyne to our health and salvation, as before by death were understood sin
and all that followed of sin. This life our savior Jesus has given to us
with his second hand. And of this gift he has written to us a sure preuilege
or deed of gift written (I say) with his precious blood, not in paper or
parchment: but in his right hand / which also he has sealed for a
perpetual remembrance with a sharp nail persynge his hand, as it were with
a seal. Secu^da Petri. 1. A.
And herunto says saint Peter: Maxima et preciosa vobis promissa donauit deus.
etc. Almighty god has given to you most good and precious promysses, and
thereby ye may be made like unto god / and fellows or partakers of his divine
and godly nature.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn how to hyde all our good works that our lord
works in us, in this wound of this second hand attributyng them, not to
ourselfe as that we should be the chief werkers of them: but gyuyng all to the
goodness and grace of god, praynge and desiring his grace that all our
negligences and inperfeccyons may be restored / performed and fulfilled by this
most sweet wound. In manua li. cap. 21.
And thus did saint Austen saying: What so ever I want in my self as of my
self: I vsurp and take it to me, of the bowelles of my lord Jesus / for from
thens flows mercy plentuously, nor there wants no hooles or ryuers whereby
that mercy might have recours to me. And therefore I shall evermore praise the
mercyes of our lord, for the wounds of Jesus Christ be full of mercy, full
of pity, full of swetenes and charity, by these hooles and rivers: it is
le^ull for me to taste how sweet and pleasant my lord my god is. And though
this is spoken generally of all the wounds of Christ: yet specyallye it
apperteyneth to the wound of this second or right hand. And a man to conform
him self to this article should oftymes kiss the wound of the right hand of
the crucifix / and often reuolue in his mind the forsayde words of saint
Austen and pray as follows.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me a wretch would have thy right hand persed through with
a nail and so fastened to the cross: grant to me that I may hyde in the most
sweet wound of thy right hand with thanks, al my good works that it shall
please thy goodness to work in me / and that all my neglige^ces and
imperfeccyons may thereby be performed and supplied. Amen.

The naylynge of the first foot or left foot of Christ. The.l. article.
THe.l. article is the naylynge of the first or left foot of Christ, By
feet in scripture ar taken and understood our affeccyons and desires, with
the which our soul goes / which for the more part / be in us senistrall
that is of the left part evil or imperfite, but in Christ they all be on the
right side good and perfyte, and therefore Christ by the wound of his first or
left foot that did cure and heal our evil cogitacyons and affeccyons.
Scripture speaking of our old and corrupt man says: Gene. 6. A.
Cuncta cogitatio cordis humani prona est ad malum omni tempore: All the
cogitacyon and desire of man's heart is prone and ready to evil at all times.
But now of man renewed and healed by Christ: may be veryfyed this saying of
the wyseman: Prou. 11. C
Desiderium iustorum omne bonum: The desire of just men is all good. Of these
just men also speaks the prophet Ezechiell saying: Ezech. 1. B.
Pedes eorum pedes recti: The feet of them be right feet / for the affeccyons
and desires of good men be not crooked / froward / or turned to evil, and that
is by the efficacitye and virtue of this wound of the first or left foot of
Christ.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson that as often as we be impugned with
evil cogitacyons / affeccyons or vain desires: we should forthwith fly unto
the wound of this foot of Christ, for from thens, as from a most pure and
holsom fou^teyn there flows to us an holsom medicine, wherewith all the fylthe
of our cogitacyons / all our corrupt affeccyons and desires and breuely all
our evil and sin is washed and so purified and healed. This perceived well
saint Austen in him self when he said in his contemplation those words that
be written in the lesson of the.xlviii. article. A man to conform him self to
this article, should oftymes kiss the wound of the left foot of Christ with
the remembrance of this lesson, and pray as follows.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would have thy most holy feet persed with a great
gross and hard nail and so to be fastened unto the cross: grant to me yt
when so ever I am impugned or troubled with evil cogitations / sinistrall
affeccyons and desires: I may run to the wound of thy left foot and there
to find and receive wholesome medicynes for my salvation. Amen.

The naylynge of the second or right foot of Christ. The.li. article.
THe.li. article is the nailyng of the right foot of Christ. By the wound of
this foot our good desires which of them self be feeble and imperfyte: Secu^da
cor 3. B.
be strengthed and made perfect. For as saint Paul says: We be not sufficyent
of ourselfe / as of our own virtue: to think any good thing, but our
sufficiencye therein is of god, wherefore though our cogitacyons / wylles /
affeccyons and desires be sometime good of their own kind and nature: yet they
be of no value or merit in the sight of god: except they be dyed or put in the
blood of the feet of Christ, Psalm. 67.
therefore the prophet says: Vt intinguatur pes tu us in sauguine: Thy foot or
affection must he dyed and put in the blood of Christ or else all is without
fruit of eternal reward. And herunto says the gloss upon these words:
Psalm. 21.
Foderunt manus meas et pedes meos: Glosa Cassiodori.
They have delued or dug my hands and my feet, he says not: Transfixerunt
or vulnerauerunt: They has nailed or wounded: but foderunt: they have delued
or dug for the earth that is delued is apt to bring forth fruit. So Christ
dug in his hands and fete, brought to us the fruit of life, and no meruell
/ for he ran after us all the days of, his life with great thyrst and most
fervent desire of our health*

A Lesson.
IN this article we learn how to offer and to put al our good thoughts /
wylles affeccyons and desires into the frutfull wound of the right foot of
Christ and that with great thanks ioynynge our desires unto his desires at all
times / as it ware by a loving kiss that thereby they might be performed /
and so might bring forth good fruit. So Mary Magdalene did kiss the feet of
Jesus: and thereby she received so plentuouse fruit that all her affection and
love were turned in to tears of contricyon / compassion and devotion, and if
at sometime we can not have good desires: at the lest let us have a will to have
good desires / as Dauyd says: Psalm. C. 18
My soul has coueted to desire thy iustificacyons at all times, and if we so
do: then god shall accept our will for a deed. A man to conform him self to
this article: may oftymes kiss the wound of the right foot of the crucifix
with the remembrance of this lesson / and then pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which did make a founteyne of thy grace spring to us from the holsom
and most sweet wound of thy right foot: grant to me that I may fasten and
join all my good desires to that same thy wound with a lovely kiss / and to
make them conformable and agreynge to thy holy desires. Amen.

How the cross with Christ upon it was raised up. The.lii. article.
THe.lii. article is the areyryng up or lyftyng up of Christ upon the cross,
An^el i^ dialog passion^.
for after some doctors Christ was nailed to the cross: the cross lyeng
upon the earth, and after that he was nailed thereunto: they lyfted him up with
the cross / and this lyftyng up and putting of the cross in to the stamp or
foot that was fixed in the earth was one of the most grievous pains of Christ,
and that was because all the weight of his body did rest upon his hands and
fete nailed, and therefore when they had areysed up the cross and put it down
with violence in to the stamp or foot: it did so shake the body that it rent
the wounds of his hands and feet, in so much that great plenty or ryuers of
blood did flow or run out of those wounds and founteynes of our savior. O
blessed Jesus how swetly and pleasantly was thou conversant with men, How
great gifts did thou give to men, and that in most abundance? how hard and
sharp pains haste thou suffered for them? thou haste suffered hard words /
harder strokes and beatynges, and most hard torments of the cross, and that
in every part of thy body. Man was seake in his head / that is in his
intention, that is when he did any thing for an evil intent, which intention
is as it were the head of the soul. Man was also seake in his hands when he
did evil works or imperfyte, he was also seek in his fete: when he had
unclean affeccyons and desires / he was seake in his heart for he had evil and
vain cocitacyons, he was also seake in his hole body: for he lived a worldly
life / after the pleasures of the world and of the body. And for these causes
good Jesus / thou would be wounded, first in the head: that thou might cure all
our evil and perverse intencyons, thou would be wounded in thy hands: to heal
al our sinful and remiss operations In thy fete: to purge all our unclean and
worldly affeccyons, thou would be wounded in thy heart to cleanse all our evil
and vain cogitacyons. And also thou would be scourged and wounded in all thy
hole body: to amend all our carnal life and worldly conuersacyon. But
wherefore good Jesus would thou be left up on hight? Se^ de (...) C. xxx. C.
Herunto saint Austen answering says, that was: he because he would also purge
the air from the power of the deuyls, and from the infeccyon o^ our sins.
And in like manner he cleansed the earth: by his blood that ran from his body
unto the earth. Of this exaltacyon and lyftynge up Christ said before: Ioh. 12.
E.
Si exaltatus fuero a terra: omnia traham ad meipsum: If I be exalted or lyfted
up above the earth: I shall draw to me all things / that is all my elect and
chosen people, also he drew to him of all nacyons or of all kind of people.
who is he that hearing these things / will not have a sure hope and trust to
have remission and forgiveness of his sins, and that specially when he
reme^breth and beholds the desposicyon of Christ's body hyngynge upon the
cross / he has his head enclyned down ready to kiss the / his arms abroad
ready to half the / his hands open ready to give / his heart open to love the /
his fete nailed fast to abide and continue with the / his body all spread
abroad ready to give him self holly and all to gether to the.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson that we remembering the pains and
passion of our lord should be exalted from the earth, that is from erthly
affeccyons or worldly conversation at lest / for that time of our remembrance /
and though it be not given to all persons to be bodylye eleuate or lyfted up
from the earth / as ware Mary Magdalene / saint Austen mother called Monica /
saint Birgite / with diverse other: yet let us enforce our self with the grace
of god to be eleuate in mind, that so we may be drawn from the earth / up
to Christ hyngynge upon the cross, so that we may be of the noumber of them /
of whom he spoke / saying: Ioh. 12. E.
And I be exalted from the earth: I shall draw to me all my elect people.
And a man to conform him self to this article may of his devotion raise up
his heart and mind unto Christ / as if he saw him visibly hanging upon the
cross. Also he may sometime show that devotion: in the outward gesture and
behavior of his body / and pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be lefted up on the cross and so would be exalted
from the earth: make me I beseech the to be eleuate from all erthly affeccyons,
and to be conversant in mind in heuenlye things. Amen.

How.ii. thieves were crucified with Christ. The.liii. article.
THe.liii. article is the crucifyenge of.ii. thieves with Christ, which
without was done to his great rebuke and shame, Ome^. 84. Super John^
as saint Crisostom says. And also to make men believe that Christ was
culpable in such things as the Iues did accuse him in, and so worthily to
suffer death. O the wicked and cursed iniquity of the Iues in this deed, for
they crucified Christ as a thief, and with him as the euangeliste says: Luc.
23. E.
Crucifixerunt duos latrones: vnum a dextris: et alium a finistris: They
crucified.ii. thieves / one of the right hand of Christ and the other of his
left hand. This vilanye our lord suffered willing to be crucified with
thieves: to show that he suffered passion and death for sinners, and herin / was
fulfilled the saying of the prophet: Esa^. 53. D
Et cum sceleratis reputa^us est: He is accounted with thieves or reputed to be
as one of the wicked persons, he was rekened or accounted with wicked men in
his death: that by his resurreccyon he might reuyue and quicken them: as saint
Ambrose says* Super Luca^. cap. C. 2.
and so our lord was crucified bytwixt.ii. thieves as the capteyne and master
of them, and the worste or most mischeuous of them, and also that he seeing or
hearing their pains and heaviness: might be more troubled and vexed thereby in
his passion. By these.ii. thieves may be signified those persons that be
crucified with Christ for to do penance for their sins / in religion, and
that by prorofession made unto the same, but some of them utterly leave or
forsake their religion by apostasy, of whom is well veryfyed the sayng of
saint Paul: Nomen dei per vos blasphematur inter gentes: Rom^. 2. D.
The name and religion of god is blasphemed by such apostatays among the
worldly people, and that never so much as in these days / our lord amend it,
and these persons be noted by that the^e that hang of the left hand of
Christ and did blaspheme Christ. The other that keep their professyon / and
patiently bear their cross of penance / be signified by the other the^e that
hang on the right hand of Christ and confessed Christ and desired him of his
mercy.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn how we should be crucified with Christ bitwixt
two thieves. For as Jesus was crucified and.ii. thieves with him: so morally our
spirit noted by Christ: should be crucified bitwixt.ii. thieves yt is the
flesh and the world. The flesh is to be crucified: as the thief on the
right side. Gala. 5. D.
And herunto saint Paul says: Qui Christi sunt: carnem suam crucifixerunt cum
viciis: They that be very true christians have crucified and subdued their
flesh and sensuality with all vices. The world is to be crucified as the
thief on the left hand. And therefore saint Paul says: Gal. 6. D.
Nichi mundus crucifixus est: et ego mundo: The world is crucified to me and I
to the world. These thieves thus crucified in us: our spirit is crucified with
Christ in the myddle, Ibidem. cap. 2. D.
so that it may say with saint Paul: Christo confixus sum cruci: viuo
autem: iam non ego: viuit vero in me Christus: I am crucified with Christ / I
live not now with mine own life: for Christ lives in me: and in his life I do
live. And here note that the left thief was crucified: but not saved / for he
continued in his infidelity. So the world though he be crucified: yet he is
not saved: for he remains in his misery and wretchedness. The flesh is
crucified and saved with the spirit, for after the general resurreccyon: it
shall be glorified with the soul. Luc. 23. F.
And therefore Christ said to the right thief: Hodie mecum eris in paradiso:
This day thou shall be with me in glory. And farthermore note here that the
cross whereupon our flesh is crucified: is the rigor of discipline or
sharpnes of penance, and this cross has.iiii. branches or parts, that is:
watch / abstinence / hard or sharp wearynge clothes / and sharp or
rebukynge words. The cross upon the which the world is crucified: is the
poverty of spirit, and this cross has also.iiii. arms: that is the
contempt of worldly glory / the contempt of money / of our country / and of
our kynsfolke. The cross of the spirit: is the fervor of devotion / and
his.iiii. arms / be these hope / fear / love and sorrow, hope is the part
that is upward, fear is downwarde, love: of the right side, and sorrow: of
the left part, the root whereof all these do spring: is charity. And
herunto says the apostle: Ephesians. 3. D
In caritate radicati vt possitis comprehendere, etc. Be ye founded in charity
/ that ye may comprehend and clearly se with all saints what is the length /
the bread the hyghte and the depenes. In these words (as saint Austen says
and also the gloss ordinarye is plainly expressed the figure of the cross and
the mystery thereof. In libro devide^do deo ad paul^^a^ cap. 13.
And a man to conform him self to this article: should often remember how
Christ did hyng bitwixt.ii. thieves, Glosa ordinaria super Ephesians. 3.
and remember therewith this lesson and pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me a wretch would be crucified bitwyxt ii. thieves and would
be reputed as one of them: grant that my spirit may be crucified bitwixt the
flessh and the world, that I may rest quietely in the in the middle, the
extremes that is the flesh and the world crucified to me. Amen.

How the saugiours divided Christ's garments. The.liiii. article.
THe.liiii. article is the division of Christ's garments, for when the
saugiours had crucified Christ: they took his garments and divided them in
to.iiii. parts, to every saugiour one part, for there were iiii. hangmen, and
besides those.iiii. parts Christ had an other cote that was hole vnsewed or
without any seame, for it was wouen or knytte. Ioh. 19. E.
Of this cote the saugiours or hang men said Non scindamus eam: sed sottiamur
de ea cuius sit: We will not cut this cote: but cast lottes who shall have it,
and herin was fulfilled the scripture which says: Psalm. 21.
Diuiserunt sibi vestimenta mea: et super vestem meam miserunt sortem: The
hangmen divided to them self my garments, and they cast lottes upon my
garment. This was a great abiection and vilanie to Christ as Crisostom says,
Super John^ Ome^. 84.
for they did not so to the thieves. This thing is only done to vile / abiecte
and condemned persons that have nothing but his garments. Tho^s in cathena
super Mar. 15.
And Theophylus says: they did this to the rebuke and shame of Christ, and of
a wantones as if they should say scornfully / because he called him self a
king we will have iche one of us, some of his royal or kings roobes. O
marvelous pacyence and dispensacyon of the mercy of Christ which is the very
lamb of god, a sheep or a lamb does both feed and cloth them, that clyp him
and sley him, he feades them with his flesh and body, and clotheth them with
his flees. So our true lamb Jesus Christ did cloth those saugiours with his
garments, and also he feades us daily in the sacrament of the altar with his
precious body flesh and blood.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may note that charity (which after saint Austen is
signified by the cote without seames) can not be divided, and yet that same
charity does knytte virtues together. And also by that same cote is signified
one holy catholical and universal church which gathers all faithful
people in to one faith / which church and faith: No man ought to deuyde by any
scisme or heresye. Of this church speaks the spouse in his canticles: Cant.
6. C.
Vna est columba mea: vna est perfecta mea: My douue (that is my spousesse
simple as the douue) is one / my perfect spousesse is but one / and so their
is but one church / as their is but one god / one faith / and one baptism.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would have thy garments divided among thy crucifiers /
and would have them cast lottes for thy vnsewed cote that was wouen or knyt and
without seames: grant to me to take part with thy saints and to follow their
examples in the keeping of thy commandments / and that I may ever keape thy
charity in me. Amen.

Of the writynge of the title above Christ's head. The.lv. article.
THe.lv. article / is the superscription or writing of the title, for Pylate
at the desire of the Iues wrote a title expressing the cause of Christ's death
and this was it: Ioh. 19. D.
Jesus nazarenus rex iudeorum: Jesus of Nazareth king of the Iues / as if he
should say / Jesus of Nazareth was crucified: because he is the king of the
Iues. And this title was written thus to separate the cause of his death / from
the causes of the other.ii. that were crucified with him, and that for their
evil deeds and life. The Iues intended by this title (as Theophilus says)
scornfully to rebuke the person of Christ which (as they said) made him self a
king so that the people passing by and redynge this title / should have no
compassion upon him: Tho^s in cathena super Lu 23. and super Mat. 15.
but rather rebuke him as a tyrante / that would have usurped the kingdom. But
Pylate wrote not as they would have had him to write / that is: that he made
him self the king of Iues, but he wrote plainly / that Jesus is the king of
Iues. Super Mat. 27.
And herunto saint Hierome says: the Iues of envy and to scorn Christ / did
speak for the writyng^of the title: but the virtue and secreate power of god
did order it otherwise in the heart of Pylate, though he were ignorant and
wy^t not what he did (as the gloss says) For it was god that procured such a
title to be put above Christ's heed / that thereby the Iues might know that
Jesus was their king / and that they culd not avoid though they slew him for
that purpose yt they would not know him for their king, De lita super John^.
19.
that notwithstanding it appeared by the title that he was their king, Beda.
Super Mar. 15.
for his kingdom or dignity was not lost or hyndred by the death of the cross:
but rather confirmed / stablysshed and the more strengthed as Bede says:
Super Luca^. libro. 6. cap. x C.
Also by this title Pylate commended Christ in.iii. things / though Pylate
did not so intend, for the death of Christ was first the cause of the
remission of our sins, and that is noted in this word Jesus a savior.
Secondly the death of Christ is the cause meritorious of our grace that we have
and that is noted in this word Nazarenus, that is as much to say as
florisshynge, for by grace we florisshe in all virtues. Thyrdly by the death of
Christ we be made enheritours of the kingdom of god noted in these words:
Rex iudeorum: The king of Iues that is of all faithful people that truly
confess god / and by this king we all shall be kings in glory. And when many
of the Iues had red this title / and perceived that it was to their infamy and
sclaunder: Ioh. 19. D.
said to Pylate, Noli scribere: r^x iudeorum: sed quia ipse dixit: rex sum
iudeorum: write not thus, the king of Iues: but that he said: I am the king of
the Iues then Pylate said: Quod scripsi scripsi: That I have written: I have
written, as if he should say: It is true that I have written / and therefore I will
not change it / I will not corrupt the truth though ye love falshed. And
though Pylate spoke thus not knowing the truth that he said, yet that same
was prophesied before by the prophet David in the lvii. psalm, Iuxta.lxx.
interpretes
which speaks of the passion of Christ and diverse other before, which have
this title or inscription: Ne corrumpas tituli inscriptionem: Destroy not or
change not the inscription of the title. And therefore saint Gregory says,
this title was immutable, not for that Pylate wrote it: but for that the truth
said: I am the king of Iues: that is of the faithful people and of such as
confess and knowledge god to be their lord.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn that when so ever we be inpugned or troubled by
the devil: let us fly to this title and lay it against him, that is: Jesus
nazarenus rex iudeorum: Jesus of Nazareth king of the Iues which is called
the title of tryumphe or victory / for it manifestlye expressethe the victory
of Christ that he had against the devil. And therefore the devil perceiving
this title fyxed upon the cross: moved the Iues to require of Pylate that it
might be changed / but Pylate would not as we said before. And among all the
acts of the passion of Christ: the devil most abhors and fereth this
victorious title* as the devil showed and confessed to a certain devout
person by compulsyon in a certain visyon.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would be diffamed scornfully with the superscripcyon of
the victorious title: grant to me that I may strongly life and teyght under
the banner and victorious title: Jesus nazarenus rex iudeorum: That my ghostlye
enemies afraid by the sight or hearing thereof: should not darre to come nyghe
unto me. Amen.

The illusyon and mocking of Christ crucified. The.lvi. article.
THe.lvi. article is the mocking of Christ crucified: and here note that
Christ was.viii. times mocked on good friday. First was in the house of
Cayphas.^ Second in the house of Herod. Third in the motehall of Pylate. And
the other v. was when Christ was upon the cross, the first of them and
the.iiii. in order was in the superscription of the title: of yt which we spoke
in the last article, an other was done of the men that passed by / there as
Christ was hyngynge upon the cross. The third was done by the princes /
scribes and seniours of the Iues. The.iiii. was done by the saugiours, and of
these.iii. last: we shall speak in this present article. Of the first of
these.iii. which is the.v. Mat. 27. E
in order: the evangelist says: Pretereuntes blasphemabant eum: The people
that passed by that way did blaspheme Christ, Libro. xiii.
and this they did for.iii. causes, as says Simon de Cassia. First for their
blyndnes and ignorance or want of knowledge of the truth, and no meruell though
they that passed by / did blaspheme him, for they did not tarry or abide to se
and know the invisible truth, so the Iues do pass by / and do not abide in
the knowledge or searchynge of the scripture that therein they might find and
know Christ, though Christ said to them: Ioh. 5. E.
Scrutamini scripturas: Search your scriptures, for they bear witness of me.
Secondly this was done and spoken to show their inco^stancy or instabilitie in
good works, for they passing by: do leave or do not continue in good works
before god / as in meditacyon / prayers / works of charity for the pure love
of god, and so they pray not to god that he would lyghten their understanding /
that they might find the founten of truth, and though for a little time they
pray: yet they do not continue / for they be pretereuntes / that is passing by
and not abiding in any goodness. And thyrdly they show herby that they receive
not the prophet of his redemption, for they pass by him whom they have
crucified, so that another they have compassyon of Christ's pains and passion,
nor yet will take part of the fruit of our redemption which we have by
Christ's passion for they abide not with him / but pass by mouyng or shaking
their heads upon him as if they had the palsy or trimblynge in their members.
These.ii. last causes do morally toche those christians that will not give them
to prayer and to good works, whereby they might obtain the knowledge and the
love of god, and also those that will not remember the passion of Christ and
therefore leese the fruit thereof, for they pass by without fruit / mouynge
their heads and saying: Mat. 27. E
Vah qui destruis te^plum dei et in triduo reedificas illud: salua temetipsum:
Vah is an interiection of displeasur or of derisyon and vpbraydynge, as they
might say: A straw for the that will destroy the temple / and in three days
build it again, these folisshe people used or spoke the same words that
those false witness spoke before in Cayphas house. Artic^^. 13.
O said they scornynge Christ, if thou could do that (that is destroy the
temple and build it again in.iii. days) why doste not thou save thy self /
if thou be the son of god descend from the cross and save thy self. And
not only those that passed by did thus blaspheme Christ: but also the princes
of the prestes mocking him Alios saluos ^ecit: seipsum non potest saluum
facere: Mat. 27. E
And this is the second illusion of this article / and the.vi. in order, these
princes and seniours said / he saved other: but he can not save him self. And
in these words (as saint Bid says) they confess (though they did not so
intend) that Christ saved other, Super Mar. 15.
and so their own sentence condemned them, for if he saved other: he might
also have saved him self if it had pleased him. The seniours said farther Si
rex israel est: descendat nunc de cruce: et credimus ei: If he be the king of
Israel let him descend from the cross where as he is fast nailed / and then
we will believe to him. To these folisshe and blasphemous words (as holy pope
Leo says) all the elements and in a manner all creatures make answer and with
one sentence condemn you, Ser de passio^e domini
for heaven / earth / the son / the moon / the sterres declaryng you to be
unworthy their ministry and service do show to all the world your malicyous
blyndnes that would not know your creator and king, and that they showed (I
say) by a terrible and ferefull erthquayke, and by the eclipse of the son
contrary to the order of nature, and with many other merueyles as we shall
show herafter in the third part. In pri^cipio
Morouer the scribes said: Si filius dei es: descend de cruce: If thou be the
son of god descend from the cross. I say to you / ye should have said thus
because thou art the son of god: therefore thou will not descend from the
cross / for thou was incarnate and took our nature, for that thou would be
crucified and suffer death for us, for no pro^et it should have been to us to be
borne: except also we had been redeemed (Ye sayd^) Mat. 27. E
If he be the king of Israel: let him descend and we will believe to him. Ye
lie: ye thought not as ye said. And herunto saint Gregory says. O folysshe
blind companey of priests and learned men, was it impossible to him to
descend from a little or law tree: which descended from the heyght of
heuens / or from above them? May those nails hold him fast whom the heuyns
could not hold? he came not to deliver him self for he was not under any
bondage: but of his own fre will: to deliver us from bondage. Also by their
words ye may perceive whose chyldern they be, for they follow the voice of
their father the devil / he said: Math. 4. A
Si filius dei es mitte te deorsum: If thou be the son of god: cast thy self
down, the Iues do say: If thou be the son of god descend from the cross,
he rose from his sepulcre or grave which was much more than to descend from
the cross, why did not they then believe in him, but ye may perceive they
thought not as they said. Not only they did mock Christ: but also the
saugiours did mock Christ / saying: Luc. 23. F.
Si tu es rex iudeorum saluum te ^ac: If thou be the king of the Iues: save
thy self. And this is the third rebube of this article / and the.vii. in
order. But this suffer any wrong: they be not moved to wrath: but rather to
prayer. As so was our most mylde savior Jesus, which then spoke his first
word, that he spoke upon the cross, and that was this: Luc. 23. E.
Pater ignosce illis: quia nesciunt quid faciunt. Father / forgive them, for
they know not what they do. In this prayer we be taught to hear shortelye
such persons as ask any thing of us, also to remitte the injuries and
wrongs done to us, and to desire no vengeance, and also to love our enemies
and pray for them. who has so hard a heart that will not melte and be made
soft at this prayer of Christ, as the prophet says: Psalm. 94.
Hodie si vocem eius audieritis nolite obdurare corda ves tra: If ye here this
day the voice of god: suffer not your hertes to be indurate or obstinate. Our
lord said: Father forgive them: for they know not what they do, for they do
much good and profytte to me, and great hurt and evil to them self. And
truly so it is: For he that does wrong or evil unto an other man: he
knowethe not what sin and pain he gets to him self, and what grace and
glory he opteyneth to the person that pacyentlye and gladlye suffrethe
wrong. Or else they do not know what they do, for they know not that I am the
son of god, they know that they crucifye one: but whom they crucifye:
Super. Luca^ capi. x C.
they know not. And here says saint Bid, that Christ did not pray for
them that knew him to be the son of god, and of malice / pride / and envy
/ did crucifye him: but he prayed for them, which having a goodde zele of
the law of almyghtye god / thowghe it were not well ordered, did not know what
they did. For there ware sum simple and also unlearned persons, deceived by
the priests of the Iuwes, the which persewed Christ of a zele that they
had to the same law, and for thyese he did pray, And that same prayer was
not in vain, For in one day after the ascencyon of our sauyoure Christ
there ware converted of them three thowsande. Actuu^. 2. G et. 4. A.
and in an other day, five thowsande. And no dowte that was by the virtue of
this prayer of our lord Jesus Christ, Esae. 53. D
as the ordinarye gloss says upon this text of Esaie: Et pro
transgressoribus orauit: He did pray for his enemies and transgressoures of
his law. O how sweet a melodye was bytwixte the prayer of our lord Jesus
Christ, and the knocking or smiting in of the nails in to his hands and
fete, through the which armony so many thowsandes ware converted to Christ?
And that was no meruell, for Christ keeping so great myldnes and meakenes in
his contumelyes and rebukes / having so great pacyence in his torments, and
also showing so great benignity and charity to his crucifyers: did evidently
declare him self to be the son of god the father to whom he prayed for his
crucifyers, what miracle can be more then this charitable pitye.

A Contemplation of this prayer of Christ. Pater ignosce illis: Father forgive
them.
THis prayer was a word of great pacyence / a sign of great love and
unspeakable goodness / of great swetenes and forgyuenes. In this prayer do
apere three acts or works of charity. First for that he prayed most
affectuouslye for his crucifyers. Second, for to his prayer he added and put
to tears / for he wept. Third he offered his prayers for them: with great
sheddynge of tears / and also a mighty or great voice or cry. Of this prayer
saint Bernarde says: In ser* fer^. 4. ebdo pen^
Christ scourged with whippes / crowned with thorns / crucified and nailed
with great gross nails / filled with rebukes / forgetting all these sorrows
/ said: Father forgive them. From this charitable lord comes great mercy to
our bodies and much more to our souls. O good Jesus how much is thy mercy
stablysshed upon wicked men. And how great is the multitude of the swetenes
of thy mercy, for thou shalt make us that fervently desire the to drink of
the plentuous river of thy swetenes and pleasure. Also the same saint Bernarde
says: In serm^ de passion^ dn^i.
who and of what kind is that person which in all his tribulations and
torments would not ones open his mouth to complain or to excuse him self /
to threat or to curse his cruel adversaries? and above all this: at last he
opened his mouth and spoke for his enemies a blessed word / such a word as
has not ben hard from the beginning of the world, that is: Father forgive
them. O my soul haste thou ever seen any man so myld / so pacyent / so
charytable? Consider what quietness pacyence and charity was hyd in that most
sweet breast and heart he would not show his injuries / he regarded not his
pains he would not speak of his rebukes: but he had compassyon of them: of
whom he suffered these things / he cured them that wounded him, he procured
life for them that slew him / and said Father forgive them. O my soul hyde or
put up this most sweet word of Christ in the treasor of thy heart, that as o^te
as thy enemies be cruel against the: thou may remember the abundance of this
swetenes of blessed Jesus, and so to lay or put this word and prayer of Jesus as
a shield for thy defense against the assaults of thine enemies, thy spouse and
lord Jesus does pray for his crucifyers: shall not thou pray for thy
detractours? let us yet repete this prayer, father (says Jesus) forgive them.
what name is this father? It is a name of natural love. Chylderne when they
would have any thing or greatly desire a thing / they be wont to name their
father, to reduce unto his mind the natural love that fathers have unto their
chylderne, that thereby they might the more shortly have their desire. So our
savior Jesus / pitious and merciful / pacyence and of much compassion / good
and loving to all persons / though he knew that he was ever hard in his
peticyons to his father: yet to show unto us with how great affection and
desire we should pray for our enemies: in his prayer he put that name of love /
Father, as if he should say: I beseech the for thy fatherly love: in which
love we be one, to here my prayer and to forgive them that crucifye me. Know
the love of thy son: that thou may forgive mine enemies. Super Mat. 27.
Also saint Hierome says: Al these illusyons and scorns or mockynges ware
done to Christ by the mocyon of the deules / which an one as Christ was
crucified they began to perceive and feel the virtue of the cross / and so
thought that they should lose their great power, and therefore they labored
instantelye: that Christ should descend down from the cross. But Jesus
knowing their falshed and craft: would continue upon the cross unto his
death, that thereby he might destroy death and subdue the devil. O most
gentle Jesus / how great was here thy pacyence.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn / that when we be in deep contemplation: in good
operation or else in religion / we should not descend or leave them / for any
rebukynges / mockynges / or scornynges of any persons, but continue and
pacyently bear such despysynges for the love of Christ: as Christ for our
love did pacyently bear all the foresaid rebukes, and for our example would not
descend from the cross: but there continued unto his death, Iudic. 9. B
and this was figured in the book of judges. where as the vine tree said unto
the other trees (that would have had the vine to come to them and to have been
their king: Nunquid possum de serere vinum meum quod letificat deum et
homines. etc. It is convenient for me to forsake my wine that conforteth both
god and men, and come to you to be your king? Nay I will not. In like manner
said the olyue tree and the fig tree. So our very true vine tree (that says)
Ego sum vitis vera: Ioh. 15. A.
I am a true vine tree, would not leave the fruit of his passion that gladdeth
both god / angel and man, and come of the cross to be promoted among ye Iues.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me crucified would be mocked and despised with many
rebukefull words and yet would so charitably pray for thy crucifiers: make me
that I never descend from my religyon or any good work, for no suggestion of
the devil or despysynges of man, but that I may continually persevere in thy
love / and that I may for thy love forgive all them that do or say any evil
to me or against me, and that I may evermore pray hertely for them. Amen.

How the thief of the left hand rebuked Christ. The.lvii. article.
THe.lvii. article is the rebukynge that the thief spoke to Christ, for one of
the thieves that were hanged with Christ / that is he on the left side of
Christ, began to rebuke Christ sayng: Luce. 23. F.
Si tu es xp^s salua temetipsum et nos. If thou be Christ the son of god:
save thy self and also us. This was the.viii. mocking of the which we spoke
in the last article, and this was more rebuke to Christ than the other three
declared in the last article, because so vile a person, wretched and
condemned to death and furthwith should suffer death for his own sins and
myslyuynge, would thus so shamefully rebuke the auctor of life. And therefore
this rebuke is conveniently made a special article. But the other thief hering
him speak so loudly: did sharply blame him saying: Luc. 23. F.
Neque tu times deum qui in eadem dampnatione es. etc. Do not thou fear god
/ that art condemned to death as well as he is, and we be worthily and iustlye
condemned to death, for we suffer worthy pains for our sins: but he never
did evil. Ser. C. xx. de tempore.
Of this saying saint Austen merueylynge says: who taught this thief to say
thus: but he the son of god that hang by him / Christ was hanged nyghe to
this thief: but he was more nyghe in his heart, Ibidem.
and therefore he turned him self to Jesus and said: Memento mei domine dum
veneris in regnum tuum: Remember me lord when thou shalt come in to thy
kingdom, and then Jesus spoke his second word upon the cross sayng: Amen
dico tibi: Hodie mecum eris in paradiso: Truly I say to the: this day thou
shalt be with me in my glory. This confortable promise Christ made unto the
thief, to rejoice of the triumph and victory that Christ should have against
the devil. Tho^s in cathen^ super luce. cap^. 23.
And herunto Theophilus says: As a victorious king retournynge from his
triumph: does bring with him the best of such prey and goods as he has
gotten of his enemies: so Christ ouercommynge the devil: did spoil him of
his best preys, and one of them / that is / this thief he brought with him
unto paradise: that is to the vision and fruition of god / which fruition the
holy fathers being in Lymbo patrum / had: what time the soul of Christ
descended to them after his death / for then they did se the godhed of Christ,
which was never separate from the soul: after that it was first joined
thereunto. Here thou soul behold how liberal / yea how prodigal Christ
was here, for he gave his kingdom to a thief / heaven to one that was hanged
upon a cross, and paradise to one condemned to death, and that at one short
or little peticyon. Also the liberality of god did give to him more then he
asked / and so is he commonly wont to do. And herin all sinners have an example
to trust in god / and to forsake their sins, seeing that the thief so breuelye
and shortly had forgyuenes of his sins, for surely his grace is more ready
then our desire or prayer. O good lord thou did say unto the thief: This day
thou shalt be with me in paradise, and that was to put disparacyon from our
hertes, thou forgave the thief: to show to us the fruit of penance / the
fountain of mercy / and the celeritie or speed of forgyuenes. Thou the
phisitien of our souls, did save the thief accusynge him self and accusyng
the, calling for mercy and rebukyng his fellow that blasphemed the wherefore
thou penitent sinner / consider what Christ rysynge from death and reignynge in
glory may give unto the: which gave so great gifts being mortal and going
to his death? If he in that extreme captivity and thraldom of death / did give
so large rewards: what shall he give: being in most high liberty of
pleasure and glory? And to show that he would do in deed that he promised: he
confirmed it with an oath sayng: Amen. truly. O what virtue and swetenes had
this flower or word of Christ.

A contemplation of this second word spoken by Christ upon the cross. Amen
dico tibi. etc.
THis most confortable word of our most sweet savior Jesus spoken unto the
thief, that is truly this day thou shalt be with me in paradise / was of that
virtue / that thereby the thief was forthwith of an enemy: made a friend / a
familier or neighbor: of a stranger, where before he was a thief: he was now
made an holy confessor of Christ. who is he that will dispeyre of so pitious
and a gracyous heart, so swifte a promiser / and so prompte or ready a gyuer. O
good lord we trust in the that know thy name Jesus, for thou do not forsake
them that trust in the and labor for thy grace. wherefore a most benign Jesus /
we com to the sitting in the trone of thy majesty / with as good a mind as
we can, humbly besechynge the that we may be brought in to the / and by the /
unto that glory, to the which thou brought in that thief that confessed the
upon the cross. But thou sinner / differ not thy conversion and penance unto
the hour of death / trusting then to opteyne heaven as this thief did, for
though it be a good and wholesome counsel at all times to trust in the great
mercy of god: yet that a man should only trust thereof and not to be sorry for
his sins and labor to amend him self by penance: it is a great folysshnes
and a presumption, for god is not only merciful: but also just and
rightuous. And though this good thief and some other persons have had
forgyunes of their sins at their last end: yet I say to you that the
preuilege of a few persons: makes no comen law. And surely there be very
few that be truly penitent at their death, when their life has been
continuallye evil before, for as it were a monstrous and merueylous thing to
se a wulfe have a shepes tail: so it is seldom seen that an evil life has a
good and holy end. But of this holy thief, we read that he had.iiii.
things, for the which he opteyned mercy of god. The first was that he
rebuked his fellow that blasphemed Christ saying: Luc. 23. F.
Neque tu times deum: Nor thou do fear god. The second is that he accused
him self saying we be worthily punisshed for our sins. Third / he excused
Christ saying: This just and good man never did evil, forth: he asked
forgyuenes / saying: Remember me good lord when thou shall come into thy
kingdom. Of this thief also saint Gregory says: Li. 18. moraliu^. ca 25. B
There was no thing in this thief, at his own liberty: but only his tongue
and his heart. And he (by ye inspiration of god) offered to god all that he had
in his liberty and power to give, yt was his heart / wherewith de did believe
faithfully in god to his own justification. and his mouth: wherewith he did
confess Christ to be god by the same faith, and that was to his eternal
health. He had faith: for he believed that Christ should reign in glory as god*
he had hope: for he trusted and desired or asked to come to the same glory. He
had charity to god for he defended and magnified Christ the son of god, he
had charity to man: for he rebuked his fellow for his iniquity and
blasphemye. And also he procured grace and life eternal for him self. where
shall we find one that thus does profit at the end of his life. Behold here
the great faith of this thief / which did believe Christ to be god and to
reign eternally: whom he se there dye so shamefully and miserably. Ser. C.
xxx de tempore. I^ ser. Cxx.
And herunto saint Austen says: This holy thief had a great faith, for another
for fear of the Iues or saugiours there standing, nor for his own grievous
pains / nor for the blasphemye of the other thief / nor for the departing of
the apostles from Christ, or the denyenge of Peter, nor yet for that it seamed
to all men that Christ was a frail and disparate person not able to help him
self for all these things (I say) he would not let to confess the truth and
so to declare his faith, and therefore he had not only the remissyon of his
sins: but also of al pains due for his sins, for as it appeared: he was
more sorry of the pain and passion of Christ: than of his own passion, which
he knew that he had deserved. wherefore I would that every sinner would do as
that good thief did, that is: to know him self charitably to correct his
neighbor, to ask forgyuenes of god, and by his faithful prayers to opteine
everlasting health. O thou old Adam return sometime to thine own heart / and
consider how the new Adam Christ did search for the, and where he found the
that is upon the cross. who was this these but Adam, not now a thief: but an
holy martyr and confessor of Christ / which turned the necessity of his
death into good will and virtue, he changed his pain in to glory / his
cross and death into triumph and victory wherefore thou sinful soul: now
areyse up thy self in to hope and trust of forgyuenes, if so be that thou
will labor to follow the steps and example of thy lord that suffered for
the.

Here follow.iii. Lessons.
IN this article we may learn.iii. lessons: First is to bear Ser. C. xxx de
tempore.
which for one word: was made the enheritoure of paradise, as saint Austen
says.

A prayer.
O Jesus which form would be scornfully rebuked of one thief and of the other
would be honorablye confessed to be god: make me for the glory of thy name to
suffer pacyently the rebukes of evil persons when need requires, and never to
suffer thy injuries, and also to possess the joys of paradise with this holy
thief. Amen.

Of the passion that Christ had upon his mothers sorrow and heaviness The.lviii.
article.
THe.lviii. article is the compassyon of his mothers sorrow. For when Jesus
being upon the cross: se his mother standing by the cross in great sorrow:
he had great heaviness thereof, he se his mother (I say) a mother / a virgin
singular above all other mothers / a meake mother loving her son, above the
love of all other mothers to their sons, and no meruell for she was the
mother of god / of the only son of god, and therefore she had more sorrow for
the passion of her son: than all other mothers can have for their sons, for
at his passion / the sword of sorrow did run through the soul of that most
blessed virgyne and mother. O holy virgin what vehemence of compassion and
sorrow did almighty god lay upon the and so oppress the with heaviness, he made
the joyful and delivered the from all anguysshe and sorrow at the virgynall
chyldynge or birth of thy most sweet son Jesus: but now he paid the for
both / for now he put upon the all the thrawes and sorrows of a woman
trauelynge with child. And when thou did bring forth thy son / god and man:
thou had great joy, but now when the blessed fruit of thy womb was in thy
sight / crucified and slain: then was thy sorrow fare above all the pains and
sorrows of a woman chyldynge. In so much that thou might well say that old
Noemy said: Ruth. 1. D.
Nolite me vocare Noemi: sed Mara, quia amaritudine valde me repleuit
omnipotens. Call not me Noemy / that is fair and pleasant: but call me Mara /
that is bittter or sorrowful: for almyghtye god has fulfilled me with
bitterness and sorrow. For this blessed virgyne and mother of god, considering
and depely weaynge in her heart all the pains and passion of her son Christ
/ morned with him morning, sorowed with him sorowyng, she stood nyghe unto the
cross, that he might be all hole fixed to her in her heart that was fixed for
her upon the cross. This sorrowful and loving mother when Christ did se: he
was moved with great compassion upon her, she had compassyon of his passion /
and he again had more sorrow for compassion of her sorrow. So blessed lady thy
son shot at the the same arowe or darte of love: that thou did shote at
him, and therefore he says in his canticles: Cant. 4. C.
Vulnerasti cor meu^ soror mea in vno contuitu oculorum tuorum: Thou have
wounded my heart: O my sister / my spouse / my daughter and my mother / thou
haste wounded my heart in the sight of thine eyes. And she in like manner might
say the same to her son. Christ knew well the great sorrows of his mothers
heart, he knew the heuines of her soul, and those sorrows which she felt not
at his birth: they were now doubled to her in his passion and death, for her
son in like manner suffered double sorrow upon the cross / that is: for his
own passion and also for compassion of his mother. And this sorrow for his
mother: was not his lest sorrow, and therefore conveniently it is assigned as a
special article of the passion of Christ, for the compassion of his mother
did greatly increase the pains of his wounds and passion, whom he did se
stand nigh the cross with a most sorrowful, with weapynge eyes / great
abundance of tears flowynge from her eyes / with a most heavy countenance /
with a lamentable voice and in all the powers and strengthes of her body:
fayntynge for great sorrow and heaviness. Yet for all these panges: he se her
stand constantlye and perseuerantlye / and also strongly like a man never
flyenge from him. O how often (suppose you) did that blyssed vyrgyne sighe and
sobbe / saying in her self. O my son Jesus: who may grant to me that
favor that I might dye for the / or with the. O my sweet son Jesus. etc. as
ye shall se herafter in the.lxiiii. article. O how often (think you) did she
lift up her virginal and shamefaste eyes unto those cruel wounds of her
son, if at any time she withdrewe them from the sight of those wounds, or
else if she might behold them for her continual weapynge. O how often times
(believe you) might she have swoned for the vehemence of her sorrows / for she
suffered more cruel sorrows and panges: than the panges of death, and so she
living: continuallye was in dyenge / and yet could not dye, for she was
preserved by her son that she should not dye for his death. And thus Christ
when he se his mother and his disciple whom he loved standing / that is:
Johan the evangelist, commended or assigned his mother to his disciple Johan
saying his third that he spoke upon the cross: Ioh. 19. E.
Mulier ecce filius tuus: woman behold there thy son. who may hear Christ
speak these words without weapynge. He did not name her or call her mother:
for that should have much more greuouslye tormented her, after this Christ
said to his disciple Johan: Ecce matter tua: Behold there thy mother. And when
he spoke these few words: both those.ii. derbeloued / that is: Marie and
Johan weep full bitterly / those.ii. holy martirs kept silence / for their
sorrow was so great that they could not speak. And from that hour forward:
this disciple Johan took Marie as his mother: or else he took her in to his cure
and diligence / to provide for her in all things as for his mother. This
third word or sentence of Christ: Mulier ecce filius tuus: woman behold thy
son (this I say) was a word of great dilygence / love and pity, for as
much as Christ being in so great anguisshe and sorrows of death / would yet
remember his most heavy and sorrowful mother, and provide her of a son or
minyster to attend upon her to her comforth. And herin he taught us to have
compassyon of the afflyccyon of our parents / and to provide for them in their
necessities. O sweet lord Jesus thy cross and passion does torment the
grievously / but the compassyon of the mothers sorrow, is no less pain to the,
and no meruell / O good child if thou sorrow / if thou suffer and have
compassyon of the heaviness of thy mother, of her separation from the, of her
commendation to a stranger. In meditationibus vite x^i cap. 79.
And here doctors done say / and specially Bonauenture: that the sorrow that
Christ had in the compassyon of his mother / was more intense and more grievous
to him: then the sorrow of his own pain and passion.

THe mother of Jesus stood by the cross / She stood for she never fell by sin
/ she stood to the great glory and praise of al women, where as his discyples
that should have been men of gostly strength and virtue / did fly away and
leave their master alone. She only abode with him constantly in all his
grievous panges and pains / wherein was fulfilled the prophecy of Esaye saying
in the person of Christ complaining. Esae. 63. A.
Torcular calcaui solus et de gentibus non est vir mecum: I only have trodden
in the prease of the cross / and there was not one man with me having
compassyon upon me, but my mother alone she had compassyon and stood by me. And
not only she stood because she did not fly / but also for that in so great
heaviness of heart she did nothing vnseamyngly or vnreligyously but ordered her
self in most godly behauour without any misorder in cryenge or cursynge and
such other like / though she suffered in her heart all those pains that her
son Jesus suffered in his body outwardlye. And (as we said before) here she
felt and suffered all the panges that she escaped at the birth of her son
Jesus. Of these.ii. birthes or chyldynges speaks the prophet saying: Esae.
66. C
Antequam parturierat: peperit masculum: Before Mary the mother of Jesus had
any panges or thrawes / she brought forth her son, so that she had her son
without sorrow, then it follows in the prophet: Nun quid parturiet terra vna
die: aut parietur gens simul? Shall the earth bring forth with pain all her
fruit in one day, or all the people shall be brought forth or borne in one day?
Note well these saynges. First the prophet spoke of the birth of Christ which
was without sorrow or pain to his mother and with great joy. But now at her
second chyldynge where as at the passion of her son Jesus she brought forth
all the elect chylderne of god at one birth, she had great panges and
manyfolde sorrows. And here note that this blessed mother of mercy did help or
assist the father of mercyes in this most high work of mercy, and so with
Christ did regenerate and redeem al mankind, and this generation was to the
great sorrow and pain of them both: and herunto Albert says though Marye did
bear her son Jesus in great joy and without all pain: yet after ward
when she did regenerate all the faithful people in faith that was with much
sorrow and of this it appears that Christ did communicate unto his mother this
high work of our redemption / for she suffered with him his passion in her
soul as we said before. And note me well here for I do not say that our
blessed lady did redeem us because Christ of him self was insufficient, for to
say so it ware heresye. But I say it pleased our savior Christ to have his
mother present at his passion / and there to suffer with him in soul as he
suffered in body, that so consequently as he is called the father of mercy: so
she might be honored and called the mother of mercy, and also for other
considerations as follows, First that our redemption might reanswere unto the
first condempnation, for in our first loss and perdicyon both Adam and Eve
did syn, notwithstanding, if Adam had not sinned we had not ben condemned,
and therefore the only sin of Adam was the cause of our perdicyon, but for
asmoche as Eve did persuade / move and counsel Adam to sin, therefore we say
that we ware dampened by our first mother Eve, so in like manner though we be
redeemed by the passion of Christ, yet for as much as our blessed lady was
consenting to that passion and also sufferyde it in her soul: we may say
that she redeemed us with Christ. Secondlye / that as Christ redemyng us by
his passion: was made our father, by the which passion / the sacrament of
baptysme / wherein we be regenerate / takes his efficacitie and virtue, so our
blessed lady might be called our mother because she suffered in her soul the
same passion of Christ. Thirdly that after Christ: we al should honor the
gloriouse virgyn as our modre. Fourthly for the increase of her merit. And
fifthly that ye passion of Christ should be more bitter and paynful to him
thorough the presence of his modre by whom he shows his most high charity
unto us. She stood also for all other departed from the stablenes of faith but
she only / and therefore it is said of her thus. O good lord thou haste
stablished thy testament upon the heed of Marie al way virgin, for after the
death of thy son thy faith only remained perfetely in the reason of the same
virgyn.

Of the sorrow and compassyon of our lady.
AS the great clerk Alberte says upon these words of Luke: Luc. 2. E.
Tuam ipsius animam pertransibit gladius. The sword of sorrow shall pass
through thyn own soul. It is the more true exposition and sentence when this
pronowne deriuatyue, tuam / is resolved in to his primityue, tui / so that this
is the true sentence of the foresaid words of Luke, the sword of sorrow / that
is: the pain of the passion and death of thy son (O vyrgyne Mary) which he
suffered in his body: shall perse and pass through the soul of thine own
self Marie. So that the sorrows which thou felt not at the birth of thy
son, so that thereby thou did not know thy self a mother: at his death thou
shall feel them in most paynfull and sorrowful manner, so that thou shalt
know thy self then to have had a child and to be a mother. Our savior Jesus
her son was to Marie his mother as her own heart, and therefore when he was
borne of her: she felt as if half her heart had been borne and departed from
her body. And as that thing which is half without and half within, if that
part that is outward be pricked or hurt: the part inward does feel the
pain as well as the outward part. And so when Jesus the son of the vyrgyn
was scourged and pricked with thorns, the herce of the glorious virgyn / was
in a manner also payned and pricked, and so in like manner when her son Jesus
was crucified and his heart persed with a spear: it seamed to her as if her
own heart had been persed with the same spear. And therefore god wroughte no
small miracle in that that the glorious virgyn his mother wounded inwardlye in
her soul with so many grievous and great sorrows did not yield up her spirit
and dye, and specyallye when she se her most dearebeloued son hanging
bytwixte two thieves / naked / wounded / scorned of all men / crucyfyed / and
dead, and then his heart persed with a spear: It was (I say) a great
miracle that she lived. Pri. Reg. 4. D.
For the wife of Phinees the son of Hely / the Judge of Israel hearing that
the ark of god was taken / she being great with child: sodaynlye fell to
traueyllynge. and for the great and vehement sorrow the which that she had
for the taking of the arche of god: she chylded and dyed, and yet her sorrows
and great pains ware no thing so vehement and so great as the sorrows of
the blessed virgyne Mary, nor ware to be compared to the sorrows of the mother
of Jesus / which did se the body of her son (signified by that arche)
crucified by his enemies / and so put to the most shameful death / which
vyrgyne also the same night after that her son was buried: going through the
city of Jerusalem / weapte so bitterlye and pitiouslye / that all both men
and women that se and herd her: ware provoked to sorrow and mourning. Also
that most increased her sorrows: that she did se him at his death, so bette
/ wounded / in great thyrste or dryness / and could not help him, and
namelye so cruellye racked upon the cross / there nailed / and after his death
his heart persed with a spear. These ware her sorrows / and above thyese she
was compelled to enter in to an other man's house, and there to continue in
sorrow and mourning. And so the mother of god / the queen of heaven / and the
lady of all the world was sustained with the alms and charity of other men.
But why would our lord suffer her to have all these tribulacyons? because he
intended to exalte her after her death above all creatures in glory, which
excellent / singular and inestimable gift, he would not give to her for the
merits of any other person (for the reward of glory / shall be given after a
man's own merytes and deservings, and not for any other man's merytes) And
therefore he would have his blessed mother subdued to hard lobours / paygnes /
and sorrows in her self, in the most high pouertye / in extreme vilytye and
despection / in the most profounde meekness / most pure chastytye / most
perfyte charity / and in other like virtues and pains, and specially in
sufferynge of pains and sorrows (that she might go by the same way / that
her dearebeloued son Jesus did.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn to have compassion of the afflyccyon of our
parents, and to provide for them in their necessityes accordynglye to the
commandment of god, Exodus xx. B
honor thy father and thy mother: and this our sweet sauyoure Christ taught
us by his example. Super John^ ^rac. C. xix.
And herunto saint Austen says: The tree of the cross upon the which the
me^bres of Christ ware nailed at his death, this tree (I say) was also a
chair wherein our doctoure and master Christ (...) and taught us. And a man
to conform him self to this article should have compassyon of the mother of
Christ, or as I may say: of his own dearbeloued lady and mother / our
blessed lady Marie, as Christ had compassyon on her, and then pray thus.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me crucified / having compassyon of thy mothers sorrow and
compassyon / would diligently commend her to thy dearbeloued disciple Johan,
and also commend him to her, I commend me unto the and also all mine in that
faith and love that thou commendeste them together: meakelye besechynge the,
that for the tenderness of so great love: thou would make me to come truly
and perfytely to thy love, and thoroughe their prayer and commendacyon I may
be preserved and kept from all aduersytye and peril, in the perils and
dangers of this world and life. Amen.

How the manhood of Christ compleyned him self to be forsaken of god
The.lix. article.
THe.lix. article is / when Christ said him self to be left and also
forsaken of god. Mat. 27. E
As the euangeliste says from the syxte hour of the day unto the neynth
hour, that is / from.xii. of the clock unto three at after none, there was a
great derkenes over all the earth, For the son was in an universal eclypse,
which was against the natural disposycyon and order of the son for that
time, and therefore it was done by miracle, and by the only power of god. Li.
3. de ^iuitate dei. ca. 15. B.
And hereunto saint Austen says for as much as the innocente lamb Christ
/ the true son of Justice did suffer the eclypse of death, therefore this
visible son / the most clear light of all the world, having compassyon of
his creatoure and maker: withdrewe the beams of his light and hyd him self /
as though he durst not or would not behold his maker hyngynge upon the
cross, nor se his most vile and bitter death. And then about the.ix. hour of
the day our savior Jesus cried with a great and loud voice. And that was (as
Simon de Cassia says) for he suffered great torments and pains. Libro. xiii.
Also for that he suffered great wrong and injury. He cried with a great
voice of the body / but that was more by the virtue and power of his godhed:
than of his manhed. He cried with a great voice for the great pains that he
suffered might not prevail against him: but at his own will. He cried with a
great voice that they might hear him and know him hyngynge upon the cross,
and at the point of death: whom they would not hear swetely and devoutly
preaching: but rather with a froward and obstinate mind ever despised him.
Jesus cried with a great voice and spoke his.iiii. word upon the cross saying:
Mat. 27. F
Heli heli lama hazastani: These be words of Hebrewe and thus they be spoken
in latin: Deus meus deus meus: vt quid dereliquisti me? My god my god: wherefore
haste thou left or forsaken me? These be not the words of the godhed of
Christ: for that suffered no pain it is impossible, as if the son beam should
shine upon a tree, and one person took an ax or hatchet and did kut that tree:
the son beam should in no thing be hurt thereby, and so in like manner
though the body and manhod of Christ suffered great pains and death: yet the
godhed therein was in nothing hurt / ne yet suffered any pain, but Christ spoke
thus for his manhod which then seamed to be forsaken of god / for it was
subdued to intolerable pains and most shameful death. Christ was left in
great pains / that thereby and for those pains we might be conforted of god.
It was done by a great miracle that the glory which was in the higher
porcyon of the soul of Christ / did not descend and redounde in to lawer
part of the soul: but was suspended and let: so that the lawer part
suffered all pains asmoche as is possible any creature to suffer without death,
for it was hollye left to it self without all comforthe, which was not in
the holy martirs in their martirdom and death, for the comforth that they had
in the higher porcyon of their soul: did redownde unto their senses, so that
their martyrdom and pains was no great pain to them, but with great joy
they suffered them, as it appears in the lives of saint Laurence / Vincente and
many other. But our sauyoure Jesus had none such consolation in his senses:
no help of any person, but all left to suffer what so ever was put to him,
and that to the extremity. And therefore he compleynethe him self to be
forsaken of god / which might not in deed be left of god / for the godhed
was ever joined both to the soul and also to the body: but this he spoke for
us / for he knew that many of his elect members should come to so great
tribulation: that it should seame to them that they were utterly forsaken of
god. Now blessed be our dearbeloued and most merciful savior Jesus, which
first in his own body for us / and now also in us and with us it pleases
him to suffer our tribulation: for the tribulation that we suffer for justice
and for god, he reputeth it as his own tribulation for he says: Psalm. xC.
Cum ipso sum in tribulatione: I am with the good person in his trouble, and
that is / that we should more surely and faithfully trust in him. This pain
when he said him self to be forsaken of god: was most grievous pain to him
above all the other, for without this leauyng: there should have been no pain,
for who so is consorted by god: there is no torment that can be paynfull to
him. Christ said twyes: My god, and that was to show the vehemence of his
sorrow both in soul and in body. And herunto saint Bonauenture says. He
cried with a great voice for he felt great sorrow / and specially for the
great unkindness of man, for though he suffered for all man kind: yet there were
very few present there that took fruit thereof at that time, as the thief that
hang on the right hand / and the glorious virgyne that was full heuye there
by the cross, so that our lord might well say: why have I so vaynly and with
out fruit subdued my self to so many great pains and to death? O blessed lady
what sorrow had thou when thou hard thy son cry so? He cried also with a
great voice / for the sin was great which was the cause of all that misery,
those pains and death. For as saint Ambrose says: He wept and sorowed for the
sin and misery of them: whose nature he had taken.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn how to have a recourse to our lord in all our
tribulations, and by our prayer complain and show to him our desolation /
that it would please him to behold our troubles and help us, for so our
savior Christ in his troubles and sorrows / cried unto god his father /
saying: My god my god why have thou forsaken me, Super psalm. 21.
which as the gloss ordinary says) was not only a compleynte: but also a
prayer, as it appears in the psalm of the which these words be taken / for
there it is said thus: Psa. 21 iu^^ lxx. in^pre^.
Deus deus meus respice in me quare. etc. O god my god behold me / why have
thou forsaken me. Also saint Paul speaking of the prayer of Christ: Hebr.
5. B.
seameth to speak of this prayer saying: Qui in diebus carnis sue preces cum
clamore valido et lacrimis offerens: exauditus est pro sua reuerentia: Our
savior Jesus in the days and time of his mortality offering prayers to his
father with a great cry and with tears: was hard for his reverence.

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ the son of the living god which at the.ix. hour of
the day for me most wretched hyngynge upon the cross / cried to thy father
with a great voice sayng: He li heli lamahazastani: That is: My god my god why
haste thou forsaken me: grant to me that in all my trouble and anguysshe I may
cry to the my lord god with the great voice of my heart that so thou never
suffer me to be reproved / as left and forsaken of thy mercy. Amen.

How they gave him to drink: vinegre or asell. The.lx. article.
THe.lx. article is the drinking of vinegar, for Jesus after all the foresaid
pains and labors being thurstye or dry (for then all that was written of
Christ in the law of Moses or in the prophets / ware fulfilled, except one
/ that was written in the psalm: Psalm. 68.
In siti mea potaueru^t me aceto: In my thyrste they gave to me vinegar to
drink) therefore Jesus to fulfill all the scripture: he said: I am dry. Not
so to be understand, that Jesus therefore was thirsty / and therefore they gave
to him vinegar to drink: because it was so written before by the prophet: but
because god knew long before / that Christ should be dry, and also that the
Iues or the saugiours should give him vinegar to drink, therefore our lord would
have it written by the prophet, and so in this thirst of Christ that scripture
was fulfilled, Johan. 19.
and so in like manner understand all the other propheties of Christ. Christ
said: Sitio: I thyrste. And this was his.v. word that he spoke on the cross,
for after his long and continual labor and pain had all the night before
and also that same day unto.iii. of the clock at after none, also for his
effusyon and sheddynge of so much blood, and for hanging so long upon the
cross in the heat of the day, it was no meruell though he ware dry, and of
this the prophet also says in the person of Christ: Psalm. 21.
Aruit tanquam testa virtus mea: et lingua mea adhesit faucibus meis: My virtue
or strength of my body was as dry as a shell / and my tongue clyued fast to my
chekes for drynes, and therefore he might well say: Sitio. I thrist. For they
that be let blood: be more dry then other men, but our sauyoure Jesus was let
blood that day, both in scourgyng / beatyng crownyng with thorns and
crucifyeng, besides his sweatyng, therefore it was no meruell if he were dry.
Saint Bernarde entreatyng this article says: O good Jesus why do thou cry
and say: Sitio. I am thristy. Do not thou know that thine adversaries will
ministre and give unto the: vinegre for thy drynk where as thou gave them
drink in the deserte when they were thristie? Num^. xx. B
And he answers in the person of Christ saying: I thriste and fervently
desire the conuersyon of sinners, the tears of penance / of compunction / of
compassion / and of inward devotion. I thyrst your health and the redemption of
all souls. Therefore that Christ did here express his great drynes / was not
without great mystery. For he did not say: I thyrst, for that he desired any
wine or yet vinegre / which he knew that they should give to him. But what
drink (suppose you) did he desire, which is the founten of the lively and
wholesome water, the vein of life / the river of all pleasure / the floode
wateryng the heavenly paradise. Surely he thristed and desired our health / that
is: by his thyrst he desired our thirst, that is / that we should desire and
thyrst god the well of life. Also I thyrst (says Christ by saint Bernarde) all
you that goes by this way / that ye would attend and se / if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow / that by compassyon ye might kut your hertes / for
this day my heart was opened for you. O good Jesus, thou complaynest of thy
thyrste: but thou speaks not of thy cross: thou suffrest pacyently the crown
of thorns, thou forgettest all thy most grievous wounds and despysynges, the
Iues and the gentylles / they thirsted thy blood and therefore they crucified
the / but thou thyrsted their health / and therefore thou would dye for them, as
if Christ should say the health of your souls does more tormente me: then all
the pains of my body. But when Christ said: Sitio. I thrist, anon they gave
to him no good nor wholesome drink: but vinegre, for as the evangelist says:
Ioh. ^9. F.
Erat ibi vas aceto plenu^. etc. There was a vessel full of vinegre, and they
filled a sponge with the vinegre / and wonde it about with ysope / and
fastened it to a read and so put it to his mouth. This they did first / for
there by was the scripture fulfilled that said: Psalm. 68.
In my thirst they gave me vinegre to drink. Secondly to signifye the malice
of the Iues which went out of kind from their old holy fathers / for as
saint Austen says: Super John^ trac. C. xix. C.
The Iues ware as vinegre declynynge from the good wine of the patriarchs and
prophets, in to vynegre / that is in to malice and crueltye, having craftye /
deceytfull and malicyous hertes. These Iues ware conveniently signified by that
vessel full of vinegre / for they were full of iniquitye / having their
hertes like to a sponge full of poores or hooles, so their hertes ware full of
many false deceytes and malycyousenes.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may learn to beware that we do not offer unto Christ to
drink bitter wine or mixte with gall. For as then the Iues and saugiours did
to Christ: so do now a days evil christians give to Christ a bitter drink:
for where as Christ thirsts and desires the health of their souls, they
offer to him the bytternes of their sinful life. Tho christians that believe
well and work or live evil: they give to Christ wine mixte with gall, for
they mixte the wine of true faith with the mirre or gall of evil conuersacyon,
in as much as by their evil life: they sclaunder the church and specially
now a days evil prelates, our lord amend them. This mixtyng of drink may
be also taken in a good sense. As ye shall se in the prayer following.

A prayer.
O Jesus which thirstynge our health would have vinegre and wine mixte with
mirre and gall offered and given to the to drink: make me worthelye to offer to
the the wine of devotion mixte with the mirre of mortifycacyon of my
sensualytie / and with the gall of contricyon for my sins, and that I never
drink of the vinegre of infidelity or of sclaunder / though I taste of any
sclaunder, that is: suffer wrongfully any sclaunder. Amen.

The consummacyon and end of the passion of Christ. The.lxi. article.
THe.lxi. article is the end and consummacyon of the hole passion. for when
Jesus had taken or tasted of the vynegre. Ioh. 10. F.
He spoke the.vi. word upon the cross saying: Consummatum est: It is done or
ended, as it in the tastynge of that vinegre the fulness of his passion and
pains was consummate and ended, or else that tastynge done: all that was
prophesied of Christ that he should suffer: was ended, only death except.
And therefore as our heed and capteyne Christ sufferynge the bytternes of his
passion for our sins perseuered and continued pacyentlye unto the end /
that is unto that all that was spoken by the prophets and scripture that he
should suffer ware fulfilled, so we (if we will be the members of this head)
should continue in perseuerant pacyence in all our aduersytyes and troubles /
so that we might come to the end of all our troubles, our most benign savior
Jesus being our guide, and that we might say with Christ: Scd a Tim^. 4. B.
Consummatum est: That is: With thy help Jesus and not by my virtue, I have
faught a good batell or feyght. I have ended my course and kept my faith. Then
a thing is said to be consummate: when all together is perfytly ended and
gathered to gyther as it ware in a sum. So our savior Christ after that he
had suffered all the pains that be spoken of before, in the. lx articles, so
that there was no more to be suffered but death, then he gathered all them
together as it ware in one heap or sum, and so offered them al to his father
sayng: Consummatum est: That is to say: What so ever scripture said that I
should suffer: I have done it / performed and ended it. The work of my
passion is ended which I offer to my father for the redemption of man kind.
Nor this consummacyon was without natural pain, as if a man had passed many
great perils / dangers / and pains / he can not lightly remember and
recompte them without a grudgynge to the body / though on the other part he
be glad that he has so escaped them. Such a paynfull horror and grudgynge had
Christ at this remembrance and no meruell / for he was as yet hanging upon the
cross / to his no small pain, and also this remembrance and consummacyon
contained in it self virtually all the forsaid articles of the passion of
Christ / which all in sum he noted when he said: Consummatum est: It is
ended. And therefore this consummacyon does conveniently make a special article.

Of this.vi. word: Consummatum est.
THe.vi. word that Christ spoke upon the cross, that is Consummatum est: It
is ended, was a word of great perfeccyon / notynge thereby (as we said before)
that he had done and suffered all things which he ought to do or suffer for the
redemption of man. And that is declared by this example, a good phisicyen will
thus order his pacyent, whose health he intends. First he will give or assign
to him his dieat. Seconly he will cast him in a sweat. Thyrdly if these be not
sufficyent: he will let him blood, to correct the evil humors. And fourthly
he will give him a pocyon to avoid all the evil matter that is the cause of his
sekenes So our lord Christ that he might cure us from the infirmity and
seakenes of sin: he first kept a dyeat / for he fasted.xl. days Secondly
he swet blood for us. Thyrdly he was let blood in all the parts of his body /
when as he shed his blood without weight or mesure / so that his body
hanging upon the cross: was as dry as a fyrebrand. Fourthly and last, not
content with all the other medicynes: he took a most bitter pocyon, when for to
cure our sinful sekenes, he took vinegre and tasted thereof, and therefore he
said conveniently: Consummatum est: All things be fulfilled that I should
suffer for the health of man. And thus after that he had suffered in all the
members of his body the sharp darts of most bitter pains and passion, he
might well say the words of the prophet: Tren^. 3. B.
Repleuit me amaritudine: inebriauit me absinthio. He has fulfilled me with
bitterness, he has made me drunk with wormewod, and so in his passion he
drank a bitter pocyon / and that to cure us.

A Lesson.
OF this article we may take this lesson / that in the end of every good
work that we do, which has diverse acts and parts: we should gather them
together as it ware in a so^me and so offer that good work to god, and so
comonlye we use in all the service of the church for ever in the end: we
conclude with a collecte, which is so called for asmoche as in that prayer all
the office or service said before, is as it ware virtually gadred and contained
in that orison or collect as in a sum. And so this word. Consummatum est, is
as it were the collecte of the hole passion of Christ unto his death. And a man
to conform him self to this article: should remember breuely as it were in a
sum all the forsayde artycles of Christ's passion, and so give thanks to all
myghtie god for them, and pray as follows.

A prayer.
O Jesus which, offering the consummacion of thy hole passion as it ware in a
^ume / ^o god thy father for we, did say, Consummatum est. it is ended* grant
to me that I may dewly consummate and end all the good works and pains that
it shall please thy grace to work in me and by me, and so ended: to offer them
with due thanks unto god the father, by the. Amen.

Of the yeldyng up of his soul or of the death of Christ The. lxii article.
THe.lxii. article is the death of Christ, for when Christ had said It is
ended: then he criynge again with a great voice said (or no necessite, but
for our example) (...) tuas co^mendo spiritum meum. Father, I commend my
spirit in to thy hands. Luce. 23. F
This was the.vii. and last word that he spoke upon the cross. And by this
sayng, he would declare unto us that the souls of holy saints: be in ye
hands of god after their departing from the body, where as before yt time all
the souls ware in the hand and power of hell. And by this his commendacion he
commends to his father all his elect people for we be his members as saint
Paul says. Omnes vnum sumus in Christo jesus. Gala. 3. D.
We be all one in Christ jesus. Which in the days of his mortality offering
prayers to his father with a great cry and tears: Hebr. 5. B.
was hard for his reverence. And this word said and prayer made: he bowed
down his head, and so gave up his spirit. Hiero super Mar. 15.
In criyng, weapyng, and praing / As the gloss says, we that be erthly or made
of ye earth: do dye or give up our spirit / with out any voice / or at most / a
soft or small voice. But Christ yt camme from heaven: he at his death exalted
his voice, and cried with a great and loud voice / He that is not moved with
this voice: is more heavy than the earth, more hard than ye stone, and more
close and stynkyng than dead menes graves / for all these ware broken, moved
and open by this voice. And note here that among all the pains that Christ
suffered: this pain of death was most sharp and paynefull for as the
Philosopher says. 3. Ethi. Ca. vi.
Death is the most terrible of all terrible or fearful things / and that is
for the natural inclinacion that the soul has to the body. But there is a
more special cause in Christ for as Damasten says. Lib. 3. Ca. xxvii.
His godhed was unit and knyt, both to the soul / and also to the body, and
therefore, that separation of his soul from his body: was most paynfull to him.
Christ inclined and bowed down his head: to show unto us. iiii. things,
that is. First the greuouse and Pri. Petri. sedo. D.
Peccata nostra ipse pertulit in corpore suo super lignum. Christ bare our
sins in his body upon a tree, that is the cross. Also Christ says by the
prophet. Conuolute sunt iniquitates et imposite collo meo. Tren^. pri^o: E.
The iniquites or sins be folden or lappid up to gether, and laid upon my
neck, and therefore no meruel though he bowid down his head to show unto us
what heavy burden he bare. Secondely he inclined his Pro. 4. B.
Viam sapientie monstrabo tibi. etc. I shall show to the the way of wisdom,
and I shall lead the by the paths of equity: which when thou art ones entered
in to: thy feet shall not let nor thou runnyng shall have any let or
obstacle. This way is the virtue of meakenes, Luc. 18. C.
for as Christ says. Qui sehumiliat: exaltabitur. He yt meaketh him self
shall be exalted, and as ye prophet says. Non habitabit in medio domus me qui
facit superbiam. Psalm. C.
The proud person shall not dwell in my house. Forthly Christ enclyned his
Absorpta est mors in victoria. 1. Cor. xv. G.
Death is destroyed by the victory and triumph of Christ. Ibidem.
And in the same place. Deo gracias qui fe cit nos vincere in domino nostro
jesus Christo. Beda. li. vi: Super. Luca^ capi. x C.
Thanks be to god that has given to us the victory over death by our lord
Jesus Christ. And note here after sum doctors, that the same hour that our
first adam did sin / our second adam Christ gave up his spirit, and so
the same hour that the first adam by his sin subdewed him self and al his
posterity to death, the same hour this second adam by his death distroyed
death eternal so that none of his elect chylderne shall be subdued there unto.
And the same hour that paradise was shyt from our first adam: the same hour
Christ opened paradyse to us.

A compassion and a contemplacion of the death of Christ.
Saint Bernard entreatynge this article says on this manner. I am sorry and have
compassion upon ye my lord, king / master and father yea my good brother and
most beloved Jesus, more amyable and to beloved above all women whose arowe or
dart has not turn backward / thine arowes ben very sharp / thy doctrine is
valiant and myghtie, Scdo. regu^ primo. D.
thy sermon and word is quick and leuely of much efficacitie and virtue,
Psalm. C. xix
more persynge than any two edged swerd / entryng thorough, Heb. 4. C.
even to the deuidyng a sonder the soul and the spirit. Also thy shyld never
declined from the batell, for thou haste crowned us with the shylde of thy
grace and of thy good will. The spear of thy prayers never turned bac void, for
you prayed for thy enemies yt they should not perish. How more then do thou
pray for thy fryndes and saruauntes. Thou art stronger than the lion, Apoc. 5.
B.
yea thou art ye lion of the tribue or stock of Judah, Pri^a. Pe^. 5. C.
that haste ouercumme the raumpyng lion that runnyth all over, searchyng whom
he might devour. Thou art more swyfte than the egle. Psalm. xviii.
For thou as a giant had great joy to run in the way / to fulfill the
mystery of thy incarnation, unto the time yt thou as an egle did provoke thy
birds to fly. Thou spread the wings of thine arms abroad upon ye cross, and
fliyng over us: thou took us / lefted us up, and bare us upon thy sholders with
great strenght: unto thy holy habitacle / unto the household of thy father,
Luce. 15. B
where, for the fedyng of thy sheep and dra^me, that was lost, and by thy
passion found again? thou made a great feast and joyful to thy fryndes and
neighbors, thy holy angels, making to them great joy for the conversion of
a penitent sinner. And though thou be such a myghtie and noble person yet thou
wast condemned unto the most shameful death, and so thy spirit commendyd in
to the hands of thy father, and thy head inclined and bowed down: thou gave
up thy spirit. O all ye that desire to joy in our lord cumme I beseach you
and sorrow with me. Take heed and behold our mighty and strong David, how he
is all to rent with wheppys behold him, whom we most desire, and whom the
aungelles desire to behold, how he is slain in our batell. Where is thy red rosy
color? where is thy beauty? where shall thou find fayrnes in thy broused
body? Behold, our days have decayed and failed, the days (I say) of our most
benign Jesus which only is the day without all derknes. And his bones have
waxed dry as a fire brande, Psalm. C. i.
he is cut down as the grass: and his heart has wydred away, he was lyfted
upon the cross and very grievously hurt and broused. And though he was thus
shamefully and vilenously arrayed outwardly: yet he kept his beauty and
fayrnes in wardly. Therefore faint not for him in thy trobles, for the Iues and
gentylles that see this person hangyng upon the cross (which in him self was
more beautyouse than all the chylderne of men) they (I say) only beholding
outward things: Psalm. xliiii.
see him / having another beauty ne yet fairnes, for his face was more like to
a lepre than a clean man, and all the disposicion of his body was then very
deforme and foul to behold, yet of that deformytie of our redemar: did essew
and flew out / the price of our beauty / of our inward beauty I mean / In
part we have showed unto you now the deformity and blaknes or fowlnes of the
body of most amyable Jesus, but his inward beauty there is no man that can
declare / for in him restith and inhabiteth the hole divinity or godhed / let
us therefore be contented to be deformed in our body outwardly with our savior
Jesus shamefully deformed / let us conform our self in our body to the body
of our true vine Christ: that he might reform the body of our mortality unto
the body of his clernes and glorification.

O death most to be beloved. O passion of Christ, most to be desired. O
meruelouse mysteries, what is more meruelouse tha^ that death should give life?
wondes: should cure and heal, blood should purify, and that sorrow: should
inflame and kyndle love? The openyng of his side: does cople and join heart
unto heart. Also what is more meruelouse than that the son in the eclipse or
darked by clouds should shine more clear and bright? the fire extincte, does
more inflame and kyndle the heart / the shameful passion does glorify and make
gloriouse, thirst or drines: makes one drunk. Nakydnes: does cloth with the
garments of virtue / the hands fast nailed: does louce us / his feet nailed:
done make us to ru^ne, Christ yeldyng his spirit: does give to us life / he
diyng upon the tree: does call us to heaven / the son of god is lead to death,
he is smiten / buffetid and beat: that is our victory, he is crowned with
thornys: that came to break the thornys of our sins / he was bownd: that
lowseth them that be bound, he was hanged upon a tree: that reyseth them that
be fallen down / the well of life: has vinegre offeryd to him for his drink
/ health is wounded / life: dies, pity is scourged for the sinner / wisdom is
mocked like a fool / treuth is slain as a lier / Justice is dapned for a
wicked person / mercy is vexed for an infidel, swetnes is made drunk with
gall, life is dead for the deed man. All this is the sayng of faint Austen.
Sermon. C. xiiii. de tpere.
By the premises ye may perceive that Christ suffered death / he just and
ryghtuouse: for us vnryghtuouse, he suffered death, for unjust persons, by
unjust persons, with unjust persons, for unjust causes / and under unjust
judges / and also with unjust pains and torments. Behold therefore thou
deuote soul in to the face of thy savior Christ, and see in him / how he did
bear and suffer the pain of the cross that thou should follow him in bearyng
the cross / his body was naked, for our example that we should make our
confession openly or plainly and nakedly to our gostlyfather without all
clokyng or hydyng and excusing of our sins / his arms was spread abroad upon
the cross ready to embrace the in a token that he will gladly receive the unto
his grace, if thou forsake thy sin, he was fast nailed both in hands and
feet: that thou should persevere and continue in his love and service / his heart
was also opened, for the effusion of the price of our redemption / As ye shall
see in the next article.

Here follow.iii. lessons.
THe first lesson of this article is that we should dye with Christ, that is
from the world and sin if we will live with him in glory eternal. Scda
Tim^. 2. C.
And here unto saint Paul says. Si commortui sumus cum Christo: et
conuiuemus. If we dye with Christ we shall live with Christ. And in an other
place. Mortui enim estis et vita vestra abscondita est cum Christo in deo.
Colos. 3. A.
Ye be dead fromme the world and all vain or transitory things, and your
life is hyd with Christ in god. The second lesson is, that it is very good and
profitable, to

A Lesson
O Blissed Jesus which for me, dyeng upon ye cross, did commend thy soul to
thy father: grant to me that I may spiritually so dye to the and with the in
this life: that it would please the at the hour of my death to have my wretched
soul reco^mendyd to the, which lives and reignys with god the father and the
holy ghost world without end. Amen.

The openyng of Christ's side and heart with a spear the.lxiii. Article.
THe.lxiii. Article is the opening or wondyng of Christ's heart with a spear.
Mat. 27. F*
For at ye death of Christ there ware showed many miracles, as ye derknes of
the son, ye cuttyng of ye veyle in ye temple, ye rentyng or breakyng of the
stonys, the openyng of the monumentes or grauys, the conversion of the noble
man and capiteyn Centurio / the conversion of the thief and of many other, that
seeing these great things that ware done, knocked upon there breasts / in sign
or token of penance, and returned homewardes, his most heavy mother there
abidyng with a few women with her. The Iues then because it was the sabbath
even, that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the saboth day (for
that sabbath day was an high day and festfull with them) they I say besought
Ioh. 19. F.
Pilate that their legs might be broken and so taken down of the cross /
then camme the sawgyours and brake the legs of both the theuys. And when they
camme to Jesus, and saw that he was deed alredie: they brake not his legs,
for as the legs of the paschall lamb ware not broken: no more ware the
legs of Christ, that is the true lamb of god / and in that was the scripture
fulfilled that says. Exo. xii. G
os non comminuetis ex eo. He shall not break a bone of him. Ioh. 19. F.
But there came one of the sawgiours with a spear / and did thrust Christ in to
the side and forthwith there came out blood and watre. This sawgior was called
Longius and he was blind or at lest his sight was but weke and what time he
had thrust Christ to the heart with his spear: ye blood runnyng down by the
spear unto his hands, he (not knowing the virtue thereof) touched or rubbed
his yen with his blody hands and so had his sight clearly given to him. Also
of this blood and watre; all the sacraments of ye church have their
efficacitie virtue and strenght, Super did. 2. 4. sen^^.
as by their meritoriouse cause. As the master of the sentence says and all
doctors. And though at that time the deed body of Christ could feale no
pain: yet ye Iues did this thing of a great malice and to the great rebuke of
Christ, for they ware not ^aciate and content with the obprobries / rebukes and
pains that they put him to in his life: but that also they would put him to
more and so persew him after his death. And for that cause this wondyng of
Christ's side is taken here for a special article of Christ's passion / for
all ye cruelties / shames and despites that be done to ye deed corpse or corse
/ be acompted as if they ware done to the persons living. As sometime the
bodies of deed persons: be drawn / hangyd / headyd, quarteryd, or burned: for
the correction and punishment of such defawtes as those persons did in there
lives. And though Christ that time deed, felt not that wound of his side: yet
the blessed virgyn his mother felt it, for that spear then did perse her most
sorrowful soul / as saint Bernard says, truly. O blessid mother, than the
sword of sorrow did perse thy soul: when that cruel spear opened thy son
side, after his death. His soul then was not present with his body. But thy
soul might not be departed from it, for ye soul is rather there where it
louyth: than where it gyuith life / and so not without great cause, we say that
thou art more than a martyr, for the effect of compassion in the: did exceade
the fealyng of all bodilye pains.

Of the miracles that ware done at this time: we shall speak, in the begynny^g
of the third part of this myrrour / book or / treatesse.
OF this wound of the side of our lord / the deuote and holy saint Bernard
says thus. O good Jesus, thy side was wounded and openid: that we might have
entrance or a way to cumme to the. Thy heart was wounded: that we absolved from
al outward trobles and business might rest and abide therein. It was also
wounded: that by that visible wound: we might see the invisible wound of thy
love / for who so ever fervently louith, he is wounded with love. And how might
his burning love be more clerelie and openly declared to us: but in that yt he
would not only have his body outwardly woundyd: but also have his heart wounded
with a spear / therefore this bodily wound: does show to us his spiritual
wound of love. Arise therefore thou spouse of Christ, as a dove buyidyng thy
nest and restyng place in the deapnes of this hole or wound there watch
continually as a sparow fynding thy nest! there hyd thy birds of chaste love
with the turtyll. Join or put thy mouth to that wound: that thou may suck or
draw the watre of health from ye fou^tayns of our savior. This is ye well that
spryngeth in ye myddest of paradise / which does make fruitful the devout
hertes and plentiously does watre all the world. This is the door that was
made in the side of the ark of Noah / by the which did enter all tho bestes and
men that ware sauyd from the universal flode. Study and labor therefore with
all thy diligence to have a recourse unto the holes of this stone and unto the
cave or den in this stony wall both now in this life and also at thy death /
there to rest and hide thy self / that thou might escape the danger of the
wode lion the devil, and also that thou might find there plentiouse pasture
and fode to thy eternal comforth. And here note that Christ did shed his
blood.v. times this day for us. First in his prayer, when he swet blood.
Second, in his scourgyng. Third, in his crownyng with thornys. Fourth, in his
naylyng to the cross, and. Fyfth, in the openyng of his side as ye have herd
before.

Here follow.ii. Lessons.
First lesson of this article is this, that when we be dead with Christ from
the world and from all sin then also we should be wounded in our heart with
the spear of charity so that we might say with ye spouse in her canticles.
Canti. 2. A. iuxta. 70.
Vulnerata charitate ego sum. I am wounded with ye spear of charity. Saint
Austen also desired to be wounded with this spear sayng. I beseech the my lord
and king, my most sweet Jesus for thy most holy wondes, which thou suffered
upon the cross for our health, from ye which that most preciouse blood ran out
wherewith we be redemyd. I beseech the (I say) to wound this my sinful soul
for the which it pleasyd the to dye. Wound it I beseech the, with the fiery
dart of thy most myghtie love and charity. Nail fast my heart to the with the
nail or dart of thy love, that my soul may say unto the, I am wounded with
charity / and so sore wounded: that from this wound of thy love there might
run the full rivers of tears / both night and day, both of co^tricion /
compassion and devotion. Smite I beseach the good Jesus this most hard flynt my
soul, with the mighty and sharp spear of thy love: that it may myghtilie
enter in to ye inwardnes or deapnes of my hard Augus super.
For as of the side of our first Adam sleapynge, his wife Eua was formed and
made: Ioh. tract. Ca. xx.
so of ye side of our second Adam (that is Christ) sleapyng by death upon the
cross was formed the church / the spouse of Christ. By this wound as by a
door of love saint Austen did enter when he said, In Manuali. Ca. 23.
Longyne has opened to me the side of Christ with a spear / and I have entered
therein and there I surely and quietly reast. The nails and the spear cry to
me that I am truly reconsiled to Christ: if I love him.

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me would have ye side of thy deed body opened, from whens came
plentye of blood and watre for our health and comforth: wound (I beseach the)
my heart with the spear of thy charity, yt I may worthily receive thy
sacraments, which flowed out of that thy most holy side. Amen.

How the body of Christ was taken down of the cross the.lxiiii. Article.
THe.lxiiii. article is the taking down of Christ's body from the cross. For
after that our savior Jesus had given up his spirit upon ye cross: that was
about the ix. hour of the day: the body of Christ hang still upon the cross
unto euensong time / and there abode and tarried our blessid lady and
other.iii. women sittyng by the cross / and not knowing what to do, they would
have taken down the body / and have buried it: but they had no strenght
thereunto, nor yet such instruments as ware necessary for that purpose. And to
depart leuyng the body upon the cross: they durst not / and there to tarry
or abide ye night drawyng nygh: they might not. Behold and considre (thou
deuote soul) in what proplexitie they be in and have compassion on them with
all thy heart. And as they sat thus in troble and heuines there came Joseph of
ye city of Aromathya sometime called Ramatha, where as Helchana and Anna the
parents of the prophet Samuel dwelled. Pri^o regu^. pri. A.
This Joseph was a rich man and of noble blood and also he was a senator /
and had great office in ye court of the emperor, a good man in him self and
in ye sight of god, just to his neighbor, a disciple of Christ, but secreate,
for fear of the Iues, he had a trust to come to the kingdom of god for he
did in no thing consent to the cowncell and those maliciouse acts of the Iues.
St Math. Ca. 27.
And as saint Hierom says ye first psalm was made of him. Beatus vir. etc.
This holy Joseph strenghthed through theffusion of Christ's blood (all fear
set a part) went boldly unto Pilate, not fearyng the malice of the Iues, nor
yet the power of Pilate, and asked of him the body of Jesus, for a great
treasure, for he preferryd that body above all erthly treasures though they be
never so preciouse. Pilate meruelyd that Jesus was so soon deed, and called to
him a capten of an hundredth men, and asked of him if Jesus ware deed / and when
he knew the treuth by that capteyn: he gave the body to Joseph. And then
Joseph bought a fair lynyn clothe for to wrap Christ's body therein. And so
Joseph came, not now as a secreat and preuy disciple of Christ: but an open
disciple of Jesus. And also there came with him. Nichodemus, which before time
came privily unto Jesus in the night for fear of the Iues, but now all fear
set a part he came with Joseph and brought with him / of myrre and aloes about
an hundredth pownde weight, to anoint and dress the body of Christ before his
buriyng. And when they came nyghe to the place where Christ hang: they kneled
down / and did worship our lord. And our lady perceyuyng that they came to
take down her so^nys body (as risyng from death) her spirit began to quicken,
and so our lady receyuyd them at their coming reverently. And furthwith they
prepared them self: to take down the body, and our lady healped as much as
she might. One drew the nails out of his hands / an other sustained the
body that it should not fall down, our Lady standing: lifted up her arms on
heyght, ready to receive the body when it should com down, and as shortly as she
might touch him: she drew his head and his hands upon her sorrowful breast
embrasyng and often kyssyng his wondes wherewith she culde not be saciate, and
what time the body was taken down: this blessed Lady took his head and his
shulders in to her lap, and Mary Maglene, took his feet, remembryng what
grace and comforth she found by them and all the residue that stood about:
greatly lamented and morned his death.

The lamentacion and mournyng of our Lady.
Saint Bernard speaking of this lamentacion of our Lady / says. In libro de
pla^ctu virginis.
She lifted up her hands on height, embrasynge and kissing the body of her
son / but her son did not embrase her again for his arms ware to stiff
or stark thereunto. And then that blessid virgyn seeing she culd have none other
solace did kiss with a great and faruent desire his wounds and the blood that
ran from his wounds. In so much that the face of this sorrowful Lady was made
all blodie with the blood of her son slain which thing in it self was very
pitiful and much lamentable to behold, that is / that so noble a body should
be so shamefully entreated, as though it had been the most vile carrion / and yet
in truth: that body might never fall to corrupcion, for the godhed was
continually joined thereunto / which keapte it from al corrupcion. And for this
cause / this article is nowmbred among the articles of Christ's passion though
this body when it was deed felt no pain, but yet this blessid virgyn at this
time suffered the pain for she was there present with other deuote women. And
then Joseph meakly desired our Lady / that she would suffer ye body of her
son to be anointed and wrapped in the lynen clothes, and so to be buried, but
she refusyd to be so shortly departed from her son, and when they would have
buried him: she would have retained him, and so there was a godly and a pitiouse
co^tencion bitwixt them. And at last though not gladly: yet reverently, she
suffered them to take the body at their pleasure. Then this blessid virgyn
weapt without comforth, and so such aboundau^ce of tears flowed from her ien,
that it might be supposed* that all her body ware turned to watre. She washed
her face with tearis and also the deed body of her son and specially his
wounds, and also the stone upon the which the body was laid when it as
washed. And it is said that her tears don yet appear and may be seen upon yt
same stone which is in the entrau^ce of the church of the holy sepulcre. She
washed and dried his blody wou^des, and kyssed them and oftymes she beheld his
most holy face / his wou^des and his head, and there she see the prickynges
of the thornys, and how the hear was pulled from his berde and also his head
/ she beheld his face (I say) how it was defoyled with blood and the spittynges
of the Iues and so she culd not be saciat with seeing and weapyng / her sorrow
might be perceived: but it culd not be declared as it was: but she felt it to
the extremity.

Here follow.iii. lessons.
THe first lesson of this article is that the faithful people To. iiii. D.
so our lord would not descend from his cross in the time of his life: but
when he was deed he suffered his body to be taken down. The third lesson is,
that we should gladly take Christ of the cross with

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me a wretched sinner, after thy death would have thy body
taken down from the cross by Joseph and Nicodemus, and so be anointed and
dressed with sweet oyntme^tes and spices, would be wrapped in fair lynen
clothes: grant to me worthily to receive thy blessed very leuyng body in the
sacrament of the altar, as if I should take him of the cross, and so to
anoynte him with the oyntmentes of virtues, that I may continually keape him in
a pure heart and chaste body. Amen.

Of the buriyng of Christ's body the.lxv. Article.
THe.lxv. and the last article is the buriynge of the body of Christ. For
after it was taken of the cross / and dressyd with spices and sweet oyntmentes
and also wrapped in fair lynen clothes as we said before: then they went
about to bury him. And the time passing: Joseph meakely desired our Lady that
she would suffer the body to be buried before that the saboth day should enter,
for then it should be unlawful for them to do any such labor or busynes. And
then our lady very gently and discreatly ordered hyre self to them, and so
crossyng and blessing that body though with great sorrow: yet reuere^tly she
suffered them to take the body and bury it. Ioh. 19. D.
And as the Evangelist says. Erat in loco vbi crucifixus est: ortus, et in
orto: monumentum nouum. etc. In the place where Jesus was crucified: there was
a garden, and in that garden: a new sepulcre or grave cut or hewn out of a
rock of stone, and it apperteyned to the same Joseph. Math. 27. G.
And in this new tumbe: they buried the body of Jesus. And here says Simon de
Cassia, that Christ praynge dyed, and after his death: he was put in a garden,
Li. xiii. in fine.
that by his prayer and death: there might spring to us the plants of virtues
of his invisible garden / and that thereby we might deserve to enter the garden
of heavenly pleasures, much more pleasant than that garden of paradise that was
prepared of god for our first parents in the este part of the world. This new
sepulcre also was convenient for our new Adam, I^ ibidem.
that his buriyng might reanswear to his incarnacion. For when he was
incarnate: he was put in to the womb of a virgyne, where never man was before
/ nor should be after him and so was he put in a new grave where as never man
was put before. Also he was buried in an other ma^nys sepulcre for he had none
of his own / nor would have. For he yt came to give him self to the comforthe
of man: would have no erthly thing propre to him self. It was not convenient
for him that came to give us heavenly things, that he should labor for any
property in erthly things, and therefore he made poor for us from his
natiuytie unto his death: did keep a poor li^e, 1. Cor. x. A.
and free from all property in worldly things. He was also buried in a
sepulcre of stone, Math. 16. C.
this stone signified Christ, upon the which stone is stablished ye sure
foundation of our faith. Nu. 20. B.
Also he was buried in a stone: for many mysteries. This is the stone that gave
watres plentiously unto the people of god in the desert. This is the stone that
gave forth rivers of oil unto Job. This is the stone upon the which a man is
exalted and fixed in the tribulacions and anguishes of his heart, Psalm. lx.
to his great comforth and defense, Psalm. C. iii.
if he cum thereto by sure faith. This is the stone that is the refuge and
comforth unto penitent sinners / that be full of pricks (that is, Psalm. 139.
contricion for their sins) as the hurchen is full of pricks. This is also
the stone: against or unto the which the young spryng of our sins be cast
and all to crushed and broken or destroyed, that is, our evil cogitacions / at
the beginning of them, or first mocion before they increase in us they should be
cast against this stone, remembering the death and burying of Christ, and so
avoid and destroy them. In to this stone they put the body of Christ which was
the lord and gyuer of life. Math. xxvii. G.
And when they had buried him then Joseph rolled or put to the door of the
sepulcre a great stone and so departed. Li. xiii. in fine.
As Simon de Cassia says, this stone put to the door of the sepulcre: does
signify the infidelity of the Iues, and the hardness of their hertes, for
another they would cease from their evil works, nor yet leave their obstinate
and froward hertes. This stone was put to the se^ulcre: by ye hands of men:
but it was removed by aungelles / to signify that by his own evil deades a
mam may fall to obstinacy and heardnes of heart. But that can not be removed
but by the pouer and virtue of god. If the question be mouyd why this article
is nombred among the articles of the passion of Christ / seyth Christ being
deed suffered no pain thereby? It may be answered that one of the miseries of
our corrupt nature is, that the body will putrify after the death, and
therefore it must be buried. And though this reason have no place in Christ, for
his body should never have been putretfied / as the prophet says. Psalm. xv.
Non dabis sanctum tuum videre corruptionem. Thou shall not suffer thy holy
son to see the putrefaction of his body: yet for asmoche as the Iues had
brought this body of Christ to that condition, that it seamed necessary to
bury it, and also that the Iues would not have been otherwise conten^, except
it had been buried: therefore it is conveniently accounted as an article. And
also for that, there followed this buriyng.ii. great things / that is the
lame^tacion and mournyng of our Lady and the other women, and also ye watch
and keapyng of the sepulcre. First (I say) for the lamentacion of the blessed
virgyn and other women, by whose lamentacions ware fulfilled the lamentacions
that the prophet Hieremy wrote upon the death of the good king Josias. The
sorrowful mother of god might first direct her words to the father of heuyn and
say. In libro. Trenorum.
Alas, my lord god, why have thou given to me a son to die so miserably, and so
to leave me behynd him al desolate and full of sorrow and heuines. etc? Secondly
she might speak to Gabriel ye archaungell. O Gabriell where is the glad
tidings that thou showed to me? I find no joy: but most bitter sorrow. Thyrdly
she might speak to Johan the euangeliste and to other women that ware with
her, and say / if ye love me, if ye have any compassion of me: I charge you
that ye bury me with him. These and other like, this sorrowful mother might have
said. The second thing that folowyd this buriyng: was the watch and keapyng of
the sepulcre by the saugiours. And hereof the evangelist says thus. Math.
xxvii. G.
Altera autem die que est post parasceuem dixerunt principes sacerdotum et
pharisei ad Pilatum. Domine recordati sumus quod seductor ille. etc. The next
day after good friday / the princes of pristes and the phariseis came to Pilate
and said. Lord, or sir, we remember that this deceyuer said, while he was yet
alive. After.iii. days. I will arise again. Command therefore that the
sepulcre be made sure and keapt unto the third day, less paraduenture his
disciples come and stele him a way and say to the people that he is arisen
from death. And then the last error shall be worse than the first. This the
Iues did first to show the malice of their hertes. And therefore Simon de
Cassia says. Li. xiii. in fine.
This is a great iniquity of men, a great envy of the Iues, that they do not
cease to pursue and falsely accuse ye innocent deed, calling Christ after his
death, a deceyuer / and that also they spoke before the judge, which had prouyd
the contrary / they had don to much before in yt they falsely accused him in
many things and moreouerby their importune clamoures and criynges had made him
to be condemned unto a most shameful death. Ibidem.
Secondly, they did thus for their own excusacio^. For as ye same Simon de
Cas. says. It is ye condition of an enuiouse person: ever to speak evil of
that person whom he hates, and though he have slain or hurt that person whom
he so hates: yet he will never speak of him, but with obprobriouse and evil
words, that thereby he may be Judged to be good and ryghtuouse: for asmoch as
he perse weth that person that was evil and vnryghtuouse, and so he cloketh,
hides and coloreth his envy by false crimes that he puts upon the innocent.
But for all that, the conscience of such evil persons be ever more in fear for
they know that they do evil / but because they will not have their malice
known: they cease not to falsely accuse their enymy also after his death. And
so theys false Iues ever repete their false accusacions: because they would not
be noted as confounded. O blind malyciouse people. In all their evil deades
against Christ they go to the Judge Pylate, that their iniquity and sin
should seem as justice: because it is done by authority. And they called him
Domine, that is lord, but they would never obey to him with their good will. It
is the property of maliciouse and froward persons to praise him before his
face whom they hate in their hertes, Math. xxvii. G.
and that is to bring their purpose to pass. Then Pylate said to them.
Habetis custodiam. Ite custodite sicut scitis. Ye have there the watch men,
take them and goo and make the sepulcre as sure as ye can. As if he should say
after Rabanus. Tho^s super.
It might be sufficient to you that I have co^sentyd unto the death of this
innocent, Math. 27.
from hens fourth do what ye will, your error shall rest upon your self. And
then they went and made the sepulcre sure with watch men and sealyd the stone.
This was done for.ii. causes. First to show the folishenes of the Iues. Super.
Math. in fin^.
And herunto saint Hillarie says. The fear that the Iues had of the steylynge
of Christis body, the watch men and the sealyng of the stone: be a testimony
and a witness of ye infidelity and folyshues of the Iues. Was it not a great
folishnes of them / to watch and seal his sepulcre that a lytil before that
time commanded a deed man to rise out of his sepulcre / the which was.iiii.
days buried? Secondly this was done for the more sure testimony of the truth
that is of the resurrection of Christ. And hereof Crisostome says. Tho^s super.
Considre and note well here how the Iues against their own minds do labor
to show and prove the truth against them self. For this their act is a
manifest and sure prove of ye resurrection of Christ. And thus we may prove
it. The sepulcre was sealed and surely keapte with saugioures: ergo / there culd
be no craft or deceyte. If their ware no deceyte: ergo Christ is surely risen
/ for there is the sepulcre, and the body is gone.

Here follow.iii. lessons.
Can^. 3. B.
which is the sure stone, so that we may say that is written in the canticles.
Tenui eum nec dimittam. I

A prayer.
O Jesus which for me at the hour of complen would be buried in a sepulcre
lamented and keapte: grant to me that thou my lord god may be buried in the
sepulcre of my heart and there lamented and keapt that I buried with the: may
deserve to com to the glory of thy resurrection. Amen.

Here endyth the second part of this Glass or Myrour.
Here follows the third part / that is the conclusion of this Myrrour, Which
is divided in to.xi. Chaptres.
First we shall declare unto you certain Miracles, and specially. x. that were
done, some of them at the death of our lord, and some of them after his death.
The first Chapitre.
Of the first Miracle.
THe first Miracle was theclipse or derknes of the son / and of this, Math. 27.
E.
the euangeliste says thus. A sexta autem hora tenebre fact sunt super
vniuersam terram vsque ad horam nonam. From the sexte hour unto the.ix. hour
of the day there was derknes over all the world or earth. And this derkenes
or eclipse was not natural, but only by miracle. And that we may prove
by.iiii. reasons. First by Glosa i^ter^^earis. s^^ Math. 27. 1.
and the son toward the Weste, which can never be naturally / ergo this
eclipse was by miracle. But for what cause / god would show this miracle then:
doctoures done assign.v. causes. First for the compassion of the Libro. xiii.
and here unto Simon de Cassia says. Derknes was brought over all the world:
to show ye ignorance of all the world, for the world would not know the son of
god. Forthly for the obstinacy Ibidem.
For as the same Simon says, the Iues suffered horrible derkenes, for they
blinded in their hertes by malice: condemned the son of god. Fystly, for the
co^templacion of many Ibidem.
And therefore says ye same Simon This darkness besides that / yt it showed
outwardly: it also mouyd the minds of men to considre higher things, for our
lord would meruelously compass ye ien of men with thycke derknes: that their
sight should not be wanderyng about outward things, but that they should enter
in to their own hertes and there consider deaply such things as wax don to
the son of god and in the son of god, and so he turnyd the day in to the night
yt they might more diligently consider the heavenly mysteries.

Of the second Miracle.
THe second Miracle was cuttyng or rentyng of the veil of ye temple, Math.
xxvii. F.
which was immediately after the death of Christ. Of the which Matthew says
thus. Ecce velum templi scissum est in duas parts a summo vsque deorsum. Math.
xxvii. F.
Behold the vale of the temple was rent in to.ii. parts fro the top unto the
bottom. This veil deuidyd the part of the temple that was called holy: from
that part which was called holiest of all, as we might say in our church it
divided, the body of the church: from the quere. And this veyle Tho. in cathena
super Luce. xxiii.
For where before no man might enter in to it but the high bishop ons in the
year: now it was made open, and so was given to the power of the Romanys
Omelia. xxxv.
Secondly, for to signify the reuelacion and declaring of mysteries. For as
Origin says. Super. Math.
In the passion of our lord, when the veyle was rent: the secreat mysteries was
poblished and opened, which unto that time super. Math. in fine.
Thyrdly for the separacion / dispersion and division of the Iues. And hereunto
saint Hillary says, therefore the veyle of ye temple is rent: for that after
this, the people of the Iues should be divided in parts, and shortly after:
they ware disperpled over all the world. Also the honor and glory of the
temple with the custodye of aungelles ware taken away. Libro. vii. de bell. Judah
ico. Ca. xii.
Josephus says, that there ware stirrynges mouinges and voices hard in the
temple, saying and cryenge. Let us depart from Super. Mar. xv.
Fourthly, to sygnifie ye openyng of heuyn which unto that time was shut. And
herto saint Hierom says. The veyle of Thomas. Super. Mar. xv.
The body of Christ is ye temple whose veyle and garment: is his flesh, and
this veyle or flesh was rent for ye curing of our sins. Or thus. Our flesh
or body is the veyle of our temple that is our soul, the virtue and pour of
this flesh was rent in Christ's passion, from the top unto the bottom, that
is from Adam the first man unto the last man that shall be in the end of the
world for Adam was made hole by the passion of Christ, and his flesh is not
now under the curse of god or of the law, and after the general resurrection
we all shall be honored with incorrupcion and inmortalitye.

The third Miracle.
THe third Miracle was the earth quake / and therefore the evangelist says.
Math. xxvii. F.
Et terra mota est. And the earth was mouyd or did quake. And that was for.iii.
causes. First to show that it was not worthy to receive in to Super. Math. in
fine.
And therefore Hilarious says, the earth did quake: for he was not able to take
this deed body in to it. Second cause is for the malice of the Iues. Herunto
Simon de Cassia says. It Libro. xiii.
when the maker of the earth did suffer death in his corporal body. The earth
did quake at the gyuyng of the law, to make them afraied to whom he gave the
law and which should break the law. The earth did also quake at the death of
Christ: that his unjust death should be known or felt through out all the
world. Third cause was to instruct the

The forth Miracle.
THe Fourth Miracle was the rentynge or breaking of the stonys. Math. xxvii. F.
For the evangelist says. Et petre scisse sunt. And the stonys ware rent or
broken. And that was for iiii. causes. First for thereby was verified the sayng
of the prophet Zachary. Ca. xiiii. A.
Scindetur mons oliuarum ex media part sui ad orientem et occidentem. The
mount of Oliuete shall be rent or broken for the myd part of it from the Este to
the West. Second cause is to signify the great virtue of the word of god. And
here unto saint Hillary says. Super. Math. in fi^e. E.
The word of god and the power of his eterne virtue does divide and break all
strong and hard or mighty things. Libro. xiii.
Third cause, was to confou^d the Iues. For as Simon de Cassia says. The
breakyng and rentyng of stones: is na open cry and an accusacion of the
insensible things against the Iues, that the gyuer of life and maker of all
things is unjustly dampened. The Iues did cry with loud voice, crucify him,
but now the stonys on their manner did cry by their parts broken as by their
open lippys, that the Iues did wrong and so where as the reasonable men would not
answer for the truth in this false condempnacion of Jesus: the stonys rent or
broken in their manner spoke. The.iiii. cause was to inflame the hertes of
sinners. For as the same Simon says. Ibidem.
The stonys rent or broken in their manner did provoke the hard hearts of men,
that they should be broken by contricion and also remember him that suffered such
pains and passion for them.

The.v. Miracle.
THe.v. Miracle was the openyng of the sepulcres or graves. Math. xxvii. F.
And therefore theuangelist says. Et monumenta aperta sunt. And ye supulcres or
graves ware openid. And this was for.iii. causes. First to show that the prison
of hell was opened, super. Math. in fine.
for as saint Hillary says. Then was the clausures of death opened. Secondly
for the example of our resurrection. For this was a token or sign that deed
men should rise again according to the sayng of the prophet. Ezech. 37. D.
Ego aperiam tumulos vestros. I shall open your grauys. Thyrdly for our
spiritual instruccion. For hereby we be learned that we should open the
sepulcres of our conscience / by true and plain confession that the carrion and
filthynes of our sins may be seen and cast out. And here note that the
miracle before the death of Christ: was showed above in the heuyns. For by fore
his death: Christ was in a manner only known in heuyn. But the miracles after
his death ware showed and done in the earth, for then began the knowledge of
Christ to be spread abroad upon the earth.

The.vi. Miracle.
THe.vi. Miracle was the risyng again of deed men. Math. xxvii. F.
And therefore theuangelist says. Et multa corpora sanctotum qui dormierant:
surrexerunt. etc. And the bodies of many saints which ware deed: arose, and
came out of their graves after Christ's resurrection, and came into the holy
city of Jerusalem, and apperyd to many. This testimony of the risyng of deed
men is convenient. First for their nombre, for they ware many. Secondly, for
their condicyon, for they were holy and the bodies of holy saints. Thyrdly for
the noueltye, for they arose after their death and buriyng. Also for the time,
for it was after the resurrection of Christ, for he was the first that rose.
Fyftly for the holy place for they came into the holy city. And also for that
they apperyd to many persons.

The.vii. Miracle.
THe.vii. Miracle was the conversion of much people. Of the which the
evangelist says. Math. xxvii. F.
Centurio et qui cum eo erant custodientes Iesum viso terre motu et hijs que
fiebant: timuerunt valde dicentes. Vere filius dei erat iste. When Centurio
(which was a capteyn of a.C. men) and they that were with him, watchyng and
keapyng Jesus, saw the earth quake and those things which happened then: they
fearyd greatly and said, of a suerty this was the son of god. This Centurio and
his compaygney confessyd Christ to be the son of god, and this was don for.v.
causes. First for that he saw so many great miracles don, which mouyd him to
this confession and faith. Second was for the calling of the paganes or
gentylles to the faith. Libro. xiii.
Behold (says Simon de Cassia) a great mystery, that in the Natyuitie or birth
of our lord, and also at his death: the gentylles did prevent the Iues and came
to the faith before them. For at the birth of Christ the.iii. kings and great
wise men which came from the Eest to worship Christ: did prevent the Iues at
that time. And now at his death this Centurio with his compaigney of Rome, that
came from the Weste: did also first believe. Third reason was to reuok his
errors. For now Centurio did glorify god: that so had ordered his son to
suffer death. He believed in to god and glorifed him being sorry that he had
obeyed to the president Pylate in so cruelly tormentynge the son of god and
openly with his mouth he confessyd Christ to be just and innocent: whom the
maliciouse Iues had falsely condemned as unjust and worthy death. In like
manner did his compaigney sayng the same with great fear and wondre, and so
coming to the knowledge of true faith: deseruyd forgyuenes of their errors and
infidelity by the merit of the prayer of Christ, when he prayed for his
crucifiers and said. Father forgive them: they know not what they do. Forth
reason is for to confound the heretics. Super. Math. 27.
And therefore saint Hierom says. Note here that Centurio a gentle and pagane
seeing Christ put to most shameful death, yet for all that seeing such Miracles
confessyd Christ to be the son of god, and Arrius a christen man. And a pressed
or doctor in the church of Christ, did blaspheme Christ and say that he was
a creature and not the natural son of god. Fyfth reason was for the informacion
of us christians. Sermon. xiii. de passione. d^i.
Herunto says the holy pope Leo. Every man should tremble and be afraed in ye
remembrance of the passion of his redemar Christ as Centurio was in ye sight
thereof the hard hertes of men should be broken as ware the stones, and they that
be buried in the custom of sin: should cast away all obstacles and customs or
occasions of syn and without tariyng arise up, and com unto the holy city /
that is to the church and there be reconsyled and so appear to many persons,
that they may se and know you truly risen from ye death of sin unto the life
of grace, and so that which was done corporally at the passion of Christ, may
now be done spiritually in our hertes and soulys by the remembrance of the
same passion.

The.viii. Miracle.
THe.viii. Miracle was the very blood and very watre ran out of Christ's side
after his death. For as the evangelist says. Ioh. 19. F.
Iudei aute^ quoniam parasceue erat. etc. The Iues because it was the sabbath
even, that the bodies should not remain and continue upon the crossys on the
sabbath day (for that sabbath day was an high day and solemn fest with them)
they (I say) besought Pylate that there legs might be broken and so taken
down of the cross. The Iues did make this desire to Pylate for.iiii. Libro.
xiii.
causes, of the which Simon de Cassia makes mention. First, for the reverence
of there festfull day. It was a meruelouse supersticion of the Iues (says he)
that thought yt their sabbath day should be violate and defoyled: if the bodies
of those which ware condemned to death: should hyng that day upon ye cross,
but they had no conscience nor would se the co^taminacion and defoylyng of their
own soulys, which for envy condemned the innocent falsely to death. Secondly
it was for the unquietness of the people, that the Iues alleged for them to
Pilate ye reverence of the sabbath day (but in their hertes was hyd great
malice) for they pretended that they would have his body taken down, less the
people should be truobled and unquieted upon the sabbot day which is a day of
quietness / but it was for the great signs and miracles that ware showed at his
death and after his death, and they thought that if the people should see the
body hyng upon ye cross: that thereby they remembryng all these signs: should
shortly be mouyd to insurrection and against them that condemned him to death.
Thyrdly for that they would have no mo miracles showed. For they ware afraid
that if he continued long upon the cross: that there should have been many
momyracles showed. Forthly they did it to avoid perilles, for they councelynge
to gether: decreyd wisely for them self corporally: that the bodies of the
deed persons condemned to death should not be suffered to hyng long, for the
auoydyng of many perillys that might hap. It is the custom of wise gouernars
of any co^mynaltie to remove or a void that person quick or deed by whom
they fear any troble to com. And therefore the princes of the Iues desired
Pylate, that their legs might be broken, and so taken down. And then the
sawgioures came and brake the legs of the.ii. Super. Ioh. tractatu. C. xx.
theuys, that was (as saint Austen says) yt they might the more shortly dye,
and also for the commandment of the law / but when they came to Jesus and se
that he was deed all ready: they brake not his legs. Deuteronomy. 21. D
And that was for.ii. Ioh. 19. F.
causes after Simon de Cassia. Libro. xiii.
First for verifiyng of the figure, for here of we had a figure before in the
paschall lamb, of whom it was commau^dyd that they should break no bone of it.
Exodi. 12. G.
Not so to be understand that / that figure or commandment was the cause that
Christ bonys or legs ware not broken: but contrary wise / because that god
had so provided that no bone should be broken in Christ: therefore it was
commaundyd and keapt in the paschall lamb that was a figure of Christ.
Secondly it was to sygnifie a thing in the mystical body of our savior
Christ, that is, that the bonys of this mystical body, which be the perfect
men, should not be broken or ouercum by i^pacience in any tribulacion or
aduersite / but that they should continue and abide vnsuperable / ready to
suffer all things unto the death. And though sumtyme they be ouercum in body /
that there body is taken and put to prison and pains: yet in mind and good
manners they be never ouercum nor broken. And therefore they brake not Christ's
legs. But one of the sawgiours with a spear did thrust Christ to the heart,
and forth with there came out watre and blood. This man was claled Longius, and
he did thus for the pleasure of the Iues which would be certified of his death.
This Longyne was then a cruel and a wicked man, but afterward he was converted
and dyed an holy martyr. It is said that his sight was very feeble, and as the
blood ran down by the spear from the heart of Christ by chaunche it toched
his yen: and furthwith he had his sight clerly, and so he beleauyd in Christ,
left his sawgiourshyppe, and enstructe by the apostles in the faith of Christ:
he leuyd an holy monastical live by the space of.xxxviii. years in the city
of Cesary in the county of Capadoce, and after that he had converted much
people to the faith of Christ by his holy word and good example: at last he
was put to death for the faith of Christ. And that watre and blood came out of
the side of Christ: it was done for.iii. causes. First for the multiplicacion
of miracles. It was a boue nature / and a very miracle that pure and very blood
/ and pure and very watre should com out of any deed body. And note here that
this blod and watre came not myxte to gether: but first, very pure blod and
after that very pure watre. Libro. xiii.
As Simon de Cassia says. Secondly it was done for the virtue of the
sacraments. Tract. 120.
For of this wound they had their efficacitie and virtue. And herunto saint
Austen says super Iohannem / the evangelist used here a very good and a
discreat term sayng. Aperuit latus eius. Non percussit nec vulnerauit. Saint
Johan says that the sawgiour with his spear did open the side of Christ, he
does not say that he smote or wondyd it / but opened it, that he might show
that, that wound was as the door of life, from whens all sacraments have
their virtue (as we said in the.lxiii. article) with out the which sacraments
no man may enter in to ye eterne life, specially if they may be had. Thyrdly
this was done to inflame our love. And herunto saint Austen says. One of the
sawgioures did open Christ's side with a spear: that by yt open wound we
might se and know the love that Christ had in his heart to us, and so thereby
love him the more strongly and faithfully.

The.ix. Miracle.
THe.ix. Miracle was the buriyng of Christ, for it was a meruelouse rare and a
thing never hard or seen: that a person so vilely and rebukfully hangyd upon
the cross as Christ was should be so honorally buried of great and deuote
persons / as he was. Of this buriyng, saint Johan says. Post hec rogauit
Pilatum Joseph ab Aromathia. etc. Ioh. 19. G.
After that Christ was deed: Joseph of Aromathy desired Pylate to grant and
give to him the body of Jesus. This peticion he made, for iiii. cau^es. Omel.
84.
First, for (as Crisostome says) Joseph supposed that the malice of ye Iues
that they had against Christ / had been endyd seeing that they had crucified him,
Super. Ioh.
and therefore he went boldly to Pylate and asked ye body. Secondly: because of
his familiarytie that he had with Christ, for he was the disciple of Christ
though then it was not openly known. Libro. xiii. prope finem.
Thyrdly, Joseph was a good man and therefore he fearyd not to do a good deed.
Of his goodness Simon de Casia / says. We may not justly reprove this Joseph in
any thing: whom so seriously the evangelist Luke commendith sayng. Luce. 23. G
Ecce vir nomine Joseph qui erat de curio, vir bonus et iustus. Hic non
consenserat consilio et actibus eorum. etc. Behold (says Luke) a man called
Joseph which was a noble man worldly, Beda super. Lucam. Ca. 91.
for he was of the order of the court / or of the council of the emperor / a
good man to god and just to his neighbors. This Joseph did not consent to
the counsel and acts or deades of ye Iues against Christ / he dwelled in
Aromathy a city of Jury, and he trusted also and waited for the kingdom of
god. Some says he was decurio because he was a captain over.x. men. And this
office agreith to a mystery, for he keapt the.x. commandments of god, and
thus for his goodness he was bold to ask of Pylate the body of Jesus. Forthly
it was for his dignytie, for as we said before, he was a noble man and rich,
and well accept with Pylate, and therefore he went the more boldly to Pylate:
where as a poor mean man durst not be so bold. And therefore we may say that
it was done of the provision of god that Joseph should have that riches and
noblenes whereby he might the more honorably burye the body of our savior Jesus.
etc. Of this we spoke in the.lxiiii. article.

The.x. Miracle.
THe.x. Miracle or meruell was the watch and keapyng of the sepulcre, for ye
Iues desired of Pylate, that they might have sawgiours to watch and keape the
sepulcre, which was a rare and a meruelouse thing, that he which was put to so
vile and shameful death: should be keapt and watched. And note, that I do not
take a Miracle here properly and in his most propre significacion: but largely,
as every rare and un wont thing yt is meruelouse may be called so a miracle.
And of this marvel, we spoke sufficiently in the.lxv. article, of the second
part. Of other miracles that ware showed that time: ye shall se hereafter in
the treates of Bernardyne of the.xii. merulouse fruits of the tree of life, and
of the wonderouse mysteries of the most holy cross. Also ye have like
miracles in the first part of this book in the first chapter of the.v.
particle. etc.

Why Christ would suffer so many and such greiuouse pains for us. Capi. ii.
HEre sum doctors assygne diverse reasons / as it ware by a manner of
recapitulation, or rehersynge of such things as have been spoken before of the
passion of our lord, sayng that Christ suffered so many, and so greuouse pains
for us: for that, that he would by every one of them / take from us some evil,
and give to us some good thing. Which thing is to be diligently attendyd / and
strongly and also continually to be infixed and prynted in our heart. We
deseruyd by our sins: eternal heuines, against the which our lord Jesus in
the beginning of his passion after his last supper did wyllyngly take so great
heaviness that he his self said unto his disciples. Math. 26. D.
Tristis est anima mea vsque ad mortem. My soul is heavy unto the death. And
this heuines he took upon him, that by it which he suffered i^nocently: he might
take from us that everlasting heuines which we had deseruyd for our sins,
and also that he might give to us / eternal joy and gladness. Also we by our
sins deseruyd to be perpetually subdued under ye power and thraldom of the
dyuell and so to be committed to the eternal prison of hell. But our lord in
his blessed passion suffered him self to be taken prisonar, that he by his
sufferyng innocently that captivity: might thereby deliver us from the power
and captivity of the dyuell and also preserve us from that most dark prison
of hell, and restore us unto the liberty of the childerne of god. Moreover we
by our sins deseruyd to be perpetually associate and acco^panyed with the
dyuels and other dampened soulys. Against this our savior Jesus would be associat
with theuys and would be accounted as one of the^: that he might bye us from the
cumpaygnie of dampened soulys and from the feloweshyp of dyuels, and so to make
us the chyldern of god and fellows of au^gells. He to whom all the glory of
heuyn does serve and which only of him self is all beauty and glory would
suffer shamys rebukes and mockynges: that he might redeem us from confusion and
etarnall derision of dyuels and their rebukes, and also that he might revoke
and bring us again to the glory of heuyn which we lost by our sin. He that
only has power to louce and bind, of his great mercy would be bound for us:
that he might louce us from the bonds of our sins, and from all the pains yt
we deseruyd by our sins. And at last he suffered death innocently: that by his
death he might destroy our eternal death and also give to us eternal life in
glory. And thus ye may under stand of all other pains of Christ. For
universally to speak there was no thing vain, no thing unprofitable i^ al his
passion, but every pain that he suffered, was ordenyd to take away from us sum
perpetual evil that we had deseruyd by our sins, and to merit and give to
us sum eternal goodness that we had lost by our sin. And therefore saint Austen
says, Christ suffers to my profit / he is heavy for me, he soroweth to my
co^forth. And the cause of these is this, for he has louyd us eternally, and
has desired to be louyd of us again, for love can not be recompensyd but by
love. Super. Ca^ti. Serm^. xi.
And hereunto also saint Bernard says. Might not our creatoure and maker
repare his creature again or redeem him without that great difficulty and hard
pains of his passion? Yes he might have done it without pain, if it had so
pleased him. But he would rather do it with his great injury and pain: to win
the love of man and to give him many and great causes of love. For this great
difficulty and greuouse pains that he suffered for our redemption should move
that person to give him thanks, which lityll regardyd the work of his
creasion, because it was done so easly. What (think you) said the unkind man,
of his creacion? I was create and made lightly and freely, without any pain or
labor of my creator and maker, he only spoke the word: and I was creat, as
al other things ware. So the wicked unkindness of man little regardyng the
work of his creasion: showed there matter of unkindness: where he should have
taken cause of love. But now the mouth of those wicked men be stopped. For now
it is more clear than the light, what pain and labor thy lord god had (o
unkind man) for thy redemption. Of a lord: he becam a servant, where he was
rich: he was made poor / he being god: took upon him a mortal body, and the
son of god: despised not / for the to be made ye son of man. Remember therefore
(thou unkind man) though thou were made of naught: yet thou wart not redemyd of
naught. In.vi. days god made all the world, and the (o thou man) among them
all. But.xxxiii. year he labored continually with great pains to work thy
health and salvation. What labor had he in soueryng the incommodities of our
nature / as hunger, thyrst / heat / cold / and such other. What temptacions
of the devil / what slanders / rebukes / despisynges, mockynges, beatynges
with many greuouse pains, and at last most paynefull and shameful death.
Therefore thou man be no more unkind, but love and thank god, and have
compassion of thy creatoure / redemar and savior. Amen.

How Christ descendyd unto the helles. The third Chapitre.
AFter that our savior Jesus had given up his spirit, and so was deed:
furthwith his soul unit and knyt or joined unto the godhed: descendyd unto the
helles, unto the holy fathers that were there in prison and there stood with
them. Of this descension: Damascen says thus. Libro. iii.
The soul of Christ joined to his godhed: descendyd unto the helles, Ca. xxix.
that as he had before, comforted them that were in the world above the earth:
so he might shine and comfort them that sat in darkness and in the shadow of
death. He descendyd to comfort the holy faythers / to glad them and to
glorify them. For as shortly as he presentyd him self to them: they did se
his godhed / and so then they ware in paradise, that is, they had the clear
sight of the godhed: which is joy and life eternal. Of this descension also
saint Austen in a certain sermon says thus. Sermon. C. xxxvii. de tpere. C.
Anon as Christ had given up his spirit: his soul knyt to his godhed:
discendyd to ye deapnes of helles. And when he was cum to yt place of derkenes,
as a victoriouse captain shynyng and terrible: tho wicked hell hounds and
legions of derknes, beholding him: begane to enquire and say. From whens came
this person, so strong, so terrible, so shinyng and gloriouse? That world
which has been ever subdued to us: did never send to us such a deed person.
He never sent to us such gestes before this time. What is he, that so boldly
enters in to our jurisdiction? And not only he does not fear our torments:
but moreover he does louce other from our bonds. Behold and see how they
which ware wont to weape and more over under our torments: now they rebuke
us and vpbrayde us of their deliverance and salvation. And not only, they in
nothing fear us: but moreover they threten us. There was never deed men so
proud and stubbourne borne agayst us as these be. Nor never might any persons
in captivity: be so glad and joyful as these be. O thou Lucifer our captain,
why would you bring this person unto our place? All thy mirth is paste, all thy
joy is turned in to weapyng and sorrow. When thou did hang Christ upon the
cross: thou knew not what damage thou prepared for thy self in hell. After
these complaynyng voices of these most cruel tormentoures of hell: there was a
great multitude of saints weapynge for joy that said. Welcome our redemer,
welcome our savior, whom we daily and of long time with great desire have
looked for and tarried thy cummyng. Thou haste now descendyd unto helles for us,
forsake us not wha^ thou shall return again to heuyns. O deuote soul.
Consider here how tho holy fathers did joy in the cummyng of Christ, how they
ware replenished with great gladness, al sorrow and displeasure utterly excludyd.
Psalm. C. xvii.
And so they stood in songs and praysynges before god sayng. Blessed be he
that is com in ye name of god, our lord god has shyned to us. Thou art our god
/ our savior, Psalm. C. vi.
thou have driven away al derknes from us, and thou have loused our bonds you
have broken ye brason gates and the iren bars thou i^ thy great strenght
delivers ye bond prisoners, and you leads thy elect people from prison, with
great joy. Therefore now we laud and worship the for evermore, and so they fell
al prostrate and worshypped him. Psalm. 77.
Than answeryng to them / our lord Jesus said. Aten dite popule meus legem meam.
O my people attend my law. Peace be to you and eternal joy. I am your lord
god yt brought you out of Egipte. And many other things we may suppose that
Christ spoke to them, of the which the gospel makes no mention. Also he
said, take heed and se, for I am your god, which has create redemyd and sauyd
you. Psalm. xxxix.
It is written of me in the head or beginning of the book: that I should do
the will and pleasure of my father. Psalm. 97.
And for your health I have descendyd. I have been poor and in great labors
from my young age entendyng to the salvation of your souls. They that should
have been my chylderne: Psalm. xvii.
ware made strangers to me, and have made false lies upon me. Psalm. 37.
My friends and negboures thought evil against me. Psalm. xxi.
All that saw me: did mock me. I was scourged all the day, Psalm. lxxii.
and my betyng was in the morning. Psalm. xxi.
They have diggyd my hands and my feet, Psalm. 68.
and they have nombred all my bonys. They put gall in to my meat, Psalm. iii.
and they gave me vinegre to drink. I have sleapte and slumberyd or dyed upon
the cross and my body reasteth in hope of my restrreccion, It. lxxxvii.
and so forth of diverse other things which the prophets wrote upon him. Psalm.
lxxi.
As saint Bonauenture says In his meditacions of the life of Christ. And then
all the holy souls answered, blessed be ye name of thy majesty for evermore and
all the earth might be replenyshed with thy majesty and glory. Psalm. lxxxix
Amen Amen. Psalm. x C. 3.
For thou art made to us a refuge and a comforter for evermore. If thou had not
healpyd us: our souls should have abiden in hell eternally. 1. Pet. 1. C.
But thou our lord god have remembered us and have redemyd us with thy preciouse
blood thou have showed unto us thy face which the aungelles in heuyn desire to
behold. Psalm. lxv.
All the world might worship the our lord god and praise thy holy name now and
ever Amen. In such lauds / praysynges / songs and ioyenges: stood the holy
souls in limbo patrum nygh unto the time of Christ's resurrection, and there
was also with them a great cumpaigney of au^gelles ioyeng and praysyng god with
them. And after this our lord took those holy souls from hell with great joy, and
with great glory going before them: brought them and put them in Paradise of
pleasures. And there a little while abydyng with them and with Enoch and Hely /
which there knowing him: did worship him and praise him. And then our savior
said to them. It is time that I go and reyse my body. I will go and take it
again. And all the holy fathers falling down prostrate: said, go ye our lord
and gloriouse king and return shortly again if it shall so please you, for we
greatly desire to se your gloriouse body.

A prayer.
O Good Jesus, thy unspeakable pity and charity was not yet saciate and content
with thy death, but that thou would visit the clausures of hell and redeem thy
people there being in captivity, therefore thy most blessed and gloriouse soul
knyt to thy godhed, descendyd unto the helles delyueryng thy elect people from
ye derknes and shadow of death: I beseach the O merciful Jesus that thy grace
and mercy might descend upon the souls of our parents brethren / sisterne
and all our kynsfolkes / also upon the soulys of our familiar aquayntance /
benefactoures and al other that we be bound to pray for and of al christen
soulys, that thou would deliver them from ye pains that they have deseruyd for
their sins, and that thou would bring them to eternal glory. Amen.

Of the resurrection of our Lord. The.iiii. Chaptre.
OUr Lord cummyng with an honorable multitude of au^gelles very early on the
Sunday in the morning and reysyng his most holy body from his sepulcre: did
cum forth of the same by his own power and virtue it being closse or shut and
sealid as the Iues left it. And hereof saint Austen says. Our savior Jesus
after his beatynges and scornynges after the drink of vinegre and gall, after
the pains of the cross and his wounds, and at last after his death and
descendyng to hell: in a new flesh and body but yet the same: he arose from
death / the secreat and hyd life, and health reseruyd in death: did rise and
cum again more beautiouse and gloriouse after his death. Psalm. C. iii.
Then was the age of Christ renuyd: Gene. 49. B.
as is in the Egle. Then the Lion did reyse his whelp. Then the byrd called
Fenix did live again. Hebre. 18. A.
Then the potter after that his pottes ware broken, of the same earth: made a
new pot, after his own pleasure. Ione. 2. D.
Then Jonas came out of the Whallys belie with out hurt. Zach. 4. A.
Then was the candelstike coueryd with gold. Then: (that is at this
resurrection) the tabernacle of David that was fallen: Amos. 9. C
was raised up again. Then the son shone, Which before was in a cloud. Ioh.
12. D.
Then was the whete grain or corn quickened: which cast in to the earth was
deed. Iudicu^. 16. A.
Then the Heart took his horns again. Then Sampson took the gates of the city
and went unto the hill. Gene. 41. C.
Then Joseph brought out of prison: was ordained and made the lord of al
Egypt. Then the sack that is the body of Christ cut and rent in his passion:
Psalm. xxix.
was now clad with glory and joy. Wherefore this paschal solempnite is very
great and solemn. Ro^s. 6. B.
In the which Christ arisyng from death / does not now die, or is not now deed
and death hereafter shall never have dominion or power over him. For god his
father has clothed him with the stole of i^mortalytie and glory. And in this
solempnitie: we have example of our resurrection, the hope and trust of the
heavenly cuntre is offered to us, the clausures of hell ben destroyed, and the
gates of heuyn be opened to us. Therefore this is the day that our lord has
made. Psalm. C. xvii.
Joy we and be glad therein. For this day Christ has taken away the burning
swearde, and opened the gates of paradyse, which no man might cum before, unto
that Christ came thither with the holy thief / sayng to ye au^gelles. Open ye to
me the gates of justice and I entered in to them, Psalm. C. xvii.
shall praise god. This is the day in the which the sinagoge is deed or endid /
and the church borne or begun. This is the day in ye which we sing Alleluya
that is, we laud and praise god. Praise we therefore (friends) our lord god in
our life and in our speech with heart and mouth, with our voices and good
manners for so will our lord god have Alleluya (that is his praysynges) song to
him, that there be no discord in the praise / that his lite and words agrey
in one. O blessed Alleluya, or praysynges of god that is song in heuyn, where
as is the temple of god, and legions of au^gelies. There is the most high
concord of the praysers. There is no repugnaunce in the members against the
spirit. There is no stryuyng for couetise / whereby should perish ye victory of
charity. Let us here sing Alleluya diligently: that there we might sing it
surely here in hope: there in the very presence of god / here in the way there
in our heavenly contre / let us here sing, not for that we have the delectacion
of quietness: but for the solace of our labor / as we se that men going or
rydyng by the way, be wont to sing, to comfort their labor, to quicken them
in their journey and to go forward merely. And herunto saint Bede says. O my
soul arise with Christ from thy filthy sepulcre or custom of syn. Areise up
thy heart unto the hope and trust of thy resurreccion and eternal lefe. Let us
now dye from syn in this present life for ye love of god that after our
resurrection we may live in the life to com, for if we mortify our body now
for the love of Christ: then we shall reygne with him in everlasting joy. Let
us so enforce ourselfe to be present and to honor god in these feasts in the
cumpaigney of mortal men: that we may deserve to be present at the eternal
feasts with au^gelles. For what should it profit us to keape these feasts
temporally, if we be excludyd from those eternal feasts? For these present
solemnities ben but a shadow: of the feasts to cum / therefore we keape these
feasts reverently and yearly: that we might cum to those feasts that be
continual. When any feast is here keapt at his day assigned: our mind should be
referryd and occupied with the desire of that same feast that is in heaven
continually and eternal. Therefore our hertes through the frequentacion and use
of spiritual joy in these temporal feasts: should be kyndled and wax fervent
to the desire of eternal joys, and so we should use our meditacions here in the
shadow of joy: that in very truth we may here after have the fruicion of the
true and everlasting joy. Amen All this is taken of saint Gregory. Omel. 2 9.


A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ our eterne and only swetnes, which breakyng the bonds of
death has glorified thy body / and has risen from death in glory
unspeakable: I pray the and I beseach the for thy gloriouse and florishyng
resurrection to grant to me, that I risyng from vices and ye death of soul
may ever florishe in virtues and so walk in the newnes of good life that I may
sauer and follow those things that be above and heavenly, and not tho things
that be erthly and transitory. Also good lord by the virtue of thy clernes:
purge my soul from the derknes of syn, that by the same virtue at the day of
general resurrection my body may arise unto glory, that I may joy both in
soul and body, eternally with the in thy glory. Amen.

Now Christ apperyd to his mother Mary the.v. Chapitre.
THe same hour that Christ rose, the three Mary's, that is. Mary Magdalene.
Mary Iocobe, and Mary Salome desirynge license of our Lady: of great devotion
and love they had to our savior Christ, began to go with sweet oyntmentes
unto the sepulcre of Christ to anoint his body. And our Lady remained at home,
continuyng in weapyng and prayers. And very conveniently, these three women ware
called by one name, for they ware of one will and mind, and like desire
toward Christ. There be three states of men that shall be sauyd, and iche one
of these does seek Christ, and without these three states there is no man
sauyd / that is, begynners, profiters, and perfect persons, or else,
penitentes, active / and contemplatyue persons, which three states be signified
by the three. Mary's which sought our lord, and that we may take by three
interpritacions of this word. Maria. The state of begynners or penitentes is
noted by. Mary Magdalene, which was a famous and known sinner, and afterward
very penitent. And thought sometime by her, may be signified the contemplative
life, Luce. x. G.
as in the.x. chapitre of Luke. Yet at this time she may signify to us the
state of penitentes for the evangelist says of her, Math. 16. C.
that Christ cast out.vii. deuylles, that is, al vices, from her. And also in
the gospel of Luke she is known to be the capteyn and example of all true
penitentes. Luce. 7. F.
And for this cause: she is conveniently called Maria, that is, a better see /
or else after the Hebreus Maria, commyth of Mara, that is, interpreted bitter,
And hereunto the old woman Ruth: Ruth. 1. D.
said. Non vocetis me Noemy pulchramised vocate me Mara. etc. Call not me
fair: but call me bitter, for our Lord has fulfilled me with bitterness. And
this was verefied in Mary Magdalen, Luce. 7. F.
when before the feet of our Lord: she washed with her tears the spots of
her sins. So Petre being penitent: Math. xxvi. G.
weapt bitterly. And so to every penitent soul may be said the words of the
prophet. Tren^. 2. D.
Magna velut mare contricio tua. O thou penitent soul, thy contricion is great
and bitter as the sea. The state of profiters or of active persons is sygnified
in Mary Iacoby, that was the mother of James the self. Iacobus is asmoche to
say by i^terpretacion as a supplanter or a wrestlar, for it apperteyneth to
active persons and profiters to supplante or to subdue vice, also to wrestle
and labor in the spiritual exercise of virtues. And herunto is also
convenient the second interpretacion of this name Maria, which after ye Sire
tongue or speech: is called Domina. A lady. For since these profiters and active
persons be in continual datel, for the pronitie that they have to vice, and the
difficulty unto all goodness and virtue: therefore it is necessary that these
profiters have the dominion or ladishippe over their own passions / and that:
by reason, so that they give no place unto temptacions. And through this strife
or wrastlyng when reason has the dominion over sensuality: virtues be
generate and gotten. The state of contemplative and perfect persons is
signified by Mary Salome, which was the mother of James the more and of Johan
the evangelist. Math. xx. C.
This woman asked of Christ his kingdom for her sonnys. So perfect and
contemplative persons ar chefely occupied about the kingdom of god, for they
have in them self the kingdom of god and here do partly taste thereof. And
hereunto, Salome, is called by interpretacion, peaceful. For there is no peace
to man in this life: but in contemplacion. And hereunto accords the third
interpretacion of this name Maria, that is, illuminate / and therefore it may be
said to every contemplative person. Esaie. 60. A
Surge illuminate Jerusalem quia venit lumen tuum. Arise thou perfect soul
and receive light for thy light cummyth. And also iche one of these three Mary's
had their oyntmentes, as ye may se in Ludolphe de Vita x^i 2. part. Ca. lxx.
But if any person move this question why our blessed Lady did not go to
visit Christ's sepulcre: as the three other Mary's did? Herunto we may assign
three causes. First, for the mother of Christ might not se the sepulcre of her
son without great sor^^, and specially being so lately buried. Second cause,
for she had weapt so much the Friday and Saturday before, and brought her
self so low: that she might not sustain and suffer that labor. And
hereunto says saint Bernard. The blessed virgyn Marie was so feeble and weak:
that she was brought home from the cross: as half deed. Third cause, for ye
foresaid women thought that the body of Christ was then liyng in his sepulcre,
and therefore they would have anointed (as of old custom have been used) his
body, to preserve it from corruption where as this gloriouse virgyn knew
that it should never corropte, and that he was risen from death to life
immortal, or else shortly should rise. And therefore she went not with them. But
she sat in a secret place alone very feeble and weak in all the powers of her
body, for she had greatly tormentyd her self with great sorrow / watch and
abstinence, from that time yt she hard say that her only and dear beloved son
was taken and scourged, and afterward when she se him crucified / smytyng and
knockyng with her delicate hands upon her tender breast. And thus (I say) very
feeble sat alone in contemplacion and prayer and also weapyng for those
mysteries and pains that her son had suffered. And as she was thus in prayer
and sweet tears of devotion: suddenly her son Jesus came and apperyd to her in
most white clothes of glory and in the newnes of his resurrection, beautiouse
and gloriouse, with a glad and lovely chere comfortyng his desolate and heavy
mother. And therewith she knelyng down worshipped him, and then risyng up: with
tears and unspeakable joy embraced him and then all the bitterness of her
sorrow was turned in to joy and comforth. After this they both setyng to
gether: our Lady besily and curiously be held him in his face hands and feet
and in all his body, whither he had the printes and signs of his wounds /
searchynge and askyng whether all his pains and sorrow were clean paste and
gone from him. And he said, yea my worshipful mother all my sorrows and pains
be now past and gone, and shall never return again to me. O with how great joy
(think you) was then that blessed Lady repleat? When she se and beheld her son
immortal and impassible and not only that he should live evermore: but also
that he had the perpetual dominion over heaven and earth and all creatures in
them. And so they louyngly and pleasantly commynyg and talkyng to gether: made
a great joyful pasch, or solemn feast. And though of this first aperyng unto
his mother there be nothing written in the gospels: yet we do godly beleaue /
that Jesus first appeared unto his mother Mary. For so it was conuenyent as
doctors don say that he should so do, and that he should first conforth and
glad his mother by his resurrection, which louyd him above all other persons.
Also because she had more sorrow of his death than any other had: it was seamyng
and worthy that he should first comforthe her. And the church of Rome does
seame to approve this same for first in the morning of Ester day she makes
a solemn stacion at the church of our Lady, called our Lady the more. Maria
mayor. Mary the more. Herby notyng that Christ did first appear unto his
mother. And where the evangelist says, Mar. 16. C
that Christ did first appear unto Mary Magdalen: is to be vnderstondyd of
these apperynges / whereby he would prove his resurrection. For he apperyd first
of al unto his mother, not for that he would thereby prove his resurreccion: but
for to comforth and glad her with his presence, and do his duty and honor her
as his mother.

A prayer.
O Mary the mother of god, most graciouse virgyn and comfortar of al desolate
persons calling and criyng unto the: I beseech the for that great joy whereby
thou was comforted, when thou know that thy son Jesus Christ was risen ye
third day from death unto life immortal and impassible: that thou would be a
comfortar of my soul, that what time I shall arise both in body and soul at
the last day of judgment and there appear before that same son of thyn Jesus
Christ / and there to render mine account of al my thoughts / words and
deades: it would please thy motherly pity to healpe me / that by the (o blessed
mother and vigyn) I might escape the sentence of eternal dampnacion: and
graciously to cum to the everlasting joy and glory with all the elect and
chosen people of god. Amen.

How Jesus apperyd to Mary Magdalen The syxte Chapitre.
MAry Magdalen full of bitterness and sorrow, burning in love and not knowing what
she should do: for without her master Christ: she might not live, and where he was
buried: she fond him not and where to search for him she knew not. Wherefore of
great feruore and constancy: she stood as if she had been amaised, for the
vehemence of her love: would another suffer her to sit ne yet to lie, therefore
she stood without in the garden before the holy sepulcre weapyng and lamentyng
for her lord. Her heart was so fervently kyndled in love, she was moved with so
great pytie / drawn with so mighty and strong bonds of charity: that
forgotten her own infirmity and frayltie: she was not withdrawn and let
from the visitynge of Christ's sepulcre for the darkness of the mournyng, nor
yet for the cruelty of the Iues, but rather she abode there weapyng and
searchyng for her lord. She would not depart: though the disciples went from
thens, for she was so kindled in the fire of love, she was so burned with a
fervent desire / she was so wounded with inpacient love: yt nothing was
pleasant to her, but only weapyng, So that she might well say the words of
the prophet David. Psalm. 4.
Fuerunt mihi lacrime me panes die ac nocte. My tears ware to me my bread or
meat, both by the night and the day / when it was said to me daily, where is
thy god. She had lost her master whom she loved so syngulerly that besides him
she could love no body, nor trust to them. She was so drowned in his love, he
was so much in her mind: that in a manner she was inse^sible to al other
things. Whiles she thus weapt for the absence of Christ's body: she oftymes
inclyned and bowed down her body, lokyng in to the sepulcre, where as the body
was leyd, she had lost ye life of her soul, and therefore she thought it better
for her to dye: than to live, for she peradventure deynge might find him: Omel.
25.
whom she might not find living. And thus weapyng (I say) she looked oftymes
into ye grave, for as saint Gregory says. It is not sufficient for a lover,
to look ones, for the fervor of love increases the desire of searchyng or
lokyng. And at last when she so looked: she did se with her bodily yen.ii.
Angels sittyng in whyt garments, which said to her, why do thou weap? thou
have no cause to weape: but rather to joy of Christ's Resurrection, he is not
here, he is arysen. Than she supposyng that they ware men and not Angels: said
to them showing the cause of her weapyng, they have taken away my lord, and I
know not where they have put him, Ioh. 20. C.
for she se the stone taken away / and therefore she thought that sum other
body had stolen the body of Christ and borne it to sum other place. And when
Mary Magdalen did thus continue in her sorrow and weapynge and nothing
regarding the Angels: her most loving master Christ: could absente him
self no lengar from her. Than she turned her self about: that she might se
Jesus, for before that, her back was toward him, and that was to signify ye
doutfulnes of her soul, for she belyued not that he was risen from death unto
life, and therefore her back was toward the face of our lord. But yet for
asmoche as she loved him / though she douted of his Resurrection: therefore she
did se him: and did not know him. She se him: but not in his glorious form or
body: for as yet she did not belyue that he was risen, And so he appeared to her
after that manner in his body: as he was in her mind and soul, And than Jesus
said to her, Ioh. 20. D.
Mulier quid ploras, quem queris? woman why weapest thou? whom do thou
seach? he does not ask this of any ignorance: but yt hearing her answer: he
might more conveniently instruct her in the faith. And as saint Gregory says,
Omel. 25.
He asked the cause of her sorrow: to kyndle and augment or increase her love
and desire, that wha^ she should name him whom she loved: her love should be more
fervent toward him. And note here that Jesus appeared to her in the likeness of
a gardener, and that very conveniently, For he was to her a spiritual gardyner,
for he labored to pluck out the thorns and weades of infidelite and vices:
and to sow and plant in the garden of her soul, the grene seades of faith and
virtue, by the virtue of his fervent love. Such office / such operation /
such exercise: and such interpretacion of her name: is convenient for
begynners or penitentes. For it is convenient that a penitent use him self as
a gardyner / that is, that he pull out by the roots al vices / and plant in
his soul: virtues and also that he have contricion according to the first
interpretacion of this name Maria, As we showed in the chapitre next before
this. Ioh. 20. D.
And than this blyssed woman (as in a manner drunk in love) answered to Jesus:
as to a gardyner, Domine si tu sustulisti eum, dicito mihi zc. Sir / if thou
have taken him away: tell me where he is: that I may go and take him? A
marvelous boldness of this woman, for she was not afraid of ye sight of a deed
body / and would also attempt to bear a deed cors: the which far passed her
power But she thought that she could do it, for there is nothing to hard to a
loving soul. And than our lord Jesus having compassion of her great sorrow /
and willing no longer to suffer her to weape called her by her proper name.
Before that he called her by a co^me^ name / sayng, mulier, woman, and tha^ she
knew hi^ not, but now wha^ he said Maria: furthwith she was turned both heart
and soul / as she was before turned i^ body / and as a good sheep: knew ye
voice of her and so she reuyued? Ibidem.
said to him with unspeakable joy, O Raboni: O master (for so she was wont to
call him before his passion) you art he whom I saught / and anon she ran to
him, and falling down to his feet, with great love and devotion would have
embrased them and kyssed them as she was wont to do before / by an imperfect
affection to his manhood, but our lord as a spiritual gardyner willing to
plant true faith in her heart / and to lift up her soul to his godhed and
heavenly things: Ibidem.
said to her. Noli me tangere, touch not me in that erthly manner with thy
bodily hands: whom as yet thou have not touched with true faith of heart. And
so he enstructe her in the true faith of his godhed and resurrection. Let us
now learn of this Mary to love Jesus, to trust in him / to seache him without
ceasyng, to fear none adversities, to receive no consolacion or co^forth but
in Jesus, to despise al things but Jesus.

A prayer.
O Most sweet master, o most sweet Jesus, how good art thou to them that be
clean in heart, how sweet art you to them that love the. O how happy ar they
that seache the and find the, how blyssed ar they that trust in the, It is
truth, that thou louyst all them that love the, thou never forsakest them that
trust in the / lo lord, this Mary thy true lover of a good siple mind she
saught the, and truly she found the, she was not forsaken of the, but she had
more of the: than she looked for. I beseach the lord, grant me to love the,
to seache the and to trust in the, yt I may deserve to find the and to be
loved of the, and never to be forsaken of the. Amen.

How Jesus appeared to his disciples: Thomas being also present. The.vii.
Chapitre.
THe.viii. Ioh. 20. G.
day of his Resurection / our lord Jesus appeared to his disciples / Thomas
being present with them, For the first day of his Resurrection he appeared to
his disciples, E.
what time Thomas was there absent, F.
And when Thomas was comme to their compaigney: the disciples said to him,
Vidimus dominum, we have seen our lord and our master, and than Thomas said,
except I see the signs or the pryntes of the nails in his hands and put my
finger in the holes, Ci^illus (...)
and also put my hand into his side: I will not belyue. These words ware not
spoken of any malice: Ioh. lib. 12.
but rather of ignorance, and of a great sorrow and heaviness for that he had not
seen our lord and therefore his loving and godly master Jesus would not leave
his loving discyple in that blyndnes and heaviness: Ca. 57.
but for to comforth him and for to reform his faith: it pleased him to appear
again. Bonauen^. in medita. vite x^^.
Therefore when his discyples ware gadred to gyther in ye mount of Syon, where
as he kept his mau^dy or supper / and also Thomas being with them: Cap^. 74.
et. 105.
the good shepherd and herdman Jesus / diligent to comforth his little small
flock: came unto them the gates / doors / and wyndowes being shyt / and so stood
in the myddest of them, that he might be seen of them all, and said to them.
Pax vobis. Ioh. 20. G.
Peace be to you. And note here that there can never be peace in a comynalty:
except the prelate be in the myddest, so that he be not enclyned more to one
part: than to the other. A pillar can never sustain and bear up the house, if
it be set nygh to ye wall and not in the myddest, and therefore the earth which is
set in ye myddest of the world: is immovable, to signify that every prelate
or herd should not be moved by any parcialite more to one person than to an
other. Our lord Jesus did oftymes show peace unto his disciples / did also
commend it and persuade them to have it, for without peace: Psalm. 77.
we can not have god, the prophet to witness wha^ he says. In pace factus est
locus eius. His place and abydyng is in peace, Io. 20. G.
Than Jesus said to Thomas. Infer digitum tuu^ huc et vide manus meas. Put in
thy finger here and se my hands, and put forth thy hand and thurst it in to
my side, and be not unfaithful, but belyue. Than Thomas toyched the signs of
Christ's wou^des, and so byleued, not only with his heart: but also confessed
it with his mouth and said. Ibidem.
Dominus meus et deus meus. Thou art my lord after thy humanite / for thou
have redeemed me with thy preciouse blood, and thou art my god in thy divinity,
for thou have create me, I doubt in nothing now, Ibidem.
but I am sure that thou art risen from death to life. Than Jesus said to him,
Quia vidisti me Thoma cre didisti, beati qui non viderunt et crediderunt.
Thomas thou do belyue because thou have seen me, blyssed be they that belyue
and have not seen. In these words, is not only affirmed the faith of Thomas:
but also our faith is much commended and blessed, and the error of the
heretics confounded: which said yt Christ had no true body. And here se the
goodness and mercy of our lord / how that he would appear and show him self
with his wounds: to save one soul. Also note here, that the infinite wisdom
and goodness of god suffered Thomas to doubt: that the resurrection of Christ
should be prouyd by evident and manifest arguments or signs, therefore Thomas
douted: yt we should not dout. Herunto says saint Gregory. Omel. 26. a^te
medium.
It was not of chance: but of the ordinance of god that ye well-beloved
disciple of Christ, Thomas was absent when Christ did first appear, that he
hearing of his resurrection: should dowte, he so dowtyng: should feale and
touch the places of the wounds of Christ, and so fealyng should beleaue, and
that: to expel al dowtfulnes from our hertes. And so in fealynge or putting
in his hand into the side of Christ: he cured in us the wounds of our
infidelite. Also the incredulite or doutfulnes of Thomas did more profyt us
unto our faith: that the prompte and ready beleaue of the other disciples, for
by his dowtyng and fealyng: our mind is stablyshed in faith / all dowtes set a
part. Mary Magdalen did less profyt to me by her swyft and ready faith: than
Thomas by his long dowtyng, for he touched the pryntes of his wounds: and
utterly expelled from my soul the wound of doutfulnes. Our lord of his great
goodness reserved the pryntes or signs of his wounds in his body after his
resurrection, Not for that he could not cure the^: for he yt destroyed the
power of death: might also have cured and put away those signs of death if it
had pleased him, but he would reserve them for diverse causes. First to confirm
our faith, as ye se in Thomas, Secondly, for to show to his father: when he
will pray for us. And thyrdly to show them at the day of dome to the dampened
people to their confusion. And these tokens of his wounds ware in no thing to
the deformity of his glorious body: but rather as Crisostom says: to his
great beauty, for they shone more bright than the son. Libro. 22. de
Ciuitate dei. Ca. 20.
And as saint Austen says, the tokens of the wou^des that holy saints have
suffered here for Christ: shall in heaven appear in their bodies not to their
deformite: but to their glory as a star in the firmament, as a presiouse
stone in a ring, as a flower in the medowe, and as the red color in a rose,
which be to the fairnes and beauty of these things, and so be tho pryntes of
their wounds in their bodies to their glory and dignity. O thou loving soul,
behold now thy lord and consydre his wont goodness, meaknes and fervent love,
how he shows his wounds to Thomas and to his other disciples: to put away
all blyndnes and ignorance from their souls, for their profyt and ours also.
Our lord stood there with them a little while: speaking comfortable words of
ye kingdom of glory. And his disciples stood with him i^ great gladness hearing
his godly words, and beholding his face full of favor, beauty and glory.
Behold them how they stand about him, And stand thou reuere^tly with joy
beholding them a far of: if paraduenture our lord moved of pytie and mercy will
cause the to be called, though thou of thy self be not worthy that compaygny.
At last Jesus said unto them, that they should goo into Galile and there he would
appear unto them according unto his promise. And so he blessed them and
departed from them, And they remained in great comforth, but yet much desirous
to se him again.

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ which showed unto Thomas yt douted of thy resurrection,
the places of the nails and the spear, and has revoked him from error by
the putting in of his finger into the holes of thy hands, and of his hand
into thy side / grant to me that I having ever the remembrance of thy wounds
and passion, may expe^d and put in my finger and hand, that is, what so ever
good werk or discreacion be in me I may put it in and expende it all holl in
thy service to thy honor, And that I may confess with Thomas, that thou art
my lord, which has bought me with thy preciouse blood, and my god, which
has creat and made me, And that which thou said before of our faith, that
blyssed be they which have not seen and yet beleaue: I may have experience
thereof in my self, and that by thy grace: I may be found blyssed in thy
sight. Amen.

Of the Ascencion of our lord. The.viii. Chapitre.
Our lord Jesus knowing that the time was come, Ioh. 13. A.
that he should depart from this world unto his father: he would show, that
not only he loved his chosen people in this life, or when he was mortal: but
also yt he loved them unto the end, or for ever more and therefore he said to
them, Ioh. 14. A.
Vado parare vobis locum, I go to prepare a place for you in heuyn, yet before
that he went: he would comfort them, and take his leave of them, And therefore he
appeared to them in the mownt of Syon in that place where as he made his supper
before his passion, for as they ware sittyng and eating in that place with our
blyssed lady and other friends of our lord: he appeared to them and did eat
with them before his Ascencion as well for a sign or toke^ of his special love
to his disciples / as to prove his resurrection. And after yt they had eaten:
he brought them all forth, not with hand: but with his word and byddyng, and
so they went from Jerusalem unto Bethany, and than he had them go unto the
mownt of Oliuete, and there they should se him ascend, and so he departed and
vanished from their sight. And at ye mownt of Oliuete he appeared to them
again. Actu^^. 1. A.
And than some of his disciples said to him, Domine si in tempore hoc restitues
regnum Israel. Shall thou lord restore at this time the kingdom of Israel,
that is, will thou now deliver the Iues from the subjection of the Romays. etc.
our lord answered, It apperteyneth not to you to know tho secreat times or
things, that my father has in his only power. Bonauen^.
And so after that Christ had spoken certain things to their instruction and
also comforthe: In meditationibus vite Christi.
he kyssed ych one of them (for as saint Ambrose says, he left to them ye
token of peace, that is he kyssed them), Ca. C. v.
and so byddyng them fare well: he lyfted up his hands, to offer them all to
his father, and blyssed them, gyuynge them grace and strenght to defend them
from their enemies, and also to werk good and godly works, and so he ascended,
And tha^ his mother and his disciples seeing him eleuate and lyfted up in to
heaven: fell down prostrate and worshypped him, And for his departing: they
could not refrain them self from weapyng, and yet they had great joy and
comforth: in that they se him so gloriously ascend. And than there came and
met him all the ordres of Angels reverently and in order, by diverse compaygnyes
and ordres, there was not one: but that he came and did his deutye to his lord
god, And inclynyng to him with all reverence: they waited upon him with Hympnes
and songs of joy unspeakable. For as the prophet David says, Psalm. 46.
Ascendlt deus in iubilo, Christ god and man ascended in great songs of joy,
which is to be referred not only to the great joy of the Angels: but also to
the joy of the holy souls redeamed by the passion of Christ and asce^dyng with
him, with a wonderful joy. It followed in the psalm. Et do minus in voce
tube, And our lord ascended in the voice of the tru^pe, And this is to be
referred to the sown and voice of the prechyng of the apostles, which
preaching was than enjoined and commaundyd to them, Math. 19. D.
our lord sayng to them. Euntes in mundu^ vniuersum predicate euangelium omni
creature. Go ye through out all the world: and preach my gospel to every
nation. When thus both the angels and blessed souls did sing: our lord
ioynyng his hands to gyther deuotely, and lyftyng them up straight before his
breast: ascendyd with a cloud under his feet, And so all the blyssed souls
reverently ascendyd with him. Now for asmoche as all the acts of our
redemption ware complete in the ascencion of Christ: therefore that day is
worthily acompted as a high and a great joyful day. For it is the most
solemn feast of our savior Jesus, for that day he began to sit on the right
hand of his father, in his humanite, and so took rest of all the labor and
pain that he suffered in this world. It is also the propre feast of al blessed
spirits in heuyn, for than began their ruin and decay to be repaired. It is
also the feast of patriarchs and prophets and of all holy souls, for that
day they first entered into the kingdom of glory. It is morouer the feast of
our lady, for asmoche as than she saw her son Jesus very god and man ascend
up unto heaven with great glory in the same flesh and body that he took of her.
Yet that day is properly our feast, for than our nature was first exalted
above the heuyns, and so man that before was lost: was that day brought again
by our savior Jesus unto the kingdom of heuyn and unto the compaigney of
angels. Therefore let us now ascend in heart and mind: that when time shall
come that we be called from this world: we may ascend in soul, and after the
general resurrection: ascend both in soul and body. Christ did ascend and
withdraw from us his corporal ^sence: to provoke our affection and love, and
that we should desire to be with him with all our heart. Collo. 3. A.
And therefore as the Apostle says, Quae sursum sunt queramus, quae sursum sunt
sapiamus. Let us search and labor to know tho things that be in heuyn, and to
taste or love the same. Let us fly all worldly and vain desires, let no thing
transytory please us or content us: which have our father above in heuyn, And
though we be here in body and also use these temporal things for the fraylty
and infirmity of our body: yet let us go to god by our love and desire, as we
read of a certain deuote knight, which with great devotion went unto
Jerusalem to visit all the holy places where as our lord suffered his passion
or did any notable thing in his life / and when he had with fervent devotion
visited all tho places: at last he came unto the mount of Oliuete, unto the
place from whens our lord ascended, where after that he had deuotely prayed:
he said with tears. O good lord, I have delygently saught the in many places
here in earth, and where now to seache the: I know not, but in heaven, command
therefore sweet Jesus my soul to depart fro my body: that I may find the in
heaven where as thou syttes on the right hand of thy father in great glory, And
with these words he yielded up his spirit without any sorrow.

A prayer.
O Jesus our crown and glory, which rysyng from death did ascend unto the
right hand of thy father: draw my soul unto the: that I might fervently
seache and desire ye only, grant to me I beseache the that I may with all my
desire and study come to that place: to the which as I steadfastly belyue thou
have ascended, And that I being here in body: may be with the in love and
desire, that my heart may be there: where as thou art my love and treasure most
to be louyd and desired. Draw me after the, that by thy grace I asce^dyng from
virtue to virtue: may deserve to se the my lord god in the heavenly Syon. Amen.

Of the sendyng of the holy ghost. The.ix. Chapitre.
THe.L. day after ye Resurrection of Christ, and the.x. day after the
Ascension, that is on wytsonday: when the discyples of Christ were gadred to
gether in the place of mount Syon where as he made his supper / both men and
women to the nombre of.C.xx. or there about / there contynuyng in prayer, and
abydyng the coming of the holy ghost acordyng to promysse of Christ: about the
third hour of that same day, there came suddenly from heaven a wonderful noise
or sound as if it had been the coming of a great wind, Ac^. 2. A.
and it filled all the house, and there appeared unto them cloven tongues: or
dyuyded / as they had been fire. And here note that the gifts of the holy ghost
be not given, but to them: which be gadred to gyther by unite or one assent in
virtue, and lyfted up by desire unto heavenly things. Also the.vii. gifts of
the holy ghost / be conveniently signified or showed by fire. First for the
holy ghost does purge like as fire does, and that is by the gift of fear.
Secondly, as the fire does melt: so does the holy ghost by the gift of pytie.
Thyrdly, he beautyfieth and makes fair by the gift of science or knowledge.
Fourthly, he strenghtheth by the gift of strenght. Fyftly, he lyfteth up the
soul: by the gift of council. Syxtly, he does illumyne or lyghten the soul:
by the gift of understanding. And seuently, he does make sweet and pleasant by
the gift of wysdom. And all that compaigny ware filled with the holy ghost,
and so began to speak diverse speeches or langages, that is, when they spoke
any thing to the glory of god: every nation perceived that speech as their
own speech / for so it sounded to them, and so they spoke after the mocion of
the holy ghost and as he gave to the^ vtterau^ce which dyuydeth and gives his
grace to every person after his will and pleasure / where he will, wha^ he will,
asmoche as it pleases him, by what manner he will, and to whom he will.
Peradventure thou will ask this question, Sith the ways and operacions of god
the holy ghost be unsearchable and can not be perceived: how may I know that
the holy ghost is in me? Surely I may greatly conjecture his presence in me: by
the good mocions of my heart. Also I may aduerte and consydre the power of his
^tue in me: by that I avoid all carnal vices, and subdewe al inordinate
affections, Also I may perceive his wysdom in me: by the often discussion of my
conscience, and rebukyng of my self for my sins, Also I may suppose his
goodness and myldnes to rest in me: by the amendment of my manners and living.
And also by the reformacion and renouation of my spirit: I may conjecture the
same. Let every man look well in his own heart, If he love his neighbor: it
is a sign that the spirit of god is in him. Also if he love peace and unite,
and that in all the members of Christ's church through out all the world,
Ludolphus de vita x^i perce. 2. ca. lxxxiiii.
And note here that these signs be taken dyuersly in diverse degrees of
persons. For the holy does inspire, he does enhabite, and does replenishe or
fulfill, he does inspire, or come to the begynners, he does inhabit the
profyters, and he does fulfill the perfyt persons. The signs or tokens of the
holy ghost, whereby he is perceived to inspire the begynners ben ghost does
inhabit the profiters that goo forward in virtue. First is the deligent true
and often examination of his conscience, 1. Io. 4. D.
Vbi spiritus domini: ibi libertas. where as is the spirit of god: 2. Cor. 3.
D.
there is liberty, and no vain fear. For liberty can not stand with yt
servile fear. Third sign is, when Math. 3. D. and. 17. A.
And for this cause the holy ghost appeared in.iii. similitudes or lykenes.
Ite^. Orig. super Math. Omel. 3.
First in the lykenes of a douue, and that was at the baptism of Christ. In
the lykenes al so of a cloud: when Christ was transfygured in the mount. And
in lyknes of fire upon the disciples on Wytsonday. Actu. 2. A.
First sign (I say) whereby we may know or conjecture the presence of our
hertes assende upward by desire of heavenly things, which things if thou
desire: thou must forsake and despy^e all vain pleasures of the flesh / or
of the world. And herunto saint Gregory says, If we put away the pleasures
of the flesh: we shall shortly find that thing which is pleasant to the
spirit. Also spiritual persons or carnal: may be known by the words of the
Apostle sayng. To. 8. A.
Qui secundum carnem sunt: que carnis sunt sapiunt. zc. they that be carnal:
love carnal pleasures / and spiritual persons love spiritual and heavenly
desires. But than specially a man is known to be spiritual: if he as sone /
as shortly / and asmoch will avoid that place and compaigney where he may be
hurted or hyndred in spirit: as he will do yt place where he may be hurted in
body. Also if he as gladly will hear speak of spiritual things, as of the
profytes of the body. Thyrdly if he be as diligent to procure for his soul: as
the carnal man for his body.

A prayer.
O Jesus the gyuer of all gifts which sent the holy ghost unto thy disciples
in the lykenes of fire, I pray and beseache the O most merciful lord, that
I (though most unworthy) might receive to my perpetual health by thy grace,
those gifts which thy disciples received of thy only beautiouse goodness, and
send upon us (good lord) thy servants ye spirit of thy charity / and love
and peace: which might vysite and comforth our hertes* purge them from vices,
lyghten them with virtues, bynd us in the bonds of peace and love / illuminate
us with the light of thy knowledge, and inflame us with the fire of thy charity,
forgive us our sins, and bring us to life everlasting. Amen.

Of the Assumpcion and praise of our glorious Lady. The.x. Chapitre.
AFter the sendyng of the holy upon the disciples: the blyssed virgyn the
mother of Jesus, aslong as she lived: did remain in the mount of Syon. O ye
christians, I beseache you, if ye have any pity or compassion in you: consider
what sorrow she had, how she was cruciate with love / how she burned i^ great
desire: wha^ she remembered, and reuolued in her mind al such things as she
had hard / seen / and known of her most sweet son Jesus. And now to speak of
her assumpcion: this is the true and vndoutfull sentence. We beleaue, that she
was assumpte and exalted above all the ordres of angels / though we were
sumtyme ignorant, whether she was assumpte in soul only: or else / both in
body and soul. But the church now meakly and godly beleuith that she is
assumpte both in soul and body. And as we beleaue angels ware present to
honor her, both at her death / buriyng and also assumpcion, and all the court
of heuyn did greatly joy thereof. For it is to be beleauyd yt all the court of
heuyn with their cumpaigneys in order: came gloriously to mete the mother of god
and compassed her all about with a meruealouse light, and so brought her up
with great praysynges and spiritual longes unto the trone, which was prepared
and ordained for her before the creacion of the world. And no doubt thereof,
all that blessed cumpaigney of heavenly Jerusalem then reioysed with an
unspeakable gladness, then was comforted with an in estimable charity / and
then ioyed with a meruealouse gratulacion and reioysyng, for that feast of this
blessed virgyns assumpcion, which is but ones in the year celebrate with us: is
to them a continual feast and joy. And not without cause, In sermo. de
Assu^ptione Marie ad Paulum and Eustachi.
for as saint Hierom says, our lord Jesus the savior of all, came with great
glory and met with his mother and with great joy to all the court of heuyn:
did set her in a gloriouse trone nygh unto him self. O thou gloriouse Lady,
what may I say more? Who so laboreth to considre and declare the inmensitie and
hudghnes of thy grace and glory: his tongue fails, his wit wants, and his
reason can not com thereto. For as all saints in heuyn by thy glorification be
inestimably beautified and gladded: so al creatures upon earth be unspeakably
exalted by the same glorificacion. For as god by his power / creatynge and
making al creatures, is the father and lord over al: so our blessed Lady / by
her merits repayryng all things: is the mother and Lady of all. And as
almyghtie god the father did generate of his own godly substance his eterne
son, by whom he has given life and beginning to all things: so blessed Mary
conceyuyd and bare him of her own body / which restored all things unto the
beauty and fayrnes of their first condition. And as there is no thing made or
has his being, but by the son of god: so there is no thing condemned forsaken
or put to etarnall dampnacion, but that person whom Christ absolueth from
her savior, or whom she does not favor or defend. Who is he that
considering these things with a right sense or wit and a pure heart, may fully
know or perceive thexcellency of this Lady / by whom the world is erecte and
raised up with unspeakable grace: from so great a fall and decay? Therefore we
leauyng tho things that can not be searched and known by our natural reason:
let us labor to opteyn by prayers that we may deserve to get that in holsom
and fruyteful effect: which we can not perceive by our under standing. Hereby
we may perceive that it is impossible that any person should be dampened: that is
truly turned to her, and whom, she favors and beholds. She is the mother
of Christ that is our iustifier / and also she is the mother of them that
shall be justified. She is the mother of the savior: and of them that shall be
sauyd. How therefore may we despeire seth our health or our dampnacion depends
of the will of our good brother and pitiful mother? Shall our good brother
suffer his brethren to perish eternally, whom he has redemyd so derely? Or
may our pitiful mother suffer her children to be dampened, whose reademar she
bare in her virginal womb? Nay suerly if we will forsake our syn, and cum
faithfully to them. Therefore let us wretches joy with ye holy spirits and
souls in heaven and with all creatures as much as we may, and let us study and
labor to laud and praise so gloriouse so merciful a mother and virgyne / as
far as our infirm and frail nature will suffer. 2. Reg^^. 6. C.
The assumpcion of this gloriouse virgyn was figured in the old law, when as
the ark of god was translate in to the house of king David. At which time
king David did harp and dance before the ark of god, and so brought it in
to his house with great joy. 3. Reg^^. 2. C.
It was also figured in the mother of Solomon, for whom he made a trone, next
unto his trone, and set her therein, sayng, ask of me what thou will. It is not
convenient or seamyng for me to deny it to the. Also it was figured by the
woman which saint Johan speaks of, Apo^^. 12. A.
in his reuelacions, sayng. Signum magnum apparuit in celo. Mulier amicta sole
et luna sub pedibus eius. etc. A great sign apperyd in heuyn. A woman clad or
coueryd with the son, and the moon under her feet, and a crown of.xii. sterres
upon her head. This woman signifies our Lady, which when she was assumpte
unto heuyn: was clade or compassyd about with the son that is with the glory
of the divinity of Christ. The moon was under her feet, for she despised the
world and worldly things, signified by the mutable moan. She had a crown
of.xii. sterres upon her heed, for the.xii. apostles ware present at her death
/ or else. It signifies her unspeakable glory. For these consideracions: all
men should cry and call unto our lady Mary should name Mary, and should love
her above all other creatures. Both young and old man and woman, every
profession: should diligently call upon Mary. When by our syn, we have offendyd
god the high king of glory / when we have lost the cumpaigney of all holy
aungelles and saints in heuyn, when also we be greuouse and much paynfull to
our self, and know not what to do and whether to go for help: then this only
remedy have we wretched sinners, that we may lift up our ien of our soul and
body unto the (o merciful mother Mary) for counsel and healpe. Therefore o
pitiful Lady, intend to us, that we may receive that profitte and effect: for
the which our Lord god was made man in thy most chaste womb, and so liuyd here
among men, and at last suffered death for the health and salvation of man. To
the blessed Mary we commend us: procure for us and defend us, that we do not
perish euerlastyngly. Amen.

A prayer.
O Lord the gyuer of joy, the graunter of solace, the diligent releuer of the
desolate person, the chaser away of all heuines and sorrow, which haste gladdyd
and make joyful the most blessed virgyn Mary thy mother the glass of thy
majesty / the solace of au^gelles, the image of thy goodness, the begynner of
our health (thou have gladdyd her I say) with manyfold joys both i^ heaven and in
earth: I beseach the grant to me thy suppliant, that I which presume to com
trustely and faithfully to her as to the well and fountain of joy in all my
sorrows and trobles: may by her merits and prayers feale and receive the
effect of her prayers and comforth in this present life, and finally to cum to
that ineffable joy, to ye which she assu^pte ioyeth with ye eternally in
heuyns. Amen.

Of the last judgment and of the cummyng of the Judge to the same the.xi.
Chapter.
WE read in scripture of.ii. co^mynges of Christ. Esaic. 62. D. 64. A. (...)
zacha. 6. B
First is past, that was when he came to be cum man and in our nature of his
manhod suffered death for ye redemption of man. Math. 24. C. (...). 25. C.
Second shall be when he shall com to judge all man kind. And the condycions of
the judge in this coming: Luce. 21.
be contrary unto his condycions in his first coming, for then he came in great
meaknes / with the co^paignye and fellowship of very poor people his apostles,
and in his propre infirmity and feebleness. But contrarywyse, to ye judgment,
he shall cum in great power and majesty with the compaigney of angels,
Super. Luc. Ca. 76.
and in his great dignity as a judge. Herunto Beda says. He that first came in
the form and meakenes of a servant to be judged and also condemned: shall
here after com to judge the world: in the great majesty of his deity. And
that shall be manifestly and openly, not hid in a mortal body as before, that tho
persons that contempned him in his humility and mortality: should now know him
in his power and majesty. Math. 25. C.
And then he shall sit upon the seet of his majesty. And there shall all
people be gadred before him: as before their judge, And he shall separate and
divide them a sondre: as the herd man divides the sheep from ye gootes. In the
day time he keapeth them to gedre in ye pasture / but in the euyntyde: he does
sever them a sondre. So in this present life, both the good persons and also ye
evil: ben fed to gedre in the church militante, but in the euyntyde of death
or of the world: Christ shall seauer the good from the evil, as sheep fro
the gootes. In the sheep: is understand the innocence of good men for their
simplicity / myldnes and fruytfulnes. And in the gootes is noted the
frowardnes of evil men: for their filthynes, stynche stubbernes and barennes.
Math. 15. C.
And Christ shall set the sheep or good men on his right side and the gootes:
on his left side, that by the same orderyng in the right or left side: every
person may know, to whom mercy shall be showed: and to whom eternal pain
remains. And the good men be conveniently set on the right hand: for they at
their death ware found on the right part, that is having charity and good
works. And the evil men also be conuenie^tly set on the left hand: for they
would not follow the right part by doing of good works for ye love of god. Tho
be on the left part: which here love temporal and vain things. Tho be on
the right part: which here love eternal things. And then shall Christ
recounte and remember the works of mercy unto the good men on the right hand,
which they did to Christ in his members, and so shall say thus. Math. 25. C. D.
Venite benedicti patris mei. etc. Com ye belssyd chylderne of my father,
possess and receive ye the kingdom prepared for you before the beginning of
the world. I was hungry: and ye fed me. I was thristy: and ye gave me drink.
I was without lodgyng: and ye harbored me. I was seake: and ye did visit me. I
was in prison: and ye came to me. I was naked: and ye clothed me. Then the good
and just persons (as fliynge their own commendacions and praysynges) shall
ask, when they did any such thing to him. And Christ shall say to them truly
I say to you, as often as ye did any of these things unto one of these my lest
bredren: ye did it to me. Tho be his bredren: that fulfill the will of his
father in heuyn, they be also called the least: for that they be meke and in
this life abiecte or despised. And note here that though we spoke here but
of.vi. works of mercy, that is because, Math. 25. D.
there be no mo remembered by our savior Christ in the gospel of Mathewe / yet
we say commonly that there be.vii. works of mercy, and truth it is, for
the.vii. is to bury the deed bodies, Tob. 1. D. 2. A. and 12. C.
which is taken of the book of Toby, for he used the same to his great reward
and our example. And these.vii. works be contained in this verse. Visito,
poto, cibo, tego, redimo, colligo, condo. So that every word notes one work
of mercy. The first word. Visito, notes the visityng of them that be seek.
Second. Poto. to give drink to ye thristy. Third. Cibo, to feed the hungry.
Fourth. Tego. to cover the naked. Fyfth. Redimo. to redeame the prisoner.
Ibidem.
Syxt. Colligo. to lodge the harborles. Seventh. Condo. to bury the deed. Math.
25. D.
Also the judge shall say to them that be on ye left hand. Discedite a me
maledicti in ignem eternum. etc. Depart from me you cursed people in to
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his aungelles. I was
hungry: and ye would not feade me. I was thristy: and ye gave me no drink and
so all the other.vi. forsaid works of mercy. Then the evil men shall answer.
Lord when did we se the hungry / thristy, naked / seek / herborles or in
prison: and we have not conforted the? Then our lord shall say, when ye would
not do these things to one of these onys: ye would not do it to me. And here
note that this question mouyd by the good or evil persons: does not proceed of
any ignorance / for the just and good persons shall know that ye works of
mercy done to the members of Christ in his name and for his love: he reputeth
those good deeds as done to him self, and also they know that they shall have
a great reward thereby. And in like manner the evil persons shall know / that
they shall be dampened for the contrary. And therefore / they asked not that
question of any ignorance: but it is a question of great admiration and
meruell, for ye greatness of grace and glory, which shall be given to the just
people for those good works, and also for the intolerable myserie and pain
that shall fall upon the evil persons for their hardness and unmercifulness.
Iaco. 2. C.
And so hard judgment without mercy: shall be done to him that would show or do
no mercy. What shall they deserve that steal and rauishe other mennys goods:
sithe they be eternally dampened, which will not give their own goods in
almosse? If the unmerciful people shall suffer so greuouse pains what shall
they suffer that be cruel? S^ Math. omel. 80.
And note here as Crisostom says, that the pain of evil persons is
everlasting, and so is the reward of good men. For as eternal sins don
pass for ye act or doing after that they be don, but yet there remains the
gylt or offense toward god, which shall be punished. So good works don for the
love of god / don pass to speak of the act or deed: but yet they remain in
their merit and so to be rewardyd of god. Also saint Hierom says: S^ Math.
25. in fine.
thou wise reader attend and remember diligently, that both the pains of hell
be eternal, and also the glory of heuyn, for that life shall have no fear of
decay or death. And therefore the evangelist says, Math. 25. D.
that the evil men shall go to eternal fire, and the just men to
everlasting life / and joy of heuyn which was prepared for them before the
beginning of the world, for thereunto they ware predestinate. And note well
here / that the predestination of god is not the necessary cause of thy
salvation. For the predestination of god is ever condicionally, that there is
no thing predestinate but under some condition, as it was predestinate that the
world should be sauid: but that was by the death of the son of god and by the
watre of baptism, so that they would receive it and live thereafter. Also all
good and just men be predestinate to glory eternal, yet with this condition,
if they contine we in true faith / charity / humility or meknes, patience
mercy / pity, with other virtues and the operacion of them, whom our lord
does predestinate to life everlasting, he sees and knows before that they
shall have such virtues, as if in his predestinacion he might say to them. I do
predestinate you to glory: if ye have such virtues: if ye keape my
commaundimentes. etc. Who so will not keape gods commaundymentes / will not
continue in faith with charity and good works. etc. he shall not com to the
end of predestinacion, that is to the glory of heuyn: for he will not keape the
condition thereof. Therefore do not ouermoch attend and trust to the
predestinacion of god which thou knows not: but rather attend to the words of
god, which thou heris, and knowis. For as god is true, and can not be
chaungeable: so his words be true and can not be changed. Ca. 33. C.
But let us here, what be those words of god. Ca. 18. E. G.
The prophet Ezechiel says in the person of god. Nolo mortem impij sed vt
conuertatur a via sua et viuat. Si autem impius egerit poenitentiam ab omnibus
peccatis suis, et custodierit omnia precepta mea: vita viuet. I will not (says
almighty god) the death of a sinner: but rather that he be conuertyd from his
syn and live in grace: for if the sinner do penance or be sorry for all his
sins that he has don and keape all my precepts and do true judgment and
justice, he shalliue here in grace and he shall not dye eternally. Also he
says. Marci. xvi.
Qui crediderit et baptisatus fuerit: saluuus erit. He that beleuith and is
baptized and so continues in that true faith and promise made at his baptism:
he shall be saved. Also he says. Si vis ad vitam ingredi: Math. 6. B
serua mandata. If thou wylt cum to life everlasting: keape the
commaundimentes. And in an other place Christ says. Math. 19. C.
Si dimiseritis homnibus pecata eorum: dimittet vobis pater meus pecata vestra.
If ye forgive to other men their offensis don to you: my heavenly father shall
forgive to you your sins. In these words and many other like stands our
predestinacion to life, or our reprouyng to death ever lastyng. And look for
none other predestinacion. If thou keape these saynges of god: thou shall be
sure. Therefore say not as many unwise persons say. I am predestinate of god to
be sauyd, therefore I can not be dampened, though I never pray, nor do any other
good dead. For I assure the, that if thou keape not the commau^dimentes of
god. etc. thou shall be damned, wherefore be ware of such folyshe saynges, for the
predestinacion of god is so ordered: that it may be obtained and gotten by
prayers and other good labors and works. And hereunto saint Austen says: if
thou be not predestinate: labor that thou may be predestinate. For as god
sees before that a man shall be sauyd: so he sees ye mean and manner how he
shall be sauyd, that is he sees how he shall for sake his syn, and labor for
grace and keape the will of god and so be sauyd.

A prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ judge of both quick and deed vouchsafe to order and set
me in the last judgment on thy right hand, and that I may then hear thy most
sweet voice to my comforth which thou shall then speak to thy chosen people,
that is. Cum ye blessed chylderne of my father, and take possessyon of the
kingdom of glory: that was prepared for you before the beginning of the
world. And also keape me, that I fear not the hearing of that most terrible
sentence / which then thou shall speak unto the reprouyd sinners, saying. Go
ye cursed people in to everlasting fire prepared for the dyuel and his
compaygny O thou only begoten son of god, have mercy on us, that we never feel
that incurable and intolerable pain, that is, to be excludyd from the glory
and sight of god and to be burned perpetually in everlasting fire. O my god my
mercy and socour: be merciful to us. Amen.

: Thus ends this little treatise called the Glass or Myrrour of Christ's
passion. Imprynted at London in Fleet street / at the sign of the George / by
me Robert Redman. The year of our lord god. M.CCCCC.xxx.iiii. The.xii. day of
December. RP

printer's device of Richard Pynson




