A CHRISTIAN LETTER of certain English Protestants, unfeigned favorers of the
present state of Religion, authorized and professed in ENGLAND: unto that
Reverend and learned man, Mr R. Hoo. requiring resolution in certain matters
of doctrine (which seem to overthrow the foundation of Christian Religion and
of the church among us) expreslie contained in his five books of
Ecclesiastical Policy.

1599.

A Christian LETTER of certain English Protestants, unfeigned favorers of the
present state of religion, authorized and professed in England: unto that
Reverend and Learned man, Master R. Hoo. requiring resolution in certain
matters of doctrine (which seem to overthrow the foundation of Christian
Religion, and of the Church among us) expreslie contained in his five books of
Ecclesiastical Policy.
WHEN men dream they are asleep, and while men sleep the enemy sows
tares, and tares take root and hinder the good corn of the Church, before it
be espied. Therefore Wise men through silence permit nothing looselie to pass
away as in a dream. Your offer then, May. Hoo. is godly and laudable, to
inform men of the estate of the church of God established among us. For the
Teachers of righteous things, are highly to be commended. And he that leads
me^ rightly to judge of the church of God, is to be beloved of all men.
Howbeit sometimes goodly promises are mere formal, and great offers serve
only to hoodwinke such as mean well. And as by a fair show of wishing well,
our first parents were fowlie deceived: so is there a cunning framed method, by
excellency of words, and intising speeches of man's wisdom, to beguile and
bewitch the very Church of GOD. And such as are used for this purpose come in
sheep clothing. For he translateth him self into an Angel of light, who
blinds all men with utter darkness. When we therefore, your loving cuntrymen
(vnfaynedlie fouoring the present state, and embracing from our hearts the
Gospel of Christ, as it is preached and professed in England, being ready
every hour to give up our lives for Gods glory: and the honor of our Queen)
having so goodly a champion to offer combat in our defense, were made very
secure, and by the sweet sound of your melodious style, almost cast into a
dreaming sleep: We happily remembering your Preface that there might be some
other cause, opened at the length our heavy eyes, and casting some more
earnest and intentive sight into your manner of fight, it seemed unto us that
covertly and underhand you did bend all your skill and force against the
present state of our English church: and by color of defending the discipline
and gouuernement thereof, to make questionable and bring in contempt the
doctrine and faith it self. For we saw the theme and the cause you have in
hand, to be notable simples, whereof a skillful popish Apoticarie can readily
make some fine potion or sweet smelling ointment, to bring heedlesse men into
the pleasant dream of well-weening: while they closely set on fire the house
of God. And may we not truly say, that under the show of inveighing against
Puritanes, the chiefest points of popish blasphemy, are many times and in
many places, by diverse men not obscurelie broached; both in Sermons and in
Writing: to the great grief of many faithful subjects, who pray for the
blessed and peaceable continuance of her most gracious Majesty, and of the
estate of the Church of JESUS Christ; as it is now established among us. And
verelie such a thing offered it self unto our eyes, in reading your books,
and we had not skill how to judge otherwise; of the handling of your pen and
of the scope of your matter. Notwithstanding because rash judgment may
prejudice honest travails, and faithful laborers may have their unadvised
slippes, and we could not tell how zeal, love, or glory might carry a man of
such towardlie and excellent gifts, in the first showing of him self to the
world; or that an earnest striving and bending your self in heat of
disputation against the one side, might dazell your eyes, and draw your hand
at unawares to far and too favorable to the other side; or else peradventure
we might mistake your meaning, and so we should do you wrong against our
wills. We thought it therefore our part, in regard of our duty to the
Church; and most agreeing to charity, both for your credit and our ease; in
all christian love to entreat you, that as you tender the good estate of
Christ's church among us, and of thousands converted to the gospel, you would
in like public manner (but plainly and directly) show unto us and all English
Protestants, your own true meaning, and how your words in diverse things do
agree with the doctrine established among us. And that not only for avoiding
of offense given to many godly and religious Christians: but also that the
Atheistes, Papists, and other hereticques, be not encouraged by your so hard
and so harsh style (beating as it were, as we verily think, against the very
heart of all true christian doctrine, professed by her Majesty and the whole
state of this Realm) to despise and set light, by her sacred Majesty, the
reverend Fathers of our Church and the whole cause of our religion. We have
made choice therefore of a few principal things, which trouble many godly
minded christians, who advisedly read over your books, that by the sincere
answering and upright clearinge of them, you might satisfy us all, both in
them and in all the rest, and free your self from all suspicion of falshoode
or treachery, and make us able to give a reason of defense unto all such as
stumble at your writings. And for your better ease herein, and our more ready
satisfaction, we have compared your positions and assertions in your long
discourses, unto the articles of religion set forth An^. Dn^i 1562. and
confirmed by Parliament the 13. of her Majesty's most blessed and joyful
reign, and unto the Apologies of such Reverend Fathers and chief pillars of
our church, as from time to time since the Gospel began to shine among us,
have written and preached, and every way labored to advaunce and defend the
same, with the Liturgy and church government established among us. If you
therefore good Ma. Hoo. will make it to appear to the world, that in these
points you are all one in judgment with the church of England, and that your
such speeches wherewith your godly brethren are grieved, may bear such sense
and meaning: or else (as every humble christian will do) freely and
ingenuouslie acknowledge your unwilling oversight, or at the least (which we
undoubtedly believe you will never be able) show plainly and by good
demonstration, that all our Reverend Fathers have hitherto been deceived; then
shall we hold our selves very well contented and satisfied. Hoping therefore of
your charitable, direct, plain, sincere, and speedy answer, we tender here
our doubts unto your christian consideration, and crave your brotherly
resolution in manner and form following.

One foundation of christian faith professed by 1. The Deity of the Son.
the English church is this: Artic. 1. de ^ide in sacrosanctaram Trinitatem.
There is one true and living God. etc. And Quicunque vult, in the book of
common prayer.
Although we acknowledge the three persons to be God and Lord, yet the Godhead
of the Father and the Son is all one. etc. Here we crave of you Master Hoo.
to explain your own meaning where you say, book 5. page 113.
The Father alone is originallie that Deity which Christ originallie is not.
How the Godhead of the Father and of the Son be all one, and yet originallie
not the same Deity: And then teach us how far this differs from the
heresy of Arius, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 5.
who says of God the Son: There was when he was not, who yet grants that
he was before all creatures, of things which were not. Whether such words
weaken not the eternity of the Son in the opinion of the simple, or at the
least make the Son inferior to the Father in respect of the Godhead: or else
teach the ignorant, there be many Gods.

Another foundation of our belief: Artic. 2. and 5.
The Son is the Word of the Father, 2 The coeternitie of the Son, and
proceeding of the holy Ghost.
from everlasting begotten of the Father. etc. and the holy Ghost proceeding
from the Father and the Son. Where we hold the coeternitie of the Son with
the Father by express litterall mention in the Scriptures found in these
words: Prouer. 8. 2^
The Lord has possessed me in the beginning of his way. etc. And again: Ioh.
1. 1.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. etc. And again: John 17. 5.
Glorify me thou Father with thine own self, with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was. And we hold the proceeding of the holy Ghost
from the Father and the Son, by like express words of holy scripture:
namely, Ioh. 15. 2^.
When the Comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the spirit of truth, which proceeds of the Father. etc. Show we pray you
your full meaning where you say: Book 1. page 86. 87.
The coeternitie of the Son of God with his Father and the proceeding of the
spirit from the Father and the Son, are in scripture no where to be found by
express litterall mention. Whether there be not express litterall mention of
these two points in the former alleged places, and whether such manner of
speeches may not work a scruple in the weak christian, to doubt of these
articles; or at the least so underprop the popish traditions, that men may
the rather favor their allegations, when they see us feign to borrow of them.

The Church of England professes: Artic. 6. De diuinis scripturis.
Holy Scripture contains all things which are necessary to salvation, The
holy scripture contain all things necessary to salvation.
so that whatsoever is neither read in it, neither can be proved thereby, is
not to be exacted of any man, that it should be believed as an article of
faith, or should be thought to be required unto the necessity of salvation.
You on the other side say: Book 2. page 122.
In actions of this kind (speaking of direct, immediate, and proper necessity
final to salvation) our chiefest direction is from scripture* and again: The
insufficiency of the light of nature is by the light of scripture fully and
perfectly supplied. And in another place: Book 1. page 88.
It suffices that nature and scripture do serve in such full sort, that they
both jointly and not severally either of them be so complete, that unto
everlasting felicity we need not the knowledge of any thing more then these
two. etc. Where you seem unto us, that although you exclude traditions as a
part of supernatural truth, yet you infer that the light of nature teaches
some knowledge natural which is necessary to salvation, and that the
Scripture is a supplement and making perfect of that knowledge. Which being
compared unto page 127. Lin. 36.
where you affirm that the want of moral virtues exclude from salvation.
Last. lin.
And page 82. where you make faith hope and charity, to be taught only by
supernatural truth. It seems to us that natural light, teaching moral
virtues, teaches things necessary to salvation, which yet is not perfect
without that which supernatural knowledge in holy Scripture reveileth. Here
we pray you to explane your own meaning, whether you think that there be
any natural light, teaching knowledge of things necessary to salvation,
which knowledge is not contained in holy scripture: if you think, no: How then
say you before: Not the scripture severallie, but nature and scripture
jointly, be complete unto everlasting felicity. If you say yea: how then
agree you with the belief of our Church: which affirms, that holy scripture
contains all things necessary to salvation? And here we pray you to show
us, whether nature reach any thing touching Christ, whether without or beside
him any thing be necessary: whether that in him we be not Coloss. 2. 10.
copleate. Lastly, whether you mean that the knowledge of humane wisdom
concerning God, have any thing not expressed in Scripture, or that moral
virtues are any where rightly taught but in holy scriptu. or that whersoeuer
they be taught, they be of such necessity, that the want of them exclude from
salvation, and what scripture approves such a saying, or that cases and
matters of salvation be determinable by any other law then of holy scripture.
And then tell us how you understand these places following, and how they
agree with this your position of the light of nature and moral virtues: Romans
3. 27.
A man is justified by faith without the works of the law. Act. 4. 12.
Neither is there salvation in any other. For there is no other name which is
given under heaven amongst men by which we must be saved. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
The natural man perceaueth not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishnes unto him. etc. Ioh. 3. 3.
Except a man be borne again, he can not see the kingdom of God.

The Reverend Fathers of our church, 4. Holy scripture above the Church.
to avouch our forsaking of the Antichristian sinagogue of Rome, and cleaving
to the scriptures of God, do so far make the judgment of the scriptures
above the Church, that with the ancient Fathers they say: Reply of Bb. Jewel
against Harding, arti. 15 page 537.
In time of dissension it is most behoofefull for the people to have recourse
unto the scriptures; and that we may in no wise believe the Churches them
selves, unless they say and do such things as be agreeable to the
Scriptures. Reioynd. to Brist. replye by W. Fulk. pa. 84.
The trial of scriptures is necessary to discern the true church from all
false congregations, which all boast of the spirit of truth, as much as the
true church. And ibid. page 99.
Only scriptures are a sufficient warrant to every Christian to try what is
the word of God, and what is the word of man. etc. But you May. Hoo. do
say: Book 2. page 102.
It is not the word of God which does or possibly can assure us, that we do
well to think it is his word. And again, Book 2. page 146.
By experience we all know, that the first outward motive leading men so to
esteem of the scripture, is, the authority of Gods Church. And a little
before: lin. 38.
Scripture teaches us that saving truth which God has discovered to the
world by revelation; and it presumes us taught otherwise, that it self is
divine and sacred. Here we beseech you May. Hoo. that if as our Reverend
Fathers affirm, we may noe otherwise believe the Churches them selves, but as
they agree to the scriptures, and that by them the true church is to be
discerned, etc. and that only scriptures, sufficiently warrant the trial of
Gods word, what certainty of salvation we can have, in any presuming or
motive by the church, if the scripture cannot assure us that it is the word of
God. Are not these contradictorie? Tell us therefore if your meaning be not
that the authority of the church must do that which the scripture cannot do,
namely to assure us that they are the word of God. And our reverend Fathers
say, The church can not so assure us, unless we try it first to be the true
church by the scriptures: Are not these contradictorie? They say: Only
Scriptures warrant us what is the word of God, you say they cannot assure us
of the word of God, but presume us to be taught that thing otherwise: Are not
these contradictorie? Have we not here good cause to suspect the underpropping
of a popish principle concerning the churches authority above the holy
Scripture, to the disgrace of the English church? If not, then reco^cile your
assertions unto theirs, and show mercy and truth unto our reverend Fathers.
And therewithal we pray you to expound either by experience or otherwise;
Whether the word of God was received in the world, and believed by men, by the
virtue and authority of the witnesses, either Prophets or Apostles, or the
holy church, or that such witnesses were not esteemed for the words sake: and
the Church always approved both by God and faithful men, as the same was
described, commended, and ordered by the rule of holy scripture. What think
you of the Esaie. 52. 6, 14.
beautiful feet that bring glad tidings, and of the Kings, who for reverence
stopped their mouths at it. Act. 2. 37. and
The people pricked in heart at Peter's preaching. And the men of Berea
searching the scriptures: whether that in all these, 17. 11.
the testimony of man, as Prophet, Apostle or church did authorize the word of
God, that it was believed? 1 Cor. 2. 4.
or the demonstration of the spiritual power of the word it self? And was not
this the meaning of Saint Paul when rejecting letters of commendation, he
affirms that the Corinthians 1 Cor. 3. 1. 2.
were his epistle written in their hearts, which is understood and read of all
men. etc. Does he not prefer the power of the word, testifying of it
self, by the Psalm. 19. 7.
conversion of the heart, before all other motives, and by it he him self was
authorized in their consciences, and not it by him.

Lastly, show us where you find that the scripture presumes us taught
otherwise, etc. What think you? Is it of man, or by man? or of God, that it so
presumes: or do not you presume against the word of God, to set up man's
testimony, when we know that the 1 John 5. 9.
testimony of God is greater. When the Jews and the Gentiles did both oppose
them selves against the gospel, what did it presume upon? was it not of it
self Heb. 4. 12.
the two edged sword, pearching into the marrow of the bones: Psalm. 2.
the rod of iron to crush in pieces the Nations, and the 2 Cor. 10. 3. 4.
armor spiritual to bring in subjection every thought unto the obedience of
the knowledge of God?

The Church of England professes this ground of faith: Artic 10. De libero
arbitrio.
Without the grace of God (which is by Christ) preventing us, 5 Of free will.
that we will; and working together while we will; we are nothing at all able
to do the works of piety which are pleasing and acceptable to God. You to
our understanding, write clean contrary: namely, Book 1. page 60, 61.
there is in the will of man naturally that freedom, whereby it is apt to
take or refuse any particular object, whatsoever being presented unto it. And
a little after: There is not that good which concerns us, but it has evidence
enough for it self, If reason were diligent to search it out. Here we pray
your help to teach us: how will is apt (as you say) freely to take or refuse
any particular object what soever, and that reason by diligence is able to
find out any good concerning us: If it be true that the Church of England
professes, that without the preventing and helping grace of God, we can, will,
and do nothing pleasing to God. To which belief of England the scripture
accords, showing that without the said grace of God, Ephe. 2. 5.
we are dead in sins and trespasses: 2 Cor. 3. 5.
we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing. Phil. 2. 13.
It is God which works in us the will and the deed, even of his good
pleasure. Show us therefore how your positions agree with our church and the
scriptures. If you say you understand reason and will help by the grace of
God, then tell us how we may perceive it by your writing: which puts
difference betwixt natural and supernatural truth and laws. If you mean
reason uncorrupted, not respecting how in truth we are by Adams fall
perverted, may we not suspect that your whole discourse is subtle and
cunning, because you pretend the natural way of finding out laws by reason to
guide the will unto that which is good, page 59. 62. 63. etc. or at the least
friuoulous, seeing man has no such reason without the grace of GOD, if you
mean without the grace of God, and in the state of corruption, as in deed all
men naturally now are. Here we desire to be taught how such sayings
overthrow not our English creed and the holy scripture in this matter, and
therewithal show us the true meaning of Saint Paul, and how he fitteth your
discourse in this place, namely when he says. Romans 8. 7. The wisdom of the
flesh is ennimitie against God, for it is not subject unto the law of God,
neither in deed can be.

The Church of England believes, Artic. 11. De hominis iustificatione.
Only for the meritt of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Of faith and
works.
through faith and not for works and our merits we are accounted righteous
before God. You say, Book 1. page 82.
The way of supernatural duty which to us he has prescribed, our Savior in
the Gospel of Saint John does note, terming it by an excellency the work of
God. This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent; not
that God does require nothing at the hands of men unto happiness, saving only
a naked belief (for hope and charity we may not exclude) but that without
belief all other things are as nothing, and it is the ground of those other
divine virtues. And again, Book 1. page 95.
The same things divine law also teaches, as at large we have showed, it
does all parts of moral duty; whereunto we all of necessity stand bound
in regard of life to come. And in another place, Book 5. page 221.
Every man's religion is in him self the wellspring of all other sound and
sincere verities, from whence both here in some sort, and hereafter more
abundantly their full joy and felicity arises: because while they live,
they are blessed of God, and when they dye, their works follow them. And yet
again you say, Book 5. page 208.
I will not dispute whether truly it may not be said, that poenitent both
weeping and fasting, are means to blott out sin, means* whereby through
Gods unspeakable and undeserved mercy, we obtain and procure to our selves
pardon which attaynement unto any gracious benefit by him bestowed, the
phrase of antiquity uses to express by the name of merit: Here we desire
to be resolved how these your assertions can stand with the doctrine and
belief of the church of England; Faith only justifies. To which the holy
Scripture accords, saying: Galat. 3. 21. 22
If there had been a law that could have given life, surely righteousness had
been by the law: but the scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. And
again: Romans 4. 6.
David declares the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works. For if from sound and sincere virtues (as you say) full joy and
felicity arises, and that we all of necessity stand bound unto all parts
of moral duty in regard of life to come, and God requires more at the
hands of men unto happiness, then such a naked belief; as Christ calls the
work of God: alas what shall we poor finful wretches do, who can have no
confidence in the flesh being far from those sound and sincere virtues, and
from many (that we say not all) parts of moral duty, in such measure, as
the holy, just and good law of God does require them; yea our very righteous
works we find to be stained like a filthy cloth: when we compare them unto
that absolute righteousness which is indeed pure and unspotted before the eyes
of God; therefore we claim nothing by any duty we do or can do, or any
virtue which we find in our selves, but only by that naked faith which is
the work of God in us, and makes us believe in him whom he has sent, and by
his stripes only we hope to be healed. Tell us therefore by sound and plain
demonstration what we may trust to, whether the English belief be imperfect,
without some necessary additament: whether you think that not faith alone,
but faith hope and love, be the formal cause of our righteousness, whether a
man that has faith can also do all the works of the law, and so make up that
which is wanting in his naked faith: or that if he cannot, but falls into
sin seven times, yea sometimes into great sins, whether his faith may not
save him. Lastly, whether there be not other sufficient causes to induce a
christian to godliness and honesty of life, such as is the Mat. 5. 16.
glory of God our Father: Romans 12. 1.
his great mercies in Christ: 1 Ioh. 4. 11. 19
his love to us: 1 Pet. 2. 12. 15
example to others, but that we must do it to merit or to make perfitt that
which Christ has done for us. And lastly, show us that phrase of antiquity
whether it were in the Apostles time among the sounder christians, or in what
time immediately following; or do you not closely make the popish doctrine of
meritt by works at the least to be tolerable, to the disgrace of our English
creed?

The church of England professes, 7 The virtue of works.
that Artic. 12. 13.
Good works, the fruits of faith and following the justified cannot abide the
severity of Gods judgment, and that The works which are done before the
grace of Christ, are not only not acceptable to God, but also have the nature
of sin. You say: Book 1. page 63.
The most certain token of evident goodness, is, If the general persuasion of
all men do so account it. And again: Ibid. pa. 68.
Only man's observation of the law of his nature is Righteousness; only man's
transgression sin. Book 2. page 122.
Gods very commandments in some kind as namely his precepts comprehended
in the law of nature, may otherwise be known then only by scripture, and
that to do them, howsoever we know them must needs be acceptable in his
sight. Here we desire to be instructed, how the goodness of these actions done
by the light of nature, are to be understood, either simply in them selves,
as nature only declares and teaches; or as men following the light of
nature, judge of them and so do them: if you answer only as nature teaches
without regard of man doing according to nature, then can we not understand
your discourse, which seems to us to teach, that by doing such operations of
goodness as nature teaches, though he have no further teachinge, it is
righteousness and pleases God. If you mean this second, then I pray you, in
what sense can you call that righteousness in man, which our Church calls
sin: and do you not establish the Romish doctrine of pura naturalia and
works of congruitie? And if that be true which you say, that men doing such
works, be acceptable in Gods sight, do you not make the Church of England to
hold an error, when they say they are not acceptable to God.

The church of England professes, 8 Works of supererogatio^.
that Artic. 14.
Works of supererogation cannot be taught without arrogancy and wickedness.
And you say: Book 2. page 122.
God approved much more then he commands. Open unto us then that seeing you
seem to teach that the order and course of all things supernatural, natural,
sensible and reasonable, is a divine law, and so by it he commands
according to every kind: and that in the former articles you appear to us
to scatter the profane grains of popery, whether we may not justly judge,
that in thus speaking you sow the seed of the doctrine which leads men to
those arrogant works of supererogation. If not, show your own meaning, and
how you esteem of this Article of our belief.

The Church of England holds, 9 None free from all sin
that Artic. 15.
Christ only being the immaculate Lamb, was without sin, and that we which
are baptized and regenerated in him, do all offend in many things. You say:
Book 5. page 102.
Although we cannot be free from all sin collectiuelie in such sort, that
no part thereof shall be found inherent in us, yet distributiuelie at the least
all great and grievous actual offenses, as they offer themselves one by one,
both may and ought to be by all means avoided. So that in this sense to be
preserved from all sin, is not impossible. Here we demand to be informed,
that if all offend in many things, and to say otherwise be a lie, as our
English creed affirms, how your saying can be true, that it is possible to
avoyde all great and grievous sins. And what many things they be whereof
the scripture speaks: Whether it means not actual offenses, great and
grievous; but that some may be excepted in regard of great sins: or whether
you mean, that it is possible for all christians to be preserved from all
great sins: and if so, why should it not be as possible; from all small
offenses: and if from small and great, why do we not keep our robe pure and
without spot until the coming of Christ, and so be justified more and more
by our works, as the popish Cannons teach: but pray by Christ's commandment
every day, Forgive us our trespasses.

The Church of England believes, 10 Predestination.
that Artic. 17. De Praedestinatione.
Predestination unto life is the eternal purpose of God, whereby before the
foundations of the world were laid, he constantly decreed by his counsel
unto us unknown to deliver from the curse and destruction them whom he chose
in Christ out of mankind, and (as vessels made unto honor) through Christ to
bring them to eternal salvation. Whereupon they who are endowed with so
excellent benefit of God, are called according to his purpose, and that by his
spirit working in a fit time. But you May. Hoo. seem to us, to affirm
contrary, when you say: Book 5. page 104.
If any man doubt how God should accept such prayers in case they be opposite
to his will, or not grant them, if they be according to that him self
wills: Our answer is, that such suits God accepts, in that they are
conformable to his general inclination, which is that all men might be saved:
yet always he grants them not, for so much as there is in God a more
private occasioned will, which determines the contrary. Here we beg your
aid to make manifest unto us, how God eternally predestinateth by a constant
decree, them whom he calls and saves (as our Church professes) and yet
has, as you say, a general inclination that all men might be saved: Whether
he foresaw not something that occasioned his will otherwise; so that he elected
not all, but only them whom he calls and saves, or that of his general
inclination he elected all men, but some more privatelie occasioned him in time
to alter his will, and to refuse them; or that some men gave God occasion that
he saves them, though he never decreed it before the foundations of the world.
What meant the blessed Apostle where he says: Romans 8. 3^
Whom he predestined them also he called: and whom he called them also he
justified. etc. Is this to be understood of a constant decree, as we say, or
of an inclination? He says: Ephe. 1. 1^
God works all things after the counsel of his own will. Is this to be
understood, that upon occasion sometimes he either alters his counsel, or
decrees something which he had not thought upon before. Saint James says,
that 1 Iam. 1. 1^.
In God there is no variablenes nor shadow of turning. Is not this more then a
variablenes or shadow of turning to incline one way, and upon occasion to
decree another. Do not these words of yours give some place unto chance and
fortune: Do they not make GOD as a man not of an all-sufficient knowledge,
wisdom, and counsel, but inclinable some one way, till by occasion he find
a more better way. Where is that God you speak of in your page 5^.
first book, of whom and through whom and for whom are all things. And where
is that law by which he works, which you there call aeternall, and therefore
can have no show or color of mutabilitie. Have we not cause to fear that the
witty schoolmen have seduced you, and by their conceited distinctions made
you forget, That you are neither able nor worthy to open and look into the
book of Gods law, by which he guides the world. And yet you will say, There
is in God an occasioned will. Good May. Hoo. help us here, and show us how
we may think, that you incline not to the error of popery touching works
forseene, and that you favor our churches belief.

The Church of England does confess, 11 The visible church, and of the
church of Rome.
Artic. 19. De Ecclesia.
That the church of Christ is a company of faithful people, among whom the
pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments rightly administered
according to Christ's institution, etc. and that the church of Rome has erred,
not only in manners and ceremonies, but also in matters of faith. Which by the
Reverend Fathers of our Church is expounded thus: Bb. Jewel reply against
Harding. Artic. 2. page 99.
Without Christ the church is no church, neither has any right or claim
without his promise; nor any promise without his word. ibid. Artic. 6. page
366.
The church of Rome being as it is now utterly void of Gods word, is as a
lantern without light. Apolog. eccle. Angl. page 191. print. 1581.
We have departed from that church which they have made a den of thieves, and
in which they have left nothing sound, or like to a church; and which the^
selves did confess to have erred in many things, even as Lot in old time out
of Sodom, or Abraham out of Chaldea, etc. Noel. confut. Dorman. ca. 1. page 57.
The general error and defection of the popish Sinagogue from Christ his true
Church foreshewed in the scriptures, is now manifest to the world by dissension
from Christ and his holy Apostles doctrine, and from the doctrine of the
churches by the Apostles founded. And for this cause, they call the heresy of
that Romish church Apostasia Romanensium ab Ecclesia, The Fulk. ad cavil. T.
Stapleton, fere in princi.
Apostasy of the Romish rabble from the church. And they call the Pope
Apostatam, Antichristum, an Apostata, Antichrist. And bind up in one bundle D.
Whitgift page 178.
Idolaters, superstitious persons, papists and Atheistes; constantly
affirming, that W. Fulk. Reioynd. to Brist. reply to pa. 272*
among English christians no other thing is meant by the name of papists, then
heretics and traitors, Antichristians and Apostataes, enemies to God, their
Prince, and their country. Now we find in you these peremptory affirmations:
Book 3. page 130.
With Rome we dare not communicate concerning sundry her gross and grievous
abominations, yet touching those maine parts of christian truth, wherein
they constantly still persist, we gladly acknowledge them to be of the
family of Jesus Christ. And a little before: We hope that to reform our
selves, if at any time we have done amiss, is not to sever our selves from
the church we were of before. In the church we were, and we are so still. And
in another place you would have men, Book 5. page 188.
To acknowledge that it is due to the church of Rome to be held and reputed a
part of the house of God, and a limme of the visible church of Christ. And your
principal reason seems to be because you say: Book 5. page 186.
That which separateth utterly: That which cutteth off clean from the
visible church of Christ, is plain Apostasy; direct denial, utter reiection
of the whole christian faith, as far as the son is professedly different
from infidelity. Here you seem unto us to come forth, as an other Elias, to
bring again the people, unto the God of their Fathers. They say that the
church of Rome has erred, not only in manners, but also in matters of faith.
You; you call the^ back and say: Sundry gross and grievous abominations.
They say that the church of Rome, as it is now, is utterly void of Gods
word; as a lantern without light, and that it is a den of thieves, in which
they have left nothing sound, or like a church, but is like Sodom. etc. You
call them back, and say: That they have main parts of christian truth
wherein they constantly persist. They affirm, and that constantly, that
there is a general error and defection of the church of Rome foreshewed in the
scriptures, and therefore called them Apostataes, and matched them with
Atheistes. seeing it is now made manifest to the world, that they are departed
from the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, etc. you call them back and say,
we gladly acknowledge them to be of the family of Jesus Christ, and to be
held and reputed a part of the house of God, and a limme of the visible
church of Christ. And therefore you are bold to affirm, that we sever not our
selves from the church we were of before: In the Church we were and we are so
still. We are here in a straight except you help us out. For if we believe
you, we must think our reverend Fathers to have misledd us all this while;
either of malice, or ignorance; if we believe them we must think that May.
Hoo. is very arrogant and presumptuous to make him self the only Rabbi. We
pray you therefore to reconcile these two judgments, that men fall not away to
look back into Egypt, or else explane your mind further, and show us some
clear demonstration of that you intend; whether you be not sorry that we
are departed from the unity of that Sea, or that you think they err not in
matters of faith; and that all these great disputes about the church and
bloody dissentions and conflicts come by oversight and too great zeal, and
for want of knowledge in our Reverend Fathers, and in all those millions of
learned men, that have frankly given their blood for the detection and
departing from that church, as from Antichrist and an Apostata. And here we
pray you to show us out of divine truth, your rule to discern a Congregation
to be a member of the visible Church: whether whosoever holds any one
professes truth differing from infidelity, may be reputed a member of the
visible church, and whether you mean by infidelity, nothing else but that
which is not taught by the gospel of Jesus Christ, and they which hold any
part of that which you call supernatural truth (that is, as we take it, of
that truth which men know no otherwise but by the word of God) they are not
fallen into an Apostasy, etc. And here we crave your judgment of the Turk,
how your rule fitteth them. For as we think by reading his Alcoran, he
holds some main points of christian truth, as namely these: There is one
God; Read Azoara 2. 10. 15. 17. 20. 29. 45. 56.
and that he created all things without labor or wearines: and that he
preserves the things created: faith is given and augmented of God. He
forbids the adoring of saints and images: affirms God to hate and abhor
the art of Magic: and teaches the resurrection of all men from the dead.
Show us now whether the Turk be not of the family of JESUS Christ. Lastly
we pray you to open unto us, that seeing you say the church of Rome is the
house of God, whether a man continuing in that house, and never coming out to
hold the true belief of Christ, as we do in England, but renouncing and
persecuting it to the death, whether such a one may be saved: if yea, why need
we sever our selves to so great trouble from her gross and grievous
abominations, if they be not such as can extinguish our faith to our
destruction. If no, why do you not join with our Reverend Fathers, to abandon
that house where there is no salvation. Of Gods house it is said: It is the
ground and pillar of truth. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
The habitation of God by his spirit: and the glorious rest of Christ. Ephe. 2.
22.
In which God loves to dwell, and wherein he has delight, and the same he
will bless in victualles, Esai 11. 10.
Priests and Saints. Psalm. 132. 13, 14.
So that such as be planted in that house, shall flourish in the courts of our
God, Psalm. 92. 13.
they shall still bring forth fruit in their age. etc. Show us we pray you,
whether these things may be applied to the church of Rome rightly and
essentiallie, and what comfort we may have by departing from her communion; if
she be a part of the house of God. etc. and these things we pray you to
aver, not by humane witness, but by that which comes down from heaven. So
did Elias.

Again out of this article arises another noe small scruple, Of preaching.
where our church constantly affirms, that Artic. 19.
The visible church is that congregation of faithful people wherein the pure
word of God is preached. Whereupon the Reverend Fathers of our church
publickely teach, that Whitgift page 81.
The true preaching of the word is an essential note of the church. For which
cause they interpret the parable of the seed, in this sort: Bb. of Lincoln 1.
sermon upon Matthew. 13. 3.
God is the husbandman, the Preachers of the word are the seed sowers, the
seed is the word of God, the ground is the hearts of men, etc. And Id. sermo
1. upon Romans 1. 16.
Therefore Christ did send his Apostles to preach the Gospel, that thereby
they might be brought to the belief of the Church. And Id. Sermo 1. page 4. 5.
6. and 7.
To this preaching he annexed such force of his holy spirit, that it had
greater strength and authority, then all the eloquence, then all the wisdom,
then all the learning, then all the policy and power of the world: and that
not only in the Apostles, but also in the Preachers, who have restored the
pure light of the Gospel in these latter days, even in those countries, whose
Princes and people were professed adversaries thereof: unto which accords the
holy scriptures calling this preaching Ephe. 3. 7.
A gift of the grace of God, Colos. 1. 28.
to admonish every man, and to teach every man in all wisdom, that we may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Which things makes us much to muse
what you mean where you say, Book 5. page 46.
Since speech is the very image whereby the mind and soul of the speaker
conveyeth it self into the bosom of him that hears. We can not choose but
see great reason, wherefore the word that proceeds from God, who is in him
self very truth and life, should be (as the Apostle to the Hebrews notes)
lively and mighty in operation, sharper then any two edged sword. Now if in
this and the like places, we did conceive that our own sermons are that strong
and forcible word, should we not even hereby imparte even the most peculiar
glory of the word of God, unto that which is not his word? For touching our
sermons, that which gives them their very being, is the will of man, and
therefore they oftentimes accordingly taste too much of that ouercorrupt
fountain, from which they come. Here May. Hoo. we are hampered with your
words, because they seem to us contrary to the judgment of our church. We
therefore desire you heartily to resolve us, what you mean in this place by
sermons: whether it be not all one with that our Fathers call preaching of the
word, consisting in teaching and exhorting by the word of God; secondly, what
you mean by the being of a sermon, whether the Logical and Dialecticall frame
by which men contriue their matter in such and such a form: or that by the
gift of the grace of God, Eccles. 12. 8.
waying and searching and fitting together many sentences, they seek out
pleasant words and every right writing and faithful words, and so utter Tit.
2. 7.
in their doctrine, integrity, gravity, and the wholesome word which can not
be reproved. If you mean the former, then every declamation and formal
oration in the schools, may be called sermons, for these are framed of the
mere wit of man: if you mean this latter, then we think you teach contrary
to our church and the holy scriptures. You say our sermons are not that strong
and forcible word: They say, it is an essential note of the true church, to
have true preaching of the word: and namely, the preaching of the pure word
of GOD, and that this has such a force as no eloquence, wisdom, learning,
policy, and power of the world can match. You say the wit of man gives
our sermons the very being. They say, God sent his Apostles: that the
Preachers are the seed sowers, and the seed is the word of God, and that
this is done by the gift of the grace of God. Here we beseech you to show the
just harmony of your words and theirs, and therein to teach us by sound
demonstration, that a man can preach the pure word of God by his own natural
wit, without a gift supernatural of the spirit to give him utterance and to
speak the word as he ought to speak. If all that a man preach be the pure
word of God, what derogation is it to call such a man's sermons or preachings
the strong and forcible word. In every being there is (as you scholars
teach) the matter and the form; and that which joins these together, is the
efficient. Unto which of these will you apply the wit of man, if you say to
the matter, then our church is against you, and says it is the pure word of
God: if to the form, as, interpretation, doctrine and exhortation, then the
holy scriptures do tie unto the gift of the spirit, saying: Romans 12. 6.
That we have diverse gifts, as the gift of prophecy, teaching, exhortation,
and no 2 Pet. 1. 20.
scripture is of any private interpretation. If you make it the efficient,
then the scripture says: 1 Cor. 12. 4.
There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit, and there are
diversities of administrations but the same Lord, and there are diversities of
operations, but God is the same which works all in all. Rom: 10. 15
No man can preach except he be sent. Ephe. 4. 8. 11.
When he ascended, he gave gifts unto men* Here we pray you to teach us how
your speeches consent to these testimonies of our church and holy Scripture; or
may you not mean that the Sermons of many now a days who in stead of the
pure word of God, do most curiously bring into the pulpitt, Poetts,
Philosophers, Rhetoricians, Physicians, Schoolmen, and whatsoever, either by
finenesse of wit, or help of art, they think may appear fine and smooth to
their hearers and win praise to them selves; may you not mean, I say, that
such our sermons have their being of the mere wit of man; or do you think
that the sermons of our Reverend Fathers, and more stayed divines, which are
very wary, that in all their sermons, whatsoever they speak, may be the true
sense of holy Scriptures, and according to the proportion of faith; seeing
they agree not with the family of Jesus Christ that is at Rome, are not
therefore the strong and forcible word of God. And here we pray you to teach
us, whether that all doctrine, interpretation and exhortation which is truly
and meerelie the natural meaning of holy scripture be not the word of God, or
that the word is only in the letter of the text, as of Hebrewe and Greek,
or, if you will, truly translated: and which of these has the word of God;
he that alleges the words as did the Tempter, or he that alleges the
true meaning, as did our Savior Christ, Mat. 4. 6. 10. Lastly, show us that
if all our sermons be of the wit of man, and none the strong and forcible
word of God, whether Romish Babylon may not chalendge our church to want one
essential mark, as preaching the pure word of God? And whether it be possible
for the wit of man to give being unto that which is an essential mark of the
church of God, and of that which has greater strength and authority then all
eloquence, wisdom, learning, policy, and power of the world: And lastly,
open unto us whether that reverend Father did well, who grants that the
word of God is not only in writing but in preaching, W. Fulk. replye to Brist.
reioind. page 99.
in Counsels or Doctors: Because Christ says, He that hears you, hears
me.

The Church of England affirms, 23 Of the Misters office.
that Artic. 23.
It is not lawful for any one to take to him self the office of preaching
publicly or administering the Sacraments in the church, except he be first
lawfully called, and sent to do these things. And heerevpon our Reverend
Fathers do not only not defend nor D. Whitgift page 516.
use any reasons at all to prove that women may baptize, and therefore Ibid.
pa. 504. 793.
would not have the book of common prayer, touching baptism in private to be
understood, to permit women to baptize: but also co^nstantlie affirm, Gervase
Bab. upon Genesis cap. 17. ver. 7. page 121.
that God and well ordered churches forbidd Women to dispense that holy
mystery. But you May. Hoo. have another kind of determination, where you say,
Book 5. page 228.
Ministerial power is a mark of separation, because it seuereth them that
have it from other men, and makes them a special order, consecrated unto the
service of the most highest in things wherewith others may not meddle. And in
another place: Ibid. 240.
There is an error which beguileth many, who much entangle both themselves and
others, by not distinguishing services, offices, and orders ecclesiastical:
the first of which three, and in part the second, may be executed by the
laytie, whereas none have or can have the third but the clergy. From the
which Clergy you separate Catechistes, Exorcistes, Readers, and Singers,
etc. And in another Ibi. pa. 140.
place you seem to mainteyne and defend the practice of those churches, which
(necessity requiring) allow baptism in private, to be administered by Women;
affirming elsewhere ib. page 150
That diverse reformed churches do both allow and defend that kind of
Baptism. Here we desire to know what you mean by ministerial power,
whether you take it actiuelie, as that every minister, or all Ministers have
power to make an order consecrated to the service of God; or passiuelie that by
their calling they are made to have the authority and power of a Minister, or
that you understand by it the formal cause of their ministry, by which they
differ from al other orders, or that you mean the holy unction and character,
which the church of Rome gives in their consecration of priesthood. And this
we desire, because we find our church and Reverend Fathers, speaking like to
Heb. 5. 4. No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called, etc.
holy scripture, to use plain, good and sensible terms, to note out the
difference of a ministers estate from other men's: and yours seems to carry
another kind of style more befitting the glory of the Romish character, then
the simplicity of our ministry. Our church says, they must be called that
preach publicly: you say, a Catechist (or whom we find in Eusebius. book 6.
cap. 3. and 6.
ancient time to have been such as Clemens and Origin in Alexandria, as to
whom the people came to hear the preaching of the word of God) is none of the
order of the Clergy; meaning, as we think, without this ministerial power.
We pray you the^ to show us, whether you mean by ministerial power, Clergy,
or order, that which our church means by calling: if you do, then we see not
how you and they agree; that you allow a Catechist, which is an office, to
preach the word, which is not of the Ecclesiastical order, and as we say,
has no calling thereunto, and our church says, that it is not lawful, etc.
Again, our Church says, that it is not lawful to administer the Sacraments
without that calling: and that God and well ordered Churches forbidd Women to
baptize: you (as we think) contrary to our church, maintain such churches
as allow the private baptism by Women in case of necessity: and you say,
diverse reformed churches allow and defend such baptism. Here we entreat
you to declare the agreement of these sayings: and whether because you say that
the special order (you speak of) is consecrated unto the service of the
highest in things wherewith others may not meddle: your meaning be, that lay
people in case of necessity, may meddle with those things which our church
says is not lawful without calling* or that because you would have the
ministerial power to be a mark and character, you give liberty to preaching
and baptizing, as to certain services: and that the character and indeleble
order, has nothing to it self peculiar but the making of the body of Christ
in the Sacrament, and offering him up in sacrifice to his Father, that the
laity, women, and catechist may not meddle with that. And here we desire to
understand whence you fett that worthy distinction, the ignorance whereof
beguileth many; and that you would declare the same by holy scripture, and
bring us one pregnant proof to show the error of our church in affirming
preaching and ministering without calling, to be unlawful: or else declare the
exception either by scripture, or by some order or interpretation published by
our church; or some of our Reverend Fathers, which also may have their harmony
with the sayings of the Reverend Fathers by us before rehearsed. And lastly,
whether that you in these three places are not contrary to your self, or that
you make not a deluding proposition, which contains a general prohibition
without limitation, which yet is not general but must have exception. And if
you place Readers as distinct from clergy, what may we think you esteem of
our reading ministers; are they no clergy men?

It is an Article of our faith, 24 Of the Sacraments.
that Artic. 25. De Sacramentis.
The Sacraments instituted of Christ, are not only marks of christian
profession, but rather certain testimonies and effectual signs of grace and
of the good will of God toward us; by which he does work invisiblie in us:
and does not only stir up, but also confirm our faith toward him self.
Which by the reverend Fathers of our Church is interpreted thus: Apolog. eccl*
Angl. cap. 10. divi. 1.
Sacraments are visible words, seals of righteousness, and tokens of grace.
Defense of the Apolo. 2. part. page 204.
The soul of man and not the creature of bread or water receive the grace of
God. etc. The grace of God is not in the visible signs but in the soul. Ibid.
page 134.
The substance of all Sacraments is the word of God; which St Paul calls
verbum reconciliationis, the word of Atonement: this word is the instrument
of remission of sin. The Sacraments are the seals affixed unto the same: the
Priest is the mean. And speaking of all the faithful to be one body, all
endewed with one spirit, they further say: Repli. to Hard. ausw. by I. Jew. Bb.
of Salisbur. Artic. 1. pa. 36.
This marvelous conjunction and incorporation is first begone and wrought by
faith, etc. Afterward the same corporation is assured unto us and increased in
our baptism, etc. And for that we are very imperfect of our selves, and
therefore must daily proceed forward, that we may grow unto a perfect man in
Christ: Therefore has God appointed that the same incorporation should be
often renewed and confirmed in us by the use of the holy mysteries; wherein
must be considered, that the said holy mysteries do not begin but rather
continue and confirm this incorporation. Here we demand how it may
appear unto us that you broach not a new doctrine diverse and contrary to our
belief in England. When you say that Book 3. page 126.
The Sacraments chiefest force and virtue consists in this that they are
heavenly ceremonies which God has sanctified and ordained to be administered
in his church. First as marks to know when God does imparte the vital or
saving grace of Christ unto all that are capable thereof. And secondly, as
means conditional which God requires in them unto whom he imparteth grace.
And in another place: Ibi. pa. 133.
It is a branch of belief, that Sacraments are in their place no less
required, then belief it self. For when our Lord and Savior promises
eternal life, is it any otherwise then as he promised restitution of health
unto Naaman the Sirian, namely with this condition, wash and be clean. And in
another place you say, that ib. page 105.
both the Word and Sacraments have generatiue force and virtue. By which your
words we are greatly amazed, that our Church has left out in her creed; and
the Reverend Fathers have not taught us, that which is (as you say) the
chiefest force and virtue of the Sacraments. Where find you that God ordained
the Sacraments to tell us when God gives grace, and that they are means
conditional, and as necessary as faith? Teach us we pray you by holy
scripture these three chief virtues of the Sacraments. The furthest that they
say (as we gather) is to make them seals of assurance, by which the spirit
works invisiblie to strengthen our faith; and they seem to square their
faith by holy scripture: which propou^deth Romans 4. 1* 23.
Abraham to be an example of the true way of justifying, and a pattern to all
the children of God, namely; ibid. ver. 10. 11.
that he was first justified by faith, and after received the Sacrament as a
sign to be a seal of the righteousness of his faith. Show therefore whether
we ought not to go further then our church or holy scripture, unless we will
leave out the cheifest virtue of the Sacraments. Moreover they say the grace
of God is not in the visible signs; you say, they are means co^dicionall*
they say that grace (which they call this marvelous conjunction and
incorporation) is first begone and wrought by faith, and afterward is assured
and increased by the Sacraments: you say, the sacraments have the generatiue
force and virtue as well as the word. They say, that the substance of all
Sacraments is the word, etc. and that the Sacraments are the seals affixed
to the same; which being borrowed from the Apostle out of the former recited
place, Romans 4. does argue that the necessity of the sacraments, is not
comparable to that of faith. For by this he proves Abraham to be justified by
faith without works, because he first was justified by faith before he
received the Sacrament, and that the Sacrament was but a sign and seal of his
faith; so that he excludes the Sacrament as it is a work, and as you call it
Book 5. page 128.
a moral instrument of salvation, from all copertenership with faith in the
matter of justification. You make it a means condicionall, and no less
required then faith it self, and of as absolute necessity as that to Naaman:
wash and be clean. These things, good May. Hoo. we can not reconcile, and
therefore we are suitors unto you to aid us in the same, and to make your mind
to appear not to ouerturne the faith of our church: and herein to tell us
where you find, that the grace of God is tied to any time, as namely the
time of the Sacraments: or whether the Sacraments teach us some other time:
and whether the condition of Sacraments make not for the additament of works
unto faith, in that which the English church holds to be only and
properly of faith. And lastly whether such speeches be not meerelie popish and
accursed mixture of humane folly, giving a further grace to the blessed
Sacraments then God has ordained; and herein explane unto us, whether a man
dying without faith, and yet receaueth the Sacraments, can be saved; or that a
man having faith, and never any sacrament, may not be saved; or whether any
ca^ be saved, if the condition of salvation be the upright and perfect
performance of all moral duties which God requires expreslie in his word.

The Church of England affirms, 15 Of Christ's institution.
that Artic. 26. De vi institutionum divinarum.
By the malice of wicked me^ which are over the administration of the
Sacraments, the effect of the things ordained by Christ is not taken away, or
the grace of Gods gifts diminished, as touching them which receive by faith
and orderly the things offered unto them, which for the institution of Christ
and his promise, are effectual, although they be administered by evil men.
Whereupon the Reverend Fathers define a Sacrament to be Thom. Bb. of Lincoln
sermon. 1. upon 1. Cor. 10. 1.
A reverend and holy mystery ordained of God: wherein he by his holy word
and promise does both stir up and practice the faith of his people, and by
the operation of the holy ghost, increase his grace in them. etc. And of the
intention of the church, they say: Bb. Jewel replic. to Hard. Artic. 1. page 34
This is the very dungeon of incertaintie. The heart of man is unsearchable,
if we stay upon the intention of a mortal man; we may stand in doubt of our
own baptism. You seem to speak otherwise where you say: Book 5. page 129.
We must note that in as much as Sacraments are actions religious and
mistical, which nature they have not unless they proceed from a serious
meaning, and what every man's private mind is, as we can not know, so neither
are we bound to examine; therefore always in these cases the known intent of
the church generally does suffice; and where the contrary is not manifest, we
must presume that he which outwardly does the work, has inwardly the
purpose of the church of God. Here we desire to be instructed how these two
opinions can stand together. The one which says the Sacraments are
effectual through the institution of Christ and his promise; the other which
tyeth it to the good meaning of the Priest or of the Church. Again, the one
says the intention of the Church is the very dungeon of incertaintie; to
make us doubt of our Baptism: the other, that the Sacraments have not the
nature to be religious and mystical, without a serious meaning, that is, the
intent of the church. These things we pray you to reconcile, and therewithal
to show us how the intent of the church can give them their nature to be
actions religious and mystical, and yet our reverend Fathers say they be holy
mysteries ordained of God. Resolve therefore whether the virtue of the
sacrament depend upon the institution and promise of God, or upon the good
meaning of the Priest or of the Church; or upon both: and whether they cannot
have the nature of religious actions and mystical without the intent of the
Priest or of the Church; and so whether the church may ordain a mystery; or
that the mysteries ordained of GOD have not their nature and form with the
presupposed intent of the Church. Whether God in ordayning these mysteries were
helped by the serious meaning of the church, or did except that they should not
be mysteries, without the liking and allowing of the church, by their good
meaning. And lastly, whether your assertion be not mere popery, a humane
invention, and an inducement unto that (which is called fides implicita) that
it should suffice a man to believe as the church believes, etc. And
herewithall show us what comfort we can have in the use of the Sacraments, if
they can not be actions religious and mystical, unless they proceed from the
intent and purpose of the church, being (as our Reverend Fathers esteem) the
very dungeon of uncertainty.

The Church of England professes, ^^ Necessity of Baptism.
That Artic. 27. de Baptism.
Baptism is a sign of regeneration, by which as by an instrument, they which
rightly receive baptism, are ingrafted into the Church: the promises of
remission of sins and of our adoption to be the children of God by the holy
spirit, are visibly sealed, our faith is confirmed, and by the force of the
calling upon the name of God, grace is increased. Which the Reverend Fathers of
our church do expound in this sense: Bb. Jewel defen. of Apol. 2. part page
150.
The children of the faithful are borne holy, and notwithstanding by nature
they be the children of anger, yet by Gods free election, they be pure and
holy. This is Saint Paul's undoubted doctrine; which notwithstanding, he never
despised the Sacraments of Christ. And that Bb. Babingt. upon Genesis ca. 17.
verse. 12.
A man may stand in the state of salvation and out of all danger of damnation
before he be baptized. And the contrary to this they call This is disputed at
large by Bb. Bab. in Genesis ca. 27. verse. 12.
fearful doctrine, injurious to thousands of poor infants, and blasphemous
against the bottomless mercy of a sweet and tender Father, who has said; I
will be thy God and thy childs, not adding any condition of baptism if it
can not be had as it ought: and heerevpon they affirm that Sacraments make not
the couenantes, but only seal them, and that God has not thus inthralled his
grace (that there is such necessity, that either women or all sorts of
persons should dispense the holy mysteries, to the end that no poor creature
might be cast away for want of it) nor taught his church in his word, but
quite contrary, as we see by telling Abraham his covenant reached to his
seed, and by differring the seal of the same; to wit, circumcision to the
eight day. You Master Hoo. speak to our understanding a far differing
language: namely, Book 5. page 132.
Predestination brings not to life, without the grace of external vocation
wherein our baptism is employed. For as we are not naturally men without
birth; so neither are we christian men in the eye of the church of God but by
new birth: nor according to the ordinary course of divine dispensation, newborn, but by that baptism which both declares and makes us christians, in
which respect we hold it to be the door of our actual entrance into Gods
house, the first apparent beginning of life, a seal perhaps to the grace of
election before received, but to our sanctification here a stepp that has not
any before it. And again: Book 5. page 146.
The fruit of Baptism depends only upon the covenant which God has made;
that God by covenant requires of the elder sort faith and Baptism, in
children the sacrament of Baptism alone. And in another place: Ibi. page 135
136.
We have for baptism no day set as the Jews had for circumcision, neither
have we by the law of God, but only by the churches discretion, a place
thereunto appointed. Baptism therefore even in the meaning of the law of
Christ, belongs unto infantes capable thereof, from the very instant of
their birth, which if they have not howsoever, rather then loose it by being
put of, because the time, the place, or some such like circumstance, does not
solemnly enough concur, the church as much as in her lies, wilfully casts
away their souls. Here are we at our wits end, not knowing what to
believe. For if our English confession be true that baptism is a sign of
regeneration, and visibly seals our remission of sins and adoption, and
increases grace, etc. we know not what to make of that you say: Baptism to be
the first apparent beginning of life, a seal perhaps of the grace of election,
and that there is no stepp of sanctification before Baptism. And again, if it
be true (as you say) Predestination brings not life without the grace of
external vocation, wherein baptism is employed; what shall we think of that
our Reverend Fathers say: A man by Gods free election is holy and pure; and
that before Baptism a man may stand in the state of salvation. And if our
churches doctrine be true; that baptism is a seal of remission of sins, and
that the Sacraments make not the couenantes but are seals of the covenantes,
how can yours be true that by covenant God requires faith and baptism in
the elder, and baptism alone in children. Is baptism part of the covenant,
and more then a seal? And seeing our Reverend Fathers affirm that God and
well ordered churches forbidd baptism by women, and that God has not
inthralled his church to such urgent necessity, and that such doctrine is
fearful, injurious, and blasphemous, and our sweet and tender Father has
said: I will be thy God and thy childs, not adding any condition of
baptism, if it cannot be had as it ought. How can it be well in you to make
it a bloody and wilful casting away of souls, if the church provide not that
children have baptism howsoever. And here we pray you to teach us whether the
covenant and Sacraments in the Gospel be not the same in nature, virtue and
substance that they were under the law, or that our Sacraments have more
necessity. And if so, why our Reverend Fathers disavow the necessity of
Baptism, to be done any other wise then as it ought, because God appointed
circumcision till the eight day, is there a further grace in our sacraments, or
have they not somewhat in the work wrought, which the Sacraments of the law
had not: We pray you therefore, plainly and distinctlie to show us your
mind; whether righteousness comes by baptism, or by faith. And seeing
notwithstanding all these hard and peremptory speeches, you sometimes say,
that Page 134. 135.
grace is not absolutely tied to sacraments: and the necessity of receaving
not so absolute, as that of administering the Sacraments. We would feign know
what you hold and affirm; what manner of necessity you mean. For if grace
be not absolutely tied unto Sacraments, and necessity of receaving Sacraments
not absolute; we know not what should make necessity of administering
absolute, but that as our Reverend Fathers say, we are not enthralled to
appoint or suffer it to be done by Women or lay persons, if it cannot be had
as it ought: and if GOD have not added any such condition of baptism, where
borrowed you that distinction? We can not tell where to find you, or how to
take your meaning, or at the least that your mind concurreth with the doctrine
of the church of England: we expect therefore and pray you to declare
faithfully these things unto us.

The Church of England pronounces, 17 Of Transubstantiation.
that Artic. 28. Decoena Domini.
The Transubstantiation of the bread and wine in the Eucharist, can not be
proved by the sacred Scripture, but is against plain words of Scripture,
overturneth the nature of the sacrament, and has given occasion of many
superstitions. And for this cause our Reverend Fathers call it: Th. Bb. of Lin.
upon 1 Cor. 10
A monstrous and blasphemous doctrine: Nowel. Catechis.
bringing in doubt the truth of Christ's body. Prefat. and protestatio Nic.
Rid. habit. 20. April. in scol. pub. Oxo^. anno 1555. Read also book of Mart.
page 1327. print. 1576.
Contrary to Christ's words, saying: It is expedient that I go away, Joh.
16. 7. and to that of Peter: Whom the heavens must contain until the time
that all things be restored, Act. 3. 21. disagreeing from the articles of
faith, He ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of God the Father,
etc. making void the institution of Christ, which is to continue till he come,
etc. casting holy things to profane, as whoremongers, murderers, etc. mise and
dogs to receive the true real body of Christ. causing most cruel eating of
man's flesh, and many monstrous miracles: accidents without subjectes: the
body of Christ without his qualities and true manner of a body: nourishinge
the Marcionist to believe the fantastical body of Christ, and Eutichians
confounding the two natures of Christ, and therefore they which affirm
transubstantiation are indeed right Sacramentaries and Capernaites. In regard
whereof we entreat you May. Hoo. to make a fit construction of your words,
were you say: Book 5. 176. 177.
Since we all agree that by the sacrament, Christ does reallie and truly in
us perform his promise: why do we vainly trouble our selves with so fearce
contentions. whether by consubstantiation or else by transubsta^tiation the
sacrament it self be first possessed with Christ or no: a thing which no way
can either further or hinder us howsouer it stand, because our participation
of Christ in the Sacrament, depends on the cooperatio^ of his omnipotent
power, which makes it his body and blood unto us, whether with change or
without alteration of the element, such as they imagine, we need not greatly
to care nor inquire after. In all which words you seem to make light of the
doctrine of transubstantiation, as a matter not to be stood upon or to be
contended for, cared for or enquired into: Which makes us to marvel how our
Church and Reverende Fathers have all this time passed, been deceived. What
should cause them to affirm it to be a thing contrary to the plain words
of scripture, ouerturning the nature of the Sacrament, to call it monstrous
doctrine: why so many reverend Fathers, as Crammer, Ridley, Hooper, Latimer,
Rogers, Bradford, etc. have given their lives in witness against it, if it be a
thing that neither furthereth nor hinders, a thing not to be cared for, nor
enquired after? And here we pray you ingeniously to show whether your meaning
be to bring that side into creditt by softening the odiousnes of their
heresy, and our side into suspicion of peeuishnes, for standing upon trifles;
which the rather we desire to be resolved in, because else where you call the
enemies to Transubstantiation page 178.
Sacramentaries, and page 119. 120.
labor to show a certain vbiquitie of Christ's manhood and of his body, and
of his soul, which seems to us that you would give a gentle construction of
Popish opinions, and privilie rob the truth of our English creed of her due
estimation. If you call our Reverend Fathers Sacramentaries for oppugning
transubst. and they again call the maintayners of it right Sacramentaries and
Capernaites (if you have given as good testimony of faithfulness as they) whom
shall we believe? are you not contradictorie: and may we think you can favor
that side; your words do beat down; show us then we pray you how shuch
great favors do not prejudice the doctrine of the church of England, or not
condemn those millions of learned divines and blessed Martirs of extreme
folly, who have died for the same; and that God should reveal to you only
that it was for that which neither furthered nor hurts? Lastly instruct us
whether the institution of the Sacrament by Christ, saying: this is my body:
do this in remembrance of me, be not the true and right making of it
Christ's body and blood unto us: and upon what ground of Scripture it may be
proved, that the cooperation of his omnipotent power does make it his body
and blood unto us, and in what sense: And whether such phrases do not help
the Popish argument of Gods power which they commonly use to approve their
transubstantiation.

There be also in your book diverse Theoremes not so familiar to us common
Christians, 18 Of speculatiue doctrine.
neither do we perceive them in the English Creed; neither in the reading of
the holy writings of God. We pray you therefore declare unto us by what
spirit or word you teach them unto us. what foundation they have in holy
writ: and how they pertain to the faith or discipline of the English church?
Such as are these. Book 5. page 245.
Ten, the number of natures perfections. page 109.
Angels perpetuity: the hand that draws out celestial motion. page 61.
Church attire with us lively resembles the glory of Saints in heaven. page
67.
Daily bruses: spiritual promotions use to take by often falling. page 72.
Multiplied petitions of worldly things, a kind of heavenly fraud to take the
souls of men as with certain baytes. pa. 154. 155
In Baptism God does bestow presently remission of sins, and the holy
Ghost, binding also himself to add in process of time, what grace soever
shall be further necessary, for the attaynement of everlasting life. page 160.
The sign of the Cross (as we use it) is in some sort a mean to work our
preservation from reproach, and page 162. lin. 27.
Christ's mark. page 261.
Assuredly whosoever does well observe how much all inferior things depend
upon the orderly courses and motions of those greater orbs, will hardely judge
it meet or good, that the Angels assisting them, should be driven to betake
them selves unto other stations, although by nature they were not tied where
now they are, but had charge also elsewhere; as long as their absence from
beneath might but tollerablie be supplied, and by descending their rooms above
should become vacant: and such like, whereof your writing is not a little
stored; but show us only concerning these, that if Heb. 2. 14.
all Angels be ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes
which shall be heirs of salvation (as Gods spirit testifyeth) where is it
reveyled, that they attend upon the celestial orbs, or that their
perpetuity is the hand that draws out celestial motion; and if they do,
whether it be not sin in them, to leave their natural charge, and to attend
upon that which they are not tied unto? Do you not mean the Iud. ver. 6.
Angels which kept not their first estate but left their own habitation whom
God has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of
the great day? or would you have the elect Angels to be like unto the Angel
of the bottomless pit, whose name is Abbaddon? When, where, or how did Christ
rell thee that the sign of the cross (as we use it) is the mark of Christ,
and preserves from reproach: and what warrant have you of present grace in the
very work wrought of Baptism; did you see in the mountain of God the
pattern of that heavenly fraud which you say is to catch men by multiplied
petitions of worldly things? And what be the bruses and falls that
spiritual promotions ordained by Christ, do or can take? And how does it
appear in nature, or from the God of nature; that ten is the number of natures
perfections?

The Reverend Fathers of our Church call Mr Calvin I. Whitg. page 390.
one of the best writers: Bb. Jewel. defen. of Apol. 2. part, page 149. Read
any English writer defending the church of England: and namely Fulke against
Stapl. fortress. page 71. Read Apolog. Angl.
A reverend Father, 19 Of Calvin and the reformed churches.
and a worthy ornament of the church of God, not only defending the same
doctrine, but also discharging him of slanderous reports wrongfullie laid
against him, knowing that by defaming the persons of christians, and
especially of Ministers, the Devil of old time labored to overthrow the
Gospel of Christ. How greatly all christian churches are to praise God for
that man's faithful labors, and how instantly therefore all sorts of
papists have and do endeavor and strive to diminish his creditt, all the
christian world most aboundlie both by word and by writing, do testify.
Wherefore we wonder not a little. What moved you to make choice of that worthy
pillar of the church above all other, to traduce him and to make him a
spectacle before all christians. Wherefore we crave your favor that with
truth and patience you would answer our doubts and scruples which by the
preface of your first book you have made in us concerning him. And first,
what Master Calvin has done against our Church, that you should single him
out as an adversary: Which of our Reverend Fathers of this land has wished
you thereunto; or else tell us plainly whether our adversaries (in whose
mouths you are a most invincible champion) have not provoked you against him?
And open unto us without deceit ingenuously, whether all the learned men of
our covntrie, who have written and disputed for discipline, be not to base and
mean persons, that on them only so mighty a man should spend his sharp
arrows and coals of Juniper? but you will pass over the Seas, and search the
sepulchers of the strangers, and finding no man alive worthy your combat, you
call Master Calvin out of his sweet bed of rest, and him that is entered into
peace, you chalendge again into the field. Will no man fit you but he that
was (as you bravely affirm) inco^parably the wisest man that ever the French
church did enjoy, since the hour it did enjoy him, to whom thousands were
debtors: and who for his exceeding pains in composinge the institutions of
Christian Religion, and exposition of holy scripture, gained the advantage of
prejudice against all gainsayers following him, and of glory above all that
consented to him. How unlike are you unto that great and mighty Goliath, who
defied the whole Host of God, and made challenge of a man out of them all: he
was so proud that he demanded but chose not: he sought for one that was alive
and vaunted not him self over one that was dead? And here we most instantly
beseech you, whether your weapons be the words of righteousness and the
faithful pen of truth. Where learned you, and how prove you that May.
Calvin was the founder of discipline? And herein declare unto us, what moved
that Reverend and learned man May. D. Whitgeeft to spend so many D. Whitg.
page 174.
leaves to show that the parts of Discipline might be altered by the civil
Magistrate, as serving more fitly for the Apostles time, and the time of
persecution, then for us, having the Magistrate to friend, and living in peace
and quietness. If Master Calvin (as the T. Beza in vita Calvin.
true story reports) obtained the consent of the towns men of Geneva, not
only by demonstration out of the holy scriptures, but also by showing the
mind of very learned men of his age, out of their writings, as of
Oecolampadius, Swinglius, Suychius, Philip, Bucer, Capito and Miconius, who was
the founder of the discipline? Where had these notable men their judgment? Did
he teach them? or write before them? Was it not one founder even the Lord
Christ, the author and builder of his Church, who raised up diverse men in
diverse places, and taught them by the same spirit out of the same holy
scripture, the same doctrine and commandment of truth and righteousness? Show
us also we pray you before our God which searches the heart, whether we have
not just cause to judge, that in penning this story, you make of Calvin, your
purpose were not to deceive your reader by an artificial entwining of some
part of the truth with the hollow and glittering thread of your own witty
conjectures and peremptory censures; as namely when you begin to tell of
the repentance of the people of Genevah, page 5. 6.
irefullie champing upon the bitt: you suddenly fall into a discourse of the
rising up of those reformed churches; you besprinckle them with likelihood of
desire of glory of their own enterprises; you blame the^ that in that
troublesome time they wanted common conference, and that afterward least they
should derogate from their credit, they became ever after resolute to
maintain that which they had done, and so leaving the churches all bespotted
with leuitie and selfepride, and eased of all conscience and honesty; you
closely thrust in Calvin with this word, therefore: that he and his
associates (as parteners of the same self weening) stiffelie refusing to
administer the holy Communion, were banished the town. After speaking of his
restoring and reestablishing of Discipline, you have in one place, page 7. 8.
Many things might lead them etc. And in other place, He rightly considered,
etc. This devise I see not how the wisest, etc. And again: This sort it may
be, etc. Therefore we pray you to teach us how such might lead and may bees,
such entering into his thought and cross commending that for his divise which
he simply propounded as out of the Scriptures of God; may not drop into your
readers heart such vnheeded impressions, as may make him highly admire R. H.
great gravity and judicious wisdom and J. Caluins carnal policy, fine
hypocrisy and peremptory folly.

We beseech you also help us in these things following. First the true story
says, The. Beza in vit. Calvini.
Many being at the first gently admonished, for many unworthy acts, and for old
enmity among the chief families, and the stubberne being more sharply
reproved; the city was divided by the faction of certain private men,
Farellus and Calvin with Coraldus, openly protested that they could not orderly
celebrate the Lords Supper unto men so much at discord. At which time also
betwixt the Church at Barn and Genevah was difference in certain rites, which
while they were about to set in order by a Synod summoned for that purpose;
the chief Magistrates for that year of Genevah, being the Captains of the
factions and discord, assembling the people brought the matter to this end;
that these three faithful servants of God were commanded to depart the town
within two days. And when these Officers, like unto filthy froth, were cast
out (the one accused of sedition going about to escape through a window,
falling down headlong, by the pease of his body, was so hurt that within few
days he dyed: another for murder was put to death, and the two other being
accused for ill govern meant in a certain embassage, forsook the cuntrie, and
were condemned being absent; the City then began to seek again for their
Farellus and Calvin. You say when these things began to be put in ure; page 5.
6. 7.
the people began to repent them of that they had done; the rather for that
they grew by means of this innovation into dislike with some Churches near
about them, etc. and so Calvin and his associates (as is before said) were
banished, and that after the places of one or two of their Ministers being
fallen void, they are importunate to obtain Calvin again, and that they were
content the other two should enjoy their exile. The contradiction of these two
stories we pray you to reconcile, either by the 24. epist. which you cite, or
by any true narration whatsoever. First show us that the dislike of other
churches was for discipline, and that for that dislike the town was the rather
moved against Calvin. And whether rather these churches did not make
intercession by the decree of a Synod for Calvin to the Genevians. Secondly,
whether those Sindickes being wicked and taken away by the righteous judgments
of almighty God, the people were not made free from the former factions: and
whether that thereupon the Lord moving their minds, they remembered not the
injuries done to those two good Pastors. And show us by clear demonstration
they sought not as well for Farellus as for Calvin. And here also without your
help, we know not what construction to make of your descanting on the
Ministers, assuring Calvin of their allegiance, his returning as it had been
another Tullie, and the assenting of the people with no less alacrity of
mind then cities unable to hold outlonger. Are these any other but bitter
skornes and despitefull fictions? And to omit many things (because this is a
personal cause) we do most heartily beg at your hands to answer us
truly and faithfully, whether you think Master Calvin to have been an
honest truehearted christian, fearing God, and not an imposter and a deceaver
of the people, or at the least you would have men so to esteem of him. For
how can we otherwise conjecture in that you blame him more for the
countenancing of discipline being established, page 10. 11.
then for establishing of it, affirming with no small incitements of cunning
insinuations, that because he by wisdom and not by the word of God, saw that
discipline requisite for that people, he employed all his wit by sifting the
very utmost sentence and syllable of holy Scripture to confirm the same; and
not to omit the least occasion in all his writings following of extolling the
use and singular necessity thereof. If we may thus judge of his faithfulness
in promoting of discipline, what may we suspect of his sincere dealing in the
doctrine? About rites (as the ministering with common bread) you acknowledge
that he would not stand with the Church, to make trouble for a thing
indifferent, and why if he were a good man, should we think that he would
profess it to be traiterous cowardlines, Epist. 165.
not to dye a hundred times rather then to suffer that to be wickedly borne
down which he very well knew to be taken out of the word of God? Can you so
far make manifest either by good and just presumptions, or by plain and true
story, his deep hypocrisy and arrogant pride; that even against his own
conscience; he would so earnestly strive and trouble the whole Church to
maintain a devise of his own? We pray you therefore to show us sincerely
whether such insinuations be charitable? and whether if you be a friend to
the Gospel, you make not a greater rent in Gods Church, by such arguments then
if you meddled not at all in the matter, but left it to men of more stayde and
sound discretion and of a more charitable and peaceable spirit. For if such
bold and bare affirmations may go for payment, why may we not as well hear
and believe Master Harding, which calls all the whole and pure doctrine
believed and professed in England; In his Epist. to Bb. Jewel
A wicked new devise of Geneva. We desire you therefore in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall judge all men at his coming and make manifest the
intents and thoughts of the heart, to show unto us without all artificial
glozing whether all this your treatise of Calvin, be not polished armor, and a
sharper rasor, prepared for the use and help of the enemies of the Gospel,
and that it may not rather be called a prejudicial commentary; and a Popish
paraphrase; then a story true plain and without partiality, and that men
have not just cause to think the better of Master Calvin and the cause of
discipline, when they see so little plain and faithful dealing in your
writing. Read therefore his preface before his comment on the Psalms, and
Beza his story of his life, and the French or any other stories or monuments
of faithful honest Christians and then answer faithfully the truth and
show your honest meaning.

Our reverend Fathers D. Cranmer as Mr Fox writes. book of Mart. page 1752.
converting their studies from school authors unto the holy scriptures, and
causing others to do the like, ^^ Schooleme^ Philosophe and Popery
brought many to be well seen in divinite, and themselves and others well
affected in Religion; and therefore constantly affirm that Tho. Bb. of
Lincol. ser. 1. upon Romans 1. 16. page 7.
The heavenly doctrine of our Savior Christ was so buried in the darkness of
schoole-learning, that no man tasted the sweetness of it, which to be true that
worthy man Martin Luther, through Gods goodness to his Church finding by great
experience in him self and others, is bold to say, Respons. M. Luth. ad
dialect. Siluest. cont. conclus. sextam.
Theologia illa scholastica exulem nobis fecit veram and sincer am theologiam.
That school divinity has banished from us the true and sincere divinity.
And again, Conclus. 50. vol. 1. page 56.
Totus Aristoteles ad Theologiam est tenebra ad lucem. All Aristotle unto
divinity is darkness unto light. Now in all your books, although we find
many good things, many truethes and fine points bravely handled, yet in all
your discourse, for the most part, Aristotle the patriarch of Philosophers
(with diverse other humane writers) and the ingenuous schoolmen, almost in all
points have some finger: Book 1. Preface page 6.
Reason is highly set up against holy scripture, and reading against
preaching, the church of Rome favourablie admitted to be of the house of God.
Calvin with the reformed churches full of faults: and most of all they which
endeavored to be most removed from conformity with the church of Rome: Almost
all the principal points of our English creed, greatly shaken and
contradicted. If you do not sincerely, plainly and truly answer all
these our necessary doubts and demandes; what shall we have cause to think
of these your tedious and laborious writings. Shall we do you wrong to
suspect you as a privy and subtle enemy to the whole state of the English
Church, and that would have men to deem her Majesty to have done ill in
abolishing the Romish religion, and banishing the Popes authority: and that
you would be glad to see the backesliding of all reformed churches to be made
conformable to that wicked synagogue of Rome: and shame and reproach to all
faithful Ministers, whom GOD has raised up to reveal and beat down
Antichrist: and that you esteem the preaching and writing of all the Reverend
Fathers of our Church, and the books of holy scripture to be at the least of
no greater moment then Aristotle and the Schoolmen? Or else do you mean to
bring in a confusion of all things, to reconcile heaven and earth, and to make
all religions equal? Will you bring us to Atheism, or to Popery; or to
prepare a plott for an Interim, that our streets may run with blood, when
all religious shall be tolerated, and one shall bearde and provoke another? Are
there not examples sufficient of unspeakable massacres abroad; unless we
should fett the same home to our country, rejoicing under the blessed unity
of the Gospel of peace. Think you that the long experience of Gods
protection, in these golden days of quiet concord, the religious and
peaceable heart of our dear sovereign Lady and Queen ELIZABETH, (for whose
joyful preservation all good and christian minded English men, do vnceasantlie
pray) and the thousands of faithful subjects, who have learned Christ under
the shadow of her most happy and honorable reign; would ever give you
thanks for such great service, or ever agree unto such abominations, if they
should once begin to epsy such stratagemicall operations to appear in their
effects, and to show them selves directly and openly: We beseech you
therefore in the Name of JESUS Christ, and as you will answer for the use of
those great gifts which God has bestowed upon you, that you would return
and pervse advisedlie all your five books, compare them with the articles of
our profession set out by public authority, and with the works Apologeticall
and other authorized sermons and homilies of our church, and of the Reverend
Fathers of our Land, and with the holy book of God, and all other the
Queens Majesty's proceedings: and then read and examine with an indifferent
and equal mind a book set out in Latin called Querimonia Ecclesiae, and an
other in English, late come abroad, speaking of Scotizing and Genevatising,
and Allobrogicall Discipline: and having maturelie with a judicious conscience
in the fear of God, pondered and wayed them in the balance of truth and
justice, then tell us roundly and soothelie: That if the Reverende Fathers of
our church, assisted with some of the approved divines of both Vniversies, did
read, peruse and examine your books, and those two other books, whether they
would not judge in their conscience, and give sentence with their mouths, that
by those three writings, the Church of England and all other christian
Churches, are undermined, and that they are very notable bellows (if Gods
mercy stayed it not) to blow the coals of sedition, and fiery civil war
between all christian Churches; and to make all people, who read them, to
fall either flatly to Atheism or backewarde to popery, when they shall see
all godly Ministers and christian churches, by men of their own side and
profession, to be so openly traduced and notoriously detected, and all the
articles of our Religion and many parts of our church government to be
checked, blamed, or co^tradicted. And might they not think that the Popes
factors in England, have some intelligence with such writers? Or is that new
found discipline so neerlie seated with our English creed; that such expert
archers aiming at the one, must needs hit the other?

Our last scruple and demand is this, 21. The style and manner of writing.
seeing your books be so long and tedious, in a style not usual, and (as we
verelie think) the like hard to be found; far differing from the
simplicity of holy Scripture, and nothing after the frame of the writings of
the Reverend and learned Fathers of our church, as of Crammer, Ridley, Latimer,
Jewel, Whitgeeft, Fox, Fulke, etc. And that your Prefaces and discourses
before you come to the question are so long, and mingled with all kind of
matters and suits of learning and doctrine: whether your meaning be to show
your self to be some rare Demosthenes, or extraordinary Rabbi, or some great
Pythagoras, that enjoin your scholars or your adversaries to five years
silence, before they can be perfect in your meaning or able to replye: or that
these men you write against, be not sound in matters of faith; and therefore
you handle all things, or else you had no better way to make doubtful the
chief grounds of our faith and religion, and that you would have men better
seen in Philosophy and schoolemens divinity, and namely in Aristotle: or
that you were afearde, Read book 2. page 58.
that if you had not handled it with so grave, heroical and lofty a majesty,
you should have been reputed like some other man, and so your same should have
been but small: or that you would weary your adversary with such thick and
continual fallinge strokes, that he should not be able to stand before you
to strike one blow against you, or that you would bear down the cause with
swelling words of vanity, and cunningly framed sentences to blind and
entangle the simple; or that you would show your self another Aristotle by a
certain metaphisicall and crupticall method to bring men into a maze, that
they should rather wonder at your learning, the^ be able to understand what you
teach in your writing. We which stand for the defense of our English church
highly commend R. H. books, we allege your opinions as well as we can to
stop the mouths of foolish carpers: We commend your books as very excellent
and learnedly penned, and not to be answered; then they promptly ask your
reasons and require of us to show by what arguments you maintain those
assertions: then return we to your books; we seek and beat our brains,
but are hardely able, by our mean capacity, to gather any thing: but as a
man a far of beholding a bryer tree; all blown over with his flowers, with
great desire approaches near unto it, and finds himself deceaved; so the
delight of reading your book is marvelous great, but the fruit thereof
(howsoever it come to pass) unto us that search and examine it, is far unlike
the goodly show and appearance. In the book of that most learned and reverend
Father D. Withgift: we find the question iudicially set down, his answer
to the matter in question sensible, his reasons either from holy scripture,
from Fathers or new writers, without all circumferences and crooked windings,
directly applied, so as such poor men as we be may bear away what he says
and what he intends: but in your writing we are mightily incombred; we
walk as in a labyrinth, and are suddenly overwhelmed as in the deep sea:
sometime it seems to us that we see great flourishing of warlike and
glittering weapons and to hear the loud outcryes and noyce of them which
pursue their enemies in battle, thundering, gunshott, tossing of spears, and
rattling of harness; yet cannot we perfectly perceive any thing almost rightly
to touch the adversary pretended; but rather (as in our demandes before we
verily think does manifestly appear) most heavy strokes, poisoned
pellettes, and dangerous pushes of the pikes, against the Jerusalem of God, the
holy Christian church of England, whom you would seem to defend. We desire
you therefore with all instancie, that you would not deny us three things.
First to show unto us what arguments you have alleged which are material
and of weight, which are not to be found in the answer of that reverend
Father unto Master Carthwright; and herein plainly to de clare which be your
arguments or direct aunswers, which are neither fine and close Ironies, or
blustering bitter scoffs, begging of the question, or peremptory affirmations,
and how we may know what is the state of the question, and when you are in or
out, and what you hold in your conscience to be the truth in Gods sight:
how great and large your five books would be, if you had used reasonable,
intelligible and logical arguments only as other writers and disputers do,
and had left out all needless witty gloses and Rhetorical shadows in
preambles, discourses, digressions, amplifications, and had kept your self out
of the common iayle of sophistical elenches, and impertinent outleapes, and
had followed S. Peter's prescript, 1 Pet. 3. 15. 16
in a meek, reverend and direct apollogie and defense proceeding from a good
conscience. Secondly, that if you set forth your other books which are
promised, you would be more plain and sensible; and follow the usual
language and style of other learned men and English writers; leaving out
unnecessary long discourses, and common places, set out your reasons in
plain terms and words of sincerity, without these hugie embossements or
stuffed bumbasing, that poor plain men, which cannot skill of such hidden
mysteries, may perceive and learn something by your great travailes. Thirdly
that you would be careful not to corrupt the English creed and pure doctrine
(whereunto you have subscribed) either by philosophy or vain deceate of
schoolemens newborn divinity, or by any other beggarly rudiments of this
world, nor set these Churches by the ears with these closely carried and
dainty insinuations, and that through desire of vain glory you provoke not
your brethren, and help the common and sworn enemy, which fights against
God, against Christ's church, against our peaceable cuntrie, and against our
religious, godly and christian Princess. And especially that you beware in the
cause of supremacy to give your lawful sovereign her right and full due, and
not so to make the Church of Rome of the family of Christ JESUS, Sar. contr.
B^zam cap. 2. page 57.
that you lift up the son of pride the blasphemous tyrant the Pope into
that hie chair of pestilence to be Christ's vicar upon earth, Ipsa est
maternostra in qua and per quam tegenerauit (...) Deus. etc.
and ministerial head of his universal Church. For as there is one that says
the church of Rome is Matter nostra, our mother: So if you should go but one
step further, we know not what injury may be done to her Majesty's rightful
Imperial Crown and dignity. And lastely, that you remember him which is hie
and excellent, the king of all glory, and Lord of all power, that you please
not man to displease God, and seeking your self, you forsake not your own
mercy.

You know that it is written. Prove. 13. 1^.
Only by pride does man make contention, but with the well advised is wisdom.
And Cap. 11. 2.
when pride comes, then shame comes, but with the lowly is wisdom. You
know also who has said: Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
Vengeance is mine, etc. And again. Psalm. 105. 15
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And again Psalm. 1. 6.
The Lord knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the wicked shall
perish.

Now in all these things good Master Hoo. though we thus write, The purpose
of this letter.
we do not take upon us to censure your books; neither rashly to judge of you
for them, but because we be all children borne in this Church, and every
child loving his mother, is ielous over that which seems disgraceful to his
mother; and all Christians are exhorted to Iud. verse. 3.
contend earnestly for the faith which was once given to the saints: and he
that touches our faith touches the apple of our eye; We could not but utter
our inward grief, and yet in as charitable manner, as the cause in hand
would suffer, (for is it not a great matter when you seem to us to make a wide
open breach in the church, and to stayne the pure doctrine of faith) we seek
that the truth be not darkened or defaced; and that you by wise, plain and
honest resolution unto these our doubts and demandes, may approve your self
as the faithful and sincere servant of Jesus Christ. If then in all these our
demaundes and requests, you do lovingly and faithfully satisfy us your
native countrymen, who have sucked out the sincere milk of the Gospel, by the
doctrine in England professed, published and preached, by sermons, apologies,
articles and reading of holy scripture even now these 40. years; (for which
we are not able to render sufficient praise and thanks to our most merciful
Father in JESUS Christ, and namely for that worthy instrument of our joy, that
blessed Halcyon and Christian Deborah, his anointed hande-mayde our sovereign
Lady and Queen Elizabeth, whom the sun of righteousness has raised up to
still the raging streams and roaring waves of Gods enemies, even the cursed
Cananites of Romish Babylon, whose peaceable and flourishing reign we most
humbly pray the mighty God of heaven, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
still to continue in joy and honor) if indeed you answer our desire in love
and faithfulness, we shall have good cause to commend well of your sincere
meaning, we shall be beholdinge unto you for your godly zeal in defending our
church, and give unto you your condign praise in all places, for your true and
upright dealing, and pray earnestly unto God for you, that such excellent
gifts and graces, which he has vouchased unto you above many, may be always
wisely employed, to the advancing of the glory of the most high God, and of
his most glorious Son Jesus Christ our Lord, to the furtherance of the
prosperous wealth of his holy Church, the fruitful service of your sovereign
Prince and native country, and to your own inward comfort, and vndeceavable
joy of conscience, in and through Jesus Christ our blessed Lord and Savior,
to whom be all praise and glory in his Church and in all places of the world
for ever, Amen.

Faults to be corrected.
Folio 3. lin. 31. read favoring.

Fol. 11. lin. 2. read pearcing.

Idem. lin. 30. read helped.

Fol 18. lin. 28. for son, read same,

Fol. 19 lin. 30. read professed.

Fol 22. lin. ult. then, read them.

Fol. 34. lin. penult. read ingenuously.

Fol. 35. lin. 14. read such.

Fol. 37. lin. 19. take away the puncte.

Fol. 40. lin. 13. after absent put a parenthesis thus.)


