Cynthia. WITH Certain Sonnets, and the Legend of Cassandra.

Quod cupio nequeo.
At London, Printed for Humfrey Lownes, and are to be sold at the West door
of Paul's. 1595.

To the Right Honorable, and most noble-minded Lord, William Stanley, Earl
of Darby, etc.
RIGHT Honorable, the dutiful affection I bear to your many virtues, is
cause, that to manifest my love to your Lordship, I am constrained to show my
simplenes to the world. Many are they that admire your worth, of the which
number, I (though the meanest in ability* yet with the foremost in affection)
am one that most desire to serve, and only to serve your Honor.

Small is the gift, but great is my good will; the which, by how much the less
I am able to express it, by so much the more it is infinite. Live long* and
inherit your Predecessors virtues, as you do their dignity and estate. This
is my wish: the which your honorable excellent gifts do promise me to
obtain: and whereof these few rude and unpolished lines, are a true (though
an undeserving) testimony. If my ability were better, the signs should be
greater; but being as it is, your honor must take me as I am, not as I should
be. My years being so young, my perfection cannot be great: But howsoever it
is, yours it is; and I my self am yours; in all humble service, most ready to
be commanded.

Richard Barnefeilde.

To the courteous Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen; the last Term there came forth a little toy of mine, entitled,
The affectionate Shepherd: In the which, his Country Content found such
friendly favor, that it has encouraged me to publish my second fruits. The
affectionate Shepherd being the first: howsoever undeservedly (I protest) I
have been thought (of some) to have been the author of two Books heretofore.
I need not to name them, because they are too-well known already: nor will I
deny them, because they are dislik't; but because they are not mine. This
protestation (I hope) will satisfy th'indifferent: and as for them that are
maliciously envious, as I cannot, so I care not to please. Some there were,
that did interpret The affectionate Shepherd, otherwise then (in truth) I
meant, touching the subject thereof* to wit, the love of a Shepherd to a boy; a
fault, the which I will not excuse, because I never made. Only this, I will
vnshaddow my conceit: being nothing else, but an imitation of Virgill, in the
second Eglogue of Alexis. In one or two places (in this Book) I use the name
of Eliza pastorally: wherein, lest any one should misconster my meaning (as I
hope none will) I have here briefly discovered my harmeles conceit as
concerning that name* whereof once (in a simple Shepherds device) I wrote this
Epigramme.

One name there is, which name above all other
I most esteem, as time and place shall prove:
The one is Vesta, th other Cupids Mother,
The first my Goddess is, the last my love;
Subject to Both I am: to that by berth;
To this for beauty; fairest on the earth.
Thus, hoping you will bear with my rude conceit of Cynthia, (if for no other
cause, yet, for that it is the first imitation of the verse of that excellent
Poet, Master Spencer, in his Fayrie Queen) I leave you to the reading of
that, which I so much desire may breed your Delight.

Richard Barnefeild.

T. T. in commend ation ofthe Author his work.
VVHylom that in a shepherds gray coat masked,
(Where masked love the nonage of his skill)
Reares now his Eagle-winged pen, new tasked,
To seal the by-Clift Muse sole-pleasing hill:
Dropping sweet Nectar poesy from his quill,
Admires fair CYNTHIA with his iuory pen
Fair CYNTHIA loved, feared, of Gods and men.
Down sliding from that clouds ore-pearing mounteine:
Decking with double grace the neighbor plains,
Draws crystal dew, from PEGASE foote-sprung fountain,
Whose flower set banks, delights, sweet choice contains:
Nere yet discouerd to the country swains:
Here bud those branches, which adorn his turtle,
With love made garlands, of heart-bleeding Myrtle.
Raised from the cynders, of the thrice-fact town*
ILLIONS sooth-telling SYBILLIST appears,
Eclipsing PHOEBVS love, with fcornefull frown,
Whose tragic end, affords warme-water tears,
(For pitty-wanting PACOE, none for bears,
Such period haps, to beauties price ore-priz'd:
Where IANVS-faced love, does lark disguised.
Nere waining CYNTHIA yields thee triple thanks,
Whose beams vnborrowed dark the worlds fair eye,
And as full streams that ever fill their banks,
So those rare Sonnets, where wits ripe does lie,
With Trojan Nymph, do soar thy fame to sky.
And those, and these, contend thy Muse to raise
(Lark mounting Muse) with more then common praise.
To his Mistress.
BRight Star of Beauty, fairest Fair alive,
Rare president of peerless chastiry;
(In whom the Muses and the Graces strive,
Which shall possess the chiefest part of thee:)
Oh let these simple lines accepted be:
Which here I offer at thy sacred shrine:
Sacred, because sweet Beauty is divine.
And though I cannot please each curious care,
With sugared Noates of heavenly Harmony:
Yet if my love shall to thy self appear,
No other Muse I will inuoke but thee:
And if thou will my fair Thalia be,
He sing sweet Hymns and praises to thy name,
In that clea^re Temple of eternal Fame.
But ah (alas) how can mine infant Muse
(That never heard of Helicon before)
Perform my promise past: when they refuse
Poor Shepherds Plaints? yet will I still adore
Thy sacred Name, although I write no more:
Yet hope I shall, if this accepted be:
If not, in silence sleep eternally.
CYNTHIA.
NOW was the Welkyn all inuelloped
With duskie Mantle of the sable Night:
And CYNTHIA lifting up her drouping head,
Blushed at the Beauty of her borrowed light,
When Sleep now summoned every mortal wight.
Then the (me thought) I saw or seemed to see,
An heavenly Creature like an Angel bright,
That in great haste come pacing toward me:
Was never mortal eye beheld so fair a She.
Thou lazy man (quoth she) what make thou here
(Luld in the lap of Honors Enemy?)
I here command thee now for to appear
(By virtue of loves mickle Maiestle)
In yonder Wood* (Which with her finger she
Out-poysiting) had no sooner turned her face,
And leaving me to muze what she should be,
Yuanished into some other place:
But strait (me thought) I saw a rout of heavenly (Race.
Down in a Dale, hard by a Forest side,
(Under the shadow of a lofty Pine,)
Not far from whence a trickling stream did glide,
Did nature by her secret art combine,
A pleasant Arbor, of a spreading Vine:
Wherein Art strove with nature to compaire,
That made it rather seem a thing divine,
Being situate all in the open Air:
A fairer nere was seen, if any seen so fair.
There might one see, and yet not see (indeed)
Fresh Flora flourishing in chiefest Prime,
Arrayed all in gay and gorgeous weed,
The Primrose and sweet smelling Eglantine,
As fitted best beguiling so the time:
And ever as she went she strewed the place,
Red-roses mixed with Daffadillies fine,
For Gods and Goddesses, that in like case
In this same order sat, with il-beseeming grace.
First, in a royal Chair of massy gold,
(Bard all about with plates of burning steel)
Sat Jupiter most glorious to behold,
And in his hand was placed Fortunes wheel:
The which he often turned, and often did reele.
And next to him, in grief and gealouzie,
(If fight may censure what the heart does feel)
In sad lament was placed Mercury;
That dying seemed to weep, and weeping seemed to die.
On the other side, above the other twain,
(Delighting as it seemed to sit alone)
Sat Mulciber; in pride and high disdain,
Mounted on high upon a stately throne,
And even with that I heard a deadly groan:
Muzing at this, and such an uncouth sight, (moan)
(Not knowing what should make that piteous
I saw three furies, all in Armor dight,
With every one a Lamp, and every one a light.
I deemed so; nor was I much deceau'd,
For poured forth in sensual Delight,
There might I see of Senses quite bereaved
King Priams Son, that Alexander hight,
(Wrapped in the Mantle of eternal Night.)
And under him, awaiting for his fall,
Sat Shame, here Death, and there sat fell Despite,
That with their Horror did his heart appall:
Thus was his Bliss to Bale, his Honey turned to gall.
In which delight feeding mine hungry eye,
Of two great Goddesses a sight I had,
And after them in wondrous Iollity,
(As one that inly joyed, so was she glad)
The Queen of Love full royally yclad,
In glistring Gold, and peerless precious stone,
There might I spy: and her Companion bad,
Proud Paris, Nephew to Laomedon,
That afterward did cause the Death of many a one.
By this the foremost melting all in tears,
And rayning down resolved Pearls in showers,
Began to approach the place of heavenly Pheares,
And with her weeping, watring all their Bowers,
Throwing sweet Odors on those fading flowers,
At length, she them bespake thus mournfullie.
High Jove (quoth she) and ye Celestial powers,
That here in Judgment sit twixt her and me,
Now listen (for a while) and judge with equity.
Sporting our selves to day, as we were wont,
(I mean, I, Pallas, and the Queen of Love,)
Intending with Diana for to hunt,
On Ida Mountain top our skill to prove,
A golden Ball was trindled from above,
And on the Rind was writ this Poesy,
PVLCHERIMae for which a while we strove,
Each saying she was fairest of the three,
When lo a shepherds Swain not far away we see.
I spied him first, and spying thus bespake,
Shall yonder Swain unfold the mystery?
Agreed (quoth Venus,) and by Stygian Lake,
To whom he gives the ball so shall it be:
Nor from his censure will I fly, quoth she,
(Poynting to Pallas (though I loose the gole.
Thus every one yplac'd in her degree,
The Shepherd comes, whose partial eyes began role,
And on our beuties looked, and of our beuties stole.
I promised wealth, Minerua promised wit,
(She promised wit to him that was unwise,)
But he (fond fool) had soon refused it,
And minding to bestow that glorious Prize,
On Venus, that with pleasure might suffize
His greedy mind in loose laciuiousnes:
Upon a sudden, wanting good advice,)
Hold here (quoth he) this golden Ball possess,
Which Paris gives to thee for meede of worthiness,
Thus have I showed the sum of all my suit,
And as a Plaintiff here appeal to thee,
And to the rest. Whose folly I impute
To filthy lust, and partiality,
That made him judge amiss: and so do we
(Quoth Pallas, Venus) nor will I gainsay,
Although it is mine by right, yet willingly,
I here disclaim my title and obey:
When silence being made, Jove thus began to say.
Thou Venus, art my darling, thou my dear,
(Minerua,) she, my sister and my wife:
So that of all a due respect I bear,
Assigned as one to end this doubtful strife, (life)
(Touching your form, your fame, your love, your
Beauty is vain much like a gloomy light,
And wanting wit is counted but a trife,
Especially when Honor's put to flight:
Thus of a lovely, soon becomes a loathly sight.
Wit without wealth is bad, yet counted good,
wealth wanting wisdom's worse, yet deemed as well,
From whence (for ay) does flow, as from a flood,
A pleasant Poison* and a heavenly Hell,
where mortal men do cover still to dwell.
Yet one there is to Virtue so inclined,
That as for Majesty she bears the Bell,
So in the truth who tries her princely mind,
Both Wisdom, Beauty, Wealth, and all in her shall find.
In Western world amids the Ocean maine,
In coumpleat Virtue shining like the Sun,
In great Renown a maiden Queen does reign,
Whose roy all Race, in Ruin first begun,
Till Heavens bright Lamps dissolve shall nere be done:
In whose fair eyes Love linckt with virtues been,
In everlasting Peace and Union.
Which sweet Consort in her full well beseem
Of Bounty, and of Beauty fairest Fayrie Queen.
And to conclude, the gifts in her yfound,
Are all so noble, royal, and so rare,
That more and more in her they do abound;
In her most peerless Prince without compare,
Endowing still her mind with virtuous care:
That through the world (so wide) the flying fame,
(And Name that Enuies self cannot impair,)
Is blown of this fair Queen, this gorgeous dame,
Fame borowing al men's mouths to royalize the same.
And with this sentence Jupiter did end,
This is the Prick (quoth he) this is the prays,
To whom, this as a Present I will send,
That shameth Cynthia in her silver Rays,
If so you three this deed do not displease.
Then one, and all, and every one of them,
To her that is the honor of her days,
A second Judith in JERUSALEM.
To her we send this Pearl, this Jewel, and this Iem.
Then called he up the winged Mercury,
(The mighty Messenger of Gods enrold,)
And bad him hither hastily to hie,
Who^ tended by her Nymphs he should behold,
Like Pearls ycouched all in shining gold.)
And even with that, from pleasant slumbring sleep*
(Desiring much these wonders to unfold)
I wak'ning, when Aurora began to peep,
Deprived so soon of my sweet Dream, began almost weep.
The Conclusion.
THus, sacred Virgin, Muse of chastity,
This difference is betwixt the Moon and thee:
She shines by Night; but thou by Day do shine:
She Monthly changes* thou do st nere decline:
And as the Sun, to her, does lend his light,
So he, by thee, is only made so bright:
Yet neither Sun, nor Moon, thou can be named,
Because thy light has both their beauties shamed:
Then, since an heavenly Name does thee befall,
Thou VIRGO art: (if any Sign at all.
FINIS.
SONNET. I.
Sporting at fancy, setting light by love,
There came a thief and stole away my heart,
(And therefore robbed me of my chiefest part)
Yet cannot Reason him a felon prove.
For why his beauty (my hearts thief) affirms,
Piercing no skin (the bodies fensiue wall)
And having leave, and free consent withal,
Himself not guilty, whom love guilty terms,
Conscienee the ludge, twelve Reasons are the Jury,
They sinde mine eyes his beutie to have let in,
And on this verdict given, agreed they bin,
Wherefore, because his beauty did allure ye,
Your Doom is this: in tears still to be drowned,
When his fair forchead with disdain is frowned.
SONNET. II.
Beuty and Majesty are fallen at ods,
The One claims his check, the other claims his chin;
Then Virtue comes, and puts her title in.
(Quoth she) I make him like the immortal Gods.
(Quoth Majesty) I own his looks, his Brow,
His lips, (quoth Love) his eyes, his fair is mine.
And yet (quoth Majesty) he is not thine,
I mix Disdain with Loves congealed Snow.
I, but (quoth Love) his locks are mine (by right)
His stately gate is mine (quoth Majesty,)
And mine (quoth Virtue) is his Modesty.
Thus as they strive about this heavenly wight,
Atlast the other two to Virtue yield,
The lists of Love, fought in fair Beauties field.
SONNET. III.
The Stoics think, (and they come near the truth,)
That virtue is the chiefest good of all,
The Academicks on Idea call.
The Epicures in pleasure spend their youth,
The Perrepatetickes judge felicity,
To be the chiefest good above all other,
One man, thinks this: and that conceaues another:
So that in one thing very few agree.
Let Stoics have their Virtue if they will,
And all the rest their chiefe*supposed good,
Let cruel Martialists delight in blood,
And Mysers joy their bags with gold to fill:
My chiefest good, my chief felicity,
Is to be gazing on my loves fair eye*
SONNET. IIII.
Two stars there are in one fair firmament,
(Of some entitled Ganymedes sweet face)
Which other stars in brightness do disgrace,
As much as Po in clearenes passes Trent.
Nor are they common natured stars* for why,
These stars when other shine veil their pure light,
And when all other vanish out of sight,
They add a glory to the worlds great eye,
By these two stars my life is only led,
In them I place my joy, in them my pleasure,
Loves piercing Darts, and Natures precious treasure
With their sweet food my fainting soul is fed:
Then when my sun is absent from my sight
How can it choose (with me) but be dark night?
SONNET. V.
It is reported of fair Thetis Son,
(Achilles famous for his chiualry,
His noble mind and magnanimity,)
That when the Trojan wars were new begun,
VVhos'euer was deepe-wounded with his spear,
Could never be*recured of his maime,
Nor ever after be made whole again:
Except with that spears rust he helped were.
Even so it fares with my fortune now,
Who being wounded with his piercing eye,
Must either thereby find a remedy,
Or else to be releeu'd I know not how.
Then if thou have a mind still to annoy me,
Kill me with kisses, if thou will destroy me.
SONNET. VI.
Sweet Corrall lips, where Natures treasure lies,
The balm of bliss, the soueraigue salve of sorrow
The secret touch of loves heart-burning arrow,
Come quench my thirst or else poor Daphne dies.
One night I dreamed (alas it was but a Dream)
That I did feel the sweetness of the same*
Wherewith inspired, I young again became,
And from my heart a spring of blood did stream,
But when I wak'e, I found it nothing so,
Save that my limbs (me thought) did wax more strong
And I more lusty far, and far more young.
This gift on him rich Nature did bestow.
Then if in dreaming so, I so did speed,
What should I do, if I did so indeed?
SONNET. VII.
Sweet Thames I honor thee, not for thou art
The chiefest River of the fairest I Will,
Nor for thou do admirers eyes beguile,
But for thou hold'st the keeper of my heart,
For on thy waves, (thy Christal*billow'd waves,)
My fairest fair, my silver Swan is swimming:
Against the sun his pruned feathers trimming*
Whilst Neptune his fair feet with water laues,
Neptune, I fear not thee, not yet thine eye,
And yet (alas) Apollo loved a boy,
And Cyparissus was Siluanus joy.
No, no, I fear none but fair Thetis, I,
For if she spy my Love, (alas) aie me,
My mirth is turned to extreme misery.
SONNET. VIII.
Sometimes I wish that I his pillow were,
So might I steal a kiss, and yet not seen,
So might I gaze upon his sleeping eine,
Although I did it with a panting fear:
But when I well consider how vain my wish is,
Ah foolish Bees (think I) that do not luck,
His lips for honey; but poor flowers do pluck
Which have no sweet in them: when his sole kisses,
Are able to revive a dying soul.
Kiss him, but sting him not, for if you do,
His angry voice your flying will pursue:
But when they hear his tongue, what can control,
Their back*returne? for then they plain may see,
How hony-combs from his lips dropping be.
SONNET. IX.
Diana (on a time) walking the wood,
To sport herself, of her fair train forlorn,
Chaunc't for to prick her foot against a thorn,
And from thence issued out a stream of blood.
No sooner she was vanished out of sight,
But loves fair Queen came there away by chance,
And having of this hap a glym'ring glance,
She put the blood into a crystal bright.
When being now comne unto mount Rhodope,
With her fair hands she forms a shape of Snow,
And blends it with this blood; from whence does grow
A lovely creature, brighter then the Dey.
And being christened in fair Paphos shrine,
She called him Ganymede: as all divine.
SONNET. X.
Thus was my love, thus was my Ganymed,
(Heavens joy, worlds wonder, natures fairest work,
In whose aspect Hope and Despair do lurk)
Made of pure blood in whitest snow yshed,
And for sweet Venus only formed his face,
And his each member delicately framed,
And last of all fair Ganymede him named,
His limbs (as their Creatrix) her embrace.
But as for his pure, spotles, virtuous mind,
Because it sprung of chaste Dianaes blood*
(Goddess of Maids, directresse of all good,)
Hit wholly is to chastity inclinde.
And thus it is: as far as I can prove,
He loves to be beloved, but not to love,
SONNET. XI.
Sighing, and sadly sitting by my Love,
He ask't the cause of my hearts sorrowing*
Coniuring me by heavens eternal King
To tell the cause which me so much did move.
Compelled: (quoth I) to thee I will confess,
Love is the cause; and only love it is
That does deprive me of my heavenly bliss.
Love is the pain that does my heart oppress.
And what is she (quoth he) who^ thou do love?
Look in this glass (quoth I) there shall thou see
The perfect for me of my faelicitie.
When, thinking that it would strange Magique prove,
He opened it: and taking off the cover,
He straight perceau'd himself to be my Lover.
SONNET. XII.
Some talk of Ganymede the Idalian Boy,
And some offaire Adonis make their boast,
Some talk of him whom lovely Lada lost,
And some of Echoes love that was so coy.
They speak by heere-say, 1 of perfect truth,
They partially commend the persons named,
And for them, sweet Encomions have framed:
I only t'him have sacrifiz'd my youth.
As for those wonders of antiquity,
And those whom later ages have inioy'd,
(But ah what has not cruel death destroide?
Death, that enuies this worlds felicity.)
They were (perhaps) less fair then Poets write,
But he is fairer then I can indite.
SONNET. XIII.
Speak Echo, tell; how may I call my love? Love.
But how his Lamps that are so christaline? Eyne.
Oh happy starts that make your heavens divine:
And happy Iems that admiration move.
How tearm'st his golden tresses wau'd with air? Hair.
Oh lovely hair of your more-louely Master,
Image of love, fair shape of Alablaster,
Why do thou drive thy Lover to despair?
How do thou call the bed where beuty grows* Rose.
Fair virgine-Rose, whose maiden blossoms cover
The milke-white Lilly, thy embracing Lover:
Whose kisses makes thee often thy red to lose.
And blushing often for shame when he has kissed thee,
He vades away, and thou raing'st where it list thee.
SONNET. XIIII.
Here; hold this glove (this milk-white cheueril glove)*
Not quaintly ouer-wrought with curious knots,
Nor decked with golden spangs, nor silver spots;
Yet wholesome for thy hand as thou shall prove.
Ah no: (sweet boy) place this glove near thy heart,
Wear it, and lodge it still within thy breast,
So shall thou make me (most unhappy,) blessed*
So shall thou rid my pain, and case my smart:
How can that be (perhaps) thou will reply,
A glove is for the hand* not for the heart,
Nor can it well be proved by common art,
Nor reasons rule. To this, thus answer I:
If thou from glove do take away the g,
Then glove is love: and so I send it thee.
SONNET. XV.
A fairest Ganymede, disdain me not,
Though silly Sheepeheard I, presume to love thee,
Though my harsh songs and Sonnets cannot move thee,
Yet to thy beauty is my love no blot.
Apollo, Jove, and many Gods, beside,
S'daind not the name of cu^try shepherds swains,
Nor want we pleasure, though we take some pains,
We live contentedly: a thing called pride,
Which so corrupts the Court and every place,
(Each place I mean where learning is neglected,
And yet of late, even learnings selfe's infected)
I know not what it means, in any case:
We only (when Molorchus gins to peep)
Learn for to fold, and to unfold our sheep.
SONNET. XVI.
Long have I longed to see my Love again,
Still have I wished, but never could obtain it;
Rather than all the world (if I might gain it)
Would I desire my loves sweet precious gain.
Yet in my soul I see him every day,
See him, and see his still stern countenance*
But (ah) what is of long continuance,
Where Majesty and Beauty bears the sway?
Sometimes, when I imagine that I see him,
(As love is full of foolish fantasies)
VVeening to kiss his lips, as my loves fee*s*
I feel but Air: nothing but Air to be him.
Thus with Ixion, kiss I clouds in vain:
Thus with Ixion, feel I endless pain.
SONNET. XVII.
Cherry-lipt Adonis in his snowie shape,
Might not compare with his pure Iuorie white,
On whose fair front a Poets pen may write,
Whose rosiate red excels the crimson grape,
His loue-enticing delicate soft limbs,
Are rarely framed t'intrap poor gazing eyes:
His cheeks, the Lilly and Carnation dies,
With lovely tincture which Apolloes dims.
His lips ripe strawberries in Nectar wet,
His mouth a Hiue, his tongue a hony-combe,
Where Muses (like Bees) make their mansion.
His teeth pure Pearl in blushing Correll set,
Oh how can such a body sinne-procuring,
Be slow to love, and quick to hate, enduring*
SONNET. XVIII.
Not Megabaetes, nor Cleonymus,
(Of whom great Plutarck makes such mention,
Praising their fair with rare invention)
As Ganymede were half so beauteous.
They only pleased the eyes of two great Kings,
But all the world at my love stands amazed*
Nor one that on his Angels face has gazed*
But (ravished with delight) him Presents brings.
Some weaning Lambs, and some a suckling Kyd,
Some Nuts, and fil-beards, others Pears and Plums,
Another with a milk-white Heyfar comes;
As lately Aegons man (Damaetas) did:
But neither he, nor all the Nymphs beside,
Can win my Ganymede; with them to abide.
SONNET. XIX.
Ah no; nor I my self: though my pure love
(Sweet Ganymede to thee has still been pure,
And even till my last gasp shall aie endure,
Could ever thy obdurate beuty move:
Then cease oh Goddess son (for sure thou art,
A Goddess son that can resist desire)
Cease thy hard heart, and entertain loves fire,
Within thy sacred breast: by Natures art.
And as I love thee more then any Creature,
(Love thee, because thy beauty is divine;
Love thee, because my self, my soul is thine;
Wholly devoted to thy lovely feature)
Even so of all the vowels, I and V,
Are dearest unto me, as does ensue.
SONNET. XX.
But now my Muse toyld with continual care,
Begins to faint, and slack her former pace,
Expecting favor from that heavenly grace,
That may (in time) her feeble strength repair.
Till when (sweet youth) the essence of my soul,
(Thou that do sit and sing at my hearts grief.
Thou that do send thy shepherd no relief)
Behold, these lines; the sons of Pears and Dole.
Ah had great Colin chief of sheepheards all,
Or gentle Rowland, my professed friend,
Had they thy beauty, or my penance pend,
Greater had been thy fame, and less my fall:
But since that every one cannot be witty,
Pardon l crave of them, and of thee, pity.
FINIS.
AN ODE.
NIghts were short, and days were long;
Blossoms on the Hauthorn's hung:
Philomaele (Night-Musicues King)
Told the coming of the spring.
Whose sweet siluer-sounding voice
Made the little birds rejoice:
Skipping light from spray to spray,
Till Aurora showed the day.
Scarce might one see, when I might see
(For such chances sudden be)
By a well of Marble-stone,
A Shepherd lying all alone.
Weep he did; and his weeping
Made the fading flowers spring.
Daphnis was his name (I ween)
Youngest Swain of Summers Queen.
When Aurora saw it was he.
Weep she did for company*
Weep she did for her sweet son,
That (when antique Troy was won)
Suffered death by lucklesse fate,
Whom she now laments too late:
And each morning (by Cocks crew)
Showers down her silver dew.
Whose tears (falling from their spring)
Give moisture to each living thing,
That on earth increase and grow,
Through power of their friendly foe.
Whose effect when Flora felt,
Tears, that did her bosom melt,
(For who can resist tears often,
But She whom no tears can soften?)
Peering strait above the banks,
Showed herself to give her thanks.
Wondering thus at Natures work,
(Wherein many maruailes lurk)
Me thought I heard a doleful noise,
Consorted with a mournful voice,
Drawing nie to hear more plain,
Hear I did, unto my pain,
(For who is not pained to hear
Him in grief whom heart holds dear?)
Silly swain (with grief ore-gone)
Thus to make his piteous moan.
Love I did, (alas the while)
Love I did, but did beguile
My dear love with loving so,
(Whom as then I did not know.)
Love I did the fairest boy,
That these fields did ere enjoy.
Love I did fair Ganymed;
(Venus darling, beauties bed:)
Him I thought the fairest creature;
Him the quintessence of Nature:
But yet (alas) I was deceived,
(Love of reason is bereaved)
For since then I saw a Less,
(Lasle) that did in beauty pass,
(Pass) fair Ganymede as far
As Phoebus does the smallest star.
Love commanded me to love;
Fancy bade me not remove
My affection from the swain
Whom I never could obtain:
(For who can obtain that favor,
Which he cannot grant the crauer?)
Love at last (though loath) preuailde;
(Love) that so my heart assailde;
Wounding me with her fair eyes,
(Ah how Love can subtelize,
And deuize a thousand shifts,
How to work men to his drifts)
Her it is, for whom I mourn;
Her, for whom my life I scorn;
Her, for whom I weep all day;
Her, for whom I sigh, and say,
Either She* or else no creature,
Shall enjoy my love: whose ceature
Though I never can obtain,
Yet shall my true love remain:
Till (my body turned to clay)
My poor soul must pass away,
To the heavens; where (I hope)
Hit shall find a resting scope:
Then since I loved thee (alone)
Remember me when I am gone.
Scarce had he these last words spoken,
But me thought his heart was broken;
With great grief that did abound,
(Cares and grief the heart confound)
In whose heart (thus riu'd in three)
ELIZA written I might see:
In Caracters of crimson blood,
(Whose meaning well I understood.)
Which, for my heart might not behold,
I hyed me home my sheep to fold.
FINIS.
CASSANDRA.
Upon a gorgious gold embossed bed,
With Tissue curtains drawn against the sun,
(Which gazers eyes into amazement led,
So curiously the workmanship was done,)
Lay fair Cassandra* in her snowie smock,
Whose lips the Rubies and the pearls did lock.
And from her Iuory front hung dangling down,
A bush of long and lovely curled hair;
Whose head impalled with a precious Crown
Of orient Pearl, made her to seem more fair:
And yet more fair she hardly could be thought,
Then Love and Nature in her face had wrought.
By this young Phoetus rising from the East,
Had taken a view of this rare Paragon:
Wherewith he soon his radiant beams addressed,
And with great joy her (sleeping) gazed upon:
Til at the iast, through her bright caze me^ts clear,
He stole a kiss: and softly called her Dear.
Yet not so softly but (thetewith awak't,)
She gins to open her fair christ all couers,
Wherewith the wounded God, for terror quakt,
(Viewing those darts that kill disdained lovers:)
And blushing red to see himself so shamed
He scorns his Coach, and his own beauty blamed.
Now with a trice he leaves the azures skies,
(As whilome Jove did at Europaes rape,)
And ravished with her loue-aluring eyes,
He turns himself into a humane shape:
And that his wish the sooner might ensue,
He suits himself like one of Venus crew.
Upon his head he wore a Hunters hat,
Of crimson velvet, spangd with stars of gold,
Which graced his lovely face: and over that*
A silver hatband ritchly to behold:
On his left shoulder hung a loose Tyara,
As whilome used fair Penthesilea.
Fair Penthesilea the Amazonian Queen,
When she to Troy came with her warlike band,
Of brave Viragoes glorious to be seen;
Whose manlike force no power might withstand:
So looked Apollo in his lovely weeds,
As he unto the I*roian Damzell speedes.
Not fair Adonis in his chiefest pride,
Did seem more fair, then young Apollo seemed,
When he through th*aire inuisibly did glide,
T'obraine his Love, which he Angelike deemed:
Whom finding in her chamber all alone,
He thus begins to express his pitcous moan.
O fairest, fair, above all faires (quoth he,)
If ever Love obtained Ladies favor,
Then show thy self compassionate to me,
Whose heart surpised with thy divine behavior,
Yields my self captive to thy conquering eyes:
Oh then show mercy, do not tyrannize.
Scarce had Apollo vtter'd these last words,
Rayning down pearl from his immortal cies,)
When the for answer, naught but fear affords,
Filling the place with lamentable cries:
But Phoe bus fearing much these raging fits,
With sugared kisses sweetly charmed her lips.
And tell's her softly in her softer ear,)
That he a God is, and no mortal creature:
Where with abandoning all needless fear,
(A common frailty of weak woman's nature)
She boldly asks him of his deity,
Gracing her question with her wanton eye.
Which charge to him no sooner was assignde.
But taking fair Cassandra by the hand
(The ^^e be wraier of his secret mind)
He first begins to let her understand,
That he from Demogorgon was deseended:
Father ofth' Earth, of Gods and men commended.
The tenor of which tale he now recites,
Closing each period with a ravished kisle:
Which kindness, she unwillingly requites,
Conioyning often her Corrall lips to his:
Not that she loved the love of any one;
But that she meant to cozen him anon.
He briefly t'her relates his pedigree:
The son of love, sole guider of the sun,
He that slew Pychon so victoriously,
He that the name of wisdoms God has won,
The God of Music, and of Poetry:
Of Physic, Learning, and Surgery.
All which he eloquently reckons up,
That she might know how great a God he was:
And being charmed with Cupids golden cup
He partiallie unto her praise does pass,
Calling her tipe of honor, Queen of beauty:
To whom all eyes owe tributary duty.
I loved once, (quoth he) aie me I loved,
As fair a shape as ever nature framed:
Had she not been so hard to have been removed,
By birth a sea*Nymph; cruel Daphne named:
Whom, for she would not to my will agree,
The Gods transformed into a Laurel tree.
Ah therefore be not, (with that word he kissed her)
Be not (quot he) so proud as Daphne was:
Ne care thou for the anger of my sister,
She cannot, nay she shall not hurt my Cass:
For if she do, I vow (by dreadful night)
Never again to lend her of my light.
This said: he sweetly does embrace his love*
Yoaking his arms about her Iuory neck:
And call's her wanton Venus milk-white Dove,
Whose ruddie lips the damask roses deck.
And ever as his tongue compiles her praise,
Love dainty Dimples in her cheeks does raise.
And meaning now to work her stratagem
Upon the silly God, that thinks none ill,
She hugs him in her arms, and kisses him;
The easlyer to entice him to her will.)
And being not able to maintain the feeld,
Thus she begins (or rather seems) to yield.
VVoon with thy words, and ravished with thy beauty*
Lo here Cassandra yields her self to thee,
Requiring nothing for thy vowed duty,
But only firmnesle, Love, and secrecy:
Which for that now (even now) I mean to try thee
A boon I crave: which thou can not deny me.
Scarce were these honywords breathed from her lips,
But he, supposing that she meant good-faith*
Her filed tongues temptations interceps;
And (like a Nonice,) thus to her he says:
Ask what thou will, and I will give it thee;
Health, wealth, long life, wit, art, or dignity.
Here-with she blushing red, (for shame did add
A crimson tincture to her pa^^^^ hew,)
Seeming in outward semblance passing glad,
As one that the end of her petition knew)
She makes him swear by ugly Acheron,
That he his promise should perform anon.
Which done: relying on his sacred oath,
She asks of him the gift of prophecy:
He (silent) gives consent: though seeming loath
To grant so much to frail mortallitie:
But since that he his vows ma^e not recall,
He gives to her the sp'irite prophetical.
But she no sooner had obtained her wish,
When strait vnpr^s'ning her lascivious arms
From his soft bosom (th'aluary of bliss)
She chastely counterchecks loves hot allarmes:
And fearing left his presence might offend her,
She slips aside: and (absent) does defend her.
(Multere ne credas, ne mortuae quidem.)
Look how a brightsome Planet in the sky,
(Spangling the Welkin with a golden spot)
Shootes suddenly from the beholders eye,
And leaves him looking there where she is not:
Even so amazed Phoebus (to discrie her)
Looks all about, but no where can epsy her.
Not th'hungry Lion, having lost his pray,
With greater fury runs through the wood,
(Making no sign of momentarie stay,
Till he have satisfied himself with blood,)
Then angry Phoe us mounts into the sky:
Threatening the world with his hot-burning eye.
Now nimbly to his glist'ring Coach he skips,
And churlishlie ascend's his lofty chair,
Yerking his head strong lades with iron whips,
Whose fearful neighing echoes through the air,
Snorting out fiery Sulphur from their nosethrils:
Whose deadly damp the worlds poor people kills.
Him leave me (for a while) amids the heavens,
VVreaking his anger on his sturdie steedes:
Whose speedful course the day and night now ceuens,
(The earth dis-robed of her summer weeds)
And now black-mantled night with her brown veil,
Couers each thing that all the world might quail.
When lo, Cassandra lying at her rest,
(Her rest were restless thoughts:) it so befell,
Her mind with multitude of cares oppressed,
Required some sleep her passions to expel:
Which when sad Morpheus well did understand,
He closed her cie-lids with his leaden hand.
Now sleeps she: and as she sleeps, behold;
She seems to see the God whom late she wronged
Standing before her; whose fierce looks unfold*
His hidden wrath (to whom instire belonged)
Seeing, she fighs, and sighing quak't for fear,
To see the shadow of her shame appear.
Betwixt amaze and dread as she thus stands,
The fearful vision drew more near unto her:
And pynioning her arms in captive bands
So sure, that mortal wight may not undo her,
He with a bloody knife (oh cruel part,)
With raging fury stabd her to the heart.
Heerewith awaking from her slumbring sleep,
(For fear, and care, are enemies to rest:)
At such time as Aurora gins to peep
And show her self; far orient in the East:
She heard a voice which said: O wicked woman
Why do thou still the gods to vengeance summon
Thou shale (indeed) fore*tell of things to come;
And truly too; (for why my vows are past)
But hear the end of Iowes eternal doom:
Because thy promise did so little last,
Although thou tell the truth, (this gift I give thee)
Yet for thy falsehood, no man shall belecue thee.
And (for thy sake) this penance I impose
Upon the remnant of all woman kind,
For that they be such truth professed foes;
A constant woman shall be hard to find:
And that all flesh at my dread name may tremble,
When they weep most, the^ shall they most dissemble.
This said Apollo then: And since that time
His words have proved true as Oracles:
Whose turning thoughts ambitiously do clime
To heavens height; and world with lightness fils^
Whose sex are subject to inconstancy,
As other creatures are to destiny.
Yet famous Sabrine on thy banks do rest
The fairest Maid that ever world admired:
Whose constant mind, with heavenly gifts possessed,
Makes her rare self of all the world desired,
In whose chaste thoughts no vanity does enter;
So pure a mind Endymions Love has lent her.
Queen of my thoughts, but subject of my verse,
(Divine Eliza) pardon my defect:
Whose artlesse pen so rudely does rehearse
Thy beauties worth; (for want of due respect)
Oh pardon thou the fullies of my youth;
Pardon my faith, my love, my zeal, my truth.
But to Cassandra now: who having heard
The cruel sentence of the threatening voice;
At length (too late) begins to wax affeard,
Lamenting much her unrepentant choice:
And seeing her hard hap without relief,
She sheeds salt tears in token of her grief.
Which when Aurora saw, and saw it was she,
Even she her self whose far-renowmed fame
Made all the world to wonder at her beauty,
It moved compassion in this ruthful Dame:
And thinking on her Sons sad destnie.
With mournful tears she bears her company.
Great was the moon, which fair Cassandra made:
Greater the kindness, which Aurora showed:
Whose sorrow with the sun began to fade;
And her moist tears on the earths green grass bestowed:
Kissing the flowers with her silver dew.
Whose fading beauty, seemed her case to rue.
Scarce was the lovely Eastern Queen departed,
From stately Ilion; (whose proud-reared walls
Seemed to control the clouds, till Vulcan darted
Against their Towers his burning fier-bals)
When sweet Cassandra (leaving her soft bed)
In seemly sort her self apparelled.
And hearing that her honorable Sire,
(Old princely Pryamus Troy's aged King)
Was gone into Jove's Temple, to conspire
Against the Greeks, (whom he to war did bring)
She (like a Fury (in a bedlam rage,
Runs gadding thither, his fell wrath t'asswage.
But not prevailing: truly she fore-tolde
The fall of Troy, (with bold orected face:)
They count her hare-braind, mad, and ouer-hold,
To press in presence in so grave a place:
But in mean season Paris he is gone,
To bring destruction on fair Ilion.
What, ten-yeeres siedge by force could not subvert,
That, two false traitors in one night destroi'd:
Who richly guerdon'd for their bad desert,
Was of Aeneas but small time inio^'d:
Who, for concealment of Achilles love,
Was banished; from Ilion to remove.
King Pryam dead and all the Trojans slain;
(His sons, his friends and dear confederates)
And lots now cast for captines that remain,
(Whom Death has spared for more cruel fates)
Cassandra then to Agamemnon fell,
With whom a Lemman she disdained to dwell.
She, weeps; he, wooes; he, would, but she would not*
He, tell's his birth; she, pleades virginity:
He says, self pride does rarest beauty blot:
(And with that word he kissed her lovingly:)
She, yeeldingly resists; he fair es to die:
She, falls for fear; he, on her feareleslie.
But this brave general of all the Greeks,
Was quickly foiled at a woman's hands,
For who so rashly such in counters seeks,
Of hard mis-hap in danger ever stands:
Only chaste thoughts, and virtuous abstinence,
Against such sweet poison is the sur'st defense.
But who can shun the force of beauties blow?
Who is not ravished with a lovely look?
Graced with a wanton eye, (the hearts dumb show)
Such fish are taken with a filuer hook:
And when true love cannot these pearls obtain,
Vnguentum Album is the only mean.
Far be it from my thought (duinest Maid)
To have relation to thy heavenly hew*
(In whose sweet voice the Muses are imbaid)
No pen can paint thy commendations due:
Save only that pen, which no pen can be,
An Angels quill, to make a pen for thee.
But to return to these unhappy Lovers,
(Sleeping securely in each others arms,)
Whose sugared ioies nights sable mantle couers,
Little regarding their ensuing harms:
Which afterward they iointhe both repented:
"Fate is foreseen, but never is prevented.
Which saying to be true, this lucklesse Dame
Approved in the sequel of her story:
Now waxing pale, now blushing red (for shame)
She seals her lips with silence, (women's glory)
Till, Agamemnon urging her replies,
Thus of his death she truly prophecies.
The day shall come, (quoth she) o dismal day!
When thou by false Aegistus shall be slain:
Here could she tell no more; but made a stay.
(From further speech as willing to refrain:)
Not knowing then, nor little did she think,
That she with him of that same cup must drink.
But what? (fond man) he laughes her skill to scorn,
And icsteth at her divination:
Ah to what unbelief are Princes borne?
(The only ouer-throw of many a Nation:)
And so it did befall this lucklesse Prince,
Whom all the world has much lamented since:
Insteede of tears, he smileth at hertale:
Insteede of griese, he makes great show of gladness:
But after bliss, there ever follows bale;
And after mirth, there alwaiys comes sadness:
But gladness, bliss, and mirth had so possessed him,
That sadness, bale, and grief, could not molest him.
Oh cruel Parcoe (quoth Cassandra then)
Why are you Parce, yet not moved with prayer?
Oh small security of mortal men,
That live on earth, and breathe this vital air*
When we laugh most, then are we next to sorrow;
The Birds feed us to day, we them to morrow.
But if the first did little move his mind,
Her later speeches less with him prevailed;
Who being wholly bent to self-will inclinde,
Deemes her weak brain with lunacy assailed:
And still the more she councels him to stay,
The more he strives to make haste away.
How on the Seas he seap'd storms, rocks and sholes,
(Seas that enuide the conquest he had wone,
Gaping like hell to swallow Greekish souls,)
I here omit; only suppose it done:
His storm-tyrde Bark safely brings him to shore,
His whole Fleet else, or suncke or lost before.
Lift up thy head, thou ashie-cyndred Troy,
See the commander of thy traitor foes,
That made thy last nights woe, his first days joy,
Now gins his night of joy and day of wees:
His fall be thy d light, thine was his pride:
As he thee then, so now thou him deride.
He and Cassandra now are set on shore,
Which he salutes with joy, she greetes with tears,
Currors are sent that poast to Court before,
Whose tidings hll ^h'adultrous Queen with fears,
Who with Aegistus in a lost staind bed,
Her self, her King, her state dishonored.
She wakes the lecher with a loud-straind shrike,
Loue-toies they leave, now does loment begin:
I Will fly (quoth he) our she does that mislike,
Guilt unto guilt, and sin she ad to sin:
She means to kill (immodest love to cover)
A kingly husband, for a caytiue lover.
The peoples ioies, conceived at his return,
Their thronging multitudes: their gladsome cries,
Their gleeful hymns, whiles piles of incense burn:
Their public shows, kept at solemnities:
We pass: and tell how King and Queen did meet,
Where he with zeal, she him with guile did greet.
He (noble Lord) fearelesse of hidden treason,
Sweetly salutes this weeping Crocodile:
Excusing every cause with instant reason
That kept him from her sight so long a while:
She, faintly pardons him: smiling by Art:
(For life was in her looks, death in her heart.)
For pledge that I am pleased receive (quoth she,)
This rich wrought robe, thy Clytemnestraes toil:
Her ten years work this day shall honor thee,
For ten years war, and one days glorious spoil:
Whilst thou contendedst there, I here did this:
Wear it my love, my life, my joy, my bliss,
Searce had the Siren said, what I have writ,
But he (kind Prince) by her mild words misled,
Received the robe, to try if it were fit;
(The robe) that had no issue for his head:
Which, whilst he vainly hoped to have found,
Aegistaes pierst him with a mortal wound.
Oh how the Troyan Damzell was amazed,
To see so fell and bloody a Tragedy,
Performed in one Act: she naught but gazed,
Upon the picture; whom she dead did see,
Before her face: whose body she emballms,
With brennish tears, and sudden deadly qualms.
Feign would she have fled back on her swift horse,
But Clytemnestra bad her be content,
Her time was com'n: now bootelesse used she force,
Against so many; whom this Tygresse sent
To apprehene her: who (within one hour
Brought back again) was locked within a Tower.
Now is she ioylesse, friendlesse, and (in fine)
Without all hope of further liberty:
In steed of cates, cold water was her wine,
And Agamemnons corpse her meat must be,
Or else she must for hunger starve (poor sole)
What could she do but make great moan and dole.
So dark the dungeon was, wherein she was,
That neither Sun (by day) nor Moan (by night)
Did show themselves: and thus it came to pass.
The Sun denide to lend his glorious light
To such a perjured wight, or to be seen;
(What need she light, that ouer-light had bin?
Now silent night drew on: when all things sleep,
Save thieves, and cares: and now still midnight came:
When sad Cassandra did naught else but weep;
Often calling on her Agamemnons name.
But seeing that the dead did not reply,
Thus she begins to mourn, lament, and cry.
Oh cruel Fortune, (mother of despair,)
Well art thou christened with a cruel name:
Since thou regardest not the wise, or fair,
But do bestow thy riches (to thy shame)
On fools and lowly swains, that care not for thee*
And yet I weep, and yet thou do abhor me,
Fie on ambition, fie on filthy pride,
The root of ill, the cause of all my woe:
On whose frail ye my youth first slipped aside:
And falling down* receru'd a fatal blow.
Ah who has lived to see such misery
As I have done, and yet I cannot die?
I lived (quoth she) to see Troy set a fire:
I lived to see, renowned Hector slain:
I lived to see, the shame of my desire:
And yet I live, to feel more grienous pain:
Let all young maids example take by me,
To keep their oaths, and spotless chastity,
Happy are they, that never lived to know
What it is to live in this world happily:
Happy are they which never yet felt woe:
Happy are they, that die in infancy:
Whose sins are cancelled in their mothers womb:
Whose cradle is their grave, whose lap their tomb.
Here ended she: and then her tears began,
That (Chorus-like) at every word down rained,
Which like a pair of crystal fountains ran,
A long her lovely cheeks: with roses stained:
Which as they wither still (for want of rain)
Those silver showers water them again.
Now had the poore-mans clock (shrili chauntcleare)
Twice given notice of the Mornes approach,
(That then began in glory to appear,
Drawn in her stately colored saffron-Coach)
When she (poor Lady) almost turned to tears,
Began to tear and rend her golden hairs.
Lie there (quoth she) the workers of my woes;
You trifling toies, which my lives stain have bin*
You, by whose means our coins chiefly grows,
Clothing the back with pride, the soul with sin:
Lie there (quoth she) the causers of my care;
This said, her robes she all in pieces tare.
Here-with, as weary of her wretched life,
(Which she inioy'd with small faelicitie)
Thee ends her fortune with a fatal knife;
(First day of joy, last day of misery:)
Then why is death accounted Natures foe,
Since death (indeed) is but the end of woe?
For as by death, her body was released
From that strong prison made of lime and stone;
Even so by death her purest soul was cased,
From bodies prison, and from endless moan:
Where now she walks in sweet Elysium,
(The place for wrongful Death and Martirdum.)
FINIS.

