THE LOW COUNTRY COMMON WEALth Contayninge An exact description of the Eight
united Provinces, Now Made free Translated out of french

ED. GRIMESTON

Printed by G. Eld. 1609

TO THE WORTHY Knight Sir Peter Manwood.
Sir.
AFter the Edition of the Netherland History, I was entreated to peruse and
translate this discourse, being a description of the united Provinces, written
by John Francis Petit, one of the chief Authors of that History; who (as he
himself does auerre) has made a particular suruay of all the Provinces,
towns and forts, which are now under the government of the Confederate
Estates. And finding it likely to give some contentment to the Reader, and
necessary, as well for his better understanding of the History, as for his
knowledge of the strength and state of those Provinces, which have maintained
so long and difficult a war, against so potent a Monarke: I have spent such
hours, as I could well spare, from my more necessary employments (since my
coming into France) in the traduction thereof, that it might be printed as an
Appendix to the History. The which I cannot recommend to any Gentleman better
deserving of me then your selse, unto whom I am much bound for many kind
favors and respects. Accept it good Sir, though not worthy of your view, yet as
a testymonie of his love and thankefullnesse, who will always remain

Yours, devoted to do Edward Grimeston.
Orleans April 10. 1609.
A table containing all the names of Cities, Towns, Castles, Burgs and
Villages in these eight united Provinces, with the Towns and Forts out of the
said Provinces and yet included in their union: and first of Geldres.
The Duchy of Geldres in particular. fol. 1
ARnham. folio. 6 Nymeghen. 9 Ruremond. 13 Venloo. 14 Gelders. 15 Stralen. 16
Wachtendonck. 17 Erchelens. ibid. Echt. 18 Montfort. ibid. Harderwick. ibid.
Elburg. 19 Hattem. ibid. Wageningen. 20 Tyell. ibid. Bommel. 21 Saint Andrews
Fort. 23 Culembourge. 25 Battenbourg. ibid. Buren. 26
The Earldomes of Holland and Westfreesland. fol. 36
DOrdrecht. 46 Harlem. 52 Delf. 60 Leyden. folio* 67 Amsterdam. 73 Goude. 78
Enchuysen. 87 Horn. 89 Alckmar. 94 Medenblick. 100 Edam. 101 Munikendamme. 103
Purmerende. ibid. Muden. 105 Naerden. 106 Gorrichom. 107 Worchom. 109 Heusdin.
111 Leerdam. ibid. Henclom. ibid. Aspren. 112 Oudewater. ibid. Rotterdam. 113
Schiedam. 115 Bryell. 117 Schoonhouen. 118 Iselstein. 119 Woerden. ibid. Viane.
120 Gh^ertruydenberg. 121 Hage. 122 Vlaerdinghe. 128 Seuenberghe. ibid. Goere.
129 Beuerwick. ibid. Nieuport. 131 Scage. ibid. Nobility of Holland from 136.
to 157 Description of the British Fort called L' Huis te Britain. 157
Zealand with the Islands, Towns and Buroughs. 159
VVAlachry, or Walchren. 161 Middlebourgh. ibid. Vere or Camp-vere. 165
Fl^singhe. 168 Arnemuyden. 171 Dombourgh. 174 West-cappelle. ibid. Soetlandt.
175 Rammeken. ibid. Schowen. 176 Ziriczee. 177 Browershauen. 178
Zuit-beuelandt. 179 Rommerswall. 180 Goes. 181 Tolen the Island and town. 182
Saint Martins Dike. 183 Noort-beuelandt. ibid. Wolfers-dicke* 184
The County of Zutphen in particular. 189
DOes-burgh. 192 Doetecum. 193 Bronckhorst. ibid. Lochem. 194 Groll. ibid.
Sherenbergh. 196 Bredefort. ibid. Keppel. 197 Bourg. ibid.
The Province and Signiory of Vtrecht in particular. 198
VTrecht. 199 Wickter-duyrsteede. 206 Amersfort. 208 Rhenen. 209 Montfort. 210
The state of Vtrecht in general. 211
Freesland in general. 219
LEwarden. 236 Dockum. 242 Franiker. 244 Bolsewaert. 245 Staueren. 247
Harlinghen. 250 Sneck. ibid. Sloten. ibid. Ilst. ibid. Worcum. 252 Hindelopen.
ibid. The seven Forests. 253
Oueryssell in general. 254
DEuenter. 259 Campen. 260 Swoll. 263 Steenwick. 265 Hassel. ibid. Oldenzeel.
266 Otmarse. ibid. Enschcede. 267 Vollenhouen. ibid. Geelmuyden. 268 Meppell.
ibid. Hardenbergh. 269 Coevoorden. ibid. Rissen. 270 Diepenhem. ibid. Ghoer.
271 Delden. ibid. Almeloo. ibid. Wilsen. ibid. Graff-horst. 272
Gronninghen and the Ommelandts in general. 273
DAm. 287 Delfziell. ibid. Towns and Forts out of the united Provinces and yet
comprised in their union. 289
In the Duchy of Brabant.
BErghen upon Soom. 289 Breda. 290 Steenberghen. 293 William-Stadt. ibid.
Cluyndert. 294 Lilloo. ibid. Ter-Heyden. 295
Towns and Fortresses that the States hold in Flanders. 296
Sluice. ibid. Ardenbourgh. 298 Ysendike. ibid. Lyefkens-hoeck. 299 Ter-neuse.
300 Axell. ibid.
Fortresses held by the States beyond the Rhine. 301
BOrentang^* ibid. Bellinger-wolder-ziell. 302
FINIS.
The Belgic Commonweal, Or A particular description of the eight united
Provinces of the Netherlands.
The Duchy of Gelders.
THere is great contradiction of opinions betwixt both ancient and modern
writers touching the first beginning of the Geldrois, the which they can hardly
reconcile, neither will I undertake the charge. Marlian says, that in Julius
Caesar's time, the contrie which is now called Gelders, was inhabited by the
Menapiens. Others hold that it was the abode of the Sicambrians, whereunto I
will yield, and that under that name the Cleuois were comprehended: through
whose country, as well as through Gelders the river of Rhine does run: the
which does cast one of his branches betwixt the Duchies of Gelders and Cleues,
being called Wahal, at the division of the Island of Sgrauen-Weerdt, where that
mighty fort was first built by Collonell Martin Schenck, and at this day in
great esteem. For which Island there has bin long debate betwixt the Dukes of
Gelders and Cleues, the which is not yet decided, and was begun betwixt the
Emperor Charles the fifth, and William duke of Cleues, father to this last Duke.
The Battauians or Hollanders did also hold a part of that which is now called
Gelders. There is no doubt but in Caesar's time, the Sicambrians did inhabit on
eitherside of the Rhine, in the countries of Cleues and Geldres: as Wezel on
the one side, with Burich, Cleef and others of the other side are of the Duchy
of Cleues: And of Geldres, Nymegen lies of the one side and Arnham on the
other, so as we may rightly say that the rivers of Rhine and Wahal do run
through these two Provinces: for the Sicambrians having often bin defeated by
the Romans, Augustus (who succeeded Caesar as Strabo, Suctonius and others do
write) to be the better assured of them, and to keep them in awe, transported
a good number of them with other people on this side the Rhine, and there
planted them. I will not deny that the Menapians did not first inhabit all that
country which lies along the river of Rhine, to whom the Sicambrians did
afterward succeed, who enjoyed a great continent of ground, on the one side as
far as the Vbiens, and on the other unto the ocean sea. The which Marlian
confirms by these words. The Sicambrians planted whereas the two great rivers
of Rhine and Meuse do meet and join, extend themselves unto the ocean sea* And
in another place he says. The Sicambrians are people wholly Germains*
inhabiting beyond the river of Rhine nere unto the Vbiens and Eburones, which
are the people of Cologne and Liege. So as we cannot say that those which at
this day are called Geldrois had the name of Sicambrians only, but that under
that name were also comprehended, they of Cleues, Monts, Marck and Iulliers*
all neighbors to the Rhine, and on the other side a part of the river of Meuse
which passing by the country of the Eburones and the modern Geldrois, comes
and ioynes with the river of Wahal (which is a branche of the Rhine) nere unto
Louestein, and then retayning the sole name of Meuse, washing the towns of
Dordrecht, Rotterdam, Schiedam, Vlaerdingen and the Brill, it falls into the
British sea, and so into the great Ocean. The which Sydonius Appolinaris, an
excelent Poet in his time does witness by these verses.

Sic Ripa duplicis tumore fracta,
Detonsus Vahalim bibat Sycamber.
So when the double swelling breaks the brinke*
Wahal shall be the shorn Sicambrians drink.
But no man can directly say when or how these Menapians and Sicambrians were
divided in these Provinces thus distinguished, by which distinction they have
lost their ancient name. This Province is at this day called Geldres, and the
others Cleues, Iuilliers, Monts, Marck, Lieg, yea and Westphalia: the Etimology
of which name of Geldres seems ridiculous unto me, as it is set down in the
chronicle of Holland: I would rather hold with them which maintain that the
whole country has taken his name of Gelduba, a town in old time seated upon
the Rhine, whereof Tacitus makes honorable mention, but at this day there
remains no memory thereof: Munster holds it for most certain, that the first
Lords of this country (who long after carried no higher title then of
Advocates, then of Earls, and in the end of Dukes) were two brethren, issued
from the French Wyncard and L^^old du Pont, who built a Castle called
Pont-Gelder, which castle has long retained that name of Pont, and is now
joined to the town of Geldre, which has given the name to the whole Province,
having at this day toward the North the country of Frisland, to the Norwest
the Zuyderzee: upon the South the river of Meuse ioynes upon it, and diuides it
from the Duchy of Brabant: to the South-east is the Duchy of Iuilllers.
Toward the East is a part of the river of Rhine, and the duchy of Cleues, the
which diuides it into two very unequal parts: and to the West is Holland and
the siegneurie of Vtrecht.

This Province is plain and of a goodly situation, having few mountains, but
maine heaths, and great store of woods, which are both pleasant and profitable:
among the which is that of Echterwald. All their soil or ground for tillage is
very fertile in corn: and the pasture fat for cattle, especially that which
lies upon the banks of the river of Rhine, Wahal, Issel and Meuse. Lewis
Guichardin and other writers of our time, confound the Earldome of Zutphen with
the Duchy of Geldres, as we will show in the particular description, and not
confound it with that of Gelders.

The Duchy of Gelders and the County of Zutphen, contain the towns of
Arnhem, Zutphen, Nymegen, and Ruremond, which are the four chief of the whole
country, making the four quarters of these two Provinces, and are situated
(as we will show) upon four diverse rivers, and are subject to four several
Bishops. Then are the towns of Venlo upon the Meuse: Geldres: Stralen:
Wachkendonck and Erkelens in the champian country. Then there is Hatten upon
the Issell, Elbruch, and Harderwyck upon the Zuyderzee, Wageningen upon the
Rhine, Tyel and Bomel upon the Wahal. There are many towns which in ancient
time were walled in, but through diverse accidents and disasters they are now
wholly or in part spoiled, and in the^e last wars some have bin utterly
ruined: yet as touching that little which remains they do still enjoy their
ancient privileges of towns, as Keppel, Burch, Ghendt, Batenburch, Montfort
and Each with others, whereof we will make mention coming to their quarter,
with the which there are above three hundred villages, having steeples and the
rights of parishes. The Estates of this Duchy consists upon three chief
members of the Barons, whom they call Vry Heren; of the Nobles whom they call
Redderschap, and of the four foresaid chief towns* which Estates so far as
they are fallen from the Princes of Austria, hold their College in the town
of Arnham, whereas in like manner the Chancerie and the Chamber of accoumpts
remains, as well for the Duchy as the county of Zutphen. Wherefore although
it may displease Nymegen, as the last member added to the Duchy of Gelders, we
will begin with Arnham as the chief town, and describe all the other towns
in particular, according to their dignities.

Arnham.
THis town was in old time called Arnacum, it is a good town and somewhat
spacious, seated upon the right bank of the river of Rhine: half a league
from the which is Fossa Drusiana, which is now called Issel Dort: whereas
Drusus (to keep his soldiers from idleness) caused them to begin to dig a
channel, which drawing the water out of the Rhine, it fell into a little river
called Issell near unto Dousbourg in the county of Zutphen, the which he did
build, and called it by his own name, that he might have a shorter passage by
water to go and make war against the Frisons: which channel or little river
did so increase in a short time, as at this day it is grown very great, and is
called Issel, passing before the towns of Dousbourg, Bronchorst, Zutphen,
Deuenter and Campen, where it falls into the Zuyder sea. This town of Arnham
is the chief of the Estate and siegneury of the Veluwe, which is one of the
four quarters of the Duchy of Gelders: under which town are the towns of
Hattem, Harderwyck, Elbruch and Wageningen, all walled; with many villages*
burrowes and castles, with their jurisdictions and particular officers, subject
to the justice of the Drossart or Lieutenant general of that quarter,
compassed in by the Zuyderzee, the Rhine, and the river of Issel, for which
cause fish abounds there, and is very good cheap: besides there is great store
of woods, underwoods and bushes, full of game for the pleasure of hunting.
Near unto the said town of Arnham, is an other member of the duchy, called
Velwe Zoom, the which extends near unto Zutphin on the one side, and on the
other it reaches near to Wageningen: in all which soil there are nothing but
meades, and very pleasant and fertile pastures: which quarter has a particular
officer, which is the Judge of Arnham, with four assistants: and as for the
Veluwe the Drossart has ten assistants or counselors whereas he keep his
courts of pleas. But touching the spirituality, the town of Arnham with the
whole jurisdiction, before the troubles was subject to the Bishopric of
Vtrecht. In this town the Dukes of Geldres did in former times make their
residence, and there they were intombed in the great Church before the market
place, from whence they go unto the Port which leads unto the river of Rhine.
The Chancery and the council of Gelders were established there by the Emperor
Charles the fifth in the year 1543. when as he conquered it from William Duke
of Cleues, who maintained himself to be true and lawful heir to Charles of
Egmont last Duke of Gelders, which council did serve as well for the Duchy of
Gelders as the County of Zutphen, jointly consisting of a Chancellor and ten
counselors, that is, four of the Nobility of the four quarters above
mentioned, and six Lawiers or others, the which administer Justice with great
authority, having an Attorney general, a Register and other Officers, from
whose sentence there is no appeal. In which town the Chamber of accounts was
also placed by Philip the second King of Spain and Duke of Geldres, succeeding
the Emperor Charles his Father in the year 1559. whereas all the Officers of
Geldres and Zutphen, as well of Justice, as of the treasure, must yield an
account of their charges and offices. This town within these thirty years is
wonderfully changed, as well in fortifications and Boulwarks, as otherwise: it
has been often threatened and attempted to be surprised by the Spanish
faction, but it was fruit-lesse; the which might seem strange, considering the
easy access they had, when as they held the towns of Deuenter and Zutphen*

Nymegen.
IT is a free town and a fee of the Empire, of ancient foundation: Of the
which we read that Magus King of Gaul, the Son of Dis, had been the first
founder, who called it Maga, by his own name: And that afterward Batto King
of the Catthes (as we will show more amply in the description of Holland)
coming into that quarter, pleasing himself in the situation, and in the
remarkable antiquity, caused it to be repaired, and did both amplefie and
fortefie it with new walls, whereupon it was called Nouiomagum the which in the
country speech, answers to Nyenmegen, unless that in favoring the little town
of Megen seated upon the river of Meuse, prefering it in antiquity, we will
maintain that Nymegen has been built since upon the river of Wahal, by the
same Magus, or his successor* the which I leave doubtful. Hessel Son to
Batto favored this town of Nymeghen, for that he was borne there, and did so
enlarge it, as the lower part of the town is called Hessel-marckt unto this
day. Among all the singularities and antiquities of this town the castle is
yet standing, upon the top of a little hill, and over looks the town, the
which some affirm was built and re-edefied by Julius Caesar, to discover the
Country there-aboutes, and to command it; Neither is there any place in all
that quarter to be found, which yields so goodly a prospect of the country,
rivers, towns and villages, as this Fort does, the which unto this day they
call Des Wallicks Hoff, which is as much to say, as the Gauls Court, the which
is a probable argument, that Magus or some other of the Gauls have built it.
They have found in this town and about it within few years, memories of the
Romans antiquity, as medals and goodly stones of sumptuous buildings and
sepulchers, with inscriptions and Epitaphes of some Captains and famous men.
There are also many ruins of the Romans time along the river of Wahal, where
as some think they planted their camp, and placed their garrisons: so as the
passage which is near unto the town, is at this day called in the country
language Roomsche Vort, which signifies a Roman Fort. So as they have found
great stones in the wall of the chief Port, which they call Hessell-Port,
whereas these words are graven; H^c pes Romani Imperii: Here is the foot of
the Roman Empire. And on the other side; Hic finis regni Stauriae, Here is
the end of the command of Staurius, whereof we will speak here-after in the
description of Frisland. There was also found in St. Stephens churchyard a
great stone, on the which these verses were graven.

Anno milleno postquam salus est data saeclo,
Centeno iuncto quinguageno, quoque quinto,
Caesar in orb situs, Fredericus pacis amicus
Lapsum, confractum, vetus, in nihil ante redactum
Art, nitore pari reparauit opus Neomagi,
Julius in primo tamen extitit eius origo
Impar pacifico reparateri Frederico.
Twelve hundred years (wanting but forty five)
After Salvation did appear to men,
Frederick (then peaceful Emperor) did revive
The Pristine fame of ruined Nymegen,
Julius did build it long before; as then,
His first foundations stood; but far unlike
To the repaires of peaceful Frederick.
This was when as the Emperor Frederick caused the old ruins to be repaired.
Under this town are comprehended (as making one quarter of the Duchy of
Gelders) the towns of Bomel and Tyel which are walled in, and Ghendt which
lies open, but yet it enioyes the privileges of a town. The jurisdictions are
first that of the Bourgraue, that is to say, the Vicont of Nymegen, and of the
officers of the said two towns, and of Bomelweerd: then that of the higher and
lower Betuwe, and afterward they that lie betwixt the rivers of Wahal and
Meuse. In the year 1248. this town came under the subjection of the Princes
of Gelders by the means which follow. Otto Earl of Gelders did lend unto
William King of the Romans, Earl of Holland, Zeeland, etc. the sum of
21000. marks of pure silver, upon condition, that if within a certain time
limited, he did not pay the said sum, he should enjoy the said Town with
the jurisdiction as his own proper inheritance. The which the Emperor
Rodolphus did continue since, and did augment the conditions for the Earls
advantage. And withal the said money was not satisfied: whether it were
through the negligence of the Princes of the Empire, or that they had not
means to pay it; whereby the Vicontie and Seigneury of Nymeghen has remained
incorporated upon certain conditions to the Duchy of Gelders, retaining the
jurisdiction, sovereignty and prerogative to coin money, as an Imperial
Town. In the year 1589. Collonell Martin Schencke of Nydeck, made an
unfortunate enterprise upon the town, who retyring unto his boat being
ouerladen, it sunk and he was drowned: Since the united Estates having built a
mighty fort called Knotsenbourg on the other bank of the River of Wahal,
opposite unto the Town, the which did hinder their navigations and much anoy
them with their Canon, the townse-men did press the Duke of Parma to free them
from this Fort, and to beseege it: But Prince Maurice coming thither out of
Frieseland, and having defeated some of the Dukes men, he was forced to raize
his seege, and to retire with his Army into Brabant, he himself going to the
Spaw: The Prince seeing him retired, made haste to beseege the said town,
which he soon forced to yield unto the united Estates. In the year 1592.
under whose obedience it has ever since continued.

Ruermond.
IT is a reasonable good town, seated upon the River of Meuze, joining to the
mouth of that of Ruoer, For Mondt in the duch tongue signifies mouth or
entrance, and so of that word and of Ruer the name of this town is compounded,
as many others are found in the Netherlands of the like definitions, as
Dendermond in Flanders, Isselmond in Holland and others: in Latin it is called
Ruremunda, five leagues from Maistricht* and three from Venloo: A town well
peopled, rich and well built, strong both by nature and by art of
fortifications of rampars and bulwarks. It is one of the four chief Towns
of Gelders, chief of one of the quarters, under whose Jurisdiction are
comprehended the Towns of Venlo, Gelder, Stralen Wachtendonck and Er^kelans,
al walled and strong, with three small Bouroughes, Montfort, Vucht and
Nyeustadt, one a league distant from another, which are under the Judges and
Officers of the said towns, as also they of Kessel, Middeler and Creykenbeeck.
Within sixty years this town was appointed to be the Bishops Sea for the whole
Duchy of Gelders: And there are at this day more Priests and Monks in i^ then
in any other Town in the Country. They have had their share of troubles in
these last wars, but not in so great a measure as many others.

A good league from Ruremond is the goodly Village of Kessell, with a strong
Castle built upon a Mountain, belonging to a private Lord, from which Village
there is a little Angle of the Country, called Landt-van-Kessell, which is of
the demaines of the Duchy. This place of Kessell was sometimes a town of
great importance, the which Ptolomey calls Castelleum, and makes it the
Metropolitaine of the Menapians. This town of Ruremond with the whole
Jurisdiction, is at this day subject to the Princes of Austria.

Venloo.
IT is upon the right bank of the river of Meuse, three leagues from Ruremond
and half a league from Stralen, it is a good and a strong Town, the people
are martial and given to Arms, and has in former times resisted an Imperial
Army. And although it has often had garrisons of VVallons, Germans,
Spaniards and Italiens, yet they have always found means to free themselves
by some device, and to set the garrison at division one against an other, the
Citizens fortefying one of the parties, and chasing away the other; then
finding them strong enough for that which remained and which had favored them,
they expelled them also; as it happened in the year 1578. to the Seignior of
Esstournelles, and in the year, 1591. to Otto Bentinck their Governor:
remaning notwithstanding always faithful to the Princes of Austria, to whom
they knew well how to excuse themselves. In the year 1601. Prince Maurice made
a gallant enterprise upon the said Town; but being ill seconded, the Burgers
having taken arms and recovered their Ports, it succeeded not; so as he was
forced to retire, with the loss of two of his Captains. In this Town
William Duke of Cleues, having lost all his Duchy and a good part of Iuilliers
and Cleues, came in the year 1543. and submitted himself to the mercy of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, where he was received into grace, renouncing the
league which he had with the French and marrying the daughter of Ferdinand
King of the Romans the Emperors brother, and absolutely renounced al his
interest to the Duchy of Gelders, as we have showed more amply in another place.

Guelder.
THe Town of Gelder is (as we have said*) that which has given the name to
the whole Ducthy, being within two small leagues of Stralen it has a Castle
which was wont to be without the town* but now it is comprehended within the
fortification. This was wont to be the Court of the Lords of Pont, Aduocats,
and afterward Earls of Gelders: it is divided into two habitations, separated
by a water, upon the which there is a bridge, which gives access from one to
the other, seated in a country somewhat Moorish, and not very accessible to
plant the Canon. This town in the beginning of the last troubles, was under
the obedience of the united estates. But the Earl of Lecester Lieutenant to
the Queen of England, Protectresse of the union, having placed Colonel patton
a Scottishman for Governor there, he sold it for thirty thousand crowns in
ready money to the duke of Parma, in the King of Spaines name, retaining to
him-self the horses and moueables of Colonel Schenck, and the ransomes of some
of the ritchest and best Citizens. And so this town returned under the power
of the Princes of Austria, as it is yet at this day.

Stralen.
THis town is but a league and a half from Wachtendonck, a small town, but
sufficiently fortified for the importance thereof, being too near to Venlo,
in the which the Princes of Austria intertaine an ordinary garrison under some
Governor or Captain whom they place there.

Wachtendonch.
IS also a small Town with a Castle belonging to a private Lord: the which in
the year 1588. holding the party of the united Estates, the duke of Parma
after that he had failed at the seege of Berghen up Zoom, sent Cont Charles of
Mansfeldt to beseege it, where in the end he forced them to yield. In the
year 1600. Cont Lodowike of Nassau surprised it for the united Estates. After
which the garrison of Gelders, Stralen and others thereabouts surprised it
again, but not able to take the Castle, they were forced to abandon it: So as
in the year 1605. the Marquis Spinola went and beseeged it, who received it by
composition for the Archdukes of Austria.

Erchelens.
SOme will say that this town has taken his name of Hercules Allemanicus: It
is situated upon the fronters of the Duchy of Iuilliers four leagues from
Ruremond, it is a reasonable good town, obedient with the like garrison unto
the Princes of Austria. But let us now come unto the towns which are seated
as well upon Zuyderzee, as upon the rivers of Rhyne, Wahal, Meuze and Issell.
First,

Echt
IT is a league from the Meuze, and as far from Montfort, on the side of that
goodly Wood which they call Echterwout.

Montfort.
IT is a Castle of importance, the which was in ancient time a small town: it
lies a league from Ruermond.

Harderwick.
IT is a an indifferent good town lying upon the Zuyderzee: yet the haven is
bad, so as the ships are forced to lie in the Road: Notwithstanding Charles
Duke of Gelders, sending five ships well manned with soldiers out of that
town, thought to surprise the Town of Horn in West-Freezeland, whereof he
failed. In the year 1503. this town was by chance set on fire, the which
was so violent, as in less then three hours it was all consumed to ashes,
except five or six houses, with the loss of all their goods, and the death of
many persons which were surprised by the fire, or smothered under the ruynes of
the houses and walls the which was a fearful and pittyfull sight. Since it
has been in a short time new built, and made more beautiful and stronger
then before. There are some rich and civil people in it: The Magistrate
intertaines a good School there: It has not much tasted of the miseries of
these last wars: sometime it has maintained a small garrison of horse and
foot, without any great charge unto them.

Elburgh.
IT lies upon the Zuyderzee like unto Harderwick, from the which it is distant
two good leagues, and as much from the Town of Campen in Oueryssell It is a
little town of small traffic, but yet good cheap to live in, and has during
these wars followed the same party that Harderwick. did

Hattem.
WAs in ancient time a good town, though none of the greatest, seated upon
the left bank of the river of Yssell. There is a goodly strong Castle, which
has tasted of the miseries of these last wars, for the Drossart or
Lieutenant of the Country thinking to deliver it into the Spaniards hands,
being discovered, they thought to make it good in this Castle, whereas the
Estates beseeged them, and the Castle was so battered and torn with the canon
(whereof the marks are yet to be seen) as they were forced and carried
prisoners to Arnham whereas they lost their heads.

Wagheninghen.
IS a small ancient strong town, and is the very same which Cornelius Tacitus
called Vada, as to speak the truth it man properly be so called, being in a
manner compassed in of all sides with moors and bogs, which makes it
in-accessible on those parts, it lies not far from the river of Rhyne, being
of an equal distance from the towns of Arnham and Nymeghen, and four leagues
from Culenbourg.

Tyel.
THis Town is the chief place of the Jurisdiction or Bayliwick which they
call Tyelerweerd, the which was wont to be a Peninsula: But since these last
wars Derick-vick Seignior of Soulen Bailiffe of the town and jurisdiction,
has caused a channel to be cut through the Country to sail from the river
of Meuze into the Wahal upon the right bank whereof the said town is built ^
by which means the said Tyelweerd is now made an Island, for that there is no
entrance into it but by water, or through the town: It is strong by nature and
by art, through the diligence of the said Amptman or Bailyffe, who since the
last troubles has made sharp wars against the Spaniards, by the means of that
garrison: In the year 1528. holding the party of Charles Duke of Gelders their
Prince, the Burguignons beseeged it in the Emperors name, but it was so well
defended, as they were forced to raise their seege, to the great honor of the
Inhabitants, and the few soldiers that were within it.

Bommel.
IT is a fair strong place, the chief town of all the Territory of
Bommell-weerd, which the Rhyne and Meuze do compass in, making it an Island,
the which they say was called by Caesar, Insula Batauorum (if it extend no
farther) the which we may say is now the higher and lower Betuwe, on the other
bank of the river of Ryne, as far as Tyel, and beyond to Haerwerden, where
at this present is the mighty fort of Saint Andrew (whereof we will presently
make mention) whereas the Wahal and the Meuze kissing as the pass, join
together at Louestein at the end of the said Bomels-weerd in one body, the
which soon after from Gorrichom takes the name of Meruve, until that having
past Dordrecht, it resumes his name of Meuze, and beneath Bryell runs into
the British Seas.

In this Island there are many fair Villages and Castles, among others Rossem,
whereas Martin van Rossem Seign ior of Puydroyen was borne; a famous Captain
in his time, having been Marshall of the field to the Duke Charles of Gelders
and William of Cleues, who in the year of our Lord, 1534. did terrify the
Town of Antwerp, and thinking to do the like to them of Lovuain was forced to
retire.

In the year of our Lord 1598. Archduke Albert of Austria being gone into
Spain to fetch his spouse, the Infanta Isabella, daughter to King Philip the
second, and sister to King Philip the third now reigning; left (during his
absence) Cardinal Andrew of Austria to govern the Netherlands, which were
given in marriage to the said Isabella, and Don Francisco de Mendoza Admiral
of Arragon, for general of his army: the which he sent unto the frontiers of
Germany to make war against the united Estates that way, where having done
what he listed, and taken from the Estates by seege the towns of Rhynberch
and Deutecom, and then the Fort of Creuecaeur, he past to the said Island of
Bommell, with an intent to beseege the town, the which by reason of their
works at the fortification lay half open. The which Prince Maurice
understanding, he posted thither with all speed, and assured it with his
presence and forces, causing a trench to be cast without the town, from one
side of the river unto the other, whereas he lodged the greatest part of his
Army, where-vppon the Admiral seeing there was no way to force them, he
retired farther into the Island busiyng himself about the building of Saint
Andrews Fort, so as the town of Bommel was freed.

In this town was borne that learned man Elbert Leoninus, Doctor of the Laws*
who dyed in the year 1601. being Chancellor of Gelders and deputy for the
general Estates of the united Provinces, being above 80. years old: he was
so^times Tutor to the Prince of Orange which now lives.

S. Andrew.
THis Fort was so named by Andrew of Austria Cardinal of Constance, being
Governor of the Netherlands (as we have said) in the absence of the Archduke
Albert. It is the mightiest fort that has bin made in all the Netherlands, for
the building whereof the Admiral of Arragon disfurnished the whole Island of
trees: It is comprehended in five Bulwarks, after the form of the Citadel of
Antwerp, whereof three are upon the banks of Meuze and Wahal, and the two
others toward Haerwerden, either of them having a caualier or plat-forme to
defend it, with broad and deep ditches, without the which is a counterscarpe,
the which has also a ditch round about it* and small forts to warrant it,
especially whereas these two rivers embrace one an other, toward Tyler-weerd,
whereas the Fort of Nassau is set opposite to that of Saint Andrew, in a
corner, which is also made an Island by art, being called Voorne, and is held
by the Estates: which two Forts did daily salute one an other with their
Ordinance. The Admiral having fynished this Fort thinking thereby to keep the
rivers of Wahal and Meuse and the whole Island in subjection, left a garrison
of 1500. men in it, with store of artillery and munition, and then retired
with his army to refresh it in Brabant. But Prince Maurice did not dissolve his
army, but kept it together all the winter, as well in the town of Bommel, as
in the trenches and ships which he had lying by: The spring time being come,
having recovered the Fort of Creuecaeur, he went to beseege that of Saint
Andrew, the which through want of victuals, was yielded unto him, with all the
artillery and munition, the soldiers being about 1100. and some 400. out of
Creuecaeur remained in the Princes service, who afterward at the battle of
Nieuport showed themselves both valiant and faithful. And so this Fort of
Saint Andrew has unto this day remained under the obedience of the united
Estates.

Culembourg.
ALthough this town be a fee of Gueldres, yet there is a question made whether
it be of that territory. It is scituaed upon the left bank of the river of
Lecke, a league from Buren, and two leagues from Vianen, on the same side of
the river. It has a goodly castle, whereas the Lord does ordinarily reside,
and a large jurisdiction, whereupon King Philippe the second erected it to an
Earldome, whereof Florent of Palant was the first Earl, besides many other
great possessions which he enjoyed, whereof his son is now Lord and Earl.

Battenbourg.
ALthough this town (at this present ruined) and the castle, be within the
limmits of the Duchy of Geldres, seated upon the bank of the river of Meuse,
whereby the Barron of that place makes a great reuenew of the toule and custom
which is paid by all the ships that pass that way: yet the said signeury is
merely held of the Empire, as William of Bronchurst did take it up of
Maximilliam the Emperor: His Son succeeded him, and dying without heirs,
Maximillian of Bronckhurst his cousin German did inherit, and is now Lord of
it. This place is of very great antiquity. The Chronicles of Holland affirm,
that it was the first Castle which Prince Battus (of whom Batauia or Holland
took his name) did build upon the Meuze in the County of Sicambrians, which
now is Gelders.

Buren.
THis Town is neither a fee, nor of the territory of Gelders, but a little
country of it self, which holds of the Empire, carrying the title of an Earl
with great Jurisdiction, a large territory and many Villages, and yet shut up
in the lymits of the Duchy of Gelders.

This place is seated near unto the river of Lingen, upon a little Brook
which in old time was called the ditch for muscles, a league from Till; it is
not very big, but has a very strong Castle joining unto it, where there is
an ordinary garrison for the united Estates. That valiant and famous Prince
Maximilian of Egmont was Earl of this place, who for his great services done
unto the Emperor Charles the fifth, (whereof diverse histories make mention) left
his memory immortail to posterity: Dying at Brussels in the year one thousand
four hundred and nine, to whom succeeded his only daughter the sole heir by
her mother of the house of Lannoy: Who was the first wife of William of Nassau
Prince of Orange, by whom she left a son and a daughter, that is Philip William
of Nassau now Prince of Orange, Earl of Buren, Seignior of Lannoy etc. And the
Lady Mary of Nassau widow to Cont Philip of Hohenlo.

This may suffice for the description of the Towns and chief Forts
comprehended in the Estate of the Duchy of Gelders.

The people of this Province are valiant and warlike, from whence they were
wont to draw a good part of them at Arms and Archers of the bands of
Ordinance of the Low Countries.

These were the last among the Belgic Gauls that submitted themselves to the
yoke of the Roman Empire, and the first when this Monarchy began to decline,
that freed themselves from their subjection. Afterward they were made subject
to the French: yet embracing the occasion when it it was offered, they did
shake of this yoke, and began to be governed by private Lords of the country it
self: the which happened in the time of the Emperor Chalres the bald King of
France: Which Lords were simply called Tutors ot Aduocats of the country: The
which according o their virtues and merits were chosen and created by the
people, the first of which was Wrinchard (as we have showed before) to whom
succeeded his son Gerlach in the year 910. so as there were seven Lords or
Feofes successively issued from this family, the last whereof was also called
Winchard, who left but one daughter called Aleyd or Alix, married to Otto Earl
of Nassau: who was the first which carried the title of the Earl of Gelders
given him by the Emperor Henry the third, in the year 1079.

But the said Aleyd being dead he married with the daughter of Gerlach Earl
of Zutphen, who was slain in a battle given betwixt Conrard Bishop of
Vtrecht and Thiery the sixth Earl of Holland. Where-vppon (as we have said)
the Earldome of Zutphen was also united unto the Duchy of Gelders. Otto left
these Earls after him, Gerrard, Henry, Gerrard and Otto the second, surnamed
the stump-foot. It was he which did purchase the Seigneury of Nymeghen, as we
have said before, which he did wall in with diverse others, which were but
Buroughs, as Ruremond, Arnhem, Harderwicke, Bommel and Wageninghen all in the
Province of Gelders, and above it Goch in the country of Cleues: to the which
he gave goodly privileges, as to great Cities.

To this Otto succeeded his son Renald, and to him a son of his own name,
who obtained in the year 1329. the dignity and title of Duke of the Emperor
Lewis of Bauaria in an imperial Diet held at Francfort: As in like manner the
County of Iuilliers was by him erected into a Duchy. After this Reginold the
second; Geldres was governed by Arnold and Edward his two sons, but not without
great contentions. Both of them dying, Arnold left two daughters of diverse
beds, Ioane and Isabell, who continued the division which had been betwixt
their Father and Uncle: but Isabell dying without children, Ioane remained sole
and peaceable Duchess, to whom succeeded William her son, who was the
fourth duke of Geldres, but dying without heirs, Reynold his brother the
fourth Duke of Iuilliers succeeded him, and was the fifth Duke of Geldres, who
dying without issue male, the succession went to his only daughter, married to
Arnold of Egmond, issued from a daughter of the first Duke of Geldres, by which
means the said Arnold came unto the principality, whose Son called Adolphe,
(who is numbered for the seventh Duke) repyning that his Father lived so long,
by the persuasion of his own Mother, caused him to be seized on in a night,
and to be put in prison in the castle of Buren, where he detained him many
years. Pope Paul the second and the Emperor Frederick the third, not able to
suffer so great an impiety, gave authority to Charles the Warlicke, Duke of
Bourgongne to free this miserable Father by force of arms out of the hands and
tyranie of his son: The which Adolph understanding, and seeing that the Pope
and Emperor did embrace the cause, and that he was not able to resist Duke
Charles his forces, he drew his father out of prison, and having obtained a
pasport from the Duke, he came unto him with his father to Dourlans in Picardy:
before whom the father casting his glove, defied the son: But the Duke who
loved this Adolph, labored to persuade the father to resign the Duchy unto his
Son, and that being now very old, he should retire to Grave, and content
himself with that piece and three thousand florins rent, whereupon Adolph
like an unnatural and barbarous son hearing this proposition made by Duke
Charles of Bourgongne, answered, that he had rather cast his father headlong
into a well, and him self after, then accept of that composition.

That it was reason, seeing his father had governed, forty four years, that
he should also come in his rank to the Principality, and enjoy it as his
father had don. Adding that he was well content his father should have 3000
florins yearly for his entertainment, but he must depart out of the country and
siegneury of Gelders, and never enter more into it: Duke Charles hearing these
speeches and noting the cruelty of a son toward his father, seemed so much
incensed thereat, as Adolph fearing his fury, fled in a disguised habit,
thinking to save himself in Gelders; but being known, near unto Namur he
was taken and put in prison at Villevord, and from thence carried to Courtray,
where he remained till after the death of Duke Charles. In the mean time the
father to be reue^ged of his son, sought to dis-inherit him; resigning his
Duthcy of Gelders and County of Zutphe^ unto Duke Charles upon certain
conditions. By which resignation the Princes of the house of Austria have so
much pretended unto the said Duchy, as in the end after the death of the last
Duke Charles of Egmont, they have inioyed it, although by right it should
descend to William Duke of Cleues, whom the Emperor forced to yield it unto
him. And to return to Adolph he was freed from his prison at Courtray by the
Ganthois, who made him their General against the French king Lewis the 11.
where this ungrateful son was slain before Tournay, receiving the fruits of
his desert, having bin so cruel to his father. Duke Arnould dying afterward at
Grave, he instituted (upon caution) the said duke of Bourgongne to be his
heir, dis-inheriting his son Adolph of the succession, as contumax, ingrat and
rebellious: But the Geldrois refusing to accept of Duke Arnolds disposition and
testament, the duke of Bourgongne went with a mighty army and by force took
possession of the country, receiving their oaths of fealty and homage, whereunto
he forced the towns and the Nobility of Gelders, And the better to assure this
new Estate he purchased from Gerard Duke of Iuilliers and his children, all the
interest they had or might hereafter pretend unto the Duchy of Gelders. This
done he sent Charles and Philip the sons of Adolph whom he had by a Princess
of the house of Bourbon, to be bred up in Flanders; and by that means the Duke
of Bourgongne remained in quiet possession of the Estate of Gelders, and dying
left the succession to his only daughter and heir, who was married to the
Emperor Maximillian, but the Geldrois refusing to obey him, he raised a mighty
Army, and came to Boisleduc, wherewith the Estates of Gelders being terrified,
they acknowledged him for their Prince in the right of his wife, and did swear
obedience unto him. And so Maximillian got the quiet possession without any
effusion of blood, the which he inioyed until that Charles the son of Adolph
(who had been taken prisoner with the Earl of Nassau in an encounter near
unto Bethune by the French, and afterward by reason of his Alliance by the
mothers side, set at liberty) with the help of the French King and his Kinsmen
and friends, returned into Gelders with a small Army, where without any
resistance or difficulty, he was received by the people, as their lawful
Prince, and numbered for the eight Duke of Gelders.

This Duke Charles of Egmont was in his time a valiant and warlike Prince:
making war against all his neighbors, especially against Albert duke of Saxony
feudatary of Freezland and of Groaning: Governor of a part of the Netherlands
for the Emperor Maximillian, and the Archduke Philip his son, who married
the Lady Ioane of Castile, and was afterward Queen of Spain, after the death
of the King Don Ferdinand of Arragon and of Queen Issabelle of Castile, her
father and mother: whereby the Realms of Spain came unto the house of
Austria, and have continued unto this day.

The said Duke had also great war against the Lieutenant of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, son and successor to the said Archduke Philip: so as in
the end there was a peace made betwixt them at Gorcum in the year 1528. and
afterward in the year 1536. there was an other general peace made in the
Town of Grave: The conditions whereof were in substance that Duke Charles of
Egmont should hold the Duchy of Gelders and the County of Zutphen in fee of
the Emperor or Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Holland, for him and his lawful
heirs: But if he dyed without issue, his Estates and Seigneuries should accrue
unto the Emperor and his heirs. This duke died without children in the year
1538. And so according to the said Accord and transaction, and the rights which
his great grandfather the Duke of Burgongne had gotten, these countries should
descend unto the said Emperor: But John Duke of Iuilliers pretending an
interest by reason of their ancient rights, (renounced and sold as we have said
by his Ancestors) was not received by the Estates, so that after the death of
Duke Charles of Egmont the Cleuois had labored to draw some by love and others
by force under the subjection of the King, and to make them his vassals,
where-vppon they took arms against him. And worshipping the sun rising more
then the sun seting, neglecting the old Duke, they did chose and receive his
son William, who was made sure to the daughter of the Duke of Albret and
heir to the Crown of Navarre: which election was confirmed and better
established in the year of our Lord 1539. by the death of the said Duke John:
at which time neither the Emperors title nor authority could prevail any thing
to make him to be acknowledged Lord of this Province. But this was not all, for
the Emperor being in Spain, his countries were suddenly invaded by the French
King and this Duke William: Where-vppon the Emperor being returned from his
last unfortunate voyage of Affricke, he went into the Netherlands with a
mighty army, and suddenly subdued in a a manner all the towns of the Duchy of
Cleues and Iuilliers, and among others those of Duren and Sittant. Wherewith
Duke William being amazed, and fearing this mighty enemy, by the persuasion of
the Princes of Germany, his Allies, he went and humbled himself unto the
Emperor in the town of Venlo, to whom he was reconciled, yielding absolutely
unto him the said Duchy of Gelders and Earldome of Zutphen, renouncing also
the league which he had with the French King and his pretended marriage with
Ioane of Albret Princess of Navarre, and marrying with the daughter of
Ferdinand King of Romans, the Emperors Brother. In consideration whereof all
his other Countries which the Emperors men had taken from him were restored
again. To which Accord the Estates of Gelders did willingly consent, upon
certain e conditions contained in their pattent. And so Gelders and Zutphen
returned again to the house of Austria under the Emperor Charles the fifth in
the year 1543. and in the year 1549. there was received for Prince and homage
done unto Philip of Austria Prince of Spain, the only son unto the Emperor,
as future and lawful Lord of the said Duchy and Earldome: who gave the
gouernme^nt thereof unto Charles of Brunen Earl of Meghen. Until that in
these last wars the said Provinces having entered into the general union of the
Netherlands* by the pacification of Gandt they have (notwithstanding the
disunion of them of Arthois, Henau^t and others) continued always constant in
the said union, and so remain at this present, having tasted the bitter
fruits of the said wars, as the history of the Netherlands makes mention.

The Earldome of Holland and of VVest-Friesland.
BEfore I undertake to describe Batauia (which is now called Holland) in old
time the mother of good horsemen, and the mistress of martial discipline, not
tributary, but companions and allies to the people of Rome, I think it fit in
the relating the original of the nation to make a repetition of that which
has bin collected of their antiquity by ancient records, and redeeming them
from forgettfulnesse to restore them to their ancient glory and honor. To
which effect as I hold it very absurd to abuse the reader with fables and lies,
so will I not altogether reject that which has been delivered by our
Ancestors. I know that the curious reader affects new things more then ancient,
the memory whereof is almost extinct: but I will entreat them to give me leave
to remember the honor which the Batauians have purchased by arms, registered
by all ancient writers, whereof we will presently make mention.

First of all it is well known that the Batauians are originally descended
from the Cattes a people of Germany, who driven from their native soil by
intestine dissentions, having past the Rhyne sought a new habitation, and
ceazing upon the borders of Belgia which were inhabited, they planted
themselves in the Island which the Rhyne does enuiro^. The which Tacitus a
Knight and a faithful Roman writer does witness in his book which he has
written of the manners of the Germains. Omnium (says he) harum gentium
virtute precipui Bataui, non multum ex^ripa, sed insulam Rheni amnis incolunt,
Cattoru^ quondam populus, et seditione domestica in eas seeds transgressus, in
quibus pars Romani Imperii fueru^t: manet honos and antiquae societatis insigne
etc. That is to say: of all the nations (meaning the Germans) the Batauian are
the most valiant not far from the banks, but inhabiting of the Island of the
river of Rhyne.

In ancient time a people of the Cattes, and by their civil dissentions
transported into these parts to make a portion of the Roman Empire, they yet
enjoy the honor thereof. Bataui donec trans Rhenum agebant pars Cattorum,
seditione domestica pulsi extrema Gallicae orae vacua cultoribus simulque
insulam inter vada sitam occupauere: quam mare Oceanum a front, Rhenus amnis
tergum ac latera circumluit.

The Batauians whilst they remained beyond the Rhyne were a part of the Cattes,
chased away by Civil dissentions, planted themselves upon the extremities of
the Gaulish fronters In an Island lying among the marshes having the Ocean Sea
in Front, and the River of Rhyne behind and on either side. By these words we
are taught that the Battauians must fetch their first beginning from the
Catthes; but it is questionable in what part of Germany the Catthes did dwell;
for John Stella who has written the Philippi peregrination, says, that they
did reside at Heidelberg, Heilbrunen and the Othonian forest. Schonerus the
Mathematician makes them Saxons: Marlianus sends them to the forest of Hongary,
Irenicus will have then Turingians, all which opinions are full of obscure
errors. But Stella flying a heigher pitch like unto Icarus, one error drawing
on an other, makes the Visipiens to be neighbors unto the Catthes, assigning
those of Fancford and Conflens, even unto the river of Moselle whereas it falls
into the Rhine. He affirms more-ouer that the Teucteres neighbors to the
Catthes now called a part of Hessen, remaining along the rivers of Laue and
Lip. For my part I hold them to be of Hesse, with the which many learned
writers do concur, for Tacitus does make them to be neighbors to the
Cherusques (which are the people of Lunebourg) and to the Hermodures, which
were they of Misnia, beginning their jurisdictions from the forest Hircinia:
whereof the river Sala is a good witness for the enjoying whereof the Catthes
were in continual quarrel against the Hermodures, which dividing the
Bishopric of Naumburg and Merspurg falls into the river of Elbe limiting in
old time the Signieury of the Cattes. The river of Eder is also a witness
running through the country of the Cattes, which (as the same author does
report) the young men of the Cattes did swim through when as Caesar Germanicus
did charge them suddenly. This river falls into that of Fulda, upon whose bank
Battenburg is seated, from whence we may conjecture that our Batto, or at the
least they of the house of Battenburg are issued. The which also they of
Catsenellebogen do testefie, having a Castle upon the banks of theriuer of
Rhine of that name, showing the antiquity of the name of the Cattes Meliboces:
In the country of Hessen, we have also for reliks of this nation two villages
of the Cattes, the one upon the sea, called Catwyck up Zee, and the other near
unto the village of Rinsburg called Catwycke upon the Rhine, both of them of
the jurisdiction of Holland; and Cattes a town of Zeeland, which some seventy
years past was drowned, And since, with Cortgeen and the i will of Northbeueland
(an Island of Zeeland) within this ten years recovered from the sea. There are
some that affirm that the cause why the Cattes removed from the place of
their birth was, for that they lost a battle against the Hermodures, being in
continual quarrel for their salt, which (as we have said before) was made of
the water of the river of Sala, whereby the Hermodures became more puissant;
but I hold it a detraction from the Batauian honor for that they by the
assistance of the Romans having obtained a great victory, constrained the
Cattes to change their place, and to come to inhabit this Island of the Rhyne.
For which cause the Cattes may with great reason be said to be the beginning
andfirst Fathers of the Batauians, or Hollanders. A people renowned for their
skill in war, Cornelius Tacitus attributing much to their industry and
dexterity in the disposing of an army, and also in obeying their Commanders,
to take or put of the combat as it should be thought fit; of great courage,
firm and hard bodies, well lymmed, of a fierce and menacing aspect, fearful
for the horrible length of their beardes and hair, which fashion and
countenance he says was not lawful for them to leave off, or change although
they had brought victory from their enemies.

Some say that Batto issued from the royal blood of the Cattes, was moved to
change his natural abode to a new one, not for the desire he had to find a
better or more fertile country, or in regard of too great a multitude of people
(which are the two maine occasions that nations remove their ancient
habitations) but that his stepmother laid diverse ambushes for him, and fearing
to be poisoned (being at odds with her) his father consenting thereto, or at
least not opposing it: By reason whereof, what with the splendour of his
heroical virtues, his gracious and amiable carryage, and his condition truly
royal, he drew unto him a good part of the Nobility, and a great number of
the people, who being out of hope of better times followed him willingly; and
by the council of the King of Tongres (his good father) he addressed himself
to the confines of Belgiae there to inhabit: and having past the Rhyne, not
far from the rivers of VVahal and of Meuze, he happily built the Castle of
Battengbourgh upon the river of Meuze, which having past at the parting of the
Rhyne, where the VVahal retyres and takes his course apart, he inioyed all the
whole circuit, even to the Ocean Sea, parting the land amongst the Nobles and
common people so that of his name it was called Battauia, which signifies
nothing else but the heritage of Batto, as if one should say Batous Have, for
Have in the old Dutch, and yet at this present signifies heritage: So that then
this Province has taken his name and that lawfully, from a Prince, the son of
a King: al which is witnessed by diverse authors, amongst whom the most worthy
of belief is Cornelius Tacitus, a Roman Knight, a rare writer of the Story
of Augustus, and Commissary for Gaul Belgique, who makes mention of Claudius
Ciuilis descended from Batto, issued from a royal branch of the Batauians or
Hollanders.

Here you may see that Plyny, not without great reason, called this Isle the
most noble Isle of Batto: The which name of Batto has heretofore spread it
self very far amongst the Allemans and Dalmatians, and Dion a Roman
Historiographer makes mention of two Battoes; the first Batto duke of Bruces
(which is a part of Pannonia, which I now hold to be the country of Prussia
confining Poland and Hungary:) the other Batto Desidiate, who stirred up the
Dalmatians (being too much exacted upon by impositions) to take arms against
the Romans, to whom he gave many affronts. The same Dion reports in his 55.
and 56. book a memorable answer that the said Battus gave Tyberius Caesar,
who demanding of him why he had stirred up the people to so long and bloody a
war? Answered that the Roma^es the^-selues were cause, in that they had sent
them wolves for their gardiens, not dogs and sheapheards. But as it commonly
happens amongst these barbarous nations, through the weakness or ignorance of
the men of those times, we have nothing left us whereby we may know who were
the kinsmen or successors to this Batto of Holland; so that we know not any
thing for certain of their customs or manner of living, but that Tacitus has
touched at the^, as if it were in passing by, and that breefly. Some say that
this Batto re-edefied the Castle of Nymeghen, and compast the town with walls,
and that he being dead his son Hesus augmented it by adding thereto that quarter
which is called Heselbergh, or the hill of Hesus. The which town the Kings that
succeeded after him caused to be the metropolitaine of Batauia or Holland, and
their seege royal. Al which Gerard of Nymeghen recites, affirming that he had
drawn them from the commentaries of Princes. Strabo the Geographer makes
mention of one Peremire king of the Batauians, who had a daughter called
Rhamis, married to the son of Siquier Duke of the Cherusques, who afterward
was led in triumph to Rome by Germanicus Caesar. I have not known any man that
has writ how great the limits were, or how far the inheritance of Batto
extended; some have made it too little, in taking away a great part from it;
wherefore I will assign him his confines to a hair (as it were) to remain
firm and stable for ever.

Batauia then which I call the ancient, took heretofore his beginning from the
separation of the Rhyne at the castle of Lober, and was enclosed on one side
with that which we properly call the Rhyne, (which had wont to fall near unto
Catwick into the British Ocean, which gulf is now choakt up, as we will show
hereafter) and the Wahal, from whence falling again into the Merwe, and from
thence into that which we call the Meuze, passing by Bryel renders him*self into
the same Sea: In which compass and circuit of the Rhyne there are a great
number of Towns, and to begin above, first, Huessen, Tyell, Buiren,
Wickterduirsted, Vtrecht, Viane* Culembourg, Aspeney, Hen^l^^* Leerdan,
Iselsteyne, Montfort, VVoerden Oudewater, Gorcum, Wandrichom, Schoonhouen,
Dordrecht, Goud, Leyden, Delft, Rotterdam, Schieda^ and the Bryell. I will not
meddle with Nieuport right over against Schoonhouen and Haesrecht; for that by
their ruins other towns have been augmented. If any oppose to the
designements of the limits, saying that the Betuwe (which is a part of the
Duchy of Gelderland) is that which properly ought to be called Batauia: I
will send him to the judge and principal defender of the cause, Ptolomeus of
Alexandria, who puts Lugodunum (which is Leyden) amongst the Batautans, where
he says expressly (...) Lugodunum Battauorum, which is a Town distant four
thousand paces from thence. What will this controuler say of Caesar's measuring
of it, who reckons it to be fourscore thousand paces after it parts from the
Rhyne before it enters into the Sea; between which two rivers he cannot deny
but that the Batauian Isle is enclosed: Tacitus himself ends it at the Meuze,
from whence it descends to the Sea. This inheritance of Battus which I
willingly call the old Batauia, for that certain hundreths of years after his
death Drusus, of two branches or gulphs made three, the 3. falling into the
middle sea commonly called Zuyderzee first passing by Campen in the country of
Oueryssell, amplifying thereby the territory of Batauia: the which he did to
exercise his army to prevent idleness in them; beginning at Iseloort, which
bra^ch is called the river of Isell; it seems also that he gave them an other
Isle of the Rhyne more large and spacious which we may call a new Batauia. To
expres this name, all that is comprised between the gulphes of the Fly* the old
Rheyne and the Meuze, render themselves into the British sea, the firmness
of this middle gulf of the Rheyne being the cause hat all this land holds
together. The which (by reason of the continual ditches or downs made to
resist the rage of the Sea) seperates Batauia from Freezland. Pomponius Mela
the Geographer calls it a great Lake, which is not so until the flowing of the
Ocean come into the Zuyderzee, and so to Amsterdam and Sparendam, and from
thence by Scluses to Harlem: Al which agrees very well with Tacitus, who says
it is but a short passage from one side to the other, and yet it is so large
from Encuysen to Harlinghen, that with a fair season and a good wind it will
ask some four hours passage.

To conclude who will know the manners, fashion of living and military virtue of
the ancient Batauians or Hollanders, let him read for the ancient, perticularly
Cornelius Tacitus, and for the modern Hadrianus Iunius a Physician of the
town of Horn, in his Batauia: wherein I doubt not but he shall find much to
content him.

Concerning their virtue and military discipline, I dare affirm that the
Hollanders at this day, do not only equal their predecessors but far exceed
them (both by Land, and Sea, wherein their Ancestors had no experience) as it
has well appeared for these forty years against all the attempts of that
puissant Monarch of Spain.

Dordrecht.
THis town is the first in order of 28. in the County of Holland, and has the
first voice in the assembly of the Estates for that County. It is seated upon
the Merwe, but so as this river is composed of the Rhyne, the Wahall, the Meuze
and Ling, which all being joined in one, pass before the town, so as we may
say it is seated upon 4. rivers, the Merwe, Wahal, Meuz and Ling. And so they*
represe^ted the portrait of it by these two lattin verses at the happy entrance
of king Philip the 2. into their town in the year of our Lord 1549.

Me Mosa, et Wahalis, cum Linga, Meruaque cingu^t
Aeternam Batauae virginis ecce fidem.
Guirt with the Meuse, Wahal, the Merwe and Ling
See Hollands virgin faith vn-altering.
THere are great diversities of opinions about the etimologie of the name of
it, some there are that would have it called Durdrecht and not Dordrecht,
saying that this word Drecht was heretofore as much as to say a Fair or a free
market, called in lattin Forum: Of the which name there are diverse towns after
the names of great personages, as Forum Varronis not far from Milan; Forum
Cornelii in Emilia, which is now called Imola. Forum Claudii now called
Tarentaise, Forum Iulii, Forum Liuii and others, and so by that reason
Durarecht should have its name from some certain man called Duret; yet the
Annals of Holland make but small mention of any such. The same may be said of
Haesstrecht three thousand paces from Tergoude, heretofore a town that had
three Castles, and two Monasteries, now a Village in the midst of the
Earldome of Blois, between the towns of Schoonhouen and Goude, which three
towns were the proprietary inheritance of the Earls of Blois, as you may more
amply read in the general history of the Netherlands.

The same may likewise be said of Moore-drecht, Papendrecht, Suyndrecht,
Barendrecht, and Slydrecht all Villages of Holland not far from Dordrecht,
which is also witnessed by the old seal of the said town; the circumscription
is Sigillum oppidanorum in Durdrecht: The seal of the townsmen of Durdrecht.

It is also found in rec ords, and amongst others in the Bull of the Emperor
Henry the fourth, Thure-Drecht. Be as it may be in regard of the ancientnesse
of the use and that it lasts to this day, we will give it no other name but
Dordrecht.

This Town is long in form of a compass rich and well peopled, and indeed a
very storehouse of all things necessary for man's life: being since the year of
our Lord, 1421. become an Island: the Wahal the Meuze, and the Sea, by the
breach of a ditch fills all the gulf (which before was firm land and
joining to the Duchy of Brabant) and drowned 72. Villages, where there
perished above an hundredth thousand souls, with all their substance. The time
of this deluge is expressed by these two lattin verses.

DurDreChto InCVBVItVIs atroXInCIta VentIs
Vrbs quadIssILVItprotInVs haVsta MarI.
In one thousand four hundred twenty and one
DORT felt that fearful dissolution.
THis deluge happened by the wickedness of a countryman that envying the
prosperity of his neighbor, assayed to drown his land that lay near the Sea,
or at least to spoil it, not thinking what would follow: and to accomplish
this his cursed resolution, he wrought a hole through the earth and made a
gutter, that the water of the Sea might drown his neighbors land; but the
vehemence of it was so great, that of a little stream, the Sea gayning more,
it made such a gap, that it was impossible to be stopped, and so all the country
about Dordrecht, as it is yet to be seen was lost. Notwithstanding since by
little and little Adrian Cornellis vander Mylen a Bourgue maistet of the said
town and his children have recovered, and yet daily do recover a good part of
it, by virtue of a grant given by Charles the fifth Emperor to the said
Bourguemaister, so that at this day there are fair feeldes, in firm land,
adjoining to the said Town, with the little Castle of Craesteyne, belonging
to the said Vander Mylen.

This Town especially the street called Den Langen-dike has the most fair
and lofty buildings that are to be found in all Holland, with their
storehouses and caves for Wines all vaulted, so that they never see neither
Sun or Moon. There is a fair great Church where there had wont to be a
College of Chanons. The history of Holland sets down certain foolish fables
of the foundation of this Church, which I forbear to repeat for that they are
too ridiculous.

A Faucon shot from that part of the town toward Papendrecht; there are
high and eminent relics of the Castle of Merwe near to the ditch where
before the Inundation was, as also of the Village and Barony of Merwe, from
whence the Lords of Asperen and Langueraeck have their Barony, inioying yet
both profits and preheminences in the town of Dordrecht.

Holding upon certain days in the year, either in his own person or by his
Bailyffe or sheriff, as large power in judging causes as the Bourguemaister and
Council of the town whose authority in case of justice at this day ceases.

In this drowned land and in the Merwe there are great store of Salmons and
Sturgeons taken, besides it abounds in sundry other sort of fishes, the water
being for four or five leagues sweet.

The privilege and right of the staple for all sorts of Merchandise, as Wine,
Corn, Wood and other commodities that pass by them coming out of Germany,
Gelderland, Cleues and Iuilliers belonging to this town of Dordrecht.

Well seeing we have made mention of this word Staple, it follows
necessarily for the true understanding of it, that we say something both for
the name and use of it.

The word Estaple is a French word, derived from the lattin word Stabulum, so
that the word Staple is a market or public place in a town ordained for the
bestowing of Wine, Corn, VVood and other Merchandise that comes from other
countries; every Town having their several privileges, according to the
grant of the Prince. Not without great grief and vexation to others both
Merchants and Marryners that bring them thither. As for example, The town of
Arras is the Staple for Arthois, and Valenciennes for Henault, for Wines that
are brought out of France by land into the Low Countries: So that the Merchants
or Carryers are constrained to bring them thither before any other place, and
there to be stayde a certain time in the Staple to see who will buy in the
Market, the which being done they may carry them away whether they think
best.

The town of Middlebourgh in Zealand is the Staple for Wines that come from
France, Spain* Portugal and other Countries brought thither by Sea. But the
privileges of the town of Dordrecht are more strickt and compelling; for they
are of fuch force and virtue, that what-souer is brought either by the Rhyne,
or Meuze, be it corn, wine, pitch, cole or any other Merchandise passing by
them, they are compelled (upon pain of forfeyture of all, if they be taken,
not having paid their duty) to discharge their boats or barks in their
Haven, and to pay all rights, customs, impostes and other duties what-soeuer,
and also to discharge their Marchaundise in Ships of the town or of the
Citizens and free Marryners: or else to make some agreement with them and so
they may pass them in those that belong to the custom or impost. And
notwithstanding that the privileges are at this present diverse, and vary one
from another, according to the nature of the merchandise and condition of the
towns to whom such privileges are granted, yet they have ever from the first
beginning been called by the name of Estaple. The which (being sometimes in
one town, sometimes in another, either for the situation or some other
occation) cause a great commodity and benifit to the country both in general
and particular, and a fair reuenew and large profit to the Prince of the same.

This town as the first in rank has power to coin both silver and gold, a
privilege denied to any other town of Holland what-so-euer. In this town the
Prince or Earl of Holland is put in possession of this county, taking his oath
to the states of the country, and receiving their homage and feallty.

Harlem.
THe second town of Holland in rank and prerogative is the town of Harlem,
which within this thirty years, before Amsterdam was made greater, was the
greatest and fairest of all Holland, as well in fair buildings, as sweet and
good temperature of air, having neither the Sea nor Marshes or Fens to annoy
it, feared in the midst of a good land fit both for tillage and for pasture,
environed with fair country houses, Farms, little woods and many castles and
villages, and to conclude seated reasonable high, and very pleasant. It has
one very great Church with a high steeple supported with great columns or
pillars, and much longer then any other in the Low Countries. There passes now
through it a river called Sparre, which falls out of a lake of fresh water into
the channel that runs toward the towns of Amsterdam and Leyden, which is
called the sea of Harlem; which river has been drawn with great labor and
charge from that of Tie by the sluices of Sparendam, about half a league from
thence: before the town on that side toward Leyden there was heretofore a
very pleasant wood which during the seege of the Spaniards was cut down by the
Allamaines that were quartred on that side in the village of Hemsted; But
within a few years after the Magistrate of the town caused it to be
replanted, so as in a short time it became as pleasant as it was before,
serving the inhabitants of the town for delightful walks for the excersise
of their spirits, and keeping many people of the town from the Tauernes and
such other places, in passing their time there. There is there likewise made
very great store of fine white linen cloth, much desired and sought for from
Spain, Italy, and other countries, and also good woollen cloth, which for the
dye equals any other country, and is like-wise transported into foreign
regions.

Touching the Etymology or deriuation of the name, I may not rely upon Lewis
Guichardine, who has followed the old Dutch chronicle of Holland, but rather
follow that learned Physician and Historiographer of Horn, Doctor Adrianus
Iunius, who affirms that the Harlemois are issued from the blood of the Kings
of Freezland, who first built both the their town and castle in the year of
the nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ five hundred and six. The castle was
seated upon the channel that runs toward Egmont, not far from Heimskirk,
all built of great and large brick, as yet at this day is to be seen by the
ruins and ground work of the walls. The demolishment whereof some attribute
to the tyrany of the Lord of the place, others to the fury of the people, who
sought to extirpe and root out the Nobility. This castle alone at this time
was not demolished, but like a violent thunder they threw down all to the
ground. Seeing we are speaking of this castle, I think it not amiss
(although it be set down in the history of the Netherlands) to relate a
memorable accident that then happened, as a strange* note of true conjugal love.
And thus it was.

The Lord of the place having by his exaction and cruelty made himself odious
to all his people, and he and his wife being beseeged, and so pressed for want of
victuals, that he was compelled (having no other means to escape) to enter
into treaty for the rendering of the town. His wife (atrue mirror of piety and
love toward her husband) among other articles for the rendering of the town,
capitulated that she might have as much of her most precious mooueables as she
could carry out at one time, the which being granted, she (with the help of
her chamber-maide) carried her husband locked in a chest out of the castle,
leaving all her rings and jewels behind her: In imitation of the wife of
Guelphe Duke of Bauaria, who in the like necessity prayed the Emperor Conrad,
that she and her Ladies might carry out that which they held most dear and
precious: the Emperor imagining it was nothing but their rings and jewels, she
(and all the Ladies after her example) took her husband on her shoulders and
her little child in her arms and so issued forth. But let us return to
Harlem; to the which (and that justly) we may attribute the noble invention of
the Art of printing, although some (to selfe-willed) maintain that it came
from Mogunce ot Mentz, an imperial and electorall town of Germany; but it is
for certain confirmed by many notable and ancient personages of the said
town of Harlem that from father to son they have held, and yet to this day
do hold it, that about a hundredth and seauenty years ago there dwelt in the
said Town in a very fair house, which is yet to be seen standing right
against the royal Palace, one Laurence Ians surnamed Sachristain (which was a
good and honorable hereditary office in his family) to whom this place of
honor (which some other heretofore have robbed them off) belongs. This man
walking forth for his recreation into the Wood of Harlem (as it was the custom
the of best Burguers after dinner and supper) began to cut in little pieces
of wood the letters of his name, printing them on the back of his hand, which
pleasing him he cut three or four lines, which he beat with Ink and printed
them upon paper, wherewith being much ioyd (as it is said the worekman
delights in his work) he determined to find out an other kind of ink more
fasting and holding, and so with his kinsman Thomas Peterse, who left four
sons; who al came to the place of Burguemaisters (which I speak to that end
that I would have no man think that so noble an invention could have beginning
from lowspirited and mechanical men) found out an other way to print whole
sheets, but of one side only, which are yet to be seen in the said town, and
besides a book in Flemish called the mirror of health; which he did in the
instancy of this art, no invention being brought to perfection at the first
assay) and assaying to print the sheet on the other side, the right side took
not, and so he spoiled the impression. Afterward he changed his letters of
wood into lead, and after that into tin to make them more firm, less plyant
and more dnrable, the remainder of which Caracters are yet to be seen in the
house of the said Laurence, since possessed and dwelt in by Gerard Thomas an
honorable old Citizen, who died within this fifty years. This new Art never
seen before made every one so inamoured of it; that it yielded him much profit,
and his business so increased that he was constrained to take servants to help
him, but in the choice of them he was so curious, that he entertained not any,
but he took an oath of the^ not to discover the art to any body, being very
desirous to keep the principal secrets to himself; yet notwithstanding al
his care, one of his servants called John of his own surname, who having
learnt to compose, cast the letters, and other things belonging to this Art,
spyed his time and opportunity to run away, the which he did upon Christmas
day at night when every body was at Even song, and his master absent, taking
away the Caracters and other things belonging to this Art, running away like a
Domestique thief with the goods and honor of his master to Amsterdam, from
thence to Cologne, and afterward to Mogunce or Mentz where he might live more
safe and keep open shop of his theft. Laurens Ianse printed the Doctrinall of
Alexander, a grammar then much in use, and the treatises of Peeter of Spain.
Behold then what has been affirmed from time to time by many ancient and
honorable personages of the first invention of it, besides the good and
sufficient proofs that they of Harlem have; wherefore it were a great wrong to
rob them of the honor of this invention, as that thief did his Master, to
make his name famous in the town of Mentz.

Polidore Virgill in his treatise of the invention of things, attributes it to
one John Gutttenbergh a gentleman of Germany. I must needs grant that the art
by succession of time was brought to a greater perfection then in Holland, but
they like infants sucked their milk from Laurence Ianse of Harlem the first
inuentor. Well we see that it was sufficiently diuulged, for in the year one
thousand five hundred, forty eight, one Conrade (a German also) carried this
art into Italy and so to Rome. After him Nicholas Johnson a French man inricht
it meruelously; but above all Aldus Manutius a Roman, a man well read and very
learned in the Greek and latin tounges, brought this art to perfection, by his
extreme diligence and great trauail, never shrinking at any charge or trouble
but only respecting his honor and the public good, so that every man desired
his books of Aldus edition, they were so neat and exactly printed, he being
the first that ever set up a printing press for the Greek tongue.

The people of this town of Harlem had the honor of the taking of Pelusium
(now called Damiette a famous town in Aegipt) which the Christian princes had
long time beseeged, among whom was William Earl of Holland: While the Princes
were consulting how they might first get the haven of the town, wnich was shut
up with 2. great chains of iron, fastened to two strong Towers from one side to
the other, they of Harlem caused a hulke or two be armed from the top to the
bottom with sawes made of iron a purpose to cut the chains, and with a good
gale of wind at the return of the Sea, ran with full sails spread against
the chains, which they broke: and notwithstanding all the arrows and other
shot made at them from the two Towers, past on and got the haven, making
passage for the rest of the Christian ships and so the town was won The
honor whereof was given to them of Harlem, and in memory of their valor their
arms (which before was a dry Tree) were by the Emperor changed to a Sword
compassed with six stars, to the which the Patriarch of Jerusalem added upon
the point a cross Pattee, which are at this day the Arms of the town of
Harlem.

This town was greatly afflicted and distressed in the year 1572. the
Spaniards lying before it eight months to their great loss, yet in the end by
reason of famine it was constrained to yield to the mercy of the the Duke of
Alua, the violent fury of whose soldiars brought it well near to ruin. During
this seege there was observed in the Bourgers and inhabitants a marvelous
resolution to defend, and constancy to maintain themselves; the garrison
soldiers and they never dis-agreeing, which gave examples to the other towns
of Holland to arm themselves against the Spanish fury, as we will show
hereafter in the description of the town of Alcmar.

Delf.
THe Town of Delf (heretofore renowned) (but now much more) for brewing good
beer which they transporte through all Holland, Zeeland and other neighbor
countries, not much inferior to that of England) holds the the third rank and
suffrage in the session of the Estates for the Country of Holland. This Town
has his name from his situation, being seated upon a channel that comes from
the Hage, and falls into the River of Meuze at Delfs-Hauen, which chanel cut in
a right line cost a great deal of labor and charge before it was made.

This town was first founded by Godfrey called the crooke-backe Duke of
Lorraine, who being called in and assisted by the Bishop of Vtrecht, chased
out of Holland Earl Robert the Frison, the Lady Gheertruyd his wife and her
little son that she had in her first marriage by Florent the first of that name
and sixth Earl of Holland.

This Duke of Lorraine inioyed the said Earldome above four years, during
which time he built the town of Delf.

But the little son of Geertruyd being grown somewhat bigger with the help
of neighbor Princes, both Germans (in regard of his mother) and others,
re-entred with a goodly army into Holland to give him battle, where he
overthrew him, and having chased him out recovered al his country: But shortly
after one of his servants as he was at the privy run him into the fundament
with a Iauelin, of which he died in the town of Maestricht.

This town of Delf was straightly beseeged by Count Albert of Bauaria (as you
may read more amply in the history of the Netherlands) so as being constrained
to yield, the Earl caused a great part of the wall to be thrown down. Yet
notwithstanding shortly after they did him great service in the war he had
with the Frisons (the other Towns refusing to aid him) and courageously
released certain English soldiers engaged in a Fort beseeged by the Frisons,
for which duty and valor of theirs, the Earl consented to the re-building of
their walls. There befell a pitiful accident to this town in the month of
May 1536. being set on fire by casualty and the fire so dispersed that it was
almost burned before there could be any help, yet they wanted not water, for
it has two channels that pass through the town.

But the wind being very vehement, so dispersed the fire, that there scarce
could any thing be saved; yet like the Phaenix renewing out of her ashes, this
Town was built again more fair and magnificent then ever before, remedying
their error in the first building (which was the chief cause of their ruin)
by not suffering one house to be thatcht with straw; but high and stately
buildings without, with their inward ornaments and furnitures so neat and
fitting that in the whole Netherlands it is not to be parraleld; the streets
likewise so clean and well kept, that notwithstanding the greatest rain there
is no dirt to touch the shoo, so as indeed they seem to be always washed.

In this fire there happened so memorable an accident, that (happily) the like
has not been recorded in ancient or modern storries: It is most true that
Pliny and other authors set down (as a matter of notable and great
consideration) that the young Storkes when the old ones are grown in years
and past helping of themselves supply that want by feeding them, and when their
wings fail in passing the Sea, the young ones take them on their backs: But
that which happened of the same birds in the town of Delph is of greater
consequence and more remarkable.

This town is so seated for the feeding and bringing up of these birds that
it is hard to see any house upon the which they are not nested to breed in:
This fire happened upon the third of May in the year aforesaid 1536. at which
time the young Storkes are grown pretty and big, the old ones perceiving the
fire to approach their nests, attempted to carry them away but could not they
were so weighty, which they perceiving never ceased with their wings spread
covering them, till they all perished in the flames. Gaspar Veldius (an author
of reverent esteem) in his book of Storkes recountes the same, and also D.
Adrianus Iunius in his history of Holland, from whom I have drawn these lattin
verses following.

Candida et obstreperis inuisa Ciconia ramis.
Pignora ab ardenti viderat igne premi.
Aeripatne suos, et aperta pericula tentet?
Hinc suadet Pietas, vitae amor inde vetat,
Hanc luctam pietas generosa diremit, et vrna
Esse ^adem, et sobolis vult libitena suae.
Iam minor Assyrium Phaenicem fama boquatur
Viuerae quae busto quaerit, at ista mori.
The white hu'd Storke that never sits on bow
Seeing her young in flames; ah how it pains her!
Shall she for them adventure life to loose?
Piety bids her try, but fear restraines her:
Yet piety her fear soon overthrows,
And so one tomb with her poor young contains her,
Give place thou Phaenix then: thou seeks new breath
By being Burnt: but she sought only death.
AT Delf there are excellent clothes made both great and small that are much
desired in other countries, commonly called in their language Delfs puyck.

In this town was borne that abominable Monster for heresy and imposture
called David George, but his right name was Hans van Burcht a painter of
glasses and the son of a painter, one that infected with the poison of his
heresy the town of Munster in Westphalia; A man altogether unlearned, yet of
so subtle a memory and understanding and withal so eloquent, accompanied with
a kind of gravity, that he could persuade his followers to what he thought
good, whereby he not only made himself chief head of a new sect, but caused
himself by his desciples and followers to be adored as GOD himself,
persuading them that he was the true Messiah.

This Gallant (or rather Devil) was married and had children, governing his
family in outward show indifferent honestly, but in effect had neiher
religion, virtue or any goodness whatsoever: notwithstanding (the people being
for the most part light and inconstant, lovers of novelties, wicked and
contentious, feeding their ambition by the first occasion offered) he sowed
and dispersed his heresy under color of diverse extrauagant laws throughout
the lower Germany, being already so far advanced in this business that diverse
that followed him as his desciples bound themselves to the will of this
damnable Arch-hereticke: But this impiety beginning to be discovered and the
Magistrate making dilligent pursuit and severe inquisition after it, as the
case required, this monster fled to Basil in Suitzerland with his wife,
children, household and all other his baggage, where being arrived he was taken
to be a rich Merchant of the Netherlands fled thither for his religion, and
to avoid the fury of the Imperial Placarts, where by his friends and
confederates he was welcomed and much made off. When he went to Church with
his wife and children he was accompanied (like a great Lord) with a troop of
followers and servants, showing at his first coming great liberallity to the
poor, which made him to be much admyred. Being well provided of money he
bought a fair house in the town, and a Castle called Benningen half a league
out of the town, dwelling sometimes in the one and sometime in the other: To
augment his love and reputation with the Citizens he matched some of his
children with the principal of the town endowing them very ritchly, still
advancing and teaching in private his most damnable heresy, confirming those
that were absent by letters and books which he caused to be printed in his
Castle of Beningen: He dyed in the said town of Basil in the year of our
Lord 1556. for mere grief that one of his followers was revolted, fearing
that by his means he might be discovered and so punished. Before his death
his disciples that thought him to be God seeing him draw toward death, he
resolutely said unto them, be not amazed, I go to begin to show my power.
Christ my predecessor (to show his power) rose again the third day, and I to
show my greater glory will rise again at three years. O horrible blasphemy!
The Magistrate being thoroughly informed of his life and doctrine caused his
process to be drawn after his death, and by a sentence his body was taken out
of the ground, and justice done as if he had bin alive; his goods being
confiscated, and his books burnt: some of his followers acknowledged and
abiured their errors. and embracing again the reformed religion were with all
courtesy and gentleness pardoned, and the whole history of it set forth in
print, both in lattin and dutch to the view of the world. In opposition to this
wicked monster the town of Delf has brought forth many excellent person ages
and among the rest Ioos Salsbout an excellent Poet and Chancellor of
Gelderla^d; Arnoult his son who succeeded his father in the same office of
Chancellor, and since President of the privy Counsel at Brussels, and from
that to be President for the affairs of the Netherlands in Spain* Cornelius
Musa Provost of S. Agatha, a man of rare virtue and knowledge, a great Divine
and an excellent Poet. who was unjustly put to death by the Earl of March
about thirty-fiue years since.

Leyden.
THere has bin much dispute and great diversity of opinions about the
deriuation of this name of Leyden, but I will content my self that Ptolemy
called it Lugdunum Battauorum, and Antoninus in his Itinerary or guide for
ways to Rome, calls it Lugdunum Caput Germanorum, the head city of the
Germans, or the first City of the Roman Empire, from it beginning his
Journey to Rome; concerning the lattin and dutch word of Leyden I will content
my self with the ancient use, for that many learned lattin Authors have also
called it Leyda; be it as it may, yet this is most certain that it has been
here-to-fore a town of great importance, for the Romain Praetor that governed
that quarter kept always his residence and garrison in that town; and the
historyes of Holland recount that from the first* Earls and long after it was
called the chamber of Holland.

It is seated in a low and even country, full of ditches and channels, beutified
with farms, gardens and other delights round about. It incloses in it self
thirty one Isles, passing from the one to the other in boats, besides
nineteen more that have bridges to pass over.

To conclude there are in this town 145 bridges, an hundredth and four built
of free stone, and the rest of wood: It is one of the six chief towns of
Holland, and the fourth in pre-eminence and suffrage: It is the chief for that
quarter of Rind-Land, having under it 49. towns and villages, the most part of
which bring their commodities thither (as butter, milk, cheese, lard, foul,
fruits and other necessaryes) to be sold in the Market, abounding in all
things else that the earth may bring forth, and sufficiently stored with fish,
the Sea being not above a league from it and compassed with many fresh waters.
It is likewise so stored with sundry kinds of foul, that it is incredible but
to them that know it.

This town is fairly seated in a delicate prospectiue, even in the heart of
Holland, neatly built and fit for the muses to dwell in; for which cause the
Sates of Holland in the year of our Lord 1575 after they were released of
their long and dangerous siege erected an university there, furnishing it with
professions in all languages, giving them good and sufficient stipends, drawing
to them the sufficients men in all professions that can be found in
Christendom, as at this day the Seignior of L'escale, Clusius, Baudius, and
others professing Philosophy, Physic and the laws: They want not also most
excellent and learned Divines, having within this ten years lost three as
rare ones as any were in Christendom, to wit the Lord of Saint Aldegond, D.
Francis Iunius and Trelcatius^, professors in the greek and lattin tongues,
and in Divinity.

In the midst of this town there is an old Castle seated upon a higher
mote, in the which there is a great large and deep Well all of stone, but now
dry, there is not a house in this Castle to dwell in, but compassed about the
more and above with some trees, and although it be of no use, yet it is
reserved for the antiquity of it. Ianus Douza a learned Gentleman and Poet of
Leyden, has written of it in these verses.

Putatur Engistus, Brittanno orb
Redux, posuisse victor.
It Is held, victorious Hengist builded me
At his return from conquered Britanie.
SInce called Bourg of which came the name of Burgraue (which is as much as to
say an Earl of a Town, which we call Viscounts) the title remained long in
the Noble family of the Lords of Wassenare, who held the Viconty of Leyden and
the Jurisdiction of Rhyn-landt, with the Dependances both of it and Ter-goud,
until the year of our LORD 1251. after the death of Vicont James, his
daughter Christienne being under the protection of the Earl of Holland who
utterly spoiled it, yet the possession thereof was delivered again by the
Countess Iaqueline, unto the said family of the Wassenares, but Philip Duke of
Burgondy succeeding in the said County took it away again; where-vppon
Viscount James, the son of Henry in a full assembly of the Estates contested
against the Duke, demanding again his ancient patrimony, but his means
being too weak against so puissant a Prince, he was constrained to cease his
title, and to content himself with what it pleased the Duke to give him,
which was but the bare title of Viscount.

There are in this Town three parish Churches, in Saint Pancratius there is a
company of Chanoins, and in Saint Peeters there is a lofe of bread turned to a
stone, safely kept in a place yrond about for a perpetual remembrance of the
strangeness of the accident, and this it was: In the year of our Lord 1316. a
great famine happening in the town, a poor woman went to her own sister that
was very rich to borrow a loaf of bread, to save her and her children from
staruing, her sister denied that she had any in the house, she insisted that
she had, where-vppon her rich sister fell a swearing and cursing, praying God
that if she had any it might be turned into a stone, which God miraculously
suffered to be done, to the confusion of this pitiless and perjured woman,
it is not long since there were two loaves, but now there is but one.

Two little leagues from Leyden is Wassenare a fair and beautiful Village,
with the two Catwicks, Voorburch and Voorscoten, belonging now to the Counts of
Ligne, the masculine line of the Vicounts of Leyden and Lords of Wassenare
being utterly extinct. In this town Hans van Leyden a knife-maker by his trade
was born a most disloyal Anabaptist, and one that by strange and extraordinary
means so besotted the people that he made him self King of Munster in
Westphalia to the great and pitiful ruin of it. In the end he was beseeged
by the Bishop (assisted by the Princes of Germany) and after almost a years
siege this King of perdition and his accomplices were taken and punished
according to their merits. This King and one of his chief Counselors
(called Knipperdolinge) were put into two Cages of iron and hung out of a
high Tower, where they ended their cruel and most miserable lives and reign.

This town in opposition to this il has brought forth many virtuous and
learned men, as John Gherbrand an excellent historian: Englebert of Leyden a
rare Poet and Gramarian; Nicholas Leonce a good Retorician, and above all Ianus
Douza Lord of Noortwick a most knowing man in the tongues and a most famous
Poet, as his printed works testify.

In the year of our Lord 1574. this town was straightly besieged by the
Spaniards and blockt up with some thirty-sixe fortes to famish them, wherein
there dyed above seauenthousand men of famine and the pestilence: the raizing
of this seege and deliverance of this town can be attributed to none but to
GOD, although the Prince of Orange and the States of Holland did what they
could as well by breaking of ditches and drawing up Scluses as otherwise,
drowning all the country almost to the town, but not so deep that it would
carry boats, until GOD sent a strong South-west-winde which drove the Sea
into the rivers and land that great boats past a floate and victualled the
town: Which the Spaniards perceiving they quitte all their Fortes and fled
for fear of being intrapped.

But behold the wonderful and re-markeable work of GOD who two days after
the Town was victualled sent as strong a North-west-wind that beat back the
Sea again from whence it came, as you may read more at large in the history of
the Netherlands.

Amsterdam
LEt us now come to the town of Amsterdam, which within these hundredth years
is become so rich and opulent that the very name of it is famous throughout the
whole world. It takes name from the River of Amstell that runs clean through
the town, and falls into the Zuyderzee, from whence they sail into all Seas,
yea the most remote and far off of the whole world.

They of the family of Amstell heertofore most rich and opulent (now utterly
extinct) were the first that compassed it with pallisadoes and h^ld the
proprietary Lordship of it.

This town since the decay of Antwerpe is become the most renowned of all the
Netherlands; rich in people and of all sorts of Marchandises, situate in the
midst of Holland in a marish country: It is strong by reason of the
situation, but stronger by art, the foundations of their houses being made of
piles of wood armed with iron and other necessaries of or that purpose* so that
the charge of building of most houses is more chargeable under ground then
above. The ordinary course of their Navigations is to all other parts of the
Netherlands, as France, England, Spain, Portugal, Germany, Poland, Denmark,
Liflandt, Sueden, Norway, Ostlandt and other septentrional parts, where one may
see twice a year, four or five hundred great ships arrive from Dantzick,
Rye, Revel and Varna with diverse and innumerable quantity of Marchandises; so
as this Town is become a wonderful port or Staple, to the amazement of the
beholders to see so many great hulkes belonging to the Citizens and
Inhabitants of the town arrive there, and within five or six days to be all
unladen and ready for a new voyage.

There is yearly built there a great number of tall and warlike ships as well
for trade in Merchandise as for the war: Within this 25. or 30. years the town
has bin made greater (as well in the circuit of the walls as in beautiful and
fair building) by the half with a new church built where Saint Anthonies gate
heretofore stood: It is flanked about with great bulwarks, that answering one
na other makes it inpregnable: what with the waters about it and the industry
of man it is warranted toward the Sea with a long double pallisadoe from the
East to the West, in which above a thousand great ships and innumerable of
lesser sorts may safely lie out of danger. There has been of long time two
churches, the one called Saint Nicholas the old, the other our Lady the new.

To conclude this town is a most rich Storehouse, not only for the
Low Countries, but in a manner for all Christendom, where al things necessary
for the use of man are as soon to be found as in all the world besides. D.
Adrianus Iunius in his history of Holland has writ certain accrostique verses
in praise of it, which I think not unfit to be here inserted both in lattin
and English.

A ureus, vt perhibent, quondam ab Jove perpluit imbar
M agnificis turgentem opibus Rhodon: horrea Romae
S icaniam esse Ceres, victuro munere ^essit.
T orsit et huc occulos facilis Deus ipse benignos^
E t me mactam opibus iussit, florereque rebus
L aetis: at circundor aquis, pigraque palude
O bsita: roboreoque solo stant culmina nix^
D epactis alte trabibus, surgentia caelo.
A lternansque statis vicibus, maris estus aperti
M aenia subcingit, qua part exotica puppes
V elliferae inuectant onera, exportantque frequenti
M ercatu, Hesperias qua se dimittit in vndas
B arbaraque Eous pandit qua littora Titan.
E xpedio* quos nostra tamen non area verrit,
L egifere cumulos Ceraris, genitalia dona,
G argara prouentu tanto non farris abundant.
I nferior fuerit, vel Momo iudice, mecum,
C ontendit locuplete penu si Trinacris ora,
Aequaleisque ferax non Africa stipat aceruos.
H orr^um et agnoscit me non male Belgica faelix,
O mnigenas, vt opes sic vitae altmenta ministro.
R ecte vt quis saturae similem me dixerit aluo
R obore defectos succum quae didit in artus.
E ximiae hine adeo Caesar me far coronam
V ertutis decus, ac munus spectabile Iussit.
M ateriem, at linquo soribendi vatibus a^pla^.
A shower of gold fell once from Jove, men say:
M any commend Rhodes wealth* Sicilia
S ay diverse) was the Storehouse unto Rome*
T rue, once* but Ceres now is hither come;
E uen she, and all the Deities have laid
R itches on me. Be ever rich they said:
D rown'd is my seat thereof in fenny strand
A nd on wood-piles do all my buildings stand:
M y walls are washed with waves that ebb and flow
B ut from those waves does mine advancement grow.
E ach quarter of the world sends ships to me
L aden with waves of worth, for use, for eye.
G reat is my gain by trades* but greater yet
I s that which by my vent of Corn I get.
A ffrica, Sicilia and the Idaean field
S et paralels with me for that must yield:
S uch is my state* recorded by fames hand,
T o be the Store*house of all Netherland.
O f all things man does need (nay rathermore)
R itch, needy, here may all have choice and store.
E uen as the stomachs sole digestion,
H elps Man's whole form with growth of flesh and bone.
O ur worth thus tryde, made Caesar set a Crown
V pon our sheeld, as badge of due renown.
S tay, now no more* but leave against our will
E tern^ll matter for a purer quill.
They of Amsterdam made a great present of money to the Emperor Maximillian the
first of that name, for the which he granted them leave to bear an Imperial
Crown upon the Arms of their City, a dignity never granted to any Town
before. There is yet to be seen in a glass window of the old Church certain
purses painted with their mouths downward, scattering gold and silver,
signifying this liberallity of the Amsterdammers.

All sorts of people of most nations have recourse and free leave to dwell in
this town: as French, Germa^, Italian, Spaniard, Portugesse, English,
Scottish, Cymbrian, Sarmatian, Sueden, Dane, Norweghian, Liflander, and other
of the Septentroniall parts.

At the same time or shortly after that the Anabaptists domineerd in Munster,
there was a commotion of the same kind of people in this town, who one night
after they had been at their private assembly, took arms and possessed
themselves of the Market place and the Magistrates house, killing some
Burgesses, and among the rest one Burguemaister, but they were repulst and
caused to fly some here and some there, by Boats into Freezeland and other
places: Some of them both men and women as they ran up and down the
streets all naked were taken and executed after diverse and sundry fashions. An
ancient Citizen of this town has also made these verses follow ing in honor
of his country.

Haec illa est Battauae non vltima gloria gentis
Amnis cui nomen, cui cataracta dedit,
Dicta prius Dammum, raris habitata colonis
Cum contenta casis, rustica vita fuit.
Hinc Amsterdamum, iam facta celebrior, atque
Fortunae creuit tempore nomen item:
Vrbs been nota prope, atque procul dictant* bus oris
Dotibus innumeris suspicienda bonis.
Dives agri, dives preciose vestis et auri,
Vt pleno cornu copia larga beet.
Quod Tagus atque Hermus vehit, et Pactolus in vnum
Vere huc congestum dixeris esse locum.
Belgiaes bright glory we this town may call
Which had the last name from the rivers fall
VVhilom the name was Dam, the people such
As had they meat and clothes, thought they had much*
Hence hight it Amsterdam, and with the name
The Fortune has increased and the fame
It Is known unto far Coasts and Continents
And may be well so, for the good it vents.
It Is rich in Corn, in Coin, in Flesh, in Fish
And all abundance that the world can wish.
Breefely it is so rich, it seems to hold
All Tagus, Hermus and Pactolus gold.
Goude.
ALthough the Historiographers do dispute much about the name of this town,
some saying that it came from a Lady so called, heretofore inheritrix of it,
others from the golden leaves wherewith the Steeple of their church was
covered to show their riches and magnificence: for Goude in the dutch tongue
signifies gold, yet it seems to me most probable, that it is derived from a
certain water called Goude, beginning from the sluice of Goude near unto
Alphen, where heretofore the Romans had their abode, calling it Castra
Albiniana, running even to the rivers of Yssule, upon the which at the entry
of that water is the said town built. It is a strong town, populous and
pleasant, environed with goodly feelds and farms, strong walls and deep
ditches, and within beautifully furnished with fair houses, but especially
upon both sides of the haven and the Market place: Abounding in all sorts of
victuals by reason of their commodious situation, and the continual passing of
such infinite number of ships, whereby they have this advantage, by reason of
their rivers and channels, that they may victual the^-selues and serve the
Provinces of Holland, Zealand, Brabant and others, the greatest part of their
wealth coming in by that means. The air by reason it is far from the Sea is
more healthsome then any other part of the Province; there runs a channel of
fresh water through every street of the town, by reason whereof (here-tofore)
there has been in this town 305. Brewers, who served all the rest of the
Provinces, their beer being called for the goodness of it the renenew of
Goude; but the neighbor towns (notwithstanding the goodness of it) have
taken that commodity from them. It has a fair and spacious Market place in an
Ouall form, and in the midst thereof a great and magnificent State-house,
which the Lady Iaquelin Countess of Holland caused to be built, when at the
pursuit of Phillip Duke of Burgondy (being abandoned by almost all the towns
of Holland) she was forced to retire to the Castle of this town; yet
notwithstanding it seems this State house was finished after her death, in the
year of our Lord 1440. I have seen at the Hage a chair of wood, upon the
back whereof their were two A. A. in gold, and these words Trou aen din. These
two A. A. signify Gouda, which is in Dutch A. of gold and Trou aen din.
faithful to thee, which was the devise of the said Countess, confessing that
they of Gouda had been always faithful and true unto her: under the
State-house is the Shambles of the town, curiously seated upon pillars not
wrought by the hands of a simple Architect; and on the back part is a high
place built upon the like pillars which is the place of execution, be it
either beheading by the sword or otherwise. The Parish Church of this town is
very magnificent and esteemed to be greater then any one in the Netherlands,
exceeding both in length and greatness the Archiepiscopal Church of Cologne,
passing al belief in the beauty of glass windoes, made by two brothers borne
in this town, whose equals in this art of painting have not to this hour bin
found: The 12. of January 1552. the steeple of this Church was burnt by thunder
and lightning, of the date whereof D. Adrians Iuuius in his Batauia has made
this distique.

LVX bIssena fVIt IanI hora vespere nona,
CVM sacra IohannIS VVLCano CorpVII aedes.
The tWeLfth of IanVar^e SaInt John's SpIre.
At nIne a cLoCk was MVCH Impaird with fire.
The which mischievous fire burnt nothing but the said steeple, and a part of
the church, notwithstanding that it was enuiron'd with houses. But about an
hundredth years before in the year of our Lord 1438. the 18. of August upon
Saint Lewis his day, the town was wholly burnt, except three houses upon the
Haven, the old ruins of them being yet to be seen. At this time the old
charters and privileges of this town were burnt, whereupon this distique was
made.

FLetIbVs Id dIaICI qVIa GoVda Cre Mat LVdoWICI.
Sorrow allowde with sighs proclaims,
That Lodowicks Goude is all on flames.
It is not long since, that about half a league from the said town were found
diverse pieces of silver with this circumscription on the one side, HLVDOVICVS
IMP. and on the other CXRISTIANA RELIGIO, which seem to have been coined in
the time of the Emperor Lewis the Debonaire, the son of the Emperor
Charlemaine, and the Father of the Emperor Charl^s the bauld, who after he had
settled Christian religion in those parts, gave the Earldome of Holland to
Thierry of Aquitaine, the first of that name.

There is mention made in the ancient charters and privileges of this town,
how Florentius the fifth of that name Earl of Holland told a Knight called
Nicholas van Cats, that this town had beginning in the year 1272. Others, and
among the rest Doctor Adrianus Iunius 1262. notwithstanding that the said town
has been known to have been long time before, whereof many Gentlemen have
taken their names, and chiefly among the rest Thiery Vander Goude, one of the
privy council to Earl William King of the Romans, and the privileges
granted to them of Vtrecht in the year 1252. show the like. A quarter of a
league out of the town is yet to be seen the place where the Church stood,
and is commonly called the old Churchyard, where during the Romish
superstition, they used to go on procession in Rogation week; and likewise a
way called the old Goude. But for that this place was too far from the river
of Issell, the Inhabitants for their more commodity removed from their former
dwellings to the place where the Town now stands.

The freedom and jurisdiction of this Town at the beginning was no more then
the compass of it within the ports and walls, with very little land without,
but was afterward in the year of our Lord 1484. much amplified by the Emperor
Maximillian the first, and the Archduke Philip his son* with at least a
league of land in compass on both sides the river of Yssell.

The government of this town appertained heretofore to the Earls of Blois,
Lords of the same, and was seated in the center or midst of the said County:
John of Beaumont Earl of Blois by his wife, was made Lord of it and
Schoonhouen with their dependances, by his brother William the Good Earl of
Holland, to augment his reuenews, in the year 1306 who by the consent of his
brother, instituted the first payments and rights of customs, with the houses
and sluices where he received his right: he enlarged and much beautified the
Castle of the said town, the which long time after was chosen by the Estates
of Holland (as a place very strong) for the keeping of the charters,
privileges and laws of their County; which Castle (except the Tower where
their charters were kept) was in the year 1577. demolished, at which time
there were many others thrown down in the Low Countries.

John of Beaumont Lord of Blois, died in the year 1456. leaving one only
son likewise named John, who being a Knight of the Teutonique or Dutch order,
went into Prussia against the Infidels, and there died, leaving two sons,
John and Guy, Earls of Bloys and of Soyson.

John of Chastillon Lord of Goude, rich and strong, issued by his father from
the Earls of Holland, and by his mother from the Kings of France, married
Madam Mathilda Duchess of Gelders and Countess of Zutphen, at that time when
the houses of Bronchorst and Heeckers assaied to shut out the said Lady from
her patrimoniall inheritance. To remedy the which the Earl of Blois came into
Geldres, accompanied by many Lords and Knights, and a good troop of soldiers
besieging Wagheningen and Groensvoerdt, which he took, and afterward in the
right of the Lady his wife, was received into Arnhem and acknowledged for Lord
and Prince. This Lord and Lady as Dukes of Gelders, gave privilege to the
Citizens of Goude, to sail with their Merchandise through-out the Duchy of
Geldres and Earldom of Zutphen freely, without either tax or toll. This
privilege was given in the town of Arnham, in the year of on Lord 1372.

John of Chastillion dyed in the year 1381. without children, leaving all his
goods to his brother Guy of Blois, who married Mary the daughter of the Earl
of Namur (by whom he had one son called Lewis Earl of Dunois, who dyed
young at Beaumont) the two and twenty of December 1397. After whose death the
right line of John of Blois was extinct; so that the Signeuries of Goude and
Schoonhouen, with their dependances (which were called the Baliage of the
county of Blois) returned to the country of Holland, in the time of Albert of
Bauaria: notwithstanding Guy of Blois left a bastard called John of Blois Lord
of Treslon and Henault, who (as the histor^ of the Netherlands makes mention)
had by his wife six sons.

It is apparent that the towns of Goude, Dordrecht Harlem, Delft, and Leyden,
with the Knights and nobles of the country, represented the Estates of Holland
and Westfreezeland long before the town of Amsterdam was received for a
member, as it appears by diverse records and letters of state, past under the
seals of the said five towns, together with the injuries that they of
Amsterdam have done to them of Goude upon the same. The said town of Goude for
the good order which they have always held in discipline and Scholasticall
instruction has brought forth many great and learned personages, to their
eternal fame: as Henry and John of Goude, whom Trithemius Abbot of Spanheim
puts in rank of the rarest writers. William Herman of Goude, whom Erasmus
Roterodamus in his Epistles calls his delight, a most excellent Poet and
Historiographer. Hermanus Goudanus a great Divine. Iacobus Goudanus a famous
Poet: Th^odorus Gerardi, Reinerius Suoy a Phi^^ion and historiographer, who
have all written learned works worthy to be consecrated to posterity. But
Cornelius Aurelius likewise borne in this town surpast them all in excellent
Poesy, as appears by the Laurel crown that the Emperor Maximillian the
first sent him by his orator Stephanus of Crocouia. It was he that first
controlled Gerard of Nymegen in his book that he writ of the true situation
of Batauia or Holland, between the Horns of the Rhine, which the said Gerard
of Nymegen would have attributed to the Betuwe, a part of Gelderland; wherein
the said Aurelius lively expresses the honor of the Hollanders, who in his
youth was brought up by that so much renowned Erasmus of Rotterdam, being
begotten at Goude, but by remove of dwelling borne and brought up at Rotterdam.

There are many other learned and famous persons sprung from this town, too
long here to rehearse, of whom Iustus Lypsius, Ianus Gruterus, and Dominicus
Baudius of Lille in Flanders, have amply written in their works.
Notwithstanding that throughout all the towns of the Netherlands many bloody
decrees have been executed for religion on both parts, yet they of this town
have bin so moderate even to great Papists their neighbors and in their power,
that in a hundredth years and more there have bin but three executed upon those
placarts or decrees, whereof one was an Anabaptist, who being secretly
advertised by the Magistrate that he should retire himself, yet he came and
rendered himself into the hands of the officer: whereby it may appear that
they of Goude have ever detested tyranny and persecution, believing that it
belongs only to God to command the conscience.

ENCHVYSEN.
THis town of Enchuysen has taken name from the fewness of houses it had at
the first, being by little and little become a great town, as is to be seen
at this day: this word Enckle huysen signifying little ^r simple houses. It is
a fair town and by the natural situation very strong, opposed to the rigor
of the sea, standing upon a corner of the land, their traffic by sea makes
them rich and opulent, it is for the most part built of fair masonrie, having
very few houses of wood, for fear of fire, which they have once or twice
before had experience of; for you may read in the Annals of Holland, that in
the year of our Lord 1297. the Lords of Arkell and Putten burnt it all, and
yet within twenty years after it was made greater by the half, for all the
salt pitts that were along the sea bank and the marshes behind, are now
within the walls, with many fair gardens and fish ponds. There are two
passages out to sea, and three havens, at one of the which entrances there is a
great tower, whereupon is engraven a Lattin distique made by D' Adrianus
Iunius, upon the attempt that Charles the last Duke of Gelders made for the
surprise of it that he might get an entrance into Holland, it expresses the
time of the attempt, and is this.

EnChVsaM InsIdIIs taCitIs sVh noCte sILentI
Ob^Vere adnI Xa est Ge LrICa perfIdIa.
The trecheroVs GeLDrols soVght by Violent Might
TO haVe taken EnchVIsen, through the Veil of n Ight.
This town is rich in salt pits, the Inahbitants fetching gross salt from
Brouage by Rochel, or in Spain, and sometimes from the salt Islands where they
have it for nothing, and after boil it again, and refine it, multiplying it
with seawater brought them in boats, taking the heat away and making it
white fit for the table, their are as sufficient store of sluices in this town
and about it for the passage of seawater as in France or Spain but the
sharpness of the sun is not of that force to congeale and harden it as in
other places; heretofore they made great abundance of salt of the ashes of
turues and seawater, after the manner of making of salt-peeter at this day,
which they call Silt-sout, whereof they make a great traffic: but since that
they have traded to Spain and France, and from thence brought in their great
ships what quantity the will, this manner of making it is come to nothing, it
being impossible that that which they made in diverse places should be so good
as that which is made of the pure seawater. This town may very fitly be
called Neptunes seat, for that their ships pass all the seas of the world,
and have had the honor to carry and bring back the Emperor in diverse of his
expeditions, and likewise sundry times King Philip his son, and since ^nne of
Austria his wife the daughter of the Emperor Maximillian the second. They carry
in their arms three herrings argent and two stars or, in a field Azure, as a
fatal and certain Augure presaging that after the manner of herrings they
should cut through all seas, and trade to the one and other pole, which at this
time they do: In this town dwelt Doctor Paludanus an exquisite Physician and
great gatherer together of strange and rare antiquities, to such an Infinite
number that they could hardly be seen piece by piece in three days, the
marvelous works of nature as well proceeding from the land as the sea, and the
secret works of God being therein to be contemplated and admired, but I
understand since, a great part of them have bin sold to the Lantgraue of
Hessen.

HORN.
ABout the year 1316. in the time of Count William the third of that name
called the good Earl of Holland, Zeeland, Henault and Westfreezeland this
town took his little beginning in this manner: When the town of Veronne
near Alckmar was destroyed by the Frisons, there was a great sluice in the
ditch where at this day the market place of the said town stands which was
called Roestein by the which the country people entered into the sea with their
barks. It happened that three brothers citizens of Hambourgh came and went
thither with ships laden with beer, who caused three high houses of stone to
be built there for the Frisons, for the Danes came thither ordinarily with
oxen, kine, horses and other merchandise, passing the sea with their little
ships, from the Cimbrique Chersonesus, or the country of Holstein, so that from
time to time by little and little it began to augment in buildings, and first
became a village, afterward a town, and at last a good city: one of these
three houses remained entire 220. years after, until the year 1430. The other
two being ruined were built again but not with so great stones as this third.

There is some diversity of opinion about the etymology of the name of Horn,
which signifies as well a hunters horn as otherwise, some say it is of the
haven of the town that turns in form of a little horn; others say that this
same place was full of bogges, where now the ditches and walls of the town
are, and that there grew there certain plants in great quantity in form of a
horn, the which being cut either above or below one might wind as of a
cornet.

The street of the said town that is called the New Dam, where the
woodmongers and shoomakers dwell, and where the turue boats arrive was made in
the time of the Count William when there was not water enough without the Sluice
of Horn, but that the great ships of Denmark and Hambourge were forced to
stay at the sea ditch, and therefore they caused a little long ditch to be
made which they called the New Dam, beginning at the great ditch a good
distance from the mouth of the sea, from whence they brought their horses and
oxen to the town. All this is now within the town; fairly built, and called
the New Damme.

In the year of our Lord 1350. Duke William of Bauaria the son of the
Emperor Lodowick and Marguerite Countess of Holland gave to the Burgeses of
Horn as large and ample privileges as they had given to them of Medenblick
which to this day they enjoy. There is a street in the said town called Here
Gerits Landt so called of Gerard of Hemskerke who caused a fair house to be
built in a large garden now full of houses, the which Gerard died in the said
town in the year of our Lord 1398. after he had served Duke Albert in his
wars against the Frisons.

In the time of the Lady Iaqueline Countess of Holland etc. certain towns of
West-Freesland rebelled against her, and called in Philippe Duke of Burgundy
the Son of her Aunt, unwilling to be governed any longer by a woman,
whereupon grew great wars, the Kennemers taking part with their Princess and
making wars against the Waterlanders, and East Frisons, the Hornois by reason
of their riches and great traffic that they had from North to South, being
grown proud.

It happened at this time that a young man of the said town, the son of one
of the cheifest merchants called Ian Lambrechts Cruyf, being in the town of
Goude, where the Countess Iaqueline kept her residence, seeing the said
Countess pass by, said, without thinking any hurt: It is great pity and
shame to use so noble a Dame in this sort, as if she were a common woman.

These words were worse taken then they were meant. Whereupon ^hee was
committed to prison. Lambert Cruyff hearing of his sons restraint, posted
thither with a good sum of money to redeem him. Having treated with the
Judges, and presented this money, they gave him good words, telling him that
his son should not dye, but should be only lead to the place of execution:
Whereas the executioner drawing out his sword, the Countess should cry out,
which should cause the heads-man to stay, and so his son should be freed.

The father was somewhat comforted with this answer, and seeing there was no
other means, he recommended the cause unto God. The son being upon the
Scaffold, and the e^ ecutioner having drawn his sword, the Countess made no
show of crying out, so as this poor young man was unjustly executed, wherewith
the father being much moved, he said unto himself, being understood by some
other. Thou shall not remain Contesse of Holland neither shall thou hereafter
enio^e that Country in peace. And thereupon he returned with his money to his
own house. Being come to Horn he acquainted the Magistrates and the
Bourgers with the wrong which the Contesse had done unto his son, in the
town of Goude, whereupon a council was held of all the chief of the town,
who concluded jointly never more to acknowledge her for their Princess, and to
fortefie themselves against her. The father of this young man that was
executed, full of discontent and desire of revenge, did give or lend a great
sum of money, to begin the fortification of the town.

And this being in the year 1427. they began to compass in this town with
goodly walls and deep and large ditches. Doctor Adrianus Iunius (a curious
sercher out of Antiquities, as appeeres by his history of Battauia) was borne
in that town, son to Peter de Iouge a Bourguemaster. This town abounds with
all sorts of victuals, half of it all along the sea, is defended with good
palissadoes, and banks, made of a small grass which they call Vlyer, in Latin
Alga, wherewith most of the banks in that quarter of Westfrisland are armed,
for that it settles close together, and does not rot in a long time, and being
rotten it becomes firm earth. They gather ships ladings of this grass in a
certain season of the year, in the sea about the Island of Wyeringhe, from
the which it is named, and they keep great heaps thereof in store, to repair
their banks at need when as they are any way decayed. It is strange that is
reported of this herb, that wild swannes at a low water pull it out of the
botome of the sea, the which floting upon the water, stays in a certain
place, whereas they go to gather it. This Island of Wyeringhe is not far
from that of Texel, nor consequently from Enchuysen, Medenbilck nor Horn, the
which besides all other delights which it yields, brings forth abundance of
great Skirrit roots, as delicate a meat as can be presented before a King,
wherein Pliny reports that the Emperor Tiberius did so delight, as he caused
them to be brought out of Germany to Rome.

ALCMAR.
THis town is three leagues distant from Horn, where ends the jurisdiction of
the Canenefates, or Kennemers in the country language: It is in a manner
environed round about with diverse great Lakes, the which are made by the
brooks which fall from the sandy Downs, so as in my opinion this name was
given it by reason of the multitude of these Lakes, the which in the Cymbrians
tongue they call Meer^n, as if they would say Almeer* and some in Latin call it
Almeria. There are ten of these Lakes, the which by Sluses and Mills to
draine out the water, upon hope of greater profit, have been laid dry,
partly at the charge of the Lords of Brederode, and Egmont, as also by Thierry
Teyling a Receyuor and other good Bourgers of Alcmar; the names of which Lakes
thus recovered, were Bergen, containing 1200. Acres of ground, Daele, Veronne,
Suyn, Bouckler, Heyuluen, Grobber, Temple, Argillar and the Lake behind. There
are yet five remaining, that of Diepee Voere, Scherme, Byems and that of Waerd:
the which they have no meaning to lay dry, by reason of their depth, and the
benifit they reap by the fresh water-fish which they yield. They say that
this town was first founded by Adgill King of Frisland a Godly man, nothing
resembling his impious father Radbod, who mocking at the Saints in Paradise,
having demanded what was become of his predecessors which had dyed Infydells,
and answer being made him that they were in hell, going to the Font to be
baptized by the Bishop of Soissons, he retired back saying, that after his
death he would go where his Parents were. Of whom these rough verses were
made.

OF Iocus, o dirum et tibi formidabile semper
Elogium, Radbode, tuum post tristia fata.
O jest, and dismal memory withal,
(Radbode) for thee, and thy dire funeral.
This Adgill, raygned in Frisland in the year 720. whose lymits were very
great, he founded the town of Alcmar but it does not appear by any Annals,
when it was walled in, yet of late years they have descouered the foundation
of a Castle, which Petrus Nannius a learned Historiographer borne in the same
town affirms that he has seen: the question is if this castle were built
by King Adgill, and if it were called Alcmar, which town (the Frisons having
ruined some 450. years since) is now well fortefied with goodly ditches, and
mighty walls, flanked with nine great Bulwarks, which have been made within
these 35. years, after that the Spaniards had besieged it, battred it and
given maine assaults, were in the end forced to raise their siege with
dishonor and loss, the Bourgers, yea the women and children showing
themselves as courragious and resolute to defend their rampars, as any martial
men could have done, having a late president of the Duke of Aluas cruelty
against them of Harlem after their yielding. It is a fair and pleasant town,
and exceedingly well built, furnished with fish and foul at an easy rate, by
reason of the Lakes: They have great abundance of butter, cheese, beef,
mutton and conies, the air is wholesome and the situation pleasing, having
goodly meadows round about it. Besides the castle above mentioned, there were
two others not far from thence to stop the incursions of the Frisons, who
did annoy Holland daily; which two castles Martin van Rossen Marshall of the
camp to Charles Duke of Gueldres did burn and ruin some three scoore and
ten years since. About a thousand paces from the said town, in old time
was the town of Veronna, the which was fair, spacious and well peopled; of
great wealth, and the Metropolitaine of all the base Frisons, whereof at this
day there is nothing to be seen, but the ruins, the foundations whereof give
good testymonie what it has been.

In the fieds of Veronna (which be very fertile in corn) is a village called
Saint Pancrat. We must believe that this town of Veronna has been the
chief of all the base Frisons, the Fierbrand of war and all combustions
against the Hollanders, to whom they were near neighbors: and for their
treachery and breach of faith were often assailed by the Princes of Holland, so
as in the end, John Earl of Holland, having conceived an irreconciliable
hatred against them, caused it to be razed to the ground, and plowed up,
forbidding them ever to build it up again, for the ruining whereof he drew
in the English, to whom he gave it in prey: the said town having been
delivered unto him by the treason of Phobe Bourguemaster thereof, who had sold
it for a boot full of silver, whos^ sepulcher, (being cast al^^e into a hole,
and covered with dunge) is yet to be seen in a tower of these ruined castles,
the which is at this day called Phobes tower. The History of the destruction
of this town, (the which a certain Priest has written) has been for these
many years kept in the cloister of Henloo, but I know no^ what is become
thereof since it was ruined in these last troubles. William Goudan
Schoolefellow to Erasmus of Rotterdam in his History which he has written of
Hiero a Scottishman who was slain by the Danes, speaking of this town says.

Quos pris^i Frisios olim dixere minores
Arctoo a fluvio, pelagique venitis ab ora,
Tunc vobis Verona caput, nunc campus et arua etc.
You, whom old writters lesser Frisons call
Come from the Northren coasts the first of al,
Then Veron was your head, that now lies waste etc.
In an other place he faith.

-- Frisiis, si quando bella vocabant
Dux Verona fuit ac tantae gloria gentis.
-- When unto wars the Frisons went
Verona was their guide, and ornament.
Whereby it does plainly appear that this town of Veronna has been very
famous. But why the Annals have made so base a mention thereof, I can yield
no other reason, but that it might either be through the ignorance of writers,
or for the great malice and hatred they bare against this town, the memory
whereof they desired to have extinct.

This inscription does witness the year of her destruction. ECCe CadIt Matter
frIsIae ^303. There are yet two Belles to be seen that were cast in the said
town of Veronna, the one in the village of Val^kenooge, and the other in the
City of London in England.

The rights of fishing which the said town has had, in all the Lakes, the
Rhine and the Meuse, which at this day they call Veronna, being anexed to the
revenues of the Princes of Holland, give good testymonie how rich and mighty
it has been: and the accounts which are held of the territory of the said
town, which they call the accountes of Veronna, do well witness it. The
seal of the said town has been found within these fifty years; in which
was graven an Eagle looking up to heaven, with the wings displayed, and on
the side of it a sword, with this inscription. SIGILLVM CIVIVM DE VRONELGEYST.

There was about a league and a half from Alcmar, a good part of the country
called La Sype, twice or thrice drowned, until that the well affected
Bourgers, with the help of many Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, both of
Holland and Brabant, had (with their great change) recovered it, and fortefied
it with so good banks, as they have no more cause to fear any inondation,
whereof they have made a fertile country, fit both for tillage and pasture,
with many goodly farms. Although that Adrianus Iunius would make Horn the
Metropolitaine of West-Frisland, yet this town of Alcmar has the first place
and the first voice, in the Estates of the said Province.

MEDENBLIC.
MEdenblic is seated upon the sea, in the farthest part of North Hollande, two
leagues and a half from Enchuysen^; it has a port made by art, fortefied with
that sea grass above mentioned; a safe retreat for ships in foul weather,
having a strong castle. It was quite burnt by the Frisons in the year of our
Lord and Savior 129^* and the castle was so long besieged, as they were forced
for to ea^e horses.

The ignorant multitude ^old ^n opinion that the Fabulous Medea gave the name,
and that her Image of brass guilt, being set upon an heigh eminent place,
did serve as a sea mark to all sailors: Also when as the Sun did shine upon
this Image they did call up their servants to work, crying Medeeblinckt
(Medeeshynes) and that thereof it took the name of Medenblyck.

They hold that King Radbode, who (as we have said) went from the font when
he should have been baptized, held his Court there. It has within 34. years
been so fortefied with walls and bulwarks as it is now held impregnable; the
country about it being intrencht with ditches, is full of meadows fit to sat
cattle it is well furnished with victuals, and good cheap.

EDAM.
THat which at this day is called Edam, was in old time named Yedam of a
current of water which is called Ye vry Yde, the which running about the
Church, fell by a Sluse, (which they call Damme) into the great channel of the
town, which goes unto the sea, that is to say, the Sluse of Yde. There is a
certain village in the midest of this water, called Middelye. The town is at
this present well walled in, and ditcht, it is famous for the good cheese which
is ma^e there, it has a long haven, to the which there belongs many great and
goodly ships, which are built there every year, being as stately and of as
great charge as any in Holland or Zeeland be it either for war or
Merchandise.

In the year of our Lord 1404. some women of this town going in barks to
feed their cattle in the near pastures of Purmermeer, they did often see at
the ebbing of the water, a sea woman playing in the water, whereat in the
beginning they were afraied, but being accustomed to see it often, they
incourraged one an other, and with their barks entered into this water, into
the which she was come at a full sea, and could not find the way out again:
these women having descouered her, made with their boats toward her, and the
water being not deep enough for her to diue unto the bottom, they took her
by force, drew her into a boat and carried her to Edam, where in time she
grew familiar, accustoming her self to feed of ordynarie meats: They of
Harlem desired much to have her, to whom she was sent, and lived some fifteen
years: she never spoke, seeking often to get again into the water, you may
read this discourse at large in the History of the Netherlands. This town is
two leagues equally distant as well by sea as by land from Horn.

MONICKENDAM.
THis town on the South Side looks toward, the I Will of Mark, which is
opposite unto it: the sea therein reasonably still, for that it lies under the
Lee of the said Island: It is not very spacious, and toward the Land it is
walled and ditcht. It takes the name of a Lake near unto it called
Monicker-meere, the which being at this day defended with banks, is made a
sea, whereas great ships lie safely being covered with that Land. The arms
of this town are a Monk clad in black, holding a mase in his hand whereby
we may conclude that both the Lake and the town took their names from a
Monk, but why or what he was, it is not, known. This town was built in the
year of our Lord and Savior 1297. When as the Frisons came thither with a
fleet of ships to go and succor the Bishop of Vtrecht, it is but a league
from Edam.

PVRMERENDE.
THis town stands in the midest of Moors, lying at the end of the Purmer sea,
where is a Sluice, by the which they of the town sail toward Edam,
Monickendam and other places that border upon the said sea, on the other side
there is nothing but Lakes, which coast the towns of Ryp, Graft, Wormer, even
unto Alcmar. In these three Bouroughes, they are rich men which employ
themselves most at sea, as well in fishing for herring as in trade of
merchandise. At Wormer they make abundance of good by scuit, which they carry
to sell in all the towns of Holland, Zeeland and Frisland, for the provision
of their ships.

This town is very small; it has been fortefied during these last wars,
against the town of Amsterdam, the which in the beginning of the troubles held
the Duke of Aluas party, but this was allied to the towns of Alcmar, Horn,
Enchuysen, Medenblick, Edam, Monickendam, with other places of West-Frisland,
against whom the Spaniards could not prevail, but lost many men in this
watrish country, the which is rightly called Waterland: in the which are the
said towns of Purmerende, the three Boroughes above mentioned, and many other
villages.

This town was first built by a private person, but very rich, the which
came afterward with the castle to the Earls of Egmont, and ioynes unto his
haven upon Alcmar side: It is very cheap living there, by reason of the
abundance of flesh and fish.

MVDEN.
THe town of M^den is seated at the mouth of the river of Vecte: some forty
years since it was but a poor paltrie village, feeling then the miseries,
which it had endured by the burning and spoils of the Duke of Guelders, but
within two years it was repaired. Since the last troubles (yea within these
twelve years) it has been wholly finished and beautified, with ramparts,
goodly bridges and fair houses: It has a strong castle upon the gulphe
whereas the Vecte runs into the Zuyderzee. This castle is famous by the
taking of Floris the fifth Earl of Holland; who having forced the wife of a
Knight called Gerard van Velsen, was (by the conspirac^e of many noble men of
Holland) taken being a Hawking, and carried into this castle, thinking to
transport him from thence into England, there to end his days, and to call
home Earl John, who had married the Kings daughter: but they found no
opportunity to effect it: besides the commons of the Waterlanders did rise of
all sides to succor him; the which the conspirators finding, meaning to carry
him by land into some other country, they led him from thence; but as they
were egerly poursued; Van Velsen being loath to abandon his prisoner, whom he
had mounted upon a paltrie Jade, coming to leap over a ditch (as all the
country is full of trenches) the horse falling, overthrew the Earl into the
ditch. Van Velsen (seeing that he could no longer keep him,) with a furious
desire of revenge, gave him eighteen wounds with his sword, whereof he died
upon the mount of Naerden, whether the pesants carried him Van Velsen and the
other conspirators saved themselves in the castle of Croenenburg, where they
were taken and grievously punished: The Lords of Amstel, Woerden, and some
others, escaped, and wandered long up and down. The Siegnior of Nyuclt is
captain of this castle of Muyden, with a good garrison well provided of all
things.

NAERDEN.
ALthough that this town has suffered much, being first ruined by that
warlike Prelate the Bishop of Vtrecht, of the house of Arckel, who changed the
place of situation, and did cause them to build it where it now stands, being a
fair and a strong town, the which we may justly say is but a shopp of
Weauers, whereas they make great abundance of very fine cloth. The houses of
this town are very fair, being newly built within four and thirty years.
For the Duke of Alua meaning to be revenged of the Hollanders, (who were for
the most part revolted, by reason of his tyranny,) he sent Don Frederick his
son thither with an army: who approaching near unto the town of Naerden:
the Bourguemaister and council of the town, went forth to meet him, and to
present him the Keys of the town: when being entered with his troops, the
Bourgers seeking to give them all the contentment they could devise: the
Spaniards (contrary to their faith and promise) fell upon them, and murdered a
great number (whom they had caused to retire into a church) in cold blood,
forced and deflowred the wives and virgins, spoiled the town* and having
carried away their booty, they set it on fire; the which was a good president
for the other towns of Holland: by the which the towns of Harlem and Alcmar
took example, the first being as cruelly entreated after their yielding, and
the other so encouraged to defend themselves, as after a siege of six weeks
and diverse assaults, the Spaniards were forced to retire to their dishonor and
loss. This town of Naerden is the chief of the Bayliwicke of Goeland, which
the Bishops of Vtrecht have often pretended to belong unto them, but since it
is annexed to the revenues of Holland.

GORRICHOM.
THis town of Gorchum or Gorrichom, from a small beginning, is grown to the
greatness and state wherein you see it at this day, for it takes his name from
poor Fisherman, who had their lodgings or cabins along the river of Lingen,
until it ioynes with the Meuse and Wahal, who by reason of their po^uertie;
were in contempt called Gorrikens: whom John of Arckel the seventh Baron of
that race, Lord of the country of Arckel, caused to come and dwell behind and
about his castle, where by degrees he built a good town, the which he walled
in about the year 1230. And to the end they should retain their name of
Gorrikens, he called this town Gorrichom, as much to say (hom or h^ym, in old
time signifying a house or aboade) as the dwelling of these Gorrikens. There is
in this town a great market of fish, foul, and all other provision needful
for the life of man, whereof they make a great trade, as well into Brabant, as
other places, which does much inriche the town: for the Bourgers themselves
are both merchants, mariners and factors, one man alone supplying the place of
three: from the top of the highest steeple you may see in a clear day two and
twenty walled towns, besides bourroughs and villages, which are very many,
being a pleasant sight to behold; Near unto it is the Champian country where
(as they say) Hercules Alemanicus did camp. Whereupon they call all that
quarter the country of Hercules, the which the common people did afterward
term Herkel, and from that to Arkel: when the said town was obscured by the
house of Arkel, by reason of the continual wars which their Lords made
against the Earls of Holland.

Charles ^uke of Bourgongne caused a goodly castle to be built there upon the
river, nee ^ unto the Port of Do^d^ect* the which since these last troubles
has been razed and fortified after an other manner; so as there remains
nothing but a place for the payment of the custom: it is so fortified with
twelve bulwarks, besides halfe*moones and counterscarps without it, together
with that abundance of water, as one would say it were impregnable. It is made
half bigger then it was twenty years since: the river of Linghen runs
through the midst of it, being always full of ships: it falls into the
Meruve, and mingles it self with the rivers of Wahal and Meuse: all which
together pass before Dordrecht, Rotterdam, Delfs-hauen, Schiedam and the
Briele, where it falls into the British sea. Master Ihon Harie Chanoine of
the Chapel at the Hage in Holland, was borne in this town; he was so great a
lover of pi^tie, virtue, and learning* as during his life he sought out (with
great care, diligence and cost) all books, in all languages and faculties.
When he came to reside at the Hage, he brought so great a number of books
with him, as the people thought there were not so many to be found in all
Holland: wherewith he made a goodly Library, the which he did augment with great
care even to his dying day, which was in the year 1^32. where of he made the
Emperor Charles the firt his heir.

WORCOM.
ALthough this town be out of the limit^s of the County of Holland, beyond
the river of Wahal, on Brabant side, right against the strong castle of
Louestein, having a little lower on the other bank the town of Gorchom, the
which in ancient time did belong unto the Earls of Horn, which the King of
Spain did confiscate, and since it was quite burnt: but the Estates of Holland
having seized thereon, and fortified it with good rampars, bulwarks and
ditches, it has been new built, and is made a fair town, where the Estates
do entertain an ordinary garrison, with a Captain superintendent.

Of late years the Estates (to cut of all controversy touching the
jurisdiction of the said Town) agreed with the Lady Walburge Countess of
Moeurs and Nyeuwenaert, widow to Philip of Montmorency the last Earl of
Horn, who sold them the propriety of the said Town, with the castle and
territory of Altena, not far from thence, being in ancient time all
drowned, but now it is a country full of good pastures: So these two pieces of
Worcom and Altena, are anne^ed to the revenues of the County of Holland,
wherewith it is so much augmented. There is an other Worcum in Frisland upon
the sea, not far from Hindelopen, the which has the title and privilege of
a town, although it be but a Boroughe without any walls, but it is great,
and almost three thousand paces long.

HEVSDEN.
IS a reasonable fair town and well built, situated on Brabant side, upon the
river of Wahall, with a goodly castle, where the Governors do reside, the last
of which was Floris of Brederode, Siegnior of Cloetinge, brother to the Lord of
Brederode last deceased, who left one son the only heir of all the house of
Brederode. The Siegnior of Locren commands there now for the Estates. It was
long under a private Lord. They of Brabant pretended it to be of their
jurisdiction, but Holland has held it unto this day. It has a large command.

LEERDAM.
THis town is small, yet walled in, standing upon the banks of the river of
Lingen; it has been so often ruined in the old wars, as they have had no
great care to repair it, so as it is of small moment, it belongs to Philip of
Nassaw now Prince of Orange, Earl of Buren, and has a castle which is still
maintained.

HENCLOM.
HEnclom is a town seated also upon the river of Lingen, opposite to Leerdam:
it is a little town and very ancient, but goes to decay. It has an old
Castle which they say was built by Hercules Alemanicus, but GOD best knows
how true it is. The Lords of this little town are descended from Otto, the
younger son to John the eight Lord of Arkel, who gave him this Siegneurie in
his life time.

ASPEREN.
IS situated upon the bank of the same river of Lingen, which the Inhabitants
call Lyeuen, that is as much to say as Love, for that the stream runs so
gently. In the year 1516. it was grievously afflicted by the Geldrois, who
being accompanied by some rebels and mutinous Hollanders, besieged it, and in
the end took it by assault, notwithstanding all the valiant resistance of the
besieged, whom they put to the sword, and set fire of the town, not sparing
the very Churches, into the which the women and children were retired, whom
they entreated so barbarously, as Turks in their greatest fury could not have
exceeded them.

OVDE-WATER.
THis word fignifieth Old-waters, which they term in Latin Aquas veteres, it
is a reasonable good town, and has rich Bourgers in it: it stands like unto
Goude, upon the river of Yssell, a league from Woerden, betwixt which towns
they sow great abundance of hemp, wherewith they make ropes, cables and
netts for fishing, which is the chief work of the poorer sort, and the
greatest profit of the richer. This town was besieged by the Lord of Hierges
for the Duke of Alua, and valiantly defended, but in the end it was taken by
assault, whereas the Spaniards after they had used their accustomed cruelties,
set fire of it, so as it is not yet repaired.

ROTTERDAM.
ROtterdam is situated near unto the Meuse, upon the mouth of the channel
which they call Rotter, whereunto adding Dam (which is a Scluse) it makes
Rotterdam, the Scluse of Rotter. Of that which Guichardin and Sebastian Munster
write of the foundation and antiquity of this town, I believe no more then
Doctor Adrianus Iunius does: for it is a matter without all doubt or
controversy, that the place where as the town now stands, was heretofore an
arm of the sea, without the river of Meuse, which the remainder of the banks
do yet witness, the which extended from the castle of Honingen (belonging to
them of the house of Asendelfe) unto Croeswicke, which was a castle upon the
Rotter, and so went on unto the village of Ouderschye, and ended at the ditches
of Schiedam. Rotterdam is augmented more then a moitie within these two and
twenty years, having removed the port of their haven (which they have made of
goodly Freestone) from the old seat, at the least a hundred paces nearer unto
the mouth of their haven, and to the point: Near unto which port is a goodly
Bourse for Merchants with three galleries, which stand upon pillars of
freestone. The town does daily increase in wealth, First by their fishing
with their great ships, called Busses, the which are strong and well
appointed both to encounter an enemy, and to resist the violence of the sea:
and of late years by their trade to the East and West Indies, and seeking
their fortunes against the Spaniards, from whom they have many times taken
great prizes: The haven is long, built all of a blew stone, which does resist
the violence of the water, in which haven a great number of ships may safely
lie.

Every year there are goodly great ships built in this town for theselong
voyages, and galleys where there is any need of them for the war, upon the
coast of Holland and Zeland. Some five and thirty or six and thirty years
since the Earl of Bossu having surprised it by the Duke of Aluas command
(where some Bourgers were slain) by the negligence of some insolent soldiers,
it was fired, the which by the means of a great tempestuous wind, did consume
above nine hundred houses, and some ships, where there were men lost. The loss
was great, but it was soon repaired, and the houses built fairer and higher
then before, the most of them being of blew stone. That great light of learning
and knowledge Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus was borne in this town, almost
right before the Church door, in a street which goes unto the market place,
of which town he does often speak honorably in his writings. There is over
the door where he was borne being a little house, where I have seen a Tailor
dwell, a small round circle, whereas his face only is drawn, with an
inscription in Latin and Spanish, saying, Here that great Erasmus of Rotterdam
was borne: and in the Market place looking toward the haven, his picture is
planted at length with a book in his hand. He has deserved this honor and
much more for his great knowledge, whereof he has given good testimony, by
so many Books which he has put forth to the honor of God, and the
instructions of Christians: yet all men speak not equally of him, but envy
never dies. He had been an Augustine Monk, and therefore the Monks were his
greatest enemies: yet he was held in good reputation, and had a living from
Pope Leo the tenth. He died at Basil in Swisserland, and is interred in the
Cathedral Church, where I have seen his Sepulcher entering into the Quier.

SCHIEDAM.
IS a town situated upon a current of water, which comes not far out of a
country called Schie: from whence it takes the name, as if one would say the
Sluse of Schie. It has a good haven upon the Meuse. It is apparent by the
privileges of the said town, that it was made a town in the year 1274. and
had their privileges granted from the Earl of Holland, with power to
administer Justice, with many good laws, whereof mention is made in the
foundation and of the building of the said town, which was then called
Nyeuwen-Dam, that is, the New Scluse, which name it carried until the year
1300. and since it has been always called Schiedam. In this town there is
an hospital, which for antiquity is equal with the foundation, the which
they called the Hospital of the new Dam, which has this privilege, that a
Bourger or any other dying, either within the town, or in the liberties
thereof, the best garment he leaves, does belong unto the said hospital.

The chief trade of this town is fishing for herring, to which end they do
every year send forth a good number of Busses into the North sea, and from
thence they transport and sell them far and near. It is a rich merchandise
and much desired in France and the East countries, as at Dansick, Conixbergen,
Hambourg, Lubeck, Bremen, and generally through-out all Germany. It is a
common saying, that the herring is a little fish, but strong enough to ruin
his Master, when he plays with his tail, that is to say, when he sells
not, but when the fishing and the vent is good, it makes them rich. Besides
this fishing, they commonly send forth every year many great ships, which
traffic through-out all the seas of the world; so as there are many good
masters of ships, Pilots, and expert mariners in the town. The Merchants
and Bourgers of this town are sincere and just in their dealings, who
imitating the ancient pains of the old Hollanders, hate all pride, pomp, and
superfluity, as well in bankets, apparel, as rich moouables, wherein they
are very moderate, with an honest parcimonie, such as their predecessors used,
which is an honor unto them.

BRIELE.
IT seems this town has taken his name from the largeness of the gulf,
where as the Meuse and the Rhine (joined together) fall into the Ocean or
British seas, in which place they say that Claudius Ciuilis (issued from the
blood royal of the Battauians did fight with the Roman fleet, but without
any great gain to either part. This word of Briele, does well agree with that
of Hiele in Pliny, which for the largeness of the gulf may be called
Bre-heile (which is a large heel) and by corruption of the tongue Briele. This
town with that of Gheervlyet (a small town in the same Island of Vorne) are
reasonably good, the Inhabitants for the most part are seafaring men, which
get their living by fishing, and that which belongs thereunto. The air of
this town is gross and heavy, lying so near unto the sea, so as it is every
year visited with some disease or other. The country about it is very
fertile, and yields abundance of good wheat, and all other victuals are
plentiful and good cheap there.

SCHOONHOVEN.
THis town takes his name of the goodly and pleasant gardens, which are both
within and about it, abounding in diverse sorts of fruits. For this word
Schoonhoven, signifies goodly gardens. It is situated upon the left bank of
the river of Leck: they hold that it was built of the ruins of the town of
Nieuport, the which at this day is but a Bourg, on the other side of the said
river, opposite to Schoonhouen: In all this passage even unto the village of
Leckerke; there is great fishing for Salmons, which they sell in the said
town, and the villages there-abouts.

Christopher Longolius that excellent Orator, was borne in this Town, although
that some would have him a Frenchman, or a Wallon. The which Peter Longolius
his Uncle, a very learned man did witness, whose testimony is sufficient to
confute all other opinions. There passes a channel through this town which
comes out of the river of Yssell, very commodious to pass from one river unto
the other.

ISELSTEYN.
IT is a small town but very strong, being so fortified by reason of their
great wars. It is so called of a little channel which passes, coming out
of the river of Yssell* There had been a long controversy betwixt the
Hollanders and them of Vtrecht for the jurisdiction of this town, either
party pretending an interest. Some four and thirty years since, the Church
steeple was burnt by lightning from heaven but did no other harm unto the
town. It is of the patrimony of the house of Egmont, whereof the last Lord
was Maximilian of Egmont, Earl of Buren and Iseisteyn, who left one daughter,
sole heir to the Lord of Launoy, whom William Prince of Orange did marry,
being his first wife, so as all the inheritance of these houses of Buren and
Launoy came to Phillip William, and to the Lady Mary of Nassau Countess of
Hohenloo his sister.

WOERDEN.
IS a reasonable good town and well built, with a market place, whereas all
provisions are to be sold once a week: it stands in a moore having a strong
castle, whereas they keep prisoners of importance: as of late days the
Admiral of Arragon, the Earl of Busquoy and others. The Lord of Hierges
having taken Oudewater (as we have said) for the Duke of Alua, and the town
of Schoonhoven, he went to besiege Woerden, where having begun to make his
approches, and to plant boats for his battery, they of the town let go all
their Sluses, the which in one night drowned the country about, so as he was
forced to rise and leave two pieces of ordinance. This town was built by
Godfrey Bishop of Vtrecht, a man given to arms, to suppress the courses of
the Hollanders. And therefore the superiority thereof was for a long time
questionable betwixt the Earls of Holland and the Bishops of Vtrecht. It has
for long time had a particular Lord, among others a brother to the Lord of
Amstel, who being one of the conspirators of the death of Cont Flo is the fifth
fled and continued a vagabond; since b^ the law of Arms the Hollanders have
enjoyed it.

VIANE.
IT is a little square town seated upon the left bank of the river of Leck,
a free Baronie belonging to the house of Brederode, which would neither be
subject to the King of Spain, nor to the Earls of Holland whereof there has
bin some question, (yet it is held of the dependances of Holland but it is not
yet decided. It has a fair Castle, which is the ordinary aboade of Walrard
Lord of Brederode, Baron of Viane, Ameide, etc. having a large jurisdiction. It
has endured much after the retreat of Henry Lord of Brederode, in the year
1567.

SAINT GERTRVYDENBERGHE.
THis word signifies the mount of Saint Geertruyde, it may be, for that the
place had been dedicated to that Saint. It is a strong town both by nature
and art, situated upon the left bank^ of the river of Meruve: more famous for
the taking of great Salmons then any part of all the Netherlands; and such
abundance of Aloses or troutes, as on a market day you may see above 18000.
great and small, and many great stu^gions, which in a convenient season are
transported to Antwerp, Brusselles, Gand, Bruges and other places, besides that
which is distributed into Holland, Zeeland and the rest of the united
Provinces. The like is found in the river of Yssel nere unto the town of
Campen in the country of Oueryssel. In former times there has been great
controversy for the propriety of the said town, the Brabansons pretending a
title thereunto for that it stand* on their side, and the Hollanders making
claim also unto it, by reason of their ancient possession. Which question
proceeded so far, (there being no means to reconcile it) as the Estates of
Holland (when they did receive their Earls) bound them by a sollemne o^h to
keep it under the said Earldome, and they of Brabant on the other side did
bind their Dukes to recover it: Yet it appeeres plainly by the Chronicle of
Holland, that when as their Earl (who was also Earl of Henault) intended to
go to Mons, Valenciennes or any other place of the said Earldome, the Nobility
of Holland came to accompany him to this town, whether they of Henault came
to attend him, and did conduct him whether he would go, as also in his return
they brought him thither, where as they of Holland did encounter him to conuoie
him into Holland. This town is of the inheritance of the house of Nassau, in
whose name it was cunningly surprised in the year 1573. and so continued under
the union of the united Estates, until that some lewd persons (under color
of an ill grounded mutynie,) sold it in the year 1588. to the Duke of Parma,
for ready money. But since in the year 1593. it was recovered by siege in
view of the old Earl of Manffeldt, who was general of the King of Spaines
army, and governor by provision after the death of the Duke of Parma: It is at
this day under the united Estates, better fortefied then ever, and always
manned with a good garrison, and furnished with all other necessary provisions.

THE HAGE.
BEsides Cities and walled towns which they account to eight and twenty in
number, there are in Holland many great Bourroughs, which their Princes have
inricht with goodly privileges being nothing inferior to some walled towns,
both in greatness, buildings and beauty. Among the which no man can de^ie but
the Hage holds the first place, which they do commonly call the Earls Hage:
which place the old Earls and Princes did choose for their Court, and for the
seat of their great council, whereas all causes are ended as well upon the
first instance, as by appeal to the Earls of Holland, Zeeland and
West-Frisland. This place is as stately, and pleasing, as well in buildings and
houses of Princes, great personages and of the meaner sort, as in gardins and
other delights, as any other in Christendom. The Palace is great and dicht
about, where as all the counselors both for justice, government, war and
treasure assemble. It was built by William King of Romans and Earl of
Holland who caused the counselors to be transported from Grauesandt (which is
near unto the sea) to the Hage. The great hall of the Palace is built with
wonderful art, being not strengthened with any great beams a cross, but
only with a roof in form of an Arch, which binds the whole building; the
timber was brought out of Ireland, which has a property not to endure any
poison, and therefore you shall not at any time see a cobweb there. On the
North side it has a great poole, and above it a little hill planted with great
trees, where as there are pleasant shadie walks for Summer* and feats to rest
themselves on.

Along these walks are many houses of Noblemen, Presidents, Gentlemen,
Counselors and other men of quality* Going out of the Courtgate on the
North-side also, you come unto an other goodly place, which is appointed for
the execution of Justice, all so neatly paued, as the more it raynes the
cleaner it is, the streets clensing themselves with the rain: Passing on they
come to an other great walk full of trees, one joining to an other, the which
in the spring time yield a sweet and pleasant smell; this walk coming behind
the houses and a street betwixt both, it goes to the gardins of the
Harguebuziers and Crosbow-men, whereby they enter into the court on the
backe-side. This Palace is the ordynarie residence of the Governors of
Holland, Zeeland and West-frisland, who at this day is that great captain
Prince Maurice of Nassau, Marquis of Campver^ Flussing etc. High Admiral for
the vnt^ed Provinces, second son to that valiant and wise Prince of Orange,
William Earl of Nassau. It is half an hours passage to go from the South
which comes from Delfe, unto the end of the North, (which goes to Scheueling
upon the seashoare) it is not muchlesse from the East to the West, which are
the two bredthes compassing in the Bourrogh: going out on the East Side toward
Leyden, you enter into a pleasant little wood some 1500. pace^^ong, but not so
broad, well planted with oaks and all other sorts of trees, and full of Dear
and Conies, a very pleasant place, the which in the Somer time is much
frequented; whether the Aduocats and Proctors go often to walk when as they
come from pleading, before they go to dinner. The Provincial council
consists of a President and fourteen councelors, (among the which is numbered
the Advocate Fiscall) an Attorney general, a Register and other Officers.
There also does the Receiuor general of the said country and of West-frisland
remain. The Chamber of accounts which was wont to be there for Holland,
Frisland, Groaning, Oueryssel, Vtrecht and Zeeland, is now restrained to Holland
and West-Frisland alone: the other Provinces having withdrawn themselves,
every one having his Receiuor and chamber of accounts apart: True it is they
have subjected themselves to bring the money which rises of contributions and
taxations thither, and to deliver it unto the Receiuor general, and to be
accountable unto the Treasorer general of the united Provinces, and to the
Exchequer of the general Estates. In this Palace is yet remaining that great
and royal Library, which was gathered together by that famous Chanoine John
Harrie above mentioned. About three score and ^en years since Martin van
Rossen came with his Geldrois of the garrison of Vtrecht, at noone day to
spoil this goodly Bourg, all the counselors and Advocates flying away and
abandoning their houses to these insolent souldiars, who carried away their
spoil in boats to Vtrecht, without any opposition. They said that if this
goodly Bourg had been walled in, they had not been subject to calamity.
Within these six and thirty years they had attempted it, but by reason of the
fury of the Spaniards it was not held fit: for such as were opposite unto it,
said* that coming to be besieged it should be quite spoiled and ruined:
whereas finding it open and the people fled, they did but lodge there sometimes
as they past, and sometimes they stayed there, whilst they did overrun the
villages of West-holland. In this place was borne that learned Prelat John
Iugenhage being of a Noble family, of whom the Abbot Tritemius and William
Vuytenhage make mention, being the first comicall Poet of the Lower German.
Of the same place was Gerard Signior of Assendelf, who was President of
Holland, of an honorable house, very learned in Greek and Latin, and an
excellent Poet, and his son Nicholas of Assendelf very learned also. In like
sort Hippolitus of Persin President of the Province of Vtrecht was borne there,
with Splinter Hargene Siegnior of Oosterwyck, and Arnold Knebel, who was
treasurer for the Estates of Holland, and his brother Philip councellor of the
privy council at Bresselles, all men of great knowledge.

Half a league from the Hage in our time was a goodly Abbay of Relligious
Noblewomen of the order of Saint Bernard, called Losdune, whereas is yet to be
seen in the Church of the said Abbay which has been quite ruined by these
last furious wars) the tomb of the Lady Marguerite of Holland Countess of
Hausberge, with her Epitaph both in Latin and Dutch, set there by reason of her
strange and miraculous delivery of three hundred sixty and four children at
one birth, whereof Erasmus Roterodamus, Johannes Lodouicus Viues and many other
famous Authors make mention in their writings, the which I forbear to relate
being set down at large in the History of the Netherlands.

An example of the like childbirth is to be found in the Annals of
Brunswyck* with whom Albertus Crantzius, Historiographer to Ernestus Prince of
Anha^t does accord in his Comentaries of Vandalia, who writes that seven and
thirty years after the said childbirth, the like happened to the Lady
Marguerite daughter to the Earl of Holstein, the which were all baptized.
Martin Cromer in his Chronicle of Poland writes that in Cracouia in the year
1269. the wife of the Earl Buboslas was delivered of six and thirty children
all living, the which is against all the rules of Physic and natural
Philosophy; yea against the course of nature it self, yet there is no rule but
has some exception, whereas the grace or divine vengeance interposeth it
self, the which ouer-rules Nature and the force of the Elements.

VLAERDINGHE.
ALthough this be but a Borroughe at this day yet it is put in the first rank
of all the walled towns of Holland, the river of Meuse (upon whose banks it
stands) having in a manner eaten it up with the castle, and by great tempests
driven it into the sea. Thierry of Wasenare does maintain that it ought be
called Verdinge, by reason of the toll which does yet belong unto the Lords of
Wassenare, where they did bargain as well as they could, it is two leagues
distant as well from Delfe as Rotterdam.

SEVENBERGHE.
THis town is seated upon the river of M^ruve, three leagues beneath
Gheertruydenberghe, and as much from Breda. The town lies open; it is small,
but reasonable good, where there was a mighty fort during all the time of the
last troubles, the which was held by a garrison for the united Estates: It
belongs now to the Earl of Aremberghe, who has liberty from the Estates, that
paying contribution, it shall remaineneuter, as it has done.

All the above named towns although they be not so great as those of Brabant
and Flanders, yet they are not much inferior, being for the most part greater
by the half, stronger and better peopled then they were thirty years since:
so as they which have not been there since, especially in Amsterdam, will not
know it. Of all these towns there are five which should be held for
Bourroughs, whereof we will presently speak some thing: that is to say, the
Hage, (which deserves well the name of a town) Vlaerdinghe, Seuenbergh, Muyden
and Voorn: yet there is an other town not walled in, called.

GOEREE.
WHich I find to be the last of the towns of Holland, it is situated in a
little Island inhabited for the most part by fishermen, and makers of nets,
which is their greatest labor and traffic: it has as good and as deep a
road as any is in Holland, where as great ships which go long voiages cast
anchor, attending their last provision, and a good wind. This place has of
late years been spoiled by the garrisons of Woude and Hulst, as also
Hellevooet-sluys, opposite unto it, which is the Sluse of the Island of Voorn on
that side toward the sea, whereas Bryle lies on the other side upon the gulphe
of the river, which they call the old Meuse.

BEVERWYCK.
THis word is as much to say as a retreat for Ba^arians for it seems that
the Kings of France having subdued Holland, did divide the inheritances of the
country amongst their old souldiars, whether they should retire themselves
and inhabit, the which they did distribute by nations. This Bourg is two
leagues from Harlem, upon the river of Tie, not above two thousand paces
distant from the sea; it is well built and has goodly farms about it. The
Noblest of all Borroughes and Villages ending in Wyck, is Calwyck, whereof
there are two, the one upon the sea, and the other farther up into the
country: which have been built by the Cattes, fathers to the Battauians or
Hollanders, who following their Prince, Batto, went and seated themselves near
unto the gulphe whereas the Rhine discharges it self into the sea: which
place by reason of the commodity of the situation, has been heretofore ample,
spacious and very fit to receive ships and merchandise, but diverse times
destroyed and ruined by the incursions of Barbarians and Pirates.

Besides there is Suydwyck near to Wassenare, where there is a Mil upon the
South side, the which by a breuiation they call Suyck: then there is Noortwyck
on the North side, to the which it seems that the Normans which came out of
Denmark and Suedland gave the name, whereof that worthy man Ianus Douza was
Lord, and left it to his children. Then have you Osterwyck, which some hold was
inhabited by the Vandales or Esterlings, unless that ^oppo Lord of Arckel gave
it the name of Esterwyck. Then is there Naeldwycke, whereof the Lords of the
direct line are dead, and now it belongs unto the Earl of Arembergh, where
there is a Chanonry; Martin van Dorp a great divine and a Poet was borne there.
After it is Riswyck nere unto the Hage; Stolwyck famous for the good cheese
which is made there nere unto Goude: Bleyswyck belonging unto the Siegnior of
Bronckhurst: Brerdwyck, being so called of the Bardes, Gauls, or of the
Lombards a people of Germany: Brandwyck, Schalcwyck and Hontwyck, whereof it
were hard to write the etimologies and beginnings.

NIEVPORT.
IS on the other bancke of the river of Leck, right against Schoonhoven: It
has been in former times a good town, but as the condition of human things
is frail and transitory, it seems that the spoils of Barbarous nations, and
the intestine wars which they have had in Holland has brought it to decay,
yet it is still a good Borrough.

SCAGE.
IT is a good Bourg, well built like unto a town the market place is made of a
triangle form, and goes into three streets, where there are little passages
from the one to the other. It has the best and most frutfull soil of all
Holland, both for tillage and pasture; the Bourgers are very rich.

There is a goodly castle, all which belongs unto the Siegnior of Scagen and
Barchom, who descends from Duke Albertus of Bauaria Earl of Holland.

It were an infinite thing to describe the other Bourgs and Villages of the
said county, the which we will omit and speak something of the castles; as
well of those which have been ruined during the factions of the Hoocs and
Cabillaux, as of the rest which are yet standing. Among those which are ruined
are the castles of Brederode, half a league from Harlem, and of Egmont, being
5000. paces from Alcmar: It was first ruined long since, and afterward in the
last troubles, in revenge that the Earl of Egmont the father, left the
Noblemen of the Netherlands, who had entered into league against the Duke of
Alua, the which cost him his head, and for that the sons (in steed of
revenging the ignominious death of their father) followed the Spaniards party.
Then is the castle of Teylingen, where as the Countess Iaqueline took great
delight, betwixt Leyden and Harlem, ruined also nere unto the walls, but it
might be easily repaired. On the other side of the town of Schoonhouen, is the
great and mighty castle of Lysfeldt, nere unto the banks of the river of Leck,
belonging unto the Duke of Brunswyck, if of late years he had not exchanged
it together with the town of Woerden, with Philippe Earl of Hohenlo. At
Vianen there is also a fair castle belonging to the Lord of Brederode as we
have said, with that of Ameden, which is betwixt Viane and Nieuport, on the
same side.

We have heretofore made mention of the castles of Woerden, Goude, Gorchom,
Medenblyke and Muyden. There is near unto the town of Alcmar the castle of
Assenburg, which is the place of the Lord of Assendelf, who has an other
castle nere unto Rotterdam, called Hemingen. The castle of Abcoude is one of
the Noblest and most ancient, betwixt Leyden and Vtrecht; there is a remainder
of a little castle near unto Hemskerke, seated upon a hill, with four towers,
the which for the hight does some times serve as a sea-marke unto Mariners.
Those of the house of Adrichom had a castle near unto Beuerwyke, which the
Frisons did raze and ruin; with the ruins whereof the Siegnior Antony Vander
B^rcht heir of that place by his mother, has caused a house and a farm to
be built there, all walled about. The old castle of Riuiere nere unto
Schiedam, as we have said, does belong unto the Siegniors of Matenesse. After
it is Kenebourg belonging unto James of Egmont van Merensteyn, or to his
heirs. Then Mereburg to the Siegnior of Lochorst: and the castle of Duyuen
nere unto Seuenhuysen to the Siegnior of Sprangen. There was nere unto the Hage
not far from Voorburg a castle called Elin, at this present wholly ruined.
The ruins of the castle and temple of Hildegarde, within a league of Rotterdam
are yet to be seen upon a high eminent place, whereas in old time there kept
one Hildegarde a kind of Sibille or divine, whose Oracles did represent the
times which we have now seen in Holland* There yet remains a tower all
tattered, the ground of which castle is the inheritance of the house of
Matenesse. Within the compass of the walls of Rotterdam there is to be seen
the ruins of Bulgestein, and of the castle of Veen which they call Thoff, that
is to say the Court, so as the gate which is set in that place, is called the
Hoff-port. You may see upon the river of Schye the remainders of the castle of
Sterr^burg the which belongs unto the Siegnorie of Duyvenvorde, there was also
in former times an old castle in the village of Capelle, whereof the ruins are
yet to be seen; it comes from the house of Naeldwycke, and does now belong to
the Earls of Aremberghe. The castle of Hodenpyle in the jurisdiction of
Vlaerdinghe, is quite down. The like has happened to the castle of Polanen,
the which did belong unto one of the noblest families of Holland: All these
ruins happened during their cursed factions of Hoecks and Cabillaux, whereof
these Noblemen were the chief supporters, taking a diuilish delight to ruin
one an others houses, yea in towns the strongest factions of the Bourgers
chasing away the others which factions continued not much less then two
hundred years.

The castle of Velsen, for that Gerarde van Velsen Knight had murdered Floris
the fifth Earl of Holland was in like manner ruined, nothing remaining but
certain old pieces of walls, the ground whereof belongs unto the heirs of
Ianus Douza Siegnior of Nortwyck: nerevnto which ruins Adrian Groeneveen a
rich Bourger of Harlem has built a fair house with large ditches, almost like
unto a castle* Sandenburg which was a castle of the Earls of Holland, (after
that the Court had been transported from Grauesandt to the Hage, by Count
William King of Romans) was also ruined, and so remains. The like happened
to the castle of Zyle, in old time called Thoff van Zyle.

The castle Ter Does had been also ruined, but within these fourteen or
fifteen years it has been repaired. Altena (that is to say, to nere) so
called for that it was feared by them of Delfe, by reason of the fort, being
neighbor unto them, belongs to them of Almonde: Croeswyck on the other side of
the river of Rotter; and Croelinghen half a quarter of a league from Rotterdam
are also ruined, but if the Signior of Croelinghen had a good purse, it should
be soon repaired. Louestin right against Worcom, and Henselaers-Dyck near
unto Naeld-Wyck are yet in being.

Of the Nobility of Holland.
I Will content my self with that which diverse Authors have written touching
Nobility, how it is pourchased and maintained, what the duty is, and wherein
true Nobility consists: who desiers to be instructed, let him read Adrianus
Iunius in his Battauia, in the chapter De Nobilitate Batauica, But I will here
relate succinctly what the ancient Nobility of Holland was, how it came to
decline, and what has remained. The ancient Nobility of Battauia or Holland,
took their greatest exercises in Arms, by the which they sought the degrees
of honor, for as Tacitus says. Vt Gallos pro liberate, Germanos pro praeda,
ita Batauos pro gloria ad capessendam pugnam olim fuisse instigatos. As the
Gauls for liberty, the Germans for prey, so the Battauians were in old time
provoked to enter battle for the desire of glory. They were most commonly
the best mounted, and had the fairest and most resolute troops of horse, that
served under the Roman Emperors.

After that Holland had a particular Prince, beginning with Thierry of Aquitane
their first Earl, the Nobility of Holland began to show them selves, so they
grew to have many great and worthy families, and a great number of gentlemen,
who had pourchased their nobility, either from their Ancestors, or by their own
virtues and prowess. But I cannot but lament, that so many great, noble, rich
and mighty families, are now extinct, as well by their intestine wars
against the Frisons, as against strangers; for which consideration the heirs
males failing, the successions fell to the women, and so came to other
families: besides the fury of Gerard van Velsen had many companions, all which
were put to death, and their nearest kinsmen pursued to the death, even unto
the ninth degree (a most cruel revenge) and such as could escape, were forced
to become vagabonds in foreign countries, such as had hidden themselves until
this furious revenge was past, were afterward forced to take borrowed names of
other families, and to leave their own. To come then to that which remains,
and to those which are past. We will say that the house of Wassenare (as we
have said elsewhere) was the most ancient of Holland: as it appears by this
common proverb Vassenare the most ancient; Brederode the most noble (for that
they descend from the first Earls) and Egmond the most rich. We have scene in
this last age, John of Wasenare, the subduer of the Frisons, a brave and
valiant Knight, who was slain in those wars leaving one only daughter and
heir, married to the Earl of Lingue, whereby this family and surname is
extinct.

The memory of the house of Brederode may easily be found in the Annals of
Holland, being come from Ziphard the second son of Arnulph the third Earl of
Holland and Zealand, who to avoid his fathers wrath, retired into Freezeland,
and there without his priuity he married the Potestats daughter of the country,
by whom he had two sons, Thierry and Simon: Being afterward reconciled to
his Father, he had certain land allotted him for his portion, which was
measured by the great rod, the which in the country language is Brederode, from
whence they took their name. His father gave him also the Castle and Territory
of Theylingen; the which Zyphard at his death disposed to his two sons; to
Thierry he gave Brederode and to Simon Teylingen, from whence are issued the
two families of Brederode and Teylinge, the which ended by the death of two
brethren, who were slain with their Prince William King of Romans in the
war against the Frisons. As for that of Brederode we have seen four
brethren of the right line dye also in the wars against the French in few
years, so as it fell by a collateral line unto VValrauen Lord of the said
Brederode, Vianen, Ameyden, etc. who having not any children, and not likely to
have any by reason of his age and his wives; all must return to Floris of
Brederode his Brothers son, who may raise up the house being now half
extinct.

The beginning of the house of Egmont is doubtful, for the Lords thereof
cannot truly show a continuance of their descent for three hundred years: yet
they say they are issued from Radbod (I know not which) King of the Frisons,
but I think it would be a tedious thing to find out this pedigree. Such as
contradict it say, that they are descended from a Receiver of the Abbay of
Egmond, which Office had been called Aduoe, and under this title having
enriched themselves with the goods of this Abbaie, by little and little they
attained to great wealth, and thereby to great allyances, which have augmented
their house, as well in possessions, as degrees of honor, so as in the end
they married a daughter of the famous house of Arckel, the which was heir to
the Duchy of Geldres: Whereas Arnold of Egmond the first Duke of that house,
had one son called Adolph, who did much trouble his father, yea he detained
him in prison, until that Charles Duke of Burgongne set him free. Adolph
retyring into France, married a Lady of the house of Bourbon, who having one
son named Charles* he was afterterwards slain being General of the Ganthois
before Tournay: After whose death the Emperor Charles the fifth under coullor
of some transport which he pretended, that Duke Arnold had made unto duke
Charles of Burgongne being in dislike with his son, he seized upon the whole
Duchy: but Charles of Egmond, son to Prince Adolph (for he was never Duke)
with the help of the Princes of the house of Bourbon, who stirred up the
French King, returning into his Country he was received and acknowledged for
Duke in many towns, and the Emperors men chased away. Afterward (being of a
turbulent spirit) he had great wars, so as in the end he dyed, about the
year 1536. without any children, and in him failed the distrect line of this
house of Egmond: The Seignieury of Egmond falling to the younger house who was
father to John the first Earl of Egmond, which John had one brother Maximlia^
of Egmond, Earl of Buren, Lord of Iselsteine, whose daughter being issued of a
Lady of the house of Launoy and the only heir, married with William of Nassau
Prince of Orange, so as the possessions of these two houses of Buren and Launoy
are descended to Prince Philip eldest son to the deceased Prince of Orange, as
well by his grandfather, as by his father.

Some do account next among the most ancient and Noble families, that of Vander
Merwue as descended from Merouee King of France, in honor of whom some
believe that in that place the river of Wahall was changed into Meruwe: but
this Original is far fetched: There is yet some remainder of a Tower in the
midst of Meruve, which in old time was the place where they paid toll, the
which is now received in Dordrect, whereas the Baron of Meruve, who is also
Lord of Aspren, has one day in the year all right of superiority and power to
pardon murders and al other offenses. The house of Arckel did for a long time
command insolently in the Earldome of Teysterbandt, betwixt the Wahal and the
Leck, the which the river of Linge does cross, and passing through Gorichom it
falls into the Meruve. In this County there are many other Towns then Gorichom
with the Castle; as Leerdam, Henkelom, Haerstricht, Aspren, Euersteyn,
Hagesteyn, and Gasprien, whereof the three last and Haarstrecht have been burnt
and ruined: It seems that all the neighbor Princes have conspired against
this house for their great pride: For Frederick Bishop of Vtrecht having taken
Gaspren, Hagestein and Euersteyn, he ruined them quite. The Lord of Vianen
wrested Rhynstein from him. Arnold Duke of Geldres took Leerdam and
Steenvoerd. Albert Duke Bauaria Earl of Holland took Haestrecht from him and
ruined it. Afterward the said Duke bought of John the last Lord of so many
towns, and Seigieuries, that of Gorichom, with consent of his son, and under
his hand writing, who notwithstanding soon after disavowed the contract, the
which he brake after his fathers death, and found means to surprise the said
town. The Countess Iaqueline went thither with an army, besieged it, and
took it by assault, whereas the said young Lord received the reward of his
disloyalty, for he was slain there: These Lords of Arckel were so mighty, as
besides the County of Teysterband (in the which are the towns above mentioned)
they had living in Brabant, Lembourg, Bar, Vtrecht, Geldre, Holland and Zeland,
which possessions made them proud, arrogant and hateful unto their neighbors,
over whom they did insult, until they came to the end which we have spoken of.

The house of Batenbourg is without al question one of the most ancient: taking
their name from Prince Batto, from whom Battauia is come whereof there were of
great fame for their virtue some five hundred years since, Albert, Rodolphus
and Thierry Lords of Battenbourg, as of late Thierry, G^sbercht, and William,
who being Lieutenant to the Prince of Orange, leading an army to victual
Harlem, beseeged by the Duke of Alua, was defeated by the Spaniards: This Town
of Battenbourg was afterward burnt, and the Castle held long by the
Spaniardes. The said Ghisbrecht had besides William three other sons, whereof
one was traitorously slain at Collogne, Ghisbrecht and Thierry being taken
prisoners in the War by the Earl of Arembergh, he delivered them to the
Duke of Alua, who caused their heads to be cut off at Brusselles, with
other Gentlemen of their religion: But it was not long before this Earl
received his due punishment, for before a year past he was slain in Battle
in the same Country where he falsified his faith to these two young Barons.

The race of the Lords of Harlem is also very ancient, and noble, who they say
took their beginning from the Kings of Freezeland, which had built the
Castle of Harlem according to their name in the year a thousand six hundred.
The ruins of this Castle are yet to be seen not far from Hemskerke. It
appears by the Annals of Holland that one Isbrandt of the house of Harlem,
did accompany the Lady Sophia Princess of Holland, and Prince Otto her
youngest son in a Pilgrimage which they made through devotion unto Jerusalem.
Some Knights of this house unfortunate in the war against the Frisons, have
lost their lives there. Of this house was Simon of Harlem knight, who converted
a fair house which he had within the walls of the town, into a Cloister of
Carmelites, in the year 1249.

Of which house by changing of the name, they of the house of Assendelfe have
obtained the inheritance and the Arms unto this day. Nicholas Lord of
Assendelfe was wont to say, that his father having built the Castle of
Assenburch, had repented him a hundred times that he had not set it upon the
ruins of the Castle of Harlem, to preserve the honor of antiquity. This
house of Assendelfe takes his name from the Village which is richer, the which
in ancient time (as at appears by old Charters) was called As^maundelfe.

Cralinghen or rather Carolinghen, is said to have had their beginning from the
Emperor Charl maigne: for the French had for a long time caused a part of
Germany and Gaul to be governed by them of Meruwe and Craelingen, which are
two noble families, and very famous in Holland.

We read that the house of Heusden (where there is a town and Castle) is
issued some eight hundred years since from the Earls of Cleues, having
carried the arms as well of Edmond King of England whose daughter Baldwin Lord
of Heusden stole away and married her, who having many children by her, would
have his nephews to carry a wheel of Geules in a field Or. The reason was
that when as the King of Englands servants sent to seek his daughter, came to
the Lord of Heusdins, they found her spinning at the wheel, with some pretty
children about her, which brought her into favor again. Since the year 1290.
the Earl of Cleues resigned all the interest he had to the Lordships of
Heusden and Altena, to Floris the sixth Earl of Holland to hold them of him in
fee; but this resignation did not hold long; for the Duke of Brabant came and
fell upon Heusden, and became master of it, but he held it as little, for
Count William of Bauaria) being a mediator betwixt the duke of Braba^t and the
Earl of Flanders) dealt first for himself in such sort, as he should have
Heusde^ the which has bin annexed to this day to the conty of Holla^d.

Those of Duyvenuoorde are issued from the house of VVassenare. This word
having taking his beginning, for that two Brethren of the house of VVassenare
being a fishing, the elder to cause the boat to advance, said to his younger
Brother Dole Voort, that is to say, advance, which word as a good presage,
remained to the younger house, whereof are come by corruption of the word, the
Siegnior of Duyuenvoort. This name was first given to Philippe the second son
of Aldewyn Vicont of Leyden Lord of Wassenare and of Rhinlandt, who also gave
him liberty to carry his arms, which were three Croisants. Or in a field
Sables. Philippe Curat of Wassenare does report it somewhat otherwise: he
says this Philippe had five sons, whereof the eldest being heir of the name
and arms, was called Thierry, the second Philippe Signior of Duyuen-Voorde:
the third John Lord of Polanen, who carried in a field Argent three Croissants
Sables: the fourth called Sandthorst who remained unknown, and the fifth
Arnold of Groenevelt, who carried Sinople, and the Croisants silver: of which
house the Signior Arnold of Groenevelt is yet living, being Colonel and
Governor of Nymegen for the united Estates. In the year 1353. William of
Duyuenvoorde Signior of Osterhout was so rich as he knew no end of his wealth,
who having no children, he would not make his kinsfolks partakers thereof, but
did build two Monasteries or Cloisters, near unto Gheertruydenberghe, the one
of Chartreux Monks, the other of Saint Clare. And not content with this
prodigality of his wealth, he caused a castle to be built at Osterhout, and made
the town of Viane to be walled in and dicht, as appeeres by his Epitaphe at
Brusselles.

The house of Polanen (as we have even now said) is issued from that of
Duyuenvoorde, but it was of small continuance: for John Lord of Polanen having
left one only son called also John, he dyed without any heirs male,
leaving one daughter, the sole heir of Polanen, of Lecce and of Breda, the
which she brought in marriage to Engelbert Earl of Nassau, who was the first
Governor of the Netherlands for the Lady Mary Duchess of Bourgogne, so as
the said Siegneuries do at this day belong unto the children of William of
Nassau Prince of Orange.

That of Naeldwyck was not of much longer contynuance, whereof we find that
one Baldwin a Knight, Governor of the castle of Windenesse in Westfrisland, a
league from Horn, carried himself valiantly, until that for want of
victuals and all other necessary provision, he was forced to yield up the
place. Those of that house converted their goodly castle of Wateringhe into a
Monastery, which was ruined in these last wars.

I will make but one house of those of Woude and of Warmont, for that the
Siegnor of Woude took more delight at Warmont, which stands in a good air and
in a goodly country, then in the castle of Woude which stands in a Moore, so as
the castle of Woude being neglected it fell to decay, and that of Warmont
flourished.

This house of Warmont was wont to bear in a field Or three Lozenges Geules,
until that Thierry of Wassenare, Vicont of Leyden, giving the possession of
certain Lands in the year of our Lord 1359. to James the foureteenth Lord of
Warmont, he suffered him to carry his own Arms, which is a band Or upon a
field Azure betwixt three Croisants Argent, which that house carries unto this
day. But those of that house being partakers of the fury of Gerard van
Velsen, the murderer of Count Floris the fifth, they were for the safe-gard of
their lives forced to abandon the country. But some five years after the
death of Cont John the son of Floris, John of Henaut being Earl of Holland,
to whom James Lord of Warmont did great service at the defeat of the Bishop
of Vtrecht, all injuries being trodden under foot, this house was reconciled
to their Prince, and so have continued in good Estate unto this day.

Those of Poelgeest are also of a famous race the which in old time had a
castle of the same name in the quarter of Oestgeest, the village whereof was
called Kerkwerve, the which by changing of the name, is now called Alcmada, I
know not by what title. Cont William King of Romans gave the Lordshippe of
Hoochmade to this house: as also an other William Earl of Holland and Henaut,
gave them the village of Coudekerke upon the Rhine, a League from Leyden,
where there was a mighty castle, the which was razed by the factions in the
year 1489. It was before called Horn, whereof the proprietaries were called
Lords of Horn; whose memory lies buried with their persons; Gerard of Poelgest
a Knight did afterward cause this ruined castle to be repaired, (with the
consent of the Emperor Charles the fifth) as fair as ever: who died to soon
for his children.

The castle of Alcmada, from the which they of the house take their name, is
situated in the jurisdiction of Warmond, whereof the ruins are yet to be
seen: for that which is now called Alcmada standing upon the current of Marne,
was wont to be called Poelgeest, as appeeres by the letters of Thierry Vicont
of Leyden, saying that he had given the inheritance thereof to Isbrandt of
Poelgeest. We find that Henry of Poelgeest and Floris of Alcmada brethren by
the mother, lived in the year 1320.

Those of Culembourg are descended from that Noble and famous Lord Ralfe of
Bosicom, of the race of the Earls of Teysterbandt: The town of Culembourg is
reasonable good, standing upon the river of L^ck, two leagues from Viane, and
one from Buren, it is now erected to an Earldome, belonging to the Lord of
Palant.

Abcoude was wont to be a famous and mighty family, the which had great
possessions in the diocese of Vtrecht: the town and castle of Wyckter
Duers^ede, did also belong unto them, the Lord whereof did build the castle of
Abcoude in the Moors, midde-way betwixt Vtrecht and Amsterdam. One Ghisbert of
Abcoude did purchase the Lordship of Gaesbecke, who gave it to his youngest
son Asueres, who married a daughter of the Earl of Lygnes, by whom he had
one son called James, very rich and mighty in possessions, for being Lord
of Gaesbeck, he was Siegnior of Abcoude, Putten and Streuen, all which are
goodly Signeuries, having jurisdictions. It was he which founded the Chartreux
nere unto Vtrecht, who since, after the death of his son and only heir,
being taken prisoner in battle by the Bishop of Vtrecht, was to redeem his
liberty forced to yield him the Lordship, town and castle of Wyck (where since
the bishops have kept their ordynarie residence,) and the castle of Abcoude:
which since has been the abode of one of the Marshalls of the Diocese of
Vtrecht, and of his guard, which is there in garrison. The house of Persin is
also an honorable family from the which are issued many Knights and gentlemen
of Waterlandt and the I Will of Mark, right against Monikendam. It is at this
time wholly extinct. The castle of Persin is yet standing without the wood at
the Hage.

The house of Raphorst is noble and very ancient whereof it appeeres that two
brethren had been slain with their Prince Cont Floris, in the war against
the Frisons.

That of Matenesse has in like manner with many others taken their beginning
from the Lord of Wassenare, Vicont of Leyden.

The house of Vlyet was in old time banished not as guilty of the murder of
Cont Floris, but in hatred of his brother the Siegnior of Woerden, one of the
chief conspirators, so as Gerard van Vlyet going into exile was dispossessed of
his lands and degraded of his arms. But afterward by the intercession of the
Lords of Duyuenvoorde and Li^htenberg (for his valor showed in battle for
the Earl of Holland, where the bishop of Vtrecht was slain) he was received
into grace, and restored to the possession of all his goods.

The honors which the houses of Woerden and Wesson were accustomed to have,
were lost in the persons, of Herman van Woerden for the murder of Cont Floris,
whereof Gerard being the first author and executioner, was cruelly executed,
being rolled up and down in a pipe full of nails in the town of Leyden, where
he died miserably; Herman his father in law, being brother to the Lord of
Amstel, escaped, and died poor in exile.

The house of Amstel was also blemished with this murder, namely Ghysbrecht of
Amstel, Lord of Amsterdam, Amsterweel and Iselsteyn, who died in exile, poor
and miserable, being dispossessed of half his goods, and the rest remaining to
his wife and son Arnold, who were besieged a whole year in the town of
Amsterdam, and were in the end forced to yield it, upon condition that for all
their goods they should content themselves with the town and castle of
Iselsteyn, which since came unto the house of Egmond, whereof the Emperor
Maximilian the first created Frederic of Egmond first Earl of Iselsteyn and of
Leerdam. John of Henaut Earl of Holla^d had given the signeuries of Amstell
and Woerden to his brother Guy then Provost and afterward bishop of Vtrecht,
during his life, the which he caused to be built, but after his death they
were anexed again to the revenues of the Earl of Holland, which then was Cont
William surnamed the good.

The signiors of Schagen are descended from a bastard of Duke Albert of Bauaria
Earl of Holland and Henaut, who gave this goodly Siegneury with that of
Burchorne to William the first Lord of Schagen, and from him successively to
him that is now under the Estates of Holland. So the Signiory of Hoocht-wood,
came from Duke William of Bauariae, called the mad Earl (for that after two
battles which he had against the Empress Marguerite his mother, whereof he
lost one with eight thousand men nere ^o Vlaerdingen, and the other he won,
he was distracted of his wits fifteen years, and as a mad man was kept
close unto his death) to whom Duke Albert his brother succeeded. This William
gave unto his base Son the possession of Hocht-Woude and Aertswoude, which
are two goodly villages. But this line failing, these two places have past
from one to an other; Hochtwoude belonging at this day to Cornellis Mirop
Receiver general of Holland and Westfrisland, signior of Caelslagen, Sweiten
etc.

The house of Haemstede did begin at Wit who was the first Lord, and bastard
to Cont Floris. That of Horst is of great antiquity, the which seems to have
had many branches, as that of Bronckhorst in Gelders; that of Lochorst in the
country of Vtrecht, and that of Raphorst, whereof the old castle is yet
standing betwixt the Hage and Leyden: then Bockhorst twice or thrice ruined,
being a league from Nortwyck, but not in that estate it has been.

The family of Dune is also very ancient, the only daughter and heir whereof,
married some thirty years since to Thierry the second son of the Lord of
Brederode, who left the title thereof to his children, yet carrying the arms
of Brederode and not their mothers: It continues still in that race, who do
also enjoy the Siegniorie of Sprangen which came by marriage from them of
Wyelsteyn.

The house of Zyle have taken their name from a castle standing upon the bank
of the current Zyle, which falls into a Lake thereby, so as there is yet in the
town of Leyden the Court of Zyle, the port and bridge of Zyle: Gerard van Zyle
a Knight, Siegnior of Purmerende and of Purmerla^dt, has made this house very
famous by his virtues.

That of Hattinghen is one of the most ancient races in Holland, whereof
histories make mention above seven hundred years past. Among others they make
mention of one Hasting a Duke or Captain General of the Normans who in the
year eight hundred sixty eight should have entered into the mouth of the River
of Loire, and ouer-run a part of Britain, Aniou, Turene, and Poittou, who
having defeated Robert and Ranulphe, French Captains that pursued him, and were
slain in battle, he brought his army (being laden with spoils) bravely back
unto his ships.

There have been in Holland many Abbaies, and Monasteries, both of men and
women, founded by the Nobility of the country, besides Couents of begging
Friars or Bribers, which we will omit; and treat succinctly of those which
were appointed for Noble persons. First Thierry of Acquitane, the first Earl
of Holland founded one all of wood for women: the which his son caused to be
built of stone for Monks, and be made an Abbaie near unto the Village of
Egmond (whereof the Abbot did afterward wear a Miter) inricht with great
revenues, which made both the Abbot and his Monks too idle. And seeing we are
discoursing of this Abbaie, I must by the way deliver a trick which this Abbot
played in the year 1565. with the Earl of Egmond: The Prince of Orange, the
Earl of Horn and the Baron of Brederode went with the Earl of Egmont to dine
in this Abbaie, where they were very honorably entertained, when as they
should wash, my Lord Abbot (who was but a Monk) took these three Noble men
by the hands to wash: The Earl of Egmond coming to present himself, the
Abbot said unto him; No, for you are my Vassal, it becomes you not to wash
with your better, yea he offered to put the towell upon his shoulder, to give
it unto the other Noblemen, when they had washed, whereat the Earl of Egmond
was much discontented, and went away cursing the Monk. One of the Abbots
servants, who was then present, reported it unto me for a very truth.
Without doubt it was a great affront unto this Earl, who was proud and high
minded, valuing himself more then the Prince of Orange, who was issued from
the race of the Emperors, by the Emperor Adolph of Nassau.

There were four Abbaies for women, into the which not any one might be
received, that was not Nobly borne, or at the least that had not their Arms
quartered. These were Rhinsburg; Conninxsfieldt, Leuenhorst and Losdunen: this
last in the end had little respect of Nobility, receiving as well the children
of Merchants as of Gentlemen, for that it was none of the richest: Rhinsburg
took the name of a Castle which was situated upon the Rhyne near unto the
Gulf: It was pleasantly seated, and a very commodious building. There is this
thing memorable, that the Lady Elburg the Abbess, caused a quarter of a
lodging to be built for strangers that should come to see it. Upon the Front
whereof there were two Latin verses, made by Doctor Adrianus Iunius, showing
the date of the time.

NoBILItas prob ItasqVe IsthVC sIbI IVre LegVnto
HospItIV M ElbVrgIs dVLCES qVod feCIt ad VsVs.
Nobility and Worth MaDe ChoICe to rest,
In ELburg as a place for pLeasure best.
THis Abbay was founded by the Lady Petronel Sister to the Emperor Lothaire;
wife to Floris the second Earl of Holland, the which was quite ruined by the
soldiars in the first troubles.

Leuenhorst was but a League from Rhynsbourg, and fifteen hundred paces from
Noortwick, in a very pleasant seat: whereof Arnold of Sassenheim was founder,
who spent largely as well in the foundation of this Cloister as in an other
religious house in Harlem, which was about the year 1262.

Coninx-Feldt, signifies a royal field, founded by the Lady Richlan^t, Sister
to William King of Romans, in the suburbs of Delph. But in the beginning of
these wars, for that it was too near the Town, fearing some surprise, it
was purposely set on fire, which did consume it unto the foundation. Losdunen
is two miles from the Hage, whereas there are yet to be seen the two Basins
in the which the three hundred sixty four children of the Lady Marguerits
Contesse of Henesberg were baptized, with her Tomb and Epitaph. This Abbaie
has felt the fruits of war with the rest, whreof we have made mention in
the description of the Hage.

Behold what we could say briefly of these Abbaies, omitting so many other
Cloisters, Monasteries and relligious houses, who have all tried the like
fortune.: And so we will make an end of the description of Holland (in the
which is also comprehended West-Freezeland, which they call Nort-holland) to
come unto Zealand. But first I may not forget that remarkable Antiquity,
which is near unto Catwicke the Arcenall of the Romans, which some say had
been built by the Emperor Caligula, whereas he prepared to pass into great
Britain with his army. But having advanced nothing but only put forth to
sea, he returned suddenly, and went to land, commanding all his Soldiers by
thesound of Trumpets and Drums, to fill all their head-peeces with
cockleshelles which they gathered upon the sands, and to carry them unto the
Capitol, in sign of tryumphe, and as a trophee that he had beaten the Sea.
Which Arcenall (whether that he built it or not) was afterward called the
British fort or Castle, from whence there was a short cut into England: And
this it was.

A Description of the British Fort called T'huis te Britten.
THis fort in the beginning did serve as a Beacon to set a Fyar in the night
for the direction of Mariners that should sail upon the coast, as we see at
this day the Tower D'ordre or old man near unto Bologne in Picardie, very old
also, the which the Emperor Charlemaigne caused to be repaired, and so did
the Emperor L. Septimius Seuerus this Arcenal or Britten fort, whreof the
memory remains yet graven in a stone, brought to the house of the Lord of
Wassenare at the Hage upon whose Territory before the Inondation this fort was
built, being now swallowed a good league into the sea, which is sometimes
seen, when as the wind drives back the sea at their lowest ebbs, as it happened
in the year, 1520. when as this stone was found with this Inscription. Imp.
Caes. L. Septimius Seuerus Aug. Et M* Aurelius. Antoninus Caes. Coh. XV. Vol.
Armamentarium Vetustate collapsum, restituerunt sub. Val. Pudente, Lec. Au. Pr.
curante. Caecil. Batone Prae. This Arcenall was built of a square form, every
corner of equal distance, that is, four hundred feet; each corner had two
Towers joining together and in the midst from one corner to another a Tower
all flanked with great broad stone, to resist the flowing of the Rhyne, upon
whose bank it was seated: some forty of these stones were dug up in the
year 1552. the which were four foot long and three broad. There was also
pieces of brick found a foot square, on the which were these letters X. G. I.
which seems to signify Ex Germania inferiori: Moreover an other stone broken
at both the ends, in which there did yet remain these imperfect words, ever.
Pius. An. max. Trib. Pot. XIII. ntonin. Pius. ec. Milit. Leg. I. me. Euidiorum.
There wore also Pieces of silver with this inscription, L. Septimius Seuerus.
Pertinax. Aug. Imp. Besides there was an other stone all eaten with the waves
of the sea, and winds, representing victory with wings, and on the left hand
an Eagle, with these letters, Imp. Caes. Ant. ne. Aug. Coh. M. To. Ru. Pe.
There were other stones, one with a ship, such as the Saxons used in those
times, an other with a man's face, having a beard and long hair: an other
having the figure of Hercules with his mace. Besides an other long stone broken
at one end, whereas these words were comprehended. Brittanic. Germanic. Pius.
Faelix. Augustus. Pont. Max. Trib. Pot. XVIII. IIII. P. P. Imp. III. Aram. a
Diuo. Claudio. et. postea a diuo Seuero Patre suo restitutam: In the same year
1520. there was a Key found which they did suppose was that of the Arcenall.
There were also found many figures, vessels, pottes, lamps and other square
stones, where there was graven X. Ger. Inf. There have been also found pieces
of gold, silver and Copper of Julius Caesar and others. In the year one
thousand five hundred sixty two, the foundations of this Arcenall were
descouered above twenty days together, from whence the people there-about
drew many thousands of stones. It has been descouered again of late years,
but the sand of the sea has buried much.

Zeeland, with the Islands, Towns and Bourroughes.
NO man can deny, but the Danes and Normans have ouerrunne these Islands, as
well as Holland and other farther Regions; who (as it is the custom of
conquerers to impose new names to places which they have conquered, especially
the names of countries and towns from whence they are come) some think have
given this name of Zeelandt of one of their chief Islands so called; in the
which is the royal town of Coppenhagen. But admit it were not so: and let us
draw their beginning from the signification of the word it self. Zee
signifying the sea, and Landt country, which is, a country of the sea, as in
truth it is.

There is no need then to make any further search for the Etimologie, but we
will content our selves with it. The county of Zeelande which has now more
power and authority then it ever had, is for the most part comprehended in
seven principal Islands, the which are Walchren where Middlebourg stands;
Schoven and there is Ziricxee: Zuytbeuelandt where Ter Goes is; Tertolen, where
there is the town of Tolen; Noortbeuelandt recovered from the Sea within these
ten years: Duyuelandt and Wolfersdick: there are other small ones, whereof we
make no mention.

Those of Walchren and Schouen lie most open to the sea on the West part, on
which side they be naturally defended with these sandy hills which they call
Downs; and where there are not any, they have made good and high banks,
strengthened with thick turffes and wads of straw, which bind them firmly
together, the which they call dikes: True it is that the ordinary charge to
repair and entertain them, is very great, and the time and toil they employ
greater. But they observe a good order, with such proportion, as such as have
the propriety of the land adjoining, bear the charge for the entertaining of
these dikes, every one according to his portion. All the country of Zealand is
fat and fertile, for all kind of Tillage, but especially for fair white
wheat, and of a grain to die red, which is a rich commodity, and distributed
through all Europe: There is also a certain kind of turffe for fyring, which
they call Dary, the which they are forbidden to cut near unto the dikes, for
that it is their foundation and defense.

There are none but the poorer sort that use it, for that it yields a stinking
smoke. There is generally as pleasant and fat pastures for cattle, as in
Holland: But the better to know the whole country, we must begin to describe
the Islands, and the particular towns of every of them.

Walachrie.
IS in the country language called Walchren, the most famous and most rich of
all the Islands of Zeland, not for the greatness, for it has not ten leagues
circuit, but for the strength and safety of the Seat and the quallitie of the
soil, the infinite number of people that inhabit it, their great comerce and
the great riches, which the Sea bringes unto them by their nauigations: This
Island has four walled towns, Middelbourg which is the Metropolitaine of all
Zealand, where the Court remains, Flissing, La Vere, Teruere, or Camp Vere,
which are all one, and Arnemuyden: Doubourg is the most ancient town of
Zealand, but now it is but a Bourg being covered with the sands of the sea
where it is situated, yet it retains still the municipall privilege of a
town, we will then begin with Middelbourg.

Middelbourg.
SOme attribute the beginning of this town to one Metellus a Roman Captain,
who first built the Bourg, that is to say the Castle, the which is in the
midst of the town, whereas now the prisons are. Of which Mettellus, by this
Castle, it has bin called Metelli Burgam; and so Middelbourg in Ducth. But let
us leave this definition, and say that it has taken his name of these two
words; Middel which signifies the midst, and Bourg a Castle, as much to say
as a Ca^^le in the midst, as being situated (before the Sea had gotten so
much on that side) in the very center of the Island. It stands in 50. degrees of
Latitude: It is but a quarter of a league from Arnemuyden, unto which it was
wont to have a narrow and crooked haven, which went unto their salt pits: But
within these fifty years they of Middelbourg have made a new straight haven
from their port of Dam unto the Sea, the which is good and deep, able at a
full sea to carry ships of 4. or 500. tons. Within these twelve years they
have augmented their Town more then half round about, wherein they have done
prejudice without any recompense to them that had gardens and possessions in
the Suburbs: yet all this great increase serves for no other use but for houses
of pleasure and gardens for Merchants, although there were place to have built
above 3000. good houses, for the commodity whereof they might make many
channels to pass from the one to the other: but God knows when all this void
place shall be filled with buildings.

The rampars of these new works are but of earth, with mighty bulwarks
flanking one another, where there is always something to repair. At the same
time when as these works were made the Magistrate caused the Steeple of the
Abbaie Church to be new built up, whereas they now keep the Court of Zealand,
they have drawn a ^ell up into this steeple of eighteen thousand weight to
strike the hours on, and some 24. small ones, which serve for the chyme; but
this steeple is fallen crooked, else it were one of the goodlyest pieces in the
whole country.

The Court which was wont to be an Abbaie is fair and spacious, and is the
lodging of Princes when they come into Zealand. There the Counselors of Estate
for the County are established, as also for the Admiralty, the Chamber of
account and the Treasor. The Admiral and in a manner all the Counselors are
well lodged there. This house was founded by Goudebault the three and twentieth
Bishop of Vtrecht, and afterward amplyfied, and in a manner built a new by
Cont Wiliam King of the Romans, who lies there interred with Queen Elizabeth
his wife: the foundation was made in the year one thousand two hundred fifty
six. The town is good of it self, fair and neat and of great traffic,
which the Galleys of Spain which came to Scluse under the command of Dom
Frederic Spinola restrained for a time: But since they have vndertake^ long
voiages to the East and West Indies as well as the Hollanders, from whence they
draw great commodities, and withal since the taking of the Scluse, the said
galleis being fallen into the Estates handsthey are no more anoied, neither have
they any more fear on that side: this town alone has the right of the staple
for all wines that come from France, Spain, Portugal, Candy, the Canaries, and
other places by sea: not many years since they purchased the Town of
Arnemuyden (being then but a Bourg) in regard of their roades and the
Salt Pits, the which they had good cheap from the Proprietary. But this sale
was afterward changed, as we will show in the description of the town of
Arnemuyden. In this town the ordinary Sovereign Judge does commonly remain,
they call him the Receiver of Beuerslersheldt, to whom all commandments come
from the higher powers for the execution of justice by the sword in his
precinct. Many learned and excel ent men were borne in this town. Among others
Paul surnamed of Middelbourg a famous Mathematician, who for his great
knowledge was called to Rome and presently made a Bishop. Then Nicholas
Euerardi a great Lawyer, and well seen in matters of State, President of the
Prouincial Council of Holland, and afterward of the Parliament or great
Council of Macklin, where he died in the year 1532. leaving many children,
all men of quality, and worthy of such a Father. The first was Peter Nicholai,
Doctor of Divinity and Civil Law, Prelat of the Abbay of Middelbourg. The
second was Euerardi Nicholai, a Licentiat in the laws, who was President of
the Council in Friesland, and afterterwardes (as the father) of the great
Council at Macklin, where he died in the year 1560. The third was Nicholas
Nicolai, Licentiat in the laws, and very learned in all faculties, a good Poet,
and Historiographer, which advanced him ^o be Councellor to the King of Spain,
and Register of the order of the golden fleece. The fourth was Adrian Nicolai,
who was Chancellor of Geldres. The fifth was John Nicolai, (surnamed the second)
who was an excellent Poet, giving great hope of him, but death prevented him in
his course.

Veere or Camp-veere.
VEere or Camp-veere is a good Sea-towne, one of the four of the Island of
Walchren, it retains this name of the passage it was wont to have unto the
Village of Camp in the Island of Northbeuelandt right against it: Which Village
within these ten years with the whole Island has been recovered from the
Inondation which happened in the year one thousand five hundred twenty four.
This town was in the year one thousand three hundred sixty eight walled in by
the Lord of Borsell: Being since made greater, it was endowed with goodly
priu^lidges, so as in the time of Maximillian of Bourgongne their Lord, it was
made a Marquisate. And for the commodity of the feat, the goodness of the
haven and of the road; it was frequented by many nations. They were the first
that sent unto the Canaries, from whence they brought in the year 1508. a
ship laden with sugar.

They have trade into France, where they have privilege of Franche Grue, that
is to say, free lading and vnlading: In like manner into the Eastcountries they
had liberty to traffic, before that the towns of Antwerp and Amsterdam had
any trade thither: As also into Scotland; the Scotishmen having many years
since held their staple there, for diverse sorts of Merchandise, as they do at
this day for their cloth and frizes, and for their Salt-fish. This town has
also the fishing for herring whereof there is a staple, and the mark is well
known in diverse Kingdoms, where the Bourgers traffic most, as to Spain,
France and other countries, and of late years they have trade to the East and
West Indies. This town was in the old time honored with the Residence of the
Admiral General and the Admiraltie of the Netherlands. To which end the King
of Spain, as Prince of the said countries, caused a goodly Arcenall or Magasin
for munition to be built in the year 1568. wherein they laid all their
provision and furniture belonging to the sea. The Inhabitants of this town are
grown civil and courteous by the daily frequentation of their Lords and their
Attendants, keeping their Court within an arrow shot of the Town at the
goodly castle of Sanderburg, which is quite ruined in these last troubles, as
being too near a neighbor unto the town. This Marquisat was sold by decree
for the debts of the said Marquis Mazimillian, which Philip King of Spain
caused to be bought in his name: But when the creditors were not paid, it was
sold again and bought by the Prince of Orange: who to the great contentment of
the Burgers and all the subjects, received the possession in the year one
thousand five hundred eighty one, giving them goodly privileges, with high and
base Justice in nine. Villages depending thereon: whereof Oest capel is one. By
the death of which Prince, and by his Testament the most worthy Prince Maurice
of Nassau Governor, Captain and Admiral general of the united Provinces his
son, was left heir of the said Marquisat, and put in posssion in the year one
thousand five hundred eighty eight, and in the year after of that of
Flissinghe. Besides other particularities, one thing is specially to be noted,
that the Magistrate of this town never showed any rigor against them of the
reformed religion, yea has always favored and supported them as much as he
might, so as in the beginning of the wars and troubles since, the year one
thousand five hundred seauenty two, they have with all their means both of
bodies and goods, with them of Flissinghe more then any other of their
neighbors, repulst the tyranny of the Inquisition of Spain in diverse
exploits and enterprises of war both by Land and Sea: And especially with
their brave Captains at Sea, in the beginning of the year 1578. they did
before Bergen up Zoom, aid, to defeat that mighty Spanish Fleet in view of
the great Commander of Castille, which went to victual Middelbourg, being
straightly beseeged by the Prince of Orange, so as this victualling failing
them, they were forced to yield unto the Prince. Afterward their Captains
did in the like manner help to confound that fearful and invincible sea-armie
(as they did write it) which the King of Spain sent in the year one thousand
five hundred eighty eight, to invade England.

Flisinghee.
OR Vlissinghen is the third town of the Island of Walchren, right against
Flanders, and a league from Middelbourg. It is also a Marquisate, belonging to
Prince Maurice of Nassau, as La Vere, not that they are two Marquisats, but one
only, every one apart carrying diverse arms. Flissinghe was in old time but a
country village, and did serve only for a passage into Flanders. But within
these hundred years, Adolph of Bourgongne, Lord of La Vere and Flissinghe,
caused it to be walled in, and then it began to take the form of a good town.
So as in the year one thousand five hundred seauenty one, the Duke of Alua
pretending to build a Castle on the ditch side toward Ramekins, which should
also command the haven: After that the Prince of Orange Governor of Holland and
Zealand, had by the Earl of March Lord of Lumay his Lieutenant surprised the
Island and town of Bryel, when as the Seignior of Wakenes, the Vice admiral
pretended to put a Spanish garrison into the town, being favored by the
Magistrate, the people discovering it, fell to arms, forced the Arcenall, and
chased away the Burguemaisters and Aldermen, and being master of the Ordinance
and of the town gates, they shot at five or six ships full of Spaniards,
which thought to enter into the Town, who by reason of the contrary tide, sent
a man swimming to land, to entreat them that they would not sink them,
promising them to retire upon the first ^^oud, as they did, going toward
Berghen up Zoom, whereas they could not be entertained. This town being thus
freed from the Spanish yoke, it was in a short time fortified, and in a short
time with the help of the Prince of Orange (who presently sent them a garrison
of Wallons) they made sharp wars with them of La Vere against Middelbourg and
Arnemuyden, which were held by the Spaniards: going to Sea with their ships of
war, they brought in good prizes, and many good prisoners, among others the
Duke of Aluas Cousin, who notwithstanding any ransom that he offered, could not
redeem himself from the gallows, so hateful the Spaniards were unto the
Flessingers in the first wars, as all that they took, they either cast them
ouer-boord or hung them at land, wherein the women and children took great
delight. They had an Admiral called Captain Worst, who did continually annoy
them of Antwerp and Scluse, and did set upon all ships going up to Antwerp:
one day he incountred a Spanish Fleet^, in the which was the Duke of Medina
Celi, who came to govern the Netherlands in the Duke of Aluas place. The
combat was very furious near unto S^luse, but in the end the Duke was forced
to leap into a boat and to save himself in Sluse. It is infinite to tell what
the captains both by sea and land, that were at time in Flissinghe, did
against the Spaniards. They besieged the strong castle of Ramekin, (called
Zeebourg*) both by sea and land, standing upon the Dyke betwixt Flissinghe and
the head of Middelbourg, the which they took in less then ten days. At the
battle of Berghen and in all other incounters the Flissinghers were always
the foremost. Snce they have much enlarged their town, especially on that side
where as the Duke of Alua had begun to build the castle, where there are three
goodly Bulwarks, two toward the land, and one to the sea, which defends the
haven on that side, flanking it at the port. In this enlargement they have
drawn in a new haven and a Sluse, capable for many great ships, where they
have also built a new temple for the English nation: within these twelve years
they have built a fair towne-house upon the market place, not in greatness,
but in building much like to that of Antwerp* To conclude the town, as well in
fortifications, as in buildings is now so changed, as he that has not seen
it these thirty years, would not now know it. It is second to Middelbourg in
merchandise, but it exceedes it in herrings, where they are barreled up, and
marked, and from thence are transported throughout all Christendom. This
important town (to speak tr^elie) nay rightly be termed the Key of the
Netherlands for the sea: for at all times it cuts off the navigations from
Antwerp so as nothing can come unto them by sea: wherefore the Duke of Alua
should have been more careful to keep it in time, and not to have esteemed
it so little, as he did when the news of their revolt came unto him:
answering only. Pitcilingo (so he called it) es nada. And in truth the Emperor
Charles the fifth, knowing better the importance of that place then the Duke of
Alua, going last out of the Netherlands to return into Spain where he died,
upon his departure, he did secretly and seriously recommend this town unto
the King his son. But as they say. He that contemnes the fathers admonitions,
will be deceived, as it proved in this town.

ARNEMVYDEN.
OLd Arnemuyden (which was wont to be situated in an other place, not far from
that where it now stands) was a goodly village with a good castle, well peopled
with rich Bourgers and Merchants, having a good commodious haven, whereas many
great ships might lie safely, where at that time there was greater traffic
then at Middelbourg it self. This old Arnemuyden is by Inundations quite eaten
up by the sea, so as there are no reliks to be seen, neither can they
conjecture that it stood in any other place, but betwixt the haven of
Middelbourg and new Arnemuyden, upon the plain which is betwixt S. Ioes Lands,
and the right chanel of Arnemuyden, as it is at this day.

The greatest breach which happened to old Arnemuyden, was in the year 1438 in
the time of Gyles of Arnemuyden the Lord of that place, who caused all the
Bourgers and the Inhabitants to go with their families unto the Dyke out of the
danger of the sea, whereas now the town of Arnemuyden stands. The which as well
for the commodity of Roads and Deeps, as for the situation upon the sea, has
and does retain unto this day, the trade of many great ships which arrive
there daily laiden with diverse sorts of merchandise, and from thence is
transported into the other Provinces of the Netherlands, except salt coming
from Spain, France and other places, the which remains there to be refined:
for the which there are many salt-pannes' built along and upon the top of the
Dyke, where it is boiled and made white, and then they lade it and transport it
to other places. And although that new Arnemuyden was not walled in until the
year 1572. yet has it been held of all foreign nations for a town of good
esteem, by reason of the navigations and traffic; for which respect the
Earls of Holland and Zeeland, did in old time establish their towles and
customs due unto the county of Zeeland. This town has always enjoyed the
like privileges with the town of Middlebourg, as Bourgeses and subjects
thereof, until the year 1572. that they followed the Prince of Oranges
party: Soon after the Spaniards surprised it, spoiled it, slew some and the
rest fled wandering up and down, until that in the year 1574. the town of
Middelbourg being forced to yield unto the Prince of Orange, Arnemuyden was
also comprehended in the Accord, so as the I Will of Walchren being then freed,
every man returned to his house, so as by little and little the town was
fortefied as you see it at this day. For the reedefying whereof the Prince gave
it goodly privileges and freedoms, being exempt from the subjection of
Vasselage, being subject to Middelbourg by virtue of their contract: and
causing it to be walled and ditcht, he gave them the rights and prerogatives
that belong to a good town, governed by their own Magistrates, Baylife,
Bourguemasters, Aldermen and other Officers, which they of Middelbourg were
accustomed to chose: but now they dispose of all matters concerning Justice and
government themselves. The town of Arnemuyden had for many years a particular
Lord, carrying the title of Siegnior of Arnemuyden; the last was called Gyles
of Arnemuyden, who in the year 1418. was made Knight, and married the daughter
of Wolphart van Borsselle, by whom he had two daughters, the one Mary, the
other Marguerite of Arnemuyden: Mary married with Nich^las of Borssele Siegnior
of Brigdame, Coudekerke, Soeteland and Saint Laurence; from whom is issued the
house of La Vere. Marguerite married William of Vriese. Siegnior of Oosteinde,
from whence is descended the house of Trasigny. And as the said Giles was the
last Lord which carried that name, his house fell to the distaffe. Those of
this town for the love of him carry his arms in their seals and armories,
which they use to bear, and they are at this day two Eagles Or in a field
Geules, armed and encompassed with Azure, and in the midst a sand-hill rising
out of the waves of the sea.

DOMBOVRG.
ALthough this be but an open place, which is daily more and more covered with
sand, notwithstanding all remedies, by reason that the wind drives the sand of
the sea and downs, which couers their gardins and pastures, yet being
esteemed the most ancient town of the Isle of Walchren, whereof there are yet
to be seen some old ruins of walls, it retains still the ancient
privileges and municipall rights, as the best town of the said Island.

WEST CAPPELLE.
THis place, Bourg or village, (howsoever you will call it) does enjoy the like
privileges of other towns: for that the ancient West Cappelle which stood in
the same place, was wont to be a good town, and had the best port in all the
Island of Walchren, which about 150. years since was carried away by the
inundations of the sea, so as there remains nothing but what we see of the
old buildings, having notwithstanding bin enlarged with new houses within these
thirty years, the which makes it more commendable.

SOETELAND.
IS yet at this day a good place, so termed as a sweet country, and so it is
the sweetest soil and the best seat in all the Island, which makes the
Merchants of Middelbourg and Flissinghe to walk thither, whereas after they
have recreated themselves, they return at night to their houses.

There are also in this Island many goodly villages, as Oost and West Suybourg
a quarter of a league one from the other, betwixt Flissinghe and Middelbourg:
At West Suybourg there is a good castle the which with the village, does now
belong unto the heirs of Phillippe de Marnix, Siegnior of Saint Aldegonde, the
light of learned men of our age, in which castle the Emperor Charles the fifth
remained, until the wind prooned fair to imbarke, to make his last return
into Spain, but we may not forget the important castle of

RAMMEKEN.
OTherwise called Zeebourg, which about 60. years since, the Lady Mary Queen
of Hungary, sister to the Emperor Charles the 5. gouernesse of the Netherla^ds,
caused to be built upon the Dyke betwixt Middelbourg, and Flissing, serving as
a bulwark for all ships that are forced for want of a good wind, to come and
anchor in the Road. This castle is always well manned with a good garrison,
and with all things necessary for a place of so great importance, being as
necessary to be entertained and well kept, as any other in all the united
Provinces. By reason whereof, the Queen of England desired to have it with the
towns of Flissinghe and Bryele for caution of the money which she did lend
unto the united Estates some twenty years since.

SCHOWEN.
IN Latin called Schaldia, a Flvuio, Schaldi, of the river of Escault, in old
time a great Island, but the tempests and breaches of the sea have wonderfully
dyminished it. It has yet at this day above eight leagues in circuit: and it
was in those days so nere unto the Island of North-beuelandt, as the
Inhabitants did talk together from one bank unto the other; whereas since
there has been a great distance. But within these twelve years that the said
Island of North-beuelandt has been recovered, they are nee^er. This Island is
as fertile and plentiful of all things, as any other in Zeeland, and therefore
it holds the second rank at the Estates of the said Province, in the which the
sovereign Judges of the East of Zeeland do commonly reside, whom they call the
Receiver of Be^osterghelt* who has all power of cryminall causes in that
quarter; the chief town whereof is.

ZIRICZEE.
THis town is held for the first and most ancient of the county of Zeeland,
and as some say, it is found in the Annals of the Netherlands that it was
built in the year of our Lord 849. by one called Zyringus, whose name it
carries: in ancient time very famous for the trade of Merchandise, whereunto it
was very commodious by reason of their goodly port, which the merchants did
usually frequent; But the sands having in tract of time stopped up the haven, it
is now less frequented: within these twelve or fourteen years the townsmen
have made a new haven which goes directly unto the sea, the which is fair,
large and commodious, notwithstanding since that Middelbourg grew so famous, it
cannot recover the accustomed traffic touching navigations, yet is it good,
fair and strong, retayning their ancient trade for salt and grain to die
withal, with the fishing for herring. In this town the Receiver of
Beoosterschelt does commonly remain, who is (as I have said) chief Justice
for the county of Zeeland, to whom (as to him of the Beversterschelt at
Middelbourg,) all commissions are directed, coming from the superiors, to put
them in execution every one in his jurisdiction. In this town was borne that
famous Amandus Ziricxeus, a relligious man of the order of Saint Francis, who
has written many goodly Poems; as may be seen in the Library of Cornelius
Gesnerus. From thence also came Leuinus Lemnius Doctor of Physic, and a man of
great knowledge, as his works do witness: whose son called William of the
same profession was called to be Physician to the King of Sueden. Pe^rus
Pe^kius was also borne in this town, a man of rare learning, who has written
many printed books.

BROWERSHAVEN.
IN this Island of Schoue^ two small leagues from Zi^icxee, is that great Bourg
of Browershauen more inhabited by fishermen then any other: and yet there was
borne one Petrus, carrying the surname of his town, a learned man, who writ
many books in divinity. This town did sometimes belong to Maximilian of
Bourgogne, Lord of Beueren Admiral of the sea: thus having fallen unto him
with many other goodly Siegneuries by the Lady Anne his Grandmother issued
from the Noble house of Borssele: which family has failed long since for want
of lawful heirs; which Maximiliam died also without children in the year
1558. whose succession fell to the children of the Earl of Bossu, who had
married one of the Sisters of the Lord of Beueren, and to the children of the
Siegnior of Cruminghen, who had married the other Sister, from whom is issued
the Siegnior of Cruminghen, who keeps commonly at the Hage in Holland.

In this Island of Shouven, there are many castles and villages, belonging to
certain Gentlemen and other private persons, amongst the which is the village
of Bomene seated at one end of it, very famous for the great loss of
Spaniards which the great Commander of Castille had entering into the said
Island, the which in the end he took by force, and slew all that were in the
fort, except one man who escaped dangerously, but let us pass to the other
Islands.

ZVYT-BEVELAND.
THis Island is so called for that before it was rampared with Dykes, it
trembled (for Beuen signifies to tremble, and Beuelandt a trembling country) as
if it had no firm seat and foundation. This Island is the greatest of all
those of Zeeland, and at one time it had twenty leagues circuit: but by reason
of the tempests and inundations of the sea, and the contynuall flowing and
ebbing of the river of Escault, which runs with a violent stream betwixt
Romerswael and Berghen up Zoom, it is half consumed. In this Island of
Zuyt^euelandt there was in old time three towns of Mark, the chief whereof
was Romerswal, then Borssele, which stood toward the South: but in the year
of our Lord 1432. the Dykes were broken by the high tides and great tempests
and it drowned, with the country depending thereon, which they called the
Siegneury of Borssel.

ROMERSWAL.
HEld in that time the first rank among the towns of the said Island, looking
toward Berghen up Zoom upon the East, from the which it is not above a league
distant, but the same tempests and inundations (wherewith Borssele was swalloed
up) divided this town from Zuytbeuelandt, leaving it a part in a small Island,
being forced to defend it self continually with great toil, cost and
amazement, for fear of the sea and the river of Escaut, against the which they
must fight continually, as a citizen of that town, a man of great knowledge
does wittely show by these verses following, which he planted at his door in
the year of our Lord 1549* when as Prince Phillippe, (afterward the second of
that name, King of Spain) came thither to receive the oaths of the county of
Zeeland, and to take possession thereof as follows.

Vidimus assueto priuatum lumine Solemn,
pallida turbato vidimus astra die:
Vidimus vndantes horrendos aequoris aestus,
nos miseros Belgas, cum obruit Oceanus.
Vidimus ast postquam te gloria nostra Philipe,
Caesareaproles, semi-deumque decus:
Cuncta refutamus transacti tristia saecli,
quod praesens nostrum testificatur opus.
Sit licet exiguum, sit pro ratione voluntas,
nil facit ad vastum parua catena fretum.
We have beheld fair Sol deprived of sight
pale stars at noone, and nooneday like the night:
We have beheld the furious waves make way,
through all the strengths of wretched Belgia.
But when we but beheld that face of thine,
great Phillip, glorious bud of Caesar's line:
It cleared our hearts from woes, our eyes from showers:
witness this present monument of ours.
Which be it small, our loves must be our pleas:
small chains cannot ore-reach the broadest seas.
GOES.
WHich is otherwise called Tergoes, is the only places which is left standing
on the Northside, upon an arm of the Escault, called Schenge. It is now a good
town, being since these last troubles much enlarged and fortefied with large
rampars, and goodly bulwarks, there is reasonable good-trade, especially of
grain for diars, wherewith the country abounds. There grows also the best
wheat of all Zeeland, more then they need for their own uses, transporting the
surplusage into the other Islands. Their haven is long and straight, at the
mouth whereof there are two forts, one of either side, so as nothing can pass
without descouery. Not far from this town is the village of Cloetinghen,
belonging to the son of the deceased Floris of (...) heir apparent to all
that house: a little farther off is the village of Barlandt, where that learned
man Adrianus Barlandus, who has carefully written the chronicles of Brabant,
and a sommarie of the Earls of Holland. Then Cruyningen, Zeaetskerke,
Hynckesandt, Capelle, Cattendyke which are all villages, and many others. In
this Island of Zuytbeuelandt there are yet some pleasant groves and busshes fit
for hunting for there are many hares found in the Island, and great store of
wild foul.

TOLEN.
IS one of the East Islands of Zeelande, belonging to the country, it is now
wholly environed with good trenches and some forts betwixt, fearing the
irruptions of the Spaniards, who have twice or thrice attempted to get footing,
for there is but one channel to pass upon Brabant side: It is very near the
Dyke of Saint Martin, for there is but one little channel which diuides them,
and therefore some affirm (as it is likely) that in former times they were two
Islands, although in effect it be but one, in the which are two good little
towns, both well fortefied with bulwarks, rampars and counterscarps, whereof
the first is called by the name of the Island.

TOLEN.
THis town shows the effect by the name, being the towle or custom of
marchandises due unto the Prince, and now unto the Estates of the country, who
choose the Officers of Justice, as Bailiffs, Sheriffs and others.

Saint Martins Dyke.
IS a pretty town, some times belonging to Adolph of Bourgogne, Siegnior of
Beuren, the which came afterward to the house of Buren, and now belongs to
Philip of Nassau, Prince of Orange, Earl of Buren by his mother. In this
territory is the village of Saint Annelandt, which is as much to say, as a good
Bourg, belonging also to the said Prince: Joining unto it is a little Island
called Philips Landt: these are the four principal Islands with the^r towns.

Noort-Beuelandt.
THis Island was drowned (as we have said) in the year of our Lord 1532. in
which inundation there perished the towns of Coortgeen and of Cats, the
villages of Campen, Well, Emelisse, Haemste and others, being also the
patrimony of the Prince of Orange, which Cont Philippe of Hohenloo his Brother
in law within these ten years, by an agreement made betwixt them, has
recovered from the sea, and fortefied it round about with good banks, so as
at this day it is a good country both for tillage, and pasture, likely to
be soon built again with goodly villages, as it was wont to be.

WOLFERS-DYCK.
SO called by the name of the Lord Wolphart, as much to say, as the Dyck of
Wolphart; it is the least of all these Islands above mentioned, in the which
there are but three villages, Wolfers Dyck, Sabbinghe and Hogersdyck, but there
is good pasture for cattle, the Inhabitants being most given to fishing.

There are moreover in Zeeland some other small Islands, which are daily
recovered from the sea, riseing first like banks of sand, so as seeing them
thus rise by little and little and to bear grass, they send their sheep over
to feed there, whereas the shepards have little lodges, and for their cattle
they make great barnes or stables, where they lie dry in foul weather, and
there the owners provide them hay before winter.

It seems also that these Islands of Zeeland have been recovered from the
sea, long before Charles Martel Duke of Brabant, father to King Pepinne of
France: wherein the Danes labored much, who in those days had continual war
against the French and great Brittanie: for they did choose these sandhills, as
a safe retreat for their Incursions upon the neighbor countries, which they
made their Rendezvous, making it the magasin of their spoils. First they
seized upon the Isle of Walchren, the which they did fortefie as well as they
could against the violence of the sea: before which enterprise they made many
high mounts of earth as are yet to be seen, here and there, which remain
unprofitable, some near unto towns, applied to the use of Gardens: unto which
mountes (being any extraordinary tide) they did drive their cattle, and retired
thither themselves, until the waters have fallen, and then they returned to
their lodgings. These Danes or Noortmans having thus recovered the country,
began to Tille it, especially after the descent of their great Captain Duke
Rollo: who was head of the Norman Nation in France: But in the end the Danes
being expelled out of great Britain, they were chased also out of these
Islands: the which in succession of time were peopled and made civil: And so
after many Accidents, reuolutions and quarrels in these watery parts, in the
end they were by force made subject to the Earls of Holland, being given unto
them long before, and made a County by the Emperor Lewis the gentle: as the
Emperor Charles the bald his father had made Holland a County and given it to
Thierry the first Lord of these two Earldomes. But after that the Emperor Henry
the third of that name, had given unto Baldwin Earl of Flanders, this Island of
VValchren and other small neigbour Islands, there fell great wars betwixt the
Flemings and the Hollanders: especially that furious battle in the year one
thousand two hundred fifty three: whereas Floris brother to Cont William King
of Romans, and the Prince of Cleues defeated the Lady Maguerit Contesse of F
landers near unto VValchren before the King came, in which defeat (as
histories report) there were fifty thousand Flemings slain, as many drowned,
and almost as many prisoners, whom the victors entreated ignominiously,
stripping the^ naked: among the prisoners were the two Commanders, John and
Guy of Dompierre, sons to the Contesse Marguerite; with Thybault Earl of
Guise, Geffrie Earl of Bar, and above 230. Noble men, Knights and men of
accoumpt: King William being puffed up with this victory, having such
prisoners, would not give ear to any conditions of peace, but such as he
propounded to the Contesse, which she would not yield unto. But the King
being slain two years after in Freezeland, a peace was made betwixt the
Contesse and Floris Brother to the deceased King, Uncle and Gardien to his
son, who was Earl of Holland and Zealand, named Florens the fifth. By the
which peace it was said that all prisoners should be set at liberty, paying
great ransomes: And that the young Cont Florens should marry Beatrix Niece to
the Contesse Marguerite, Daughter to Cont Guy her eldest son. By which Accord
and marriage, the Flemings did transport and give in marriage to the said
Beatrix all such rights and pretensions as they might have in the Conties of
Zealand and in the Conty of Alost. But this was but a counterfeit peace, and of
small continuance: for that Guy of Dompierre, being Earl of Fla^ders could not
endure that the Earls of Holland should enjoy this Island of Walchren, but
began to make war to his great dishonor and prejudice, the which could never
have any end until that all the Seigneuries of Henault, Holland, Zeland and
Frisland fell to the house of Burgonne, at one instant in a m^nner with the
Duchy of Brabant, under the good Duke Philip.

The Estates of the conty of Zealand, which we have described, consists of the
Nobility, and of the towns of the Islands of Walchren, Schouuen,
Zuit-Beuelandt, Tolen, Noort beuelandt (newly recovered from the Sea)
Duyuelandt, VVolfersdick, and Phil^ipslandt; whereof Prince Maurice is Governor
and Admiral general: which Estates hold their general Asse^blie in the town of
Middelbourg, whereas commonly the college of their Deputies do reside who
Assemble every day to treat and determine of all occurrents touching the
Estate, or otherwise in stead of the Court of Zeland, in the said town the
which was wont to be the Abbay of S. Martin: At which College does first
appear by his Deputy the said Prince Maurice, in quality of Marquis of La
vere, the first Gentleman of Zealand speaking for the whole Nobility of
Zealand, then the Treasoror general of the country; then the Deputies of the
towns of Middelbourg, Zirczee, La-Vere, Flissinghe, Tergoes and Tolen, which
are the six principal towns (the rest having no voice nor access unto the
said Estates) with their Recorder and Secretary. Behold wherein the Estates of
Zeland consist: In that Court there does also remain the Council or College of
the Admiraltie of the said Contie, consisting for the most part of the
Deputies of the said Estates, with an Advocate ^scall and a Secretary in which
Counsel all Sea-causes are determined.

The County of Zealand has drawn unto it self as we have said before the
chamber of Accoumptes, touching the demaines, and of all the revenues
proceeding as well from customs, Imposts, rents, collections and
contributions, as other dependances of the receipts, concerning the whole
Estate, which was wont to be entreated of and decided jointly with the Contie
of Holland and VVestfreezland, for which three there was but one chamber of
Accoumptes at the Hage. This Chamber of Zealand has a President, Masters,
Auditors, Registers, Vshers and other Officers. The said Conty of Zealand, has
now a particular coin, established in the Court of Middelbourg, which they
were not accustomed to have no more then West-freezeland; having but one Mynt
thirty years since for all three in Dordrecht the capitol town of Holland,
where it remained long and was much privileged during the reign of the
Emperor Charles the fifth. As for their government and religion, it is al one
with the united Provinces their Confederats: Ecclesiastical causes, as well for
their discipline as otherwise, are referred to their Synodes, whereas some
Deputies of the Estates do assist.

All Appellations in civil causes, be the sentences prouitionall or definitive
of all the Towns, Bailywiks and Jurisdictions in the Conty of Zealand
(Notwithstanding the Estates of this Province have sought to sequester
themselves) resort to the Prouincial Council at the Hage in Holland: Except
they of Middelbourg, who by a special privilege have choice to appeal to the
said Provincial Council or to the great Council, which is also at the Hage,
like unto that at Macklyn: whereof there is but a reuision before the
Counselors deputed out of the united Provinces. The sentences of which
reuisors are held for holy and inviolable decrees. But criminal sentences are
executed without Appeal, by every officer in his Jurisdiction. They have also
in Zealand their Dickgraues, as in Holland, which are Judges, having their
Jurisdictions apart, with certain assistants or Sheriffs whom they call
Geswooren, that is to say Iurats, to hear and determine of all controversies
concerning the entertainment of dikes, Sluses, large ditches, ways, fludgates;
which Dickgraues and Iurats are in the Island of Walchren, in manner of a
College, the which consists of the Marquis of La Vere, or his Deputy of the
towns and of the Deputies of the best proprietaries in the Island of Walchren.
The like is observed in the other Islands of the Conty of Zealand, every one
according to his privileges.

The Contie of Zutphen.
THis Conty has taken his name of the Capitol Town of the country, which is
Zutphen, standing upon the right bank of the river of Issel, by the which the
river of Berckel does pass, which falls into Issell. This town before the
first troubles, and that the Duke of Alua did exercise his cruelties, was rich,
well traded, fair and great, with a goodly Bridge to pass toward the town
of Arnhem in Geldres, the which was broken by the Spaniards, part of the town
burnt, and the Inhabitants miserably entreated; which were the first fruits of
the Spaniards government: Since it has been twice or thrice taken and re-taken
by the one and the other party, having continued since the year one thousand
five hundred ninety one, under the united Estates. Although that this town and
the Jurisdiction thereof be numbered for the third member or quarter of the
Duchy of Geldres, it has yet a long time been a Conty of it self, having a
particular Earl, the last whereof was the Earl Gerlache, who left no other
heirs but one Daughter, the which was married to Otto Earl of Nassau and of
Geldres, who brought him the said Earldom of Zutphen for her Doury: by means
whereof he augmented his Demaines: Since which time the said Town with the
Jurisdiction has been incorporate to the Duchy of Geldres, subject to one
Chancerie, Government, Chamber of Accoumptes, and making one member at the
general Estates of both Countries, which as we have said before are held in
the town of Arnhem: whereas they of the said Town and Contie have their
Assistants and ordinary Deputies, who assist in the Assembly of the general
Estates of the United Provinces, that is to say of every one of the said
quarters and of the Nobility of Geldres; who change as the Estates of the
Province shall think it fit.

The Towns and Jurisdictions of the said Contie are these which follow., after
the chief Town; Doesbourg, a league and a half from thence, Dotecome,
Bronckhorst, Lochom, Groll, Bredeuoerd, Keppel, Bourg, Sherenbourg, which are
or have been heretofore walled Towns, besides many good Villages. So as this
Conty has larger limmittes, and is richer then that of Namure: Wherefore it
merits to be held, as it has always been, and as the Emperor and King
Philip have carried it in their Titles, for one of the seauenteene Provinces of
the Netherlandes: And at this present one of the eight united and confederate.
There is in this Contie a general Officer called Drossart, which depends upon
the Chancery of Arnhem: Whose Jurisdiction extendes chiefly to the champian
country* who is bound to bring all Offenders to Arnhem, or to the other towns
that have right to take knowledge thereof: The towns are governed by their
Governors, Council and other ordinary Officers.

DOESBOVRG.
IS an ancient Town which some call Drusiburgum, other modern writers will
have it the same town which Tacitus names Asciburgum. It is seathe at the
mouth of Fossa Drusiana or Drusus ditch, the which is a channel which Drusus
(to keep his soldiers from idleness) made them to dig at Isseloort, drawing
it out of the Rhyne, and carrying it into the River of Issell at Doesbourg, the
which he made to have a shorter passage to make war against the Frisons,
then if he should have been forced to have gone down the river of Rhyne, and
so entering into the British sea, to have compassed about all the country of
the Battauians, and so to have entered into Frisland by the river of Fly. It is
a good town and well peopled, the which during these wars has not felt so
many alterations as many other towns.

In the year one thousand five hundred ninety eight the Admiral of Arragon
Lieutenant of the Archduke Albert having taken the Town of Berck upon the
Rhyne, and past his army there, he resolved to besiege this town; But Prince
Maurice raizing his camp out of the I Will of Geldre (which they call
Gelderscheweert) he went and put himself into the said town lodging part of
his troops in a little Island right against it, in the midst of the River of
Issel, and the body of his army lay intrencht without the town toward the
fields, whereas the Admiral thought to make his approches, to besiege it, but
finding such lettes, he durst not affront the Prince, who attended him long in
battle, but retired, and went to winter upon the Territory of the Empire:
where he carried himself as you have heard in the history of the Netherlands.

DOETECVM.
THis town stands in ihe Champian country, a League from Doesbourg* upon the
old Issel, it is a reasonable good town, with a double wall, yet none of the
strongest. The Admiral of Arragon having past the Rhyne to besiege Doesbourg,
he went first before it, and took it by composition within three days. But
the Admiral being retired, Prince Maurice went and beseeged it again, the
which was as easily yielded to him as to the Spaniard, remaining at this day
under the obedience of the united Estates, as it had been above thirty years
before, except those few days the Admirals men held it.

BRONCKHORST.
IT is within a league of Zutphen, seated upon the right side of the river of
Issel, erected to a Contie, having a particular Earl. The family of
Bronchoorst is ancient, from the which are issued the houses of Battenbourg,
Anholt, Megen and others. The town has been much ruined during these wars:
But the Castle which is of a reasonable strength) stands still, where there is
a continual garrison for one party or other.

LOCHEM.
IS a good little town* two leagues from Zutphen, well fortified for the
importance thereof, being very necessary during the troubles: for holding the
States party in the year one thousand five hundred eighty two, the Duke of
Parma sent Charles Earl of Mansfeldt to besiege it in the King of Spaines
name: But the Prince of Orange knowing that three of his Nephews Herman,
Frederic, and Adolph vanden Berghe, sons of his Sister and of Cont Van
Sheeren Berghen were within it, he sent the Earl of Hohenloe with an army to
raise the siege, as he did, and freed them; forcing Mansfeldt to retire with
loss: Since which time the said town has continued constant under the
obedience of the Estates, until that in the year 1605. the Marquis Spinola
Lieutenant to the Archduke Albert of Austria, besieged it, and took it by
composition, but soon after it was recovered by Prince Maurice, and continues
as before.

GROLL.
IN old time was a good Borrough, but by these last wars within these thirty
years, it has been walled in with rampars and Bulwarks having broad and
deep ditches, fortified with casemats and counterscarps. Being held by the
Spaniards Prince Maurice went and besieged it for the united Estates: Whereof
Peter Earl of Mansfeldt Lieutenant for the King of Spain by provision, being
advertised, he sent Colonel Mondragon Captain of the Castle of Antwerp, with
a small Army, to raise his siege, or at the least to cut of his victuals. The
Estates being ill informed of the strength of this Spanish army, which was
made greater unto them then it was, they commanded Prince Maurice to retire as
he did: But hearing what Mondragons forces were, who retired toward the Rhyne
to pass at Berck, he pursued him beyond the town of VVezell, in which
pursuit Cont Philip and Ernest of Nassau Brethren, Cousins to the Prince, and
Cont Ernest of Solms, being too far advanced contrary to the Princes order,
after they had defeated two Cornets of Spaniards, were themselves in the end
put to route, and the two Earls Philip of Nassau and Ernest of Solms slain,
and Cont Ernest of Nassau was taken prisoner: Where-vppon the Prince leaving
his pursuit brought back his Army and Mondragon repassing the Rhyn, returned
with his into Brabant. But two years after, in the year 1597. the Prince went
again to beseege it, in the which Cont Frederic Vanden Berghe commanded with
1200. men who finding himself very hardly pressed, he yielded it by
composition: Since in the year 1605. the Marquis Spinola recovered it
(although it were held very strong) being yielded upon an honorable
composition: It is two leagues from Breefort.

SHEEREN BERGHE.
A Town and Castle erected to an Earldom, whereof the last Earl was called
William, whom King Philip the second made Earl: he had to wife the Prince of
Oranges sister, by whom he had many sons, the eldest called Herman is now
Earl: He with two of his brethren being beseeged in Lochem, were delivered
by the diligence of the Prince their Uncle: But soon after abandoning him
ungratefully, they followed the Spaniards party: yet the Estates seized upon
the town in the which they had their garrison: until that the Prince passing
that way in the year 1597. the Contesse their mother obtained of him that the
town should remain neuter* and that she and her daughters living in the castle
should be freed from garrison: The like she obtained from the Archduke
Albert: It is a little town of small importance, a League and a half from
Dotecom.

BREDEFORT.
IS but a small Town with a Castle situated in a Moore, to the which there is
but one passage to come unto it upon a Causey, so as it is of hard access:
yet in the year 1597. Prince Maurice surmounting all difficulties, did beseege
and batter it, and having caused it to be summond, the Burgers having a
disposition to yield, yea the women and children falling on their knees upon
the Rampar, and crying for mercy, the Captain who commanded them being
resolved for to hold it, the Prince caused an assault to be given, and took it
by force, commanding the soldiars to spare the Inhabitants. The Captain like a
coward fled with his soldiers into the castle, and hid himself: The Prince
caused certain pieces of Ordinance to be brought to batter the Port, which
the soldiers seeing, they yielded upon condition that they should be all taken
to ransom. This brave Captain was found hidden in a seller, yet he was no
worse entreated then the rest: only he endured many affro^ts for his cowardly
bravery. This town lies two leagues from Anholt: since it has been well
fortified by the united Estates.

KEPPEL.
IS a little town of small importance, as al other Land-townes be* it stands
upon the old stream of Issel, half a league from Doesbourg.

BVRG.
IS not much better then Keppel, seated upon the same torrent, a League from
Doesbourg.

Here you may see ten towns as well great as small, strong as weak, in the
Contie of Zutphen, besides Boroughes, Villages and Castles, whereof there is
good store, which make this Province to have a large Jurisdiction: It has
endured much in these last war, but now they begin to take breath, whereof
they have great need as well as diverse others, but we will content our selves
with this description.

The Province and Seigneiurie of Vtrecht.
THis Estate and Seignieurie in old time belonging unto a Prince and particular
Prelat, whom they called the Bishop of Vtrecht, was first given by the mere
liberality of the Kings of France, unto S. Wildeboord the first Bishop, and
afterward by the Emperors to his successors, all under a coullor of piety,
which Estate did consist of two Diocesses: the one called the lower Diocese,
where are the capitol Town of Vtrecht, Wick-ter-Duyrsted (called Batauodurum)
Amersfort, Rhenen, and Montfort, with above sixty Boroughs and villages. The
other was called the high Dioces, which contained all the country of Ouerissel,
where there are fourteen or fifteen towns, whereof the three Imperial and
Hans towns are Deuenter Campen and Swolle: the which together with the rest,
now make a Province a part: which we will describe hereafter. The lower Dioces
is good and fertile, better manured then the upper, a higher ground and much
dryer then Holland, which is near neighbor unto it, to describe which we will
begin with the chief town.

VTRECHT.
WAs first (as some write it) called Antonia or Antonina, of one Antony a
Roman Senator, who (flying Neros tyranie) retired into that quarter, and did
begin this place. Others say that Marc Antony was the founder, from whom it
took the name: Some also maintain, that it was so called of Antoninus Pius.
But be it what it may: it is most sure (as many affirm, and as it may be
gathered by Medalles and other Antiquities) that this town of Vtrecht was for
a long time called Antonina, whereof there are yet some marks to be seen upon
the Townhouse. After that the Wiltes had taken and ruined it, they built a
Fort which they call Wiltenbourg, the which was taken by Dagobert son to
Clotaire King of France, who did fortify it more then before, and called it
Traiectum, for it was a trauers or passage whereas an Impost was paid (which in
many places in France they call Le droit de Travers, the due or right of
trauers or passage) for all Merchandise, that was carried and recarried on
either side: and it retains at this day the name of Traiectum. It stands
upon the head of the Rhyne, the which past directly there, before that they
forced it (in making a Scluse at Wicter-duyrsted some eight hundred years
since) to cast it self into the river of Leck: passing through which town, it
did pierce through Woerden, Oudwater and Leyden, and did ingulph into the Sea
at Catwick; yea since it had an other course: the waters and channels which
pass by the said towns, are at this day called the old Rhyn: It is an
admirable thing, that this town is so situated that they may go to what town
they please of fifty, which lie round about them in a day, the which being
showed visible to Philip the 2. King of Spain, being upon the place, he took
a wonderful delight. And it is most certain that there were some Noblemen
which laid great wagers for the trial thereof, and found it true. Moreover in
one of the longest days in Summer, if one parts early in a morning from
Vtrecht, he may dine at any one of 26. towns, where he please, and return to
his own house to supper: the Emperor Charles the 5. in the year 1542. caused a
castle to be built near unto S. Catherins port, to keep the town in awe, when
as by the cession of the Bishop of that place, he was put in temporal
possession of the said town and the dependances: the which he called
Vredenbourg, that is to say a Castle of peace. The City is great and mighty,
well fortified with ten good Bulwarks flanking one another, with their
counterscarps and diches al of Masons work, and the rampars in like manner:
some Bulwarks are also of stone, the rest only of earth: there are goodly
buildings, furnished with caves and vauted sellers.

There are also goodly churches, among the which there are five, that have
chanoins: The first which is the cathedral church, is called Saint Martins,
the second Saint Savior near unto it, but now pulled down: the 3. Saint
Peter the 4. Saint John, and the 5. of our Ladies, founded by the Emperor
Frederic Barberossa, having bin enjoined thereunto by the Pope, to expiate the
fault which he had committed in ruining the town and all the churches and
monasteries of Milan: But above all, the cathedral church is stately, having a
fair high goodly tower, transparent: in the which the said Emperor Charles the
5. did celebrate the order of the golden fleece, in the year 1546. the old
temple was pulled down by the bishop Adelbold, for that he held it to be too
little, and did reedefie it in the estate we now see it. This new temple was
consecrated in the year 1023. in the presence of the Emperor Henry the 2. by
12. bishops. There are also in the same town two commanders, one of the
knights of Malta, and the other of the order of the Teutons, under the great
Master of Prussia, both having churches and very stately lodgings, either of
them having his commander. He of Malta is called the Bailiff of S. Catherins,
and the other carries the name of commander or great Prior of the Province, by
reason that he has under him many small commanderies, and great possessions in
many places of the Netherlands. They hold an honorable rank and do good to
many which are entertained by the bounty of these men, as chanoins, abbayes and
monasteries which are in the said town, who (although there be no other
public exercise then of the reformed religion) hold their prebends and
entertainments, the cloisters within precinct of the town standing as they
did, except the houses of begging Friars which are applied to other uses: Of
which abbaies and cloisters there is that of Saint Paul of the order of Saint
Benet, and two of gentlewomen. There were also three of gentlewomen without the
town, but these last wars have been the cause of their ruin, fearing to
leave lodgings for their enemies, being to near the town, but the Nuns
enjoy their entertainment; and when any Monk or Nun dies, the Estates of
the Province put others in their places, to ease the poorer sort of the
gentry. The citizens of this city are courteous, civil, industrious and
ritche amongst whom there are, and have always been men that are virtuous
and of great valor; and above all Pope Adrian the sixth of that name, first of
all a Doctor of both laws, whereon he has written goodly works, and withal
he was a great Mathematician. He obtained in the university of Lovaine,
(where he studied long) without seeking it, diverse degrees of honor, and not
without profit; and so sparing his revenues, he founded and built a college
which at this day does honor his memory: whose fame was so pleasing to all
men, as he was chosen to be Scholemaster to the Emperor Charles the fifth in
his Infancy: by whose Majesty he was sent Ambassador into Spain, to the
King Don Fernando of Arragon, who for his merittes made him bishop of
Tortoso. Being afterward recommended to the Pope by the Emperor Maximilian
the first he was made Cardinal. The King Don Fernando and the Archduke
Philippe his Son in law being dead, cardinal Adrian was chosen for a time
to be Governor and Viceroy of Spain in the name of Prince Charles who was
soon after Emperor.

In the end on the sixth day of January in the year of our Lord 1522. he was
chosen Pope, the news, whereof being carried him into Spain, he made no show
of joy; being anointed he would not change his name as others did; he lived
but twenty months and some days after, in continual trouble of mind and
grief: Amongst all his Epitaphes this agrees best with him. Hadrianus sextus
hic situs est, qui nihil sibi infelicius in vita duxit, quam quod imperaret.
Here lies Adrian the sixth who thought nothing had happened unto him more
unfortunate in all his life, then that he had commanded. He caused a goodly
house to be built in Vtrecht the place of his birth, which they call at this
day the lodging of Pope Adrian.

In this city resides a Provincial council to the which all the appeals of
the town, country and Siegniory of Vtrecht do resort: In which council there
is a president and nine counselors, a receiver of the Province, Registers, and
other Officers. This Siegneury was greater in the time of King Dagobert, who
joined the temporalty to the spiritualty, giving it to Saint Willebrord, who
was an English man borne, and the first bishop, to whom succeeded Boniface, in
whose times this city was in great reputation, having the title and dignity
of Archbishop, but Boniface having been martired by the Frisons, this
pre-eminence and authority, was with the consent of the chapter (then much
afflicted by the Danes, and Normans) confersed to the bishops of Cologne who
have ever since retained this dignity: notwithstanding Pepin and Charlemayne
Kings of France restored this city, who not only established the Episcopal
dignity, but to the end the bishop might defend himself from his adversary,
he did so augment his jurisdiction, as his Siegneury did extend it self in a
manner over all the country of the Battauians: And although the Frisons, Danes
and Nortmans did spoil and burn it often, yet they did soon recover their
former estate and gather new forces: To confirm that which we have said, it
shall not be from the purpose to insert here some Latin verses though ill
pollished savoring of the harshnesse of the style in those days, the which
were written in two great tables of wood, hung upon two pillars before the
Quier of the said cathedral church, written in great Letters, half worn out
by continuance of time, those of the right side were.

Circumquaque fluens Hollandia gurgite Rheni,
cingitur Oceano fluminibusque maris.
In qua cum muris vrbs Antonina nouellis,
tempore Neronis aedificata fuit.
Hanc deuastauit fera Slauica gens, et ibidem
castrum Wiltorum conditur inde novum.
Turribus excelsis, quod adhuc plebs Abroditorum,
funditur euertens dirruit vsque Solum.
Hinc Traiectense castrum cum maentbus altis,
conditur a Francis Christicolis; sed idem
Vulgus Danorum confregit humo tenus, omnes
cum clero ciues, insimul ense necans.
Denique Baldricus Praesul noua maenia struxit,
quae modo subsistunt auxiliante Deo.
Sic Hollandensi terrae veraciter omni,
Traiectum constat vrbs capitalis adhuc.
The famous Rhine through Hollands bosom glides
and (with the sea) enguirts it on all sides.
Here, Vtrecht stands, first built (as authors say)
in Neroes time, and called Antonia.
These walls the Slauons razed, upon repair,
of which, the name of Wiltenburch it bare.
Then came the Abrodites, a nation wood,
and leuell'd it even with the place it stood.
In place whereof the christian Frankeners came
and built a fort called Vtrecht: but the same
Was by the Danes made a rude heap of stones,
and they that held it slanghtered all at ones. stand yet,
But bishop Baldrick since repaired it,
and raised those walls which (God be thankt)
And thus remains it Vtrecht still, of all,
the land of Holland, first, and principal.
On the second pillar on the left hand hung these verses.

Tempore Francorum Dagoberti regis in isto,
presenti fundo conditus ecce decens.
Primitus Ecclaesia Sancti Thomae prope castrum
Traiectum, quam gens Frisica fregit atrox.
Sed prior Antistes, Dominus. etc.
This church which men S. Thomas-his do call,
upon this plot was founded first of all.
When Dagobert ruled France, nere to the town
of Vtrecht: the fierce Frisons razed it down.
But the first prelat, Lord. etc.
The rest of these verses were so worn as it was not possible to read them.

WYCK-TER-DVYRSTED.
IT appeeres by the ancient Histories, that this town of Wyck-ter-Duyrsted,
has in ancient time been a great and spacious town, in the which they write
were 32. parish churches. It was before this town that the Rhine was dambde
up, and forced (some 8^0. years since) to leave his right course and to cast
it self into the Lecke, as we have showed before. But they set not down the
cause why they cut it off in this place, and made it take the course it now
holds. The which happened, for that when as the wind was at the Norwest, and
blew hard, the river of Rhine being driven back, and not able to pass out by
his gulf at Catwyck into the British sea, was forced to disperce it self over
all the conntries of Holland, Vtrecht and the Betuve, which is of the Duchy of
Geldres. The which happened often, whereby they sustained great losses,
wherefore the Estates of these 3. Provinces assembling together, they consulted
how they might prevent it, and in the end resolved to turn the Rhine from his
right course, which was to the Norwest, and to give it an other, which should
fall, crokedly into the sea, as it does at this present: for the effecting
whereof they dambd it up, drawing it by little and little into the Lecke which
is nere unto it making high bancks of either side, so as in succession of time
it is become a good nauigable river, falling into the Meuse beneath Dordrecht,
and so enters into the Ocean sea before Bryele. This town of Wyck is very
ancient; Whereon Cornelius Tacitus a Knight and Roman Historiographer makes
honorable mention, calling it Batauodurum. It was ruined by the Danes and
Normans, but afterward built again: yet nothing so big as at the first,
notwithstanding it has always been, as it is at this present, for the
commodity of the situation*, a good and a rich town, having a very strong
castle, whereas the Princes, Bishops of Vtrecht did for a long time keep
their court, when as they would lie in the lower diocese, as they did at the
castle of Vollenhof Gheelmuyden in Oueryssel, a league from Campen, when as
they kept in the higher Diocese. This town had in former times a private Lord,
who was also Siegnior of Abcoude; But the bishops of Vtrecht would never be
quiet until they had gotten it, this house declyning as we have showed in the
chapter of the Nobility of Holland.

AMERSFORT.
THis town was in old time built at twice, for there is a little town al
walled about in the very midest of an other greater, the which at this present
is very strong with rampars and bulwarks flanking one an other, and large
ditches. It is three leagues from Vtrecht standing upon a little river which
they call Do. It has been often taken and retaken by the Geldrois, the last
was in the year 1543. when as Martin van Rossen Marshall of the Duke of
Geldres army took it by force: but he suddenly yielded it again according to
the accord made in the town of Venlo, betwixt the Emperor and the said Duke.
To speak the truth it is a fair and a good town, well peopled for a land
town; the inhabitants are courteous and of good conversation, among the which
there are many learned men and lovers of music, who in certain days of the
week meet together in honest company to make music: for the which they have
certain gardins and fair chambers of the sworn companies, as pleasant in
summer as can be seen in any place whersoeuer, and in winter they make choice
of some of their houses: Master John Fouck Provost of our Ladies church in
Vtrecht, was borne in this town, he was honored with other degrees and
Ecclesiastical dignities, a learned and virtuous man, and therefore he was
called by the King into Spain, and there made President of the council of the
Netherlands, for the affairs of Flanders. In this town was also borne that
great personage, John of Oldenbarneuelt Knight, Siegnior of Tempel and
Groeneuclt, first councellor and advocate for the county of Holland and
West-Frisland, a man of great Judgment and experience, upon whom the affairs
of Estate do chiefly depend, not only for the said cou^ty, but also of the
general Estates of the united Provinces, which remain not at the Hage in
Holla^d.

RHENEN.
SO called for that it is situated upon the bank of Rhine five good leagues
from Vtrecht, and as much from Arnhem in Geldres, whereas they do most
commonly dine, going or coming from one of these two towns unto the other,
which is a great passage toward Deuenter, Zutphen, Doesbourg and other places,
as well in Geldres, as Cleues, or to Cologne or any place where they please in
Germany. This town has toward Vtrecht a large country, the soil whereof is
fit to make turfes to burn, but not so good and durable, neither make they so
good a cole as those of Holland: And a league from thence, there has been
within these 60. years, a village built, more for the making of these turfes,
then for any other reason. There remains yet some form of a castle in this
town, the which is little and of small importance, if this great passage were
not, which makes it to be frequented. It consists most of Innes and Tauerns. It
has also suffered much during the wars against the Geldrois.

MONTFORT.
THis town has a particular Lord at this day* who writs himself Vicont of
Montfort, it stands upon the river of Yssel, a league in equal distance from
the towns of Woorden, Oudewater and Iselsteyn. The place is little but strong,
founded by Godfry of Rhene^ bishop of Vtrecht, to serve as a bar and fronter
against Holland, who did also build against the Geldrois the castle of Horst,
against the Traiectins the town of Woerden, and against the Frisons,
Vollenhouen in the contry of Oueryssel: the which appeeres sufficiently by his
Epitaph.

Godefride tui Rhenanam prouidus arcem
donasti iuris* aereque mox proprio,
Quatuor en patriae, largus munimina nostrae,
Horst, Woerd, et Monfort construis et Volenhoe:
Wise Godfrey first with Rhenen did enlarge
our state, and then at his own cost and charge.
He Montfort, Venlo, Horst, and Woerdt, did rear,
the four chief forts that keep our foes in fear.
Lambertus Hortensius, a learned man who has composed many good books, was
borne in this twon.

Of the Estate of Vtrecht in general.
THe Bishoprike and Estate of Vtrecht was in former times very great and
powerful, the which Charles the Bald King of France did with the temporalty
make an Earldom, whereupon there grew great and long wars, betwixt the
bishops of Vtrecht and the Earls of Holland, for that the bishops sought to
recover by favor of the Emperors, all their ancient demeins, granted unto them
by Dagobert, and Charles the Bald: And the Earls of Holland seeking to
maintain, yea to augment that which had bin newly given them, were supported
by the Kings of France. I say that this Estate was in old time so great and
their territories so large, (as Aeneas Siluius otherwise called Pope Pius the
2. does write) as the bishop or prince thereof, might at need, put 40000. armed
men of his own natural subjects to field. And although they had continual
wars against their neighbors (whereof they themselves were ever the first
motives) as the Hollanders, Frisons and Geldrois, yet they made head against
the^ all, as well as they could, as appeered by Godfrie of Rhenen. But in the
latter age Charles of Egmond duke of Geldres, a proud Prince, warlike and
fierce, made such sharp wars against the Bishops of Vtrecht, as he reduced
them to great extremity, and especially Henry of Bauaria, brother the the Cont
Palatin of Rhine from whom he took a great part of his Siegneury, as well of
the higher as the lower diocese. Moreover the citizens of Vtrecht were grown
so proud by reason of their freedoms and preuiledges, and so insolent by
reason of their wealth, as they grew into factions among themselves, causing
many disorders in their town, and attempting against their bishops; they did
often revolt against them, and if they were not chosen according to their
humors, they would not accept them, but did them a thousand indignities, yea
killing their Officers, and taking some prisoners before their faces, not
without danger to the bishops own person, who was forced (to escape their
fury) to fly to his castles of Wyok or Horst. The last revolt and affront which
they did unto their Prince and bishop, was unto the above name Henry of
Bauaria, who had enjoyed this dignity four years, being incensed against
him, having been one day abroad in the country, and returning home at night,
they shut the gates against him, and would not suffer him to enter into the
town: and (which was worse) soon after they received Martin van Rossen,
Marshall of the camp to the Duke of Geldres, into the town with a garrison of
Geldrois, who from thence did wonderfully annoy the Hollanders, and at one time
made an incursion as far as the Hage, the which they spoiled, and retired
safely with their booty to Vtrecht. Bishop Henry seeing himself thus braued
by the Geldrois, and by his own subjects, resolved to cast himself into the
arms of the Emperor Charles the fifth and to transport unto him all that he
held of the temporaltie: to the end he might succor him, to preserve that
which belonged unto the spirituality in this town and state. And for that the
Emperor was then in Spain, he did impart it to the Lady Marguerite his
Aunte, who was Douager of Sauoy and Regent of the Netherlands: so as in the end
it was concluded, that on the 15 of November 1^27. he should come in person to
Schoonhouen, whether the Emperor should send some men of account on his
behalf* amongst which were the Earls of Buren and Hochstraten, the chancellor
of Brabant and the President of the Prouincial council of Holland: where being
arrived at the day appointed, after many consultations, they concluded that the
Bishop should yield up, resign and transport, all the rights, interest and
pretensions, which he had to the temporal jurisdiction in the diocese of
Vtrecht, and the country of Oueryssel, to the benifit and profit of the said
Emperor, of which rights he did put his Imperial Majesty in possession, as Duke
of Brabant and Earl of Holland, (not in quality of Emperor) as well for
himself, as for his successors descended of his blood: whereupon the Earls of
Buren and Hochstraten, the chancellor and other deputies, did promise unto the
bishop in the Emperors name their master* and did bind themselves to make war
against his enemies, and to settle him in his Episcopal seat, and make him duly
to enjoy his spiritual dignity. The Duke of Geldres being advertised of this
treaty and accord, he made sharper wars then before, and so incensed the
citizens of Vtrecht against their Bishop Henry, as they sought by all means
to deprive him of his Episcopal dignity, choosing in his place (by the Dukes
instigation and council) the Earl of Bilg, a chanonine of Cologne. The^ did
there grow a furious war betwixt the Emperor and Bishop* Henry, against the
Duke of Geldres and the comunalty of Vtrecht, holding the Dukes party* and
their new Bishops: So as after much blood spilt, and many spoils done in the
country; there were some citizens of Vtrecht well affected to Bishop Henry, who
brought the Emperors men into the town the 1. of July 1528. who entered early
in a morning by surprise, where there was some little opposition, and the Earl
of Maeurs (lieutenant to the Duke) was taken prisoner, with many of the chief
of the town, and some chanoins. Three days after the bishop entered, and
caused some of the mutines to be executed by the sword, yea he made two
chanoins to be put into a sack and cast into the river, and he would have
taken a sharper revenge without the intercession of the Earl of Hochstraten:
eight days after he assembled the three Estates in the public place, by the
which he was acknowledged to be their bishop and Prince, all sollemnly
swearing fidelity and obedience unto him. Afterward the bishop having
conferred again with the said Estates, he propounded unto them, how that
being in the town of Schonhouen, he had let them understand his resolution to
submit the temporalty of his Siegneury to the Emperor, showing them how
necessary it was, for their quiet and public preservation, to the end that
this Estate being under the guard and protection of so mighty a Monarke; it
should be defended and preserved from all enemies which did enuiron it;
entreating them to like well of that which he had resolved, and to yield unto
it. The matter being diversely debated after many allegations on either side, in
the end (for that they could not avoid it, the Emperors men being already in
possession of the town) seeing they had committed an error, and that their
oppposition would avail them nothing, but incense the Emperor and their
Prelat, they yielded unto it. That is, that the city of Vtrecht, with the
jurisdiction and limmits of all the towns, villages, borroughes, forts,
territory, champian country, mountains, woods, forests, rivers, pooles, lakes,
mills, rents and revenues to conclude all that was of the temporal demeins, of
the said Estate and country of Vtrecht, together with all the right, title and
interest, which he had to the high diocese, that is to say, to the country of
Oueryssel, and over the town of Groaning, the jurisdiction of the Groningers and
the Omelands, with all their rights, should be united and incorporated to the
demeins of the Dukes of Brabant and Earls of Holland. The which having been
agreed upon and concluded, the Traiectins were absolved of their oath of
fealty which they had taken unto the said bishop, who freely discharged
them, upon condition that they should take the like oath, and do homage to the
Emperor, and to his lawful heirs issued of his blood, Dukes of Brabant and
Earls of Holland: The Bishop reserving nothing for himself and his
successors, but the spiritual jurisdiction and revenues, and that sumptuos
Palace in the town, joining to the cathedral church, built by Charles Martel
Duke of Brabant, father to Pepin King of France, who gave it to Gregory the
third Bishop of Vtrecht. All things being thus concluded betwixt the Bishop
Henry of Bauaria, and the Emperor; Charles Duke of Geldres finding his forces
to weak to encounter so great a Monarke, he purchased a peace with his
Majesty, the which was concluded the first of October following: And the 21. of
November the Earl of Hochstraten, as governor of Holland for the Emperor, was
sent by the Lady Marguerite Regent into the said town of Vtrecht, who took a
sollemne possession in his Majesty's name (as Duke of Brabant and Earl of
Holland) and received their oaths and homages: the like he did at Amersfoort,
Wyck-ter-Duyrsted, Renen, and Montfort, (as for the sovereignty this last
town having a particular Lord and Vicont of that place) returning back to
Vtrecht the chief town of the country; he disposed of the Estate and
government. And as al things were well settled under the Emperors authority,
bishop Henry had a desire (for some reasons) to retire into Germany to his
other Bishoppricke of Worms chosing for Bishop and substituting in his place
William of Enckwoort borne at Boisleduc Cardinal and Bishop of Tortone, as
Pope Adrian the sixth had been before he was Pope, who resigned the said
Bishopprike unto him before he came to the Popedom. This Enckwoort was a
Courtier at Rome, and came not to his Bishoprike of Vtrecht (making James
Vte^engen his Vicar) until he died in the year 1533. In the mean time Pope
Clement the seventh having seen the Contracts and Instruments of the cession
and transport made by the Bishop Henry of Bauaria to the Emperor of the
temporaltie of Vtrecht, and the appourtenances, having had therein the advice
and consent of the College of Cardinals, they did approve and ratify all,
decreeing that this cession and transport should be of force, and take full
effect. But for that this Estate and Seignieury is a fee of the Empire, and
does hold of the Imperial Chamber, the Emperor was forced to demand the
Inuestiture of the said Chamber in his own private name, as well for himself
as for his successors lawfully descended from him. The which he did easily
obtain. And by this means the Cities, Towns, Territory and Jurisdiction of
the Estate and Seigneiury of Vtrecht (which had been governed by their proper
Princes and Bishops; above nine hundred year) came under the obedience of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, and after him to his son Philip the second King of
Spain, Duke of Brabant, Earl of Holland etc. Of which Estate of Vtrecht
(being two Diocesses) the Emperor made two Estates, reducing them into two
Provinces, which make the number of seauenteene in the Netherlands; that is,
into the province of Vtrecht, and that of Oueryssel: That of Vtrecht making the
fourth in rank of the confederate Belgic Provinces, under the general
Estates, and that of Oueryssel the fifth, having their voices and suffrages in
that order in their Cessions.

The Estates of which Province of Vtrecht consist at this day, as in former
times, of three members; the Clergy of five Colleges that have Chanoins, the
Nobility, and the towns: Of which Colleges the Deputies are indifferently
chosen, to assist daily in their Assemblies, with them of the Nobility and
towns; who have their Secretaries and other Officers.

This Seigneury of Vtrecht has (as we have said) a Prouincial Council, from
which at this present there is no appellation, as had bin heretofore to the
Imperial Chamber at Spier, at such time as it was merely a member of the
Empire: but since that the Emperor Charles the 5. did unite it to his demaines,
excluding the said Imperial Chamber, he made it subject to the great Council
at Macklyn: until that the Estates of the said country and of Oueryssel, having
within these thirty years recovered their liberty, it has been discontinued.
Notwithstanding in case of remission they may have their recourse unto the
Estates of the Province; where as the reuision is made by the same Acts: In
which Prouincial Council there is a president, six Counselors, an Attorney
general, and a Register. The Chamber of accoumpt, is kept by the college of
the Estates, whereas the Tresorers as well general as particular are bound to
come and yield up their Accoumpt. The said Seigneury has also a particular
Mynt, as it has always had; the which is also subject to the general of the
Mynte for the united Estates. The government and Religion is generally
maintained as in other Provinces their confederats. There are four Marshals
for the whole Seigneury, every one of which having charge in the quarters that
are assigned them, where they are to command their Archers to apprehend all
vagabonds and other offenders which they shall meet in the country. The
deceased Prince of Orange of famous memory, was Governor of this Province, as
of Holland and Zealand, placed there by King Philip, before his last return
toward Spain; after the violent death of the said Prince, the united Estates
did subrogat Prince Maurice of Nassau his son, Marquis of La Vere, and
Flissingue, making him more over their Captain General and Admiral of all the
united Provinces, as he is at this present.

FRISLAND.
NO man can deny but this Frison Nation is very ancient, as it appears by the
ancient greek and latin writers, as Strabo, Ptolomey, Pliny, Tacitus and
others: for it retains at this day the same seat and the same name, which they
gave them and had before them* Seeing that in a manner al other Nations of
Germany have either quit their old abodes, or else have received new names: the
which needs no far fetched proofs, seeing their nearest neighbors do
verify it. For the names of Holland, Vtrecht, Ouerissel, Westphalia and
others, were never known by any of the above named Authors: neither was the
name of Geldre ever in use (the Inhabitants whereof, and of Cleues, Iuilliers,
Monts, and Berghe were then called Sicambres) but eight hundred seauenty eight
years after the Nativity of our Savior JESUS CHRIST. That which they now
call the country of Saxony, was not the abode of the ancient Saxons, whereof
Ptolomey makes mention. So as it is hard for modern writers to judge (by
reason of the alteration of names) if those which be at this present neighbors
unto Frisland, be the same Nations which in ancient time were wont to be, or
whether they be now more remote. But as for the Frisons there is no dispute
nor doubt, whereof to give more firm and solid reasons both of the name and of
the Antiquity, the Reader shall understand that the succession of their Princes,
the families, the foundation of towns, castles and villages, may in their
regard, be drawn, if not farther, yet with more certainty then any other
Nation of Germany. The Danes although they be very ancient, and equal touching
their beginning with the Frisons, cannot make a true extraction, nor give a
reason of the time, but since their King Frotho the third; during whose reign
our Savior JESUS CHRIST was borne. The Franconians likewise although they be
very old (whatsoever they pretend that their freedom was purchased in the
service of the Roman Emperors) yet are they in doubt of their first
beginning, issue and denomination: so as they cannot decipher their true and
continned Chronology, but since Charlemaignes time. But the Frisons having to
this day always kept one name and one dwelling, may directly and by a plain
computation of times, report their gestes from the beginning unto the ending:
so having taken beginning 313. years before CHRIST, and since that time four
times made proof of the change and Estate of their Common weal: they may by a
clear computation of years, show how long they were under princes, then under
dukes* after under Kings, unto Charlemaigne, and since under Podestates, until
their Anarchia; how long also under the Factions unto the resignation which
George Duke of Saxony made unto the Emperor Charles the fifth, and how long
under the house of Austria until their Emancepation and liberty, which they
enjoy at this present, proving from the beginning of their Princes the
foundation and building of the town of Staueren, which then was the chief of
all the Realm of Frisland. By reason of which Antiquity this town has had a
prerogative from the Kings of Denmark, that in passing the straight of the
Sonde; their ships have privilege to go first before all others, either going
or coming out which must attend their turns, but not those of Staueren, which
must be presently dispatched by the Impost gatherers.

To describe the questions which are betwixt the ancient and modern Authors,
to find out the truth from what place Friso and his two brethren Bruno and
Saxo are first descended, were in my opinion a tedious and endless labor,
seeing they can determine nothing that is certain, no more then of the
Ancestors of these three princes; which some maintained to be descended from
Ragau, son to Sem, the son of Noe: But it appears plainly that they were
of the relics of the Macedonian Army, having served Alexander the great in
his conquest of Asia and the Indies, who placed them in garrison in the Emodian
Mountains. But the Indiens after the death of Alexondar, being persuaded by
Sandrocotus to rebel; Friso with his two brethren and all their friends
embarked in three hundred ships in the year of the creation, 3642. and before
the Nativity of Christ, three hundred twenty one, and so put to sea, sailing
from one country to another, seeking some new dwelling, but they wandered up and
down eight years and could not be received: In the end of so many ships
(whether that the Seas had swallowed them up, or spoiled with age, or otherwise
lost) there were but fifty four which arrived at a safe Port, whereof eighteen
landed in Prussia, twelve in Russia, and twenty four (in the which were Friso
and his brethren) entered by the Fly about Autome into these quarters of
Frisland without any let or opposition of the Suedens, who at that time (for
fear of tempests and Inondations) where retired into the highest part of the
country.

Having taken land they presently built a Temple to Jupiter, which in their
language the called Stauo* and there they built a town, which of the name of
their God they called Stauora, which is now the town of Staueren standing upon
the Frisons sea, the which they fortified: whereby they defended themselves not
only against the Suedens, but also against the Danes, Brittons and others,
getting their living as well of pyracie at sea, as by tilling of the ground,
until the people being multiplied, and questions growing daily among them by
reason of the straitnes of their country, which was not sufficient to feed al
their cattle: Prince Friso fearing that this contention of the Commons (he
being the elder of his brethren) might breed some dislike betwixt them three,
propounded a means to maintain love and amity betwixt them; who having
imparted it unto the people; this was found the most expedient: That Bruno and
Saxo with their families (leaving this part of Frisland) should seek forth
some new habitations near unto it, as well for themselves as for their
successors: So as being neighbors one unto an other, they might not only
entertain themselves in the Discilpine and Institution of their Ancestors, but
also succor one another with their common forces, against all incursions of
their enemies So three hundred years before CHRIST, Saxo and Bruno parted from
Staueren, and passing by the Fly, they sailed toward the East, until they
came to Haldr^cht, or Saxony, near unto the German Sea, whereas entering into
the gulf of Albis, they landed by little and litttle, and having chased away
the Inhabitants by force, they won a great country. Bruno (for that he would
not discontent his brother) went toward the West, by the Visurge or Wezer,
where he founded a City of his own name called Brunswick. (What this word
of Wick signifies we have showed before) the which although it has been
often destroyed, built again and augmented, yet when as the posterity of Bruno
came once to fail, it has always retained the title of a free town: So as
in the time of Charlemaign it was wholly destroyed, but in the year eight
hundred sixty one it was re-edified again by Bruno Duke of Saxony, son to
Ludoph; whereof I thought good to make mention, for that Albert Crantz does
maintain, that the town of Brunswick was first founded by this Bruno son to
Ludolph. Touching the gests of Bruno and Saxo, and of their successors Saxons
and Brunswickains, we will leave them to such as have written the histories of
Saxony and Brunswick, and will only speak of our Friso: who being the first
Prince of the Frisons, after the departure of his Brethren, retained al
Frisland for his inheritance, the which did extend it self along the North-sea
coast, from the rivers of Fly and Ems (or Ameris) on the West side on the
river of Zidore to the East, which is the length and breadth from the North and
the British sea, unto the Battauians or Hollanders, and to the Sicambrians:
which are the Geldrois on the South side. Al which country Bruno divided into
seven parts, according to the number of his sons, which he called Zeelandts,
for that they are all upon the sea, most part Islands or Peninsules joined to
the continent: his sons were Adel his eldest, and the second Prince of
Frisland, Witto, Hetto, Hayo, Scholto, Gailo and Aesgo: to whom he gave by his
Testament certain precepts of that which they should do or not do to entertain
amity and correspondency with their neighbor Princes: he him-self left unto
his sons their portions in writing, and also a certain treaty of alliance which
he made with the Princes of Germany: who by a common Accord and consent made
him and his successors Gardiens of the North sea, to defend the whole country
from the Inondation of the sea, as also of the public ways against robbers
and thieves, to that end that Merchants might pass and traffic freely unto
the Rhyne: and in this respect he was allowed to take customs and imposts of
marcha^dise at diverse passages: he had also an Immunity of Arms granted him,
which was a privilege, whereby neither he nor his were bound to go to the war
when as the other Princes and Provinces went to defend the liberty of Germany.
The Frisons had many other good privileges, of their liberty and freedom, the
which were given them by Caesar Augustus, Charlemaigne and other Emperors, and
ratified by Charles the fifth, which they have always maintained.

These seven parts of Frisland called Zeela^dts, were divided and compast in by
certain rivers, whereof betwixt Eldere and Fly were five* that is, Lanwer,
Eems, Wezer, Elbe, and Iadua. Betwixt the Fly and Eems there were three of
these Zeelandts, very well peopled upon the South side, for that the North part
was not habitable by reason of the lakes, moors, and bogs, which were
inaccessible, and for want of banks to defend them from the Inondation of the
sea. wherefore the places most freque^ted were that of Staueren, the seven
forests, Steenwick, Twent, Drent, a part of the Territory of Groaning, Benthem
and Oldenburch, all which lay together upon the maine land: All which until
Charlemaignes time was called High Frisland, as it may appear by the writing
of some Saints which have preached the Word of God there. But 120. years before
CHRIST, Friso the young (whom they also call Frisius) son to Grunnius who was
founder of Groaning, son to Gaylo the son of Hago the 4. son of Friso the
first Prince of the Frisons, made a new Collony of Frisons not far from the
rest; having had to wife the daughter of Vbbo third Prince of Frisons who was
named Frou, which signifies Lady, by which name Oppianus says, the Emperor
Seuerus wife was called. This Friso obtained from his father and father in law,
a troop of men, with the which he past the Fly on the West part, into an
empty Island, where he stayed, and there made his abode, calling it new
Frisland, whereof the Inhabitants were called Frisiabenes: And on a certain
place (where as since the town of Alcmar was built) he seated a town which by
his wives name he called Frougast: But as in the Frison tongue as well as in
the German, they do usually pronounce a V. consonant for an F. In succession
of times this word is changed into Vrougast or Vroulegast, with which word
Geyst there are many places end in Frisland. This town of Vrougast became
afterward, great, and of good traffic: The which the Romans making war
against the Battauians and Frisons, for the affinity which this name had with
their town of Verona in Italy, they also called it Verone. Of this
VVest-Frisland is that to be understood which Tacitus writes was done by the
Frisons for their neighborhood with the Battauians. In this Estate was
Frisland maintained since the coming of Friso their first prince the space of
one hundred ninety three years, whereof Staueren was the chief town, whereas
the Princes kept their Court, governing the other quarters called Zeelandts by
their Lieutenants. This Town of Staueren grew so proud by their wealth and
Navigations, as they seemed all gold, gilding the posts of their houses, and
their vanity was so great as a rich widow having commanded the Master of
her ship to bring her the best Merchandise he should find in the East
Countries: For that he brought nothing back but Wheat, which he held to be
best; This vain woman commanded the Master, that if he had laden it on the
larboord side, he should cast it into the Sea on the starboord side* which
having done, God sent a tempest which did so move the sands of the sea, as in
the same place where the Wheat had been cast forth, there did rise a bar or
bank of sand, which has ever since spoiled the Haven of the said Town, which
has deprived them quite both of their Navigations and wealth, so as since the
Inhabitants (having been often spoiled) are now grown more modest.

All that Prince Friso had left in writing, was not done in the Frison tongue,
but in Greek letters: having reigned sixty year he died, two hundred twenty
seven years before Christ* Adel his eldest son succeeded him, who reigned
ninety four years, and dyed one hundred thirty one years before Christ.
After him came Vbbo his son who governed eighty years, and died fifty one
years before Christ. Friso or Frisius son to Grunnius who built the town of
Groaning (as we have said) married the Lady Frou; To whom succeeded his son
Asniga Ascou 4. Prince of Frisland, who reigned 82. years, and died 31. years
after the birth of Christ: Diogarus Segon was 5. Dibaldus Segon 6. and Tabbo 7.
al which together lived 443. years: the^ had they as many Dukes, whereof Ascon
was the first, who had four sons, whereof Adelbold the eldest succeeded him,
and was second Duke of Frisland; dying without children he left his brother
Tito Bocaial his successor, who dying also without children, had Vbbo son to
his brother Richold, Nephew to Ascon for his heir, who was 4. Duke of
Frisland: To whom succeeded his son Haron fifth Duke, who dyed in the year
of Christ three hundred thirty five. After him came his son Odibald sixth Duke,
then Vdolph Haron seventh and last Duke. For after him unto Charlemaigne
Frisland had nine Kings. These seven dukes altogether reigned two hundred
sixty two years. Then came Richold Vtto who was first King of East Frisland.
(we call it so in regard of VVest-Freezeland, into the which Friso the young
son of Grunnius led the first Collonies.) To him succeeded Odibaldus,
second King of Frisland: Then Richold third King. And after him Beroald son
to Valck fourth King of Frisland, in the time of Clotaire King of France, and
by him slain in battle. Adgil was fifth King of Frisland: Radbod the first of
that name, 6. King of Frisland: After whom came Adgil the 2. the 7. King who
had three sons, Gombauld the 8. King of Frisons John called the Priest, and
Radbod: Go^bauld was a good Christian, and went to serve Charlemaigne, where he
was slain with Rolland and other peers of France, at the battle of Ronseual.
John called the Priest (so called for his holiness of life) followed
Charlemaigne in his voyage to Jerusalem: from whence (as Suffridus Petri a
Frison writer says) he past on with a Collonie to the East Indies, where he
erected a Kingdom, the which was called by his name, the Kingdom of Prestre
Iean: whose successors which came afterward into Affricke, into the Kingdom
of the Abissens, are at this day called Prestres Ieans. Radbod the third son of
Adgil, the second of that name, was King of Frisland, a great persecuter of
Christians, he was twice vanquished by the French. It was he which retired from
the font, being ready to be baptized, upon a foolish answer which the Bishop
of Soissons made him, going to baptize him. He did great spoils unto
Christians, as far as Vtrecht^, the which he ruined* and destroyed the
Temple of S. Thomas, which King Dagobert had built. He reigned fifty years;
and with him ended the Kings of Frisland; the Realm being after that anexed
to the Crown of France.

We have before made mention of Friso the young, who led the first Collony into
West Frisland: let us now speak of the second, who was brought into that
quar^er which is now called Waterlandt, which happened in this manner: we have
before said that Ascon first duke of Frisland, had four sons, Adelbod, Tito,
Richold and Radbod: that the two first were dukes successively, and that Vbbe
the son of Richold, was the 4. Duke of Frisland; there then remained Radbod the
4. son of Ascon: having taken a wife out of West-Frisland, of the race of Friso
the young; he had by her one son, called Thierry, who in the 300. year of
CHRIST'S nativity, which was the 2. of the reign of Haron the 5. duke of the old
Frisons his cousin, led a Collony into that quarter of West-frisland, with the
help of the said Haron, and other four of his cousins, the which at that time
by reason of the multitude of Islands, Moors, Lakes, and other still waters, was
not yet inhabited: yet with that aid and the interest he had by his wife, he
made this second part (which at this present is Waterlandt) habitable and
fertile, in the which are Edam, Monikendam, Purmerends, Woormer, Ryp, Graft and
other good villages, so as of these two parts joined together, with that which
he added afterward on the west part, he made an Estate, and built a Palace at
Medenblike, which he made the chief town of the whole country. Who pretending
to make it a Kingdom, Haron his Cousin, Duke of East Frisland hindered him, for
the which they were long in controversy, til in the end Haron forced him to
content himself with the title of a Duke.

This Thierry Duke of West-Frisland had one son which succeeded him, named
William the first, who had Dibauldi, Dibauld had William the second, who had
Elim, he dyed without heirs male, and in him failed the line* of this
Thierry: Having before his death adopted Beroald (being but seven years old)
the son of Richold the second of that name, the third King of Frisland: so as
al these Dukes of West-Frisland successively reigned two hundred thirty three
years, five and twenty years after the death of Elim, in the year of Christ
five hundred thirty three. Beroald after the death of Richold his father did
inherit the Realm of East Frisland. Thus were the two Frislands united
together; the which Beroald inioyed sixty years: whereof he was afterward
deprived, and of his life also, by Clotaire the second of that name King of
France, father to Dagobert: Notwithstanding Adgill the second succeeded him,
and after him Gombauld, then Radbod the second, whom Charlemaigne vanquished,
and freed the Frisons from the yoke of Kings: restoring them to their
liberty, to whom he gave goodly privileges, the which they have long
maintained with the prise of their bloods.

Since the Frisons were long under an Aristocraticall Government, sometimes
under Potestates whom they did chose themselves, and not able to agree upon
the election by reason of dangerous factions, the Earls of Holland having in
succession of time and long wars, seized upon that part which they now call
West-Frisland and Waterlandt, the which the Hollanders will have, (but the
Inhabitants of the country cannot endure it) called Northolland. On the other
side, the dukes of Brunswicke, the Hans towns of Breme and Hambourg, the Earl
of Oldenbourg, Schowenbourg and Embden have usurped much of East Frisla^d, even
unto the Territory of Groaning: the which although it be an Estate and territory
apart, is comprehended notwithstanding under the territory of that which
hereafter we will simply call Frisland, enclosed betwixt the Fly and Ems, to
distinguish it from East-Frisland held by the Earls of Embden, and
West-Frisland, anexed to the county of Holland.

That then which we will simply call Frisland, and the Inhabitants Frisons, as
Tolomcy and Tacitus term them, saying that they are Germans, and people
from beyond the Rhine, whom Pliny calls Cauches, the great and the less, are
Aborigines, or originally come from that place: who above all the people of
Germany retain their ancient appellation, keeping in their ancient and first
seat, having the same language they have always had. True it is that in the
chief towns they use the Dutchtongue, but in the champian country they keep
their Frison language, which the gentlemen take pleasure to entertain in
regard of the antiquity. Although I be well acquainted with the high and low
Dutch tongue, yet I must confess that in this ancient Frison language I
understand nothing.

We have said before that the Frisons did for a time entertain themselves
under factions, we must therefore relate succinctly the beginning thereof:
which was that in the year of our redemption. 1390. there did rise two
factions in the country of Frisland, the one Vetcoopers, which signifies in
their vulgar tongue, merchants of grease, that is to say, merchants of fat
oxen, which they hold for an honest kind of merchandise, and of Schyeringers,
which are butchers and sellers of tripes, which is a base kind of trade, which
factions they say came from East and West Frisland. The first spring and
beginning thereof was; that all these merchants of cattle and the butchers
being together at a public banquet according to their custom, there was a
guest to choose a Provost, a Deane or a King amongst them, whose charge should
be to look that no disorder should be committed, which might trouble the
company. There was amongst them of either of these two companies, one that
exceeded the rest, and both equal in wealth, in respect and love toward all
the guests. Whom both the one and the other party contended to chose, their
Deane, Provost or King: the one and the other maintayning that this dignity and
authority at the table, was most befitting him that had the honestest trade.
Whereupon a question grew among them, which of those two merchandise was the
honestest: the one preferring the merchants of cattle, the other the butchers.
Upon which dispute their brains being het with wine, in the end they fell from
words to blows one against an other, party against party, every one with his
Allies and Kinsmen, meaning to maintain the one quarrel or the other: so as
in the end there was a great fight, in the which many were either hurt or
slain. In revenge whereof, either party holding it self wronged, they began
to make factions, and to bandie one against an other: so as this canker eating
more and more; strangers (who had no interest, nor were any way wronged)
engaged themselves, upon hope of booty of the one or the other party: every
one wresting what he could from his Adversary, without either law or justice
(so confused were things then and full of disorder) but such as they made by
the sword, where as the strongest carried it. The fruits of these factions
were such, as they not only rained amongst private persons, but amongst whole
fam lies, villages, bourrougs and towns, yea among whole Provinces, so as the
whole country was full of thefts and murders, and no man was free from their
insolences. In like manner about that time Holla^d was afflicted with the
factions of Hoecks and Cabillaux that is to say, the Hamesons and the Merlus,
whereof we have made mention heretofore: which was, that the one party (as the
Merlus or Coddes be fishes which prey) did threaten to deuower the other: and
they of the Hamesons did threaten to take the others by the throat: which to
speak truth were quarrels scarce fit for children. And at that time were the
factions of Gelphes and Gibelins in Italy: Of the diversity of colloured caps
in Flanders, and of those of the star in France, al which were factions
raised from the diuill. This mischief proceeded so far in Frisland, as from
the less it came to the greater, and from Merchants and Bourgers to the
Nobility and Clergy: The gentlemen ruining the houses and castles one of an
other: and the Abbots and Monks doing all the mischief they could one unto an
other: So as to appease these factions, and to reconcile the Noblemen, the
Emperor Maximilian the first, sent Otto van Langen to persuade them to choose a
Potestat amongst them, which should govern the country according to their
preuiledges, under the authority of the Empire. But their spleen was so great,
as every one seeking to choose one of their faction, the said commissioner
prevailed nothing, but returned as he came. So as the Emperor to force them
to an accord, took occasion to give the government hereditary of all Frisland
and Groaning to the house of Saxony, to hold it in fee of the Empire.

For the attayning whereof, the Dukes of Saxony having spent a great part of
their means with small profit, finding this people so impatient of a strangers
yoke, in the end Duke George resigned all his interest unto the Emperor
Charles the fifth who enjoyed it quietly, as his son Philip King of Spain
also did, till within these thirty years that they freed themselves by their
adiunction unto the general union of the confederate Provinces of the
Netherlands. Thus much we have thought good to speak of the beginning and
Estate of Frisland in general; Now we will describe the towns in particular.

LEEWARDEN.
IS at this day (as in old time Staueren was wont to be) the chief town of
Frisland, situated almost in the center of the country, called in ancient time
during the Paganisine, Aula Dei, and in the vulgar tongue Godts*hoff* that it
to say the court of God, in the which was a college or schole for the Druides,
Philosophers and wise men of that time, which were come out of France to plant
their colleges there. In witness whereof, there are yet in this town two
Temples, the one named the ancient court, the other the new, whereof the
gentlemen of the country were in former times called Hovelingen, that is to say
courtiers, for that they were constituted public defenders of this house of
God taught by the Druides. And in truth this town has more gentlemen in it,
then any other in Frisland. Of this school of the Druides, Synard the wise, a
divine and councellor to Radbod the last King of the Frisons was Rector, whom
he councelled to persecute the Christians; he censured and caused Tullies
books of the nature of the Gods to be burnt, condemning them as full of
errors and contrary to the doctrine which they taught, of the false Gods of
the gentills. This town in process of time having taken the name of
Leewarden, and the country being converted to the christian Religion, this
school of the Druides was changed into a cloister of Nuns, by Vboalt in the
year 1233. the which Dodo the fourth Abbot of Fleurencamp, would have also
called, Aulam Dei, for that he would not have the memory of that name lost. But
in the vulgar tongue it hatth been called Nyen-clooster, that is to say a New
cloister. They of Leewarden have always continued (as it appeeres by all
ancient and modern writers) and entertained their school in good learning:
which has ever been the chief of all Frisland. Until that within these 20.
years, the Estates of the Province have erected an university in the town of
Franiker, two leagues from thence; for the entertainment of which school, as
at this present of the university, and of the learned professors which are
there, in all faculties, the magistrates of Leuwarden have never spared any
charge.

In this town is the court of Parliament for all Frisland, which does
determine of all causes both criminal and civil: whether all causes come and
are to be decided according to the sincerity of the Roman laws, the which
are observed there with the like purity as they were made by the Emperor
Justinian, and as they are taught in universities, having not above twenty
municipall laws or customs, derogating from the written law. All proceedings
and other public acts are made in the Dutch tongue, their style of writing,
and the form of their letters and caracters, as well printed as written, are as
pure and neat as in any other courts of Brabant, Flanders, Holland, Vtrecht,
and other places of the Netherlands: So as the natural Frisons as also the
Brabansons, Hollanders, Flemings and other Dutche, may easily execute all
Offices of Magistrates, Secretaries and Notaries, as well in one country as in
an other, depending upon writing, be it of Justice, Policy, Account, Treasure
or otherwise.

This town of Leuwarden is seated in the quarter of Ostergoe, being great and
spacious, and containing in circuit near half a French league; the streets
are fair, large and straight, in the which it is not lawful to leave any
filthiness, every house having a boat, into the which they cast it; the which
being full, they transport it by barks into the fields: the town being so
divided by nauigable chanells (whereon there are many bridges) to serve as
well for the traffic of merchandise, as for other commodities, so as most
houses may bring their provisions up to their doors, or not far from
them: The which do also serve greatly for the clensing of the streets, the
rain washing away all the filth (if any remains in the streets) into the
chanelles. The air is clear, but somewhat brackish by reason of the
exhalations of the sea which is nere: which is the cause that it does not
lightly engender any putrefaction, neither is it often infected, with any
contagious disease.

It stands in a very pleasant country, full of goodly Meadows, even unto
the towneditches, being a pleasant sight on Sundaies and Festival days, to
behold the Bourgers walking and supping upon the green grass by troops. It
has also many pleasant villages round about the town, which seem as walks
for the Inhabitants. The situation is (as we have said) in the midest of
Frisland, so as on a summers day they may go either in wagon, or horseback
or on foot on which side they please, either to Ostergoe Westergoe, or the
Seven Forests, out of the country, where they have good means to go and
transport their merchandise by shipping either great or small.

In regard of which commodities and the goodness of the seat, Albertus Duke of
Saxony and George his son, having obtained the hereditary government of
Frisland from Maximilian the Emperor, did there settle the Parliament for the
whole Province, which the Emperor Charles the fifth and his son King
Philippe, have since allowed and confirmed; moreover Friseland has good havens
on every side, by the which they may commodiously and speedely bring all sorts
of merchandise and commodities unto the town, which makes it cheap living
there.

This town has under his Griteny, that is to say, Baylewicke or Jurisdiction,
which they call Leewarderadeel seauenteene good villages depending thereon: for
in all the quarter of Ostergoe, whereof this town is the chief, there are ten
Gritenies, every one of which has his villages depending thereon, some more,
some less, containing alltogither one hundred thirty and two villages in the
said ten Gritenies* besides the town of Dockum which is the second town of
that quarter of Ostergoe, whereof we will presently speak.

In this town does commonly reside the college of deputies for the Estates of
the whole Province, consisting of the nobility and towns, which govern the
whole Estate, as well for matters of policy and war, as for religion, who
with the voices of the Gritenies, dispose of all Estates and Offices, both of
Justice, treasure and demains, as also of captains places, and others
concerning the war and the Ecclesiastical Estate.

There is also the minte for money for the whole country, both for gold and
silver according to the order which the deputies for the Estates shall fet
down: the which notwithstanding is subject to the generals of the mints of
all the united Provinces, when need requires.

The people there are as courteous, humble and affable, yea more then in any
other town of the whole Province, or in Holland and Zeeland, although the
Frisons have been held to be somewhat rude and inciuill; the which appeeres
contrary by the frequentation of learned men of the court of Parliament, and by
the exercise of learning: for that there is not a Bourger, if he have any
means, but he sends his children to school: The which is seen at this day by
many learned men, whom I will not now flatter, for that they are yet living, as
also by those which for their knowledge have been of great authority: Amongst
which was George Ratalder, councellor to the King in the great council at
Macklin, doctor in the laws, and a good Poet, who in the year 1566. was sent
by the Duchess of Parma, Gouernesse of the Netherlands, in Embassage to the
King of Denmark, for the affairs of the said countries. And since in regard
of* his virtues and sufficiency, he was chosen President of the Provincial
council at Vtrecht.

A league from this town is the village of Zuychem, famous at this day by the
memory of Viglus Aita Zuychemus, in his life time President of the council of
Estate for the King of Spain at Brussels, whose wife being de^d, he was made a
Bishop and Provost of Saint Bauon at Gant: where he built a goodly house,
where one of his heirs lives whom I have visited within these ten years: He
also erected a free school for a certain number of poor children and a
schoolmaster, and beside s it an Hospital for old men and women of that
village, the which are well lodged and entertained according to the capacity of
the foundation.

DOCKVM.
IS the second town in all that quarter of Ostergoe, having a channel which
goes unto the sea, and an other which leads unto Groaning, which is five leagues
distant from thence, and eight from Franiker, whereas commonly the council or
college of the Admiralty for the whole Province of Friseland does remain.
This town has suffered much during the first troubles, as well in the Duke of
Aluas time as afterward, being sometimes forced to obey the one party and then
the other; so as yet to this day there appear some ruins of this intestine
war. I have not been in any town in Holland, whereas they live better
cheap in their Innes then here, whereby we may Judge how the Burgers do, which
make their provisions at the best hand. I have found there learned men and very
courteous, and it is famous for that it is the place where- Gemma Frisius was
borne, whom in my youth I knew at Louuain a great Physician and Mathematicien,
whereof his works give sufficient testymony. He died at Louuain in the year
1555. leaving one son called Cornelius Gemma Frisius, of the same profession
that his father was. In this town is carefully kept and with great reverence,
the book of the holy Evangelists, written by Saint Boniface himself, who was
before called Winfrid, he who after Saint Willebroard (otherwise called
Clement) did greatly augment the faith of JESUS CHRIST in Frisland, where
afterward he was made a martyr, with 52. of his companio^s, in Westfrisland:
where they say there are yet some of that race which massacred the^, who from
their birth carry a white mark, or rather a tuft of white hair on their
heads. They may go easily from this town by boat unto all the towns of
Frisland, and by sea to all parts of the world.

FRANIKER.
THis is one of the most ancient and renownedst towns in Frisland, in the
which not far from the port of Harlingen, there is a little castle, in the
which Henry son to Duke Albert of Saxony was for a time as it were besieged
by the other towns of Frisland, which he took so disdainefully., as he
resigned all his interest in the said country to his Brother George, who since
sold it to the Emperor Charles the fifth. Although that the castles of
Leuwarden and Harlingen, were during the wars ruined, yet this being of
small importance stands still; for that it has no means to anoy the town,
having no passage without it whereby they might give entry unto the enemy, but
does only serve for a gentleman's lodging. The town is seated in the quarter
of Westergoe, which is the second part of Frisland, in the which besides
Franiker there are eight towns more, which are, Harlingen, Bolswaert, Sneck,
Ylstt, Worcum, Hindelopen, Staueren and Sloten, under which quarter there are
eight Gritenies or Baylewycks, the which one with an other have 125. villages
depending on them. It is a good town, being three quarters of an hours
circuit, in which many gentlemen of the champian country make their residence,
and some living in the country during the Summer, retire thither in the Winter.

The Estates of Frisland desiring to provide for the instruction of their
youth, have within these twenty years erected an university in the said town,
with great privileges, the which maks it the more famous, in the which they
entertain many professors in all faculties, with good pensions, which draws
many scholars thither from all parts, even out of Poland and France: whereas
the Estates of the country have a sworn printer. They of the Magistracy have
of late years built a fair town house. It is two leagues from Leuwarden, and
one from Harlingen, whether they may go in Summer both by water, and by wagon,
but in Winter only by boat.

BOLSWAERDT.
IS a free Hans town, situated in the third division of the quarter of
Westergoe, in a good country, a league equally distant from Sneck, Ylst and
Worcom, a league and a half from Hindelopen, and two leagues from Staueren,
Sloten, Franiker and Harlingen: three from Leuwarden, and five from Dockom, and
so environed in a manner by all the towns in the country. It is a good town,
with a channel which goes to all these other towns and villages: whereby the
streets are always clean from filthe, by reason that the rain does cleanse
them: it is equal with Sneck in bigness. The Inhabitants for the most part
live of their handiworkes, merchandise, and nauigations, traffiking for the
most part with the Hamburgers. It has a passage unto the sea by the Sluse of
the village of Mackum, a league from thence, whereas the ships of the said
town lie as safely as in a good haven. The Governors of the Estate of this
town are called Bourguemasters, Aldermen and Council. The Bourguemasters and
Aldermen have the administration of Justice, being six in number. Two which
are of the council have care of the works, reparations and entertainment of
the fortifications and gates of the town, and meddle not with the Justice, but
their charge is also to look unto all crimes that are committed, and to deliver
the offenders to the Officer, to be punished according to the exigence of the
fact: which Regents and Administrators receive their authorite and commission
yearly from the Governor and council of the Province. There was in old time
three Monasteries in the town. The pore have good entertainme^t, the Orphins
founded by Rheine, Bourguemaster of the town, the which was endowed with more
living by Hyde the daughter of Hero, being a widow.

Then the rich Hospital, whereas many poor people are fed all at one table,
with their lodging. Then the poor Hospital, whereas many poor old people
have every one a chamber a part and are entertained there with bread, beer,
butter and firing, from whence the poor people of the town have once a week
relief. This town is since the year of our Lord 1572. much increased, and
well fortefied as well in ports, rampars, bulwarks, as otherwise. The Burgers
have endured much, as well in their traffic at sea, as in lodgging of
souldiars. This town hold a market every Saturday, whether the inhabitants of
all the nerest towns and villages, Greteines or Baylewycks come and bring
their merchandise and victuals, with greatstore of wild-foule and venison:
they want no fish also, both from the fresh water and sea. The Bailiff of
Wouseradeel comes thither every marketday, to hold his seat of justice, and to
do right to all men of his jurisdiction, where the G^ieteman or Bailife does
preside, with his Assessors and Iurats, having under them 29. villages, and two
monasteries, that is the Abbay of Fleurecampe of men* and one of women called
Oogecloester, now ruined in these last wars, and their revenue applied to the
common cause. Nere unto this town is a village named Womels, famous for the
birth of that learned man Cyprianus Womelius a doctor of the law and a great
Poet, councellor in the Imperial chamber at Spyer. These of this town of
Bolswart did many years since join themselves to the Hans towns o^ Germany,
with whom they are confederate, and are registered among the members thereof,
inioying the like privileges freedoms and exemptions of imposts and customs,
as the other towns of Denmark, Sueden, Norwaie, Liuonia, Prussia, East
country, and other Principalities and commonweals.

Having also their chamber or lodging of Esterlings in Antwerp, and at the
Stylliard in London, the which is now out of use, which privileges the
inhabitants of the said town inioye, bringing only a certificate of their
Bourgesie under the seal of the town of Bolswaert: The which was wont to
yield them great profit in navigations and traffic: It was practiced generally
throughout all the Hans towns, the better to entertain their commerce, and
mutual correspondencie, and to train up their youth in the trade of
merchandise, from one Province to an other, no married men being admitted in
those places of London and Antwerp, only young men doing their own business
or their Masters, so as they be members of this company. As for the
foundation of this town of Bolswaert we find that it was built by the Lady
Bolswine daughter to Radbod King of Frisland, in the year 713. which Lady was
married to the Siegnior of Teekenbourg, issued from the Noble house of
Dockenburg, the which of a castle was made a town, and is now called Dockum.
This Lady being a widow, retired her self from Teekenburg, into this quarter
of Frisland whereas King Radbod her father gave her a house of pleasure, and
there she built a small town, which she called by her own name Bolswaert,
for that it was seated in a half Island: the which the Danes and Normans did
often ruin, yet in the end it became a good town of traffic.

Being in that town it was told me that at that time of the foundation, the
sea came up unto it, but since the land has won much of the sea, so as it
stays at the village of Mackum.

STAVEREN.
IT is the most ancient, and was in former times, the chief town of all
Frisland, whereof we have sufficiently discoursed, of the same society and
company, but more ancient then that of Bolswaert, whose privileges (especially
their precedence at the Sond in Denmark before all other ships) we have
made mention of before, being needless now to make any further repetitio^: it
stands upon the sea on the South side, on the entry of the gulf of Zuyderzee,
at the point which looks toward Holland, almost opposite to the passage of
Enchuysen, half a league from Hinderlopen upon the same shore. It seems
that this is the place whereas time the people kept, whom Pliny calls Sturi,
of which name all Frisland was sometimes called Regnum Stauriae: Which Kingdom
did extend to Nymegen, where was wont to be engraven on the East Port, hic
limes Imperii, Here is the bounds of the Empire, and on the West gate, Hic
finis Regni Stauriae, Here is the end of the Stauriens Kingdom: so as there
is no doubt but heretofore it has been a rich and mighty Town, but the
tempests and Inondations of the sea have often annoyed it, and driven it
farther into the country, being told me when I went to view it, that the old
town was a League nerer to the Sea, and now in the bottom of the Sea: Besides
certain bars of Sand have stopped the Haven, and taken away their navigations,
as we have formerly observed. There was wont to be a strong Castle at the end
of the town, looking toward the Sea and the Haven: But during these last
troubles, the Captain which was put in guard there with a garrison, being
beseeged by the Estates, growing wilful and resolute to keep it, his soldiers
having small hope of any succors, yielded up the place, and delivered their
Captain to the Estates; who caused it to be presently raized, as we may see
by a great part of the ruins. The town is long and narrow, enlarged and
fortified with rampars and bulwarks, but of small importance and ill
entertained, as being held at this present time not greatly necessary: The
houses in the great street are reasonable fair and well built, the Inhabitants
live by their handy-workes and by the Sea, but not of such navigations and
traffic as they were wont to have.

HARLINGEN.
IT is now a good and spacious town, and of good traffic, since that Gasper
Robles Lord of Billy, Governor of the country of Frisland and Groaning, for the
King of Spain caused the banks behind the Castle, to be repaired and
enlarged, with great labor and cost, which does now defend it from the
tempests and waves of the sea which beat against it, which work the
Inhabitants (notwithstanding the hard government of the said Robles) cannot
sufficiently commend.

The Estates of Frisland having since these last troubles resumed their
liberty, have caused the said Castle to be ruined so far as it did ouerlooke
the Town, retaining the fortification which looks toward the Sea and the
Banks, having in the same place where the ditch was drawn a goodly new Haven
into the Town, which passes under a great drawbridge, to go unto the Port
and not far from it, whereas a great number of Ships may lie safely. The
rest of the Town that is enlarged, is fortified with good rampars and
Bulwarks. There are two chanells which coming from the sea to the old haven,
pass through the town, whereof the one goes to Franiker a league from thence,
from whence at all hours of the day Boats do go with passengers, at an easy
rate. This town being thus situated upon the Sea, has the best haven and
nearest unto the sea of any other in all Frisland, where they are rich
Merchants, who besides their ordinary trade in the country, aduenter much in
long voyages, for the which they make goodly ships.

SNECK.
IS a good little country Town, seated in a plain three leagues from
Leuwarden, and one from Ilst: the which has Deputies also at the Estates of
Frisland: Heretofore it had goodly Cloisters, both within and without the town,
the which at this day are all ruined and applied to other uses, and their
revenues employed to the common cause, or to some works of Hospitality, Piety
or Schools. It is honored for that it is the place where Doctor Hopperus was
borne, who has written many goodly works with great credit, and has joined
practice and wisdom to his knowledge: for which respect he was first of the
Prive Counsel for the King of Spain at Brussels, and from thence was called
into Spain to supply the place of Tiseuach President of the Counsel of Estate
for the Netherlands.

SLOTEN.
A Little town near unto the gulf of the Zuyderzee lying on the South part
upon the sea, a league and a half from Staueren; it has no other trade then
Navigations, and that which depends on the sea.

ILST.
Stands upon the West, half a league from Sneeke, and upon the Nortwest a
League from Bolswaert, on the South side as far from Sloten: It is an open
town, yet has it municipal laws, it is environed with a large ditch, which
may defend it from the incursions of the enemies, or of any other insolent
persons. It consists of two long ranks of fair houses, from the East unto the
West: through the which does pass a channel, the which on either bank is
planted with high trees, which do beautify the town. There is but one Parish
Church, which was wont to be a Covent of Carmelites; being ruined in these last
troubles, but the Temple stands still.

It appears by the Antiquities of Frisland, that in the year one thousand two
hundred sixty three, this town was one of the most ancient of the country,
famous for their Navigations and traffic. Now it is the Storehouse for
ship-timber, for such vessels as pass from one place unto an other within the
country, more then to any other town in Frisland. Albert Duke of Saxony,
according to the Donation made unto him by the Emperor Maximillian the first
of the Hereditary government of Frisland, took possession of that town, as
the whole Jurisdiction of VVestergoe* and moreover being near unto that of the
seven Forests, after that he had raized the siege and freed his son at
Franiker, he became in a manner Master of all Frisland.

WORCVM.
TO speak truly, is but a good Bourough, yet has it the privileges of a
Town joining upon the sea, entering into it by a great Scluse which pierces
the bank, a League fom Bolswaert, from whence I have gone thither both by
water and by land. It has also a Channel from one end unto an other which goes
unto the said Scluse. According to the situation it is a place which has good
means to live in, and good cheap. It is governed by Bourguemaisters and
Aldermen, but for all matters of Justice it resorts to the Provincial Council
at Leuwaerden.

HINDELOPEN.
SO called by reason of the retreat of the wild beasts (at such time as
Frisland was half Forest) which they do call Hinden in their country
language, and Loopen which is to run, which is as much to say, as the course
and recourse of Stagges and Hindes: it was first a place for hunting, then by a
little and a little made a Village, and the Sea eating up to it, which gave it
a good road it became a Bourough, well known at this day, for their
Navigations, which is the peoples chief practice.

Having described the two principal quarters of Frisland, that is Ostergoe and
Westergoe, with their towns: we must now speak of

THE SEVEN FORESTS.
THis quarter so called by reason of the seven Forests which were wont to be
there, but now turned for the most part into pasture and land for tillage,
which make the third quarter of Frisland, consisting of eight Gretenies or
Baylywicks, all which together have seauenty five villages, among the which
there are good Borroughs, the which jointly have their Deputies (be they
Gryetmen or others) at the ordinary Assembly of the Estates of the said
Province, in the town of Leuwaerden. These names should be troublesome to the
Reader, by reason of the strangeness thereof. to set down in writing the
appellations of all the Gretenies of the three quarters of Frisland, being in
number 28. the which I cannot term more properly, then Bailywicks, and their
Grietmen Bailiffs.

There are some Islands depending upon Frisand, among the which Amelandt and
Schellinck are the chief, the first belonging to a particular Lord, who during
the troubles has held it free and neural paying some contribution unto the
Admiralty, of Dunkerke, so as the ships of the said Island might sail freely to
al places, as also the Dunkerkers might go and refresh themselves in the said
Island. there are three good Villages in the said Island, besides Amelandt
(whereas the Seignior has his lodging) recovered from the sea* The Estates of
the said country have also within these thirty years a good portion of ground
which they call the Bildt, which is now well defended with Dikes, and is made
the fertilest quarter in all Frisland, where they have appointed a Bayliffe or
Receiver, for it is of great proffit and revenue.

There are in diverse parts of Frisland turfes* some hard and firm, others more
light, which make not so good coal as the first: and whereas they have no
turfes, the Peasants use the dung of their cattle, with which they cut reeds
very small, and mingle it together, and then they dry it for the Winter: they
say that bacon dried with this fire, is more firm then any other. This Country
yeeldes many good and strong Horses, which are transported through all Europe:
as also great Oxen and very fat. Their Kine are very fertile, the which do
often bring forth two calves at once; and the ewes two or three lambs, and
sometimes four together, where the Sheep are very big of body, but not so
sweet and sauory as those of Berry, Arthois, Cempenie in Brabant, which have a
dry feed, and are less.

OVERYSSELL.
THis Conty of Oueryssell in former times under the Principallitie of the
Bishops of Vtrecht, was then called the high diocese, But sense that the
Emperor Charles the fifth obtained from the bishop the temporality of both
dioceses the higher and the lower; he made two Provinces, one of Vtrecht and
the other of Ouerysel, the which are numbered among the 17. Provinces, and now
under the union of the General estates of the confederate Provinces: who by
arms have shook of the Spanish yoke, and have purchased their liberty, which
they enjoy at this day. This country is so called for that it lies beyond the
riue of Yssel: this Duch word Over, signifying beyond, and in Latin Trans, so
as it was called Transissalana. On the north side it has Friseland, and a part
of the country of Groaning; on the South the Conty of Zutphen: to East the
country of West-phalia, and upon the West the Zuyderzee. It is watered by many
rivers, the Yssel, Vidre, Regge, Dan-noire and Wahal, besides the channels which
are kept in by the Sluice: A good and fertile soil, and fat pastures, where
they do yearly feed many fat cattle. There is abundance of good butter and
cheese and all other sorts of victual.

The whole Province is divided into three great Baylywicks; that is of Salandt,
of the old Saliens: of Tuent, so called of the ancient Tubantins: and of
Vollenhouen, which is in the midest of the other two, whereof the one bends to
the North and the other to the South. The quarter of Salandt comprehends under
it many good towns among the which are these three Imperial Hans towns.
Deuenter, Campen and Swolle: the lesser are Hasselt, Couoerden, Genemuiden,
Ommen, Hardenbourg, Wilson and Graff-horst: That of Tuent has the towns, of
Oldenzeel, Otmarson, Enschede, Ghoor, Diyepenham, Delden, Rissen, and Almeloo:
The quarter of Vollenhouen has a town of that name with a Castle which was
wont to be the Bishop of Vtrechts Palace when they came into the high diocese:
then the town of St^enwicke, to which the Cuyndert did belong, which was wont
to be famous for the strength of the Castle, the which was ruined in these last
wars.

Among the fortefied towns, besides the three Imperial Hans towns of
Deuenter, Campen and Swolle, are those of Hasselt upon Vidre (to distinguish it
from Hasselt a good town in the country of Liege) Oldenzeel, Steenwick,
Otmarsom and Enscheede. There are also a great number of castles and above 120.
Borroughs and villages.

The souerainty of this Province, before the troubles in the Netherlands, did
belong unto Phillip the second King of Spain, who succeeded the Emperor Charles
the fifth his father, who had the interest (confirmed by the Pope) from Henry of
Bauaria Bishop of Vtrecht, upon certain conditions, the chief whereof was,
that he should maintain their privileges; for want whereof and to free them
from the oppression of the Spaniards, they have (as all the other united
Provinces) freed themselves and recovered their liberty: whereof the people
(as well as the Frisons) are wonderfully desirous, and impatient to bear the
yoke.

The said Province has never acknowledged but two members in their government,
that is, the Nobility, of the which are chosen the particular governors, and
high officers, and they three Imperial towns, Deuenter, Campen and Swoll, and
no others. By the voices and suffrages of which two members, all difficulties
in the Estate are decided: And whatsoever has bin decreed by them according to
the constitutions of the country, shall remain firm and stable: And as the
nobility in precedence yield not to any; no more do the towns, but in their
order and degree: whereof Deuenter is the first, then Campen, and last Swoll:
every one of which towns judge by decree as well in civil as criminal causes;
and either of them has privilege to coin money. Let this suffice for a
brief description of the Estate of the country of Oueryssell: Let us now come
to a particular description of the towns*

DEVENTER.
THE first of the three Imperial Hans towns is seated upon the right bank
of the river of Yssell three leagues from Zutphen, and four from Swoll. It was
a goodly great town, and of great traffic before the last troubles: But the
two sieges which they have been forced to endure with in these thirty years
by the united Estates, has much decayed it. The first time in the year 1578.
when it was yielded to the Earl of Reneberg, Lieutenant for the said Estates
and the country, since the earl of Lecester governor for the Queen of England
Protectresse of the united Provinces, gave the Gouermnent thereof to Sir
William Stanley an English Colonel, who sold it to the Spaniard: So as it
remained subject to the Spanish insolences, from the year 1587, unto the
year 1591. when as Prince Maurice went to beseege it with the said Estates, in
the which Cont Harman Vanden Bergh, Cousin german to the Prince commanded,
whom he forced to yield by composition, after a great battery; the ruins
whereof will not be easily repaired in many years, especially toward the kaye.

But whereas the cannon could not anoy them, it is well built, with fair high
houses, the streets broad and clean with a fair market place, in the midest
whereof is the house of the sworn companies, whereas a guard is kept day and
night, before the great Collegiall Church is the townehouse which they call
Raed huys that is to say, the council house, whereas the Bourguemasters and
Senators do assemble daily to do justice to every man. The Magistrates there
show themselves modestly grave, and the Burgers civil, among whom there are
rich Merchants, by the traffic which they have of all sorts of Merchandise,
as of merchandise, as well by Land into Westphalia and other places of Germany,
as by the river of Yssel, which on one side mounts up the Rhin unto Cologne,
and descends down before Campen to the Zuyderzee, unto Amsterdam, Horn,
Enchuysen and other Towns of Holland and Friseland, Since it was last yielded,
it is wunderfully fortified with rampars and good Bullwarkes, besides that it
has always had a double wall of Brick round about it. In old time when a
matters succeeded not well in the diocese of Vtrecht, the Bishops retired
themselves to Deuenter, as we read of Bishop Baldric, who to fly the fury of
the Normans and Danes which ruined the town of Vtrecht, retired with all his
clergy to this town: then the Danes being chased away, he returned and repared
the Cathedral Church, which they had made a stable for their horses. In this
town does usually reside the Drossart (or great Bayliffe) for the quarter of
Salandt, whereof this is the chief town, and in the which there is great
store of gentlemen.

CAMPEN.
THis is the second of three Hans towns in the Province of Ouerysell, although
it be not like to all the rest, on the other side of the river of yssel, but on
Gelders side, it is a fair great town, of more length then breadth, the which
after that it had been yielded unto the Earl of Reneberg in the name of the
Estates, it was much better fortified then before. It has agoodly bridge upon
the river, at the end whereof they did then build a good fort to defend it; by
which bridge they may go both on horseback, Wagon and foot, to all the
towns of Ouerysel, Friseland and Groaning, or else if they will by the chanells
which rune through the country. Having past this bridge, going toward
Vollenhouen and Geelmuyden, you enter into a goodly great and spacious pasture,
full of diches, which they call Maester brouk, which yields as good butter and
cheese as any part in Holland: besides, that in a short time it fats a great
number of goodly Oxen. This pasture has at the least four leagues in circuit,
from the bridge of Campen unto Geelmuyden along the river of Vidre, passing
before the town of Hasselt, then passing on to Swolle, it returns from thence
to Campen, which circuit is a half days iorny. It is good cheap living in
this town, there is abundance of fresh water fish and good cheap, as Salmon,
Sturgion, Carpes, Barbels and Pikes. I did once buy three Carpes there, either
being a foot and a half long for six Patars a piece, the which tide to the
bark, and swimming in the Zuyderzee, I brought a live to Amsterdam, All sorts
of victual are good cheap there, especially fowls and Ducke and Mallard.
This town is full of Gentlemen and learned men: the houses are fair and high
built, and streets very clean. It is much enlarged and beautified within these
twelve or thirteen years. The Magistrates are affable and the people civil
and courteous, whereas those that are fled thither for relligion are kindly
entertained, yea they are drawn thither to set up their trades, being very fit
for it, for that the Merchants and workmen may go in one night with a good
wind to Amsterdam, and going from thence at night, after the dispach of their
business, they may be the next day again at their own houses, which is a
great commodity. This town has privilege to coin money, and they carefully
entertain a free schole.

SWOLLE.
IS a land town, of a round form, situated upon a little Brook running into
the river of Vidre, and from thence by the black water into the Zuyderzee: It
is held to be strong, having ever had double walls and double diches: since
these troubles it has been fortified with new rampars and Bulwarks. In former
times it was wont in time of danger to be the retreat of the Governor and of
the Council of that country, who made his residence at Vollenhouen. It is good
cheap living there, but the streets are not so clean kept as at Campen, by
reason of the Cattle which they keep within the town and the great multitude
of Wagons which come thither from all parts; for it is of greater traffic
then Campen. It has not been any way anoyed by siege during these troubles,
like to Deuenter and Campen, being fallen into the Estates power, by the
prevention of the well affected Burgers, who chased away them of the Spanish
faction, whereby they are become rich. It has two channels which pass through
it, upon the greatest of them stands the Market place, which is fair and
spacious, and joining unto it the great Temple of Saint Michel; then a little
lower, is our Ladies Church. In honor of this Town these four latin verses
were made.

Swolla diu celebris meruit virtutibus arma,
Quae populum fortem nobilitare solent:
Inde salutifera vetere p^etate, fid que,
In Tripolim recipi faedere digna fuit.
Swolls virtue whilom got these arms, that grace,
the undaunted troop that won them and their race:
And for her faith and Martial brood, 't was she
was only held fit guard for Tripoli.
For that it is the third imperial Hans Town of this Province of Oueryssell,
having privilege to coin both gold and silver, as the two others, we have
described these three chief Towns: let us now come unto the lesser, but
strong and well fortified.

STEENWYCK.
IS situated upon a brook called Blockerzyel, coming out of the country not
far from the town, and falls nere unto Vollenhouen into the Zuyderzee; In
less then twenty years it felt two sieges, the one by Charles Earl of
Mansfeldt for the Prince of Parma, who was forced to retire, the town being
victualed by Count William, Lewis of Nassau, Philippe Earl of Hohenloo and
General Norris. Being afterward surprised by the Spaniards, Prince Maurice
went to besiege it in the year of our Lord 1592. the which he did so
importune both by battery and mine, as (notwithstanding the great loss of his
men, he himself being also shot, in the cheek,) he forced them to yield by
composition. It is not ten years since the Spaniards made an other enterprise,
but it succeeded not. It was much defaced by these two sieges, but it now
begins to recover it self.

HASSEL.
THis town is called Hassel upon the Vidre, to distinguish it from Hassel nere
unto Tongre in the country of Liege: it is two leagues from Volenhouen, in
ancient time a good and rich town by reason of the commodity of the river of
Vidre which runs into the Zuyderzee, at Gheelmuyden, being mingled with the
two little rivers of Regge and Veecht. It is at this day reasonably well
fortefied, but it has no such traffic as it it was accustomed, yet it is a
pretty town and well governed.

OLDENZEEL.
IS the town which they call in Latin. Veteres Salij, from whence some will
maintain (but without any great ground) that the law Salike comes. It has
also felt the fruits of their last wars, having been besieged in the year
of our Lord 1605. and yielded to the Marquis Spinola, for the Archdukes
Albertus and Isabella of Austria, Dukes of Brabant Earls of Flanders etc. It
is a reasonable great town and of good trade, where they make great store of
fine lynen cloth, which they sell in the Netherlands, and is sent into Spain.

OTMARSVM.
IS called in Latin Veteres Marsii, which are the old Marsians whom Pliny and
Titus Liuius do often mention, being seated in the country of the Tubantins,
which at this present is Tuent, a quarter in the Prouice of Oueryssel. It is a
little town and of small importance, yet has it thrice tasted the fruits of
war, as well by siege as otherwise: Being unable to endure a long siege by
reason of the weakness thereof, lying in an open country, whereas either
party (being Master of the field) might easily cut off their victuals. In
the year 1592. Prince Maurice took it in less then four and twenty hours,
where as the Siegnior of Famas, General of the artillery for the Estates was
slain, a gentleman much lamented by the Prince, and of all men of war of his
party: within these three years the Marquis Spinola recovered it with as much
ease. To conclude this town and Oldenzeel are so weak, as they must yield to
the first enemy that comes with any force for to besiege them.

ENSCHEDE.
THis town is of reasonable good traffic, situated in the open country, in
the quarter of Tuent, a league from Oldenzeel, and two from Otmarsum: it felt
in the year 1597. the weight of Prince Maurices forces, to whom it was forced
to yield by composition, at the same time when as Grolle, Brefort, Lingen and
others were taken.

VOLLENHOVEN.
Was not 30. years since a good town, lying upon the gulphe of the Zuyderzee.
two leagues from Steenwyck. It was wont to have a fair, great and pleasant
castle, which was the court of the Princes, Bishops of Vtrecht, when as they
came into the high dioceses, and therefore it was a town renowned, where there
was good commodity of victuals, brought thither both by water and by land:
And moreover after that the temporal Estate of Vtrecht came unto the Emperor,
the Governor of the Province and the council made their residence there. But
the last troubles have greatly impaired it, and the castle is ruined.

GHEELMVYDEN.
Has run the same fortune that Vollenhouen, from whence it is a league
distant, and as much from Hassel, that stands upon the Gulphe of Vidre, toward
the Zuyderzee, having toward the land the pleasant pastures of Maesterbrouck,
in like manner a league from Campen. The castle wherein the King of Spain was
wont to keep a garrison, has been also ruined.

MEPPEL.
THis town is seated upon a little brook, which near unto Gheelmuyden falls
into the Vidre. It was never of any great importance, and now it is in a manner
all ruined.

HARDENBERG.
WAs in ancient time a good town upon the same river of Beecht, where there
was wont to be a good castle, whereas the Bishops of Vtrecht took great
delight, for that it stood in an open country. It is midway betwixt Coeworden
and Ommen, both the town and castle are to this day almost ruined by these
last wars.

COEWARDEN.
BEfore the last siege which Prince Maurice of Nassau laid before it, the
which he took by composition, it was but a little base town, commanded by a
great and strong castle. The Drossart hearing of the Princes approach, caused
the said town to be burnt and ruined, to the end the enemy should have no
commodity to lodge there: yet he did so press this town both by battry and
mine, as the Drossart was forced to yield it; some two months after the taking
of Steenwyck by the said Prince, lying in the same country of Oueryssel, in
the year 1593. Cont Herman vanden Berghe and Verdugo went to besiege it, but
when as they saw, they could not prevail any thing, neither by battery nor
mine, having changed their first resolution, and thinking to famish it in time,
they stopped up all the passages with forts, so as nothing could enter into it:
yet the Princes men that were in garrison within the castle, maintained
themselves with great constancy and resolution a whole winter; until the
Spring, when as the Prince came with a good army to victual it in despite of
all these forts: which Cont Herman and Verdugo seeing, abandoning all their
forts or burning them, they retired: wherefore the Prince having victualed it
at ease, and supplied it with fresh men, the same Summer, being in the year
1597. he went to besiege the town of Groaning, the which he took, as we will
show hereafter. Since the Estates have given order for the repayring of the
town, for that it is a good passage to go by land into Frisland, the
countries of Groaning, Westphalia, Breme and other places.

RYSSEN.
IS seated upon the river Regge, the which runs into Vidre at Hessel, and
passing from thence before Gheelmuyden, it falls into the Zuyderzee. It is so
little and at this day so deformed, as it merits not the name of a good town.

DIEPENHEM.
Upon the same river of Regge, it is a league or little more from Ryssen, and
two leagues from Enschede. At this present it is but a Bourrough, although with
all the small towns, it has the privileges of a town.

GHOER.
IS a Borrough standing upon a brook which runs into Regge at Diepenhem,
from whence it is a league distant. It has during these wars had a great
fort, which was always taken, when as eitheir party was master of the field.

DELDEN.
THis was wont to be a good town, and of traffic but now is much decayed by
reason of the last wars; having been subject to the passing and lodging of
souldiars of either party, for (as I have said) he that was master of the
field, was always master of those petty places.

AMELOO.
IS built upon a brook coming from Oldenzeel, the which two leagues from
thence falls into the Vidre, it is at this present but a Bourg.

WILSEN.
IS at this day but a village, seated upon the way as you go from Campen to
Swolle, yet has it the privileges of a town, and is numbered among the lesser
towns.

GRAFFHORST.
IS situated upon the gulf of the river of Yessl, entering into Zuyderzee,
half way betwixt Campen and Gheelmuyden. It is but a small village, not so
good as Wilsen, yet has it the title and rights of a town.

All this is comprehended in the country of Oueryssel, which is the seventh in
rank of the eight united Provinces of the Netherlands, which have recovered
their liberty by arms, and acknowledge at this day no Sovereign Prince but
the general Estates of the said union: which eight Provinces are, the Duchy
of Geldres, the Earledomes of Holland, Zeeland and Zutphen, the Siegneuries of
Vtrecht, Frisland, Oueryssel and Groaning. West-Frisland (whereof they might
make a Province by it self) is comprehended under the county of Holland, who
give it the name of Noort-holland; which the West-Friso^s will not willingly
hear of* for they have their particular Estates, Admiralty, Officers and
Mynte. Prince Maurice of Nassau has this Province of Oueryssel, under his
government, with Geldre, Holland, Zeeland, Zutphen and Vtrecht.

The assembly of the Estates of the said Prounice, both general and particular
is diversely made, according to the ancient customs and preheminences of every
quarter, not tied in that regard to any towns, but according their order and
rank; the deputies changing often. I have seen them held in a country house.
Wherefore we cannot specefie any certain place of their assembly, by reason
of their often change. Yet there remains a certain form of a college of
Estate in the town of Deuenter: But it cannot resolve of any affairs of
importance, which must be referred to the assembly of the Estates for the
whole Province, wheresoever it shall be held. Yet when as the affairs shall tend
to the good or prejudice of the generality of the union, they must refer them
to the assembly of the general Estates of all the united Provinces, the which
is commonly kept at the Hage in Holland.

Groningue with the Ommelands.
THe Estate of the town of Groningue, and the Ommelands (which are country
jurisdictions consisting of many good Borroughs Villages, Abbaies and
Monasteries) are situated betwixt the rivers of Ems and Lanwers, and make a
Siegneury or Province, which is numbered among the 17. of the Netherlands, and
the eight in rank of the united Provinces: which are represented and governed
by the common consent of the Estates of the said Province. Before that we treat
of this Estate in general, we will first speak of the town of Groningue, which
gives the name unto the whole Province: which name some hold was given it by
Grunnius, issued from the blood of the Kings of Frisland, who was the founder,
and not that Trojan of whom Sebastian Munster speaks. This town is seated in
a pleasant soil, environed with goodly pastures, some thinking that it has
taken the name from the greenes thereof; this word of Groen signifying green,
Ingen being as an adjective which makes up the word, whereof there are many
both in this and other Provinces of the Netherlands, as Husinghe, Finelinghe
and others in the country of Groeningue; Harlinghe in Frisland, Vlaerdinghe in
Holland, Flissinghe in Zeeland, Poperinghe in Flanders and others else where.

This town with the dependances, was heretofore given to the Bishops of
Vtrecht in the year 1057. by the Emperor Henry the third and others going
before him, and by their successors, (since that the Normans destroyed the
town of Vtrecht): whereof they gave letters of Estate to the said Bishops, of
the which they have always made use, until the end of the last age. The which
notwithstanding was often taken from them, as well by the Groningers
themselves, as by the Princes which have seized upon that Siegneury: amongst
others Albert and George Dukes of Saxony, who had the gift from the Emperors
Frederic and Maximilian, and Edsard Earl of Embden, whom they accepted for
their Lord, all which did not acknowledge the Bishops of Vtrecht. This town is
inricht with two small rivers, Huneso and Aha, coming out of the country of
Drenthe, through the Ommelands the which compassing about the town, meet in
the suburbs which is called Schaytendyep, from whence passing by the town of
Dam, with other small brooks which join there, they fall by the Sluses of
Delfzyele into the Dullart, which is of the river of Ems: by the which all
ships both great and small take their course, to join with the greater, which
anchor upon the Dullart, and so to go from thence to sea whether they please.
There were wont to be twelve churches in this town, whereof three were parish
churches: the first was Saint Martins, the second Saint Walburge (which Temple
has the form of a Mosquee, which they say was built by Pagans, the Parish
being now annexed to that of Saint Martin), and the third is that of our Lady,
joining to one of the Market places. Other five are Monasteries, and the four
which remain Hospitalls: among the cloisters that of Franciscains, being in
the midest of the town, is converted to a college for scholars, for the study
of humanity, whereof at my being there, doctor Vbbo Ems was Rector, the other
cloisters and monasteries are applied to better uses, then to feed idle
bellies. The four hospitalls are entertained, whereof the first, which is
great like a parish, is called of the Holy Ghost, the second Saint
Gheertruyde: the third Saint James, and the fourth Saint Anthony.

There are in this town two goodly market places, the one for the greatness,
was called Dat-brede marckt, very great and spacious, the like whereof is not
be seen in any other town, beginning from Saint Martins churchyard, going
toward the west, at the end whereof is the towne-house: nere unto it is the
other marketplace not much less, which goes to our Ladies church, which they
call Ter Aha, or fish market; At which two market places (which is a goodly
thing to see) there meet 17. of the greatest streets of the town: whereof six
go to several gates, (being eight in all) that is to Poel port, Ooster port,
Heren port, Ter Aa port, Botteringe port, and Ebbing port, which gates are
called by the name, of the said streets: The Spaniards in the Duke of Aluas
time did build a Cittadell at Heren port, which the Burgers did ruin, when as
Gaspar of Robles, Lord of Billy, a Spaniard, Governor of the town, was detained
prisoner by his own soldiars and the town reduced under the union of the
Estates, but afterward it was trecherously yielded unto the King of Spain by
George of Lalain, Earl of Rheneberg, with the murder of the Burgue-master and
some Burgers: until the year 1594. that Prince Maurice of Nassau did force it
by a siege and furious battery to submit it self under the obedience of the
said general Estates, as it continues unto this day with the Ommelandes. This
town has between Poel port and Steeneille port, a goodly suburbs with a
channel, where the ships arrive which come from Dam, Delfziell and other
places of the country, with turfes and al sorts of provision, necessary for the
town which suburbs are so fortefied as the Inhabitants think themselves as
safe there as within the town: it is called Schuytendiep. Within these ten
years the general Estates (for some jealousy which they had of the said
town) as well for fear of intelligences of some Burgers with the Spaniards,
as also to take away all occasion for Enno Earl of East- frisland to attempt
against the said town, caused a cittadell to be built, in the which they
entertained an ordinary garrison the which kept the mutins in awe.

There is yet an other suburb rampared like unto a fort, at the Port Ter Aa;
an other at the Port of Botteringe, and an other beyond the Cittadell, all
which suburbs have much endured during the siege, and in the last wars; as
many goodly houses of pleasure, as well of gentlemen, citizens, as rich
farmers, most part ruined do yet smart for it. Finally the situation of this
town is such, that as they may carry and transport whatsoever they please by
water: so may they also do by land at all seasons of the year, by the Drenth
and other neighbor places to the fronters of Germany, which brings great
proffit to the town.

As for the Ommelandes, that is to say, the champian country thereabouts, which
consists of many good Bourges and villages, although they be not subject to
the town, yet by a mutual accord, there is such unity among them, as in many
things, they have yielded unto the town; as the right of the market, the
staple of merchandise sold by great or by retaile, to sell no strange beer nor
ale throughout all the country, but only such as they do brew within the
town: the which is set down at large in the letters of the statute, in the
year of our Lord 1455. renewed and augmented in the year 1482. And the chief
point wherein the Ommelands have yielded unto the town, the which they have
enjoyed for these many years, is touching matters of Justice, by the which the
wise men of the country are governed, Inferior Judges kept in awe, the
jurisdiction maintained, the pride of the rich and mighty restrained, and the
Edicts belonging to the commonweal, concerning their authority published.
For the which the Magistrate or Senate of the town choose five honorable
persons fit for those charges to be renewed every year, if for their
sufficiency and merittes they be not continued two or three years, these are
called Hoftmannem, they are seldom chosen if they have been Bourgue-maisters,
Senators or of the council.

These five Hoft-mannem took knowledge of all things were it by themselves
alone or jointly with the Senate. Their Court was called, their judicial
chamber, their authority was great over all the champian country: which by
little and little did extend beyond the river of Lan^vers: and then into
Ostergoe and Westergoe, two chief Cantons of Frisland, wheerby there grew
great quarrels betwixt the Groningers and Frisons: yea among the Frisons
themselves, divided into those two cursed factions of the Schyeringers and
Wetcoopers. To pacefie the which the Emperor Frederick the 3. sent Otto van
Langhen a Chanoine of Ments and his councellor into Frisland: but he returned
without any effect, by reason of the wilfulness of the Schieringers. The
Emperor Frederick dying soon after, Maximilian the first his son, succeeded in
the Empire, who sent the same Otto van Langhen again into Frisland, with an
ample commission, giving them authority (as they had before time) to choose a
Potestate, (which is as much to say as a Provincial Governor) and to settle
the Frisons in their ancient liberties: whereby the Groeningers had been
excluded from the confederation which they had with them of Ostergoe and
Westergoe. But although the Frisons were well inclined to this Election of a
Potestate, (wherein they proceeded so far, as there was one chosen of the
chief of their Nobility and well qualified) yet one of the factions held him
for suspect, either party desyring to have one of his league, whereupon their
hatred did so increase, as Otto prevailed no more then at the first, which made
the Emperor Maximilian to give the government Hereditarie of Frisland and
Groningue to Duke Albertus of Saxony; as we showed in the description of
Frisland.

Duke Albertus having afterward broken this confederation betwixt them of
Groening and Frisland; over whom he held himself half Master, seeking to
dispose of all things at his pleasure, as well within the town of Groening as
in the Ommelands, where he pretended an absolute superiority: which they
being unwilling to yield unto, he went to besiege the town of Groening, the
which after a long siege, having endured many Indignities from Duke Albertus,
and fearing in the end a badde issue of this war, they did call in and
receive for their Protector Hereditarie, Edsard Earl of Embden, or rather of
East-Frisland (Lieutenant at that siege to the Duke, but discontented with
Colonel Vyt) upon certain conditions, amongst others, to build a fort or
blockhouse, the which was done.

The Duke seeing himself deceived by the Earl, and disapointed of so goodly a
prey, meant for the recovery thereof to employ all his means, holding the
Frisons to be half vanquished. The Groeningers seeing the Emperor to embrace
the Dukes quarrel, and that there was a proscription sent out by the Empire
against Cont Edsard, who could hardly free himself, and much less protect
them: rather then to fall under the proud government of the Saxons, they called
in Charles Duke of Geldre, a Prince that was stirring and high minded to
undertake their protection, and upon the same conditions that they had received
Cont Edsard only the fort which he had built should be razed, the which the
Geldrois (to augment his Signeuries) would not neglect, sending the Seignior of
Oyen to take possession: and thus the town and state of Groaning fell into the
hands of the Geldrois which was the cause of great wars betwixt the two Dukes
of Saxony and Geldres.

The Geldrois being put in possession of the town in the year, 1518. and of
the Ommelandes, 1521. (as such an active spirit cannot contain himself
within his bounds) he began soon after to attempt as well up on the rights of
the town as the preuiledges of the Ommelandes, The Groningers having
discovered his practices with Captain Meinard van Ham, for the King of
Denmark, upon the town of Dam, which is of their jurisdiction, the which he
pretended to fortefie to keep Groening in subjection, and then to do all
things at his pleasure. They seeing themselves thus circumuented, and knowing
the dukes intention, grew cold in their affection which they did first bear
him, turning it to the house of Bourgongne, whereupon having resolved with the
consent of the Ommelands they did write unto George Schencke, Baron of
Tautenburg, knight of the order of the Golden-fleece, governor of Friseland for
the Emperor Charles the fifth according to the resignation which the Duke of
Saxony had made unto him, to which effect the said Seignor Schencke (having
received commission from the Lady Mary Queen of Hungary, sister to the
Emperor) marched with all the forces he could thither, where he entered in June
in the year. 1536. and there received their oath of fidelity, in the Emperors
name, as Duke of Brabant, Earl of Flanders, Holland, Zeeland, etc. Lord of
Friseland and Ouerissel, but upon certain conditions, that the members and
state of the Seigneury of Groaning should hold their privileges, right and
statutes, as they had received them from their ancestors: that the town should
hold their ancient Preture and the foraine: that they should build a palace in
the town for the Emperor fit for a Prince, but without any fortification: the
forts in the country should be razed, and noe new built, if necessity did not
require it for the defense of the country and of the town, out of whose
revenues there should be yearly paid unto the Emperor and to his successors
12000. crowns, upon which condition Phillip K* of Spain was receiuedin
January. 1550. Among all the privileges of the said town, they have one very
notable, which came from their ancestors, with an inviolable contynuation,
which is; That noe King* Prince, Estate nor commonweal, can call any Bourger
or Citizen of that town into justice, nor cause him to be cited or adiorned
before any court, but only before the Senate or his ordinary judge: more-ouer
that noe man might appeal from any sentence that were given, either in civil
or cryminall causes, neither from the court of Hoffmans or judicial chamber,
in that which concerns their jurisdiction, from the which no man of what
quality so ever may decline* moreover the town is Lady and mistrisse of her
own laws and statutes, the which by a sovereign power they may make and
undo, create and abrogate without the authority of any person. The Estates of
the Ommelands have also the like authority in their regard. The town has had
a privilege to coin silver and copper for these four hundred years, and gold
since the year. 1474.

The Magistracy of the town consists as it has done time out of mind, of
four Bourgue-maisters and twelve Senators (but of late days, for before they
were wont to have 16.) which are the head of the commonweal, all having equal
voices, but not equal in dignity and authority. This Senate takes knowledge of
all that concerns the town: they have power to choose the Hoftmans or Pretors
of the country and to send ambassages where need should require: to conclude,
their duty is to provide both in general and particular for the good of the
common weal. Their charge is for two years and they are created with such
order as every year eight are deposed, and other eight subrogated in their
places, among the which I comprehend the Bourguemaister.

After the Senate and Hoftmans, there is within the town a college of 24. men,
chosen out of the best families, which they call the sworn counselors for that
from year to year they bind themselves by oath to the Commonweal of
Groaning, without whom the Senate cannot resolve of any matters of importance,
concerning the whole commonweal as to undertake a war, or to give it over;
to contract alliances, make laws or to break them, build new forts or other
public works: change their money; bring the town in debt or chtage it with
rents otherwise: To treat of which things, the senate causes them to be called,
which have been deposed, whom they call the old senate: and sometimes they
call some of the best citizens of the town, as the Deans or master of the
chief trades, men of great credit among the people. This college of four and
twenty sworn men, has as it were a triumuirat, which speaks for them all,
and bind themselves by oath unto the Senate, to procure the towns good, and to
make a faithful report of all, the which may properly be called Tribunes of
the people.

There are many other offices in the town, serving for the entertainment and
preservation thereof: as Prouosts of the wacth, Masters of quarters: Heads,
Captain or Deans of the sworn companies, whom the Senate does choose for life:
Masters of works, overseers of the waights and mesures for bread and beer.
To conclude, it seems there wants nothing for a well governed commonweal.

The manner of chosing the Magistrate in that town is as follows. One half
of the council which are sixeteene and of the twenty four sworn men are
yearly deposed, whose places are filled by five personages well qualified
among the twenty four Iurats whom the Governor of the Province does name,
which five do choose out of all the town eight new counselors, to fill up the
places of them that are deposed, which eight newly chosen, with eight old
remaining, chose four Bourguemaisters, more-ouer the Governor names (besides
the twenty four sworn men) five other men who choose twelve among the commons
of the town, to fill up the place of twelve that were deposed, so the twelve
new Iurats with the tw elue of the old remaining, make up the number of tw enty
four, all which together choose the three Tribunes.

There is also in that town an ordinary free schole or rather a college,
which is very famous by reason of Doctor Vbbo Emmius, an excellent
Historiographer, who was Rector and go uerned it: of whose writing we have for
the most part made use, in the description of Freeseland.

The Ommelands are divided into three quarters; the Feuelingo, Himsing, and the
west quarter, every one having their preuiledges written in diverse Seigneuries,
as places of judgment, which they call Redgerrechten, Gretenies or Baylewiks,
whereof the bourguemasters, and council of the town have some, and the Nobles
or proprietaries of the said town and Ommelands have the rest: in the which
the Redgers, Gryetmans or Bayliffes take knowledge both of civil and criminal
causes, and determine of them according unto equity and justice, from which
sentences in every jurisdiction and Seigneury, touching the right thereof
duties, Inheritances, morgages by writing or otherwise, they may appeal before
the assembly, which they call Varwen, composed of a Lieutenant, four Capitoux,
with their Assessors, Redgers, Nobles, Proprietaries, Grietmans or Bailiffs. In
other causes not concerning the matters above specified, in case of appeal,
they go unto the Lieutenants and Captains of the town of Groaning, as the
chief, and of the Ommelands, who in such cases judge also by decree, (as we
have said) without any appeal, euocation or remission: Being always to be
understood, that the said lieutenant: who is chosen by the Estates of the town
and country, and the 4. Capitoux by the Burguemasters and council, may not
meddle with the superintendency, nor the politik government of the Ommelands,
but according to the commission, oath and instructions which they have from the
Estates chosen by the town and county: In the name and behalf of the
sovereignty of the whole Estate, and Siegneury, they may administer Justice,
according to the right and ancient customs of the Province. By the which
Lieutenant and Capitoux, in virtue of a certain grant made by the Emperor
Charles the 5. in 1538. unto the^ of Wedde and Westuveldinger-landt, even in
cases of appeall all matters within the said quarters of Wedde and
Westuvoldinger-landt, are decided, without any further euocation, provocation
or reuision. Of this town does merely depend the town which they call.

THE DAM.
THis town is two leagues from Groaning, in ancient time a good town of
traffic, as being the Sluse to go to the sea, the which is now at Delfzyel
(for that which they call Zyel or Dam is all one, signifying a Sluse) but since
the year 1536. being taken by assault for the Imperialists, when as the
Geldrois did hold it, the walls were demanteled: and then it was accorded that
it should not be lawful for the Groningers to wall it in any more, nor to make
any fort. The which notwithstanding could not be observed, for since the last
wars, it has bin fortefied, and taken and retaken again. Now it lies open,
yet holding the form of a town, through the which passes the channel which
goes to Delfzeyl, and from thence by the same Sluses to the Dullart, or into
the river of Ems.

DELFZYEL.
IS at this present a great and mighty fort in form of a town, much greater
then before: for many years since there was one, but it has been often
ruined and repaired again: It was concluded betwixt the Emperor and the
Groeningers, that this fort should be razed, and that they should not build
any one there, or in any other place without the consent of both parties, yet
in these last wars they have suffered both that and others to be built,
whereof some are ruined as unprofitable, some are yet standing, which in time
may be also razed. But that of Delfzyel, for the greatness: number of
inhabitants, strength and commodity, standing upon the Dullart, is likely to
stand still, and in time to become a good town of traffic, yet under the
subjection of the Groningers.

This is all we can say in brief of the town, Estate and commonweal of
Groaning and their Ommelands; yet we may not forget that out of this town are
come great and learned men: among others Rodolphus Agricola, of whom that
great Erasmus of Rotterdam, gives an honorable testimony, for that he was
expert in the Greek, eloquent in the Latin, an excellent Orator; a good Poet,
a subtle Philosopher, a perfect Musition, being able to make Musical
instruments himself as he did the Organs of the great Church and others, of
whom also that most learned Hermolaus Barbarus does make mention in an Epitaph
which he compounded upon his untimely death, which was in the forty year of
his age, in the city of Heidelberg, in the year 1585. where the President
Viglius Aita of Zichem passing that way, as one honoring the memory of his
countriman, he caused a fair stone to be set upon his tomb, and the Epitaph
of the said Hermolaus graven thereon, as followed.

Inuida clauserunt hoc marmore, Fata Rudolphum,
Agricolam, Frisij, spemque, decusque soli,
Scilicet hoc viuo meruit Germania laudis,
Quicquid habet Latium, Grecia quicquid habet.
The glory of the Frisons show is gone,
through envious fate, and lies within this stone:
Rudolph Agricola, whose life did see,
All Europes praise deserved by Germany.
In this town, and in Agricolas time was also borne, the learned Wessel
Basillius an excellent Philosopher who died in the year, 1489. who we may say,
were the two stars of Groaning.

Towns and places out of the eight Provinces, yet comprehended under their
union.
Having described as particularly as we could, the estate of the said eight
united Provinces, the situations, the commodities, the traffic and the
ornamants of every one of the towns, and the forts comprehended within them,
and which are of their jurisdiction, although that the general estates, have
not all at their commandment; as there are some in Gelders and beyond the
Rhine, held by the Archduke Albertus and Isabella of Austria, yet the united
Estates have the greatest part and the cheifest places under their obedience:
we must now also described the towns and forts, which they hold in those
Provinces, which are under the said Archdukes, especially in the Duchy of
Brabant, and Conty of Flanders, gotten by arms, the which they keep. First.

In the Duchy of Brabant.
BERGEN UP ZOOM.
WE place this town first of all those which the united Estates hold in
Brabant, for that it is made a Marquisate, although that Breda be one of the
first Barronies of the Duchy: This town has a good haven, at the mouth whereof
there is a mighty fort which defends it: it is right against Tertolen one of
the Islands of Zeeland. Before the town of Antwerp was in credit, and that
Bruges began to decay, it had the chief trade for Merchandise. There were wont
to be goodly buildings, the which being abandoned in these last war by their
proprietaries, and remaining as it were desert, they have served to noe other
use but to lodge soldiars, and are much decayed. It has been always a good
garrison for soldiars, who went to seek there fortunes far and near, to the
gates of Antwerp, and as far as Luxembourge, bringing home often times very
good booty, with whom the Bourgers, Inne-keepers and Tauerners did so well
agree as they reaped great benifit by the soldiars. This town has constantly
mayntayned the party of the general Estates of the united Provinces, sense the
time that it was yielded in the year 1577. by the Germans, who delivered up
their Colonel Fronsbergh with the town unto the general Estates. In the
year 1588. the Duke of Parma came to beseege it with a mighty army, thinking
to take the great fort by practice with an Englishman, but he was disapointed
of his purpose, and was forced to retier with dishonor and loss: And in the
year, 1605. the Marquis Spinola, Lieutenant to the Archdukes, made two
furious attempts, the which in a manner succeeded, but they were repulst by the
valors of the Bourgers and soldiars with great loss. Although it be under
the obedience of the united Estates, yet do they retain still their ancient
rights and preuiledges.

BREDA.
IS a fair great town, with a pleasant Castle joining unto it; which was wont
to be the Palace whereas the Earls of Nassau held their Court, as the
deceased William of Nassau Prince of Orange, did for a time for it is but
twelve leagues: from Brussells. It was wont to have a goodly Heronrie in the
great Churchyard, but now they are dispersed, yet there are some of them
remain still beehinde the Castle. Colonel Foucker with his Germans, having
escaped out of Antwerp in the year 1577. he retired into this town, whereas
Philip Earl of Hohenloo went and beseeged him, in the Prince of Oranges name
(the town being his patrimony) and for the United Estates: the which the
soldiars delivered unto the Estates, with their Colonel, as they had done
Fronsbergh at Berghen up Zoom, under whose obedience it did continue, until
that the Baron of Fresin being prisoner in the Castle having corrupted some
soldiars, found means in the year 1580. to deliver it to the Duke of Parma:
from whom it was recovered in the year 1590. by a hardy and dangerous
enterprise which Chaptaine Charles of Heraugiere a gentleman of Cambray,
serving under Prince Maurice, made with 72. resolute soldiars, who being hidden
in a boatefull of turfes, in a thousand dangers of their lives, having entered
at noone day into the castle, without descouery the night following they
surprised it, cutting the Corpse de guard in pieces, and giving entry unto the
Prince and the Earl of Hohenlo, with their troops, which lay not far of:
which the Captains of the garrison seeing, fled, and the town was also
yielded by composition, since which time, the town has continued under the
obedience of the Prince and the said Estates, who made Herauguiere gouernot as
a recompense of his valor, and gave good reward unto the soldiars with promise
of advancement, as most of them have had upon the first changes.

STEENBERGHEN.
IS a little town betwixt Berghen up Zoom, and Breda, along the seacoast, the
which the Spaniard did hold, until the year 1590. when as Charles Earl of
Mansfeldt, by commandment from the Duke of Parma, went to besiege the fort of
Seuenberghe, the which he battred, and did what he could to take it, but
finding he should profit nothing, he retired. The Prince hearing that the fort
was thus freed, he went to besiege this town of Steenberghen, the which he
forced to yield by composition, and since it has continued under the obedience
of the united Estates.

WILLEMSTADT.
THat is to say Williams town, built within these 30. years, by William of
Nassau, Prince of Orange who gave it that name. It is in the Island of
Rogheville, which is in the duchy of Brabant, a good and a strong town, at
this time almost all built. It serves as a Rendezuous to the Estates army,
when they have any incursion or enterprise to make; at it was at the enterprise
of Breda whom it does much import, as well as the town of Dordrect to have it
well kept: whereof the Estates do entertain a sufficient garrison there, with
a Governor, Sargent Mayor and other Officers.

CLVYNDERT.
IS a good bourg in the Duchy of Brabant whereas the Estates have built a
mighty fort, where for the importance thereof they entertain an ordinary
garrison, with a Captain, superintendant, and other officers.

LILLO.
IS a mighty fort upon the river of Escault, within three leagues of Antwerp,
not far from the gulf of the said river, built within thirty years. It is a
place of great importance, to stop the navigations to Antwerp: which the
Colonels and Bourgers of the said town, (during the time they were under the
union) did carefully (and to their great charge) preserve. And when as the Duke
of Parma did resolve to beseege it, they did re-enforce the garrison, and sent
the Seignor of Teligny, Son to Mounsieur de la Noue to command their, and
Colonel Godin to provide for all things before the coming of Collonell
Mondragon Captain of the Castle of Antwerp: who having beseeged it, and seeing
noe means to cut of their succors by water, after that he had spent some
cannon shot, he raised his camp and retired. It has continued ever sense
unto this day under the obedience of the united Estates, who in my opinion will
not suffer it to be ruined by the peace, but rather to convert it to a good
town, the which in time, in steed of a place for war, may have good trade of
merchandise, and prove rich, being seated upon so goodly a river and so near
the gulf thereof toward the sea, right opposite to another fort which the
Estates now hold on Flanders side called Lyefsken hook.

TER-HEYDEN.
IS a fort at the mouth of the river, the which coming from Breda falls there
into the sea. It was first built by the Spaniards, but the town of Breda being
surprised, and won (as we have said) Prince Maurice (to the end that town
should not be bridled on that side) went to beseege it until it was yielded
unto him by composition, the which he caused to be presently raised.

For all which towns and places, together with their Baylewickes and
jurisdictions, there is a form of council of Brabant at the Hage in Holland,
before the which there is appeall from subalternall and inferior judges.

Towns and Forts which the Estates hold in Flanders.
SLVCE.
THis town is a good port of the sea, the which during the prosperity and
traffic of the town of Bruges, some 10^. years since. when as the nations
flourished there was their Magasin or Stoor-house, as their great and goodly
Caves do witness, serving for the wines that came from Spain, the Canaries
and France. For Flissing (which is but three leagues distant) was then but a
village, and Middelbourg no great matter; the whole traffic at that time was
either at Bruges or at Berghen up Zoom, and since at Antwerp. Since the
pacification of Gant, until the year 1587. this town was under the obedience
of the Estates, entertained, with a good garrison, whereof the Siegnior of
Groenevelt was Governor. But the same year the Duke of Parma went to besiege
it with all his forces, the which notwithstanding his continual battery, mines
and furious assaults, was for a long time valiantly defended. In the end seeing
no hope of any succors, which they had expected from the Earl of Lecester
(Lieutenant for the Queen of England in the united Provinces) and from the
Estates, they were forced to yield it upon an honorable composition, for want
of munytion and other necessaries. Since which time, this town did much anoy
the Estates, especially the Zelanders, by the means of ten Galleys which Don
Ieromino Spinola, brother to the Marquis Spinola brought out of Spain, with
the which he did often affront the ships of Holland and Zeeland, until in the
end he was slain in a sea fight, with great loss of his men and spoil of his
Galleys, the which being repaired, sought still to cut off the victuals and
succors which the Estates sent to Ostend, during the time of three years and
three months, that the Archduke Albert and the Marquis Spinola held it
besieged, the which in the end he took by an honorable composition: after
that by an other siege Prince Maurice had forced them of the garrison of Sluse
to yield by composition, being pressed by famine: which town he took without
battery or any other force, with all the Galleys and other ships, setting the
slaves at liberty, with many other forts of importance, as you shall hear,
whereas the Archduke on the other side got nothing but a heap of stones and
earth, there remaining no form of a town at Ostend, but only the rampars.
Thus was Sluse reduced under the Estates command, much against Spinolas mind,
who attempted twice to relieve it, but in vain. It was yielded unto them a
month before Ostend, which from that time was unprofitable unto them and of
great charge, seeing they had Sluse, so as their gain was much greater then
their loss. For they did win at one instant the Islle of Cadsandt, and all
the other forts opposite to the haven of that town, then

ARDENBOVRG.
Was wont to be a pretty country town, about the which and in the Island of
Cadsant they did breed good horses, whereof there was twice a year a fair at
this town. But these civil wars by the breach of dykes and inondations,
have spoiled much of the country. Prince Maurice beseeging Sluse, did also
besiege this town, the which was yielded unto him, and is now stronger then
ever.

YSENDYCK.
IS a mighty fort on Flanders side, right against Flisingue, standing toward
the Sas of Gant and Bocholdt, whereas the Archduke, for the importance of the
place, did continually entertain a great garrison both of foot and horse, to
stop the incursions of them of Flissingue and Berghen up Zoom in that quarter
of the Wast of Flanders. And although he did much rely in his fort, imagining
it could not be easily taken: yet notwithstanding that there were 800. men in
the fort, Prince Maurice besieged it, battred it, and forced it to come to
composition in less then eight days, before he gave any assault. Since the
Estates have enlarged it, and it is now like unto a town; likely in time to be
of good traffic, for that the haven is able to contain many ships of 4. or
500. tuns a piece, being well situated upon the sea, wherefore in my opinion the
Estates will not suffer it to be razed; nor leave it in any sort, being so
commodious for them.

As for the other lesser forts about Sluse and in the Island of Cadsand, we
will pass them over, having spoken of the principal.

LYEFKENS-HOECH.
THis fort was built at one instant with that of Lilloo, being opposite unto
it upon the river of Escault, so as all ship s that come from the sea to go to
Antwerp, must pass betwixt these two forts: But it could not resist the
enemies attempts like unto Lilloo: for in the year 1584. the Vicont of Gant
Marquis of Roubay besieged it, and took it by assault, by a stratageme which
he made with a heap of straw and haie, which he caused to be burnt on the
dicke-side where he gave the assault, so as the smoke being driven with the
wind, did so trouble their sights that defended the breach, as they were
forced with great fury, the Vicont killing Colonel Petain, (who commanded
there) with his own hand, in cold blood, and causing many Burgers of Antwerp
to be hanged: the which was afterward revenged upon the Spaniards and other
prisoners which they held in the united Provinces. It was since recovered by
the Estates* under whose obedience it has continued unto this day. Yet it is
not like to continue as Lilloo, but may well be razed upon the conclusion of a
peace, being of no such importance as the other.

TERNEVSE.
Is a good village of that quarter of Flanders, which has a Baylife, Alderman
and other officers, whereas the united Estates did long since build a fort, and
entertained a good garrison: it is situated in the midest of a drowned Land,
and therefore not easy to approach nor to camp before it; for which
consideration the Spaniard (who will not willingly wet his feet) would not
attempt it: remaining unto this day under the Estates, being commanded by a
captain, superintendent for them.

AXELLE.
IS a little town in the land of Waes (which is one of the best quarters of
Flanders) which Seruaes van Steelandt great Bayliffe of the said country of
Waes delivered unto the Spaniard, when as the Duke of Aniou was retired, after
that great folly committed at Antwerp. Six or seven years after Sir Phillip
Sidney Governor of Flessingue, and Colonel Ihon Peron surprised it, and
delivered it unto the Estates in the year, 1587. the which they much fortefied
since, by drowning of the great part of the country, which makes it
inaccessible, whereof the said Peron has recovered a good part, during the
time that the Estates, left him governor of the place.

There are other forts in that quarter of Axelle and of ^erneuse, upon Flanders
side, as that of Blockersdyek, Saint Marguerits and Saint Anthonis-hoeck the
which we omit, being of no great importance nor likely to continue.

Forts beyond the river of Rhine.
BOERENTANGHE.
IT is a goodly fort, none of the greatest, but at this present like a little
town upon the fronters of the county of Lingen, which is the highway to go
out of Friseland and Groaning into the country of Westphalia, and by
Cloppenbourg to Delmenhorst and Breme, and so to Hamburg, Lubecke and other
towns of the East country, along the Baltique sea. Is is entertained with a
good ordinary garrison, consisting of many half companies (at the least when I
was there) whereby (in my opinion) the Estates did wisely cutting off many
Monopolies and occasions of mutynies, for that there is seldom any accord
where there is diversity. The country about is all moorish or full of turfes,
wherewith they do both furnish the place and the country about it.

BELLINGER-WOLDER-ZYEL.
IS a good village or rather a Borrough, at the end of the Dullard* where as
the river of Ems grows narrowest, by the which they must pass coming from
Embden by water to go to Boerentanghe, leaving the castle of Wedde upon the
right hand: where the Estates have made a fort to defend the county of Lingen:
yet is it not so well fortefied, but it must yield to the first enemy if he be
Master of the field.

As for the other forts dispersed here and thereupon rivers, fronters and
passages, being many in number, throughout all the united Provinces, I have
thought it superfluous to describe them here particularly, having only
undertaken the chief.

By this description may be seen, that in the said eight united Provinces,
which make the Estates of the Belgike Commonweal, there are above sixescore
towns* great and small, and above a hundred castles and forts of all sorts,
entertained with ordinary garrisons, besides their troops of reserve which
they put into towns, especially in winter, or when they have need to refresh
their companies either of foot or horse, where they are well lodged and
accommodated.

Touching the ships of war which the united Estates do usually entertain,
as well at sea, as upon the rivers of Rhine, Meuse, Wahal, Ems and others, I
cannot set down the number, the which is great, sometimes more, sometimes
less, according to the necessity of their affairs: they have sometimes a
hundred and twenty ships of war in pay, well armed and appointed with men
and munition. Their navigations and traffic of merchandise extends to the
East, West, North and South. I dare boldly say, that the Commonweal of
Venice, which is held so rich and mighty an Estate, could not have continued
such intestine wars three years, as they have done many, and doyet like the
ebbing and flowing of the sea, whom all the forces of Spain could never
vanquish.

Wherefore we must conclude that the King of Spain was ill advised to
entreat them with such rigor, as they have been forced to oppose themselves
and to shake off his yoke. Whereas contrary-wise, the King his son now
reigning, (for fear of some greater inconvenience) has with good advice,
declared them free Estates, seeing that his father could not with all his
forces and treasure, deprive them of their liberties and freedoms: offering
then peace, without attending the prejudicial event of a war of a hundred
years: as the Princes of Austria his Predecessors had against the Cantons of
Suisses, who almost for the like occasions, did shake off their yoke, near
three hundred years since. Let us pray unto God, that their union may
continue: the which may restrain the insolency of some of their Neighbors and
norrish peace among them. Which God grant.

FINIS.

