A MOST Excellent and comfortable Treatise, for all such as are any manner of
way either troubled in mind or afflicted in body, Made by Andrew Kingesmyl
Gentleman, sometime fellow of Alsolne College in Oxforde.

Whereunto is adjoined a very godly and learned Exhortation to suffer
patiently al afflictions for the Gospel of Christ Jesus.

And also a conference betwixt a godly learned Christian and an afflicted
conscience: wherein, by the holy Scriptures the sleights of Satan are made
manifest, and overthrown: with a godly prayer thereunto annexed.

Imprinted at London, by Christopher Barkar. ANNO 1577.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
HAVING diverse papers and writings committed unto me by a dear friend of mine,
whom it pleased God not long since, after many years travail very profitably
bestowed in the ministry and preaching of the Gospel, to call out of this
miserable, wretched and wicked world: And finding amongst the said writings
this Treatise and the Exhortation annexed thereunto: I read both the one and
the other all over, to mine own great profit and comfort, I must needs
confess. And therefore persuaded by mine own experience in the reading of
both these treatises, that the publishing of them in print might be no less
profitable and comfortable to many others, then to my self I found them: I
thought good not to hold them longer in my private custody as things dead and
buried with the Authors, but to commit them to the Printer, so to have them
communicated to this Church of England, and as many as understand the
English, to the praise and glory of God for his gracious gifts in the
writers, and for the comfort and instruction (I doubt not) of so many as shall
read them.

Of the Author of the Exhortation, I can say nothing more then that (as I
conjecture by that he writes) he lived in the late reign of Q. Marie, being
then an exile in foraine parts for the Gospel, which at that time also was
banished from hence, as touching the open profession thereof in any common and
public places. And as for the matter of his Exhortation, I shall not need to
say any more in commendation thereof to stir men up to the reading of it,
then the bare title given to the same imports: which with the shortness of
the Treatise it self may suffice to allure any godly and well disposed person
to peruse the same.

As touching the Author of the Treatise whose name I have expressed, though I
could of him say very much to his great commendation, and that of mine own
knowledge, for that living together in one house we were long time and
familiarlye acquainted: Yet I will for some respects forbear to praise him
for his whole life and death, referring thee to that which is briefly said of
him (and printed before) in a little book of his entitled, The view of man's
estate, etc: of which book, though by an other name, him self makes mention
in this treatise: and had I known so much before the impression thereof, as I
could not, this coming so lately and long after to my hands, it should have
borne no other name, then now I well perceive the Author him self called it
by: though the title it now has, be not (I trust) improper and impertinent to
the matter he handles therein. To whom he writ this Treatise of comfort, and
upon what occasion, thou may easily perceive if thou read the whole all
over: And though she, to whom he writ the same be yet living, and the
occasion thereof such as peradventure some will mislike of the publishing
thereof: Yet being certainly persuaded that neither the writer, if he were now
living, or she, to whom he writ, would have any thing concealed for private
respects, that may serve so well as this Treatise will (I am assured) to the
edifying and comfort of many: I have adventured to be a mean that it might be
imprinted, with the approbation of such as by good order in this behalf are
appointed to allow of all such matters to be published.

Wherefore, gentle Reader, accept in good part both this Treatise, and the
Exhortation adjoined thereunto: which if they may serve for thy instruction and
comfort, as no doubt they will, thou have great cause to praise God both for
the writers, and things by them written. *

f. mylles.

A most Comfortable Treatise written by Andrew Kingesmill to his sister, very
profitable for all men, especially for such as are any manner of way afflicted
in body or mind, etc.
God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

Gal. 6.14.
Dear sister in our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, whereas I understand of
your present state and condition, The cause that moved the Author to write
this Treatise.
that it has pleased God our heavenly Father, somewhat to visit and touch you
with his heavy hand, to chastize you with the rod of his correction, and to
lay upon you some part of the cross of his Christ: Had I a far better talent
then I have, which (God knows) is but simple, yet I thought I could not any
otherwise better bestow and occupy the same, then so, as it were, to lay it
with you in exchange and ba^ke, as by ye grace of God to utter unto you some
saying or sentence, whereout you might receive some piece of relief or comfort:
for this usury, and those that have any, so to occupy their talents, as to
visit the afflicted, to comfort the comfortless, and to bestow although as it
were but one poor penie, to strengthen the pensive in patience, Mat. 26.10
even as our Savior commended the devout woman's work, for bestowing her oil
upon him toward his burial: So I doubt not but this task which it has pleased
God now to set me, shall appear unto him a lawful and gaineful usury, a well
bestowed ointment, and such a work, that as it lacks not his charge, so it
shall not be either to you fruitless, either with him altogether thankelesse.
Ro^. 12.15.
Rejoice with them that rejoice (says the Apostle) and weep with them that
weep. Eccle. 7.34
And the son of Sirach likewise, Let not them that weep be without comfort,
but mourn with such as mourn. Now (Sister) considering such and the like
sayings, calling to mind how we have rejoiced together, enjoying the good
days, that God of his goodness has heretofore given us, and nothing
doubting, but he will drive away those stormy clouds, and cause again his
cherefull sun to rise and shine upon us: and (that which I can not forget)
what a mourner you were with me in the time of my mourning: verily now in the
time of your distress if my heaviness would ease you, or my sorrow might turn
to your joy, I think my heart be not so hard, but that I should bestow some
tears upon you, although that I foresee mine own portion in the world to be
none other but pains without pleasure. 2. Sam. 1.12.
David we read lamented Saul's death, although one that sought his blood. And
likewise Absolon that wicked child and unnatural son, with what a fatherly
affection did he pity his case? crying when he heard the certainty of his
death, in such sort as is expressed in ye 2. of Sam. 18. My son Absolon, my
son, my son Absolon, would God I had died for thee: So verily ought our
cases and calamities to be common, and I especially have just occasion to
bear the burden with you, being unto me a true Sister, a Sister by natural
nativity, a Sister by heavenly regeneration, one with whom I have enjoyed the
sweet, and who with me has not refused the sour: wherefore as I cannot but
with brotherly affection be sorry for your sadness, so when I somewhat lift up
mine eyes toward heaven, and have in consideration the infinite mercies and
marvelous working of God our heavenly Father, concerning his chosen children
and sanctified Saints here on earth, then (me thinks) I receive so
plentiful joy of spirit, and provision of patience against those storms and
tempests of adversities and afflictions, which I know I have in the way of my
pilgrimage to pass, and which I know by the course of Gods working abide
certainly for all true and steadfast Christians, that in uttering the same unto
you it may be I shall give you some occasion of comfort. God therefore I
beseech him guide my hand, and direct my heart, and so behold you with his
Fatherly eye, and cherefull countenance, that we may both receive comfort of
his holy Spirit the true co^forter, promised by our Savior, that we may
rejoice one with another, and both in the Lord.

Now there are diverse means that God has ordained and provided for the
cherishing and refreshing of heavy hearts and sorrowful souls: Comforts, some
are temporal, some eternal.
for some there are which are proper to the body, as earthly and temporal,
other concern the mind, as Ghostly and continual, which whereas they are to be
had, Temporal comforts.
neither of them are to be refused, forasmuch as God therein with our use and
commodity, looks to reap the fruit of his own glory. 1. Tim. 5.23.
S. Paul allows Timothy and counsels him for his weak stomaks sake
moderately to drink wine: and Solomon likewise, Give the strong drink unto
him that is ready to perish, Prou. 31.6
and wine unto them that have grief of heart. Concerning these, although they
be somewhat besides my care, yet this I may truly say, that you have to
thank God with a most chereful spirit, yt he has not left you so destitute in
this behalf, as he has thousands of other our brethren.

Meat and drink, etc.
How many are there, not far from you, if you list (as I think you do) to
behold them, and consider them with some comparison, in respect of whom you
must needs confess your self and happy handmaid of God: as whose hope is
their comfort, patience their pleasure, their wine a cup of cold water, and
whom for their apparel, necessity allows no more then their bare naked skin?
how many poor Lazars are there that would be glad to gather up the crummes
under that table, where your hand is free without grudging? You say
peradventure sometimes in your fit, I am a miserable woman: But what may they
say, that have neither cloth nor clout to defend them from the bitter biting
cold? what may they say, which many times have neither bitte of bread, neither
drop of drink, wherewith to satisfy ye griedie worm of hunger, or to
quench the dry disease of thirst? How many are there, which in comparison of
you, and me although peradventure the least of xiiii, who being driven to the
draffe of hogs, may say with the prodigal son, In how far better case are
the hired servants of that house, then we seely souls are? doutlesse having
as we have, although we did get it hardly, and buy it dearly, yet should we
be in far better state then a great number, which by experience know what
the want of those necessaries are, which God of his gracious goodness has with
a liberal hand, bestowed on us his evil deserving servants: and who for any
thing to be seen in our selves, deserve as evil and worse the^ many of those
nedy naked souls, which at sundry times faint for want of food, and as the
bare beasts stand open to all wind and weather, subject to all adventures,
free from no adversity. David well considered these benefits of God, which
we, because that we have not felt the lack of them, make little account of. God
satisfies says he, Psalm. 107.9
the thirsty sottle, and fills the hungry soul with good things: and
numbering diverse other the like benefits, which Gods people daily receive at
his hand, he cries out twice or thryse with earnest zeal, O that men would
acknowledge before the Lord his loving kindness, and his wondrous works before
the sons of men: Let us likewise acknowledge the goodness of God toward us in
this behalf.

Kinsfolks and friends.
And me thinks (Sister) if these outward earthly things may any thing make in
the matter, you have just cause to rejoice. David you know complains often
times that his familiars and kindred started from him in his adversity, for
beside the multitude of his enemies, which as he makes his account were more
then hears upon his head, he says also, Psalm. 69.8.
I am become a stranger unto my brethren, even an aliant unto my mothers sons:
In another place, he utters as a part of his grief, that he was bereft of
his Father and Mother: Concerning those points you are not so far in as
David was: you have brethren, you have sisters, I know, that account your case
their common case. That God has visited our Father, I crave as great part of
that plague as the best or the worst of you: that God has so preserved our
Mother, the mirror of al mothers, therein you have as great part as the best
of us. As for open enemies that seek your hinderance, or that rejoice at your
adversity, I know none you have: but you know your self a number of your
friends, that unfeignedly wish your prosperity.

Our Savior, you may remember, complained that the Foxes had holes where to
couch them, A house or dwelling place.
and the birds of the air have their place of rest, but the Son of man had
not where to hide his head. O that we could, that we would compare our selves
in our adversities with our Savior, the Son of man, the very Son of God,
of him to learn patience: then no doubt but by him we should receive comfort.
Consider therefore the goodness of God, how he has provided for us by the
gentleness of our dear Mother, a place which we use as an home and habitation,
and that no Fox hole, but thanks be to God a warm and well feathered neste,
where we have free egresse and regresse.

This scripture was fulfilled in our Savior, Concord of brethren
They of a ma^s own house are his enemies, and he thereof complaining said,
He that eats bread with me has lift up his heel against me: but thanks be
unto our heavenly Father, who has joined our house in such an unity, that we
do not (as far as I see) one disdeine the other in necessities and
adversities, neither envy each other in things succeeding prosperously. God of
his mercy grant that band long to continue in ye house of Sidmountaine, that
it may deserve the commendation of Jerusalem, even to be as a City which is at
peace within it self. Psalm. 122.3
This was it whereof David received much comfort, that after great diuisio^s,
God had granted in his kingdom the peace and concord of his people, so he
says of his experience, Behold how good a thing it is, Psalm. 133.1
and how comely, for brethren to dwell even together. He compares it unto the
precious ointment powered on the head, that spreads abroad to the refreshing
of the whole body, and unto the dew of Hermon, and that which falls upon
the mountains of Sion, places rich and fruitful both with temporal
benefits, and with the spiritual blessings of God. This cherefull oil and
fresh dew of unity and concord betwixt you, your brethren, sisters and
friends, God has blessed you withal: such dew falls not in all places,
such oil is not to be found in all houses, the fresh flower of unity and
amity is not to be found in every field: but this as it grows green in
the Garden of Sidmountaine, which if it fade, then farewell my part: but now
flourishing as it does by the gracious goodness of God, me think you should
not but rejoice in the Lord, who has reserved unto you this piece of Paradise,
that you may have the full fruition of that beautiful and sweet smelling flower
of concord. Thus I have endeavored somewhat to lead you into the consideration
of the temporal benefits and blessings of God bestowed upon you, whereout it
may be you shall pick some piece of comfort, if things worldly and earthly,
outward and temporal, may make any thing in this medicine. But it may be, that
as to the sick, things otherwise sweet become sour and unsavory, and to the
weak and sickely stomach, the sweet honey is loathsome: so the mothe of
pensiuenes has entered your heart, that these weaker medicines may not have
their full force, and due operation.

Now after that you have stood on this place, to see and look about you what
comfort is to be had on earth, where you may well epsy more then I have showed
you: hencefoorthe (Sister) let us get on the mounting wynge of faith,
Everlasting and heavenly comforts.
let us raise our selves up through the clouds, eue^ to the heavens, let us
come from the fotestoole of God to his glorious seat, and that cannot be but
comfortable unto us to consider. Reave. 4.4.
For S. John (as he describes his vision) when he saw the Majesty of God
sitting on his glorious throne, declares that the throne of God is compassed
about with a rainbow, a sure seal and token of Gods mercy toward us, that
although he often times rain upon us, yet he will no more drown us. This has
ever been the chief comfort of the godly in all their distresses and
afflictions, they all had an especial eye this way: Read you ye 121. Psalm. the
123. Psalm, there to consider the practice of the Prophet, how he looked
toward ye throne of God. I will lift mine eyes to the Mountains (says he)
from whence mine help shall come, mine help comes from the Lord which has
made heaven and earth, etc. I lift mine eyes to thee that dwell in the
heavens: behold, as the eyes of an handmayde mark the eyes of her mistres, so
our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. Now then
(Sister) laying aside all earthly considerations, if they will not work with
you, let us look upon that help that comes from heaven.

This as I remember is one amongst the wise sayings of Solomon: Heaviness
casts down the heart of man, but a good word rayseth it up again: If any
man's word or wisdom may any thing herein prevail, then especially the good
word of God, Gods word.
which as David says is mighty in operation. It is so full of comfort, that if
grace wanted not to utter and receive it accordingly, I nothing doubt but if
you were half dead, it would soon quicken and set you upright again. Romans
15.4.
So says S. Paul, whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, that we
through comfort and patience of the Scriptures, might have hope. Seeing then the
Lord has left us this heavenly treasure here on earth, even to our so great
commodity thereby to learn patience, and receive comfort, let us use these as
our spectacles to behold the mercies of God, which of our selves being nothing
but blindness it self, are not able to search out or to see: and this
shall be as your diet, that you resort to those sweet running ryuers, springing
up unto eternal life, counselling and aduising you, here to lay out the whole
line of your life: no day, nor hour comes amiss, but in the Scriptures you
may find comfort: Yea, there ye shall meet with the fountain of all comfort,
the Spirit of God chering and cherishing you after a heavenly and marvelous
manner. Presently for my part, I chiefly commit your cause to his cure, and by
his grace, I shall endeavor to give you some taste of that precious liquour:
God grant it be not marred for lack of a better vessel.

First therefore, I am persuaded yt you nothing dout of your adoption and
election in Christ Jesus, Election in Christ.
that your name is entered in the book of life, and that you are surely sealed
up for a saved sanctified soul. This foundation being laid on so sure a
ground, having our hands fastened on this hold, what storms or floods of
affliction may there arise, but we may (considering ye tender mercy of God
toward his chosen children) endure with patience, overcome with comfort, and
wade through with joy, knowing sure we shall have a day, and seeing certainly
although a far of, the quiet and glorious haven we have to arrive at? It is a
most comfortable saying which the Apostle utters unto you: Romans 8.28.
We know (says he) that all things work together for the best unto them
that love God, even to them that are called of his purpose. This one sentence
so setting forth the care that God your heavenly Father has over you, might
satisfy you, if you could weigh it as it is worthy.

Great and manifold were the miseries which that chosen of God suffered, read
you the 11. of the 2. to the Corinthians. Paul.
You shall find there at what hard meat, and how sour sauce the Lord set that
his paineful and faithful servant: as stripes, perilles both on Sea and land,
evil entreatie both of the Jew and the Gentile, the deceit of false brethren,
weariness, painfulnesse, watching, hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, and all
kind of persecution. Yet he having that confidence and steadfast persuasion of
the eternal providence of God, that he turns all things to the commodity of
his elect, even in the midst of these miseries he showed a most chereful
spirit, as he says numbering many kinds of persecutions, Romans 8.37.
in all these things we are more then conquerours, by him that loved us.

In what distress think you was that just Joseph, being endangered to perish
in the pit, Joseph.
thrown in by the hands of his own brethren, Genesis 37.24.
and afterward sold of them into a strange country, where also being taken
of suspicion to have abused his Master Potiphars wife, was cast into prison:
yet he also over these and the like temptations, Genesis 39.20
became in time a conqueror, well perceiving in the end, that it was the
Lords doing to some good end, although he did not straight understand the
same. And therefore besides his own comfort, he quieted also the troubled
minds of his brethren, declaring unto them the providence of God, whereon he
wholly depended. Genesis 45.4, 5.
I am Joseph your brother (says he) whom ye sold into Egypt: now therefore be
not sad, nor grieved with your selves that you sold me hither, for God did
send me hither for your preservation: neither did he so much attend the fact
of his brethren, as the providence of God in the matter, so that he seems in
respect flatly to deny that they had done ought in the matter: Genesis 45.8.
as in these words, Now then you sent me not hither, but God who has made me
a Father unto Pharao, and Lord over all his house, and ruler throughout all the
land of Egypt. And by this means and considerations, God gave him that he made
the less account of the absence of his parents, the ingratitude of his
brethren, the lack of his country, and also the slanderous and unjust
imprisonement.

Likewise David being in flight for the fear of his own son Absolon,
heard, and bare with patience, railing Shimei, taking as it were his pleasure
of him in his adversity, throwing stones at him as though he accounted no
more of him then of a vile dog, cursing and calling him murderer: and whereas
Abishai his courage served him to revenge David's quarrel, and would have fet
his head, David.
if that he would have but said the word: Behold the humility, the patience
of a Prophet, the comfort of a King, verily he lifted up his eyes to the hill,
the holy hill of God, from whence he was assured all those things proceeded, to
some commodity and furtherance of his: wherefore this was his answer to
Abishai that sought reuengement, he curses me, even because the Lord has
bidden him curse David. This was the hold and handfast, that that princely
Prophet took wherewith to stay him self, ever depending upon the providence
of his living God. He knew that whatsoever befell him, God had a stroke in it,
yea and further, being fully persuaded of the mercy of God, he knew most
assuredly those chastisements and corrections should turn him to God, as he
makes protestation, in the 119. Psalm. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted: so that beside his patience and comfort he accounted it a gain, and
none of the smalest benefits of God, that he was so corrected at his just and
merciful hand.

You may also consider the example of patient Job: How he waded through his
temptations, as who knowing that all those hills of misery, fell upon him, no
otherwise then by the determinate appointment of the most hiest, with the
consideration thereof he refreshed himself, after that all worldly succors
and comforts were taken from him, and so became a conqueror over all the
grievous assaults of Satan, as who, he was assured, could go no further then
he had his limittes appointed and assigned unto him, by the just ruling and
merciful disposing hand of the everliving God: wherefore he made it no matter
of misfortune (as we commonly do in the like cases) that his cattle were made a
pray for his enemies, that his sons and daughters had that strange end, the
house falling on their heads: but by such his words he openly shows the
inward comfort of his heart, The Lord has given (says he) ye Lord has taken
away, as it pleased the Lord so is it come to pass, blessed be ye Name of the
Lord: and by this we understand that he had not so much regard of his enemies
the Caldeans and the Sabeans, whom he knew to be but the instruments of the
Devil the chief workman, but always had his eye steadfastly bent upon God
his Creator and redeemer, without whose ordinance and appointment, neither of
them could have any whit moved or prevailed against him, no more then the
senseless wind had power of it self, so to overthrow the house upon his
children. And for as much as he was the servant of God, he assured himself,
that Satan with his slaves could not do or intend him so much hurt, but his
Lord and God would even by the same means turn it to his great furtherance
and commodity, as we are given to understand in ye end of the history that
God did in deed perform ye same: So that by this he became so humble and
patient, so steadfast in hope, that he said, that if the Lords pleasure were to
kill him, to take his life from him, yet would he not let go his hold, give
over his hope, or blaspheme the Name of God, to the which he was marueilously
provoked.

Behold likewise the behavior and courage of those three noble young men whom
Nabuchodonozor threatened the terrible fire, Three children in the furnace.
for that they refused to worship his golden god: see how they take hold on
the mercy, and provident care of God their Lord. For thus they answered the
King, Behold, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the hot fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand (O King.) But if not, be it
known to thee (O King) that we will not serve thy gods, nor do worship to thy
golden Image, which thou have set up: and according to that their constant hope
and faith, the Lord fails not, as you know, marueilously to deliver them.

Daniel.
And what other comfort had their fellow Daniel being enclosed to be devoured of
the Lions in the Den? Dan. 6.16. etc.
according to whose hope, likewise the Lord sent his Angel to shut and mouzle
up the Lions mouths, saving him harmless. The Scripture yeldeth plentiful
store of the like examples and sayings, whereout if we stand to consider them,
we have enough so to arm us against all adventures, that no tribulation, no
anguish may be so extreme, but that by patience we may overcome them, no
calamities so great or grievous, but that they are to be conquered by comfort
of the Scriptures. So says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.13.
God is faithful which will not suffer you to be tempted above your power, but
will even give the issue with the temptations, that you may be able to bear
them: where he so comforts the afflicted among the Corinthians, and does
strengthen them under the cross, leading them no farther then into the
consideration of Gods eternal providence, which makes the sharp and the
sour, soft and sweet in the end, Heb. 12.11
although no manner of chastisement (as he says) is joyous for the present
time. I have in those former examples according to my simplicity, sent you
some of the righteous and tried servants of God, to stand you in stead of
Apothecaries and Surgeons, of whom you may learn to cure your wound without
douting, forasmuch as they minister you even such sovereign medicines, as they
them selves have tasted and tried (as you see) to their endless comfort: but
yet the chief physician is to come, Christ.
Christ Jesus (I mean) the salve of all our sores, the pattern of al patience,
and most assured comfort of all sorowing souls, and ready redress in all
adversities. You have seen in the examples before, the experience of good
soldiers fighting a good fight, and how they have quitte themselves against
the temptations of the world, and the assaults of Satan: Now turn your eyes
toward Christ our redemer the great Captain, and most renowned conqueror of
all that ever tasted these worldly infirmities, whose evil entreatie and hard
handling the time serves not now to describe unto you, but I send you to the
head spring, the history of the Gospel: you may also at your leisure read
that mine exercise concerning the love of God, This is since imprinted and
called, The view of the estate of man, etc. Philip 2.5.6.7.8.
where I have assayed to say somewhat to this purpose. Only now I give you S.
Paul's exhortation, Let the same mind be in you which was even in Christ
Jesus, who being the Son of God, and very God, one with his Father, made
himself of no reputation, took on him the form of a servant, he humbled him
self and became obedient unto the death, eue^ to the death of the cross. Here
learn of your Savior, patience and humility, and mark where lay his
comfort, verily that way that other his saved souls have sought, even the
providence of his God, and by him our God his Father, and (thanks be to him)
our Father: for so he said when that lost child went out from him and his
other disciples to work his purposed treason, Verily (says he) it goes with
the son of man, as it is written of him: and at this mark he seemed to aim,
when as Pilate vaunted himself and triumphed over him, saying, that he had
power to crucify him, and likewise to loose him: then our Saviors answer
was, thou could have no power against me, except it were given thee from
above. So when he did with deep consideration as it were aforehand, taste the
bitterness of his cup, this way he found out of his temptation, saying to
his father, thy will be fulfilled and not mine: this was his comfort in the
extremities of the cross, Act. 2.26, 27.
and his flesh also rested in this hope, that the Lord would not suffer his
holy one to see corruption. By these you may be sufficiently stored with
diverse kind of medicines, you have both the gentle and the strong working
before you.

The next care concerns the use hereof, The applying of the former examples.
that they be applied and placed to the sore. Now therefore if you will set
these glasses of the afflicted servants of God, and especially Christ crucified
before your eyes, I doubt not but that it shall quicken all the dead flesh that
lies about your heart. For first if you will compare quantity with quantity,
surely yours may seem but an April shower in comparison of these bloody
floudes and seas of sorrows that passed over their heads. But make your case
comparable with others the aforesaid (as peradventure it is more then I am
aware of) yet being grounded on Christ Jesus with steadfast faith, having your
election certain by your honest conversation in the works of light, and the
Spirit of adoption bearing witness with your spirit that you are a chosen child
of God, having in just consideration the just dealing and merciful providence
of God toward his vessels prepared to honor, although in your self you be
humbled (as necessary it is) yet in God you cannot but rejoice and glory with
his servants and Saints on the earth. Were it so that men reviled you as
Shimei did David, why should you not content and quiet your self as David did,
saying, the Lord has sent him for this purpose? yea, whatsoever kind of
cross it shall please God to visit us withal, we ought by his example to
consider the good purpose of God therein, and to say, It is good for us that we
taste of some trouble, Heb. 12.8.
lest we be found for bastard children (as the Apostle speaks.) If you had
sustained loss of friends, parents, children or husbands, standing at one
stay with Job, then for your comfort you have to say, The Lord has given, the
Lord has taken away. Let the case be (I am sure it is not so ill) that you
were pestered with Jobs miserable disease, as we are all in the hands of God,
upon us to work his will, and there is neither of both undoubtedly, but have
deserved far worse then just Job: yet he has provided for us before hand a
staff to stay on, and has given us a lesson of patience in that answer
which he made his wife, provoking him to yield to the assault of Satan, and to
blaspheme his God: Thou speak like a foolish woman (says he) shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? If you had lost your
country, which now you enjoy by the benefit of God, might you not well
conceive with your self of the will and work of God therein, to some such
purpose as he wrought by Joseph's sale and bannishment? wheresoever you shall
come, whatsoever entertainment or entreatie you should find, would you not
say as he did, it is God that has sent me hither? Suppose you were in the pit
with Joseph, in the de^ne with Daniel, or that you made up the mess with those
three appointed to the fire, Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego: would you mistrust
now especially that they have made the way before you, but that God would
provide some issue for you in the midst of these temptations, either to save
you harmless by a mighty deliverance, or else as it should be best for you to
make you a conqueror by patience?

And to come to Christ that fountain of all consolation for all Christians: O
Sister, Christ's to^ments and afflictions.
we never felt with our little finger that fire wherein he was consumed for our
sins, we have not tasted with the typ of our tongue, that bitter cup,
wherein he swallowed up death due unto us for our offenses: we sleep in whole
skins, his hands, his feet, his sides were pierced of merciles murderers: we
for the most part have ease and rest, he found no place on earth where to rest
his head: we think much if we be somewhat diseased with a little pain or
grief of body, he swet and shed bloody water to ease us, and release us of
perpetual pains. Now then (Sister) thrust in your finger with Thomas the
Apostle, and feel with faith the bloody wounds of your savior and redemer:
and these being considered, what are our greatest griefs, but fleabites in
comparison, besides that inward anguishe and passion of the soul, far
passing his outward apparent pangues, whereby he felt the severe judgment and
wrath of God, the reward of our evil deserts? Come you hither (Sister) with
your heavy burden and here refresh you, for here is the well and the water of
life, receive you hence the most comfortable aqua vite, stilling down from the
cross of our redeemer and peacemaker Christ Jesus the righteous. God has
laid upon you some kind of cross, but none such as his own Son your
Savior has borne before you, God has thought good for some purpose
appertaining to his glory, to put you to some pains: O why should you or any
of us grudge to take on us the yoke of God? he has not spared his dear and
only Son, to make him a man, a servant, a sacrifice for our souls
redemption, which were once sold under sin, the slaves of Satan. But were it
(happy were you if it were so in deed) that you had to pledge your savior
where he has begun unto you, if that you hong on the cross together with him,
had you not then comfort enough by you: could you not well content your self
to be baptized with his baptism, whose handmaid, I know you will not deny
your self to be? is it not enough for the servant to be served as his master?
were you in the place of the penitent thief, craving his pardon as he did hang
together with our savior, would you have despaired, would you have mistrusted,
might you be comfortless, would you not rejoice?

But you will say he had his Savior present before his eyes. But O you of
little faith, if you have not as good assurance of mercy as he: do you not
consider that by the judgment of our Judge, they are most blessed which believe
and see not? But he happy man heard those joyful words at his redemers
mouth, To day thou shall be with me in paradise. Warrants out of the
scriptures for our comfort.
And is that sufficient? why then have not you as sure an obligation, the
warrant of his word, his testament sealed with his most precious blood? or else
are you left out of that will? Does he not say unto you as directly as to any
other, Come unto me and I shall refresh you? Does he not say unto you, Ask and
have, seek and find, knock and it shall be opened? are you not assured of
that absolution in the day of the Lord his appearance, Thy faith has saved
thee, Mar. 7.29.
go thy way in peace? are you not to be numbered among them to whom it shall be
said, Come ye blessed of my father? John. 3.16.
when that Christ says unto you, he that believes has everlasting life: when
that he says, I bring the water of life, I am the bread of life, I am the
vine, you are the branches: I am the good shepherd, the true Messiah, the
redemer of the world, the physician of the sick, coming to save that which
is lost: in all these can you not pick out that promise to be with him in
paradise? I dare not doubt (Sister) that you are to seek concerning these
things, you have (I nothing mistrust) laid the foundation of your faith on
Christ the right rock of salvation: then can you no more doubt, then if you
had the possession of paradise already, even as it was prepared for you from
the beginning, seeing that he made the grant, that has the whole matter in his
hands, and in whom there is no guile. Stand therefore, stand stiff and fall
not, let not go this handfast, which if you do, no wind or weather may rise
in the world that shall any whit move you or your so sure building, 1. John.
1.4
standing on so good a ground and so sound a rock. S. John in his first
epistle, setting Christ Jesus before the^ to whom he writes, This we write
unto you (says he) that your joy might be full. Verily (Sister) if we could
fully consider Christ with his mercy and merits, our hearts might not but be
filled up full with joy: for there is nothing so sour, but in Christ it
becomes sweet and sauourie, there is no want of any earthly thing, but
Christ supplieth with a greater measure. The branches that abide in that vine,
no weather may make them to wither: and although they seem for a season much
like to the natural vine, to be as dry and rotten sticks, such as men would
scarce gather up in the way, yet the heavenly husbandman so cherishes and
tendereth them, yt in time which he knows to be most convenient, even then
they shall show themselves in their kind, and freshly flourishe in their
fruits, when all other flowers are faded, and other trees which are not planted
by him may not longer stand for their rotten roots.

Answers to certain objections concerning the want of things.
Let us therefore stand a little and see what more comfort we may suck out of
that fresh and fruitful vine, so shall our hearts receive joy, and our joy
shall be full. You have no lands, nor liuinges (I think) in deed any thing
superfluous, but yet competent. and if you were much more needy, even utterly
destitute, yet you have not to take great thought for the matter, seeing Christ
tells you, you shall have life everlasting, paradise is your inheritance, his
own kingdom is your possession.

Company.
Company in deed is comfortable: but be it that you were berefte of the
company and comfort of your brethren and sisters, yet the true Christian
cannot be solitary. 1. John. 1.7
S. John says, If we walk in the light as he walked, we have fellowship with
him. And he him self says, he will not leave us comfortless or solitary,
yea he will be present with us unto the worlds end, that is, with all his, at
al times sending us the Comforter his holy spirit. If we do that which he
commands us, then he accompteth us his friends, his brethren, his sisters,
and that which is chiefest, because it is endless, after we have ru^ne out our
course, we shall be with him in Paradise, making continually that prayer for us
unto his Father, which he began here on earth, Father I will that they which
thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory.

Behold, Worldly estimation
you shall behold the glory of Christ: what then will you take thought for
any piece of worldly estimation? All the glory of man (says the Prophet) is
as the flower of the field, sone ripe, sone rotten, but the crown of glory,
which you shall receive by Christ, is incorruptible, once found, never lost,
once ripe, never rotten: what need you pass upon the wicked earthly Mammon,
whereas you be most assured of that treasure laid up for your store in heaven,
even Christ Jesus the riches of the rich, and high God of heaven?

It would be a comfort for you peradventure, Marriage.
to have an head and husband to defend you, and in whom you might delight as in
your own soul, by whom you might have the increase of godly children, unto
many in deed the very blessing of God: but in this also you must submit
your self to the mighty hand of God, knowing that he works diverse ways
in diverse vessels, and those ordained to honor, for to some marriage is
expedient, to some it brings joy and gladness: but contrarily in many you may
see it is a snare of the world, a stumbling block, and plain diuorcement
betwixt God and them. And this inconvenience I know comes not of marriage it
self, as the proper and principal cause, which God has ordained as holy and
comfortable: but by their abuse, and for their just plague. Whereas some suck
honey, some other meet with gall, and venyme: and yet the flower beautiful
enough, and goodly in the eye. Wherefore God of his high wisdom, knowing much
better what is good for us then we for our selves, does at sundry times cut us
short from the fruition of many his good creatures, benefits and ordinances,
least by abuse we should in manner turn the nature of them to our own
hinderance and confusion, so that it may be better for us to lack them then
to have the^. Diverse I think there be good men, and honest maidens, which
peradventure would be hard husbands, and shrewd wives: neither would it be any
strange case to see, that some bare the first yoke honestly and godly, which
at the second match ouerrule and weary their yoke fellows, causing them with
repentance to wish their former liberty again. Such is the diverse working
of God, that in some he is better pleased with marriage, and other he holds in
single life as most expedient for them.

Some again he blesses with the fruit of children, Barennes.
other he makes baren and fruitless, yet both for the better, both serving to
the glory of God, and commodity of his chosen. Look on the comparison made
by Solomon, the 4. of the book of wisdom: he says, that barennes is better
with virtue, then to have a multitude of children. Neither do I write this as
one that despaireth of your prosperity this way: I know you have had good
offers, which by judgment of man, might have been convenient for you to have
followed, but I have told you the worste, and yet nothing doubting but that ye
best is to come. Anna you may remember mentioned in the first of Sam. 1. the
wife of Elkanah, Anna.
the happy handmaid of God, how he exercised her a long time in patience with
the shame of barrennes, as it was counted in those days. But the Lord when
he had brought her low enough, then he raised her again, heard her humble
petition, and gave her for her comfort that just Judge her son Samuel, his
true servant. Tob. 3.10.
In the history of Tobias, we read in what distress that humble maiden Sara
was, Sara.
whom it pleased God to visit, and chastise her with seven husbands, so that
she became a reproach unto her own fathers maids, laying to her charge that
she had strangled her husbands. Think you (Sister) your case is comparable to
this? If it be so, then take that remedy which she used, and mistruste not of
the success that followed, as you have in the example of Anna. So she made her
prayer to God the almighty, which is expressed in the history, desiring him
to pity her case, and by some means to take away her reproach: and
accordingly the Lord (as his ears are always open to the prayers that
proceed from an humble spirit) gave her to wife to good Tobias, with whom she
saw many a good day, and also for token of Gods blessing, issue of children.
Even so if we may hope for the best (and why should you mistrust the matter,
Abraham.
seeing that Abraham in a more desperate case, hoped against hope?) the Lord
our God I doubt not, pitieth your case so far, that he will send you a
trusty Tobias, to whom you may betake your self without fear, with whom you
may lead out your life in peace and comfortable quietness, by whom you may
conceive and bear some such son as is reported of Samuel, in whom you may
rejoice as in an obedient son, and in whom God may be glorified as his
servant. But if the example of Anna, and Sara, do not so much move you, if it
be out of your hope to have their good hap, let us then return again to
Christ our sweet savior and righteous redeemer, at whose hand, when all other
aids do fail, we may be bold to fetch comfort, and that most plentifully.

If Tobias come not, An excellent comparison between the profit and comfort
that the wife may have of her husband, and the same we have of our head and
husband Christ
yet you may well content your self with Christ, finding that in him you shall be
sped as fully as you can wish. You are of the flock of the faithful: then
will he stand you to all purposes in stead of an husband, not after an
earthly, but after an heavenly sort. He is the head to defend and govern
that body, whereof you are a member. Such as the husband is to the wife, such
is Christ to those that are of the Christian Congregation, as S. Paul has made
comparison. It is a great comfort in deed for Adam to have his Eve, and
contrariwise: but Christ it is, that blessed seed, that has blessed them
both. There is a narrow bond and copulation betwixt the wife and her husband,
for they are reckoned one in flesh: Even so has Christ, to make us unto him an
holy spouse, taken bone of our bones, and flesh of our flesh. Your husband
would cleave unto you when your other friends would forsake you, and Christ
will accompany and assist you when your husband has left you. He must
sometimes of necessity be absent from you, death shall make a grievous
diuorcement betwixt you: but no time may tie Christ from you: by him it is that
you live, and that you live well, he shall assist you at your dying day, and at
the latter day he shall raise you again. Your husband peradventure, would
think no money, no meat, no apparel to dear for you, and so doing, you
would think him a good husband: but whether he would die for you I doubt. But
Christ Jesus that good shepherd has showed you so much love, that he has
laid down his life for you, he has shed his blood for you, he died eue^ the
death of the cross, he died for your sins, and rose again for your
justification, and now makes intercession for you, which he will continue
until the time he has placed you in his kingdom to reign with him for ever.

Thus (Sister) as my simplicity serves me, I have attempted that, which I
fear I have not obtained, (if it might be) to comfort you, or rather to tell
you where you may seek and find comfort, then of my self to make you any
deed of gift: For God is called the author of al consolation, therefore I
refer you to him by your prayer, and by resort unto his word, written for
all our comfortes. I have but somewhat assaied to play John Baptistes part, I
am not he of whom you must receive this good gift, but you must look toward
an other: Therefore I say unto you of him whose shoolatchet I am not worthy to
unloose, Behold the Lamb of God who brings this comfort with him, a salve
(me thinks) sufficient to heal all sores, as that he is that Lamb that
takes away the sins of the world. Nature has so provided that if we
receive any wound in the head, the whelke that is in the hand, the corn that
is in the foot, we soon forget and lose the sense thereof. O consider
(Sister) how your head was wounded, then shall your hands and your feet the
less grieve you: Now again our head is whole, triu^phing in heaven: why then
should our hearts be heavy on earth, as though the head had forgotten the
body, or any part thereof? No (Sister) doubt you not, he will not suffer an
hear to perish of that body which he so dearly purchased, seeing that this
mighty Michael has subdued our archenemy, Revel. 12.
that terrible dragon, and subtle serpent with his petie captains, death and
hell, what should we be so much moved with any force of the flesh, or any
mischief that the world may work us? Yea, here also your Savior speaks
co^fortably unto you, saying, Be of good there, I have overcome the world.
Seeing that he has broken the head of our enemy, what should his tail so much
trouble us? seeing he has taken away our sins, what should any sorrows
remain amongst us? and if we sorrow not for our sins, why do we lament for
any other earthly trifle? So (Sister) if your eye be fully fixed on Christ your
redeemer, seeing his pains and his patience, you may not but quiet your self,
considering his merits and his mercy, you can nothing mistruste but he that
took away the greater burden of your sins, will also open you a way out of
your sorrows, so that now you have no occasion left of mistrust in the goodness
of God. For he that gave us his Son, Romans 8.32.
how should he not with him give us all things also? and now your joy must
needs be full, as S. John says. Say not then you are in misery, for you see
present remedy having good assurance of eternal felicity. And if a man
should ask you how you prove your state to be miserable, I am sure you can not
prove so fast as I can disprove.

You will say, I am an abject in the world: Comforts against the contempt of
the world, and sorrow and heaviness. 1. Cor. 12.
I answer, the more meeter for God, the liker you are to your Savior: so
says the Apostle to your comfort and mine, The vile things of the world,
things despised and things of naught, has God chosen.

I am sad and pensive, (you will say) my meat does me no good, I enjoy not
the world. But these are no arguments, hereby to conclude miseries. For even
the holy and happy David had such sugar and sauce to his meat, he mingled his
bread with ashes, and where was most likelihood of rest, his bed he watered
with tears, so that of your sorrow it self you may receive comfort, because
that short worldly sorrows are but a passage unto unspeakable, incredible,
and eternal joy and consolation. Our Savior says they are happy that
lament, for they shall be comforted, but he sets a woe upon those that
laughe: so that by his judgment happiness (and heavenly happiness he speaks
of) comes rather by lamenting then laughing. Yea, Reave. 21.
God himself will take ye pains to wipe away the tears of the eyes of such as
sheade any under the cross, and especially in the cause of his Christ. You
have little comfort peradventure in the world, yet I am sure more then Lazarus
in his penury, or Job in his perplexity: and the less you find on earth,
the more belike you shall have in heaven. You know the answer to the rich
man, in the parable, that he had his earthly pleasure for his portion. Luke
16.25
But what an exchange made Lazarus? even eternal pleasure for temporal penury.
If you have not your portion with the rich man here; you may the less doubt
to have part and place with Lazarus in the kingdom of God. And here let
Christ be your comforter: You shall lament (says he) but the world shall
rejoice, and in him, he says you shall have peace. O see that pitiful and
saving Samaritan, how he powers wine and oil into your wounds, even the
peace of conscience, the peace of God that passes all understanding. Ioh.
15.18.
If the world hate you (says he) you know that it hated me before you: and if
our Savior has lead us the way, what should we stick at the matter? where
as he has ouerlept so great blocks, why should we stumble so at every straw
which the devil casts in our way? The Apostle says, 2. Tim. 2.11, 12.
If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him: and if we die with him, we
shall live with him. O Sister, let us not shrink from our Captain, whom we
see already to be a conqueror. Let us prepare our selves patiently to abide
the pleasure of God: let us exercise patience in the lighter, that we may the
better bear the greater burden. Let us live and die with our Savior, let us
suffer with him in all patience, that we may reign with him in glory, to the
which the afflictions of this world with all extremity (as S. Paul has cast
the matter) are nothing comparable. We hope to have our part in the kingdom of
Christ Jesus, let us not then look for it there where he has told us it is
not to be found: Let us not seek after worldly wealth or earthly felicity,
let us not look here to rule the roste, but to be roasted rather of Rulers. Our
kingdom is where Christ reigns, let that content us, knowing that his
kingdom is above all powers, al things being in subjection under his feet.

Here I leave you (Sister) betaking you to Christ, who covers you as one of
his chosen chickens, under the shadow of his comfortable wings, against whom
as long as you live, neither the world, which he has conquered, neither death,
which he has swallowed up, neither the gates of hell, which he has closed unto
you, shall any thing prevail. That which I have said, I have said once, and
peradventure as good unsaid: but Christ continually comforts you with his
sweet promises and everlasting word of salvation: he still cries unto you, Be
of good chere, I have overcome the world: rejoice in this (says he) that your
name is written in the book of life. Betake you therefore wholly to him,
rejoice in his cross, resort to his word, whence, as out of paradise you may
gather flowers sufficient to fill you with joy. And if it has pleased
almighty God any thing to refreshe you with this my poor posy, his will be
done, his name be glorified, Amen: I have my reward: and he the God of all
consolation grant us the heavenly comfort of his holy Spirit, that peace which
the world can not give, and that constant patience in all his fatherly
corrections, that we be not found false hirelings, but true and trusty
servants: no bastard children, but by unfeigned faith, the blessed posterity of
the blessed Abraham, and true regenerates of God by our Savior Christ. And the
holy sanctifying Spirit of truth, and God be blessed for ever, Amen.

A very godly and learned Exhortation to suffer patiently imprisonment, exile,
or what misery soever else may happen to a man in this life for the profession
of the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS.
IF the world hate you, good Brethren, and thereupon with sundry afflictions
and griefs do moleste and vex you, marvel not with grudging, but praise GOD
with patience, who in this furnace fashioneth you to the likeness and image of
his own Son, Ioh. 15.
whom the world has hated from the beginning, for whose sake also in no wise
it can love you, but with most spiteful hate will pursue you, even unto the
death, for that you are chosen by Christ from the world, Romans 6.
to walk forth and bring out fruit, which shall continue to sanctification,
whereof the end shall be everlasting life. For as a rich and beautiful Harlot
full of amorouse filth, with a painted face, wanto^ looks, trim array, fair
words, large promises, great gifts, and with the entisement of quiet,
wealthy and pleasant life, allureth them on whom she casts love (yet at the
end rewards them with pockes, piles, fighting, brawling, and most shameful
death) whom if she can by no means entise to follow her fancy, she hates so
deadly, that she cease not, but causes the whole rablement of her bawdie
bawdes, ruffling roysterkins with brawling bragges, shameful slanders,
subtle surmises, quarreling questions, and falsely feigned accusations, to vex,
trouble and bring to destruction: So the Princess of the world, that most
filthy harlot wooeth Gods children, espoused unto his son Christ, to break
their faith and troth to him plighted, and to become her dearlings, setting
before their eyes all the kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof,
promising with holowe holiness, subtle suspicion, falsely fained religion, and
a pokefull of such pretty persuasions, that if they will fall down and worship
as she does, she will give unto them all these same: for then shall they be
her own dear dearlings, and she will love them, as her own: but the end
shall be most dreadful damnation. Ioh. 15.
Whom if she cannot persuade, neither by one way or by other unto her love,
from Christ their best and only beloved spouse, she conceiueth so great an
hatred against them, that she stirs all her champions with might and maine
to do them displeasure in their goods, to work them hatred of their friends,
to impair their good name, to punish their bodies, to offend their
consciences, to make their life yrksome unto them, and most cruelly without
mercy to kill them, yet whose death is most precious in Gods sight, and has
to reward a most glorious resurrection. Thus the world has served our dear
and best beloved Christ before us for our sakes, who was given into the hands
of this harlot to be thus cruelly dealt withal, for to be unto us a pattern,
which we should follow, 1. Pet. 2.
an image, after which we must be fashioned, painted forth before our eyes in
the Scriptures, to teach us to follow his trace with patience, and in running
this race to conceive comfort, Romans 8.
hoping after victory through faith in him, Romans 15.
who both gave us warning of the pain, and lest we should faint, to comfort
us, promised victory, Ioh. 16.
saying, In the world shall you have affliction, but in me peace: be of good
cheer, for I have ouercommed the world. To fight with a puissant enemy,
whose courage was never abated, whose strength is invincible, and who has been
oftentimes assailed by many, but never vanquished, might discomfort a weak
heart, and cause it to give over at the first without further resistance: But
for so much as this stern madame with all her chivalry and force is so
overcome, and weakened to our hands, that she is not able to resist, what
countenance so ever she makes, much less able to overcome such as do stoutly
withstand her malice and cruelty, how faint hearted and cowardly milksoppes
may we be judged, that will be abashed, and may not abide the lowering
countenance of a feeble, maimed, and beaten bragger, especially seeing that in
striving faithfully against her and her soldiers, the loss of renown here
is the purchasing of eternal glory, the loss of worldly goods, the gayning
of heavenly riches, the loss of a miserable and short life here, the winning
and very entrance into a joyful and everlasting life in heaven? Is the
friendship of the world so dear to us, that therefore we should not esteem
Gods favor? Ought our goods, wife, children, friends, lands and possessions
so much to be regarded, that for to save them we should forsake the heavenly
riches and everlasting inheritance? Ought we to be so desirous to live here,
that for a short life and unpleasant, we will purchase an everlasting and most
painful death? But the burden of poverty is importable, hunger,
imprisonment, exile is intolerable, the bitter storms of persecution, and the
sharp showers of death are so insufferable, that we fear least we should not
be of power to abide and pass through them, and therefore do think it better
to sit still then to rise and take a fall, better not to enterprise the
conflict, then in the mids for lack of strength through faintnes to give
over with shame, and run away. How delicate, fearful, and therefore
unwilling the flesh is to suffer, common experience teaches, al men having
any feeling of them selves perceive, and chiefly they, who setting all
persuasions of the flesh apart, have of full purpose and resolute
determination with them selves, entered into the school of sufferance,
beginning at Christ his cross, and so forth to learn therein only to glory,
can by that they feel in them selves best declare. For as the deadly foe to
mankind assaulted our dear brother Jesus Christ then most hotly, after he
perceived by plain tokens, that he was Gods Son, bent, by the cross and
contempt of the world to enter into glory with ye fiery darts of famine,
Math. 4.
poverty, ignominy, shame, and afterward with the fear of death: on ye other
part, with plenty, riches, honor, possessions, and glory of the whole world,
knowing most perfectly yt these persuasions should be most strong to move and
persuade the flesh to refuse ye cross, weying ye pains and the trauail with
one eye, and the pleasant wealthy honor with ye other: so he ceasseth not to
assail Christ's members with the self same entisements, to cause the flesh to
abhor the cross, and seek after ease, but then most busily, when he
perceyueth the heart moved by Gods Spirit to contemn these as vanities, and to
seek after true wealth, quietness and glory. And without al doubt the mistrust
in Gods providence, wherewith all flesh is naturally infected, and fear of
the great painful bitterness, yt hunger, imprisonment, and persecution
brings, always objected and propounded by the delicate flesh, does move the
heart of man to hate, and fly by always the cross, and to invent and
pretend excuses and causes which it should be better to refuse the^ to enter
into trouble, among which this is not the least, yt the flesh, not regarding
Gods working in the mids of affliction, far above the capacity of man's
wit, pretends as though it would gladly for trueths sake enterprise great
matter, but yt it has not power given, able to go through withal accordingly.
And this excuse is pretended even by them, yt yet will not seem to be fleshly,
but spiritual, not flattering the world for fear, but favoring the truth of
love, and so deceive them selves, where they utterly forsake and refuse that
thing they would seem most gladly to obtain. Wherein they commit double
offense: of hypocrisy, when they would seem to be that they are not: and of
incredulity, for that they declare plainly in this saying, that they think
either that God can not, or else that he will not comfort, strengthen, and
deliver them forth of all miseries, not esteeming his promises, wherein he has
declared his will, neither marking his wondrous working for his children from
time to time in their afflictions, wherein his power most manifestly appears,
neither yet considering his fatherly care, which is more mindful and tender
over his, then the mother can be over her only beloved child. It suffices
betwixt man and man, specially if they be of honesty and credit, that things
pass by word and writing: we persuade our selves, that the thing so promised
and confirmed ought and also shall be performed. Upon this persuasion, if the
Prince promise to the subject, the noble man to the mean, the father to the
son, and among merchants one to another, it is accounted so sure, that we
will make our reckoning thereof, as though we had it in possession: such trust
we give one unto another: and shall we then doubt in Gods promise, which has
not only past by words, but also by writing sealed, and confirmed with the
blood and death of his only Son? Is there any man so mindful of his
promise, or so able to perform the same, as our heavenly Father is, of that he
promises to us? It is commonly seen among men, that leagues, couenantes and
bargains can not be so wisely made, nor so surely confirmed, but that with
wyelie falshoode and false unfaithfulness, they are defeated and of none effect.
But God is so faithful in performing the thing to us, which he promises, that
heaven and earth shall rather come to nothing, the^ one title of his promise
shall be unperformed. Yea, they that mistrust or doubt of the surety of his
promise, are no less in doubt whether there be a God or no. For to doubt or
deny his truth and fidelity, is to mistrust or deny him to be GOD. A Prince
and noble man for his own honor sake, a Father for his father like affection
to his child, a Merchant for his credit sake will keep their promise: and
would not our heavenly Prince (who as he has made all things to serve to his
own glory, so will not give the same to any creature) have his honor herein
advanced and most highly regarded, that he is most sure, just, and true of
promise? Would not our heavenly Father we should persuade our selves, that his
love toward us does far surmount the affection of a carnal father to his
child? Can any man so much esteem his own credit, and estimation of
trustines, as he, who is faithful truth it self, regards so to be known to
his creatures? It is the greatest dishonestie among men to be so unthankful,
to suspect or mistrust him, whose friendly fidelity, and faithful friendship
we have been sure of at al times, whenever we have been in distress: much
more shame is it, to suspect, mistrust, or doubt of Gods faithful assistance,
whensoever we shall have need, for so much as his faithful friendship, and
friendly love is far above the trustines of man, as heaven above ye earth,
fine gold above filthy dross, and precious pearls above dirtie doung. Yea
there is no engine, wherewith ye devil works so forcibly man's destruction,
which draws so many from god, and does wring forth of Gods justice his
fearful vengeance, as mistrust in gods promise, and incredulity: On the other
part, nothing attaineth salvation, brings men nere to Gods presence, and
draws forth of gods mercy his favorable love, but only faith and constant
affiance in his most sure and faithful promises. The loss of riches, lands,
and earthly possessions is a sore grief: but is not the winning of an hundred
fould so much, and the obtaining of an everlasting kingdom a good salve for
this sore? If we gain with the loss of transitory things, heavenly
treasures, with the forsaking of worldly friends, Christ to be our dear and
sure friend, and with refusing father, mother, brother, sister, wife, children,
purchase God to be our most merciful Father, Christ our most loving brother,
and to be loved of the Son of God, as his dear dearlings, and only beloved
spouse, what have we lost? what greater gain can we have? or what more
profitable excha^ge can be made? This bargain and profit has our heavenly
Father promised unto us by a byl of his own hand, sealed with the blood of his
only Son, testified by the witness of his Apostles, and left with us in our
own custody to be paid at the sight, whenever we shall require it: whereof
this is the content: Who so has forsaken house, Matthew. 9.
brother, sister, father, mother, wife, children, or lands for my Names sake,
he shall receive an hundredth fold, and the inheritance of everlasting life.
Who will deny, but that hunger, cold, nakedness, extreme poverty, and want of
things partly necessary, are an heavy burden for man to bear? but the weight
hereof is lightened and made easy to the^, that with right eye, and unfeignedly,
1. Pet. 5.
do believe Gods promise, and cast their care on him. Cast thy care upon the
Lord, for he has care over thee. Math. 6.
Your heavenly Father knows yt you have need of all these things, meat,
drink and clothes: he ministers these things in due time to the beasts of
the earth, the fouls of the air, the fishes in the sea, he clotheth and
decketh with beautiful apparel the flowers of the field, according to his
promise: and will he not keep his promise unto us, for whose sakes he has made
these creatures, and has made us lords over them? Psalm. 8.
What cause have we rather to mistrust his promise, the^ ye bird that flies
forth in ye morning upon this natural persuasion, yt she shall find food, not
douting, but he, who made her, will not suffer her to sterue with hunger? Have
we seen such as have put their trust in him, sterue for hunger, die of cold,
Psalm. 37.
perish through nakedness? It has not bin heard of, yt the righteous has bin
forsaken, Psalm. 9.
or his seed (beg) wanting bread. For they yt know the Name of the Lord, will
trust therein: for he forsakes not them, that seek after him. Math. 6.
Seek after ye kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you, says Christ. If he be true that makes this
promise, why should we fear hunger, cold, or nakedness? If he be not to be
trusted, why will we take on us his Name? If we cannot deny him, but to be
most just of promise, as he is in deed, we argue our selves of to much
hypocritical incredulity, when we say, that we would gladly suffer these
for his sake, saving for fear to want necessaries in our need, and that we
shall not be able to abide it. And he has promised no less assistaunce, aid,
and comfort in all kind of persecution, whether it be imprisonment,
banishment, loss of life or any membre. Yea, because we should not faint in
prison, wax feeble in exile, give over through fear of ye bitter pangs and
sharp pricks of death, he has promised not only to be revenged on our
persecutors, but also to be present with us, to help, comfort and deliver us.
Psalm. 50.
Wherefore he has willed us in ye day of our troubles to call upon him, adding
this promise, yt he will deliver us. Whereunto the Prophet David did so trust,
feling ye comfortable truth thereof at sundry times in many and dangerous
perils, that he persuaded him self, al fear set apart, either of one painful
danger or other whatsoever: yea, if it were to walk in ye valley of the
shadow of death, yt he should not have cause to fear, comforting him self with
this saying, which was Gods promise made unto us al, For thou art with me:
Psalm. 23.
Thy rod and thy staff, eue^ they shall comfort me. Is Gods staff waxed so
weak, that we dare not lean to much now thereon, lest it should break? Or is
he now such a cha^geling, yt he will not be with us in our troubles according to
his promise? Will he not give us his staff to stay us by, and reach us his
hand to hold us up, as he has been wont to do? If he be the self same God
and no chaungeling, when we be put into prison, or led into captivity, he
goes with us, or thrown into the sea to be drowned, he does not leave us, or
cast into the raging fire, he is with us, to this end, either to deliver us
from the violent force of them utterly, or at the least so to comfort us in
the mids of them, that we should rather take pleasure therein, then feel
pain. Wherefore he cries unto us continually: Mat. 10.
Fear not thou little flock: fear not them, that can do no more but kill the
body, that is their uttermost: but now the Lord that made thee (O Jacob) and he
that fashioned thee (O Israel) says thus, Esa. 43.
Fear not, for I will defend thee, I will call thee by thy name, thou art
mine: when thou wentest in the waters, I was by thee, that the strong floudes
should not pluck thee away, when thou walk in the fire, it shall not burn
thee, and the flame shall not kindle upon thee: For I am the Lord thy God, the
holy one of Israel, thy savior. Let the cruel Papists rage and roar, let the
obstinate Sodomites fret and fume, let the rableme^t of Antichrists
soldiers, the devils own dear dearlings threaten with sack, sword, faggot
and fire, yet if God be with us, who can be against us? the mighty, strong,
holy one of Israel has made a faithful promise, that he will be with us,
defend and deliver us. Romans 8.
This promise suffices to a Christian to arm him against all fear of
trouble, anguishe, persecution, hunger, nakedness, peril, sword and death, for
that none of al these can separate us from God, but we shall overcome, and have
the ouerhand in all these things through the aid and comfort of him, who has
loved us: for he is a faithful God, which will not suffer us to be tempted
above our strength, but shall in the mids of temptation make a way to come
out, that we may bear it. Who now weying these promises dare surmise that God
will not aid, comfort, and strengthen you in all necessities? And will you
think he is not able to perform the thing he wills? Is the arm of the
Lord shortened? Shall not he who is able to raise of stones children unto
Abraham, be of power to comfort, relieve and defend, whom he has already made?
If we be assured of his will, which his promise teaches us, we need not doubt
of his power: for whatsoever him pleases, Psalm. 13.5.
he does in heaven, earth, the sea, and in all deep places. If we believe his
promise, Mar. 9.
all things are possible, yea there is nothing, but it is easy of him to be
done. As a mighty Captain, who has under his government many soldiers and
servants, has the^ so at his commandment, yt when he bids the^ go, they
go, when he says abide, they abide, and when he wills them to do this or
that, they obey his word: so is pain, pleasure, grief, ease, sickness, health,
life, death at the beck and call of God, that they come and go at his
appointment, as the faithful Centurion confesses in the Gospel. Matthew. 8.
Yea he works so forcibly in his children, that lean wholly unto his promise,
yt he makes to them of pain, a pleasure, of grief, an ease, of sickness
health, and of death, life: as contrariwise to ye unbelieving, pleasure, ease,
health, life is a weary irksome, and painful death. When you were in
prosperity, had the true religion of Christ among you, and were so strong
within your selves, as no foreine Prince could invade and overcome you, the
Lord of hosts turned al vpside down in ye twinkling of an eye, has wrapped you
up in adversity, choked your whole realm with false superstition, and given you
up into the rule and government of such lean locusts, stinging serpe^ts, and
spiteful spa^gers, as no people have been heretofore plagued withal. And is
the Lords power not so able to deliver his from these miseries, to restore his
true religion, and vanquishe these Sodomitical Babylonians, as it was to give
them up, for a time to be chastened, into their subjection? Let the Idolatrous
Papists ascribe their victories, and whole felicity unto their Idols and God
of bread: yet our hope is in the Lord, who has made heaven and earth, who can,
and will for his own glories sake, show him self to be the only God of might
in giving overthrow to these Idolatours with a sudden confusion, when they
think the^ selves most sure, and look least for it. Let them now for a while
fret and fume against the Lord and his Christ, shake of his yoke, Psalm. 2.
and break his bo^des in sunder: Yet is the Lord in his holy temple, his
abiding is in heaven, his eyes behold these sons of men, and laugh them to
scorn, and at the length shall talk with them in his fury, pouring upon them
from heaven, snares, fire, and brimstone, whose cup and portion shall be burning
storm and tempest. Let them persuade them selves, and believe darkness to be
light, truth falsnes, blindness sight, and life death, and bring this to pass,
that men's eyes may seem with a skin or slime of superstitious ignorancie to
be covered and made blind, yet can the Lord, and also will, when he sees
time, restore light, truth, sight and life again to the advancement of his
own glory, the comfort of his Church, and utter confusion of his enemies.
Matthew. 9.
Follow therefore after the Lord, cry unto him with the two blind men, desire
him of his mercy to restore your sight, mistrust not but he is able to do it,
say with them that you so believe, and the Lord will make you answer and
perform it in deed: after your faith be it unto you. If you trust in the Lord
and confess him to be omnipotente, why should you fear the cruelty of
Antichrist, who afflicts Christ in his members, persecuting and punishing
their souls with superstition, idolatry and unbelief, and afflicting their
bodies with hunger, imprisonment, exile and painful death? Has not God
aforetime assisted his to wade through, and overcome the pains of all these,
yea in the mids of ye bitter storms to take great pleasure? And is he of
less power to help us? shall not we now by his assistance be so able to
abide, and take pleasure in pains, as our brethren have been before us? My
brethren, Ephe. 6.
be strong in the Lord, and through the power of his strength learn, to
whatsoever estate God shall call you, therewith to be content, Philip. 4.
knowing how to be low, and how to exceed, every where and in all things
instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to have plenty, and to
suffer need, yea, to do all things through Christ, who strengthens you, by
whom also you shall overcome. For if you be troubled on every side, 2. Cor. 4.
yet shall you not be without shift: when you be vexed with poverty, you
shall not be utterly without somewhat: wrapped in persecution, not forsaken
therein: cast down, yet perish not: that the excellency of the power may be
Gods, and that you may only glory in the Cross of Christ. By the cross he
entered into glory, and they that are his, must enter in the same way. The
Princes had no power over him, further then was given them from above, neither
have they over you, Mat. 10.
no not to pluck of one hear of your head, for they be all numbered, and not
one falls away without the will of your heavenly Father, Romans 8.
who works all things for the best to all them that love him. And would we
not have all things work to our most advantage? In worldly things we seek
after most gain, and will we neglect that in heavenly things? For to win a
small sum of money, we will take upon us a far journey in danger of
robbing, in perils of drowning, and let for no pain, persuading our selves
that God will be with us, assist and prosper us in all our travail: and shall
we refuse to traueile by land, to pass the seas, to suffer what pain soever
thereunto belongs, to win the penny of everlasting life, mistrusting that
God will not be with us, aid and further us in whatsoever painful peril we
shall come in? O blind incredulity, that make easy things to seem hard by
working an unwillingness in the minds of men, whom thou rulest! If men forsake
their own wills, submitting them selves wholly unto Gods will, what thing can
be to hard? But if we will follow the appetites and delicate niceness of
our own wills, what can be easy? Cry therefore with Christ, (dear
brethren,) Not our wylles, but thy will (O heavenly Father) be done: So eschew
troubles, as may stand with his good will and pleasure: When they come upon
you, embrace them willingly, suffer them patiently, wade through them
faithfully, for that is his good will and pleasure. Follow the example of
Christ, of the Prophets, Apostles, and holy martyrs, who were not wedded to
their own wills, but submitted them selves wholly unto Gods will, who wrought
so with them, that in poverty they wanted not necessaries, in prison among
ravening Lions they lived harmeles, in the mids of fire they burnt not, in
the most cruel torments they felt no pain, and trusting to the faithful
promise and mighty aid of their heavenly Father, desired rather to be
exercised under the cross, to die with Christ, then to be at ease, and live
with the world. Genesis 11.
Abraham with his Father Their forsook his native country, Genesis 12.
and from thence was commanded to depart into a country, whereof he neither
knew the name, where it was, neither what commodities were therein for men to
live withal, neither yet could he abide there any while: for a great dearth
did oppress the whole land, so that he was compelled to fly into Egypt,
where he was in danger of much displeasure, for he perceived before he entered,
that he must forgo either his wife, or else sustain danger for keeping her.
He was constrained oftentimes to remove his habitation not without great
loss, travail and peril. Genesis 28.
Jacob also went forth of his native country into a strange place, partly
for that his father would not that he should be joined in marriage, with the
daughters of the Idolatours of that country, partly to fly the cruelty of
wicked Esau his natural brother, where he served Laban fourteen years for his
two daughters, Genesis 46.
in keeping his sheep: a painful kind of labor. Afterward in his old
days was constrained by the force of a great dearth to remove into Egypt,
where his offspring was grievously molested many years. Joseph was sold by his
brethren to the Ismaelites, and by them unto an Egyptian, where he sustained
great pain and peril in a strange country. 3. Reg. 19.
The Prophet Ely, being persecuted by the wicked Iezabel, fled from post to
pillar. Dan. 1.
The Prophet Daniel with a great number of good and godly Israelites were
carried into Babylon captives, there to live in captivity in a strange
country among their deadly enemies. The Apostles of Christ, and many godly
men, and also women in their time forsook all they had, and went into strange
countries for the Gospels sake. And after their time to this our time the
Ecclesiastical histories are full of ye examples both of men and also women,
that left lands and goods, fled their countries, and did choose rather in an
vnkoth and unknown land to live in hardness with freedom of conscience, to
serve God after his will, then to tarry at home in wealth with bondage of
conscience, and dishonor the Lord in disobeying his holy will. It is not read
that any of these did murmr and grudge to leave their houses, lands, goods,
and native countries, fearing the want of friendship, the hatred of strangers,
the burden of poverty, the raging of hunger, and the lack of things necessary
for man's life here, nor yet that they came into any such distress, but that
they had sufficiency, if not of the finest sort, yet such as served their
turn, and they well content therewith. Abraham when he perceived it stood with
the Lords will he should depart, he wist not whither, nor what shift to make,
did not debate the matter with himself, take counsel of his friends, co^sult
with his wife, whether he should do the thing yt most pleased God or no, but
setting apart all persuasion and wisdom of flesh, bowed down his own will
subject unto Gods pleasure, bent himself without further delay to obey his
will, that ought only to be obeyed in all manner of creatures: and therefore in
a strange country, yea in the mids of his enemies, had not only at all
times sufficiency, but also did grow unto great abundance of riches. Of like
sort Jacob was not only not left destitute of succor, but did come to so
great abundance, that at his return into his country, he made therewith his
most mortal foe, his dear friend, and served the Lord all his life in great
wealth. Joseph being a bondsman in a strange country, was not so moved with
the fear of false and slanderous accusations, of hunger, imprisonement, and
such like griefs, that he would, to eschew these, commit unclean things
against Gods will, but cleaving to Gods providence, was fostered up against the
rage of hunger, the violence of imprisonment, cleansed from the foul spots
of slanders, set at liberty, and at length made ruler over Egypt. Although
his brethren meant his destruction, when they sold him to strangers, Genesis 45.
and drove him forth of his native country, yet he acknowledges this their
fact to be the good will of GOD, who works all things to the best for them
that love him, whether it be hunger, cold, exile, imprisonment, or death it
self, and makes that which seems painful and grievous, easy and
pleasant. What should we say to the Prophets Ely and Daniel? Ely flying the
fiercenes of Achab, because he should not suffer more pain of hunger, then he
might well away withal, was fed by ravens sent unto him morning and
evening, 3. Reg. 17.
to bring him bread and meat for that purpose, and afterward by a poor
wydowe of Sarephta, and last of all by Gods Angel, 3. Reg. 19.
when he was in a desert, flying the cruelty of Iezabel. In like sort Daniel
was fed in the prison by Habacuc brought by Gods Angel, Dan. 14.
whereupon Daniel said: O Lord thou have remembered me, thou do not forsake
them that love thee. A saying of him, who had felt the ease and relief, that
GOD provides for all them that unfeignedly trust in him, worthy to be written
in golden letters, and deeply graven into our hearts. This is a common and
pleasant persuasion to the Apostles, and al other of Christ's Church, who
suffered for Christ's sake, poverty, exile, persecution, that in the mids of
poverty they were most rich, when they had nothing left them at all, then had
they all things, and wanted nothing. These examples should move us to set
apart all fear of want, and to cast our care whollye upon the Lord, for so
much as he is no less our loving and merciful Father, then he was to
Abraham or any other: yea, he has exhibited unto us in deed, and we have
seen that Abraham would gladlye have beholded. Romans 8.
God has not spared his only Son, but has given him for us all unto death:
how much more will he give unto us, if we trust in him, all other necessary
things? It is not a necessary thing to have strength and ablenes to abide
patiently for his sake, not only poverty, loss of goods, imprisonment and
exile, but also power to pass through easily the burning flames of fire,
hanging, drawing, stoning, racking, devouring with wild beasts, broyling,
boiling, and such kind of most cruel torments and bitter death, as the
enemies to Christ, the old tyrants and Antichrist him self, the Pope with
his clergy now daily inuenteth and practices to withdraw and fraye men from
Christ? God has always to his time given his such strength to overcome and
contemn these, and whatsoever cruelty could be invented, yea he has so
encouraged them to take pleasure in the mids of most cruelty, that they
rejoiced most, when they seemed to be in the greatest pain, as it is plain in
many histories of the Church: and will not God deal so mercifully with us
now, as with them of old time? Is his mercy waxed less now toward us, or
his power not so able? God is not like unto man to change his purpose, and to
be every year of a new mind, he is faithful, he changes not, although to
the judgment of the flesh he seems to forsake the man that is cast in
prison, banished his country, thrown into the fire, and most cruelly dealt
withal, yet he is present with him, aydeth and comfort much more strongly,
then the tormentours be able to grieve or discomfort, yea, turns the
bitterness into sweetness, the pain into pleasure, and that, which seems
unto others most intolerable, to be most sufferable. The three Israelites were
commanded to fall down and worship the golden Image, they did not dissemble
the matter, Dan. 3.
but plainly said they would not: they were threatened to be cast into the
burning furnace, they feared it not, they might have dissembled the matter for
a time, following the world, but they knew GOD could not be deceived, nor
would not be played withal. The oven was made seven times hotter, then ever
before, and they cast into it, yet were they well able to abide it, and had
much more solace in the burninge fire, then they that only looked on. The
mother with her seven sons in the Machabees chose rather to suffer most
cruel death, 2. Match. 7. 1. Match. 2. 2. Match. 6.
which they passed through most joyfully, then to commit the least thing
against the Law of their GOD. Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 6. cap. 4.
So likewise Mathathias his sons, and Eleazarus. Rhais that Christian woman,
although not yet so fully catechized, that she was admitted to baptism, set
on fire with the burning heat of Gods Spirit, and the famous chaste woman
Potamiena with her mother Marcella, Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 6. cap. 5.
after they had suffered great and horrible torments for the truths sake,
were consumed in burning fire. Eccle. hist. li. 6. cap. 41
Quinta the faithful woman and constant martyr of Christ, suffered rather to
have her legs tied together, and to be drawn through the streets upon the
sharp stones, and whipped most sharply, then she would seem to worship
the images or idols in the temples. The constant old matrone Apollonia was
beaten about the lace till all her teeth were beaten out, a great heap of
wood set on fire before her face, and threatened to be cast thereinto quick,
if she would not agree to the Idolatours, and did willingly choose to be burnt
in the raging fire. So likewise the history shows of Ammonarion, Mercuria,
Dionysia, and other notable women, that were so unfearful to suffer most
sharp death, that they would run, when they heard, where the execution was
in hand, and carry their young children with them (such delight had they to
suffer for Christ's sake) in great have as unto a joyful feast, fearing
nothing else, but that the tormentours would spare them, and that they should
not be thought worthy to bear witness to Christ's death with their own
blood. Call to your remembrance that faithful woman and worthy martyr of
Jesus Christ your own country woman Anne Askew: her imprisonment moved her
not, she little weyed the cruel torture and tearing her body on the rack, she
joyfully went to the fire, and was of more comfort in feeling the pain, and
less weary thereof, then the lookers on to behold, or the torme^tours to do
execution. The history says, that Theodorus a young man, was so grievously
tormented with diverse and sundry kinds of torments, and at length his body
so rent and torn, that they left him for dead: Whom Ruffinus the writer of
the Ecclesiastical story, afterward asked whether he felt not grievous
pains, whiles he was in the torments, to whom he answered, that he felt very
little pain: For, said he, there stood, as he thought, a young man by him, who
always wiped the sweat from him, and so much comforted his stomach, that the
time of the tormenting seemed to him much more pleasant then painful. Who
made the young men walk in the fire and burn not? Who hardened these martyrs
of men and women, that they did not shrink at pain, but ran through fire,
water, and most cruel torments, and not be overcome? Certainly even he, who
had promised them, that neither in fire, water, no nor yet in the shadow of
death he would be from them, but would be their buckler, defendour and
shield, faithfully performing that no temptation should so assail them, but
that he would give a joyful end and deliverance: whereunto they trusted, and
so by their constant faith overcame, and had the victory. For this is the
victory that overcomes the world, 1. John. 5.
even our faith. Yea as S. Paul says, Heb. 11.
ye time would not serve us, if we would rehearse how the Patriarks, prophets,
Apostles and Martyrs through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained the promises, stopped ye mouths of Lions, quenched ye violence of
fire, escaped ye edge of ye sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed
valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliants, ye women received
their dead raised to life again. Other were racked and would not be delivered,
that they might inherit a better resurrection. Again, other were tried with
mockings and scourgings, moreover with bonds and imprisonments, were stoned,
were hewn in sunder, were tempted, were slain with sword. And these al
through faith obtained good report. The holy Ghost has caused these histories
to be kept in writing for us, yt are now in the latter days, to this end,
that we should not only behold in them the fiery raging of the world from the
beginning against the chosen people of God, and how stoutly they withstood and
overcame by faithful patience the malice thereof, but also yt by reading of
the^, we should in our like troubles, learn like patience, receive the same
comfort, and being thoroughly tried, conceive a sure hope of ye same victory,
which they after many and sundry trials did win: whereof we shall not be
disapointed, if we to ye end strive lawfully. If it be to hard and above your
capacity to behold al ye histories and examples propounded in ye scriptures,
and the Chronicles of Christ's church with such consideration, that you may
epsy and behold in them the order of Gods working with his Church in all ages,
whereby to perceive these your grievous chaunges to be no new and unwonted work
of God: If you do not perceive and see in them the true and just cause, which
moves the Lord hereunto, and thereby to learn faithful repentance: and if you
do not understand in diligent perusing them, that the end and issue was
always joyful and glorious victory and deliverance, wherewith to comfort
your selves in the mids of miseries, take into your hands the comfortable
history of King David, mark his whole life from that time he was taken from
his fathers sheep to his death: behold in him, your selves: in the people
during the time of his rule, the church of England: and in the wonderful
judgment of God in ordering his Church then, what shall be the end of his
sharp cross, wherewith he does exercise you at this time. And to the end you
may the better see, how to wade in considering his whole life, we have
disclosed and opened for you to behold a part thereof: wherein you shall see
plainly, that the grievous afflictions of every one of you severally, and of
the whole Church of England together, is not fallen by chance of evil or good
fortune, but by the mighty hand of God, whose good will it is thus to have
you tried for a while, also for what cause GOD thus works, and what shall be
the end of al these doings. After the Lord had found out David, a man after
his own mind, and appointed him King over his people, who labored worthily
to deliver and defend Gods people from their enemies the Idolatours, that dwelt
nere about them, he did not grant to him such quietness, neither to his people,
but that he was in continual troubles, and no small dangers, during the life
of Saul, and also after his death, the Idolatours, and also Saul's friends,
seeking all the ways that might be, to disturb him forth of his kingdom. And
not only was he thus vexed with his foraine enemies, but also most grievously
of all, by those of his household, who should have bin his most dear friends,
his own natural son Absalom, his most privy Counselours, the nobility of
his Realm, and ye most part of his subjects. 2. Reg. 15.
Absalom pretending to his father David a great holiness, (as the manner of the
hypocrites is) desired to have leave to go into Hebron, there to do sacrifice
for the performance of a vow, which he had made in the time of his being in
Syria, but his meaning was to obtain the kingdom from his Father, and to
stir all Israel against him, which he brought to pass: David was banished,
and pursued unto ye death by his own son, who wrought so much vilanie
against his father, that he did not forbear in the despite of him, to misuse
his fathers wives in the sight of all the people: how grieuouse and dangerous
this sudden change was to David, and to the godly people, which were but a
very few in respect of the great number of the malicious hypocrites, which
followed Absalom, it appears plainly in the story, and you may easily
consider. The best that was like to come of the matter, was, that whiles the
kingdom of Israel was thus divided, Gods enemies the Philistims, who had lain
long in wait therefore, should snatche up from both the parties the kingdom
of Israel, and not only utterly banishe Gods true religion from among the
Israelites, but also bring the^, their country, and their posterity into most
miserable bondage and thraldom, and that, to Gods enemies the most vile
people, and hated of all the world. David in all these perilous dangers of his
own life, loss of his kingdom, and utter destruction of Gods people, did not
discourage himself, but understanding all this to be the work of Gods own
hand, acknowledging the true cause unfeignedly, did persuade him self yt the
Lord after a time, when his good will should be, would give a comfortable end
to al these storms and bitter pa^gs. His whole behavior he himself describes
in a Psalm, Psalm. 3.
which is left in writing for us to learn thereafter how to behave our selves
in the like persecutions. When he was fled from Jerusalem, and the priests
were departed from him with the Arc of ye Lords Covenant, 2. Reg. 15.
he went upon mount Oliuet barefoote, wept as he went, and had his head
covered, and so did all the people that were with him. And he made his moan
unto the Lord, saying, O Iehoua, how are they increased that trouble me? Psalm.
3.
how many are they that rise against me, how many are there that say of my
soul, There is no help for him in his God? Selah. Wonder not though this good
King with an heavy heart, and sorrowful cheer does lament and bewail his
dolorouse estate. Would it not grieve a King, when he thinks of no such
matter, suddenly to be cast out of his Royal seat, and brought in danger of
his life, and that by his own natural Son?

Can the displeasure of any enemy so much pearce the heart of a kind father,
as the unnatural cruelty of the son to seek his death, of whom he himself
had his life? It grieved him no small deal to perceive such as had bin his
wise Counsailours, whom he much trusted, (whose duty it had bin, with the
spending of their own lives, to have defended the common weal brought to good
and quiet order, both in matters of policy, and of Gods true religion,) to be
the supporters and mainteiners of an hypocrite, who had neither respect to Gods
true honor, nor yet consideration of duty to his most honorable Father,
neither yet regard to the prosperous weal of his native country. But nothing
of all these grieved him so much, as this one thing, the remembrance and true
acknowledging in himself, that he himself was the only cause of all these
evils. He called to his remembrance, that these plagues fell upon him sent from
God, whose work it was, and that for his sins, which were the cause thereof,
and this made him weep and mourn. For so soon as the Prophet Nathan had
warned him of his offense, 2. Reg. 12.
he cried, peccaui, I have sinned: and afterward when he saw this grievous
and sudden change follow, he perceived it came partly for his sin by the
work of God, and therefore submitted him self wholly to Gods will, saying, 2.
Reg. 15.
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and
show me both his Arc and the Tabernacle thereof: but, and the Lord thus say,
I have no lust unto thee, behold here am I, let him do with me what seems
good in his eyes. Thus the worthy man of God acknowledges his troubles to be
of Gods hand, his sins to be the cause, and therefore humbly and faithfully
submits himself to Gods ordering, well content to receive whatsoever should
be laid upon him. He assured himself that when he himself were most weakest,
then God would declare his strength for his own glories sake, and after he
were reduced to a faithful repentance by the correction of his merciful
Father, then the rod should be cast into the fire. This consideration of
plagues both to private men particularly, and also of Realms and whole common
Wealths is diligently to be weyed, that as they come from God, so have they
this end, that they tend partly to his own glory, partly to our profit, and
amendment. For although sin is the general cause wherefore all mankind
generally was, is, and shall be molested with many and sundry kinds of troubles
and calamities, yet the calamities and afflictions are not to all kind of men
alike, nor yet for one end and purpose. For the wicked and reprobate are
punished and whipped of God to a far other end and meaning, then the godly
and chosen children, who are ye true church of God, the lively members of
Christ, and such as shall be never separated from God and his loving favor in
Christ Jesus. These although they be never without trouble in this world, but
always exercised under ye cross, yet the cause and consideration why God will
have them thus exercised, is either for the glory and honor of his own Name,
or the profit, commodity; and exceeding benefit of them whom he thus
afflicts, either else for both these considerations together, for that there
is no trouble that comes to Christ's church or any member thereof, which
appears not plainly to redound to Gods glory, and the profit of ye
afflicted, if it be well and justly considered. These two causes and
considerations does the Scripture teach in all calamities of the church,
whether they be general or particular, which being well marked, will easily put
out of ye way this stu^bling block, whereat many stumble and fall, marueyling
wherefore God will suffer his word, and his chosen children thus to be used and
evil dealt withal. The children of Israel were in Egypt most cruelly dealt
wtal 400. years, oppressed with most painful labors, most servile exactions,
their infants slain, they cried unto ye Lord, their griefs increased, for God
had hardened Pharao his heart, that he should not ease or deliver his people.
Wherefore did God thus afflict his people, and stirred this cruel tyrant so
grievously to vex the^? truly for his own glory, and their profit. God
rehearses this cause and consideration in ye scripture, of the hard and cruel
hearts of ye Egyptians toward his people, The Egyptians shall know yt I am the
Lord, Exodus 7.
and that I will deliver my people by strong hand from among the^. Exodus 9.
For this purpose (says God to Pharao) have I raised thee up, that in thee I
may declare my power thorowout the whole world. This profit they received, the
exercise of their faith, the trial of their patience, and the confirming of
their hope for deliverance, which was not deceived. Thus S. Paul notes and
collecteth of this history, the one end to be Gods glory, Romans 9.
for the honorable fame and renown of his Name throughout the whole world,
and also the profit that the afflicted receive, which is the exercise of faith,
Hebr. 11.
as he notes of Moses and his parents to the Hebrews. But much more plainly
does S. Paul note and teach these two considerations to the Corinthes, saying,
2. Cor. 4.
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that ye power which excels,
might be of God, and not of us. We are troubled on every side, yet are we not
without shift: we are in poverty, but not utterly without somewhat: we are
persecuted, but we are not forsaken: we are oppressed, nevertheless we perish
not. But seeing we have the same Spirit of faith (according as it is writteng
believed, and therefore have I spoken) we also believe, and therefore we
speak. For we know that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up
also by the means of Jesus. Therefore we are not weary, but though our
outward man be corrupt, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our
trouble, which is but temporal and light, works an exceeding and an eternal
weight of glory unto us. What can Saint Paul speak more to the commendation
of Gods praise and glory, then that the excellency of his mighty power is
declared and advanced in this, that his are troubled, impouerished,
persecuted, oppressed, and yet in all these do not perish nor faint, but
overcome by him, who has willed his in all their troubles to call upon him,
and he will so deliver them, that his Name shall thereby be glorified, and
honored? And what greater profit can come to the Church, then to have the
faith of Gods children so exercised, that the inward man may be renewed day by
day, and that as Christ entered into his glory by troubles, the cross, and
death, so also our troubles, which are but short and light in respect of his,
may work unto us an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Both these two
things S. Paul notes in the general afflictions of Christ's Church, and also
the Scripture teaches the self same general causes of the troubles of every
private member of Christ. As our Savior Christ reports of the infirmity of
the borne blind man, which was for this cause, says he, John. 9.
that the works of God should be showed on him. And in like case when Christ
heard tell that Lazarus was sick, he said. This sickness is not to death, but
for the praise of God, yt the son of God might be praised there through. This
did much set forth ye glory of God in Christ, that he was of power to raise up
from death a man, which had bin in his grave huried 4. days, and was so
corrupted yt he did stink. And wherein does ye power of God more excedingly
appear to his glory, the^ in raising his church and faithful people from the
grave and pit of troubles, afflictions, and many intolerable miseries, wherein
the world goes about to tread them down, and bury them? Does not Christ
herein most marueilously set forth his glory, yt when the world by motion of
ye devil does furiously fret and rage against his faithful to root out his
word, then it springs and florisheth most plentifully, and the faithful are
fastened and confirmed therein most unfeignedly and boldly? This has God wrought
in all ages in ye fire of troubles and afflictions, trying his faithful
children for his own honors sake and their profit, as appears in ye
histories of ye church from the beginning. And beside this yt our faith is thus
tried, our patience proved, our hope confirmed by these afflictions, ye
faithful do receive also diverse other commodities and profits by troubles
which are more necessary to the^ then either meat, or drink: The worldly
ones set more by their easy life here to serve their idle bellies, the^ by the
necessary and profitable things to eternal life. By troubles and afflictions
the faithful are made of like and semblable shape to the Image of Gods own
Son Jesus Christ, says S. Paul, Romans 8.
If they suffer with Christ, they shall live with him in glory. Whom the Lord
loves, Heb. 12.
him he chasteneth, yea and he scourges every son, whom he receives, and
nourtereth us to that, which is profitable, yt we might receive of his holiness.
And to ye Corinthians S. Paul says, that when we are afflicted, we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be damned with the world. Thus the
scriptures do teach plainly and also abundantly, that for these two
considerations, God does suffer his church to be afflicted, and his own
people in this world to be exercised under the cross: which appears in all
ages by the examples of all histories. For behold the face of Gods church from
that good King David unto this our time, and you shall see what wonderful
chau^ges and grievous overthrows his people have suffered always, and
therefore should not marvel of this our change in England. After David was
anointed King over Gods people, ye 2. book of Samuel declares with what
troubles God did exercise him, and his whole kingdom during his time. But he
observed the ordinances of the Lord, and kept the true religion among his
people according to the commandment of God. After him Salomo^ has governance
of Gods people; who in the beginning of his reign walked after his Father
David, 3. Reg. 11.
did build Gods temple, and observed the true religion, but yt lasted but a
while: for in his latter years he fell to idolatry and the service of false
gods, so that the true service of God began the^ to be corrupted. After him his
son Roboam reigned, at whose beginning yt realm had such a miserable
change, that it could never after recover it self again: for the kingdom was
divided, and 10. tribes which were called afterward Israel, fell from Roboam,
and from the true religion unto idolatry, and false serving of God, and so
continued in false supersticious religion, always hating the true service of
God, killing the Prophets that did teach the truth, and the godly people that
confessed the same many years: and yet all that time persuaded them selves that
they had the true service of God, and that their doings did much please God:
yea the face of Gods Church was so blemished and brought to such a small number
of true professors, that the Prophet Ely complains, that there was not one
left, but he himself alone, whose life also they sought after. Consider well
this history, and the working of God with his Church and true religion. The
Prophet Samuel had taught the people the true service of God: the worthy king
David maintained the same all his time, but with great difficulty. Solomon his
son a Prince of most wisdom and knowledge, perfectly instructed in the ways
of the Lord, fell from God, and corrupted Gods religion with the false
services invented by man, so that the Lord was so offended therewith, that he
cut of from the rule of his posterity ye most part of the kingdom: for the
ten tribes were never after him under the governance of his succession,
neither did afterward walk in the fear of God, but in Idolatry and false
religion, till at the last God sent the Assyrians to invade them in that wise,
that they overcame them, carried them forth of their own country, dispersed
them in many countries among the heathen, sent strangers to inhabit their
land, and so utterly destroyed that kingdom. God defend the realm of England
from the like punishment. This was a fearful judgment of God, where he had
but one small kingdom in the whole world, that bare the face of his Church,
where his true honor was maintained, and that so suddenly of twelve tribes ten
should fall from God to idolatry, and false religion: yea and the other also,
during all the time of Roboam, and his son Abia after him, so yt during all this time there was not in the world any Church or people, where the sincere
religion and pure word of God was received by public authority and common
order: although God reserved always some that privately served him and feared
his Name faithfully, who were always so hated and punished by the Idolaters,
that their lives were bitter unto them. In those days did ye idolaters make
the self same reasons and arguments against the Prophets and their doctrine,
which your Idolaters do make now against Gods people and his true religion.
The faithful then lived among those Idolaters with no less fear, trouble and
persecution, then the Christians do now in England. The Prophets were then
imprisoned, and driven out of their country like seditious heretics, the
causers of all evil, as the true preachers now in England are partly
imprisoned, partly driven out of the realm. After the death of these wicked
Kings of Iehuda, God visited his people with some light of the truth by the
means of Aza, and King Iosaphat after him: who restored, although not
perfectly, the true religion, bannished the false, and destroyed the Altars of
the Idolaters. The which reformation was not done without great difficulty and
trouble, 3. Reg. 22.
and continued but a small time in that same order. For Ioram the son of
King Iosaphat ouerthrewe the true service of GOD, condemned it, and brought in
the place thereof the superstitions, and Idolatries of the Kings of Israel,
and so the Church continued never perfectly reformed, but always afflicted,
till the time of Ezechias. For although Aza, Iosaphat, Ioaz, Amazias, Vzzias,
and Ioatham, attempted a reformation, and were indifferently good Kings, yet
was not the Church cleansed of all the Idolatries, and false counterfeit
religion, as it appears by the Prophets, Ely, Amos, Esaias, Ozea, Micha. But
the worthy King Ezechias in the first year of his reign began to reform the
religion, brake down and banished all Idols and Images, hill altars, and
whatsoever was against Gods commandment, restoring Gods true religion after
the rule of Gods word. The which thing as he brought to pass not without
great troubles and difficulties, so it continued in purity but a little time.
For his Son, wicked Manasses, who reigned after him, put away, and did
forsake the true way, and brought in again all manner of Idolatry and false
religion, and did grievously punish and persecute the faithful people, and
true Prophets. He shed (says the Scripture) innocent blood exceeding
abundantly. In like manner did his son Ammon also, 4. Reg. 21.
who reigned after him. This grievous change remained thus, until the good King
Josias made a new and godly reformation: which ought to be a glass to all
Princes to behold themselves in. 4. Reg. 22.
But this godly reformation of this good King did not continue: for his son,
and all the Kings of Iehuda after him forsook the ways of God, and restored
again the Idolatry, and false religion of their forefathers, and so
continued, till God sent the King of Babylon to destroy their city, Temple,
and country. Who also led them captive into Babylon, where they continued many
years in great affliction, as it appears by the Prophets, Jeremy and Daniel,
so that in five hundredth years and above, in the days of all the Kings of
Iehuda Gods religion was set forth, and received in public order syncerely and
perfectly, and the contrary utterly banished and abolished, but only in the
times of David, Ezechias and Josias: as Jesus the son of Sirach witnesses,
saying, all Kings except David, Ezechias and Josias committed wickedness: for
even the Kings of Iehuda also forsook the laws of God. With what difficulty
and troubles, Gods religion and true service was restored after ye return of
Gods people from Babylon, and how short a time it continued in purity, what
troubles and grievous persecutions the true servants of the Lord suffered, it
is partly set forth in Esdras, and Nehemiah: after in Hester, and then in the
Machabees: And although unto the coming of Christ, there was an outward face
and beautiful show of Gods religion among the Jews, yet was it so defaced,
and utterly falsified with traditions of the Pharisees, who were that time in
estimation, that Christ himself does testify, that their service was but
vain traditions of men, Mat. 15.
and the commandment of God was not observed. All that time there were no
Prophets to instruct them in the right way. For immediately after the
captivity, all prophesying ceased in Israel. Now peruse the history of our
Savior Christ in the four Evangelists, and you shall perceive in what state
Christ found his true religion, what pains and travail he took to restore
the true and sincere honouringe of God, with how great difficulty he brought
it to pass, and at the last, how it cost him his life. After whose death the
cruelty of them, who would seem to have and maintain the true honoring of
GOD, Act. 8.
ceased not, but stirred most vehement persecution against the true Church of
Christ, and dispersed it thorowout all the world: with what pains, troubles,
and difficulty true Christianity was planted, and false religion put away, S.
Lucas partly mentions in the Acts of the Apostles, who spent their lives in
the buylding of Christ his Church. After Christ his death the cruel tyrant
Nero the Emperor did persecute the Church most cruelly, after whose time, the
Church was in some quiet, but not long: for Domitian the Emperor did persecute
Christ his Church to destroy his true religion most hainously. Nerua his
successor was friendly to the Christians. Traiane after him a cruel
persecutour, and enemy: and then Hadriane: after whose time the Church had
rest for a while. For shortly after, the Christians that were in Asia, and also
in the West parties, were cruelly disquieted. Shortly after this time did
England receive the Christian faith, and was the first country of all the
world that received the faith of Christ by public authority ( Lucius being
their first Christian King,) but the purity of Christ his truth, did not long
there continue, not much above an hundredth years. Seuerus the Emperor wrought
all the means that might be, to destroy Christ's Church, and to subuerte the
true religion with most sharp persecution, after whose time there was some
quiet: but shortly after the cruel tyrant Maximinus did sore molest the
faithful, and likewise after him Detius, Gallus, Hostilianus, Lucius
Valerianus. Galienus granted the Christians peace, Aurelianus did persecute
them. And Dioclesianus more like an infernal serpent, then an earthly man, did
as it were devour the Church most cruelly. In this time was the greatest
persecution, that had been before: The tormentours were much more weary in
sheading the Christian blood, and cruelly tormenting the faithful, then the
holy martyrs were in suffering the pains. Eusebius eccle. hist. li. 8. cap. 9.
There were in this persecution within thirty days above seventeen thousand
Christians killed most spitefully. But Constantine the good Emperor became a
Christian, set the Church in peace, and was the f^^^ Emperor that did by
public authority put down gentilitie, and truly maintained the
Christianity. But that lasted not long: for within short time after, Iulianus
th'apostata being Emperor, went about to undo all that Constantine had done,
used wonderful policies to destroy the Christian religion, and did afflict the
faithful very grievously. After this time the Church was grievously molested
by the Arrians, after with Hunnes, Vandals, and Goths, and so continued many
years till all good learning began wonderfully to be decayed, and at the length
albeit the Church seemed to be at rest, yet has it been even to this day
miserably afflicted, and the pure religion utterly defaced, by two vicars the
Devil put in commission at one time about eight hundredth years since: the
Antichrist of Rome for the West, and Mahomet for the East. Now weye and
consider with your selves this same brief rehersall of the state of Gods
Church, how the Church of the Israelites was afflicted in Egypt, then in the
time of the Judges, next under the Ringes, at the last carried into a strange
country captives, after their return and reedifying of the Temple what great
perils and troubles it sustained till after the days of the Machabees, next
consider the history of Christ, and the Acts of the Apostles. After this the
ten notable persecutions the Church suffered under most cruel tyrants from
the eight year of Nero, by the space of three hundredth and twenty years, unto
the time of Constantine, and from his time three hundredth years after by the
Arrians, and barbarous Hunnes, Vandals and Goths, by whose means good
learning was decayed, and ignorancie brought in: And then mark with
aduisement, how that from that time hitherto Mahomet has usurped and afflicted
the East Church, and the Pope the west (for he began to exercise his proud
power over the Church about the same time, that Mahomet brought in his
religion) consider I say with aduisement in all these times, how little while
Gods religion was maintained in the Church, what perilous chaunges were in the
kingdoms, what exeeeding cruelty was always used against the people of God,
as though they had been heretics, his word condemned as heresy, and the cause
of all evils: and you shall perceive that this is no new or vnkoth thing, that
the true religion of God should be thus put away and condemned, and the
faithful Church molested and afflicted both generally as is plain in these
histories, and also particularly in the ministers and faithful members, as
appears in Abel, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ, his Apostles, and in a
great number of holy saints and martyrs, since the death of Christ til now
our days. Thus may you plainly see how God has wrought with his Church at
all times, and therefore should not discourage your selves, because of this
sudden change, but with David acknowledging your sins to God, declare unto
him how many they be, that vex you, and rise against you, naming you heretics
and the children of Belial, as they named David. Let the wicked Idolaters boast
and brag that they have overcome you, and that God has given you over and
will no more be your God: let them put their trust in Absalom with his long
golden locks, and in the wisdom of Achitophel the wise counsailour, yet say
you with David, thou O Lord art my defender, thou art my worship, and the
lifter up of my head, fear not their violence to hurt you in your bodies, to
harm you in your goods. Persuade your selves with David that the Lord is your
defender, who has compassed you round about, and is as it were a shield, that
does cover you on every part: it is he only that may and will compass you
about with glory and honor, it is he, that will thrust down those proud
hypocrites from their seat, and exalt his lowly and meek. David in the mids of
his miseries did thus comfort him self, leaning to the providence of God,
looking for deliverance from him, appointing God no time, but committing the
whole matter unto his wisdom and goodness. He laid him self to sleep,
rose again, was not afraid for innumerable people, that set him round about
to have destroyed him, for ye Lord will sustain me, says this good King. This
was his shot anchor, here was his refuge, herewith he comforted himself, that
the Lord would be his defender and sauegarde, and at the length restore him to
his place again. He armed him self with the armor of God, Ephe. 6.
but above al he took to him the shield of faith, wherewith he quenched the
fyrie darts of the wicked. He had the helmet of salvation, the sword of the
spirit, the promises of God, and buckled these fast unto him self with this
long and durable girdle of faithful prayer and watching, saying, I will cry
unto the Lord with my voice, and he will hear me from his holy hill. If you
will receive comfort, cry with David unto the Lord, exercise your faith in
earnest and continual prayer, say, arise O Lord and help me, and he will smite
your enemies on the cheekebone, and brast all their teeth in sunder, he will
hang up Absalom by his own long hear. Achitophel through desperation shall
hang him self, the bands shall be broken, and you delivered: for this
belongs to ye Lord to save his from their enemies, and to bless his people.
Thus David in the mids of his affliction did comfort him self, trust to the
only providence of his most merciful God, persuading himself both of his good
will, and mighty power, whereby he should have deliverance, and was not
deceived. This blessing shall also be on you, if that neglecting the wisdom of
the world, you submit your selves to the correction of God your heavenly
Father, faithfully crying him mercy, and patiently abiding his good will and
pleasure.

FINIS.

