A Testimony of ANTIQVITIE, showing the ancient faith in the Church of
England touching the sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord here
publicly preached, and also received in the Saxons time, above 600. years
ago.

Jeremy. 6. Go into the streets, and inquyre for the old way: and if it be
the good and right way, then go therein, that ye may find rest for your
souls. But they say: we will not walk therein.

Jmprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath S. Martyns.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
GReat contention has now been of long time about the most comfortable
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ our Savior: in the inquisition and
determination whereof many be charged and condemned of heresye, and reproved as
bringers up of new doctrine, not known of old in the church before
Berengarius time, who taught in France, in the days when William the Norman
was by conqueste king of England, and Hildebrande otherwise called Gregorius
the seventh, was pope of Rome: But that thou may know (good christian
reader) how this is aduouched more boldly then truly, in especial of some
certain men which be more ready to maintain their old judgment, the^ of
humility to submit them selves unto a truth: here is set forth unto thee a
testimonye of very ancient time, wherein is plainly showed what was the
judgment of the learned men in this matter, in the days of the Saxons before
the conquest. First thou have here a Sermon or homelye, for the holy day of
Easter, written in the old English or Saxon speech, which does of set purpose
and at large, entreat of this doctrine, and is found among many other Sermons
in the same old speech, made for other festival days and sondayes of the
year, and used to be spoken orderly according to those days unto the people,
as by the books the^ selves it does well appear. And of such Sermons be yet
many books to be seen, partlye remaining in private men's hands, and taken
out from monasteryes at their dissolution: partlye yet reserved in the
libraryes of Cathedral churches, as of Worceter, Hereford, and Exeter. From
which places diverse of these books have been delivered into the hands of the
most reverend father, Matthewe Archbishop of Canterburye, by whose diligent
search for such writings of historye, and other monumentes of antiquity, as
might reveal unto us what has been the state of our church in England from
time to time, these things that be here made known unto thee, do come to
light. How be it the Sermons were not first written in the old Saxon tongue:
but were translated into it, as it should appear, from the Lattyne. For about
the end of a Saxon book of lx. Sermons, (which has about the midst of it
this Sermon against the bodily presence) be added these words of the
translatour. Fela faegere godspell e forlaetath on thisu^ dihte. tha maeg
aendan se the i will; Ne durre e thas boc na micle sithor gelaengan. thyles the
heo ungemetegod sy. and mannum aethraet thurh hire micelny'sse astirige; We let
pass many good gospells, which he that list may translate. For we dare not
enlarge this book much further, lest it be over great, and so cause to men
lothsomnes through his bygnes. And in an other book contaynyng some of these
Saxon Sermons it is also thus written in Lattyne. In hoc codicillo continentur
duodecim sermones anglice quos accepimus de libris quos Aelfricus abbas Anglice
transtulit. In this book be comprysed xij. Sermons whche we have taken out of
the books that Aelfricke abbot translated into English. In which words
truly here is also declared who was the translatour, to wit, one Aelfricke.
And so he does confess of him self in the preface of his Saxon gra^mer, where
he does moreover give us to understand the number of the Sermons that he
translated thus. Ic AElfric old thas litlan boc apendan to engliscum gereorde
of tham staef craefte the is gehaten gsammatica. syththan ic ta bec aende on
hund eahtatigu^ spellum. I Aelfricke was desirous to turn into our English
tongue from the art of letters called grammar this little book, after that I
had translated the two books in fourscore Sermons. But how soever it be now
manifest enoughe by this above declared, how that these Sermons were
translated: I think notwithstanding, that there will hardlye be found of them
any Lattyne books being (I fear me) utterly peryshed and made out of the
way since the conquest by some which could not well broke this doctrine. And
that such has been the dealing of some partial readers, may partlye hereof
appear. There is yet a very ancient book of Cannons of Worceter librarye, and
is for the most part all in Latyne, but yet intermyngled in certain places,
eue^ three or four leaves together with the old Saxon tongue: and one place of
this book handles this matter of the sacrament: but a few lines, wherein did
consiste the chief point of the controversy, be rased out by some reader:
yet consider how the corruption of him, whosoever he was, is bewrayed. This
part of the Lattyne book was taken out of ij. epistles of Aelfrike before
named, and were written of him as well in the Saxon tongue, as the Lattyne. The
Saxon epistles be yet wholly to be had in the librarye of the same church, in a
book written all in Saxon, and is entitled, a book of Ca^nons, and shrift
book. But in the Church of Exeter, these epistles be seen both in the Saxon
tongue, and also in the Lattyne. By the which it shall be easy for any to
restore again, not only the sense of the place rased in Worceter book, but
also the very same Lattyn words. And the words of these two epistles, so much
as concern the sacramental bread and wine, we here set immediatlye after the
Sermon: first in Saxon, then the words of the second epistle we set also in
Lattyne: delivering them most faithfully as they are to be seen in the books
from whence they are taken. And as touching the Saxon writings, they be set out
in such form of letters, and dark speech, as was used, when they were
written: translated also for our better understanding, into our common, and
usual English speech. But now it remains we do make known who this
Aelfricke was, whom we here speak of, in what age he lived, and in what
estimation. He was truly brought up in the schools of Aethelwolde bishop of
Winchester, Aethelwolde I mean the elder, and great saint of Winchester
church: So canonised because in the days of Edgar king of England, he
conspyred with Dunstane Archbishop of Canterbury, and Oswalde bishop of
Worceter, to expel out of the Cathedral churches, through out all England the
married priests, which then were in those churches the old dwellers, as
writes Ranulphus Cestrencis in his pollicronicon and to set up of new the
religion or rather superstition and hypocrisy of monks, after that the same
had been a long time, by the just judgment of God, utterly abolished, the
Danes spoiling them, and cruelly burning them up in there houses, as is at
large, and plentifullye confessed in the historyes of their own churches. For
this new rearing up of monkerie is Aethelwolde called in most old historyes,
pater monachorum, the father of monks. Under this Aethelwolde was Aelfrike
traded up in lerning, as he witnesses of him self in the Lattyne preface of
his Saxon grammar, where speaking of his interpretation of Lattyne words he
writes thus. Scio multis modis verba posse interpret^ri, sed ego simplicem
interpretationem sequor, fastidiu^ vita^di causa. Si alicui tamen displicuerit
nostra interpretatio, dicat quomodo vult. Nos con tenti sumus sicut didicimus
in scholis venerabilis praesulis Aethelwoldi qui multos ad bonum imbuit. I know
that words may be expounded diverse ways, but for to avoid lothsomnes I do
follow the plain interpretation. Which if any shall mislike he may do as he
thinks best: but we are content to speak, as we have learned in the schools
of the most worthy bishop Aethelwolde, who has been a good instructour to
many, or who has brought up many to good. This he writes of himself. So
upon this his education in the schools of Aethelwolde he became afterward to
be an earnest lover and a great setter forward of monkerye, and therefore no
less busy writer and speaker against the matrimonye of priests in his time.
For which respect he was afterward so regarded, that he was made by Oswalde
bishop of Worceter (as reports John Capgraue) the first abbot of S. Albons
newlye restored, and replenished with monks, and was also made abbot of
Malmesburye by king Edgar, (as reports William of Malmesburye) in the life of
Aldelmus. And truly he calls him self abbot in diverse of his epistles,
although he never named of what place, as in that he writes Egnesh amensibus
fratribus de consuetudine monachorum. To the monks of Egnesham, of the order
and manner of monks, and in this he writes here to Wulfstane Archbishop of
York, and in an other against priests matrimonye sent to one Sygeferth, with
whom was an anchor abiding, which defended the marriage of pristes, affyrming it
to be lawful. The epistle begins thus in the Saxon tongue. Aelfric abb. great
Sigeferth freondlice; Me is gesaed that thu saedest beo me that ic other taehte
on Engliscen geriten. other eoer ancor aet ham mid eo taehth. forthan the he
sutelice saegth that hit sie alefd. that maesse preostas el motan ifigen. and
min geriten ithcetheth thysen. That is, Elfricke abbot does send frendlye
salutation to Sigeferth. It is told me that I teach otherwise in my English
writings, the^ does thy anchor teach, which is at home with thee. For he says
plainly that it is a lawful thing for a priest to marye, and my wrytynges does
speak against this. etc. Thus as well in his own epistles, as in all other
books of Sermons in the Saxon tongue, that I have seen, I find him always
called abbot, and only so called. Howbeit, John Capgraue who gathered together
into one volume, the lives of English saints, writes in the life of Oswalde,
that Aelfricke was last of all advanced to the Archbishops see of
Canterbury. In alijs inquit Angliae partibus insignes ecclesias ob praefixam
causam clericis euacuauit, et eas viris monasticae institutionis sublimauit:
quoru^ haec nomina sunt. Ecclesia S. Albani, S. Aetheldredae virginis in Eli et
ea quae apud Beamfledam constituta honorabilis habebatur. Instituit enim in
ecclesia S. Albani Aelfricu^ abbate^, qui ad Archiepiscopatum Cantuariensem
postea sublimatus fuit. In other parts of England Oswald avoided out of the
most notable churches the clerks, and advanced the same places with men of
the order of monks, whose names be these S. Albons, the church of the virgin
S. Aetheldrede in Ely, and that which is at Beamfleot reputed very famous. He
did appoynte abbot in S. Albons Aelfricke, who was afterward promoted to the
Archbyshopricke of Canterburye. Truly this Aelfricke we here speak of, was
equal in time to Who did put out secular priests out of the church of
Canterbury, as the story of that house shows.
Elfricke Archbishop of Canterbury, as may certainly appear to him that will
well consider, when Wulfstane Archbishop of York, and Wulfsine bishop of
Scyrburne lived, unto whom Aelfricke writes the Saxon epistles, from which the
words concerning the Sacrament hereafter following be taken. And the
certaintye of this consideration, may well be had out of William Malmesburye De
Pontificibus, and out of the subscription of bishops, to the grauntes, letters
patentes, and charters of Aethelrede, These charters are to be seen.
who reigned king of England at this time. Howbeit whether this Aelfricke, and
Aelfricke Archb. of Canterbury was but one, and the same man, I leave it to
other men's judgment further to consider: for that writing here to Wulfstane,
he names him self but abbot, and yet Aelfricke Archb. of Canterbury, was
promoted to that his archb. stole vj. years before that Wulfstane was made
Archbishop of York, as is declared most manifestly in the historyes of Symeon
of Durham, Roger Houeden, the history of Rochester, Flores Hystoriarum, Thomas
Stubbes in his history of the Archbishops of York, and in all other most
ancient histories, as well written in the old Saxon tongue, as in Lattyne:
Moreover in many deeds and writings of gifts, made by king Aethelrede, when
Aelfricke subscribeth as Archbishop of Canterburye, then in them is one
Aldulphus, Wulfstanes predecessor, named Archbishop of York, and Wulfstane
him self subscribeth but as an inferior bishop. But be it, that this Aelfricke
was only abbot, and not Archbishop of Canterburye, yet this is also most true,
that beside the praise of great learning, and of being a most eloque^t
interpreter (for which William of Malmesburye does greatly commend him) he was
also of such credit and estimation to the lyking of that age in which he
lived, that all his writings, and chiefly these his epistles, were then
thought to contain sound doctrine: and the bishops them selves did judge them
full of right good counsel, precepts, and rules to govern thereby their
clergy: and therefore did most earnestly request to have these epistles sent
unto them, as do well appear by ij. short Lattyne epistles, set before the
Saxon epistles, whereof the one is sent to Wulfsine bishop of Scyrburne, the
other to Wulfstane Archbishop of York. And after this also bishops of other
churches among other ca^nons that they collected out of general and
particular counsels, out of the books of Gildas, out of the poenitentialls of
Theodorus Archbishop of Canterburye, out of the extractes of Egberhtus the
iiij. Archbishop of York from Paulinus: out of the epistles of Alcuinus
teacher to Charles the great, and to conclude, out of the writings of the
fathers of the primative church: among other Cannons I say, they collected
together for the better orderyng of their churches, they do place among them
also these two epistles of Aelfricke, as is to be seen in ij. books of Ca^nons
of Worceter librarye: whereof the one is all in the old Saxon tongue, and there
these epistles of Aelfricke be in the same tongue: the other is for the most
part all in Lattyne, and is entitled Admonitio spiritualis doctrinae, where
these epistles be in the Lattyne tongue, and be joined together for an
exhortation to be made of the bishop to his clergy. There is also a like book
of Cannons of Exeter church, where these two epistles in Lattyne be appointed
instead of two sermons to be preached, Ad clericos et presbyteros, to the
clerks and priests, and the epistles be also in the same book in the Saxon
tongue. And this book was given to Saint Peter's church in Exeter by Leofricke
the first and most famous bishop of that church, as in his own record and
grant of all such lands, books, and other things he gave unto the church, it
is thus expressed in the Saxon tongue. Here sutelath on thissere bec haet
Leofric b. haefth gedon into sancti Petres minstre on Exanceastre thaer his
bisceop stol is. that is that he haefth geinnod that aer geutod aes thurh Gods
fultume. etc. thonne is seo oncnaennis the he haefth god mid gecnaen and
sanctum Petru^ into tham halgan mynstre on cyrclicu^ madmu^ that is that he
haefth thider inngedon. 11. full maesse bec. and ane colectaneum. and.11. pistel
bec. and.11. fulsang bec. and.1. nihtsang. and.1. ad te leuaui. and.11.
psalteras. and. se thriddan sa man singth on rome. and.11. ymneras. and 1.
deorurth bletsung boc. and.111. other. and theos englisc Cristes boc. and.11.
sumer raeding bec. and 1. inter raeding boc. and regula canonicorum. and
martyrologium. and.1. canon on leden and scrift boc on englisc. etc. Here is
showed in this book or charter, what Leofrike bishop has given into Saint
Peter's mynster at Exeter, where his bishops seat is, that is, that he has
got in again through Gods help, what soever was taken out: and so forth,
first showing what lands of such as was taken from the church he recovered
again, partlye by his earnest complaynte, and suit made for the same, partlye
by his geuyng of rewards. Next making also report what lands with other
treasure of his own he gave of new to the place: he comes at last to the
rehearsal of his books, whereof the last here named a Cannon on Leden and
scrift boc on Englisc. that is, a Cannon book in Lattyne and shryfte book in
English, is the book we speak of, and has in it the Lattyne and Saxon
epistles of Aelfricke. Thus as this book of Exeter church has this good
evidence by which it is showed, that Leofrike was the geuer thereof: even so the
book of Ca^nons of Worceter church, written all in Saxon, has in it most
certain testimony that the writer thereof was the public scribe of the church
whose name was Wulfgeat. For thus (...) have. And let bishops take heed that
they presume not to ordain priests or deacons unless they do first profess
to have no wives. Now albeit this and many other councels held from time to
time by the space more the^ of an hundredth years after this did little avail,
but that the priests did both marrye, and still keep their wives, because as
writes Gerardus Archbishop of York to Anselme. Cum ad ordines aliquos inuito,
dura ceruice renituntur ne in ordinando castitatem profiteantur. When I call
any to orders they resist with a stiff neck, that they do not in taking
order profess chastity. Or as is reported in the Saxon storye of Peterborowe
church, speaking of the counsels of Anselme, of John of Cremona, and of
William Archbishop of Canterburye. Ne forstod noht ealle tha bodlaces. All
these decrees auayled nothing. Ealle heoldon here ifes be these cinges leaf sa
sa hi ear didon. They all kept their wives still by the kings leave as they
did before: Yet it came to pass upon this decree of Lanfranke, that the form
of words wherein the priests should vow chastity, was now first put into
some bishops No such demand of this profession in any English pontifical
before this time.
pontifical. Ego frater N. promitto deo, omnibusque Sanctis eius castitatem
corporis mei secundum cannonum decreta, and secundum ordinem mihi imponendu^
seruare domino praesule N. present. And as the words were thus put into some
po^tifical in a general speaking as the manner is. (...) this controversy, but
also, that more is, what was the common received doctrine herein of the whole
church of England, as well when Aelfricke him self lived, as before his time,
and also after his time, eue^ from him to the conquest. But what was the
condition and state of the church, when Aelfricke him self lived? In deed to
confess the truth, it was in diverse points of Religion full of blindness and
ignorance: full of childysh servitude to ceremonies, as it was long before
and after: and to much given to the love of monketye, which now at this time
vnmeasurablye took root, and grew excessiuely. But yet to speak what the
adversaries of the truth have judged of this time, it is most certain, that
there is no age of the church of England, which they have more reverenced, and
thought more holy then this. For of what age have they canonized unto us more
saints and to their lyking more notable? First Odo Archbishop of Canteaburye,
who dyed in the beginning of king Edgars reign. Then king Edgar him self, by
whom Aelfricke was made abbot of Malmesburye. Then Edward called the Martyr
king Edgars bastard son. Then Editha king Edgars bastard daughter. Also
Dunstane archbishop of Canterbury, of who^ Aelfricke was greatly esteemed.
Aethelwold bishop of Winchester, under whom Aelfricke had his first bringing
up. Oswalde bishop of Worceter, and after Archbishop of York, who made
Aelfricke abbot of S. Albons. Wulfsine bishop of Scyrburne unto whom Aelfricke
writes the first of the epistles we here speak of. Elfleda a Nun of
Romesey, and Wulhilda Abbess of Barkyng, lived in the days of king Edgar. And
last of all Wlfritha K. Edgars co^cubyne. All these I say with some other
more, be canonized for saints of this age in which Aelfricke him self lived
in great fame and credit. Also Leofricke and Wulfsine, whom we have showed to
have been the geuers of those Cannon books wherein be seen Aelfrickes epistles
be reverenced for most holy men and saints of their churches. And these ij.
lived bishops in the coming in of the Conqueror. Thus do some men now a
days not only dissent in doctrine from their own church, but also from that
age of their church which they have thought most holy, and judged a most
excellent pattern to be followed. Wherefore what may we now think of that great
consent, whereof the Romanistes have long made vaunte, to wit, their doctrine
to have continued many hundred years as it were lincked together with a
continual chain, whereof has been no breche at any time. Truly this their so
great affirmation has uttered unto us no truth, as good christian reader thou
may well judge by dulye weighing of this which has been spoken, and by the
reading also of that which here follows, whereunto I now leave thee.

Trusting that after thou have well weighed this matter of such manner of the
being of Christ's body in the sacrament, as shows this testimonye, no untruth
or dishonor shall need to be attributed to Christ's loving words pronounced
at his last supper among his apostles: no derogation to his most sacred
institution: no diminishing of any comfort to christen men's souls in the use
of his reverend sacrament: but all thing to stand right up most agreablie
both to the verity of Christ's infallible words, and to the right nature,
congruence, and efficacy of so holy a sacrament, and finallye most comfortable
to the conscience of man, for his spiritual uniting and incorporation with
Christ's blessed body and blood to immortality, and for the sure gadge of his
resurrection.

AMEN.
A SERMON OF the Paschall Lamb, and of the sacramental body and blood of
Christ our Savior, written in the old Saxon tongue before the Conquest, and
appointed in the reign of the Saxons to be spoken unto the people at Easter
before they should receive the Communion, and now first translated into our
common English speech.
MEn tha leofostan. gelome eo is gesaed ymbe ures haelendes aeriste. hu he on
thisum andeardan daege aeften his throunge mihtiglice of death aras; Nu ille e
eo geopenian thurh Gods gife be tham halgan husle the ge nu togan sceolon. and
geissian eoer andgyt ymbe thaere gerynu. aegther ge aefter thaere ealdan
gecythnysse. ge aefter thaere nipan. thylaes the aenig teonunge eo derian maege
be tham liflicu^ gereorde; Se aelmihtiga God bebead Moses tham heretogan on
egypta land. that he sceolde bebeodan Israhela folce. that hi namon aet aelcu^
heorthe anes geares lamb on thaere nihte the hi ferdon of tham land to tham
behatenan earde. and sceoldon that lamb Good geoffrian. and syththan snithan.
and pyrcan rode tacn on heora gedyrum. and oferslegum mid thaes lambs blood.
etan syththan thaes lambs flaesc gebraed. and theorfe hlafas mid feldlicre
lactucan; God caeth to Moysen. ne ete ge of tham lamb nan thing hreap. ne on
paetere gesothen. ac gebraed to fire; Etath that heafod. and tha faet. and that
inneearde. ne his nan thing ne belife oath mergen. gif thaer haet tolafe sy.
forbaerneth that. thicgath hit on thas isan; Begyrdath eoere lendenu. and beoth
gesceode. habbath eo staf on hand. and etath heardlice. theos tid is Gods
faereld; and earth tha on thaere nihte ofslegen on aelcum huse geond eall
Pharaoes rice, that frumcennede cild. and paes that Gods folc Israhel ahred
fram tham ferlican death. thurh thaes lambs offrunge. and his blodes
mearcunge; tha caeth God to Moysen. healdath thisne daeg on eoru^ gemynde. and
freolsiath hine maerlice on eorum cynrenum mid ecum bigenage. and etath
theorfne hlaf symle seofan dagas aet thisre freols tide; Aeften thissere daede
laedde God that Israhela folc ofer tha readan sae. mid drium fotum. and
adraencte thaer on Pharao. and ealne his here samod the heora ehton. and afedde
sith than that Israhela folc feoertig geara mid heofonlicu^ bigleofan. and him
forgeaf aeter of heardum stan clude. oath that hi common to tham behatenu^
ethele; Sum thas race e habbath getrahtnod on othre stoe. sum e yllath nu
geopenian. that the belimpth to tham halgan husle; Cristene menn nemoton
healdan nu tha ealdan ae lichamlice. ac him gedafenath that hi cunnon haet heo
gastlice tacnie; that unscaeththie lamb the se ealde Israhela tha ofsnath.
haefde getacnunge aefter gastlicum andgyte Cristes throunge se the unscaeththig
for ure alysednysse his halige blod ageat; Be tham singath Gods theoas aet
aelcere maessan. agnus dei qui tollis peccata mundi miserere nobis; that is on
uru^ gereorde. thu Gods lamb the aetbretst middan eardes synna gemiltsa us;
that Israhela folc earth ahred fram tham faerlicum death. and fram Pharaoes
theote thurh thaes lambs offrunge. the haefde getacnunge Cristes throunge.
thurh tha e sind alysede fram tham ecum death, and thaes rethan deofles
anealde. gif e rihtlice gelyfath on the one sothan alysend ealles middan eandes
haelend Crist; that lamb aes geoffrode on aefnunge. and ure haelend throode on
thaere sixtan ylde thissere orulde; Seo yld is geteald to aefnunge thises
ateorigenlican middan eardes; Hi mearcodan mid thaes lambs blood on heora
gedyrum. and ouerslegum tau. that is rode tacen. and urdon sa gescilde fram
tham engle. the acealde thaera egiptiscra frumcennedan cild; And e sceolon
mearcian ure forepearde heafod. and urne lichaman mid Cristes rode tacne. that
e beon ahredde fra^ foryrde. thonne e beoth ge mearcode aegther ge on foran
heafde ge on heortan mid blood thaere drihtenlican throunge; that Israhela folc
aet thaes lambs flaesc on heora easter tide tha tha hi ahredde urdon. and e
thicgath nu gastlice cristes lichaman. and his blod drincath. thonne e mid
sothum geleafan that halige husel thicgath; The One timan hi heoldon him to
easter tide seofan dagas mid micclum urthmynte the hi ahredde urdon ith Pharao.
and of tham earde ferdon. sa eac cristene menn healdath Cristes aerist us to
easter tide thaes seofan dagas. forthan the e sint thurh his throunge. and
aerist alysede. and e beoth geclaensode thurh thaes halgan husel ganges. sa sa
Crist sylf caeth on his godelle; Soth soth ic eo secge. naebbe ge lif on eo.
buton ge eten min flaesc. and drincon min blod; Se the et min flaesc. and min
blood drincth. he unath on me. and ic on him. and he haefth that ece lif. and
ic hine araere on tham endenextan daege; Ic eom se liflica hlaf the of heofonum
astah. na sa sa eoere forth faederas aeton the one heofonlican hlaf on estene.
and syththan sulton; Se the et thisne. hlaf. he leofath on ecnysse; He halgode
hlaf aer his throunge. and to daelde his discipulum thus ctheende; Etath thisne
hlaf hit is min lichama. and does this on mynum gemynde; Eft he bletsode in on
anum calice. and caeth; Drincath ealle of thisum. this is min blod that the
bith for manegum agoten on synna forgyfenysse; THa apostoli dydon sa sa Crist
het. that hi halgodon hlaf. and in to husle eft syththan on his gemynde; Eac
sylce heora aefter genegan. and ealle sacerdas be Cristes haese halgiath hlaf
and in to husle on his naman mid thaere apostolican bletsunge; Nu smeadon
gehilce men often. and git gelome smeagath. hu se hlaf the bith of corn
gegearcod. and thurh fyres haetan abacen mage beon aend to Cristes lichaman. oe
that in thebith of manegum berium arungen eorthe aend thurh anigre bletsu^ge to
drihtnes blood; Nu recge e gehilcum mannum that sum thing sind gecedene be
Criste thurh getacnunge. sum thurh geissum thing; Soth thing isand geis that
Crist aes of maedene acenned. and sylf illes throode death. and paes bebyriged.
and on thisum daege of death aras; He is geceden hlaf thurh getacnunge. and
lamb. and leo. and gehu else; He is hlaf gehaten. forthan the he is ure lif
and engla; He is lamb geceden for his unscaeththinysse; Leo for thaere
strencthe. the he ofer sithde the one strangan deofol; Ac sa theah aefter sothum
gecynde nis Crist nathor ne hlaf. ne lamb. ne leo; Hi is thonne that halige
husell geceden Cristes lichama. oththe his bold. gif hit nis sothlice that that
hit gehaten is; Sothlice se hlaf. and that in the beoth thurh sacerda maessan
gehalgode other thing hi aeteoiath menniscum andgitum ith utan. and other thing
hi clypiath ith innan geleaffullum modeum; ith utan hi beoth geseene hlaf and
in aegther geon hie ge on saecce. ac hi beoth sothlice aefter thaere halgunge
Cristes lichama. and his blod thurh gastlice ge rynu; Haethen cild bith
gefullod. ac hit ne braet na his hi ith utan theah the hit beo ith innan aend;
Hit bith gebroht sinful thurh adames forgaegednysse to tham fant fate; Ac hit
bith athogen fram eallum synnum ith innan. theah the hit ith utan his hi ne
aende; Eac sylce that halige fant aeter the is gehaten life's ylspring. is gelic
on hie othru^ aeterum. and is under theod brosnunge. ac thaes halgan gastes
miht genealaecth tham brosnigendlicum aetere. thurh sacerda bletsunge. and hit
maeg syththan lichaman. and sale athean fram eallum synnu^ thurh gastlice
mihte; Efne nu e geseoth ta thing on thisum anum gesceafte; AEfter sothum
gecynde. that aefter is brosniendlic aete. and aeter gastlicre gerynu haefth
halende mihte; Sa eac gif e sceaiath that halige husel aefter lichamlicu^
andgite. thonne geseo e that hit is gesceaft brosniendlic. and aendedlic; Gif e
tha gastlican mihte thaer on tocnaath thonne undergite e that thaer is lif on.
and forgifth undeadlicnysse. tham the hit mid geleafan thicgath; Micel is betux
thaere ungeseenlican mihte thaes halgan husles. and tham geseenlican hie agenes
gecyndes; Hit is on gecynde brosniendlic hlaf. and brosniendlic in. and is
aefter mihte Godcundes ordes. sothlice Cristes lichama and his blod. na satheah
lichamalice. ac gastlice; Micel is betux tham lichaman the Crist on throode.
and tham lichaman the to husle bith gehalgod; Se lichama sothlice the Crist on
throode aes geboren of Manian flaesce. mid blood and mid banum, mid fell and
mid sinum. on menniscum limum. mid gesceadisre sale gelifaest. and his gastlica
lichama the e husel hatath is of manegum cornum gegaderod. buton blood. and
bane. limleas. and saulleas. and nis forthi nan thing thaer on to
understandenne lichamlice. as is eall gastlice to understandene. Sa haet sa on
tham husle is the us life's edist forgifth. that is of thaere gastlican mihte.
and ungeseenlicre fremmincge; Forthi is that halige husel gehaten gerynu.
forthan the other thing is thaeron geseen. and other thing undergiten; that
that thaer geseen is haefth lichamlic hi. and that that e thaer on
understandath haefth gastlice mihte; itodlice Cristes lichama the death
throode. and of death aras. ne sylt naefre heonon forth. ac is ece and
unthroiendlic; that husel is hilendlic. na ece; Brosniendlic. and bith sticc
maelum todaeled; Betux tothum tocoen. and into tham buce asend. ac hit bith
theah haethere aefter gastlicre mihte on aelcum daele eall; Manega underfoth
the one halgan lichaman. and he bith sa theah on aelcum daele eall aefter
gastlicre gerynu; theah sum menn gesceote laesse dael ne bith sa theah na mare
miht on tham maran daele thonne on tham laessan. for than the hit bit on aelcum
menn ansund aefter thaere ungeseenlican mihte; theos gerynu is edd. and hi;
Cristes lichama is sothfaestnyss; THis edd e healdath gerynelice. oath that e
becumon to thaere sothfaestnysse. and thonne bith this edd geendod; Sothlice
hit is sa sa e aer caedon Cristes lichama. and his blod. na lichamlice. ac
gastlice; Ne sceole ge fmeagan hu hit gedon sy. ac healdan on eorum geleafan
that hit sa gedon sy; e raedath on othaere. bec. the is gehaten uitas patrum.
that tegen munecas abaedon aet Good sum sutelunge be tha^ halgan husle. and
aefter thaere been gestodon him maessan; THa gesaon hi licgan an cild on tham
eofode the se maesse freost aet maessode. and Gods engel stod mid handsexe
andbidiende oath that se preost that husel tobraec; tha tolythode se engel that
cild on tham disce. and his blod into tham calice ageat; Eft tha tha hi to tham
husle eodon. tha earth hit aend to hlafe. and to ine. and hi hit thygedon. Good
thancigende thaere sutelunge; Eac se halga Gregorius abaed aet Criste. that he
ateoede anu^ tynigendum ife embe his ger ynu micele sethunge; Heo eode to husle
mid tynigendum mode. and Gregorius begeat aet Good thaerrihte. that him bam
earth aeteoed seo snaed thaes husles. the heo thicgan sceolde. sylce thaer
laege on tham disce anes fingres lith eall geblodgod. and thaes ifes teonung
earth tha gerihtlaeced; Vton nu gehyran thaes apostoles ord embe thas gerynu;
Paulus se apostol eaeth be tham ealdan folce Israhel. thus ritende on his
pistole to geleasfullu^ mannum; Ealle ure forth faederas eron gefullude on
olcne. and on sae. and ealle hi aeton the one ylcan gastlican mete. and ealle hi
druncon the one ylcan gastlican drenc; Hi druncon sothlice of aefter filigendan
stane. and se stan aes Crist; Naes se stan the that aeter tha of fleo
lichamlice crist ac he getacnode Crist. the clypode thus to eallu^ geleaffullu^
mannu^. sa ham sa thyrste come to me and drince; And of his innothe fleoth
liflic aeter; this he saede be tham halgan gaste the tha under fengon. the on
hine gelyfdon; Se apostol Paulus caeth that that Israhela folc aete the one ylcan
gastlican mete. and drunce the one ilcan gastlican drenc. forthan the se ylca
heofonlica mete the hi afedde. xl. geara. and that aeter the of tham stane
fleo. haefde getacnunge Cristes lichaman. and his boldes. the nu beoth
geoffrede daegho^lice on gods cyrcan; Hit aeron tha ylcan the e nu offriath.
na lichamlice ac gastlice; e saedon eo hene aer that Crist halgode hlaf and in
aer his throunge to husle. and caeth. this is min lichama. and min blod; Ne
throode he tha gyt. ac sa theah he aende thurh ungeseenlice mihte the one hlaf to
his agenum lichaman. and that in to his blood. sa sa he aer did. on tham
estene aer than the he to men geboren urde. tha tha he aende the one heofonlican
mete to hi falaesce. and that floende aeter of tham stane to his agenum blood;
Fela manna aeton of tham heofonlican mete on tham estene. and druncon the one
gastlican drenc. and urdon sa theah dead. sa sa Crist saede; Ne maende Crist
the one theah the nan mann forbugan ne maeg. ac he maende the one ecan death the
sum of tham folce for heora geleafleaste geearnodon; Moses and Aaron. and
manega othre of tham folce the Good gelicodon. aeton the one heofonlican hlaf. ac
hi naeron dead tham ecum death. theah the hi gemaenu^ death. forth ferdon; Hi
gesaon that se heofonlica mete aes geseenlic. and brosniendlic. ac hi
understodon gastlice be tham geseenlicum thing. and hit gastlice thigdon; Se
haelend caeth. se the et min flaesc. and drincth min blod. he haefth ece lif;
Ne het he na etan the one lichaman. the he mid befangen aes. ne that blod
orincan. the he for us ageat. ac he maende mid tham orde that halige husel. the
gastlic is his lichama and his blod. and se the thaes onbyrigth mid geleaffulre
heortan. he haefth that ece lif, On thaere ealdan ae geleaffulle men offrodon
Good mistlice lac. the haefdon to earde getacnunge Cristes lichama. the sylffon
urum synnu^ syththan geoffrode his heofonlican faeder to onsaegednysse;
itodlice this husel the nu bith gehalgod aet Gods eofode. is gemynd Cristes
lichaman the he for us geoffrode. and his blodes the he for us ageat. sa sa he
sylf het. does this on minum gemynde; Aene throode Crist thurh hine sylfne. ac
'sa theah daeghomlice bith his throung geedniod thurh gerynu thaes halgan
husles aet thaere halgan maessan; For thy fremath seo halige maesse micclum ge
tham libbendum. ge tham forth farenum. sa sa hit sor often gesutelod is; Us is
eac tosmeagenne. that that halige husel is aegther ge cristes lichama. ge
ealles geleafulles folces. aefter gastlicre gerynu; Sa sa se ise Agustinus be
tham cpaeth; Gif ge illath understandan be cristes lichaman. gehyrath the one
apostol Paulum thus cethende; Ge solice sindon Cristes lichama. and leomu; Nu
is eoer gerynui geled on Gods myran. and ge underfoth eoer gerynu totham the
ge sylfe sind; Beoth that that ge geseoth on tham eofode. and underfoth that
that gesylfe sind; Eft caeth se apostol Paulus be thisum. e manega syndon an
hlaf. and an lichama; Vnderstandath nu. and blissiath. feala sind an hlaf. and
an lichoma on Criste; He is ure heafod. and e sind his lima; Ne bith se hlaf of
anum corn. ac of manegu^; Ne that in of anre berian. ac of manegum; Sa e
sceolon eac habban annysse on urum drihtne. sa sa hit arisen is be tha^
geleaffullan eorode. that hi aeron on sa micelre annysse. silce him eallum aere
an saul. and an heorte; Crist gehal good on his beode tha gerynu ure ribbe. and
ure annisse. se the underfehth thaere annysse gerynu. and ne hilt thene bend
thaere sothan sibbe. ne un derfehth he na gerynu for him sylfum. ac gecyonysse
togeanes him sylfum; Micel god by cristenum mannum. that hi gelome to husle
began. gif hi unscaeththignysse on heora heortan berath to tham eofode. gif hi ne
beoth mid leahtrum ofrette; tham yfelan men ne becymth to nanum good. ac to
foryrde. gifhe thaes halgan husles unurthe onbyrigth; Halige bec beodath that
man ge maenege aeten to tham ine the to husle sceal. forthan the that aeter
haefth thaes folces getacnunge. sa sa that in Crister blodes; and forthi ne
sceal nathor buton othrum beon geoffrode aet thaere halgan maessan. that Crist
beo mid us. and e mid Criste. that heafod mid tham leomum. and tha leomu mid
tham heafode; e oldon gefyrn trahtnian beitha^ lamb the se ealde Israhel aet
heora easter tide geoffrodon. ac e oldon aerest eo genaeccan ymbe thas gerynu.
and syththan hu hit man thicgan sceal; that getacniendlice lamb aes geoffrnod
aet heora easter tide. and se apostol Paulus caeth on thisum daegtherlicum
pistole. that Crist is ure easter tide. se the for ur aes geoffrod. and on
thisum daege of death aras; Israhel thigde thaes lamber flaesc. sa sa God
bebead. mid theorfum hlafum. and feldlicum lactucum. and e sceolon thicgan that
halige husel Crites lichaman. and his blod buton beorman yfeln ysse and
manfulnysse; Sa sa se beorma aent tha gesceafta of heora gecynde. sa aendath
eac leahtras thaes man's gecynde fra^ unscaeththignysse to geemmednysse; Se
apostol taehte that e sceoldon geistfullian na on yselnysse beorman. ac on
theorfnyssum sifernysse. and sothfaestnysse; Lactuca hatte seo yrt the hi etan
sceoldan mid tham theorfum blafum. heo is biter on thigene; And e sceolon mid
biiternysse sothre behreorunge ure mod geclaensian. gif e illath Cristes
lichaman thicgan; Naes that Israhela folc geunod. to hreaum flaesce. theah the
God him bebude. that hi hit hrea ne aeton. ne on aetere gesoden, ac gebraed to
fire; Se i will thicgan Gods lichaman hreane. se the buton gesceade enth that he
aere anfeald man us gelice. and naere God; and se the aefter menniscum isdome
yile smeagan ymbe tha gerynu Cristes flaesclicnysse. he death sylce he seothe
thaes lambs flaesc on aetere. for than the aeter getacnath on thissere stoe
mennisc ingehid; Ac e sceolon itan that ealle tha gerynu Cristes menniscnysse
aeron gefadode thurh mihte thaes halgan gastes. done thicge e his lichaman
gebraedne to fire. forthan the se halga gast com on fyres hie to tham apostolum
on mistlicum gereordum; Israhel sceold etan thaer lambs heafod. and tha fet.
and that inneearde. and thaer nan thing belifan ne most ofer niht; Gif thaer
haet belife. forbaernan that on fire. and ne tobraecan tha baan; AEfter
gaslicum and gite e etath thaes lambs heafod. thonne e underfoth Cristes
godcundnysse on urum geleakan; Eft thonne e his menniscnysse mid lufe
underfoth. thonne ete e thaes lambs fet. forthan the Crist is angin and end.
God aer ealle orulda. and man on thissere orulde geendunge; Haet is thaes
lambs inneearde buton Cristes digelan bebodu. tha e etath thonne e life's ord
mid graedignysse underfoth; Nan thingne most thaes lambs belifan oath merigen.
forthan the Gods cydas sind to smeagenne mid sa micelre carfulnysse. sa that
ealle his beboda mid and gite and eorce beon asmeade on nihte thises andeardan
life's. aerthan the se endenexta daeg thaes gemaenelican aeristes aeteoige; Gife
thonne ealle tha genynu Cristes slaesclicnysse thurh smeagan ne magon. thonne
sceole e thia lafe betaecan thaes halgan gastes mihte mid sothre eadmodnysse.
and na to dyrstelice ymbe tha deopan digelnysse ofer ures and gytes maethe
smeagan; Hi aeton that lamb mid begysdum lendenum; On lendenu^ is seo galnysse
thaes lichoman. and se the isle that husel thicgan he sceal geryithan tha
galnysse. and mid claennysse tha halgan thigene onfon; Hi aeron eac gesceode;
Haet sind gescy buton deadra nytena hyda; e beoth sothlice gesceode. gif e
efenlaecath mid urum faerelde and eorce forthfarenra manna lif. thaena the Good
gethugon thurh gehealdsumnysse his beboda; Hi haefdon him staef on handa aet
thaere thigene; Se staef getacnath gymene. and hyrdnysse; tha the bet cunnon
and magon. sceolon gyman othra manna. and mid heora fultume underrithian; tham
gemettum aer beboden that hi sceoldon caflice etan. fortham the God onscunath
tha sleacnysse on his thegnum. and tha he lufath the mid modes cafnesse thaes
ecan life's mirthe secathe; Hit is ariten. Ne elca thu to gecyrranne to Good.
thylaes the se tima losie thurh tha sleacan elcunge; tha gemettan ne moston
thaes lambs ban scaenan. ne tha cempan the Crist ahengon ne moston tobraecan
his halgan sceancan. sa sa hi dydon. thaera tegra sceathena the him on ta
healfa hangodon. ac driht aras of death gesund buton aelcere forrotodnysse;
And hi sceolon geseon aet tham micclan dome haene hi geundodon aelhreolice on
rode; theos tid is gehaten on ebreiscum geneorde Pasca. that is on leden
Transitus. and on englis Faereld. forthan the on thisum daege ferde Gods folc
fram egipta land ofer tha readan sae. fram theote to tham behaitenan earde;
Ure driht ferde eac on thisne timan. sa sa se Godspellere John's caeth. fram
thisum middan earde to his heofonlican faeder; e sceolon fylian uru^ heafde.
and faran fra^ deofle to criste. fra^ thissere unscaeththigan orulde to his
stathelfaetan rice. ac e sceolon aerest on uru^ and-eardan life faran fra^
leahtrum to halgum maegnum. fram untheaum to godum theaum. gif e illath aefter
thisum laenan life faran totha^ ecan; and aefter uru^ aeriste to haelende
Criste; He us geli^de to his lifigendan faed^r. the hine sealde for usu^ synnum
to death; Si hun uldor and lof. thaere ^ldaeda. on ealr^ orulda orulo. AMEN.

MEn beloved, it has been often said unto you about our Saviors
resurrection, how he on this present day after his suffering, mightily rose
from death. Now will we open unto you through Gods grace, of the holy housell,
which ye should now go unto, and instruct your understanding about this
mystery, both after the old couenaunte, and also after the new, that no
doubting may trouble you about this liuelye food. The almyghtie God badde
Moses his captain in ye land of Egypt, to command ye people of Israel to
take for every familye a lamb of one year old, the night they departed out of
ye country to ye land of promise, and to offer yt lamb to God, and after to
kill it, and to make ye sign of ye cross, with ye la^bes blood upon the side
posts, and the upper post of their door, and afterward to eat ye lambs
flesh roasted, and unleavened bread with wild lettisse. God says unto Moses.
Eat of ye la^be nothing raw, nor sodde^ in water, but roasted with fire. Eat ye
head, ye feet, and the inwardes, and let nothing of it be left until ye
morning: if any thing thereof remain, yt shall you burn with fire. Eat it in
this wise. Gyrde your loins, and do your shoes on your fete, have you staves
in your hands, and eat it in have. This time is ye lords passover. And there
was slain on yt night in every house through out Pharaos reign, the first borne
child: and Gods people of Israel were delivered from yt sodeine death through
the la^bes offering, and his bloudes marking. The^ said God unto Moses. Keep
this day in your remembrance, and hold it a great feast in your kinredes
with a perpetual observation, and eat unleavened bread always seven days at
this feast. After this deed God led the people of Israel over ye read
sea, with dry foot, Exodus 14.
and drowned therein Pharao, and al his army together with their possessions, and
fed afterward ye Israelits forty years with heavenly food, and gave the^
water out of the hard rock, Exodus 17.
until they came to the promised land. Part of this storye we have treated of
in an other place, part we shall now declare, to wit, yt which belongs to
the holy housell. Christian men may not now keep that old law bodily, but it
behooves them to know, what it ghostlye signifies. That innocent lamb which
the old Israelites did then kill, had signification after ghostly understanding
of Christ's suffering, who unguilty shed his holy blood for our redemption.
Hereof sing Gods servants at every mass. Agnus dei qui tollis peccata mundi
miserere nobis. That is in our speech, Thou lamb of God that take away ye
sins of the world have mercy upon us. Those Israelites were delivered from
that sudden death, and from Pharaos bondage by the lambs offringe which
signified Christ's suffering: Math. 27.
through which we be delivered from everlasting death, Marc. 15.
and from the devils cruel reign, Luke. 24.
if we rightly believe in the true redemer of the whole world Christ the
Savior. That lamb was offered in the evening and our Saniour suffered in the
sixth age of this world, This age of this corruptible world is reckened unto
the evening They marked with the la^bes blood upon the doors, and the upper
posts No such sign commanded by God in that place of scripture, but it was
the blood that God did look upon. Exodus 12.
Tau, that is the sign of the cross, and were so defended from the angel
that killed the Egyptians first borne child. And we Understand this as that
of S. Paul. Ephe. 2. Christ reconciled both to God in one body through his
cross.
ought to mark our foreheades, and our bodies with ye taken of Christ's roode,
that we may be also delivered from destruction, when we shall be marked both on
forehead, and also in heart with the blood of our Lords suffering. Those
Israelites eat the lambs flesh at their Easter time, when they were
delivered, and we receive ghostlye, Christ body, and drink his blood, when
we receive with true belief that holy housell. That time they kept with them
at Easter seven days with great worship, when they were delivered from
Pharao, and went from that land. So also Christen men keep Christ's
resurrection at ye time of Easter these vij. days, because through his
suffering and risiing we be delivered, and be made clean by going to this holy
housell, as Christ says in his gospel. Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye
have no life in you except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood. He yt eats
my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him, and has yt
everlasting life: and I shall raise him up in ye last day. John. 6.
I am ye lively bread, that came down from heaven, not so as your forefathers
eat that heavenly bread in the wilderness, and afterward dyed. He that
eats this bread, he lives for ever. He blessed bread before his suffering,
and divided it to his disciples, thus saying. Eat this bread, Math. 26.
it is my body, and do this in my remembrance. Luke. 22.
Also he blessed wine in one cup, Mark. 14
and said. Drink ye all of this. This is my blood that is shed for many, in
forgiveness of sins. The Apostles did as Christ commanded, that is, they
blessed bread and wine to housell again afterward in his remembrance. 1. Cor.
11.
Even so also since their departure all priests by Christ's commandment do
bless bread and wine to housell in his name with the Apostolic blessing. Now
men have often This was now in question, and so before Beringarius time.
searched and do yet often search, how bread that is gathered of corn, and
through fyers heat baked, may be turned to Christ's body, or how wine that
is pressed out of many grapes is turned through one blessing to the Lords
blood. Now say we to such men, that some things be spoken of Christ by A
necessary distinction.
signification, some thing by thing certain. True thing is and certain yt
Christ was borne of a maid, and suffered death of his own accord, and was
buried, and on this day rose from death. He is said bread by signification,
and a lamb, and a lion, and a mountain. He is called bread, because he is our
life and angels life. He is said to be a la^be for his innocence. A lion for
strength wherewith he over came ye strong devil. But Christ is not so
notwithstanding after true nature neither bread, nor a la^be, nor a Lion. Why
is then yt holy housel, called Christ's body, or his blood if it be not truly
that it is called. Truly the bread and the wine which by the mass of the
priest is balowed, show one thing without to humayne understanding and an
other thing they call within to believing minds. Without they be seen bread
and wine both in figure and in taste: and they be truly after their halowing,
Christ's body and his blood through ghostly mystery. An heathen child is
christened, yet he alters not his shape without though he be changed within.
He is brought to ye fontstone sinful through Adams disobedience. Howbeit he is
washed from all sin within, though he has not changed his shape without.
The water in baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords supper, compared.
Eue^ so the holy font water that is called the welspring of life is like in
shape to other waters, and is subject to corruption, but the holy ghostes
might comes to ye corruptible water, through the priests blessing, and it
may after wash the body and soul from all sin, through ghostly might.
Behold now we see two things in this one creature. After true nature that
water is corruptible moisture, and after ghostlye misterye, has holowing
might. So also if we behold that holy housell after bodily understanding,
then see we that it is a creature corruptible and mutable: if we acknoledge
therein ghostlye might, than understand we that life is therein, and that it
gives immortality to them that eat it with belief. Much is betwixt the
invisible might of the holy housell, and the visible shape of his proper
nature, It is No transubstantiation.
neturally corruptible bread, and corruptible wine: and is by might of Gods
word truly Christ's body, and his blood: not so notwithstanding bodily, but
ghostly. Much is betwixt the Differences betwixt Christ's natural body, and
the Sacrament thereof.
body Christ suffered in, and the body that is hallowed to housell. The body
truly that Christ suffered in was borne of the 1. Difference.
flesh of Marie, with blood, Not the body that suffered is in the housell.
and with bone, with skin, and with sinowes, in humane limbs, with a
reasonable soul living: and his ghostly body, which we call the housell, is
gathered of many corns: without blood, and bone, without lymme, without
soul: and therefore nothing is to be understand therein bodily, but all is
ghostlye to be understand. What soever is in that housell, which gives
substance of life, yt is of the ghostlye might, and invisible doing. Therefore
is yt holy housel called a misterye, because there is one thing in it seen, and
an other thing understood. That which is there 2. Difference.
seen, has bodily shape: and yt we do there understand, has ghostlye might.
Certaynely Christ's body which suffered death and rose from death, never 3.
Difference.
dies henceforth: but is eternal, and vnpassible. That housell is temporal,
not eternal. 4. Difference.
Corruptible, and dealed into sondrye parts. Chewed between teeth, and sent
into the bellye: Math. 15.
howbeit nevertheless after ghostlye might, it is all in every part. Many
receive that holy body: and yet notwithstanding, it is so all in every part
after ghostly mystery. Though some chewe less deal, yet is there no more
might notwithstanding in the more part, then in the less: because it is all
in all men after the invisible might. This misterye is a 5. Difference.
pledge and a figure: Christ's body is truth it self, This pledge we do
keep mistically, until that we be come to the truth it self: and then is
this pledge ended. Truly it is so as we before have said Christ's body, and
his blood: not bodilye, but ghostlye. And ye should not search how it is
done, but hold it in your belief that it is so done. We read in an other
book called vita patrum, that two Monks desired of God some demonstration
toucbing the holy housell, These tales seem to be infarsed placed here upon no
occasion.
and after as they stood to hear mass, they saw a child lying on the
alter, where the priest said mass, and Gods Angel stood with a sword, and
abode looking until ye priest brake ye housell. Then the angel divided yt
child upon the dyshe, and shed his blood into ye chalice. But when they did
go to ye housell, the^ was it turned to bread and wine, and they did eat it
giving god thanks for yt showing. Also S. Gregory desired of Christ, yt he
would show to a certain woman doubting about his mysterye some great
affyrmation. She went to housell with doubting mind, and Gregorye forthwith
obtained of God, that to them both was showed yt part of the housell which ye
woman should receive, as if there lay in a dish a ioynte of a finger al be
bloded: and so ye woman's doubting was the^ forthwith healed. But now hear the
apostles words about this misterye. Paul ye apostle speaks of ye old
Israelites thus writing in his epistle to faithful me^. 1. Cor. 10.
All our forefathers were baptized in the cloud, and in the sea: and all they
ate the same ghostlye meat, and drank the same ghostly drink. They drank
truly of the stone yt followed them, and that stone was Christ. Neither was
that Note this exposition which is now a days thought new.
stone then from which the water ran bodily Christ, but it signified
Christ, that calls thus to al beleauing and faithful me^: whosoever thirsts
let him come to me, John. 4.
and drink. And from his bowelles flows lively water. This he said of the
holy ghost, whom he receaueth which beleaueth on him. 1. Cor. 10.
The apostle Paul says that the Israelites did eat the same ghostly meat,
Exodus 17.
and drink the same ghostly drink: because yt heavenly meat yt fed the^
xl. years, and that water which from the stone did flow, had signification of
Christ's body, and his blood, that now be offered daily in Gods church,
It was the same which we now offer: not bodily, but ghostly. We said unto you
ere while, Math. 26.
yt Christ hallowed bread and wine to housell before his suffering, Luke. 22.
and said: Mark. 14
this is my body, and my blood. Yet he had not the^ suffered but so
notwithstanding he Now we eat that body which was eaten before he was borne
by the faithful.
turned through invisible might yt bread to his own body, and yt wine to his
blood, as he before did in ye wilderness before yt he was borne to me^, when he
See a transubstantiation.
turned that heavenly meat to his flesh, and the flowing water from that
stone to his own blood. Very many ate of that Manna.
heavenly meat in the wilderness, and drank that ghostlye drink and were
nevertheless dead, John. 6.
as Christ said. And christ meant not that death which none can escape: but
that everlasting death, which some of that folk deserved for their
unbelief. Moses and Aaron, and many other of that people which pleased God
eat that heavenly bread, and they dyed not that everlasting death, though they
dyed the common death. They saw that the heavenly meat was visible, and
corruptible, and they ghostly understood by yt visible thing, and ghostly
received it. The Savior says: John. 6.
He yt eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has everlasting life. And he
bad the^ not eat yt body which he was going about we, nor yt blood to drink
which he shed for us: What body do the faithful now eat.
but he me^t with those words yt holy housell, which ghostly is his body, and
his blood, and he yt tastes it with beleauing heart, has that eternal life.
In the old law faithful me^ offered to god diverse sacrifices, that had A
signification before Christ
fore signification of Christ's body, which for our sins he himself to his
heavenly father has since A sacrifice in Christ's time.
offered to sacrifice. Certaynlye this housell which we do now halow at gods
alter is a A remembrance after Christ.
remembrance of Christ's body which he offered for us, and of his blood which
he shedd for us: Math. 26.
So he him self commanded, do this in my remembrance. Ebreu. 10.
Once suffered Christ by him self, but yet nevertheless his suffrynge is
daily renewed at the mass through mysterye of the holy housell. Therefore
that holy mass is profitable both to the living, and to the This doctrine with
praying to images and to the dead bodies of men at their tombs took his
beginning of the avarice of monks unto whom it was gain full.
dead: as it has been often declared. We ought also to consider diligently
how that this holy housell is both Christ's body, and the body of all The
housell is also the body of al faithful men.
faithful men, after ghostly mysterye. As the wise Augustine says of it. If
ye will understand of Christ's body hear ye apostle Paul thus speaking. Ye
truly be Christ's body and his members. Now is your mysterye set on Gods
table, and ye receive your misterye, which mystery ye your selves be. Be yt
which ye se on the alter, and receive that which ye your selves be. Again the
apostle Paul says by it: We many be one bread, and one body. Understand
now and rejoice, many be one bread, and one body in Christ. He is our head,
and we be his limbs. And ye bread is not of one corn, but of many. Nor the
wine of one grape, but of many. So also we all should have one unity in our
Lord, as it is written of the faithful army, how yt they were in so great an
unity, as though all of them were one soul, and one heart. Christ hallowed on
his table the mysterye of our peace, and of our unity: he which receives
that mysterye of unity, and keeps not the bond of true peace, he receives
no mysterye for him self, but a witness against himself. It is very good for
Christen men, that they go often to housell, if they bring with them to the
alter vngyltynes and innocencye of heart. To an evil man it turns to no
good, but to destruction, if he receive unworthily yt holy housell. Holy No
scripture enforces the mixture of water with the wine.
books commau^d yt water be mengled to yt wine which shall be for housell:
because ye water signifies the people, and the The wine signifies christ's
blood.
wine Christ's blood. And therefore shall neither ye one without the other be
offered at ye holy mass: yt Christ may be with us, and we with Christ: the head
with the limbs, and the limbs with the head. We would before have entreated of
the lamb which the old Israelites offered at their Easter time, but yt we
desired first to declare unto you of this misterye, and after how we should
receive it. That signifying lamb was offered at the Easter. And the apostle
Paul says in the epistle of this present day, that Christ is our Easter, who
was offered for us, and on this day rose from death. The Israelites did eat
the lambs flesh as God commanded with unleavened bread; and wild lettisse:
How we should come to the holy communion.
so we should receive yt holy housell of Christ's body and blood without the
leaven of sin, and iniquity. As leaven turns the creatures from their
nature: so does sin also change the nature of man from innocencye to fowls
spots of giltinesse. The apostle has taught how we should feast not in the
leaven of euelnesse but in the sweet dough of purity and truth. The her be
which they should eat with the unleavened bread is called Lettisse, and is
bitter in taste. So we should with bitterness of unfeigned weepinge purifye
our mind, if we will eat Christ's body. Those Israelites were not wont to eat
raw flesh although god forbad them to eat it raw, and sodden in water, but
roasted with fire. He shall receive the body of God raw that shall think
without reason that Christ was only man like unto us and was not God. And ^e
that will after man's wisdom search of ye mysterye of Christ's incarnation,
does like unto him yt does sees lambs flesh in water: because that water in
this same place signifies man's understanding: but we should understand that all the mystery of Christ's humanity was ordered by ye power of ye holy ghost. And
the^ eat we his body roasted with fire: because the holy ghost came in fyrye
lykenes to the apostles in diverse tongues. The Israelites should eat the lambs
head, and ye fete, and ye purtenaunce: and nothing thereof must be left over
night, If any thing thereof were left, they did burn yt in the fire: and they
brake not ye bones. After ghostlye understanding we do then eat the lambs
head, when we take hold of Christ's diuinitye in our belief. Again when we
take hold of his humanyte, with love then eat we the lambs feet: because
that Christ is the beginning and end, god before all world and man in the end
of this world. What be the la^bes purtenau^ce, but Christ's secret
precepts, and these we eat, when we receive with gredines the word of life.
There must nothing of the la^be be left unto the morning, because yt all gods
sayings are to be searched with great carfulness: so that all his precepts
may be known in understanding and deed in the night of this present life,
before that the last day of the universal resurrection do appear. If we can
not search out thoroughly all the mystery of Christ's incarnation, then ought we
to betake the rest unto the might of ye holy ghost with true humility: and not
to search rashlye of that deep secretnes above ye measure of our
understanding. They did eat ye lambs flesh with their loins gyrt. In the loins
is the lust of the body. And he which will receive yt housell, shall restrain
that concupisce^ce: and take with chastity that holy receypt. They were also
shod. What be shoes but of the hydes of dead beasts. We be truly shod if we
follow in our steps and deades the life of those pilgrims, which please god with
keeping of his commau^deme^ts. They had staves in their hands when they ate.
This stafe signifies a carefulnes and a dilligent ouerseing. And al they, yt
best know and ca^, should take care of other men, and stay them up with
their help. It was enjoined to the eaters yt they should eat the lamb in
haste. For god abhors slouthfulnes in his servants. And those he loves
that seek the joy of everlasting life with quicknes, and have of mind. It is
written: Prolong not to turn unto god, lest the time pass away through thy
slow tarrying. The eaters might not break the la^bes bones. No More might the
souldyers, yt did hang Christ break his holy legs, as they did of the two
theefes that hanged on either side of him. And ye Lord rose from death sound
without al corruption: and at the last judgment they shall see him, whom they
did most cruelly hang on ye cross. This time is called in ye Ebrue tongue
Pasca, and in latin Transitus, and in English a Passover: because yt on this
day the people of Israel passed from the land of Aegipt over the read sea:
from bondage to the land of promise. So also did our Lord at this time depart
as says John the Euangelyste from this world to his heavenly father. Even so
we ought to follow our head, and to go from the devil to christ: from this
unstable world to his stable kingdom. Howbeit we should first in this present
life depart from vice to holy virtue: from evil manners to good manners, if we
will after this lent life go to that eternal life, and after our resurrection
to Christ. He bring us to his everliving father, who gave him to death for our
sins. To him be honor, and praise of well doing, world without end. Amen.

This sermon is found in diverse books of sermons written in the old English
or Saxon tongue: whereof two books be now in the hands of the most reverend
father the Archbishop of Caunterburye.

Here follows the words of Aelfrike abbot of S. Albones, and also of
Malmesberye, taken out of his epistle written to Wulfsine bishop of Scyrburne.
It is found in a book of the old Saxon tongue, wherein be xliij. chapters,
of Canons and ecclesiastical constitutions, and also Liber poenitentialis,
that is a poenitentiall book or shryfte book, divided into iiij. other books,
the epistle is set for the 30. chapter of the fourth book entitled be preost
sinothe, that is, a Synod concerning priests: and this epistle is also in a
canonn book of the church of Exeter.

SVme preostas healdath thaet husel the bith on easter daeg gehalgod ofer gear
to sceocum mannum. ac hi misdoth sithe deope. that thaet halige husel sceole
fynegian. and nellath understandan hu mycele daedbote seo poenitentialis taecth
be tham. gif thaet husel bith fynig. oththe haeen. oththe gif hit forloren
bith. oththe gif mus. oththe nytenu thurh gymeleaste hit etath; Man sceal
healden thaet halige husel mid mycelre gymene and ne forhealdan hit. ac halgian
other ednie to sceocum mannum. a embe vii. niht. oath the embe xiiii. niht that
hit huru fynig ne sy. forthon the eal sa halig bith that husel. the nu to daeg
aes gehalgod sa that the on easter daeg aes gehalgod;THaet husel is Crister
lichama na lichamh ce ac gastlice; Na se lichama the he on throode. ac se
lichama the he embe spraec. tha tha he bletsode hlaf and in to husle anre nihte
aer his throunge. and caeth be tha^ gebletsode hlafe. this is min lichama. and
eft be tham halgan ine. this is min blood the bith for manegu^ agoten on synna
forgyfennesse; Vnderstandath nu that se drihten the mihte aendon the one hlaf aer
his throunge to his lichaman. and that in to his blood gastlice. thaet se ylca
daeghamlice bletsath thurh sacerda handa hlaf and in to his gastlican lichaman.
and to his gastlican blood.

Here thou see good reader how Aelfrike upon fynding fault with an abuse of
his time which was that priests on Easter day filled their housell box, and
so kept the bread a whole year for sickmen, took an occasion to speak against
the bodily presence of Christ in the sacrament. So also in an other epistle
sent to Wulfstane Archbishop of York, he reprehending again this ouerlong
reserving of the housell adds also words more at large against the same
bodily presence. His words be these.

SVme preostas gefyllath heora husel box on eaftron. and healdath ofer telf
monath to untrumum mannum. sylce thaet husel sy haligre thonne other. Ac hi
does unislice. for tham the hit annath. oththe mid ealle forrotath on sa langum
first. and he bith thonne scyldig sa sa us saegth seo boc; Se the husel
forhylt. oththe hit forlyst. oththe mys eton. oththe othre nytenu. sceaa tha
poenitentialem. haet he saegth be thisum; Eall sa halig is thaet husel the bith
gehalgod to daeg. sa thaet the bith gehalgod on tham halgan easter daege;
Healdath forthig ic bid the one halgan Crister lichaman mid maran isdome to
scocu^ mannum fram sunnan daege to sunnan daege on sith claenum box. oththe
be tham maestan feoertyne niht. and thicgath hit thonne. and lecgath thaer
other; e habbath bysene be tham on Moses bocum. sa sa God sylf bebead on
Moses ae. thaet se sacerd sceolde on aelcu^ saeternes daege settan telf hlafas
on tham tabernaculo ealle nie bacene. tha aeron gehatene panes propositionis.
and hig sceoldon thaer standan on tham Gods getaelde oath otherne saeternes
daeg* and etan hi thonne tha sacerdas sylfe. and settan thaer othre; Sum
preostar nellath thicgan thaet husel the hi halgiath; Nu ille e eo secgan. hu
seo boc segth be tham; Presbyten missam celebrans. et non audens sumere
sacrificium accusante conscientia sua anathema eft; Se maesse preost the
maessath. and ne dear thaet husel thicgan. at hine scyldigne. se is amansumod;
Laesse pleoh is to thicgenne thaet husel. thonne to halgienne; Se the tua
halgath ane ofletan to husle. se bith tham gedolan gelice. the an cild fullath
tua; Crist syif gehalgode husel aer his throunge. he bletsode the one hlaf. and
tobraec thus cethende to his halgum apostolum. etath thisne hlaf. hit is min
lichama. and he eft bletsode aenne calic mid ine. and caeth heom thus to.
drincath ealle of thisum. hit is min again blood thaere nian gecythnysse. the
bithfor manegum agoten on synna forgyfenysse; Se drihten the halgode husel aer
his throunge. and eaeth that se hlaf aere his again lichama. and thaet in aere
itodlice his blod. se halgath daeghamlice thurh his sacerda handa hlaf to his
lichaman. and in to his blod on gastlicere geryne. sa sa e raedath on bocum.
Nebith se liflica hlaf lichamlice sa theah se ylca lichama. the Crist on
throode; Ne thaet halige in nis thaes haelendes blod the for us agoten aes on
lichamlican thing. ac on gastlicum andgyte; AEgther bith sothlice se hlaf his
lichama. and that in eac his blod sa sa se heofonlica hlaf aes. the e hatath
manna. the feoertig geara afedde Gods folce. and thaet hlutre aeter aes
itodlice his blod. the arn of tham stane on tha^ sestene tha; Sa sa Paulus arat
on umon his pistole Omnes patres nostri eandem escam spiritualem manducauerunt:
et omnes eundem potes spiritualem biberunt. etc. Ealle ure faederas aeton on
tha^ estene the one ylcan gastlican mete. and the one gastlican drenc druncon; Hi
druncon of tha^ gastlicum stane. and se stan aes Crist; Se apostol saede sa sa
genu gehyrdon thaet hi ealle aeton the one ylcan gastlican mete. and hi ealle
druncon the one gastlican drenc; Ne caeth he na lichamlice. ac gastlice; Naes
Crist tha gyt geboren. ne his blod naes agoten. tha thaet Israhela folc geaet
the one mete. and of tham stane dranc. and se stan naes lichamlice Crist theah he
sa caede; Hit aeron tha ylcan gerynu on thaere ealdan ae. and hi gastlice
getacnodon thaet gastlice husel ures haelendes lichaman. the e halgiath nu.

SOme pristes keep the housell that is hallowed on Easter day all the year for
syke men. But they do greatly amysse, because it waxes horye. And these will
not understand how grievous penance the poenitentiall book teaches by this,
if the housell become hory and rotten: or if it be lost: or be eaten of mise or
of beasts by negligence. Men shall reserve more carefullye that holy housell,
and not reserve it to long, but hallowe other of new for syckemen always
within a weke or a fortnight that it be not so much as horye. For so holy is the
housell which to day is hallowed as that which on Easter day was hallowed.
That housell is Christ's body not bodylye, but ghostlye. Not the body which
he suffered in, but the body of which he spoke, when he blessed bread and wine
to housel a night before his suffering, and said by the blessed bread this is my
body, and again by the holy wine this is my blood, which is shede for
many in forgeuenes of sins. understand now that the lord, who could turn
yt bread before his suffering to his body, and yt wine to his blood ghostlye:
that the self same lord blesses daily through the priests hands bread and
wine to his ghostly body, and to his ghostly blood.

Here thou see good reader how Aelfrike upon fynding fault with an abuse of
his time which was that priests on Easter day filled their housell box, and
so kept the bread a whole year for sickmen, took an occasion to speak against
the bodily presence of Christ in the s;acrame^t. So also in an other epistle
sent to Wulfstane Archbishop of York, he reprehending again this ouerlong
reserving of the housell adds also words more at large against the same
bodily presence. His words be these.

SOme priests fill their box for housel on Easter day, and so reserve it a
whole year for sick me^, as though that housel were more holy the^ any other.
But they do unadvisedly, because it waxes black: or al together rotle^ by
keeping it so long space. And thus is he become guilty as ye book witnesses to
us. If any do keep the housell to long, or lose it, or myse or other beasts
do eat it, see what ye paenitential book says by this. So holy is altogether
that housell, which is hallowed to day, as that which is hallowed on Easter
day. Wherefore I beseech you to keep that holy body of Christ with more
aduisement for sick men from sunday to sunday in a very clean box: or at
the most not to keep it above a fortnight, and then eat it laying other in the
place. We have an example hereof in Moses books, as god him self has
commanded in Moses law. How the priests should set on every saturnday
twelve loaves all new baked upon the tabernacle: the which were called panes
prepositionis: and those should stand there on gods tabernacle, til ye next
saturnday, and the did ye pristes the^ selves eat them, and set other in ye
place. So^e priests will not eat ye housell, which they do hallow. But we will
now declare unto you how ye book speaks by the^. Presbyter missa^ celebrans,
et non audens sumere sacrificium, accusante co^scie^tia sua, anathema est. The
priest that does say mass and dare not eat the^ housell, his conscience
accusynge him, is accursed. It is less danger to receive ye housell, the^ to
hallowe it. He yt does twyse hallowe one host to housell, is like unto those
heretics, who do christen twyse one child. Christ himself blessed housel
before his suffering: he blessed ye bread and brake thus speaking to hisa
postels. Eat this bread it is my body. And again he blessed one chalice with
wine and thus also speaks unto the^. Drink ye all of this it is mine own
blood of ye new testament which is shed for many in forgeuenes of sins. The
lord which hallowed housel before his suffering and says yt ye bread was his
own body and yt ye wine was truly his blood, he haloweth daily by ye hands of
ye prist bread to his body, and wine to his blood in ghostly mystery, as we
read in books. And yet yt lively bread is not bodily so notwithstanding: not ye
self same body yt Christ suffered in. Nor yt holy wine is ye saviors blood
which was shed for us in bodily thing: but in ghostly understanding. Both be
truly yt bread his body, and yt wine also his blood, as was ye heavenly bread,
which we call Manna, that fed forty years gods people. And ye clear water
which did then run from the stone in the wilderness, was truly his blood, as
Paul wrote one sum of his epistles. Omnes patres nostri eandem escam
spiritualem manducauerunt, et omnes eundem potum spirituale^ biberunt, etc. All
our fathers ate in the wilderness the same ghostlye meat, and drank the same
ghostly drink. They drank of yt gostly stone, and yt stone was christ. The
apostle has said as you now have heard, that they all did eat ye same ghostly
meat, and they all did drink the same ghostly drink. And he says not bodily
but ghostly. And Christ was not yet borne, nor his blood shed, when that the
people of Israel ate yt meat, and drank of that stone. And the stone was not
bodily Christ though he so said. It was the same mystery in the old law, and
they did ghostlye signify yt ghostly housell of our sauioures body which we
consecrate now.

This Epistle to VVulfstane Elfrike wrote first in the Latyne tongue, as in a
short Latyne Epistle set before this, and one other of his Saxon Epistles he
confesses thus. Aelfricus abbas VVulfstano venerabili archiepiscopo salutem in
Christo. Ecce paruimus vestrae almitatis iussionibus transferentes Anglice duas
epistolas quas Latino eloquio descriptas ante annum vobis destinauimus, non
tamen semper ordinem sequentes, nec verbum ex verbo: sed sensum ex sensu
proferentes. Behold we have obeyed the commandment of thy excellency in
translating into English the two Epistles which we sent unto thee written in
Latin more then a year ago. Howbeit we keep not here always the same
order: nor yet translate word for word, but sense for sense: Now because
very few there be that do understand the old English or Saxon (so much is
our spech changed from the use of that time, wherein Elfrike lived) and for
that also it may be that some will doubt how skilfullye, and also faithfullye
these words of Elfrike be translated from the Saxon tongue: we have thought
good to set down here last of all the very words also of his latyne epistle,
which is recorded in books fair written of old in the Cathedral Churches of
Worcester and Excester (*)

QVidam vero presbyteri implent alabastrum suum de sacrificio, quod in Pasca
Domini santificant: and conseruant per totum annum ad infirmos, quasi sanctior
sit caeteris sacrificijs, Sed nimium insipienter faciu^t. Quia nigrescit, and
putrescit ta^diu conseruatum. Et liber poenitentialis pro tali negligentia
poenitentiam magnam docet: aut si a muribus commestum sit: aut ab auibus
raptum. Tam sanctum est sacrificum, quod hodie sa^ctificatur quam illud quod in
die Pascae consecratum est. Et ideo debetis a dominica in dominicam, autper
duos, vel maxim tres heddomadas tenere sacrificium in alabastro mundo ad
infirmos: ne nigrescat, aut putrescat, si diutius seruetur. Nam in lege Moisi
pone bant sacerdoted semper omni sabbato panes propositionis calidos in
tabernaculo coram Domino: and in sequenti sabbato sumebant illos soli
sacerdotes, and edebant: and alios nouos pro eis ponebant. Facite and vos
sacerdotes similiter. Custodite caute sacrificium Christi ad infirmos, and
edite illud, ne diutius teneatur, quam oportet. Et reponite aliud nouiter
sanctificatu^ propter necessitatem infirmoru^, ne sine uiatico exeant de hoc
seculo. Christus Jesus in die suae sanctae caenae accepit panem: benedixit, ac
fregit: de dit discipulis suis dicens. Accipite, and co^medite. Hoc est enim
corpus meum. Similiter and calicem accipiens gratias egit, and dedit illis
dice^s. Bibite ex hoc omnes. Hic est sanguis meus noui testamenti, qui pro
multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum. Intelligite modo sacerdotes, quod
ille dominus qui ante passione^ suam potuit conuertere illum pane^, and illud
vinum ad suum corpus and sanguinem: quod ipse quotidie sanctificat per manus
sacerdotum suorum panem ad suum corpus spiritualiter, The words enclosed
between the ij. half circles, some had rased out of Worceter book, but they
are restored again out of a book of Exeter church.
and vinum ad suum sanguinem (Non sit tamen hoc sacrificium corpus eius in quo
passus est pro nobis: neque sanguis eius, que^ pro nobis effudit: sed
spiritualiter corpus eius efficiter and sanguis: sicut manna quod de caelo
pluit, and aqua quae de petra fluxit. Sicut) Paulus Apostolus ait: Nolo enim
vos ignorare fratres, quoniam patres nostri omnes sub nube fuerunt: and omnes
mare transieruut: and omnes in Moysi baptizati sunt in nube and in mari. Et
omnes eandem escam spiritualem man ducauerunt: and oe^s eunde^ potu^
spiritualem biberunt. Bibeba^t autem de spirituali consequenti eos petra. Petra
autem erat Christus. Vnde dicit Psalmista. Panem coeli dedit eis. Panem
angelorum manducauit homo. Nos quoque proculdubio ma^ducamus panem angelorum:
and bibimus de illa petra, quae Christum significabat: quotiens fideliter
accedimus ad sacrificium corporis and sanguinis Christi. (*)

AS the writings of the fathers even of the first age of the Church be not
thought on all parts so perfect, that whatsoever thing has been of the^
spoken ought to be received without all exception (which honor truly them
selves both knew and also have confessed to be only due to the most holy and
tried word of God:) So in this Sermon here published some things be spoken not
consonant to sound doctrine: but rather to such corruption of great
ignorance and superstition, as has taken root in the church of long time,
being overmuch cumbred with monckery. As where it speaks of the mass to be
profitable to the quick and dead: of the mixture of water with wine: and
whereas here is also made report of ii. vain miracles, which notwithstanding
seem to have been infarced for that they stand in their place unaptly, and
without purpose, and the matter without them, both before and after, does hang
in it self together most orderly: with some other suspicious words sou^ding
to superstition. But all these things that be thus of some reprehensio^ be as
it were but by the way touched: the full and whole discourse of all the former
part of the Sermon, and almost of the whole Sermon is about the understanding
of the Sacramental bread and wine how it is the body and blood of Christ
our Savior, by which is revealed and made known, what has been the common
taught doctrine of the church of England on this behalf many hundredth years
ago, contrary unto the unadvised writing of some now a days. Now that this
foresaid Saxon Homely with the other testimonies before alleged, do fullye
agree to the old ancient books (whereof some be written in the old Saxon,
and some in the Lattyne) from whence they are taken: these here under written
upon diligent perusing, and comparing the same have found by conference, that
they are truly put forth in Print without any adding, or withdrawing any
thing for the more faithful reporting of the same, and therefore for the
better credit hereof have subscribed their names.

Matthewe Archbishop of Canterburye. Thomas Archbishop of York. Edmunde Bishop
of London. James Bishop of Durham. Robert Bishop of Winchester. William
Bishop of Chichester. John Bishop of Hereford. Richard bishop of Elye. Edwine
Bishop of VVorceter. Nicholas Bishop of Lincoln. Richard Bishop of S. Dauys.
Thomas Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield. John Bishop of Norwiche. John Bishop
of Carlyll. Nicholas Bishop of Bangor.
With diverse other personages of honor and credit subscribyng their names,
the record whereof remains in the hands of the most reverend father Matthewe
Archbishop of Canterbury.

THE Lords prayer, the Creed and the x. Commandments in the Saxon and
English tongue.
THat it is no new thing to teach the people of God the Lords prayer, and the
articles of their belief in the English tongue whereby they might the better
serve their God, and hold fast their profession of Christianity: may well be
proved by many godly decrees of bishops, and laws of kings made from time to
time in the reign of the Saxons, before the Conquest. In a council holden by
Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterburye, in the year of our Lord. 747. and in the
33. year of Aethelbalde king of Mercia (who was present at this same Council
with his princes and dukes) it was decreed, William of Malmes. 1. lib. de
pontificibus.
vt ipsi presbyteri dominicam orationem et simbolum anglice discant et doceant:
That the priests do both learn them selves and also teach to others the
Lords prayer and the Creed in English. In old Cannon books of churches,
and in the epistles of Aelfricke we read it thus enjoined to priests. Se
maesse preost sceal secgan on sunnan dagu^ and maesse dagum thaes godspelles
andgyt on englisc tham folce. and be tham Pater noster and be tham Credan eac.
sa he oftost maege tha^ mannu^ to onbryrdnysse. that hi cunnon geleafan. and
heora cristendome gehalden; The priest shall say unto the people on sondayes,
and holidays the sense of the Gospel in English: and so also touching the
Lords prayer and the Creed, so often as he may to men's contritio^, that they
may know their belief, and keep suere their Christianity. Cnut a king of
England worthy of memory, amongst many other good laws he made in the time
of his princely government has also this law. And ealle cristene men e laerath
sith georne. thaet hig ineardne heortan aefre God lufian. and rihtne
cristendon geornlic healdan. and god cundan lareoan geornlice hyran. and Gods
lara and laga smeagan often and gelome him sylfum to thearke; And e laerath that
aelc christian man geleornige that he huru cunne rihtne geleafan. and ariht
understandan. and Pater noster and Credan geleornian. for tham mid othrum sceal
aelc christian mann hine to Good gebiddan. and mid tham othrum gesutelan rihtne
geleafan: We admonish diligently all Christian men, that they do always love
God with an inward heart, and be diligently obedient to divine teachers and
do subtillye search Gods learning and laws often and daily to the profit of
them selves. And we warn that all Christian men do learn to know at the least
wise the right belief, and aright to understand: and learn the Pater noster,
and the Creed. For that with the one every Christian man shall pray unto God,
and with the other show forth right belief. Thus is it reserved in memory,
and put in writing, as touching the diligent care that the former age of the
church of God bad to have the people of God well instructed in that prayer,
whereof Christ him self is the author, and in the articles of their belief.
Which prayer of the Lord, and Creed with the ten lawlyke words, that God
him self taught Moses, and wrote with his finger in two tables of stone on
the Mount Sinai for all men's chastisement, as well for that old people that
was in times paste, as also for us that be now: be here set out as they are
yet seen in old books of the Saxon tongue. But for the better understanding of
any word that may seem hard unto the reader, we have thought good to place
over the Saxon the familiar words of our own speech. ()

Math. 6.
Verily when ye pray Sothlice thonne ge gebiddan nyll ye speak much nellon ge
spraecan faela as ye hethe^. They think sa sa haethene; Hig enath that they be
hard in thaet hig syn gehyrede on their manyfolde speaking. heorna
maenigfealdan spraece Nill ye therefore them Nellon ge eornoslice him do like
unto. Verily your geefenlaecan: Sothlice eoaer father wot what your need
faeden at haet eo thearf is, before yt ye to him pray* is* aer tham the ge hine
biddath; Wherefore pray ye Eornostlice gebiddath eo thus. thus;
The Lords prayer in English.
THou our father THu ure faeder which art in heaven, the eart on heofenu^. be
thy name hallowed. si thin nama gehalgod. Come thy kingdom. Be thy Cume thin
rice; Si thin will in earth, as in illa on eorthan. sa sa on heaven. Give us to
day heofonum; Syle us to daeg our daily bread. And urne daegha^lican hlaf; And
forgive us our trespasses, forgif us ure gyltas. as we forgive them that sa sa
e forgifath tham the against us trespass. And ne ith us agyltath; And ne led
you not us into temptation. laed thu na us on costnunge; But deliver us from
evil. Ac alys us fram yfele; Be it so. Si hit sa.
The belief in English.
I Believe in God Ic gelyfe on God ye father almightye, maker faeder
aelmihtigne. scyppend of heaven and earth. And heofenan and eorthan; and I
believe in ye savior Christ ic gelyfe on haelend Crist his only begotten son
our his ancennedan sunu urne Lord, who was conceived of drihten. se aes
geeacnod of the holy ghost, and borne tham halgan gaste. and acenned of Marye
the virgyne, suffered of Marian tha^ maedene. gethrood under Pontius under tha^
Pontiscan Pilate, on ye cross hanged, he Pilate. on rode ahangen. he was dead,
and buried, and he aes dead. and bebyrged. and he down descended to hell. And he
ny er astah to hell; and he arose from death on the third aras of death on
tha^ thriddan day. And he went up to daege; And he astah up to heaven, and
sits now at heofonu^. and sit nu aet ye rightha^d of God almighttie sithran
Gods aelmihtiges the father. From thence he faeder; THanon he will come to
judge i will cuman to demenne both the quick, and the aegther ge tha^ cucum. ge
tham dead. And I believe on the deadu^; and ic gelyfe on the one holy ghost. And
the holy halgan gast; And tha halgan congregation. And of ye saints ye
gelathunge; and halgena society. And sins forgiveness. gemaennysse; and
synna forgifenysse; And of ye flesh ye rising. and flaesces aerist; And yt
everlasting life. and that ece life.
The ten commandments
which also God himself the eac God sylf proclaimed from the mount geclypode
of tham munte with loud voice to mid micelre stemne to all the men which with
eallu^ tham mannu^ the mid Moses were in the Moyse aeron on tham wilderness
then. aestene tha; THe lord was Dryhten aes speaking these sprecende thas
words to Moses, and thus ord to Moyse. and thus says: I am the Lord thy
caeth. Ic eom thryhten thin God, I thee out led of God. Ic the ut gelaedde of
Egypt land, and of their egipta land. and of hiora bondage. Ne love you other
theodome; Ne lufa thu othre strange Gods besides me. Ne fremde Godas ofer me;
Ne my name name thou in minne noman ne cig thu on vain: for that thou ne
idelnesse. forthon the thu ne art giltlesse with me, if bist unscyldig ith me.
gif thou in vain namest my thu on idelnesse cigst minne name. Remember that
thou noman; Gemyne that thu hallowe thy rest day. gehalgige the one raeste daeg;
Work ye vj. days, and on yrceath eo. vi. dagas. and on the seventh rest ye:
because tha^ siofothan restath eo. fortham in vj. days Christ on vi. dagu^
Crist georhte made heaven and earth, heofonas. and eorthan. ye sea, and all
creatures, that saes. and ealle gesceafta. the in them be. And he rested on him
sint; and hine gereste on the seventh day. and therefore on the one siofothan
daeg. and forthon the Lord it hallowed. dryhten hine gehalgod; Honor thy
father and thy Ara thynu^ faeder. and thinrae mother, that the Lord medder tha
the dryhten gave thee, yt thou be long sealde the. that thu sie thylenge
living in ye earth. Ne kill libbende on eorthan; Ne sleah thou. Ne That is,
commit no adultery.
lig ne you priuelye. thu; Ne That is, commit no adultery.
lige thu dearnenga; Ne steal thou. Ne say thou Ne stala thu; Ne saege thu
false witness. Ne desire lease geitnesse; Ne ilna thou of thy neighbors thu
thynes nehstan heritage with unright. ierfes mid unryhte;
These commandments we have taken from the laws of Alfrede the king, before
which they are always placed: but here the manner of speaking in the scripture
is somewhat changed, and that more is, here is left out these words. (Non
facies sculptile neque omnem similitudinem quae est in coelo desuper, and quae
est in terra deorsum, nec eorum quae sunt in aquis sub terra: non adorabis
neque coals, etc. 2. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in
the water under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them.
For I thy Lord. etc.) Which thing is done in all copyes of Alfredes laws
written in the Saxon tongue: and not only in them but in many other books as
has been seen either Saxon, or Lattyne intreatyng of the commandments,
which were written before the Conquest, and since the second Nicene council,
wherein was decreed the worshipping of Images. See what followed of taking away
from the word of God contrary to the express commandment of the same upon
the ungodly decree of that counsel. When this thing was espied by them that
translated these laws into the Lattyne tongue sone after the conquest, these
words were restored again by the tra^slatours to their due place, as by the
Lattyne books of the laws it is to be seen. But because we have made mention
of that second Nicene council which decreed both of the having and
worshipping of Images, we shall here brieflye show what our stories report,
was thought of the same counsel by the learned of England, and chieflye by
that great learned English man, and of most fame in that age Alcuine,
scholemaister to Charles the great. Anno ab incarnatione Domini. 792. Carolus
rex Francorum misit Synodalem librum ad Britannia^ sibi a Co^stantinopoli
directu^, in quo libro heu proh dolor multa inconuenientia and verae fidei
contraria. reperta sunt: maxim quod pene omniu^ orientalium doctorum, no^
minus quam trecentoru^, vel eo amplius episcoporum vnanima assertione
confirmatu^ imagines adorari debere: quod omnino ecclesia dei execratur. Co^tra
quod scripsit Alcuinus epistolam ex autoritate diuinaru^ scripturarum
mirabiliter affirmata^, illamque cu^ codem libro and persona episcoporu^ and
principum nostrorum regi Francorum attulit. That is, In the year from the
incarnation of our Lord. 792. Charles king of France sent to Brytaine a
Synod book, which was directed unto him from Constantinople: in the which
book alas many things inconvenient, and contrary to the true faith were
found: in especial that it was establyshed with a whole consent almost of all
the learned of the East, no less then of three hundredth bishops or more,
that men ought to worship Images, the which the Church of God does utterly
abharre. Against the which Alcuine wrote an epistle wonderouslye proved by the
authority of holy Scripture, and brought that epistle with the same book, and
names of our bishops and princes to the king of Frauuce This story has
Simeon of Durham, Roger Houeden, Flores Historiarum, and the history of
Rochester (*)

The Saxon Caracters or letters, that be most strange, be here known by
other common Caracters set over them.
d. d. th. th. th. th. f. f. g. g. i. i. r. r. s. s. t. t.. w. y. y. z. z. and.
and. that. that.

AE. AE. AE. AE. TH. Th. TH. Th. E. E. H. H. M. M. S. S.. W. and. And.

One prick signifies an imperfect point, this figure; (which is like the
Greek interrogatiue) a full painte, which in some other old Sai^^^ books, is
expressed with three pricks, set in triangle wise thus:^

Imprinted at London by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate beneath S. Martyns.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


