THE PRACTICE OF POLICY.

Written by Lodowike Lloyd, Esquire.

Qui foueam fodit, incidet in eam: and qui laqueum ponit, peribit in illo,
Eccle. 27. Qui dissipat sepem, mordebit eum Coluber.

Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling in Hosier lane, near
Smithfield.

1604.

To the most high and mighty Prince, James, by the grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.
CRATERVS contending with Ephestion (most gracious Prince) which of them two
loved Alexander best, appealed to the king for judgment, who judged that
Craterus loved the king, and Ephestion loved Alexander: but both alike loved
Alexander the king. So the Brytaynes and the English love your Majesty in like
sort, that you can hardly judge which of them loves you best, unless you do as
Alexander did, to judge the English as Craterus, and the Brytaynes as
Ephestion. but both Brytaines and English with equal love and loyalty love
King lames alike, that all having the like cause of joy, all should so rejoice
to enjoy such a Jewel, that in one day enriched England and Ireland with a
king, and the whole Empire of Brytayne with a Prince, to whom it was reserved
and continued from Brutus the first King, to your Majesty the second King, not
as to a stranger, but to a just and a lawful king of the stock and lineage of
Brutus, to succeed and sit on Brutus seat 2800. years after Brutus, where your
Majesty may better say then Caesar, Veni, vidi, vici, for that you have
conquered Time, came to your own kingdoms, and may see in your self such a
succession, that neither the Macedonians, who much bragged of their Hercules,
whose line ended in Alexander: neither the Romans, who much gloried of Gens
Iulia, whose stock extincted in Nero: nor any nation under heaven (which can
boast of their antiquities most) can say so much.

The Scythians with their Acornes in their heads, and the Athenians with their
Grassehoppers in their hairs, may well brag of their Acornes and
Grassehoppers, but not of the like Empires: for as Anaxagoras said to Pericles
of the Empire of Greece, so Cratippus spoke to Pompey of the Roman Empire,
that periods of times are limited.

Embrace you therefore (most mighty Prince) the great blessings of God, which
so embraced your Majesty, and elected you King, to govern his people, and to
maintain his laws, without which, neither king nor kingdom can stand, for
that is the rich Tablet, which Moses brought from Mount Sinay, to set about
Isreal's neck. It is that long ladder, which Jacob saw in his dream at Bethel,
that reached from the earth into heaven: and it is that bright-shining Star,
which guyded the kings from the East, unto Christ at Bethlehem.

The only Pearl that we should buy, and the only Jewel that we should wear,
not as gards on our garments, or frontiers on our forheads, as the Jews wore
Phylacterium, but rather printed in our hearts, where we ought to give thanks
for our King, which for 50. years have been without either King or Prince, and
now we enjoy a King, a Queen, a Prince, and Princes, with no less blessings
by the coming of your Majesty over the river Tweede, from Scotland to England,
to incorporate both to the ancient name of great Brytaine, then by the coming
of Israel from Mesopotamia, over the river Jordan, to alter the name of Canaan
into Judah; whose posterity, as they were wrought on Aarons garment, to remember
Israel, so your princely progeny may be sure set on the unseamed coat of
Christ, to remember the house of Jacob.

Your Majesty's most bounden and dutyfull servant, Lodowike Lloyd.

THE PRACTICE OF POLICY.
THeodoricus, King of the Goths, began Theodoricus.
his letter, to the Senators of Rome, with a sentence of Plato, That Nature
might sooner err, then a Prince to frame a Common wealth unlike to himself.
It is most true, Imperium ostendit virum, for such as the Magistrates are, such
are the people: such as the Prince is, so are his subjects: and that was the
cause, why Cyrus, King of Persia, was Cyrus.
so much honored among the Persians, for his wise laws, grave government, and
great policy, in enlarging the Monarchy of Persia, in so much, that he that
resembled Cyrus, if it were in any part of his body, or had but a crooked nose,
like Cyrus, he was so esteemed and made much of, in all Persia, as he should
have favor Leuin. li. 1 cap 15.
showed him in any place, and in every company. And so he that had but a long
head, like Pericles, in Pericles.
Athens, his cause should be heard before the Judges of Areopagites, or before
any Magistrates, in the Court Prytaneon, free, and before other. Such was the
law and favor of the people toward Pericles in Athens, and toward Cyrus in
Persia, that the Midwiues, and Nurses, both in Asia, and in Greece, had in
charge given them by the parents, to do their best endeavor to frame and to
mould their young infants, like Cyrus in Persia, and like Pericles in Athens:
yet few (though the Nurses did their endeavors) were found in Athe^s, like
Pericles, unless it were with a long head: and few, or none, were found in
Persia, like Cyrus, unless it were with a Cyrus. Val. max. l. 9. ca. 14. Plin.
li. 7. cap. 12.
crooked nose. This kind of likeness is found in many. So was Artenon like to
Antiochus the great: and Menagenis, a Cook, like to Strabo Pomp.

And therefore that noble Roman, Pompey, being yet but a very young man,
(heating by common report, that he much resembled Alexander the great, in
countenance, gestures, and outward behauiours, but specially likened to
Alexander, for the growing of his hayres vpwardes upon his forehead: in which
some write, that Alexander, Hector, and Pompey, much resembled Alex. Hect. and
Pomp. Opisthocomae
one the other:) this noble Captain, I say, esteemed little to be like
Alexander in external form and frame of his body, but he exercised, how he
might imitate Alexander, to be like to him in qualities, and actions of the
mind, Non ex apparatu, sed ex animo reges: so that he imitated Alexander in
valor and magnanimity of mind, and not in form of his body.

By such means, Pompey became afterward to be compared, and was called Pompey
the Great, after he Pompey.
had subdued Sertorius in Africa, as Alexander the great was called in Persia,
after he had subdued Darius.

This was a more laudable imitation in Pompey, then in the great men and
Captains of Macedonia, who would wish nothing more then to be called
Opisthocomae, for so the Grecians called Alexander, for that his hairs upon
his forhead grew upward: but good Captains must not be like the Macedonian
Captains, following only Alexander, to be called Opisthocomae: but like
Pompey, imitating Alexander in greatness and valor of mind. There were many
Opisthocomae in Macedonia, and yet not one like Alexander: many crooked noses
in Persia, but not one like Cyrus and many that had long heads in Athens, and
yet not one like Pericles.

Aristotle the Philosopher writ unto his M. the great (...), etc. Arist. pr^s.
ad Alex, Plut. in Demet.
Alexander, of another likeness that should be in a Prince; that it was more
Princely for a King, to have a noble mind endued with noble virtues, then a
gallant body furnished with gay Garments, like Demetrius, who had more care of
his Astrologicall cloak, then of his Kingdom, to hang the world on his back,
then to think in his mind of his people: Like Nero, who ware no Garment
twice, but daily new-inuented Garments. Or like Caligula, who ware Sacras
Deorum Vestes, to set forth the greatness of his Authority. These were Reges
ex Vestibus, non ex Virtutibus: For the most part of Heathen kings, studying
how to please the people with outward show and pomp, would paint their faces
and anoint their eyes, to seem to be of greater Majesty with their Subjects.

So the Kings and Peers of Ethiopia, were wont to be anointed with
Vermillion, that they might seem young and fair, to be amiable unto the
people.

The Kings of Assiria used to anoint their eyes and Alex. lib. 6. cap. 6.
to paint their faces, with like policy, to entise blind and common people to
esteem them rather gods then men, according to king Cyrus Decree, for that
they held their Crowns under Cyrus: For then the Persians had all other kings
under their obeisance, as the Romans had afterward: And therefore Cyrus made a
Law, that the great Kings of Persia, in any Feast or Triumph, should anoint
their faces adipe Leonino, that they might seem more manly and more Princely,
to allure the people to accept their greatness, and to ad nyre the Majesty of
their presence.

They write, that Augustus Caesar was instructed with Augustus Caesar.
Cyrus Laws, for in his third Triumph he used the like: whether it was for
love or for fear, his countenance terrified the Army of M. Antonius in the
Battle of Actium.

And yet among these Heathens, there were many that despised those external
shows and pomp.

Such a one was Agesilaus, among the Lacedaemonians: Epaminondas, among the
Thebanes: and Fabricius, among the Romans.

It is historied, that Germanicus the Emperor was so amiable and loving in
sight, because in sight he seemed Germanicus.
so plain a Prince in Apparel, so plausible and so gentle in speech, for
that he was a singular wise Prince, that they that saw him and heard him, were
so addicted unto him; that he was so beloved of his Subjects, so magnified of
his Nobles, that it was never heard, that Germanicus was either hated of the
one, or envied of the other: Such is the force of Virtue, Si cerni potuit
oculis, says Plato, that it would move much affection and love in men by
looking: the like says Cicero: the Report of virtuous men whom we neuersaw,
does Cic. de not. Deo. li. 1.
breed such affection, that good men are desirous to see them.

The presence of a good and a godly Prince is great, and so great, that the
Prayer and presence of king Abia 2. Chron. (...). 13. 14
overthrew 500000. Israelites: The Prayer and presence of king Asa, overthrew
Zerath the Ethiopian king (...), Plat. in Apophth.
with his great Army of ten hundredth thousand: and therefore Antigonus, hearing
one of his Lieutenants and Captains saying, that the enemies (king Ptolomey
his Army) were more in number then they, Antigonus seemed to be angry and
said, How many do thou number me for?

Alexander was ever wont to say in any danger, by Sea or by Land to his
Soldiers: Alexander is here: Habetis Alexandrum.

So often would Caesar say in any peril, Ye have Caesar and his fortunes with
you: so he said to Amyclas his pilot.

It was an usual speech of the people of Sparta, to ask where the enemies
were? and not to ask, how many they were?

But we leave those Princes to Fortune, Qui plura Fortunae quam virtuti
tribuunt. The greatest praise and commendations of Christian Princes must not
be attributed to the Actions of Fortune, as the Heathen Princes do, but to the
benfites of Virtue, who by the greatness of their wisdom and virtue, have
their authority from God. For the Crown, the Scepter, and the Kingdom it
self is from God, who made them so great, that he called them Gods, saying:
Ye are Gods on earth: but how? Pietate et iustitia, says Augustine. And so in
Plato, a King is called, Deus quispiam humanus; and yet in Homer, a King is
called but Pastor populi: (...).
and the King of Kings, is called the great Shepherd: for a king ought to have
as great care over his people, as a shepherd over his sheep. Adrian the Emperor
said, Rempub. non esse suam, sed se Reip. For as without a King, neither town,
city, country or kingdom can stand: so ought a King to govern and rule his
subjects, that he may deserve the name of a King, and not of a Tyrant: (...):
Xenoph. ped. 9.
for it is fit, says Cyrus, that a Governor must far excel those whom he
governs in virtue and wisdom. Such as Caleb was with Joshua, and such as
Iethro was with Moses, and such as Nathan was with David: If such wise
Counselors attend upon Kings in Court, that Court shall flourish, and that
Commonwealth shall prosper.

Wise men in Court with Princes, are as Preservatives kept for a sick body.
That made Solomon to ask for wisdom only to govern his people. That made
Ulysses to cry out in Homer to Minerua, Si te Diua Minerua (...) etc. Odyss.
vtar: If I can have thy company, O Goddess, I esteem not who will be against
me. That made Pericles to forsake his youthful companies, and to have sage and
wise men about him, when he in Athens succeeded Themistocles in public
government of the Athenians: And that made Dion to speak of Plato, having had
proof of Dions speech of Plato.
Platoes wisdom and counsel, Mallem vnum Platonem, qua^ mill Antimachos: For
Plato gave such counsel to Dion, not to please, but to profit Dion. Such
counsel gave Solon to the Athenians, Non quae suauissima, sed quae optima.

But good counsel is often rejected. Jeremy gave good 3. Reg. cap. 12. Good
counsel.
counsel to King Zedechias, but he rejected it. Lot gave good counsel to the
Sodomites, but they regarded it not. The Elders of Israel gave good counsel to
Rehoboam, but he esteemed it not. Wisdom cries out in the streets, and
offreth her service free unto Princes, and yet some Princes regard her not: But
truly that Prince is happy, where wisdom may say, Habito in consilijs: That
wisdom guided Noah in the Arc: that wisdom instructed the Patriarchs before
the Law, to live under the Law.

Iephtha showed himself a wise man, and gave wise Iephtha.
counsel to his Captains, how they might find out the false Ephramites from
the true Israelites, by pronouncing of the letter Shiboleth; and that before
the Ephramites Iud. 12.
should pass over Jorden, lest they should gather head against the Israelites
again.

Great wisdom it is to look in time to such, and to cut off the heads of them
that would willingly have many heads like Hidra. I wish there were no heads of
Hidra yet lurking in any English Laerna.

Thus was Iephtha called from the land of Tob, and Gedeon from the
Barne-threshing, to kill and destroy Gedeon.
these wicked Madianites, and false Ephramites, which were scattered and
dispersed into all parts of the world.

Was not David called from a Shepherd, to be anointed David, a Shepherd
king in Israel by Samuel, while yet Saul lived, for the sins of Saul, and to
overthrow the house of Saul, for all the practice and policy of Saul to the
contrary?

Was not Jeroboam, the servant of Solomon, called and Jeroboam, a servant.
anointed king in Israel, by the Prophet Ahias, in the time of Solomon and of
his son Rehoboam, and to take ten of the twelve Tribes from Solomon? And was
not Iehu, from a soldier, called and anointed king by Elizeus Iehu, a soldier.
servant, while Achab yet reigned in Israel, to destroy Achab and all his
posterity, for the Idolatry of Achab? The just judgment of God against wicked
Princes. And so in other like practisers, that seek by policy to overthrow
kingdoms.

Saul, with all his policy, with his sons, his servants, and his daughter
that he married to David, only to deceive David, could not prevent David of the
kingdom. It was the purpose of God.

Solomon, for all his wisdom and royalty, and his friends, could not hinder
Jeroboam his servant from the kingdom. It was so determined.

Achab, with all his gods and Idols, could not prevent Iehu, nor take revenge
upon Elizeus, no more the^ Benhadad, king of Syria could feed his wrath upon
Elizeus: no policy, no practice, no counsel against the Lord.

Elizeus, looking in the face of Hazael, said, that he should be king after
Benhadad in Syria, and withal wept, knowing how he would strangle his master
Benhadad, the king, and how Tyrant-like he would plague Israel, during the time
of his cruel government. Many had cause to weep, if men knew, as Elizeus
did, what policies are practiced in many men's hearts.

And therefore had old Osiris, king of Egypt, the Osiris his scepter.
likeness of a man's eye in the upper end of his Scepter, to signify, that kings
should be circumspect and wise, to see unto the policy and practice of wicked
men: for against such wise and godly Princes, no policy can prevail, no more
then a little cloud can darken the brightness of the Sun. And as the Sun
with his brightness lighteneth all the Sky, so does a virtuous Prince with his
wisdom, his subjects: for so Aristotle says, Vnica (...). 3. Polit.
and sola virtus Principis, prudentia: The only virtue of a Prince, is to
become wise, and to choose such Wise Counselors, as Moses did of grave and
godly wise men (which counsel was called, synadrion) to help and to aid him in
the government of 600000. men, and that in a wilderness.

By counsel, Commonwealths and Kingdoms stand: So in Salust it is said unto
Caesar, Quo magis Imperium, co mayor cura: So long shall kingdoms prosper, while
good Counsel gouernes: Dum apud eos vera consilia valueru^t: For (said Plato)
All good and godly Counsayles are (...).
sacred, according to that which Christ said: Where two or three are gathered
in my name, there am I among them. It is neither, said Scipio to Micipsa,
strong armies, treasures, nor golden Scepters that uphold kingdoms, but truth,
wisdom, and Counsel. So Aristotle Pro. 20.
says unto the great Alexander; that Counsel is (...): Arist. Rhet. ad Alex.
Suet. cap. 25. Augustus saying.
most divine in matters of states: for that he was ever careful to have
Alexander governed by counsel, knowing well the greatness of his mind, and
the conquest which he took in hand: Many perish for want of counsel, and many
more for not accepting of counsel.

Wise counsel and the reward thereof, was more given in Sparta to the
Captain that subdued the enemies by policy and counsel, then by the sword:
for that attempt, said Augustus, is not to be enterprised, where more fear is
in losing, then hope in getting the victory.

The Carthagineans so esteemed wise counsel, that if any of their Captains had
done any thing but by wise counsel, though they had obtained great victories,
the law in Carthage was, that they should die. Great Captains wanne more by
counsel, then by the Sword: Pluraconsilio, quam vi magnos Duces perfecisse.
Wise Princes must be like Ianus, looking backward as well as Tacit. 11. Ann.
(...).
forward.

It was Sertorius saying to Pompey the great: Quod respicere magis, quam
prospicere oporteat Ducem. That a wise Governor looks backward as well as
forward: But Ambition says Seneca, never looks back, but forward, Plut. in
Serto.
how he may enterteyne factious and seditious men to hold him up. They never
think of their own lives, when they imagine to prevent others of their lives:
Sedition therefore is as dangerous to Kings in their kingdoms, as to
Commanders in Field in the Army. For so Seneca said, Idem ius habet aduersus
imperia, atque aduersus imperantes.

Sectio. 2.
SERVIVS GALBA, under pretense Oros. lib. 5 cap. 21.
of doing of some great good unto the Lusitanians, assembled the chiefest men,
and the gallantest Youths of three great Cities, to the number of seven
thousand, whom he most trecherously and falsely slew: which moved great
Sedition and tumult in Spain against the Romans.

Hastrubal, intending, under the color of hunting, to invade Numidia, being
resisted by the Numidians, told them he came but to hunt Elephants.

By the like policy of hunting, Hanibal got Tarentu^.

Such a hunter was Nymrod, that hunted kings and kingdoms, and therefore he
was called, The mighty Genesis 10.
Hunter.

Ninus was a great hunter of kingdoms and countries.

So may it be said of Cyrus and of Alexander: so great hunters were they, that
they died in their hunting out of their kingdoms.

Hunting is a military exercise, which made Sertorius Plut. in Serto.
to use hunting, and to travail the hard rocks of Africa; and that he and
his soldiers thereby might better endure labor and pain against the Romans,
he acquainted them so much with hunting, that they were able to sustain any
hardness.

The cause therefore why Brasidas compared hunting to war, was, for that the
like stratagems are often invented and executed in wars against soldiers, as
the Hunter does against diverse kinds of beasts, specially in Venatione
Circensi, at Rome; or in hunting of Elephants, Lions, Tigers, and such other
wild beasts, where the policy and stratagems of the Hunter, as the force and
courage of the soldiers, must be.

Mithridates, King of Pontus, to avoid the snares Just. li. 37.
and dangers of the enemy, gave himself so to hunting, that he neither used
City, Town, or any houses for seven years together, so that by such paynefull
exercise he held tack with the Romans for forty years. That was the cause why
Cato preferred hunters and laborers Cato de re rust. lib. 1.
fit for wars, Ex venatoribus and agricolis milites strenui gignuntur.

We read in Xenophon, that young Gentlemen were brought up, first in hunting,
to make them more strong and more able to endure the wars.

Plato makes mention of three kinds of hunting, Pla. de leg.
Aquatilia, volatilia, ac terrestria; but he much commends the last,
Quadrupedia venari.

This kind of hunting, Adrian the Emperor so loved in his youth, that he could
spare no time about his own business, until he was better persuaded by his
counsel.

So lawdable was this exercise, and very necessary to soldiers, that
Maximinus the Emperor used Roman Legions to hunting.

Domitianus a great Hunter, is much praised in Suetonius, and for nothing else,
but for hunting; and yet he Suet. in Dom. ca. 4.
hunted in Rome, as Hastrubal did in Numidia, that all Rome might be his
Fermors and Tenants, and so to be called Colonia Domitiana: that was the
secret practice of Domitianus hunting.

Probus the Emperor, is reported to cause his soldiers to pluck up young Oaks
by the root, and to make the Theaters so large and wide, set and compassed
with branches and boughs, that it seemed rather a Forest, or a Park, then a
Theater, that sometime a thousand Estriches, a thousand Hearts, a thousand
Lions, a hundred Stagges, and such other fierce beasts of Libia, were there
hunted: so that such hunting was called, Circences venationes, and often used
of the Emperors of Romes Suet. in Oct. ca. 4. 5
insomuch as they made Theaters round before, to see plays: and afterward, the
Romans made them Amphitheaters long and wide, to see hunting; that by hunting
with beasts, they might the more bolder, and with less fear, fight with the
enemy.

Xenophon wrote a whole Book in praise of Hunting, wherein he named the
greatest Kings and warriers of the world, as Achilles, Cyrus, Alexander, and
others.

But many of late, practiced the like policy, not only to hunt Elephants, but
Lions and Unicorns.

In Mount Parthenius, there was a Temple dedicated to Pan, and therein was a
place named Aula, as it were a Sanctuary to all kind of Beasts being hunted
either by Lions, Bears, or Wolves: if they could recover this place AVLA, they
were safe: and no further might they be followed by those Lions, Bears, or
Wolves. Such credit had they in their god Pan, that he could save all Beasts
that fled for succor thither, whether they came from Spain, Italy, or from
any where else.

In Aetolia, there was a Wood consecrated to Diana, Alex. lib. 4. cap. 2.
that Dogs hunting after any Beast, when they came ad lucum Dianae, the
sacred wood of Diana, they staid and could hunt no further.

Aristotle writes of the like place in the Mountain, which the Greeks call
Menalus, to which place if any wild Beasts were hunted by Dogs, and could
recover (...)*
this mountain, they were safe as though they were in Sanctuary; the Dogs
neither could nor would follow any further.

Some kind of Dogs there are more bloody, that will so follow their game,
that neither the Temple of Pan, nor the sacred wood of Diana, nor the mountain
Menalus, nor yet Aula Regia, can stop their eagernes, like the Dogs of
Actaeon, that will devour their own Master.

These be the seed of Caligula, that seek not only to cut off the neck of
Rome at one blow, as Caligula wished, but the neck and head of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

These be the brood of Centaures, that dippe their weapons in the blood of
Nessus: These are they that conceive mischief, and bring soorth iniquity.

These be they (says the Prophet) that hatch Cockatrice Esaias 59.
eggs, and he that eats of their eggs, dies, and that which is trodden
upon, breaks out unto a Serpent, and becomes a more deadly Serpent, then
the Serpents of Arabia or Africa, whatsoever is come from them, is poison, and
brings death.

These wicked ones, are like the raging seas that can not rest, whose waves
cast up nothing but mire and Esaias 59.
dirt.

These wicked men be they that weaue the Spiders web, and yet shall not they
cover themselves with garments of their own labor.

Their Laws, their peace, their fair words, and their foul hearts, are
nothing else but Ius sine Iure in Armis: and therefore, it was the wish of
Apollonius Thianaeus, to know good men and to avoid evil men, who can not
change their accustomed wickedness, no more then the Blacke-more can change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots. Iorem. 13.


Next Hunting is Swimming, accounted for a Military exercise, both to swymme to
the enemy, as also to escape from the enemy by swymming, as Caesar did in Vig.
lib. 1. cap. 10. Diodor. lib. 17.
the Watres at Alexandria, when he followed after Pompey.

Alexander, at the River Acinases, when there was no hope of help to save his
life, put off his Armor unto his shirt, and made himself ready to save his
life by swymming.

Great overthrows have been given to those that could not swymme; as Niceas
the General of the Athenians, at the River Asinarus, where many of his
soldiers, for want of skill to swim, were slain in the River by the
Siracusans. And this want of skill in swymming, often hindered Cyrus and his
soldiers in many enterprises, as Xenophon says.

Sectio 3.
PVBLIVS SCIPIO in Lidia, after contynuall foul weather day and night, and
Antiochus, when he thought to relieve his wearied and wet soldiers, were then
set upon and overthrown by Scipio and his Army.

We read that Hanibal, after that he was driven out Vid. Hanibal lib 1. cap 5.
of Africa unto Asia by the Romans, taught the kings of Asia all policyes and
stratagems, and counsayled Antiochus the great, in his Counselles against the
Romans, to throw great vessels full of quick Vipers into the ships of the
enemies, that the Romans, being frighted with these Vipers, might be hindered
of their fight, and daunted of their courage.

So did Antiochus, who imitated Hanibals counsel, but to no effect.

So did Prusias king of Bythinia, but to no effect; for victory comes from
the Lord.

I commend both Antiochus and Prusias, in following Hanibals directions against
the Romans, being their enemies: for these were lawful stratagems to be used
against enemies: but to throw these Vipers into the faces of our friends, yea,
into the faces of Kings and Princes, unto the destruction of our country, this
is the practice of Satan and of his soldiers, who ever have been most
seditious in all good common wealths, far worse then the Snakes of Syria,
which will not bite The snakes of Syria.
their countrymen in Syria, though they find them out sleeping: but better and
fitter to be likened to the Scorpions in the mountain Altenius in Caria, who
are pernicious and most perilous to their countrymen, sparing none, yet to
strangers never hurtful.

As in Alexandria, between the Jews and the Graecians, Sedition between the
Jews, and the Grecians in Alexandria.
such seditions grew first by private men, that it came to public wars
after. Between the Samaritans and the Galileans grew such sedition, for that
the Samaritans would not suffer the Galilea^s to pass through their territories
unto the feast at Jerusalem, according to the custom of the Jews. Such
slaughter and murder grew between the Jews and the Samaritans, that neither
Camaus the Roman President, neither Numidius Quadratus the President of Syria,
might quench this furious rage and sedition between the Jews and the
Samaritans. One sparkle of fire burns a whole City: and one seditious man is
dangerous in a commonwealth.

And therefore, the Athenians used lawful policy, to prevent their enemies the
Lacedaemonians, arming a certain number of men in Garments like women, upon a
solemn feast day which the Athenians kept to Minerua, out of Athens: the
Lacedaemonians supposing to find them for their slaughter, were prevented with
this stratage^, for women, they found men, armed with weapons, Front. lib. 4.
cap. 7.
under the form and shape of women, and were thereby overthrown by the
Athenians, and forced to return with strokes to Lacedemon. A lawful practice
of policy to prevent known enemies.

God taught the Israelites a stratagem, after they were overthrown twice, the
third time to overthrow the Iud. 20.
Beniamites.

So with the like policy, was Sempronius Gracchus with his Roman Legion by
Vaccei, a people in Spain, put to flight, by putting the most valiantest men
they had, in women's apparel, in Chariots and Coaches; the Romans imagining
them to be women, supposing to have a great prey thereby, came as though they
should easily take the^ away into their camp: but the Romans were forced to
retire to their Camp with loss, and not with gain, which they looked to
have. Such practices are often used, and often prevented by the enemies: but to
practice any policy against our country, was ever odious.

Phocion, a man of good estate, and of best desert among the Athenians, who had
bin in times past General for the Athenians, yet being condemned of some
suspected treason, might not be buried in Athens, but was carried out of
Attica terra to be buried. It was not hard in Greece to find out such
practisers, for that all Val. lib. 5. cap. 3.
the Cities in Greece were so envious one unto another, that they practiced
nothing else, but to destroy one another.

Milciade, the Athenian, who wan such great fame by killing many thousand
Persia^s at the battle of Maratho^, yet being dead in prison, suspected of
treason, his son Cymon, that renowned Grecian, became most willingly a
prisoner for his father, to have his burial in Athens: of which, Cymon would
often brag, that he obtained his fathers Patrimony, Carcerem et Catenas: for
there was a Law in Athens, that if there were any, Qui de Repub. male meriti
sunt, which might not be found true unto their Country, they should dye in
Athens, but not be buried (according to the Law) at Athens. So horrible is
treason, and so odious were Traitors in Athens.

Such a Law was in Egypt against their kings, that if they should offend in any
great capital crime against the public state, they should give account before
the thirty Judges of Egypt, before they should be buried in Pyramides: which
was the most odious thing in Egypt, for their Kings to want burial, and
therefore, Simandius, an ancient king, had a rich Tablet hanged upon his breast,
whereon was set the picture of Justice; which Diod. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Monument, after his time, Simandius left to his posterity, the kings of Egypt,
that they might be put in mind, by looking upon the picture of Justice, to do
justice.

Wicked Ishmael, practicing treason, came to Godolia, whom the king of Babylon
made Governor over the Cities of Judah, and Ishmael did eat, and was feasted
at ^ere. 40.
Godolias table, and after slew him with the sword, and all the Jews that were
with Godolia at Mispha, of mere envy, which is the cause of all revenge.

So the two Porters of king Ahashuerosh, that kept his gate, conspired against
their Master, and both consented Hester 2.
to kill the king, had not Mardocheus the Jew prevented it.

Haman, so envying Mardocheus, that he could not abide the sight of him,
practiced policy, first with the king, against the Jews, and after, he
consulted with his wife, how he might destroy Mardocheus.

Caesar, with the like envy, after long doubting of his marching in arms as an
enemy unto Rome, his own country, yet at length being overcome with desire of
revenge, said, Iacta est alea, being resolved to revenge his malice against
Pompey, to plague Rome, and to punish his Country. A man (says Solomon)
deuiseth Pro. 16.
a way in his heart: but it is the Lord that orders his doings: the lottes
are cast into the lap: but the ordering thereof stands in the Lord.

Sectio 4.
WHen Achior had said, that great was the power of the God of Israel,
Holophernes Iudeth 5.
and his Captains would have slain him, like the Scribes and Pharisees, who
fretted and fumed to hear the people cry, Hosanna to the Math. 21.
King of kings the Son of God. But the Lord finds out the policy and
practice of such wicked men: for so he found out the practice and policy of
Cain (who under color Genesis 4.
of walking unto the field, did kill his brother Abel) by asking a question:
Where is thy brother Abel?

The Lord also found out the practice and policy of Esau toward his brother
Jacob, who said in his heart: Occidam fratrem meum Jacob. Genesis 27.


Joseph, demanding of his brethren, what became of their other two brethren,
made Ruben confess to his brethren, that the Lord had found out their wicked
practice.

What treason, what murder, though long kept secret by men, but was either by
Birds of the air, or Stones of the street found out and described?

Achilles, very craftily practicing policy to hide himself in a woman's garment
in Greece, lest he should go with Agamemnon to the wars in Phrygia, was found
out by the policy and craft of Ulysses.

Ulysses likewise fayning himself mad (through the like policy to stay in
Ithaca, with his fair wife Penelope) his practice was found out by Palamedes.
Sic Ars deluditur art among men.

If practices of men by men are found out, where shall the Traitor or the
murderer hide his practice and wicked policy from the knowledge of God?

Adam could not hide it in Paradise, nor Lucifer in Heaven, nor Jonas in the
bottom of the Sea: Where shall a man fly from the presence of God, that is of
a guilty Conscience?

Genesis 4. (...) 1.
It made Cain to say: Omnis qui inuenerit me, occidet me. It made Jonas to say
to the Sailors to Tharsis: Tollite and mittite me in mare: And it made Judas to
say, Tradidi sanguinem iustum, and to hang himself.

It makes a number to hang, to drown, and to kill themselves, provoked thereto
by a tormented conscience.

For we read both in Divine and profane Hystories, that more lewd and wicked
men come from good men, then good men from the wicked: So that, of one
Cateline, being a wicked man in Rome, became so many wicked Catelines, that
Rome had too many Catelines, so full of spite and envy unto Rome, that they
were (as Salust says) Impuri animi Dijs hominibusque infesti. And so likewise,
in Athens, of one hateful Tymon, surnamed Misantropos, grew so many odious
Tymons, that there were too many Tymo^s in Athe^s. But we leave these Catelines
in Rome, and these Tymons in Athens, and we wish that there were neither
Catelines nor Tymons in England.

There were at Rome in S. Ieromes time, certain S. Ieromes saying of
Englishmen in Rome.
Englishmen, of good constitution and fair complexion: whom when S. Ierom saw,
he said, Isti Angli Angeli dici possunt. How strange is it, that of that
Nation, then called in Rome Angels, by St. Jerome, there should be now some in
England, which might be called Devils, in whom are such wicked practices, and
such lewd polycies, as neither Philip of Macedon, against the Graecians, nor
Hannibal of Carthage, against the Romans, could exceed them with their
Military stratagems, which was lawful against foreign enemies?

The cause, says Lactantius, of such rebellious minds in such men, was, Non
nosce supremum numen, and Lact. lib. 3 lust. li. 30.
illud non venerari.

Therefore, the chiefest care of a good Prince, ought to be first vigilant
about Gods Service. So could Aristotle, the Heathen Philosopher say, Res (...).
Arist. 5. Polit. c. 11
diuinas, etc. For as Cicero says, The Romans ever supposed the serving of
their gods, to be rather the cause of their Victories and Tryumphes over
Africa and Asia, then their strength and courage: and therefore, Maecenas
wrote to Augustus the Emperor, to keep and defend the Roman Religion, and the
sacred Ceremonies of their country to their gods, and not to imitate the
Egyptians, Qui variam et mixtam religionem coluerunt, which accept of al kind
of Religion, and never consent in one: for says Cicero, Maioru^ instituta
tueri, etc. It is wisdom to defend the Laws and decrees of the Elders, and
the Religion of their Country: which to neglect, is sacrilege.

The Egyptians, though most superstitious and idolatrous people, yet had they
in their Temples in Greek written upon the walls, Deus est quae sunt, et quae
non sunt, (...). Her. in Pom. 5.
not much disagreeing with the saying of the Apostle, Romans 11.
that God was he, by whom all things were done, and in whom, and from whom all
good things proceed, and without him, nothing.

It is not the Iuory Maces of the Romans, nor the Ebony maces of the Indians,
nor the Lions and Bears of the Babylonian, neither the Dragons and Serpents of
the Egyptian maces, that hold up a kingdom: but the Scepter of Justice. (Per
me Reges regnant, says the Lord.) (...).


The Ethiopian Kings had their Scepter made in ancient time, in form like a
plough, in sign of husbandry, which ought to be maintained by the king unto
his people: for their kings were put in mind by their Scepters, to be careful
of their subjects, which are the strength of the king.

And so the old Persian kings had their maces made Diodor. li. 4. cap. 1.
like a spade, as the Ethiopians the plough, to put their kings in memory, that
the plough and the spade are the two only Instruments most necessary in a
commonwealth to enrich a king.

Some other Heathen kings had upon the tops of their maces, the figure of a
Storke, to signify piety and lenity in a Prince to be necessary; and upon the
nether end of the mace, the likeness of Hippopotamus, that a Hippopotamus, a
Seahorse. Plut. in Alex.
Prince should avoid fiercenes and wrath. Which had Alexander looked unto, as
the History says, Nec Lysimachus Leoni obiectus, nec Clytus hasta traiectus,
nec Calisthenes mori iussus. These three great murders dimmed and obscured his
three great victories over Asia, Europe, and Affricke, not then thinking of
Cassanders draught.

For when Alexander would know of Calanus, the Indian Philosopher, at his
death, what he would have Alexander to do for him? Nothing, said Calanus: and
answered him, as the shadow of Samuel answered Phetonissa for Saul, I shall
shortly see you. So in Homer, does Hector say, that Achilles should be the next
of the Greek Captains that should follow him. To be ignorant therefore in
things to come, said Cicero, is much better then to know them.

Alexander would have been most sorrowful, after he had won so many
kingdoms, if he had known that he should have been poisoned in Babylon,
before he had come to Macedonia. Achilles had no cause to rejoice, after his
victories in Troy, if he had known, that he should dye in Troy, and not in
Greece. Neither Caesar, after he had subdued Pompey, if he had known that he
should be slain before the Image of Pompey in Rome.

Cicero being banished from Rome, by M. Antonius, and Cicero his dream. De
diui. lib. 1.
being very pensive and sad, the Image of C. Marius with the Sergeants before
him, appeared as he was, when he was last Consul, enquiring of Cicero why he
was so sad, and how he did. Cicero told Marius, for that he was forced to
forsake Rome, by means of M. Antonius. The Image took Cicero by the right
hand, and delivered him to one of the Sergeants, and willed him to bring Cicero
to his tomb, and said, that there he should be comforted and relieved with
great welcome. These dreaming Practisers, are often instructed by dreams,
visions, and Idolatrous serving of Images, which some have in their houses in
England, as Alexander Seuerus Alex. lib. 6. cap. 13
had in his gallery at Rome, the Images of Orpheus, of Apollonius, of Abraham,
and of Christ: and yet these Images profit nothing, but to bring such men to
Marius grave.

Tyberius, perceiving that the whole Empire of Rome was weary of his life,
having children of his own, fearing his tyranny (by his conscience moved)
should be the cause, that none of them should succeed him in the Empire,
consulted with auguratio^, wherein himself was welseene, and made supplication
to his country gods, as the manner and rites of the Romans were, to give him
some certain sign, who should succeed him in the Empire: being advertised, that
the first that would come and salute him the next morning, should succeed him
in the Empire, caused presently Euodus his Chamberlain to call all his sons to
come in to him, to prevent others: but as Euodus went out of the chamber, came
in Caeius, the son of Germanicus his brother, and saluted the Emperor:
whereby he knew, that his divination Tiberlus deceived by his divination.
failed him, that none of his children should succeed, but Caius, his brothers
son, according to Salomons saying, Man determines, God disposes.

Many in this age would faineknow the successions of Empyres and kingdoms: but
they are not of wise men's opinions: Animi morbus est de his quaerere: That
which is only in God to know, is not fit for man to search: for Hermes. (...).
ambitious men want no boughs to clime.

Hannibal, persuading king Prusias to commence war against the Romans,
answered Hannibal, that he would enterprise nothing, before he had consulted
with a Sooth-sayer. To whom (said Hannibal) Carunculae vitulinae mauis, quam
veteri Imperatori credere? De diui. lib. 2.
Can thou believe, king Prusias, rather the liver of a beast, or the flying
of a Foul, then believe an old Captain, who had bin General against the
Romans 17. years, who (to my loss) have learned to be a Soldiour, and can
better counsel thee, then the Soothsayer?

The likesaying is tepbrted of king Mithridates, that in spite of fortune,
after she had done what she could, said, I can counsel others not to trust
Fortune, though it be often true, Rara est Virtus, quam Fortuna non gubernat.
But what is it but Superstition will do? Which made Cato to say and to wonder,
Lib. 2. de Diui.
Quod non rideret Aruspex, Aruspicem cum videret, that one Soothsayer would not
laugh when he saw another.

Pub. Claudius, in the first Punicke watre, jesting at so many Augurers,
commanded some Chickens that would eat nothing out of their Cage or Coupe, to
be drowned in water, for that they might drink, because they would not eat, in
contempt of their Divination: but he was condemned to death by the people, for
not esteeming Auguration.

Lib. 2. de not. Deo.
For the like cause, his fellow Consul Lu. Iunius, to escape the danger and
wrath of the people, slew him self. Athens more superstitious then Rome, where
Diagoras, was banished, Socrates poisoned, and Timagoras imprisoned.

Such Augurations and Soothsayings had been in honor and worship in old time,
and of such credit, that it was death among the Romans and the Persians, to
jest at it for their Magic among the Persians, and Auguration among the
Romans, without which their kings could not be in times past elected.

Scipio and Figulus, because they were elected and became Magistrates, and not
allowed by the Augurers 2. Divine.
Laws, being wrongfully created, they both refused and forsook their Offices,
and were also rejected of the people.

Paul and Barnabas, after the restoring of an impotent cripple, being so borne
of his mother, the people Acts 3.
in Lystra cried out, that Gods are come down in the likeness of men. And
they called Paul, Mereurius, and Barnabas, Jupiter; and the Priests of Jupiter
brought Bulls trymmed with Flowers and Garlands unto the gates, where Paul and
Barnabas lodged, and there would have sacrificed with the people.

In like manner, one Demetrius, a Syluer-Smyth unto Diana, stirred up sedition
among the superstitious people, saying, that Paul persuaded the people, not
only Acts 19.
at Ephesus, but throughout all Asia, that they be not Gods which are made
with hands: so that the Temple of the great Goddess Diana, and the Image that
came down from Jupiter, should be nothing esteemed, and that her magnificence,
which all Asia and the whole world worshipped, should be destroyed.

In Jerusalem, their superstitious Idolatry was the only cause of the
overthrow of both the kingdoms of Judah and of Israel, every one worshipping
several gods of strange nations. And therefore the Prophet said, That the
Plummet of the house of Ahab, and the Line of Samaria, should be stretched over
Jerusalem, that as Samaria was destroyed with her Idols, so should Jerusalem
with her Images.

Cicero does report of certain Chaldean Philosophers, being in his time at
Rome, who showed their cunning Cic. de Divine. 2.
upon three of the greatest men of Rome, of equal fortune and greatness, and
therefore, one envying the other, much doubting one of another, co^sulted with
certain Chaldeans then at Rome, by whom they were certified in the presence of
Cicero, that each one of these 3. viz, Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar, should live
to be very old, they should dye in their houses, and should with honor and fame
accomplish all their actions, whereas in truth, they dyed afterward otherwise,
and that out of their country: Crasius first was slain among the Parthians,
and his head sent by Surena to Pacorus, king of the Parthians. Pompey was
slain in Egypt, and his head sent by Ptolomy to Caesar: And lastly, Caesar was
slain in the Senate house, among the Senators.

Their dumme stratagems must be prevented, as Iehu did by the messenger of King
Ioram, who came to Iehu, 4. Reg. 9.
saying, Thus says the king: Is it peace, Iehu? What have thou to do with
peace, says Iehu? come behind me and follow me. What peace should be, when
factious and seditious men bearesway? or what peace can be, said Iehu to king
Iora^, whiles the whoredom of thy mother Iezabel, and her witchcrafts are yet
in great number; when Judah and Israel agree not in one religion? When Achab and
Baeals priests rule Israel, they must be prevented, as Philip of Macedon did
the Ambassadors of the Etolia^s, Front. lib. 1. cap. 4.
who coming to entreat for peace, were kept in talking of peace, until king
Philip had won Thermopyla, and placed his garrison there.

These rebellious Practitioners have, and also had their Ambassadors always
abroad, to know if it be peace, for them to come there, if they failed of
their purpose, which should more fear God in their country, then fear their
enemies out of their country. But as Benhadad cou^sayled Iehoram, that he
should make streets in Damasco for him and his people to dwell, 3. Reg 20
as his father made streets in Samaria for the Assyrians to dwell, saying, My
people shall be thy people: So Rebels were promised Towns and Cities to
dwell in, and therefore said they: Litet, silibet, to practice treason, murder
and sacrilege.

There were many Antigonies in Greece: one Antigonus Many Antigonies in Greece.
surnamed Gonatus, for that one knee was bigger the^ another: all his care was
to make both his knees of equal proportion, that it might seem unto the
people but of one quantity.

Another Antigonus, surnamed Polyorcetes, for that he was always practiced
busily to overthrow towns and cities, and to triumph in his tyranny: he would
ever boast and brag what evil he had done, rejoicing (...), etc.
much in titles of violence and of his conquests, as many of the Greeks were
wont to do, but none of equity and justice, but only Aristides.

Another Antigonus, surnamed Dosan, for that he would promise any thing, but as
Plutarch says, would perform nothing. This Antigonus left more heirs behind
him in Courts and in Countries.

And there was another Antigonus, surnamed Euargetes, for that he was a
beneficial Prince and a benefactor in all Greece, and therefore his Statue was
carried at Athens in the Banner of Peplon, with the Statues of Jupiter and
Mars, in memory of his benefits to the Grecians. Such is the continuance of a
good Prince for virtues sake, and the decay of evil Princes for their
wickedness.

Cyrus, being relieved of the rude and barbarous nation, Diodor. lib. 17.
called Arimaspi, being in much want and great extremytie of victualles, for
their friendship and liberality, changed the name of Arimaspi, and called them
Euargetes.

Among many Emperors of Rome, called Antonines, one only Antoninus, surnamed
Pius, for his zeal and love toward his country, in banishing of Usury, and
punishing Usurers in Rome: one Alexander, called Seuerus, for his virtuous
severity. The rest, as Heliogabalus, Comodus, Caracalla and others, were rather
Monsters, then good Emperors.

So much might be spoken of the kings of Egypt, among Many Ptolomies in Egypt.
so many Ptolomies, few good, saving Ptolo* surnamed Euargetes, a benefactor
to his country, and Ptol. Philodelphos, for his singular love and zeal to his
Country, in providing the Bible to be translated from Hebrew to Greek: yet
had the other kings of Egypt, of such loving names, one surnamed Ptol.
Philopater, another Philometor, as though they should reverence and love their
parents, when in truth, they were no otherwise but paracides and murderers of
their parents, and destroyers of their Countries.

The old kings of Egypt, which were in number 330. were called Pharaones, whose
names, Herodot does not recite, because they were all called Pharaones, which
in the Egyptian tongue, are called kings, from Mineus time that builded
Memphis, until Salomons time: for his father in law was the last Pharao in
Egypt.

Then reigned Nicaule, the Q. of Egypt and Ethiopia, Joseph. lib. 8. cap. 2.
How long the name of Pharaoes continued.
who came to Jerusalem to hear and to see Solomon, with Camelles laden with
gold, silver and precious stones. After this Queen, the name of Pharaoes
ended; which had continued 1300. years, from the first unto the last, whose
daughter, Solomon married.

Sectio. 5.
ANaxarchus, the Philosopher, flattered Alexander The flattery of Anaxarchus.
the great, when he saw him make much mourning for Clytus, whom in his fury he
slew. Art thou ignorant, Alexander, said Anaxarchus, that ancient wise men have
placed the Image of Justice hard by Jupiter, that whatsoever Jupiter does,
that Justice does always allow? A small matter for Diodor. lib. 17. Gel.
lib. 3. cap. 8.
Alexander the great, to kill Clitus, Parmenio, and Philotas his son; when
other meaner men then Alexander, do practice their policy, not only to kill,
but also to poison kings and princes: so was Alexander, that killed so many
kings and princes, poisoned by his servant Cassander. So should Pyrrhus have
bin, by his Physician and servant Timochares, who offered Fabritius to poison
Pirrhus, if Fabritius would. But the Roman Consul sent word to Pirrhus, Vrbem
nostram a filio Martis conditam, non venenis, Cic. 3. Offic.
sed armis bellum gerere: That Rome was builded by Mars his son, to wat with
weapons, and not with poison; concealing the name of Timochares, and yet warned
Pirrhus to look better to himself.

Antiochus the great had a Parasite in court, named Minio, who flattering
Antiochus, as Anaxarchus did Alexander, counseled him to move wars against
the Romans, as Hanibal did before him, whereby he lost the name of Antiochus
the great, in Asia and in Syria, Antiochus the great.
and was driven by the Romans, to live within the precinct of mount Taurus: so
that the Roman Scipio wan Asia from Antiochus, and was named Scipio Asiaticus,
and not Magnus: for the Romans could not abide the name of Magnus: So that by
following of ill counsel, Antiochus the Great lost his Greatness in Asia: and
Alexander the Great lost his life in Babylon.

The like is historied of one Alexander Acarnan, that contrariwise, never took
counsel to take wars in hand, for that he never doubted of the victory, but
co^sulted where and how he might have money, by practicing of policy.

Liui. 33.
Many do imitate this rash fellow, who to accomplish their treacherous purpose,
make more haste then good speed, without regard of that which does follow: for
delays are dangerous for seditious men to practice Policy. Malum nascens,
facile opprimitur. Rebels may not delay as Fab. Maximus did to weary Hanibal.
Sedition is Tacit. 11.
full of fear, one fearing another, lest the one be betrayed by the other:
all the practices of the seditious is to sow Discord, no hope rests unto
them, but by discord: and therefore said Cicero against that seditious Roman
Cateline, Qui honores quieta Repub. desperant, perturbata se consequi posse
arbitrantur. Many Catelines were in Rome, which, under pretense of liberty,
practiced all the policyes they could, to overthrow the Commonwealth: Tumultum
ex tumultu, et bellum ex bello serunt. Never quiet, until they see the state of
a kingdom unquiet: and many say in their hearts, as Cateline spoke of Rome,
Aut incendio aut ruina extinguam.

Attilius Regulus was a man of great credit and authority, and of more truth
and faith toward his country, Front. lib. 4. cap. 3.
then Cateline: having run over so many great Offices in Rome and out of
Rome, that at his death he wrote nothing to the Senators, but de Successore, of
a Successor, which was hard for the Senators to find in Rome, the like to
succeed him. So just and faithful a man was Attilius found in Rome.

The like is historied of Luc. Mummius, after he had subdued many towns and
Cities; but especially Corinthus, Luc. Mummius.
the richest and chiefest City in all Greece, that he filled all Italy with
Tablets, Statues, and Images, and all other rich ornaments: and though Mummius
might have bin Lord of Corinthus, yet had he rather dye a poor man in his
country at Rome.

Attalus, surnamed Philometor, had great delight to plant venomous herbs, as
Hemlocke, Wolfeband, Eleborum, and others: and being required of one of his
Nobles, why he planted such venomous herbs, he answered, To practice policy.

Such policy practiced Dalila against Samson: Pharaoes daughter against
Solomon: and Tullia, Tarquins wife Judge. 14. 3. Reg. 11.
practiced such policy against the king Seruius Tullus, her father. Some plow
with Samsons heyfar, to their own overthrow: and some with Minoes Cow, to
breed many monstrous Minotaures, to devour their country. And too many plow
against the law of Moses, with an Ox and an Ass; and all this to practice
policy.

Sectio 6.
IN Greece were two general factions, the Doreans, and Ionians: the
Lacedaemonians took part with the Doreans; and the Athenians, with the Ionians.
From these two Factions Two general factio^s in Greece.
grew in Greece, such seditions, that the Boetians, the Argiues, Elians,
Mantineans, and others, some affecting the Doreans with the Lacedaemonians, some
affecting the Ionians with the Athenians, that it brake out into civil wars,
which continued 27. years, to the destruction of the Empire of Greece, which
sometime gave so many overthrows to the Persians, so many victories at
Maratho^, at Artimesium, at Salamina, and other-where, that now, by means of
their factions and seditions, Philip of Macedon saw such opportunity to subdue
the Graecians, which he long thirsted for, that he overcame Greece with
Greeks; for so it is written, Graeci Graecorum manibus mactabantur, by means
chiefly of their civil seditions and factions: he wan more towns in Greece by
Greeks, then by the Macedonians.

The like of the civil wars among the Romans: the Danes thought it the
fittest time to win Rome Front. lib. 1. cap. 10 Scorylo.
in such a seditious time, as Philip did Greece: yet Scorylo their General at
that time appointed, doubting much of this enterprise, caused two great mastiue
dogs to fight eagerly before the people, that both were well wearied: then
Scorylo brought in a Wolf in the sight of these mastiue dogs, and straight
ways both the dogs left off fighting, and both of them ran fiercely, and
fought egerly with the Wolf. The fierce civil wars and fighting of the
Romans at home, said Scorylo, will even so do, when they see a Wolf, I mean,
a forrayne enemy, to commence war against them.

There was also in Athens, two factions, Pericles being the author of one, and
Cymon, the son of Milciades Two factions in Athens.
the other. Pericles affected the common people; and Cimon preferred the
Nobility, and favored their proceedings, in such sort, that Athens was never
quiet, but when it was disquieted with it self by means of factions, which do
nourish seditions, having their busie-brayned Orators to force the Athenians
to fight with their tongues, consilio, calamis, and lingua: for it was (...),
etc. Aristoph.
the disposition of that City, never to consult, as Demosthenes said, but too
late: every town in Greece, was so factious, that the glory of Greece, by
means of factions and seditions, continued but 50. years, and some odd in
any greatness.

And in Sparta, for all Lycurgus care, and his laws, he could not free Sparta
from factions; and yet he divided Two factions in Spartae. Obas and Philas.
them all into 2. factions, whom Lycurgus himself named Obas and Philas: which
laws and decrees of Lycurgus were so kept for 500. years without violating
them, for none in Greece durst break Lycurgus laws, but Agesilaus, and that
but once upon great necessity, to punish seditions.

In Carthage also they had two factions, the one faction followed Hamilcar,
Hanibals father, and after him his son Hanibals the other followed Hanno and
his friends: so that in kingdoms and countries, factious men moved such
sedition, whereby no greater harms happened to kingdoms and countries, then by
practicing seditions and factions.

Hamilcar, Hannibals father so hated the Romans, that having 4. young youths
to his sons, said, that he would have 4. Lion whelps nourished and brought
up with his 4. sons, as mortal enemies to the Romans; and swear Hannibal
his eldest son, being of 9. years old, Polib. 2.
to continue an enemy to the Romans during his life: and further, to show his
malice and envy toward the Romans, he raised up the dust from the earth with
his foot, and said, that then should be the end of the wars between Rome and
Carthage, when one of both those Cities should be brought to nothing but such
dust.

In Rome, before Fab. Max. time, they had but four Four factions in Rome.
factions, which were divided by Tullus Hostilius the third king of Rome, and
by him named Palatina, Colina, Exquilina, and Suburrana, after the name of the
four gates of Rome, at that time being the Infancy of Rome: But after, it grew
from four factions to be five and thirty Tribes, that every Tribe was full of
diverse factions, and the Roman Empire waxed so mighty, that Fabius Maximus,
when he was Censor in Rome, for that he brought all foreign factions within
Rome, to be one of these four, which Seruius Tullus named Fab. named Max.
Vrbanas factiones, was so grateful to the Citizens of Rome, that they named
him Fabius Maximus, which was the first time that he was called Maximus, for
abridging the multitude of factions, that then would have grown in Rome, unto
infinite numbers, if Fabius had not brought them under one of these four.

But in the time of Sylla and Marius, factions began so to multiply in Rome, as
it did in Greece, that likewise The civil wartes of the Romans.
it brake out into civil wars, which continued from Sillaes time, unto the
last overthrow of Mar. Antonius, welnigh forty years, to the destruction of
the whole Empire, some following the fury of Marius, as Sertorius, Cynna,
Carbo: and others followers of Sylla, as Metellus, Pompey, and others, that
none might dwell in Rome, but those that either should be on Marius side, or
on Syllaes.

Thus was the Empire divided by factions, from Sylla to Caesar, from Caesar to
Augustus, sometime running from Caesar to Pompey, and from Pompey to Caesar,
until they and their factions were slain by the sword, and their country
welnigh destroyed.

Of all miseries, civil wars is most miserable, and a very Ocean sea of all
miseries, in which, Nobilitas cum plebe perit, whereof Homer exclaimed, and
said, Let him be cursed as an unnatural monster and no man, that seeks (...)
etc. Iliad. 1. Cic. Phil. 12.
his countries harm. And Cicero in like sort cried out upon him, Quem caedes
ciuium, quem bellum civil delectat, and wished such to be cast out of the
society of men, and to weed them out of the bounds of nature.

Factions among great men, are more dangerous and hard to be quenched, for that
these potentates draw the people and move them, which are compared to the sea
immovable, until a tempest rise: and therefore Plato thought good to join
Aristides, surnamed the just, for his justice, truth and constancy, with
Themistocles, being haughty and somewhat ambitious. And Lycurgus much commended
the policy of Agamemnon, Lycurgus.
to put Ulysses forward to claim Achilles armor, as well as Ajax, who judged
himself most worthy, in respect of his valor, to be next Achilles, throughout
al Greece. This discord was tempred by Agamemnon, by giving Achilles armor to
Ulysses, that wise and politic men might be esteemed as well for counsel, as
valiant men for valor.

Augustus the Emperor, was written unto by his dear friend Maecenas, that if
he would have a quiet Empire, and his subjects to love him, he should cut off
faction, the chief cause of sedition, and that the name of factions, or any
other new name, tending to move quarrels and debate, might be quite excluded
out of Rome. And so does Aristotle exhort, that Magistratuum and potentum
contentiones, the beginning of brawles Arist. pol. 5.
and contentions, should be stayed and stopped by laws: if not by laws, by the
sword, Adulta seditio melioribus consilijs flectetur, says Cicero.

What slaughter came of the cynders and ashes of Pompey the great, of Cato, of
Scipio, and of others, to revenge their death upon Caesar and his friends? What
murder, what war, was, to revenge the murdering of Caesar, upon Brutus,
Cassius, and others? The Law of Thrasybulus, which curbed the thirty Tyrants
in Athens, could do no good in Rome, though Cicero did what he could, in
persuading Thrasybulus law to take (...)
place with the people: For then every man in Rome seemed as a Serpent one to
another, ready in arms one to kill another. Orosius hereupon induces a Fable
of Medea, of a Serpent slain, of whose teeth set in Oros. li. 6. cap. 17.
the ground by Medea, grew so many armed men, who presently fought so within
themselves, that one destroyed another. Such was the slaughter by the civil
wars at Rome.

Sectio. 7.
THeopompus being demanded, why did Sparta flourish? Is it for that their
kings govern their subjects wisely, or that their subjects obey their kings
faithfully? Theopompus answered, We practice in Sparta, but to endure labor
Theopom. saying of Sparta. No sedition in Sparta.
to overcome our enemies, and to obey our kings, howsoever kings govern, the
commandment is given to subjects from God, to use their shield, and not the
sword. The law in Sparta was therefore, that the soldier that lost his shield
in the field among the enemies, should dye for it. The sword is put into the
hands of princes, to punish offenders, and to cut off disobedient and seditious
subjects. Chirurgians cut off rotten and putrified members, from the sound
members; which may be well likened to Gangraena, which must of necessity be cut
off, lest the whole body perish. God used to show such severity to those
factious Rebels the Jews, for their disobedience, that fire came from heaven
above and burned them, and the earth below swallovved them for their factious
disobedience, which of all other Nations were most factious to Moses in the
wilderness, to Joshua at Jericho, and from time to time, to the Judges in
Israel.

It was ever the wonted practice of policy among the seditious and factious
people, to taunt Magistrates, or to speak some whispering speech against a
prince, to feel and to hear, who will join with them to move sedition. These
be the Vipers that bite men privily: these be the domestical Serpents, the
secret brue-bates of (...).
Commonwealths, in who^ there is no faith found, nor oaths to be believed, as
Aristophanes says.

Augustus Caesar hearing that a slanderous fellow, one Elianus, spoke
vnreuerent words of the Emperor, the Magistrates willing to punish him;
Augustus commanded Suet. in Aug.
those that accused him, to go and tell Elianus, Sciat Elianus, Augustum
habere linguam, that Augustus had also a tongue, both to punish and to pardon.

Philip of Macedon, in like sort to his friends that persuaded him to banish
the like lewd fellows, for their speech, out of his court and country, said,
God Plut. in Apotheg.
forbid, lest they should speak of me more in another Country then in
Macedonia. But these were dilatory plees to look further unto the^, and to
find more fellows of the like practice.

The example of Raymerus is much more commended, which looked unto the
disposition of his Noble men, and saw them intractable, little waying the care
and love the king had unto them, contemning and despising both him and his
laws, giving ear to seditious men, until the king saw their practice, waxed
angry, perceiving that they esteemed him not as their king, caused 11. of
these, whom he saw most contentious, to Lips. lib. 3
be put to the sword in the City of Osca, giving them this taunt withal,
Nescit Vulpecula cum quo ludat. A caveat, not to pluck hairs from Lions, as
the proverb is, Lecnem vellicare. To serve a king, says Brasidas, consists
in three precepts: Velle, obedire, and vereri. Brasida^ precepts.


A certain king in Persia, used in like sort as Raimerus did in Spain, but of
meaner persons, which for some reproachful taunting words, that they spoke of
the king, he caused those scoffers nostrils, quite on both sides to be cut off,
saying, Ecce sigillum Regis in conuitiatores, Behold the kings seal against
scoffers. This severity is more commended in these princes, then the clemency
of Philip or of Augustus.

What became of the taunt which the Egyptia^s gave to Ochus K. of Persia,
naming the K. the Ass of Persia? King Ochus taunt to the Egyptians.
said Ochus, Faciam vt hic asinus vestru^ bouem depascat. I will make the Ass
of Persia eat your Ox of Egypt: for the Egyptians worshipped an Ox, which
they called Apis, as one of their chief gods, which within a while after,
Ochus, surnamed Artaxerxes, marched with a great Oros. li. 3. cap. 7.
army and subdued Egypt, and sacrificed their Ox and their god Apis, according
to his promise.

Cotis, a Thracian K. answered one, that said his severe government was rather
fury then clemency toward his Cotis.
subjects. Yea, said Cotis, hic furor meus sanos reddit subditos. Clemency must
be joined with severity. This my severity, said Cotis, shall make my subjects
both to love me and to fear me: Nimia clementia nocet.

Had Artabanus observed the rule of Raymerus, or the severity of Cotis, he
needed not to have fled secretly Artabanus.
from Parthia to king Izetes, beyond Armenia, a far meaner king then himself;
neither to fear the snares and trappes of his subjects, being so great a king,
called the king of kings; for so the kings of Parthia are called; but he was
restored to his kingdom, by this mean king Izetes.

A thousand mishaps may happen to princes, which subjects are free of. Examples
may be found of Iugurth king of Numidia, and of Persius, king of Persia, who
were taken Captives in their own kingdoms, and dyed prisoners in Rome.

Charles, surnamed sapiens, the French king, saw the king his father taken
captive in his own kingdom, and carried into England; and the whole kingdom
of France possessed of Englishmen.

The Roman Histories are full of these horrible examples, that by seditions
and factions, the whole Empire was welnigh destroyed, that I need not declare
of Tomoembeus, the great Sultan of Egypt and Affricke, king and Lord of so many
Nations, in his own kingdom Tomoembeus. Lip. lib. 2.
how cruelly and strangely he was both deprived of his kingdom and of his
life: And how the great king, de nouo orb, Mexicanus, after infinite good
Mexicanus
success of great fame and fortune, lost suddenly both fame and fortune.

I need not confirm these histories with authority, as of Achab, Zedechias,
and other, who felt the just Judgment of God; neither of Manasses and
Nabuchadnezar, one 2. Reg. 10
confessing the Lord to be God, being a king among beasts; the other a
captive and a prisoner out of his own kingdom, of whom the Greek Proverb is
verified, (...).
Misery, captivity and want, make kings to know themselves. It is a true
saying, Miseria bona matter prude^tiae.

Augustus Caesar would know of his friend Asinius Pollio, if he would come with
him to the battle of Actium, between Mar. Antonius and him. He answered the
Emperor, In civil war I will take no part, but Vell. 11.
I will rest and be a pray to the Conqueror. Tit. Atticus, though Pompey by a
Decree pronounced him a Rebel that would forsake his Senators, the Consuls and
the state of the Commonwealth in so troublesome a time, yet Atticus was of the
like opinion as Q. Hortensius Hortensius saying.
was, who often used to brag that he had never been in any civil wars. Cicero
wrote his Epistle to them being his dear friends, that scattered cattle will
come to their flock: how much more should such wise men be a comfort Cic. ad
At.
to their afflicted country and follow the best sort, seeing Cato himself,
Viua virtutis Imago, was a Captain in these wars.

Observe the nature of factions in the best men. Cicero and Cato went out of
Rome, as men determined and resolute to take part with the best men, and with
the state of the Empire to abide what so ever came of it.

Pomp. Atticus, and Q. Hortensius, men of no less judgment and credit in Rome
then they were, forsook to be factious or to take part with either Pompey or
Caesar: at that time spoke Cato to Pompey to strike the ground according to his
promise, yet Solon in Athens, decreed a law, that they which would be neuters
in civil wars, Gel. li. 11. cap. 12.
and separate themselves in their Countries calamities, they should be banished
igne and aqua.

The Prophet Elizeus spoke to Ioas king of Israel being in such distress as
Rome was, and bade Ioas smite the ground with his foot: and Ioas smote the
ground three times and ceased. Elizeus was angry and said, Thou should have
smitten five, six, or seven times, and so 4. Reg. 13.
many victories should thou have had over the Assyrians, as thou strookest
the ground.

So Pompey also said to Cato, If he should but strike the ground of Italy with
his foot, he should want no men Plut. in Pomp.
on his side to fight against Caesar: But Pompey could not keep promise with
Cato, as Elizeus did with Ioas. Many promise more then they can perform, and
do deceive themselves and others.

I could well compare these seditious people to Balaam, who being sent for by
king Balac, promising him great rewards to come and curse Israel: as Balaam
rode on his journey, an Angel with a drawn sword in his hand stood in his way,
which the Ass saw and started, but Balaam saw not the Angel, until his
Ass spoke to him, and asked Balaam why he struck him?

These Asses carry some false Balaam or other, not on their backs, but in their
bellyes, that had rather go with Balaam to Balak to curse Israel, and to
conspire against their own native country, and if they can not prevail Number.
22.
by cursing and banning, they will practice another way by policy and counsel,
as Balaam did to deceive Israel.

But these practisers do as Benhadad did, when he was overthrown in the
mountains, he said, that the The blasphemy of Benhadad. 3. Reg. 20.
Gods of the mountains were against him, and therefore Benhadad would have a
battle in the Valley with the Israelites: so these Balaams Asses ever have
done and will do, if they fail of their practice in the mountain, they will
practice in the valley: if they fail in the valley, they will practice their
policy in Kings Courts.

Rebels have their snares laid down, how treason may be wrought, and their
places appointed where their treason may be performed, and their time when to
execute their treason: So did Pausanias kill Philip of Pausanias. Chaerea.
Macedon at a Marriage: So did Chaerea kill Claudius the Emperor going to the
Theaters: So did the friar of France murder the King at his confession. What
dare not practisers of policy do, if they dare kill Emperors, Kings and
princes?

Claudius Nero sound no better way to fear Hannibal his great enemy, then to
throw Hasdrubals head into the Tent of his brother Hannibal, which so amazed
Hannibal and his army, that they made haste from Carthage to Italy.

That Hanibal had nothing to comfort him, but to nippe the Romans of so many
heads of Senators, of Consuls, of Praetors, and of Roman Magistrates at the
battle of Canna, of Trebeia, and of Thrasimena, that requited his brothers
head. But these nippes were between Hanibal and Scipio.

For it was Sillaes practice, to put Italy in fright, and to make Rome amazed
at his tyranny against his country, that Cato wondered much to see so many
heads of Magistrates and of Roman Citizens upon poles, hanged Plut. in Caton.
Oros. li. 5. cap. 21.
on every gate at Rome, about the Capitol, and in the market place, and that
no Roman for Romes sake, had killed Silla.

When Golias head was carried by David to Saul, the Philistines fled, and they
were followed unto Geth, and unto Acaron, and the slaughter was great of the
Philistians, and their terror was more to see their Captain Golias without a
head, and therefore was the Sword of Golias hanged in the Temple at Jerusalem
as a Trophey of victory, as the picture of the Sun 1. Reg. 17
was upon Ioshuas Tomb for his victory at Gibeon.

When Holophernes head was brought from the camp to Bethulia, by Iudyth, a
woman, the slaughter was great of the Assyrians, and much more were they
astonished Inaith 14
and ashamed, to find their General Holophernes without a head, and that by a
woman.

It was great policy in Alexander the great, to command all his soldiers to
shoot their pieces and their arrows together toward king Perus, in India,
perceiving Ore. lib. 3. cap. 19. Dioder. lib. 17.
that the soldiers would fly if the king were slain. And therefore diverse
great Captains did practice such policy afterward to their soldiers: as
Leuinus the Consul persuaded his soldiers, and showed them a naked bloody
sword in his hand, saying, that he had killed Pirrhus. The like policy
practiced Iugurth, saying to his Numidian soldiers, that he had slain Caius
Marius with his own hand.

It is the only mark, that every treacherous soldier in the field, and every
seditious subject in the country shoot at, I mean, the head: for if the head
be off, the body must needs fall. These be the very home-Vipers and secret
Serpents that devour their native soil.

These practicing Vipers are often troubled with the like monstrous Image which
Hanibal saw and was astonished in his dream, and asking what he was, the Image
Cic. de diuinat. 1.
said: Vastitas Italiae. These Vipers see nothing waking nor sleeping, but the
image of Hanibal, vastitatem patria, the spoil of their country.

Sectio. 8.
THeophrastus the Philosopher, and the successor of Aristotle his master, in
Athens, faith, that the playing upon a Harp, Lute, or any other instrument,
does heal the biting of some Vipers; Alex. lib. 2. cap. 17.
which Asclepiades the Phisician does confirm, that frantike people that are
not well settled in their wits, can by no means better recover their health,
quam symphonia and vocum consensu, then by the consent of harmony and the voice
of a man: for Ismenias the Theban healed many Boetians his country me^, that
were troubled with frenzy and madness, with symphony and harmony of music.

It is to be believed, that Ismenias with his Flute could ease the Boetians,
and Asclepiades with his phisike heal the frantike. Such practices were
necessary to be in many places, to prevent lunatike policies.

David with his Harp did often mitigate the fury of king Saul, and assuaged
oftentimes the phrenetical spirit 4. Reg. ca. 3.
of Saul. Again, Elizeus, when both Iehosaphat K. of Judah, and Ieboram king of
Israel, would know the event of the wars between them and Mesa, king of
Moab, Elizeus called for a Minstrel, and when the Minstrel played, the hand of
the Lord came upon Elizeus, and then he told the kings of the victory they
should have over Moab.

Harmony, says Cicero, does incitare languentes, et languefacere Cic. de leg.
2.
excitates, nothing quickneth man's mind more the such music: and I doubt, such
frantik men be likewise in many places abroad, ready like Saul with their
spears in their hands, that neither David with his Harp, nor Elizeus with his
Minstreles can heal these men of their frenzy.

These be the Vipers that sting their friends worse in England, then Hanibals
Vipers stinged the Romans their enemies in Italy.

These Vipers are so full of poyso^, that if they might kill with their sight,
like the Cockatrice: or if they might infect with their breath, as the Viper of
Affricke does; and as they say of some kind of wolves, which if they come
within their breath, they would kill some men both with sight and breath. And
therefore we have a Caveat to take heed of such infected wolves that have
dangerous and stinking breath, and be in sheep clothing, which live as
wolves, and dye as swine, they live in all commonwealths, and they dwell
together in cities, in towns, and in houses: we must be as subtle as Serpents
against Serpents.

Yet the Egiptians think themselves most happy and fortunate, and in great
favor with their gods, when The superstition of Egypt.
they are bitten with Serpents, Vipers and Crocadiles, because they worship
those kind of Serpents as their gods; and truly fit gods for such a
superstitious nation, for that they worshipped no other gods, but Serpents and
beasts: wherein they were reprehended of the superstitious Grecians: for you
shall not read, that Crocadiles, Cic. lib. 1. de Nature.
Cats, and Dogs, and for that Wolves are like Dogs, and such other like, were
slain or killed in Egypt; for they have such beasts in reverence, and worship
them as gods.

So superstitious were they in Egypt, that it was counted an abomination among
them to eat with the Hebrews: Can. 43.
for the nature of superstition is, to condemn all other men in respect of
themselves. So Joseph used the Hebrews his brethren by themselves.

So did the Samaritans hate the Jews, that they might not eat or converse
with the jews: for so did the woman of Samaria take up Christ at Jacobs Well,
Ioh. 4.
he being a Jew, to ask water at a Samaritans hand: but we have Jews, and
Samaritans, Hebrews, and Egyptians, so mingled, that we know not one another.

What will not blind superstition cause to do?

It made Nabuchadnezar and all Babel to say and confess: Great art thou God
Bell. Dar. 14.


It made the Ephesians say: Great art thou Diana among the Ephesians. Acts. 19.


It made Charles the se uenth, the French king, with the consent of all his
Counsel, to believe the superstitious speech of Ioanna Lotharinga, a woman,
that she was sent from God, to drive the Englishmen Joseph. lib. 18. cap. 4
out of France, in the great Wars between England and France. It is thus
historied, Arma gerebat, viris preibat: But she was taken by Englishmen, and
burned at Rhotomagium.

It made Pallina, the only fairest and chaste Gentlewoman of Rome, to refuse
two hundred thousand Drachmes of Decius Mundus, a young Roman knight, for one
nights lodging, and yet she came most joyfully with the consent of all her
friends and of her husband Saturninus, to lie with God Anubis in the Temple of
Isis, for nothing, by the means of Isis Priests.

But this practice being found out by Pallina, she co^playned to her husband
Saturninus, and her husband to the Emperor Tiberius, who first caused the
priests of Isis to be slain with the sword, the Idol of Isis to be drowned in
Tyber, the great God Anubis to be burned with fire, and Decius Mundus the young
knight for ever to be banished from Rome.

Nabuchadnezar destroyed the priests of Baal in Babylon, as Tiberius destroyed
the priests of Isis in Rome: And so God stirred up Iehu, to destroy the house
of Achab in Israel.

All dangerous and rebellious seditions grow of Idolatrous superstition:
therefore the Lord reprehended Ochosia, because he married the daughter of Achab.

So Iehosaphat was reprehended of the Prophet Elizeus, and in danger of his
life, for that he joined in friendship 4. Reg. 1.
with the same Idolatrous Achab.

Solomon, by growing in friendship with Pharaoes daughter, lost his kingdom:
and Sampson, by marying 3. Reg. 11
with Dalila a Philistine, lost his life.

Sara complained unto Abraham, that Ismael should not be in one house with
Isaac her son; which words though they were grievous unto Abraham, yet God
commanded him to do what Sara said; for in Isaac Genesis 21.
shall thy seed be blessed.

We must not only avoid evil men's company, but also depart from the place
where they be, and where they dwell. For God commanded Abraham to depart from
Vt, his own country, being an Idolatrous Genesis 12.
place. So God commanded Jacob to shun Mesopotamia Genesis 31.
and the company of his brother Esau, a wicked man.

Whilestany of the seditious house of Saul lived amongst the Jews, the plague
never ceased in Israel: but when at the request and petition of the Gibionites,
2. Sam. 21.
David hanged them up, the Plague ceased.

The like is historyed of Phinees, that, for killing of Numb. 25
Zymri and Cosbi for their whoredom in the camp, the Plague ceased.

Elizeus being asked of Hazael why he wept? I weep, said the Prophet, knowing
the evil thou shall do to the children of Israel, in burning their houses and
Cities, 4. Reg. 8.
slaying their young men with the sword, and in that thou shall dash out the
brains of their sucking children, and all to tear their women with child.

Such factious and seditious men, qui ex fraud, fallaciis et mendaciis, etc.
as says Cicero, have diverse times the like intent, as Hazael had to Israel. A
seditious person seeks mischief in his heart. Pro. 17.


There was a letter written unto Caesar, climing for the Empire of Rome, raging
in his fury against his country, willing him not to give too much care to such
as are greedy seditious men, and desirous of slaughters, and never satisfied
with blood, who cou^selled Caesar to that purpose, that the City of Rome being
taken, they might take rape and spoil, and use their lust for a Law.

Against these and such like, the Prophet Ezechiel does pronounce famyne,
plague, war and devouring beasts, Ezech. 7.
to try (if it be possible) whether ill and wicked people will mend and become
servants to God, and subjects to their King: for (says Solomon of such men) if
they had Pro. 1. (...).
called for knowledge, and sought for wisdom, as they sought after money; or
had they dug for celestial wisdom, as they did for earthly treasure: then
should they understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God:
but such seek spoils and prays, they only muse how they might come by
money, vita et sanguis eorum pecunia.

Yet Dionisins, after he had robbed the Temple of Proserpina among the
Locresians, and robbed Jupiter Olympius of his golden Garment in Peloponesus,
and robbed Aesculapius of his golden beard in Epidaurus, Cic. lib. 3. de Nature.
without any resisting of him, for that the people thought that he should be
punished as Xerxes was once in Greece, that either Proserpina would have
plucked out his eyes, or Jupiter would have killed him with thunderbolts, or
Esculapius would have tortured him with plagues and long sickness, supposing
Dionisius should not have so escaped free for his sacrilege, no more the^
Xerxes, who for burning their gods and their Temples in Greece, their gods have
so plagued him, that three hundred thousand Persians were slain in Greece, and
Cic. de leg. 3.
Xerxes himself murdered by his Nephew Artabanus, and therefore went they to
the Temple of Eumenides, which were Vltrices et vindices facinorum et scelerum,
to yield thanks to these Furyes for the revenging of the violating of their
Temples, their Altars and their gods.

Sectio 9.
THEAGINES leading an Army against the Magarians, his army would know of him
when he would put them to martch in order of battle. Theagines answered, at
Megara, and in the mean season, sent secretly certain Horsemen, like the enemies
to set upon them on the sudden and to assault the Athenians: which being done,
Theagines marked how every soldier was forward and took place to fight. I
promised you, said Theagines, this morning to put you in array at Megara; march
now forward, and be as ready for the enemy at al times as now, and seek not to
know the secret purpose of your Captain, but be ready at a beck: for as
Clearchus the Lacedemonian said: good Soldiers ought to be more careful of
their Captain then of their enemies. Now Theagines did this, to find out
false and seditious Soldiers from the true.

Licinius Crassus, being asked when he would remove his Tents, answered: Do
thou mean to sleep, that thou would know when they remove? Vereris ne tubam
Front. lib. 1. cap. 1.
exaudeas? So Metellus answered the like question, being asked what he thought
to do the next morning: I would burn my Coat, said Metellus, if I thought my
Coat could tell it.

How many think you are of Metellus mind, which would that none should know
their policy, neither the time of their practice? they will not only burn
their coats and their shyrts, but their skins and their flesh, and yet often
times their practices are descryed.

In Egypt, such seditious and treacherous men, for their secret practice, do
worship and also sacrifice unto the dumb Image of Harpocrates, that all secret
practices might be kept close.

In Rome they do sacrifice unto Angerona, whose finger is always on her mouth,
in token of silence.

In Persia, they offer also sacrifice unto that Image of silence, whose lip
is sealed up with a signet, with the which the Persia^s use at the choosing of
any of the kings Counsel, to lay the kings signet on their lips. But to whom
do they sacrifice their tongue? To the dumb Devil that stops their
tongues from praying unto So did Alex. to Ephestion.
God: and to the deaf Devil they sacrifice their ears, because they will not
hear the Word of God; for thereby should their policy and practice be known.

The Romans, to prevent these secret practisers, brought up Dogs, which are
quick of sent, in high Arneb. li. 6. aduers. gentes.
Towers, and fed Geese in the Capitol, which are quick of hearing, that by
the barking of the Dogs, warning might be given of the enemies coming, and
by the gaggling of the geese, men might be waked out of their sleep, as
Manlius was, to save both Rome and the Capitol from the Gauls. So did
Masinissa, king of Numidia, bind great dogs in his bedchamber, to watch
practisers.

But Christ gave us a better lesson, and a sounder watch, Vigilate and orate,
Watch and pray: the Devil is that Dog that comes in through the window.
Our Sentinel is our conscience, which should be a bridle to curb wicked men
from treachery, from sedition, and from conspiracy.

The seditious man, says Cicero, Panam semper ante eculos versari vidit.

Paulus Emilius commanded his soldiers to be unarmed in their watch, for that
they should not sleep, and be more careful of their watch. Xenoph, in Paed.


So Cyrus would not have his soldiers to be idle, lest they should become
quarrellous and seditious.

I may not omit a rare example, of Manlius the father, to correct his young
son Manlius, who fought a battle against the enemies with good success of
victory, yet against his fathers rule, and therefore was to be Front. li. 4 cap.
1.
punished with stripes, and by his father to be slain according to the
military discipline, until the soldiers took part with young Manlius against
the father. Sedition grew hereby in the eampe, that young Manlius, to avoid
this sedition, made means to the army that he might be punished, to satisfy
the law and his fathers commandment.

This was a rare example: but we speak of such as neither esteemed parents nor
Prince, neither King nor country: such a one was Judas Galilaeus, so
seditious, Judea plagued by sedition.
that he brought a multitude of the Jews, like himself, to follow him, and
promised them that the Romans should be by him fully vanquished. But Felix the
Roman President made ready certain Roman soldiers to overthrow them, and put
them all to the sword in the wilderness.

Straight after this overthrow, another seditious prophet came from Egypt to
Jerusalem, professing the name of a Prophet, promising the people, if they
would follow him to mount Oliuet, five furlongs from the City, they should see
the walls of Jerusalem, at his commandment to fall down, as the walls of
Jericho did at the blowing of Rams horns, by the Josh. 6.
commandment of Joshua, that thereby they might easily enter the City.

These were such private seditious men, as Atonges, a Shepherd, and after him
Barcosbe, who kept the people in hand, and made the Rabbis themselves to
believe, that by his policy and practice, they would make an end of the Roman
wars.

Thus from one seditious man to another, the multitude was led like a Flock of
sheep to the slaughter, that when Festus succeeded Felix, he found all Iudaea
full of such Robbers, Cooseners, Magicians, yea Coniurers and deceyuers of the
people, that Festus cut them off by degrees, as Felix did before Festus, who
met with Joseph. lib. 20. cap. 6.
this Egyptian and his fellows, and slew four hundred and took four hundred
alive, yet these being destroyed and cut off, like Hydraes head they still
multiplied: so seditious were the Jews.

In the time of Antiochus, many wicked men went out of Jerusalem, and moved
much people, saying:

Eamus et disponamus testamentum Gentibus: Let us go and make covenant with the
Heathen. This practice pleased the people well, so that at Jerusalem was an
open Schole of the Heathen, against whom Amos the Prophet cried, Vae qui
opulenti estis in Sion, et considitis in Amos. 6.
montibus Samariae: Woe be unto you which are rich in Sion, and trust to the
mountains of Samaria: woe be unto them that depart from Bethel to Bethauen,
from God to the Devil, from their friends to their foes.

Another Magician named Theudas, professed him self to be a Prophet, and for
proof thereof willed the Jews to follow him to Jordan, and they should see him
do as much with a word at Jordan, as either Elizeus did with Elias mantle, or
as Moses did with a white stick at the red Sea, that as the red sea divided
it self and gave place to Moses to pass through dry, so should Jordan do to
Theudas. But Festus the Roman President, having knowledge of Theudas practice,
armed certain Romans, slew the seditious, and brought Theudas head upon a long
pole from Jordan to Jerusalem.

Such seditious men and the like ever practiced policy, to move the people to
tumults and mutinyes, they are never quiet but when they practice such
policies, then they think they have Gyges ring in their hands, that no men see
them, and they suppose them selves as fortunate, if they effect their purpose,
as Polycrates did of his Ring that he threw into the sea and found it again:
yet Polycrates fortune was to hang afterward, as Judas and Theudas were slain.

There is another kind of politic practisers, even with kings in Court, called
Syrenes aulae, much made of and esteemed: but they also practice in a glass,
so fickle, that slattery endures no longer then the glass wherein it is
practiced; for when the glass of any wicked practice is broken, the practicer
is also betrayed.

But Cicero gave a caveat to the Senators, that they should be careful whom
to believe, Nihil subito credendo, sed semper omnia cauendo, and so writes to
his friend Atticus, Take heed whom you believe, Nisi vultu and front.

Another cries out aloud from Greece, that nothing is more profitable to many
men then diffidence, as says Euripides, Few can be excused, if accusation (...)
will serve: Auris non fides prabenda, said Maecenas to Augustus.

It is written of the Emperor Constantine, amongst Constant.
many virtues, he had this fault, that he permitted pickthanks always to
have access unto him. Of such men Nero was called Princeps delatorum, who
allowed the fourth part of the goods of the^ that were accused, to the
accusers, and therefore were these accusers called in scorn, Quadruplateres.

Tyberius the Emperor, when the Senators thought good to abrogate these great
rewards granted to accusers, Tiberius his saying.
said, Iurasubuerti, si custodes legum amouerentur.

So did Vitellius punish certain Mathematicians with death, by means of such
secret and dangerous accusers, without license to answer the accusers.

Domitianus gave attentive ear to such as would accuse secret faults of men,
being true or otherwise; insomuch as one accuser accused another, being so
many, that Rome was full of these pickthanks, while these (...). Arist poli. 5.
cap. 15.
Emperors reigned; no better then Dionisius the Tyrant, who appointed certain
men, whom he himself named Sagogidas, to inform him what every man spoke and
did.

Benhadad the king of Syria was much vexed in his mind, and suspected some of
his chief servants, and said unto them, Who betrayeth me to the king of
Israel? It was answered by one of his chamber, that king Benhadad could neither
speak nor do any thing in his 4. Reg. 6.
privy chamber, but Elizeus the man of God knew it at Dothan.

It is a true saying, that he that is God and Man, does he are our wicked
blasphemies, and sees our treacherous practices: which if he say, Quis decipiet
Achab vt cadat? there shall want no lying spirits to practice policy and to
deceive such. 3. Reg. 22


But again to pick-thanks. Vespasianus, and after him his son, Titus, so hated
such Promoters, that they caused these fellows to be scourged and whipped
round about the Theaters in the sight of the people. Antonius, surnamed Pius,
decreed that privy and secret accusers that could not prove evidently their
accusation to be true, should dye for it, and if their accusation were proved,
they had what the law permitted them, and so dismissed them cum ignominia.

The like is said of the Emperor Opilius Macrinus, that he could not abide to
hear the name of a Pick. Alex. lib. 4 cap. 22.
thank. Such busy secret accusers are like Crates the Theban, who was
surnamed, the Dore-opener, for that he would rush into every man's company to
hear what was said, and to see what was done: Many such are both in Courts and
Countries. Placida loquentes, praua struentes, such have overthrown many
kings and princes.

It had been better for Alexander to have Epicharmus sentence every where in
his mouth, Memento diffidere, then to have Darius signet upon his finger in
Babylon. And it had bin better for Caesar to have followed Ciceroes counsel
before he came to Pharsalia, then to wear Pompeyes Ring upon his finger in
Affricke. But such is the force of flattery in Courts and Countries, that the
flatterer carries the earth upon his back, as Atlas (as Poets faigne) carries
the heavens upon his shoulders.

The Persia^s and the Medes were such flatterers, and that not only to their
kings, whom they adore and worship as The flattery of the Persians.
gods, but in saluting one another, they would bend and bow them selves unto
the ground: Alexander the great was contented in Macedonia, to be the son of
his father king Philip, but in Persia they made him the son of Jupiter.

His father Philip in like sort was in Macedonia, but when he came and
conquered Greece, in any great asse^bly when they elected new Magistrates, they
prayed unto Jupiter, Apollo and Hercules, to give good success to these
Officers and Magistrates: the Argiues so flattered Philip, that they wrote his
name, and named him next after Hercules, to be the fourth in their petition and
supplication to their gods.

The people so flattered Herod a wicked king, after he had slain James, and
imprisoned Peter, that at his last Oration which he made to the Jews, the
people cried out: Vox dei, non hominis, but Herod presently fell down Acts 12.
dead and was eaten with worms.

So the false Prophets flattered the king of Israel Achab, that he should have
victory over the Syria^s: these flattering prophets so practiced with such
strange spirits, that Achab was slain by the Syrians, and was brought 3. Reg.
22
dead to be buried in Samatia.

The Athenia^s so flattered Demetrius, that his Image was carried and borne with
Jupiter, Minerua and Mars Demetrius much slattered in Athens.
in the Banner of Peplon, and Demetrius was the fourth, but he died in prison.

The Athenians lodged and entertained strangers to see, to hear, and to learn
some news; any lying flatterer might be welcome to Athens.

But others love not to be so flattered, as Octauius Augustus and Alexander
Seuerus, who so hated Flatterers, that they had spies abroad, to find them
out: and if Elattery hated of Augustus.
any seemed either with words or outward behavior to be like Flatterers, they
should be straight banished the Courts of these two Emperors.

Cassander, saluted of all men as a king, and so called, he loved not to be
flattered, nor to usurp the name of a king, and though he was written unto by
the name of a king, yet he refused to be so called. Neither would Porus.
Diodor. lib. 17.
Porus K. of India, after he was conquered by Alexander the great, suffer any
man to call him king. This seemed to be great modesty, to refuse the names of
kings being offered the^. Yet many Tyrants vsurp the names of kings, and many
make means to become kings, Emperors, and Princes, practicing many policyes
by treachery, by murder, by poisoning and killing: and many practice means to
become Officers and Magistrates, and yet would not be seen practisers therein.

Sectio 10.
IN Rome such polycies were practiced, such suits were made to become either
The election of Magistrates in Rome. (...) Thucid. lib. 3.
Consul, Praetor, Tribune, Censor or Aedile, that the 35. Tribes were so
flattered and followed in Martius field with money, with friends, and with all
means possible to become Magistrates and officers within the City of Rome, and
at that time the Art of Flattery was there to be taught and learned.

There, they that were to be elected, stood before the Senators and Consuls,
clothed all in white garments, without gowns, for that was a garment
suspicious, and not at any time to be suffered by the law, lest they might eary
some rewards to corrupt the people under them; and after they were thus chosen,
they were accompanied from Martius field, when they had flattered the Alex.
lib. 4. cap. 3.
people with thanks for their election: then they went unto the Capitol, and
from the Capitol they were brought unto their houses.

This kind of election continued but a short time, yet flattery endured
longer, and was practiced at any change of Magistrates or Officers, yet Lu.
Crassus could not be brought before Q. Scauola to give thanks unto the people,
lest he should seem to have the name of a flatterer.

Paulus Aemilius, when he was chosen Consul to go with an army into Persia,
and was for to come unto Paul. Aemilius saying.
the Capitol to thank the people, according to the Roman custom, he refused,
and said, If they could find a fitter man to go against king Perseus, he was
well contented to yield again his new Consulship unto the people, and to make
their election of another: he thought it not fit to flatter the people with
fair words.

Such was Phocion in Athens, he would make no means unto the people, neither
would Phocion be present at any time of election of new Officers or
Magistrates: he would neither send nor speak for any Office Phocion.
in Athens: the Athenians used so often to corrupt people for Offices and
Honors to become Magistrates, that Demosthenes cried out, that Populus et
pecunia were the Monsters of Athens, as Capitolium and Forum were in Rome.

Such was Aristides, a man most just and most quiet among the Athenians: but
these were rare men to be found. But Clisophus could halt in Macedonia with
king Philip, and said, he had also the Gowt as well as King Philip.

Cleo could better please Alexander with his flattery, the^ Calisthenes could
do with his philosophy. That Prince Cleo, a great flatterer.
ought not to be called a Prince, where truth dare not be spoken, and in whose
Court men are often consumed more by flatterers in the time of peace, then by
the enemies in the wars: so Q. Curtius says, Regum opes saepius assentatio,
quam hostis euertit.

There is a people in some part of Ethiopia, called Diodor. li. 4. cap. 1.
Cathaei, that if their king do halt or be lame in any part of his body, his
household servants must likewise halt and be lame in the selfsame place where
the King is lame.

Alcamenes was much praised in Athens, for that he made the halting Image of
Vulcan to stand upright in such garments that hid the deformity of his halting;
And yet for all the skill of Alcamenes, said Cicero, Claudum Cic. de diuinat. 2.
habebant deum, the Athenians had but a lame god. I fear, that many beside the
Athenians, with Vulcans garments, would feign hide their halting, and would
seem to go upright, though they halt with Vulcan for all Alcamenes skill.

Pilate had a better garment that hid his faults before Tib. Caesar; for, being
accused that he put an innocent man to death, which was Christ, he put on
Christ's unseamed coat before he came to Caesar: to who^ when Math. Westmin.
Pilate came, Caesar so embraced him, that men mused much thereat; but after
Pilate departed out of Caesar's sight, Caesar being as before incensed against
him, sent in haste for him again, and he having Christ's coat on, was in like
sort embraced and entertained of the Emperor as before: for he could find no
fault in Pilate while Christ's coat was on him: a far better garment then
Vulcans garment: yet more seek Vulcans Garment to hide their halting, then do
seek Christ's coat to learn to go upright: but these Practisers, if they may
not be helped with Vulcans garment, they will use Timantes policy.

At the sacrificing of Iphigenia, Timantes practiced his best skill to paint
the lamentation of Menelaus, the sadness of Ulysses, the sobbes and sighs of
Ajax, but such was the extreme passion and pensiveness of Agamemnon Plin. 35.
cap. 10.
for his daughter, that Timantes could not set it down in colors, but was
forced to throw a Veil over Agamemnons head, to excuse the defect of his skill
in so tragical a sight. Many do practice the like policy, Vel. lib. 8. cap. 11.
that if they can not effect their skill to their purpose, then they practice
how they may hide their defect, and cover it as Timantes did cover Agamemnons
head.

There be many sick of the sickness called Tarantula which if men would look
upon them, they seemed Alex. lib 2. cap. 17
as men half dead. No remedy was found for this Tara^tula in Apulia, but such
as was in Greece used against frenzy and lunacie, which was the playing of
Minstrels. Many are sick of this sickness Tarantula.

Sectio. 11.
SOLOMON, a man endued with singular wisdom, taught how me^ should be cured
that were possessed with Devils, and taught also how Devils might be driven
away, which the Jews for a long time used after Solomon: Devils adjured before
Vespasian. Joseph. li. 8 cap. 2.
This is that which Josephus saw being in place himself, one Eleazarus healing
diverse that were violently tormented and vexed with evil spirits in presence
of Vespasian the Emperor and his son Titus, Tribunes, and diverse Captains,
by laying unto the nostrilles of the man possessed a Ring, having in the signet
of the Ring a root which Solomon showed, that by the smell of that root, the
evil spirit should come out through the sick man's nose, whom the Jew
Eleazarus adjured never to return to that man again, making mention of
Salomons name unto the spirit.

And for that the Emperor Vespasian being then present with his soldiers,
might know that these men tormented in this sort were healed, Eleazarus set a
Basin full of water in their sight, and charged the evil spirit at his
departing out from the man, to show a certain sign in the water to the
beholders, that by the sight thereof, they might believe the Art of Eleazarus.

The like is written in Tobias, of the spirit Asmodeus, Tob. 8.
which was commanded to come out of Sara Raguels daughter, by the Liver of a
Fish.

So diverse are vexed with devils, that some carry douils in their pokes in
glasses, some in Images in their chambers, and some have them in their Temples
worshipped and adored, and use to ask counsel of them: for they are possessed
with devils, that ask counsel of devils.

To such went Achab, when he went for counsel to Baals Prophets, to know the
events of his wars between 3. Reg. 22
him and Mesa king of Moab.

To such went Saul, when he went to Phaetonissa the witch at Endor, to ask
counsel for the like purpose, as 1. Sam. 18
Ahab did, to know how he should speed against the Philistines.

And to such went Ahazia, when he went to Beelzebub the god of Accaron, to know
if he might recover 4. Reg. 1.
his health.

Many go to Beelzebub the god of Accaron, and to Baals, Prophets and the like,
to learn how they may practice policy, as Hazael did when he went to Elizeus,
pretending to know if king Benhadad his Master should recover his health: but
Hazael practiced such polycies, besides the strangling of the king his Master,
that it made Elizeus to weep, knowing the tyranny that Hazael would practice
against Israel.

Many such seditious persons practice the like mischief in their hearts, as
Hazael did, which if men might see into, as Elizeus did, or might open their
hearts and make an Anatomy of their bodies, as the Athenians did by
Aristhomenes the Messenian, which being taken captive by the Athenians, they
bowelled him, and found his heart full of hayres, Cer pilosum (as Pliny says)
no doubt, many would be found to have cordapilosa, as Aristhomenes Plin. 11.
cap. 37.
was among the Athenians.

Some Emperors of Rome had the Image of Fortune made of glass, and placed it
in their gallery, which The image of fortune made of glass.
stood always there from one Emperor to another, to signify the vncertaynety
of man's life, and to put them in remembrance how frail and fickle man's state
is.

And therefore one of the Emperors having a glass in his hand, after he
drank, threw the glass against the walls, and said, This resembles the
state of an Emperor in Rome. Such was the continuance of the Emperors of Rome,
that some were slain in the fields, some in the town, some in their chambers,
and some in their beds: Such was their practice to come to the Empire, and such
was the policy used in like manner, to destroy and to murder them in their
Empires.

Of these and such like men Diogenes the Cinick said, that they were thrice
most miserable men, to ask counsel (...).
of devils, and go to the glass of Iannes and Iambres the Sorcerers of Egypt.

Others there be, that practice their policy in the glass of usury, much
freque^ted amongst Citizens; for it is a maxim with them, Nihil turpe cum
lucro, any kind of gain is good with the usurer, they love it as they (...).
love themselves, Sanguis, vita and eorum anima pecunia, It is as dear unto
them as the blood of their bodies, or the life of their souls, whose heaven is
the world, like Ulysses, who preferred his country of Ithaca before eternity,
whose belly is their god with the Epicure, and whose hearts are so hardened,
that neither the late plague, nor the Pestilence, nor any punishment which God
does inflict upon them, can mollify their stony hearts.

Usurers were banished from Athens by the Law of Solon, and their Tables of
Usury burned in Athens, (...).
which was the purest fire that ever Agesilaus saw, as he him self said.

And in Sparta, by the Law of Licurgus, no Usurer might dwell within the
Confines of Lacedemonia. Such Usurers and Monopolies were also banished from
all Asia, by Lucullus: and for that the name of an Usurer should not be named
within Asia, he used the law of Amnestia by Thrasibulus made in Athens. (...).


So did Cate then Consul, clear all Sicilia from Usurers and Monopolies:
these be Sorices Reip. the Rats of a Common wealth: these be the Moths that
eat men's clothes on their backs: these be the Worms that breed in the
Bee-hiues, that devour all the honey.

There be others that be ambitious practisers, more dangerous, which hunt for
to become Magistrates and Officers: against these, the law of Ostracismos was
put (...)
in execution in Athens, and the law Petalismes in Syracusa, and every where
such were banished Igne and aqua; these be clymers and practisers how to be
mighty, and to be advanced unto greatness: these were of the monsters of
Athens, Noctua, populus, and Draco, of whom Demosthenes speaks.

In the time of Alexander the great, none would he suffer great besides
himself in all the earth. In the time of Antiochus, none great in all Asia but
he. And amongst the Romans, none but one Pompey the great. (...).
But in these days many practice their policy to become great, against the
rule of the Philosopher, who says, Neminem vnum magnum facere, etc.

The Lawyers also have their glass, where they may see Balaam ryding on his
Ass: Balac attended on The Images of ki^gs of Judges, and of Justice.
with Moabites and Madianites, with bribes and rewards in their hands to have
Balaams counsel, which might put them in remembrance of corrupt Judges, and
greedy Lawyers. In this glass, they shall see also Moloc with a reaching hand:
But there is a better sight in this Glass, the Images of Judges without hands:
the Images of Kings, without eyes: and Justice it self pictured without a
head, to signify, that Kings should be without affection, and Judges without
corruption: Ne gratia, (...)
precio, odio vel timore eludi possit Iustitia.

The use of Glasses were made to this purpose, to reform and to instruct men
of outward and inward faults.

Such a Glass had Plato, to reform Drunkards, and furious hasty men, that by
beholding of themselves Platoes glass.
in Platoes Glass, they might see how they were depryued of all their senses,
and left without any humane part that should be in reasonable men, and that by
looking in this Glass, they might reform themselves: Ad hoc vtile est nobis
Speculum: A Glass is necessary herein.

Such a Glass had Socrates to show his Scholars, that they which were most
beautiful and goodly, (...), etc. Plu, in Timokon.
wanting no comely form of body, might learn by Socrates Glass, not to
deface that Beauty, or deforme that body with any foul vice, or filthy fault
of the mind: And if they were lame, crooked, or any way deformed, in the same
Glass, Socrates taught them how to amend and to counteruaile the deformity of
the body, with wisdom, knowledge, and virtue of the mind: Ingenii cultu
morumque probitate pensarent.

This was the use of the Glass, said Seneca, to amend faults, and not to
learn faults; not to learn Idolatry, as Nestorius did, to make Mirrors of
men; or like Narcissus, to flatter our selves. Narcissus glass.


Archimedes Glass was much more commended in Syracusa to deceive the Romans
his enemies by his Glass, then we by our own Glasses to deceive Archimedes
glass.
our selves.

It was lawful for Archimedes to practice policy, to burn Towns, Cities and
Ships by his Glass, to destroy the enemies of Syracusa.

Next this Glass of flattery, comes in the practicing Glass of Idolatry.

If Nestorius and Narcissus deceived themselves and others, what wonder is it
that Zeuxes painted a Bitch on a Table so lively, that Dogs at the sight
thereof barked? Or that Parrhasius painted a Mare in such sort, that Horses
neighed at the lookng on it?

Neither of that picture which Praxiteles made, which was the Image of a
beautiful comely woman of Marble, to stand in a Temple at Gnydos, that some
youth Aelian. 2. de var. hist Plin. li. 36 cap. 5.
of that city supposed the Image to be no less a woman, then the Dogs that
barked at Xeuxes Bitch, or the Horses that neighed at Parrhasius Mare, or the
Bull that lowed at the brazen cow in Syracusa: but I think not so of the
wooden Cow of Creet, the mother of Monsters.

But these are things natural and easy to be believed in Beasts, because they
are beasts: but for people of reason and understanding, to love Images and
pictures, and to honor and worship them, is more beastly then beasts them
selves, because they should not be beasts.

Rome, of all kingdoms and countries, was beholden to Images: for when Camillus
had overcome the Veients, Plut. in Camil.
one of Camillus Soldiers asked Iunoes image, Vis migrare Romam? Who answered,
Libenter velo.

So the Image of Fortune in Coriolianus time, at the dedication of her Temple,
gave great thanks unto Plut. in Camil.
the Matrones of Rome, and said, Recte me dedicastis Matronae.

The city of Rome being vexed with a long plague, was admonished by Sybillaes
books, to send to Epidaurus for Aesculapius image, who followed the
Ambassadors Oro. lib. 3. cap. 22.
in forma Serpentis, from Epidaurus to Rome, and healed the Roman plague, so
that Rome was so full of Images, that Cicero said, Quot linguae hominum Romae,
tot nomina Deorum.

In Athens were but few less in number then in Rome, they had as many Images
in Athens, as they had Poets to feign the^, or Painters to paint them, they had
so many Images, that they had an Altar ignoto deo, that some Philosophers
thought good to banish all Poets and Painters out of Athens.

In Egypt, the mother of Idolatry, were the Images of all kind of Beasts, of
Serpents, of Fowls and of fishes worshipped as gods, O seculum Daemoniorum,
non Deorum!

And therefore Iehu using this stratagem to destroy these Idols, feigned a day
of great solemnity and sacrifice The stratagem of Iehu. 4. Reg. 10
to Baal, and called all the prophets, priests and friends of king Achab to this
solemnity, saying, that he would, as Achab had done before, sacrifice to Baal:
and having them all within the Temple, commanded certain soldiers to invade
and kill them.

So God taught Moses such stratagems in Egypt against Pharao, and to Joshua at
Jericho, and at Ai, to destroy the enemies of God.

Ergamenes, king of Ethiope, using the like policy as Iehu did, to make an end
of all the priests of Ethiope, who by their Law had authority to elect a King,
so Dioder. (...) 4. cap. 1.
long to reign as pleased those priests to suffer him, dissembled the like
policy as Iehu did, to solemnize a sacrifice to their gods, where he slew them
every one.

So is dissimulation lawful in such and like actions. So Chusa dissembled with
Absalom, and said, God save 2. Sam. 17
King Absalom, as though he had refused and forsaken king David, and was become
an obedient servant to Absalom. By this means he overthrew Achitophel and his
counsel, and afterward Absalom.

Samuel dissembled his coming to Bethlehem to anoint David king over Israel,
pretending that he came 1. Sam. 16
to do sacrifice, as the Lord commanded.

So David feigned himself mad, lest he should go 1. Sam. 21
with king Achish to fight against Israel.

Dissimulation therefore may be used, yea even in (...). Plat. de Rep. 5.
Courts, as Plato said, that Princes may dissemble, to prevent greater harms
to their subjects, and may use such policies as the Phisician does to his
patients, to put poison in his drugges, to heal his patients.

Yet I remember Augustines saying of dissimulation, that there be many kinds of
dissimulatio^, and in some of these says Augustine, Non magna culpa, non tamen
sine culpa. Aug. in 5. Psalm.


Likewise Licurgus held it necessary, that both dissimulation and ambition
should be sometimes used to offend in the least Justice, to perform a greater
Justice, (...). etc. Plu. in Pol.
and yet not allowing that, but palliata Iustitia, and that for necessities
sake.

So Cato dissembled and suffered sedition in his house among his servants.

Where the Lions skin, says Lysander, reaches not, (...). Plu. in Cat.
it must be sowed to the Fox skyn: So that Princes must be of the nature of the
Lion, and yet be as wise and as wary as the Fox.

So Hanibal, by a flattering stratagem said, that those that would go to the
enemies to learn and to know Front. lib. 3. cap. 3.
the counsel and service of the enemies, were not to be called Traitors, but
the only expert Soldiers, and most worthy to be esteemed. Then were they more
bold, and went the next night as they had appointed. The Romans having often
times understanding of the subtilty of Hanibal, took them and cut off their
hands, and sent them to Hannibal without hands.

Diodorus having a garryson in Amphipolis, suspecting Diodorus garrison at
Amphip.
two thousand Thracians which were seditious in the town, fearing some
conspiracy against Amphypolis, feigned that certain ships of the enemy sailed
at the next shore, which should be a great spoil to the Thracians, and most
easy to obtain. The Thracians being greedy and seditious Soldiers, gathered
their company together, and set out of Amphipolis with great hope of a good
pray, who as soon as they were out of the City, the Captain commanded the
Gates to be shut and kept them out, and so they cleared Amphypolis: Such
policyes must be used against false seditious people, to find them out, to ryd
and clear them from honest people.

By such dissimulation through sedition, Hanibal got Tarentum. So Marcellus, by
corrupting of Sosistratus, wanne Syracusa. So Philip of Macedon, by the Cic. do
diuinat. 2
like, got Samos of Apollonius. He could so Philippizin with Pythia, as
Demostenes says, that none might have access to Apollo, but Philip of Macedon.

But Philip being admonished by the self same Pythia, to take heed and to
look to Quadriga, though he Cic. de Fate.
caused straight all the Coaches, wagons, and Chariottes within Macedonia, to
be taken asunder, and with all care shunned and avoided the place in Booetia,
called Quadriga, yet Philip could not avoid that Quadriga, which was written
upon the hylt of Pausanias sword, with the which Philip was slain.

Julius Caesar practiced no such policy, for he quieted a Legion of seditious
Soldiers with one word, Number vos pudeat, Quirites? Are ye not ashamed, you
Romans, of your seditious practice? They suspecting that Caesar had
intelligence of their practice, they were presently reconciled and pacified
with that word, and with the sight of Caesar.

With the like word, Demades an Orator of Athens, being taken captive by Philip
of Macedon, with many more poor captive Greeks, over which Philip so
tryumphed, dau^cing and feasting with Garlands and Crowns and taunting them
with spiteful words, Demades spoke boldly unto him: Nonne te pudeat Philippe,
cum fortuna tuate Agamemnonem fecit, tein tuis opprobriis esse Tharsitem? The
saying of Demaedes.
Art not thou ashamed, king Philip, whom Fortune made equal with Agamemnon,
thou to make thy self in scoffing equal to Tharsites? Upon which words,
Philip dismissed the poor Captives, and entered in league with the Athenians.

But Alex, Seuerus clean contrary to Caesar, perceiving as Caesar did, many
seditious soldiers conspyring together, dismissed them out of the Army,
cleared his Camp, and said, Discedite Quirites, deponite arma: for he was as
glad to be ryd of such Soldiers, as they were glad to be ryd of so severe a
Captain.

Cornelius Gracchus, a very eloquent Roman, but always so factious and so
seditious, that he was ever wont to have secretly behind him, one of his
servants, a Musician with an Iuory Flute, to move, to stir, and to Cic. de
Orat. (...). etc. Plat. de leg.
give life to his Masters speech to move sedition. This Gracchus little
esteemed Platoes laws, who judged every way a seditious man worthy of death,
as the law was: Si quis priuatim pacem bellumue fecerit, capitale esto: yet had
Gracchus rather be slain among seditious men, him self being chief seditious,
then to live in peace, and to mayntaine peace in his country at Rome.

How much better was Egesias a Philosopher in Cyraena, who not only persuaded
against factious and seditious men, but also inueyed againstal wickedness of
life, exhorting to abhor vice and to love virtue.

Such counsel gave Egesias to the Cyraenians, as Solon gave to the Athenians,
whose precept was always (...) Laere. (...) Sole.
Consule quae optima, non quae suauissima.

By which persuasion, he so mortified the Cyraenians that they thought it
better to dye, then to live. But that good practice of this Philosopher, was by
Ptholomei king of Egypt put to silence, lest too many became honest and
virtuous.

Such a Philosopher to persuade, and such a Preacher to teach mortification,
were well worthy of a golden Laert. in Aristip.
Image, were it not that some kind of people would esteem more of the Image
then of the man, as Dionisius made more of Jupiters golden Garment, then of
(...).
Jupiter, more of Aesculepius golden beard, then of Aesculapius: It was ever
his speech for money.

Seditious men ever esteemed the gold of the Temple, more then the Temple; the
gold of the Altar, more then the Altar: they be like the Moabites, always 4.
Reg. 3.
ready for the spoil.

These be they which John Baptist calls Prognies Math. 3
Viperarum.

It may be said of these wicked Practisers, that they know not of what spirit
they are, as Christ said to James and John, when they would have fire from
heaven to burn Samaria. Nescitis cuius Spiritus estis. Luc. 9.


Many practice such policyes with such furyes as the Syrians that went from
Damasco with two eyes to kill Elizeus at Dothan, but they were brought blind
4. Reg. 6.
from Dothan to Samaria among their enemies.

Others practice the like policy with Gehezi, and run after Naaman the Syrian
for gifts and rewards, until the 4. Reg. 5.
leprosy of Naaman come upon them and their houses for ever.

Some trusting to their strength, put their hands to many dangers, like Milo
Cretoniates, who drew a great iron wedge out of a strong cloue^ oak with one
hand, Gel. li. 15. cap. 16.
and thrust the other hand into the cleft where the wedge was, but the oak
fastened upon his hand, and held him until wild beasts came to devour him.

Hermes the Egyptian said, that ungodliness is a very (...)* Hermes. cap. 12.
heavy sickness to the soul of man, who is never quiet, nor rests, but in
actions of ungodliness.

Antiochus was so ungodly a king, that he was wont to say, that he would make
Jerusalem a grave to bury the Jews. 2. Mac. 9.


Benhadad would brag, that the dust of Samaria would not suffice, that every
one of his soldiers should 3. Reg. 20
have a handful.

Sennacherib was wont to brag of king Ezechias, that neither God nor man
might deliver him out of 4. Reg. 19
his hands.

Dripetine, Mithidrates daughter, Queen of Laodicea, had double teeth set in a
row, one row beside another, in such deformed sort, that it loathed any man to
look upon her: and yet not so loathsome to behold, as to hear the brags and
blasphemies of these blasphemers.

The Greeks yielded divine honors to them that would kill a Tyrant, neither
can it be a greater sacrifice Alawe against Tyrants in Greece.
to the gods, says Seneca, then the death of a Tyrant, Spolia opima Ioui, A
rich spoil unto Jupiter. Wherefore Hermodius and Aristogiton, two Citizens of
Athens, for killing of Pisistratus the Tyrant, had granted them for honor,
that no man should ever be called after their names in Athens, for that they
were much plagued by Tyrants.

In Greece, a Law was made, that Tyrannorum filii conscii parentum sceleris,
haud secus morte et exilio mulctentur: that Tyrants Children should be banyshed
or dye with their parents.

Sectio. 12.
DARIUS Signet upon Alexanders hand moved much the Macedonians to doubt Darius
Signet.
of their kings favor.

Pompeyes Signet upon Caesar's finger, much spited the Romans that were
Pompeyes friends.

The Signet of Marcellus the Consul upon Hanibals finger, being slain in an
ambush, so astonished the Army, Marcellus Signet.
that Crispinus in great haste sent Letters to Salapia and to other ports and
towns about Apulia, that they should not give credit unto Hanibals Letters,
though they were sealed with Marcellus Signet.

It was the manner of Alexander, after he had conquered Darius, when he wrote
his Leters to Persia, to seal them with the Signet of Darius, and when he
wrote to Macedonia, he used his own Signet.

So Julius Caesar (after king Mithridates was subdued by Pompey,) soon
vanquished king Pharnaces, Mithridates son, without any great wars, but by
yielding of his Crown and his Signet unto Caesar: so he wrote to his friend
Anitus to Rome, but these three words, Veni, vidi, vici: No Nation resisted
Caesar after he had conquered the Gauls, but his own nation the Romans.

Divisions overthrew kingdoms and Empyres, so was Greece by Graecians, and not
by Philip of Macedon: so were the Israelites after their division into two
kingdoms, overthrown within them selves by their own nation the Israelites.

The Romans, though not equal in number to the Spaniards, nor in strength to
the French men, nor in subtilty to the Affricans, nor in knowledge to the
Grecians, yet in time the Romans mastered all these, and many more nations,
Armis et viribus, says Vigetius, Pietate et religione, says Cicero: but most
writers affirm, Viget. lib. 1. cap. 28
that the Romans became Conquerours Humanitate et vnitate: which is the only
cause of all Conquests.

Cotys of Thracia seemed herein to imitate the Romans, who was certified that
the Athenians had granted him to be free Denizin of Athens: and I will (said
Cotys) make all the Athenians free in Thracia, Val. Max. li. 3. cap. 7
and will make Athens and Thracia all one, Sic Thraciam Athenis aequauit Cotys.

The sower of all discord is Satan the Serpent, that sows Tares amongst good
Wheat, while we sleep, Math. 13.
We have no help against this Serpent, but watching and praying.

The Hebrews that were bitten by Serpents in the wilderness, were healed by
looking upon the brazen Numb. 21
Serpent in that wilderness.

The Egyptians could save themselves from Serpents of Ethiopia, by their Birds
Ibides.

The Arabians had remedies against their venomous red Serpents, by eating of an
Arabia^ fruit, where those Diodor.
Serpents bred.

The Graecians by the counsel of Theophrastus, and practice of Ismenias, had
their remedies against the stinging of Vipers.

The Apulians had their salve to save them from the Alex. li. 2. cap. 17
biting of Tarantula, by music.

The Romans found means to mitigate the plague in Rome, as you have heard
clauo fixo.

But a greater plague ceased in Israel by Iaels knocking Iud. 4.
a great nail into Siseraes temples.

Yet against the Serpents teeth which Medea sowed, whence sprang armed men out
of the earth, who devoured one another, no help, no remedy, was found against
these Serpents.

The viperous biting of seditious treacherous men that bite a great way off,
that no man shall see them, nor know them before they have bitten, Non prius
intelligas proditorem, quam proditus sis, says Seneca. How then shall we
prevent such with all the wisdom we have, or punish (...).
such with all the Laws we have? For says Cicero, Crimen conceptum aut
cogitatum, paenam non meretur. Faults conceived and thought on, which no man
knows but God himself, ought not to be punished: for (says Cato) Voluntates
non sunt legibus obnoxiae: A man's thought is under no law, but under Gods law.

But yet in another place Cicero urged before the Senators, that Clodius
servant, for that he thought to kill Pompey the great, being then a sole
Consul of Rome, which was the father of the country, and as a king of the
Romans, thought no less in his heart, then Caligula did, that wished Rome to
have but one neck, because he might cut it off with one stroke: but that stroke
fell upon Caligulas neck: so such cruel Tigers are often Curt. lib. 7
made food to feed fowls. Nothing is so strong (says Curtius) but sometime
the weakest may overthrow it. We see the long and great trees, that long were
in growing, in one hour to be cut down.

All Countries ought to be purged and purifyed of these factious and
seditious men, not as Naaman the Syrian was purifyed by washing in I ordan:
neither as Ezechias purifyed the Temple of Jerusalem, but by a Militaty
purification, and to sacrifice such fellows by decimation, as Tamberlaine and
Xerxes did.

It is in Homer written of three kinds of purification: the one by fire, the
other by water, the third by air: where mention is made of Ulysses, how he
commanded Odess. 21.
that offenses and great faults should be purified with Brimstone and fire,
and with the slaughter of hogs, for a sacrifice to the Gods.

The like is of Orestes, who, after he slew his mother Clitemnestra, was so
vexed with furies, that he wandered like a mad man, until he was purified
with water sent for from the Tracenians, and had from seven several rivers,
and being put all together into a vessel and washed over his body with that
water, to purify and cleanse him, ex materna caede, of his mothers murdering.
It should seem that Homer was acquainted with the cleansing of Naaman the
Syrian, in the flood Jordan, of his leprosy; for they lived almost in one age.

In purification and purging of false, deceitful, and seditious Soldiers, the
General, the Coronelles, the Captains, and all the soldiers, all crowned
with Laurel, The purging of Camps.
should in Martius field make such supplications and sacrifices, as Ser.
Tullius the third King of Rome had then constituted, which was a sheep, a
Goat, a Sow, and a Bull, at which time the Army should have a certain
portion of corn, pro cuiusque contubernio, for every ten Soldiers being of
one company, and every one should have a piece of money, called Dram, with
other such military rewards, as were fit for every company to offer jointly
their oblation and sacrifice for the purifying of their Army.

In like sort, if any great earthquake, lightning or thu^dring were, for the
purifying and purging of their Countries from seditious and mutinous people,
either in the field amongst Soldiers, or in their Cities amongst Citizens, or
in their Nauies upon the Sea, they used many ceremonies.

The banishing and purging of such treacherous and seditious people, in Nauies
on Seas, differed nothing, The purifying of Sea-Souldiers.
but in some ceremonies, which was, that many altars should be made upon the
shore, and that altar which the water of the Sea had sprinkled, the Priests
upon that altar should sacrifice the offenders: then part of the sacrifice
should be thrown into the Sea, the other burned upon the shore: this was the
old manner of the Romans in purifying and purging of wicked false men, from
good men.

They were so careful, or rather superstitious, that if either an Owl, or a
Wolf had bin within the Temple of Jupiter in the Capitol, sacrificium
peculare should be used. Many such night-Owles, and many day-walking Wolves,
come not only into our Temples, but into our houses.

Scipio Emilianus, at what time he was Censor, made Scipio Emilianus.
no other supplication to the gods, but only for the prosperity of the city of
Rome, and for purging of seditious men out of the city of Rome.

But Nero in his sactifice and supplication to the gods, made only mention of
himself and of the people, but not of the Senators and Magistrates. Too many
are Nero.
of Neroes nature, which would feign feed the peoples humors, to move sedition
and mutinies, but generally they have the like end as Nero had.

Supplications and prayers were made amongst the Pagans, for any victories or
good success to any kingdom Alex. lib. 5. cap. 27
or country. A decree was made in Rome, that the Citizens for fifteen days
should offer sacrifice and supplications to the gods for the good success,
that Julius Caesar had in his wars against the Gauls.

So did Cicero being then Consul, cause all the Senators, Patricians, Tribes,
with all the Citizens of Rome, Matrons, wives, young and old, by themselves
crowned, to offer supplications and sactifices in their The purification of
good success and victories.
Temples, celebrating solemn feasts, in token of great joy and triumph, that
the conspiracy of Cateline was found out by Cicero, and his confederats
vanquished by Luc. Antonius, then Consul with Cicero.

The like did Cicero for the victories and happy success of Oct. Caesar. So
did Dec. Brutus for the joy and gladness of the overthrow of Marc. Antonius at
the battle at Mutina.

The Grecians commonly never used supplication for any happiness or fortunate
success, but plays and feasts, but if it were some great victory over the
enemy, or saving of their city from the enemy, the^ they would with great pomp
and solemnity in their Temples offer sacrifice and oblations, sing Hymns and
Meeters, in yielding thanks to their gods.

The Athenians had also, says Theopompus, every fifth year, as the Romans had
their L(...), so had they their The ^^ro^ of (...)i (...) in Athens.
Panegyrys, their meeting in a Session to give thanks to their gods, with one
consent, for the defending of Athe^s against the enemy: at which time, they
made supplication for the people of Platea, their next neighbors, and of Chios,
to the gods, to maintain the prosperous estate of their country, with banning
and cursing of Philip and all his country Macedonia, with supplications to
destroy his Nauies on the sea, his Army upon the land, Alex (...). 5. cap. 77
his children and his family, as most detestable enemies unto Greece: See the
cate and love the Heathens had of their country.

The Greeks had also instructions of Epimenides, to purify their Cities in
this sort; to let two sheep, the one black, the other white, out of the
towns end, and some man appointed to follow them, and where they would stay or
lie, there would the Greeks offer oblations and sacrifice to their gods: this
was their care for their country, and such should be the care of all good men
toward their Country, to purge, to purify, and to weed all treacherous and
seditious men as are never well, but either inuenting or doing some evil to
their Country; not much unlike to the purification of Moses, which you shall
read hereafter.

When the old Gauls purified or cleansed their Cities or Towns, their custom
was to feed one man Of purification among the Gauls.
most daintily for one whole year, and being full sed and fat, they led him
round about the City or Town upon a solemn feast day, and after brought him
without the City, and stoned him with stones to death, as a sacrifice to purify
their people.

Such a custom, as it seems, had the Jews, when Pilate would have had
Christ delivered, and let Barrabas the murderer dye according to their Laws,
the Jews cried, Crucify Christ: they had rather have Barrabas a murderer,
then Christ a Savior.

It seemed by Xerxes, which by lot of Decimation slew that Soldier, and
divided his body unto two parts, to purify the army, that the Persians used
that kind of purging and cleansing of their people which the Gauls did, and
the Macedonians. The like law observed the Jews, that one yearly should dye,
to purify the people, as it seemed by Pilates speech, when Barrabas was set
free, and Christ died.

So Elizeus the Prophet willed Naaman the Assyrian to go and wash himself
seven times in the river Jordan, Elizeus.
and so he should be cleansed of his Leprosy: but some practice with Gehezi, to
deceive their masters. What shall be their reward? The reward of Gehezi, the
leprosy of Naaman for ever.

Moses was commanded from God, to put his own sister Miriam out of the host
for seven days, vnul she Moses.
was purifyed by the Law, before she should be received again into the army.

In another place Moses was commanded, that the Israelites should abstain
from their wines, their clothes washed, before they should approach near the
hill. So Christ in the new Testament willed the ten Lepers to go and show
themselves unto the Priest, according to the law of Moses: but as they went,
they were healed, and one came only to give thanks unto Christ.

I doubt much, that neither Elizeus, Moses, nor Christ himself can heal a
number of their leprosy, where men are so false, that they can neither be true
to their Prince, nor to their Country. Where shall men find faith? What fire,
what water can do good, when the fire of heaven can not purify, and the water
of life can not wash them?

The manner of purification by Moses, was to kill a live Moses purification.
Sparrow over a fountain of water, and the Priest should take Caedar wood, a
Scarlet lace and Hyssop, and should dip them with the living Sparrow in the
blood of the slain Sparrow, and sprinkle upon him that was unclean, and so to
be purified. He that was cleansed and purified by Moses Law, should wash his
clothes, and shave off al his hair of his head, of his beard, and of his
brows, and wash himself in water, and wash his clothes, and be kept seven
days from the Camp. But concerning purification by the Law of Moses, of black
spots, scabbes, and unclean issues, you may read the Leuiticall Laws, how
God would have his people clean, pure and sound, both outward and inward.
Leuit. 14.


The Heathen were so superstitious in their ceremonies of purifycation and
purging, that if any great earthquake, thunder, lightnings, or any monstrous
kind of births of men or of beasts were in Rome, they should be thrown into
Tyber, or should be slain to be sacrificed, to appease their country gods.

There are many monstrous births in diverse places and countries, that might be
as well thrown into their own country Rivers, as the Romans did into Tiber,
and ought far better to be drowned in their own countries, then the
children of the Hebrews out of their country, by the Egyptians in Nylus.

Where I leave, until I have further time to write.
FINIS.

