A notable Sermon of ye reverend father Master Hughe Latemer, which he
preached in ye Shrouds at paul's church in London, on the.xviii. day of
January. 1548.





The. iiii. Sermon
QUecu^que scripta sunt ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt.

All things which are written ar written for our eruottion and knowledge. All
things that are written in Gods book, in the Bible book, in the book of the
holy scripture, are written to be our doctrine.

I told you in my first sermon, honorable audience^, that I purposed to declare
unto you. ii. things. The one what sede should be sown in Gods field, in
Gods plough land. And the other who should be the sowers. That is to say,
what doctrine is to be taught in Christ's church and congregation, and what men
should be the teachers and preachers of it. The first part I have told you in
the three sermons past, in which I have assaied to set forth my plough, to
prove what I could do. And now I shall tell you, who be the plowers, for Gods
word is a seed to be sown in Gods field, that is the faithful
congregation, and the preacher is the sower. And it is in the gospel. Exiuit
qui seminat seminare semen suum. He that sows, the husbanman, the plowghman
went forth to sow his seed, so that a preacher is resebled to a ploughma^,
as it is in a another place. Nemo admota aratro manu, et a tergo respiciens
aptus est regno. Dei. No man that puts his hand to the plough and looks
back, is apt for the kingdom of god? That is to say, let no preacher be
negligente in doing his office. Al be it this is A place of scripture racked
or misunderstand.
one of the places yt has been racked, as I toulde you of rackyng scriptures.
And I have been one of the^ my self yt has racked it, I cry God mercy for
it, and have been one of them that have believed and have expounded it, against
relygious persons that would forsake their order which they had professed, and
would go out of their cloister, whereas in deed it touches not monkerye, nor
makes any thing at all for any such matter. But it is directlye The right
understanding of this place.
spoken of diligente preaching of the word of God. For preaching of the Gospel
is one of Gods plough works, and the preacher is one of Gods plough men.
Ye may not be offended with my similitude: in that I compare preaching to the
labor and work of ploughinge, and the preacher to a ploughman. Ye may not
be offended with this my similitude, for I have been selaundred of some
persons for such things. It has been said of me. Oh Latimer, nay, as for
him I will never believe him while I live, nor never trust him, for he lykened
our blessed Lady to a saffrone bag, where in deed I never used that
similitude, But it was as I have said unto you before now, according to that
which Peter saw before in the spirit of prophesy and said that there
should come afterward men: Per quos via veritatis maledictis afficeretur,
there should come fellows by who^ the way of truth should be ill spoken of
and sclandred. But i case I had used this similitude, it had not been to be
reproved, but might have been without reproach. For I might How our Lady might
be compared to a saffron bag
have said thus, as the saffrone bag that has been full of saffron, or has
had saffron in it, does ever after sauoure and smell of the sweet saffron that
it contained: so our blessed Lady which conceived and bare Christ in her
womb, did ever after resemble the manners and virtues of that precious babe
which she bare. And what had our blessed Lady been the worse for this? or
what dishonor was this to our blessed Lady. But as preachers must be ware and
circumspect yt there give not any just occasion to be sclaundered and ill spoken
of by the hearers, so must not the auditors be offended without cause. For
heaven is in Similitudes used in the Gospel.
the gospel likened to a musterde seed. It is compared also to a piece of
leaven, as Christ says, that at the last day, he will come like a thief, and
what dishonor is this to God? or what derogation is this to heaven? Ye may
not then, I say, be offended with my similitude, for because I lyken preaching
to a ploughmans labor and a prelate to a ploughman. But now you will ask me
whom I call a prelate. A prelate The descripcion of a prelate.
is that man, what soever he be, yt has a flock to be taught of him, who
soever has any spirytuall charge in the fayethfull congregation, and who so
ever he be that has cure of soul.

And well may the preacher and How the preacher is likned to ye plowma^.
the ploughman be lykened together. First for their labor of all ceasons of
the year. For there is no time of the year, in which the ploughman has not
some special work to do, as in my country in Lecester Shire, the ploughe man
has a time to set forth and to assaye his plough, and other times for other
necessary works to be done. And the^ they also may be likened to gether for
the diversity of works and variety of offices yt they have to do. For as the
ploughma^ first sets futth his plough, and the^ tilleth his land, and
breaks it in furroughes, and sometime ridgeth it up again. And at an other
time harroweth it, and clotteth it, and sometime doungeth it, and hedgeth it,
diggeth it, and weedeth it, pourgeth and makes it clean: So the prelate, the
preacher has many diverse offices to The Prelate has manpoffices.
do. He has first a busy work, to bring his parishioners to a tyght faith,
as Paul calls it. And not to a swaruinge faith, but to a fayeth that
enbraceth Christ, and trusts to his merytes, Note the properties of a right
faith.
a lively faith, a iustifiyng faith, a faith that makes a man righteous
without respect of works. As ye have it, werie well declared and set forth in
the Homily. The first.
He has the^ a busy work I say, to bring his flock to a right faith and
then to confirm them in the same faith, Now casting them down with the
law, and with threateninges of The law fears.
God for sin. Now rydginge them up a gain, with the gospel and with the
promyses of Gods favor. Now wreding them, The Gospel comfort.
by tellyng them their faults, and making them forsake sin. Now clottinge
them, by breakyng their stony hearts, and by making them supple herted, and
making them to have hertes of flesh, that is soft hertes, and apt for
doctrine to enter in. Now teaching to know God ryghtely, and to know their
duty to God and to their neighbors. Now exhorting them when they know
their duetye, that they do it and be dilygente in it: so that they have a
continual work to do, Great is their busynes, and therefore great should be
their Great business should have good rewards.
hyre. They have great labors and therefore they ought to have good livings,
that they may comodiously feade their flock, for the preaching of the word
of God unto the people is called meat. Scripture calls it meat. Not
strawberies, that come but once a year and tarry not long, but are sone gone:
but it is meat. It is no deynties. The people must have meat that must be
familier and continual, and daily Preaching is a daily meat.
given unto them to feed upon. Many make a strauberye of it, ministrynge it
but once a year, but such do not thoffice of good prelates. For Christ says.

Quis putas est ser^^s prudens et fidelis? qui dat ^ibum in tempore.

Who think you is a wise and a faithful servant? He that gives meat in due
time. So that he must at all times conuenyent preach dyligentyle. Therefore
says he? Who trow you is a faythefull servant? He speaks it as though
it were a rare thing to find such a one, and as though he should say,
there be but few of them to find in the world. And how few of them there be
throughout this realm that give meat to theirr flock as they should do: the
visitoures can best tell. To few, to few, the more is the pity, and never so
few as now. By this then it appears that a prelate or any that has cure
of soul, must diligently and substancially work and labor. Therefore says
Paul to Timothe. Qui episcopatu^ desiderat, hic bonum opus desiderat.

He that desires to have the office of a Bishop, or a prelate, that man
desires a good work. Then if it be good work, it is work. Ye ca^ make but
a work of it. It is Gods work, Gods ploughe, and that plough, God would
have still going. Such the^ as loyter and live idellye, ate not good prelates
or minysters. And of such as do not preach and teach, nor do not their
duties: God says by his Prophet Hieremie. Maledictus qui facit opus dei
fraudulenter. Guilefullye or deceytefullye some books have Negligenter,
negligently, or slacklie. How many such prelates, how many such bishops,
Lord for thy mercy, are there now in England? And what shall we in this case
do? Shall we company with them? O LORD for thy mercy shall we not company with
them? O Lord whither shall we fly from them? But curssed be he that does the
work of GOD neglige^tly or guilefully. A soore word for them that are
neglyge^t in dischargynge their office, or have dooen it fraudulentlye, for
that is the thing that makes the people ill. But true it must be that
Christ says. Multi sunt vocati, pauci vero electi. Many are called, but few
are chosen.

Here have I an occasion by the way somewhat to say unto you yea, for the place
that I alleged unto you before out of Hieremy the. xlviii. Chapter. And it was
spoken of a spiritual work of God, a work that was commanded to be done,
and it was of sheddynge blood and of destroiyng the cities of Moab. For
(says he) cursed be he that keeps back his sword from sheddynge of blood.
As Saul when he kept back the sword from shedding of blood, at what time
he was sent against Amalech, was refused of God for being disobedient to Gods
commandments, in that he spared Agag ye king. So that, that place of ye
prophet was spoken of them that went to the destruction of the cities of Moab,
among the which there was one called Nebo, which was much reproved for
idolatry, supersticion, pride, auaiyce, cruelty, tyranny, and for hardenes of
heart, and for these sins was plaged of God and destroyed. Now what shall we
say of these rich citizens of London? An admonicion to London to repent.
What shall I say of them? shall I call them proud men of London, malicious men
of London, mercylesse men of London. No, no, I may not say so, they will be
offended with me than. Yet must I speak. For is there not reigning in London,
as much pride, as much covetousness, as much cruelty, as much oppression, as
much supersticio^, as was in Nebo? Yes, I think and much more to. Therefore I
say, repent O London. Repent, repent. Thou hear shy faults told thee,
amend the^ amend the^. I think if Nebo had had ye preaching that thou have:
they would have converted. And you rulers and officers An admonicion to ye
rulers and officers.
be wise and circu^specte, look to your charge and see you do your duties, and
rather be glad to amend your ill living, then to be angrye when you are
warned or told of your fault. What a do was there made in London at a certain
man because he said, and in deed at that time on a just cause. Burgesses quod
he, nay butterflyes. Lord what a do there was for that word. And yet would god
they were no worse then butterflyes. Butterflyes do but their nature, the
butterfly is not couetouse, is not gredy of other men's goods, is not full of
envy and hate red, is not malicious, is not cruel is not merciles. The
butterflye glories not in her own deeds, nor prefers the tradicions of men
before gods word, it commits not idolatri, nor worshippeth false gods. But
London can not abide to be rebuked, such is the nature of man. If they be
pricked they will kick. If they be rubbed on the gale: they will wynce. But yet
they will not amend their faults, they will not be ill spoken of. But how
shall I speak well of them. If you could be content to receive and follow the
word of God and favor good preachers, if you could bear to be toulde of
your faults, if you could amend when you hear of them: if you would be
glad to refourme that is amysse: if I might see any such inclinacion in you,
that leave to be mercyles, and begin to be charytable I would then hope well
of you, I would then speak well of you. But London was never so ill as it is
now. In times past, men The euilles yt are now in London.
were full of pity and compassyon, but now there is no pity, for in London
their brother shall dye in the streets for cold, he shall lie sick at their
door between stock and stock. I cannot tell what to call it, and perish there
for hunger, was there any more unmercifulness in Nebo? I think not. In times
paste when any rich The relief of poorescholers by the rich in London, is
gone.
man dyed in London, they were wont to healpe the pore scholars of the
universities with exhiby^ion. When any man dyed, they would bequeath great
sums of money toward the relief of the pore, When I was a scholar in
Cambrydge my self, I hard very good report of London and knew many that had
relief of the rich men of London, but now I can hear no such good
report, and yet I enquire of it, and harken for it, but now charity Charity
is waxen cold in London.
is waxed cold, none healpeth the scholar, nor yet the poor. And in those
days what did, they when they helped the scholars? Mary they mainteyned and
gave them livings that were very papists and professed ye Popes doctrine,
and now that the knoweledge of Gods word is brought to light, and many
earnestly study and labor to set it forth now almost no man healpeth to
maintain them. Oh London He moves london to repentance by example of Nebo,
London, repent repent, for I think God is more dyspleased with London, then
ever he was with the city of Nebo. Repent therefore repent London, and remember
that the same god lives now that punished Nebo, even ye same god and none
other, and he will punyshe sin as well now as he did then, and he will
punish the iniquity of London as well as he did them of Nebo. Amend therefore.
And ye that be prelates An admonicio^ to prelates to do their office.
look well to your office, for right prelatynge is buisye labouryng and not
lordyng. Therefore preach and teach, and let your ploughe be doing, ye lords
I say that live like loyterers, look well to your office, the plough is your
office and charge. If you live idle and loyter, you do not your duetye, you
follow not your vocacion, let your ploughe therefore be going and not cease,
that the ground may bring forth fruit. But now me thinks I hear one An
answer to a privy objection.
say unto me, wotte you what you say? It is a work? It is a labor? how then
has it happened, that we have had so many hundred years, so many vnpreachynge
prelates, lordyng loyterers and idle ministers? ye would have me here to make
answer and to show the cause thereof. Nay, this land is not for me to
ploughe, it is to stonye, to thornye, to hard for me to plough. They have so
many things that make for them, so many things to lay for them selves, that
it is not for my weak teame to plough them. They have to lay for them selves
long customs ceremonies, and authorytie, placyng in parliment, and many
things more. And I fear me this land is not yet ripe to be ploughed. For as
the saying is, It lacks wethering: This get lacks wetheryng, at least way
it is not for me to plough. For what shall I look for among thorns but
prickyng and scratchyng? what among stones but stumbling? What (I had almost
said) among serpents but stingyng? But this much I dare say, that sense
lordyng and loiteryng Lording has put down prechyng.
has come up, preaching has come down contrary to the Apostelles times. For
they preached and lorded not. And now they lord and preach not. For they
that be lords will ill go to plough. It is no mete office for them. It is not
seming for their estate. Thus came up lordyng loyterers, Thus crept in
vnpreachynge prelates, and so have they long continewed. For how many
unlearned prelates have we now at this day? And no meruel. For if ye plough
me^ that now be, were made lords they would clean give over ploughynge, they
would leave of their labor and fall to lordyng outright, and let ye plough
stand. And then both ploughes not walkyng, nothing should be in the common
weal but hounger. For ever sense the Prelates were made Lords and nobles, the
ploughe stands, there is no work done; ye people sterue. They hawk, they
hunt, they card, they dyce, they pastyme in their prelacies with galaunte
gentlemen, with their daunsyng minyons, and with their fresh companions, so
that ploughyng is set a side. And by the lordyng and loytryng, preaching and
plough yng is clean gone. And thus if the ploughmenne of the country, were as
negligente in their office, as prelates be, we should not long live for lack
of sustynaunce. And as it is necessary for to have this ploughyng for the
sustentacion of the body: so must we have also the other for the satisfaction
of the soul, or else we can not live long gostly. For as the body
wastes An apt similitude.
and consumes away for lack of bodilye meat: so does the soul pyne away
for default of gostly meat. But there be two kinds of inclosynge to let or
hinder Two kinds of inclospuge
both these kinds of ploughyng. The one is an inclosyng to let or hinder the
bodily ploughynge, and the other to let or hinder the holy day ploughyng, the
church ploughing. The bodylye ploughynge, is taken in and enclosed through
syngular commodity. For what man will let go or dimynyshe his private
commodity for a commune welthe? and who will sustain any damage for the
respect of a public commodity? The other plough also no man is diligent
to set forewarde, nor no man will harken to it. but to hinder and let it,
al men's ears are open, yea and a great many of this kind of ploughmen
which are very busye and would seem to be very good workemenne. I fear me
some be rather mock gospellers then faithefull ploughmen. I know many my
self that profess the gospel, and live nothing there after. I know them, and
have been conuersaunte with some of them. I know them, and I speak it with
an heavy heart, there is as little charity and good living in them, as in
any other, according to that which Christ said in the Gospel to the great
number of people that followed him, as though they had had an earnest zeal to
his doctrine, where as in deed they had it not. Non quia vidistis signa, sed
quia comedistis de panibus. Ye follow me (says he) not because ye have seen
the signs and miracles that I have dooen, but because ye have eaten the bread
and refreshed your bodies. Therefore you follow me, so that I think many one
now a days professes the Gospel for the living sake, not for the love they
bear to gods word. But they that will be true ploughmen must work faithfully
for Gods sake, for the edifiyng of their brethren. And as dilygentlye as the
husband man plougheth for the sustentacion of the body: so dilygentlye must
the prelates and ministers labor for the fedynge of the soul: both the
ploughes must still be doing, as most necessary for man. And wherefore are
magistrates ordained, but that the tranquillitye of the commune weal may be
confirmed limiting both ploughes.

But now for defaulte of vnpreachynge Prelates me think I could guess what
might be said for excusing of them.

They are so troubeled with lordlye living, they be so placed in palacies,
couched in courts, ruffelyng in their rentes, dauncyng in their dominions,
burdened with ambassages, pa^peryng of their paunches like a Monk that makes
his Jubilie, mounchynge in their maungers, and moilyng in their gay manoures
and mansyons, and so troubeled with loyterynge in their Lordeshyppes: that they
can not attend it. They are otherwise occupied, sum in the Kings matters,
some are ambassadoures, some of the privy council, some to furnyshe the
court, some are Lords of the Parlyamente, some are Presydentes, and some
comptrollers of myntes. Well, well.

Is this their duty? Is this their office? Is this their calling? should we
have ministers of the church to be comptrollers of the myntes? Is this a meet
office for a priest that has cure of souls? Is this his charge? I would
here ask one question: I would feign know who comptrolleth the devil at home
at his paryshe, while he comptrolleth the mynte? If the Apostles might not
leave the office of preaching to be deacons, shall one leave it for mintyng?

I can not tell you, but the saying is; that since priests have been mynters,
money has been wurse then it was before. And they say that the euylnesse of
money has made all things dearer. And in this behalf I must speak to
England.

Hear my country England, as Paul said in his first epistle to the Cor.
vi. Chap. For Paul was no sittynge bishop, but a walking and a preaching
bishop. But when he went from them, he left there behind him the ploughe
going still, for he wrote unto them and rebuked them for going to law and
pleadynge their causes before Heathen Judges. Is there (say th he) utterly
among you no wise manne, to be an arbitratoure in matters of judgment? What?
not one of all that can judge between brother and brother? But one brother go
to law with an other, and that under heathen Judges? Constitu^te contempt^s
qui sunt in ecclesia? et cere. Appointe them Judges that are most abject, and
vile in the congregation, which he speaks in rebukyng them, for (says he)
Ad ex(...)scenciam vestram dico. I speak it to your shame. So England I speak
it to thy shame. Is there never a noble man to be a lord presybente, but it
must be a prelate? Is there never a wise manne in the realm to be a
Comptroller of the minte? I speak it to your shame, I speak it to your
shame. If there be never a wise man, make a water bearer, a tinker, acobler, a
slave, a page, comptroller of the Mynte. Make a mean gentileman, a groom, a
yeoman, make a poor beggar Lord president. Thus I speak not that I would
have it so, but to your shame. If there be never a gentleman meet nor able to
be Lord presydente. For why are not the noble men and young gentlemen of
England, so brought up in knowledge of God and in learning, that they may be
able to execute offices in the commune weal? The King has a great many of
wards and I trow there is a court of wards, why is there not a schole for
the wards, as well as there is a court for their lands? Why are they not set
in schools, where they may learn? Or why are they not sent to the
universities, that they may be able to scrue the king when they come to age?
If the wards and young gentlemen were well brought up in learning and in the
knowledge of God, they would not when they come to age, so much give them
selves to other vanities. And if the nobility be well trained in godly
learning, the people would follow the same train. For truly, such as the noble
men be, such will the people be. And now the only cause, why noble Why noble
men be not made lord presidentes.
men be not made Lord presidentes, is because they have not been brought up
in learning. Therefore for the love of GOD, appoint teachers and scholemaisters,
you that have charge of youth, and give the teachers stipendes worthy their
pains, that they may bring them up in Grammar, in Logike, in Rethorike, in
Philosophy, in the ciuyle law, and in that which I can not leave unspoken
of, the word of God. Thanks be unto god the nobility, otherwise is very well
brought up in learning and godliness, to the great joy and comfort of
England, so that there is now good hope in the youth, that we shall an other
day have a florishyng common wealth, considering their godly educacion. Yea,
and there be al ready noble men enough though not so many as I would wyshe
able to be Lord presidentes, and wise men enough, for the mynt. And as
unmeet a thing it is for bishops to be Lord presidentes or priests to be
mynters, as it was for the Corthinthyans to plead matters of variaunce before
heathen Judges. It is also a sclaunder to the noble men, as though they lacked
wisdom, and learning to be able for such offices, or else were no men of
conscience, or else were not meet to be trusted, and able for such offices.
And a prelate has a charge and cure otherwise, and therefore he cannot
discharge his duty, and be a Lord presydent to. For a presidentshippe
requires a whole man, and a bishop can not be two men. A bishop has his
office, a flock to teach, to look unto, and there for he can not meddle with
an other offece, which alone requires a whole man. He should therefore give it
over to whom it is meet, and labor in his own business, as Paul writes
to the Thessalonians. Let every man do his own busynes, and follow his
calling. Let the priest preach, and the noble men handle the temporal matters.
Moses was a marvelous manne, a good man. Moses was a wonderful fellow, and
did his duetye being a married man. We lack such as Moses was. Well, I would
all men would look to their duty, as God has called them, and then we
should have a florishyng christyan commune weal. And now I would ask a
strange question. Who is the most diligente bishop and prelate in all
England, that passes all the rest in doing his office I can tell, for I
know him who it is, I know him well. But now I think I se you listyng and
harkening, that I should name him. There is one that passes all the other,
and is the most diligent prelate and preacher in all England. And will ye know
who it is? I will tell you. It is the Devil. He is the most dilygent preacher
of all other, he is never out of his dioces, he is never from his cure, ye
shall never find him unoccupied, he is ever in his patishe, he keeps
resydence at all times, ye shall never find him out of the way, call for him
when you will, he is ever at home, the dilygenteste preacher in all the realm,
he is ever at his ploughe, no lordynge nor loyteryng can hinder him, he is
ever appliynge his busynes, ye shall never find him idle I warraunte you. And
his office is to hinder religyon, to maintain supersticion, to set up
Idolatry, to teach al kind of poperye. He is ready as can be wyshed, for to
set forth his ploughe, to deuyse as many ways as can be, to deface and
obscure Gods glory. Where the Devil is resydente and has his ploughe going:
there away with books, and up with candelles, away with Bybles and up with
beads, away with the light of the gospel, and up with the light of
candelles, yea at noone days. Where the Devil is residente, that he may
prevail, up with all supersticion and Idolatry, sensing, pain tynge of
images, candels, palms, ashes, holy water, and new service of men's
inuentyng, as though man could inuente a better way to honor God with, then
god himself has appointed. Down with Christ's cross, up with purgatory pick
pursse, up with him, the popish pourgatorie I mean. Away with clothing the
naked, the pore and impotent, up with deckynge of images and gaye garnyshynge
of stocks and stones* Up with man's tradicious and his laws, down with Gods
tradycions and his most holy word. Down with the old honor dew to God,
and up with the new gods honor, let al things be done in Latin. there must
be nothing but Latin, not as much as, Memento homo quod cinis es, et in
cinerem reuerteris. Remember manne that thou art ashes, and into ashes thou
shall return. Which be the words that the minister speaks to the
ignoraunte people, when he gives them ashes upon asshe wens day, but it
must be spoken in latin. Gods word may in no wise be translated into
English Oh that our prelates would be as dilygente to sow the corn of good
doctrine as Satan is, to sow cockel and darnel. And this is the deuelyshe
ploughyng, the which works to have things in latin, and lets the
fruteful edificacion. But here some ma^ne will say to me, what sir, are ye so
privy of the devils council, that ye know all this to be true? Truli I know
him to well, and have obeyed him a little to much in con discenting to some
folies. And I know him as other men do, yea, that he is ever occupied and ever
busy in following his plow. I know by S. Peter which says of him. Sicut leo
rugiens circuit querens quem deuoret. He goes about like a roaryng lion sekyng
whom he may devour. I would have this text well vewed and examyned every
word of it. Circuit, he goes Note a text well wayed
about in every corner of his dioces. He goes on visitacion dailye. He leaves
no place of his cure unvisited. He walks round about from place to place,
and cease not, Sicut leo, as a Lion that is strongly, boldly, and proudlye,
straytely, and fiercelye with haute looks, with ^is proud countenaunces, with
his stately braggynges. Rugiens, roaryng, for he lets not slyppe any
occasyon to speak or to roar out when he sees his time. Querens. he goes
about sekyng and not sleepyng, as our Bishops do, but he seeks diligently,
he searches diligently al corners, whereas he may have his pray. He roueth
abroad in every place of his dioces, he stands not still, he is never at
rest, but ever in hand with his ploughe that it may go foreward. But there
was never such a preacher in England as he is. Who is able to tell his
dyligente preaching? which every day and every hour, laboreth to sow
cockel and darnell, that he may bring out of form and out of estimacio^ and
room, thinstitucion of the Lords supper and Christ's cross, for there he
lost his right, for Christ fayed. Nunc iudicium est mundi, princepes seculi
huius eiicietur for as, et sicut exaltauit Moises serpentem in deserto, ita
exaltari oportet filium hominis, et cum ex altatus fuero, a terra, omnia tradam
ad meipsum.

Now is the judgment of this world and the Prince of this world shall be
cast out.

And as Moses did lift up the serpente in the wilderness, so must the son
of man be lift up. And when I shall be lift up from the earth. I will
draw al things unto my self. For the Devil was dysapoynted of his purpose,
for he thought all to be his own.

And when he had once brought Christ to the cross, he thought all cock
sure. But there lost he all his reygning, for Christ said Omnia traham ad
meipsum. I will draw all things to my self. ^e means drawyng of man's
soul to salvation. And that he said he would do, Per semet ipsum. by his own
self, not by any other bodies sacrifice. He mente by his own sacryfyce on the
cross, wheare he offered him self for the redemption of mankind, and not the
sacrifice of the mass to be offered by an other. For who can offer him, but
him self? He was both the offerer and the offering. And this is the prycke,
this is the mark at the which the Devil shoots, to euacuate the cross of
Christ, and to mingle the instytucion of the Lords supper, the which
although he can not bring to pass: yet he goes about by his sleightes and
subtyle means, to frustrate the same, and these fyftene hundredth years he has
been a dooer, only purposynge to euacuate Christ's death, and to make it of
small efficacitie and virtue.

For where as Christ according as the serpente was lift up in wilderness: so
would he him self to be exalted, that thereby as many as trusted in him,
should have salvation. But the devil would none of that. They would have us
saved by a daily oblacion propiciatorie, by a sacrifyce expiatorie, or
remissorie.

Now if I should preach in the country among the unlearned, I would tell
what propiciatorie, expiatorie and remissorie is: but here is a learned
auditorie. Yet for them that be unlearned I will expound it. Propiciatorie,
expiatorie, remissorie, or satisfactorie, for they signify al one thing in
effect, and is no thing else but a thing whereby to obtain remissyon of
sins, and to have salvation. And this way the Devil used to euacuate the
death of Christ, that we might have affyaunce in other things, as in the
daily sacrifice of the pryeste, where as Christ would have us to trust in
his only sacrifice. So he was Agnus occisus ab origin mundi, the lamb that
has be slain from the beginning of the world, and therefore he is called,
Juge sacrificium. A continual sacrifyce, and not for the continuance of the
Mass as the blau^chers have blaunched it, and wrested it. And as I my self
did once mystake it. But Paul says. Per semetip sum purgatio facta, by him
self and by none other, Christ made pourgacion and satysfaction for the whole
world. Would Christ this word (by him self) had been better weighed and
looked upon, and, In sanctificacionem, to make them holy, for he is, Juge
sacrificium, a continual sacryfice, in effect, fruit and operacion, that
like as they which seeing the serpente hang up in the deserte were put in
remembrance of Christ's death, in whom as many as believed were saved: so all
men that trusted in the death of Christ shall be saved, as well they that were
before, as they that came after. For he was a contynuall Sacrifyce, as I said
in effect, fruit, operacion and virtue. As though he had from the beginning
of the world and continually should to the worlds end hang still on the
cross, and he is as fresh hangyng on the cross now to them that believe and
trust in him, as he was fiftene hundredth years a go when he was crucyfyed.
Then let us trust upon his only death, and look for none other sacrifyce
propiciatorie, then the same bloudye sacrifice, the liuelye sacrifice, and not
a dry sacrifice, but a blouddy sacrifice. For Christ himself said,
Consummatum est. It is perfectlye finyshed. I have taken at my fathers hand
the dispensation of redemyng mankind.

I have wroughte man's redemption, and have dyspatched the matter. Why then
myngle ye him? why do ye divide him? why make you of him mo sacryfyces then
one? Paul says. Pascha nostrum immolatus est Christus Christ our passover
is offered up, so that the thing is done, and Christ has done it, and he has
done it, semel. Once for all. And it was a bloody sacrifice, not a dry
sacrifice.

Why then, it is not the Mass that avails or profits for the quick and
the dead? Woe worth thee, O Devil, woe worth thee, that haste prevailed so far
and so long, that thou haste made England to worship false Gods,
forsaking Christ their Lord. Woe worth the Devil. Woe worth thee Devil and
all thine Angels: if Christ by his death draws all things to him self,
and draws al men to salvation, and to heavenly bliss that trust in him. Then
the priests at the Mass, at the popyshe Mass I say) what ca^ they draw when
Christ draws all, but lands and gooddes from the right heirs? The
priests draw gooddes and richesse, benefyces and promocions to them selves
and such as believed in their sacrifyce they draw to the Devil. But Christ
it is that draws sowles unto him by his bloody sacrifice. What have we to do
then, but Epulari in domiuo, to eat in the Lord at his Supper. What other
service have we to do to him? and what other sacrifyce have we to offer: but
the mortificacio^ of our flesh? What other oblacion have we to make, but of
obedyence, of good living, of good works, and of healpynge our neighbors?
But as for our redemption, it is done already, it can not be better. Christ
has done that thing so well, that it can not be amended. It cannot be devised
how to make that, any better then he has done it. But the Devil by the
healpe of that Jtalian Bishop yonder, his chaplayne: has labored by all
means, that he might, to frustrate the death of Christ, and the merytes of
his passion. And they have devised for that purpose to make us believe in other
vain things by his pardonnes, as to have remission of sins for praiynge on
hallowed beads, for drinkyng of the bakehouse bole, as a Channon of Waltam
Abbey, once told me, that when soever they put their loaves of bread into
the oven, as many as drancke of the pardon bolle should have pardon for
drinckynge of it. A mad thing to give pardon to a bolle. Then to Pope
Alexanders holy water, to hallowed belles, palms, candelles, ashes, and what
not?

And of these things every one has taken away some part of Christ's
sanctificacion. Every one has tobbed some part of Christ's passion and
cross, and has myngled Christ's death, and has been made to be
propiciatorie and satisfactorie, and to put away sin. Yea and Alexanders
holy water yet at this day remaynethe in England, and is used for a remedy
against spirytes, and to chase away deuylles, yea and I would this had been
the worste. I would this were the worste. But woe worth thee, O devil that
haste prevailed to euacuate, Christ's cross and to myngle the lords supper.
These be the Italian bishops deuyces, and the devil has prycked at this
mark to frustrate the cross of Christ. He shot at this mark long before
Christ came, he shot at this prick four thousand years before Christ
hanged on the cross, or suffered his passion.

For the brazen serpente, was set up in the wyldernes to put men in
remembrance of Christ's coming, that like as they which beheld the brazen
serpente were healed of their bodilye diseases: so they that looked spirituallye
upon Christ that was to come, in him should be saved spiritually from the
Devil, The serpent was set up in memory of Christ to come, but the Devil
found means to steal away the memory of Christ's coming and brought the
people to worship the Serpenre self, and to sense him, to honor him, and
to offer to him, to worship him, and to make an Idol of him. And this was
done by the markette men that I told you of And the clarke of the markette
did it for the lucre and advantage of his master, that thereby his honor
might increase, for by Christ's death, he could have but small worldly
advantage. And even now so has he certain blaunchers longyng to the
markette, to let and stop the light of the Gospel, and to hinder the
kings procedynges in setting forth the word and glory of God. And when the
kings majesty with the advise of his honorable counsel goes about to
promote Gods word and to set an order in matters of religyon there shall
not lack blaunchers that will say. As for Images whereas they have been used to
be senced, and to have candels offered unto them: none be so folishe to do it
to the stock or stone, or to the Image self, but it is done to GOD and his
honor before the Image. And though they should abuse it, these blaunchers
will be ready to whysper the King in the ear, and to tell him that this abuse
is but a small matter. And that the same with all other like abuses in the
church may be reformed easilye. It is but a little abuse (say they) and it
may be easily amended. But it should not be taken in hand at the first for
fear of trouble, or further inconveniences. The people will not bear sod ayne
alteracions an insurreccyon may be made after sudden mutacion, which may be
to the great harm and lost of the realm. Therefore all things shall be well,
but not out of hand, for fear of further busynes. These be ye blanchers that
hitherto have stopped the word of god, and hindered the true setting forth of
the same. There be so many put offes, so many put byes, so many respects, and
consideracio^s of worldly wisdom. And I dout not but there were blanchers in
the old time, to whysper in the ear of good king Ezechyas, for the
mayntenaunce of Idolatry done to the brazen serpent, as well as there has been
now of late, and be now that can blanch the abuse of Images and other like
things. But good king Ezechias would not be so blinded, he was like to
Apollos, fervent in spirit. He would give no ear to the blanchers, he was
not moved with these worldly respects, with these prudente consyderacions,
with these policies, he feared not insurreccions of the people. He feared not
least his people would not bear the glory of God: but he (without any of
these respects, or polycies, or co^sideracions, like a good king for Gods
sake, and for conscience sake) by and by plucked down the brazen serpente, and
destroyed it utterly, and beat it to powder. He out of hand, did cast down
all Images, he destroyed all Idolatry, and clearly did extirpate all
supersticion. He would not hear these blanchers and worldly wise men, but
with out delay, follows gods cause and destroys all Idolatry out of hand.
Thus did good king Ezechias, for he was like Apollo, fervent in spirit, and
dilygente to promote Gods glory. And good hope there is that it shall be
likewise here in England, for the kings Majesty is so brought up in
knowledge, virtue, and godliness, that it is not to be mystrusted, but that we
shall have all things well, and that the glory of God shall be spread abroad,
throughout al parts of the realm, if the prelates will diligently apply their
plough and be preachers, rather then Lords, but our blaunchers, which will be
Lords, and no laborers, when they are commanded to go and be resydente upon
their cures, and preach in their benefyces, they would say.

What, I have set a deputy there, I have a deputy that looks well to my
flock, and the which shall discharge my duty. A deputy quod he. I looked for
that word all this while. And what a deputy must he be, trow ye? Even one
like him self, it must be a cannoniste, that is to say, one that is brought
up in the study of the Popes laws and decrees. One that will set forth
papistrie as well as him self will do, and one that will maintain all
supersticion, and Idolatrye. And one that will nothing at all, or else very
weakly resist the Deuyls plough, yea happy it is if he take not part with the
Devil, and where he should be an enemy to him, it is well if he take not the
Deuilles part against Christ. But in the mean time the Prelares take their
pleasures. They are Lords and no laborers, but the Devil is dilygente at his
ploughe. He is no vnpreachynge prelate. He is no Lordelye loyterer from his
cure, but a busy ploughe man, so that amonhe all the prelates, and among all the pack of them that have cure, the Devil shall go for my money. For he still
applies his busynes. Therefore ye vnpreachynge prelates, learn of the devil
to be diligent in doing of your office. Learn of the devil. And if you will
not learn of God nor good manne: for shame learn of the Devil. Ad
erubescentiam vestram dico. I speak it for your shame. If you will not learn
of God nor good man to be diligent in your office, learn of the devil.
Howebeit there is now very good hoope that the kings majesty, being by the
healpe of good goueruaunce of his most honorable counsaylours, he is trained
and brought up in learning and knowledge of Gods word, will shortly provide a
remedy and set an order herein, which thing that it may so be, let us pray
for him. Pray for him good people, pray for him, ye have great cause, and
need to pray for him.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling at Aldersgate, and Wylliam Seres,
dwelling in Peter College. These books are to be sold at the new shop by the
little Conduyte in Chepesyde.

Cum gratia et Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


