A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS CROSS, THE 25. OF NOVEMBER. 1621. Upon occasion of
that false and scandalous Report (lately Printed) touching the supposed
Apostasy of the right Reverend Father in God, JOHN KING, late Lord Bishop of
London.

By HENRY KING, his eldest Son.

Whereunto is annexed the Examination, and Answer of Thomas Preston, P. taken
before my Lords Grace of Canterbury, touching this Scandal.

Published by Authority.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for William Barret. 1621.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, CHARLES, PRINCE of Wales.
YOur Highness may please to remember how great an interest your Princely
Mother, our late Gracious Queen, vouchsafed to challenge in my deceased
Father: accounting Him as one of Hers, as most truly (next the professed band
of duty to his dread Sovereign, whose first-sworne Chaplain he was, after
his Majesty's happy arrival in these parts) by all the ties a Royal Mistress
might engage a Servant, he was. Since that Star was taken from our sight, I
know not whether else ought She could call Hers might so immediately refer as
to your self. I am sure it was His study, while he lived, to consecrate his
best endeauours to the Branches of that Royal stock, and by that line of
duty, drawn from Her merits, to measure out His bounden services to Her Line,
chiefly to your Highness; Who, I have cause to think, do yet believe you had
a faithful Orator and Servant of Him. Since then by double right he was
devoted to your Highness, by his own acknowledgement, and by the purchase of
your especial favors toward Him; I durst not entitle any other Patron to
the remainder of what he was, his Memory, without leave from your Highness.
But as it was my filial duty to vindicate a wronged Father, so I held it the
tribute of my civil duty to tender it first to your Hands, that it might take
sanctuary under your Princely wing. Thus borne up, the Truth I write shall
boldly fly into the bosom of those climes where it was first discolored;
and, if their foreheads be not meretriciously steeled with impudence, or grown
flint, fetched back it is own proper hiew, or their shame.

It is not a forward presumption in me, but the cause which makes your
Highness patronage my chief scope; upon which terms it will not be
inglorious for you to undertake it. For whilst you shall protect abused
Innocence, your Goodness will stand pitched at the just height your Greatness
now does, one degree from a Defender of the Faith. Long may you flourish, to
make all Good men happy in your protection; and may that heart want the prayers
of good men to relieve it, which does not as faithfully sue to Almighty God for
all addition to your Happiness, as he who is

Your Highness most humbly devoted Servant, HENRY KING.

JOHN 15. verse. 20. Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not
greater then the Lord: If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.


I Will not strive to attire my Text in any other fashion; the plain natural
dress it now wears, will best suit it, and my intendment.

The parts shall be, as the Propositions, Division.
Three;

I. Is monitory, and as it were an 1
(...). Introduction, or Preface to the rest, Remember the word I said unto you.

II. Is a Principle, a ground of infallible 2
truth, both in Ethick and Oeconomick rules, in Humanity and Divinity; The
servant is not greater then the Lord.

III. Is an Inference upon an Hypothesis; If they have persecuted me, they will
3
also persecute you.

I begin in order.

Remember.] I know not what better First Part. {Remember.}
exordium a Preacher can make, or from what foundation the frame of his speech
can more happily arise then from this, which is the first stone in this pile,
Remember. It is the best charge the Priest can give, and the first lesson the
People should learn; else, like children, that read only by rote, they shall
spend much time and understand nothing. It is a task can never be urged too
often, Manda remanda: nor can it ever be learned too perfectly; Nunquam satis
dici, quia nunquam satis disci potest. An age is not enough for this precept,
but when seven years are run out, they may begin again, and finish an
apprentiship long as life, yet miss that freedom and perfection they seek;
Ars longa vitabreuis.

Since therefore much is to be learned, and either we want time, or capacity,
or memory to comprehend it, the right way to profit an Auditory, and not cloy,
is to let them digest what they have bin taught, and not hear new lessons
before the old are remembered. For as eating much meat, and not keeping it,
argues a better appetite then concoction; so hearing much, and retaining none,
shows a quick ear, but a dull devotion.

There are many now adays who never think they have preaching enough: but as
exquisite gluttons lay all markets for fare, so do they lay all Churches where
there is any suspicion of a Sermon, and all is (...), to glut their Gregor.
Nazian. Epitaph. Caesar.
ears; nay, the same Father speaks them more fully, (...) they go Ibid.
not so much to feed, as delight their ears, and to satisfy that wanton itch
of hearing, which like a Tetter, the more it is rubbed, the more it spreads. I
wish there were more practicing, on condition there were less preaching. A man
may hear so much that he may ston the sense, and be like the Catadupes, whom
the continual fall of Nile makes deaf. Cisternes that have more powered into
them then they can hold, must needs run to wast; and men that affect to learn
more then they have brain to comprehend, waste their Pastors labor, and their
own patience. It is good counsel for one to eat no more then his stomach
can bear, for too full feeding engenders nothing but surfets; and I think as
good counsel will it be, to hear no more then he can carry away. For were
the retention good, the nourishment would be more solid, and Christianity
acquire that full growth, for want of which we are but Impes and Zanies, in
respect of those that lived in the Primitive Church.

No wonder then, if Preaching may breed surfets, that so many Crudities lie in
the stomach of this City; that so many Fumes and giddy vapors fly up into
the head, to the no small disturbance of the Churches quiet; that so many hot
spirits, like Canons ouercharged, recoyle against all Discipline, break into
diverse factions, and with the splints of those cracked opinions do more
mischief then deliberation or Justice can suddenly salve. I speak no new
unheard language. This community of Preaching has brought it into such cheap
contempt, with many, that, as if the gift of tongues were prostitute to Idiots
and Trades, you shall have a sort of Lay Mechanicke Presbiters of both sexes
(Praedicatores, and Praedicantissae) presume so far upon their acquaintance
with the Pulpit, that they will venture upon an Exposition, or undertake to
manage a long unweildy prayer conceived on the sudden, though not so suddenly
uttered; nay, they are so desperate, they will torment a Text, and in their
resty Conuenticles teach as boldly, as if they were as well able to become
Iourneymen to the Pulpit, as to their own Trades. I cannot but think of the
story of the poor Ass that carried the goddess Isis so long to and from the
Temple, that at last he began to take state upon him, and would needs play the
goddess. So these creatures have so long traveled betwixt the Temple,
Portantes mysteria, and conuersed with the sacred mysteries of Religion, that
they begin to flatter themselves in an opinion of worth, which none would
suspect; and forgetting their former condition, will needs turn Teachers. If
this be the fruit of so much preaching, it is high time that command be now
reuersed, Son of man, Lift up thy voice like a Trumpet: Isa. 58. 1.
rather, Son of man, sound a retreit, and be dumb, in admiration, to see
Cobblers and Artizans usurp that holy Office.

Frange leaves calamos, and scinde Thalia Martial.
libellos,
Si dare sutori calceus ista potest.
Let none think my meaning is to find fault with the multitude of Preachers,
who (without envy) were never more, nor better: neither to tax the devotion
of such who frequent those exercises; far be it from me. I only strike at the
abuse. I pity that Pastor, who is put to plough the rocks, when the ear is
too hard for his advice to enter; and is tasked, like Belus his daughters, to
fill (...), Siues and Pitchers without bottom; for such are our hollow
Formalists. And I blame that people, who like thirsty lands still gape for
rain, yet no sign of softening; or, as men sick of an Atrophy, eat much, but
thrive not. When Manna shall grow stale and common, and stink in their
nostrils, it is time to diet such mis-gouerned feeders, and stint them to their
measure, as Israel was to an Omer. I wish they would hear no more then their
memory could master. A little less preaching, and some more praying would do
well: For so they might gain more time, and obtain a better faculty for the
remembering of what they learn.

The room is now prepared, wants only the Ghest to fill it, who follows in
the next place, [The word that I said unto you.] {The word that I said.}


Wisdom is its own Herald, and the words of worthy persons need no waymakers
to prepare attention, save themselves. But when both these concur, and the
name of the Author presents it self in the front, to credit the errand, it
must needs take strong hold in the hearer.

In both these respects does Christ plead for regard. First, in respect of his
own person, [J said.] That Ego sum, uttered 1
by him in the Garden, struck such {I said.}
awe and terror into his enemies, that they John 18. 6.
did homage to the sound of his voice, by falling flat to the ground. It is to
be hoped then, that when his discourse knocked at the ears of his Disciples,
like the Spouse in the Canticles, Open unto Cant. 5.
me, it is I, his own would both know, and obey his voice: especially since
that now like one preparing to leave the world, he began to give his latest
charge, and to bequeath such lessons to them, as might both warn them of what
should befall, and comfort them in their sufferings.

The words of dying men are precious even to strangers; but when the voice of
one we love, calls to us from the deathbed, O what a conflict do his words
raise! how strongly does grief and affection strive to enclose them! knowing
that in a short space that tongue, the organs whereof yet speak, was to be
eternally tied up in silence; nor should the sound of his words salute our
ears any more. Secondly, in 2
respect of the words themselves.

Remember [the word that I told you.] If {The word, etc.}
rareness and opinion make Jewels precious, what value shall we put upon our
Saviors words, who spoke as never man spoke? within whose lips the mines of
knowledge were included: The words of the Lord are pure as silver seven times
tried, Psalm. 12. 6. Prou. 8. 11. Psalm. 119. 127.
better then Rubies; nay, (...), more precious then gold or Jewels. Now if they
be of such high esteem, where should Jewels be put but in a Cabinet; or where
should gold be disposed but in a Treasury? Both these is Memory. First, it is
a Cabinet, placed in the closet and bedchamber of the soul, the Brain; the
safest Keep in man's Cittadell: one Key it has, Reminiscentia, which opens it,
and without that, it still remains locked. Secondly, it is Aerarium animae,
the souls Exchequer, like that (...), the Treasury in the Temple, into which
the mites of knowledge and learning are cast: unto this do all the Arts and
Sciences, humane and divine offer; the precepts of the Law, the golden rules of
the Gospel are in this coffered up. And as the Temple in Jerusalem was
maintained in repair by the Treasury; so are the decays of the temple of
man's body repaired at the cost of the Memory. When tentation has shaken the
building, when sorrows and despaires, like tempestuous drifts of rain, have
beaten through us; lo from this Storehouse do we fetch props to vpbeare our
declining faith, by calling to mind the gracious promises of Christ. Here
find we comforts collected from the Gospel, to cast off the storms which
beat upon us.

If then such riches lie here in bank, no marvel if our Savior wish his
Disciples to lock it up sure, [Remember the word I told you:] knowing that the
place is not built of brass, but frail and brittle; and that there is a
thief still lurking about the door, even that great Thief who at first
robbed man of his Innocence, and upon the least advantage would spoil us of
those comforts, and carry the words away, as in the Parable. Besides, Matthew.
13. 19.
it has many Pick-lockes which often times wrench it open. First, wine, whose
subtle fumes vnriuet each joint of it, and loosen the cement which held it
fast; for you shall note, that deep drinkers have but shallow memories.
Secondly, women: I seek no further instance then Samson, into whose besotted
affection Judge. 16.
Dalila crept so far, she made him forget his safety; weak though she was,
she forced a secret from him, which all the Philistims could not wring out:
which lost, he lost himself, eyes, liberty, life and all. Thirdly,
ingratitude: this is a witch indeed, a sorceresse, whose drowzie enchantments
make us even forget God. If the^ we be apt to forget him; how shall we be
able to retain his words? or how remember what he has said, when we cannot
remember the good he has done for us? It is a crime none can acquit us of;
what is become of all his wonders? whither is the memory of his great
deliverances fled? May I not ask of them as of things worn out, or as he did
of the Kings of the Nations? Where 2 King. 19. 13.
is the King of Emath, and the King of Arphad? surely they are gone, all lie
extinct and lost. And as the grave of Pompey had not so much as an inscription,
to distinguish the dust that covered his victorious body from ignoble slaves
and cowards, or to show, Here lies Pompey: No more have those once glorious
days, now any difference in our memory or esteem. They lie promiscuously
raked up in the dust of time, without any monument set over them, to tell they
once were: no Rubric, or capital letter inserted, to distinguish them from
the common heap of days piled up in the Almanacke.

I know your City-feasts keep their annual circuit; the inauguration of
Officers, and choice of Wardens to each Company want no ceremonious form to
set them forth: for the better solemnizing whereof, Samson is brought unto the
feast, and the first dish must be a Sermon. An Italian Atheist scoffingly said,
he was wont to go to Church, that he might return with better devotion to
his dinner: be the thought of my applying it to you far from me, as I know the
intent is from you. The piety of many grave and good men in those societies,
fully resolves me that it is devotion, not form, which makes them desirous of
that act: Yet none can deny, but some there be, and those not a few, who
suppose Sermons at such times are rather for conuenience then otherwise: that
as Moses silver Trumpets served to call the people together, so they to
assemble the ghests; as if there were no difference betwixt a Sermon, and a
Wake; or preaching were become as necessary a complement to a Feast, as wine or
music. But those times, whose memory should be precious, pass by without
Sermon, or so much as the courtesy of the day; no Annals or yearly feasts to
keep them up, but in stead of a mention, there is a blanke, and solemn
silence, in stead of an Anniuerse.

Pardon my plain language. I profess ingeniously, I speak not against the
practice, but comparatively. Let their Elections and meetings want no grace the
Pulpit can aflord them: let them (in the name of God) perform those lesser
rites, but so, that they omit not greater duties: for to be diligent in things
indifferent or needless, and neglect necessary services, is at best but a
precise kind of Popery; to value Tradition above Scripture, and set more by
man's institution then Gods. When we shall see shallow customs outface
Religion, and the shadow have more honor then the substance, blame none for
speaking;

-- Nam quis iniquae Iuuenal. sat. ^.

Tam patiens vrbis, tam ferreus vt teneat se?
When the two Suns appeared in the firmament, before the great famine and
Holinshed vita Rub. 1. in fine.
plague in the time of Richard the first, that apparition eternized the day to
all posterity; nor is the fame of it yet dead. Our times have seen as great a
wonder, yet so short-liu'd, that it has not worn out the age of a man, before
it self is almost worn out; as if the Chronicle thereof had been writ in the
same element the deliverance was wrought on, Water, where no tracke of the
story, nor character of the hand that wrote it could abide. That time I mean,
when two Moons appeared in our Hemisphaere at once, the one in the sky, the
other in the Sea: a fatal prodigious Crescent, the horns whereof, like the
Horns of the Dan. 8. 3, 4.
Ram, which stood before the river, were high, pushing VVestward, and
Northward, and Southward, so that none might stand before him. Yet by the fury
of the Goat that encountered Uers. 7.
him upon the floods, were those Horns broken, and that threatening Crescent,
like a Meteor, wain'd, and went out; A Meteor indeed, for it had just the fate
of a Meteor, the matter of which it was compacted being blown asunder, and by
the winds scattered upon each adjoining shore. Here was enough to give life
to a story so long as the world should last; but we are drowned in Lethargy,
whom neither mercies can allure, nor prodigies awake.

I will not seek an instance beyond this, though I could many: and I would to
God our unthankfulness were bounded here, that though we are unmindful of
deliverances, which are without us, and concern our bodies peace, yet we might
be more apprehensiue of such as by nearer relation concern our souls good.
But not the greatest blessings that ever befell mankind, are free from this
canker of oblivion, the Death and Passion of our Savior, and the Redemption
which by that act was purchased. For how is it possible, if we remember that
Christ already dyed for us, we should still crucify him afresh, and by our
sins (each whereof is a new cross and burden to him) add afflictions to
his former sorrows? that we should wound him daily with our blasphemies; and
with serpentine tongues, sharpened with oaths and swearings, fetch new streams
of blood from him? Or can it be believed we retain the memory of our
Redemption, and the dear ransom Christ paid for our souls, when we set so
low a rate on life, as to lay it to stake for each brawle begot of wine and
choler? apt to hazard our own, and others souls for revenge of the lie given,
and (Facili redimunt qui sanguine famam) to spend our too cheap Martial. Epigr.
blood in fetching back that thing which wise men never lost, Reputation? O ye
sons of men, when will ye be wise? or when desist from being authors of your
own wretchedness? You have bin long put in mind of these faults, it is now
time you should remember to amend them. Be but you willing, and you need not to
despair of remedy: the cure is easy, and the balm familiar, if applied,
Tantum recordare, only [Remember.] Remember what Christ has said, and you
will the better remember what he has done for you. This is the right method,
the probation which Christ requires from his; If ye love me, keep my sayings;
and if you Ioh. 4. 13.
will perfectly remember me, first remember what I told you.

But is this all that Christ requires, only to remember his Word? No, there is
a farther scope, Ne sufficere tibi putes mandata Hieron. epist.
Dei memoria tenere, and operibus obliuisci: think not the duty of a Christian
is discharged by hearing only, unless thou do what thou art taught. For to
keep the Commandments in memory, and to break them in thy course of life; to
remember Christ in thy words, and forget him in thy deeds, is to mock God, and
fool away thy salvation.

Briefly thus: Let the people know it is no speculatiue, but a practick memory
Christ looks for; and to remember his words is to practice them. What shall it
avail if thou have memory beyond Cyrus, who could call every soldier in his
army by name? What good, though the evidence of Time were recorded in thy
brain? though thou keep a Chronicle of all occurences since Adam, and
could remember more history then Baronius wrote? surely if thou retain all,
yet practice none, if it be for theory and not use, thou art but like a Granary
locked up in the time of dearth, or a sword sleeping in the scabbard when it
should be drawn. Such knowledge does but Animam praegrauare, comber the
soul, as Saul's armor did David; and is only like the Persians glittering
munition, which Alexander said was for Spoil, not Fight. So this knowledge
does spoil the owners, and make their condemnation the greater, when they
shall know the right way, yet hold the wrong; hear so much, yet do so little.
Let no man think it enough to spend the day in hearing, or by frequenting a
multitude of Sermons to advantage himself; for though he count his Lectures as
the Papists their Pater-nosters, by the beads, yet if he be An hearer of the
Law, and not Iam. 1. 22.
a doer of it, he prosecutes against his own soul: each Pulpit is to him a
Tribunal, and every Preacher a Judge to pronounce sentence against him. Such
as these are liable to the woe, which Christ denounced, Woe unto you Scribes
and Pharisees hypocrites, that impose such heavy loads upon your Preachers, but
touch them not with the least of your actions. Nay they are guilty of the blood
of their Preachers, as Jerusalem of her Prophets; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that
Mat. 23. 37.
slayest the Prophets which were sent unto thee! For, with tasking them to too
much pains, they wear them out, and make Martyrs of them when there is no
time of persecution.

Again, let the Preachers know here is a Memento for them too, they must not
only tell the people what they should do, but by their examples show them the
way, Oues ipsum sequuntur, the sheep John 10. 4.
follow him; therefore it is presumed the Shepherds must go before. Quis
Chrysostom. Hom. in Mat.
audiet illum docentem, qui seipsum non audit? Who shall hear him, who hears
not himself? Or, Domine quis credet auditui? Esa. 53. 1.
Who shall believe his report, who by a life unsuitable to his words discredits
his own errand? It is Isidore Pelusiota Isidor. Pelus. lib. 4. epist. 21.
his counsel, (...); that life and doctrine may consent: for he preaches best,
Qui dicit non lingua sed vita, Aug. Ser. 18. de Uerb. Dom.
who lives as well as he speaks. Therefore Ne simus strepentes vocibus, and
muti Id. ib.
moribus: Let not their hearts and tongues jar, but let their actions be
interpreters and comments to their words, and their lives the counterparts of
their doctrine. For if their faces stand to Jerusalem, and their hearts to
Ashdod; teach others well, but follow not their own lessons, they do but (as
Nazianzen speaks) build up with one hand, and pluck down with the other.
What shall I say of them? They are as Guardians that have other men's souls in
wardship, but neglect their own: or like whetstones they set an edge on others
devotion, yet themselves are dull and cut not at all; Funguntur vice cotis,
Horat. de art poet.
acutum Reddere quae ferrum valet, exors ipsa secundi: or lastly, they are like
Conueyances of land, instruments to seat others in the Kingdom of heaven, yet
themselves have no part in the state they convey. They stand in the Pulpit like
Moses on the Mount Abarim, and only Number. 27. 12.
show the people a Land of promise, which themselves must never set foot in.

I have bin long in the passage to my Text, the copious matter would not
dismiss me sooner. One note and I pass it.

Of all faculties in man, Memory is the weakest, first waxes old, and decays
sooner then Strength or Beauty. Of all powers in man it is least at command,
the will not so little. A man may be master of his invention and of his tongue,
but who could ever boast himself the master of his memory, or promise to
himself that would not fail? Which makes God and his Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles strengthen it with so many admonitions, Remember and forget not. Deuteronomy.
9 7.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Eccles. 12. 1.
youth; and many the like both in the old and new Testament. Now as generally
in all things we are forgetful, so in nothing more then in things belonging to
our woes: Either we dare not, or cannot remember miseries which must befall us.
The Mariner loves not to hear of storms; nor states rockt in security, of
wars; nor can wanton youth endure the tidings of sickness, or age that must
surprise it. Naturally all hate reproof, nor have we patience to hear of
judgments that must follow: for all these God shall bring thee to judgment.
To such remembrances Eccles. 11. 9.
we are deaf and auerse, Monitoribus asperi: and their preachings Iuuenal.
we banish from our ears, as Amaziah Amos 7. 12.
did the words of Amos, when he foretold Jeroboams death, and Isreal's
captiuit^e; Gradere, fuge in terra^ Judah: O thou Seer, go fly away into the
land of Judah, and prophecy there, but prophecy no more at Bethel. They that
will please these times must steep their words in oil, footh and flatter, Qui
dicunt videntibus, Nolite Esa. 30. 10.
videre; though they see they must say nothing, or if they do, Loquimini nobis
placentia, they must speak plausibly. Ibid.
We love to hear of fair days, which no misfortune clouds, and cry with
Hezekiah, that Nothing but peace may sound in our ears: for sorrows and
persecutions we abhor to think on; and, like those in the Prophet, Put
far away the evil day. Hunc voluit nescire diem: such black cross days as
these we curse out Lucan.
of the Ephemerides, and excommunicate them from all society with the year, as
Job did his birthday: Let the day perish Job 3. 3, 5.
to all memory, let darkness, and the shadow of death stain it, and let
forgetfulness like a cloud dwell upon it.

Just cause then had our Savior, being to warn his Disciples of calamities
and persecutions that should ensue, to stir them up to Remember: that, as the
wise man advised, their end might be in their sight: [Remember the word I said
unto you, The servant is not greater then his Lord.]

THere is nothing so much sets out Second part. {The servant is not greater
then his Lord.}
the Universe as Order, to see how subordinate causes depend of their
Superiors, and this sublunary Globe of the Celestial. Were not this method,
what could hinder a second Chaos? For in the Worlds beginning all lay in one
common womb of darkness, it was only order and that Method Gods fiat brought
a long, which gave distinction and visibility to things. A heaven above the
earth, and light to separate day from night. Man as Lord to rule the Creatures,
and God himself Lord over all. Should all have been equal, what had man been
better then the beasts, save only his shape? Or what the Serpent worse then
other Creatures, save only for his malice? What active predominance should
Fire have had above the other Elements? Or what privilege could that Sire of
generation, Heat, challenge above inactive Drought, or Moisture? Grant equal
force to the Elements, that the qualities of the one should not be more
operative then another, like a Mare mortuum, stupid to all motion would the
World be, and Nature so be calmed that the seasons of the year would be lost.
Heat should not name the Summer, nor Cold the Winter: instead of VVinter and
Summer a blended mixture of the qualities, a lazy lukewarm season would last
all the year. Unisons yield no Music, for Harmony consists of variety in
stops higher and lower, and equality amongst men would breed naught but
confusion: Siquidem aqualia non habent per se ordinem. Look up to heaven and
read over that bright book, you shall see an inequality of light in those
celestial bodies (...) One star 1. Cor. 15. 41.
differs from another in glory: so was it allowed by God, who at the reuiew
of his work found all to be valde bona, very good. And one man differs from
another in glory, in honor, in riches, in abilities of the mind; which
Disparit as perfectionis magis ornat vniuersum, disparity in worth makes the
world more beautiful. All were not borne to be rich, nor all to be wise, nor
all to teach, nor all to rule, but some for Disciples, some for Masters, some
for the Throne, some for the Mill, some for Servants, some for Lords. Which
distinction we owe unto these two Relata disquiparantiae (as Logicians term
them) Dominus and Seruus. These were the two differences which in the Heraldry
of Nature were first put to blazon the coats of all mortality, and make a
distinction betwixt the elder and younger house, the Inferior and Superior:
for (says Saint Augustine) Aug.
Domini and serui diuersa sunt nomina, sed Homines and homines paria sunt
nomina. As men, all are alike: but these respects of Lord and Servant make a
difference amongst them.

To make it more plain, look once more back and see the host of heaven
governed by these rules of subjection and superiority; fecit Deus duo luminaria
Genesis 1.
magna, God made two great lights, unto which the lesser are servants and
tributaries, borrowing their luster from them. And as in heaven so in earth
has he ordained Luminaria magna, greater lights, and higher powers to go
before his people. Though I am not of opinion with that insolent Spaniard Juan
Puente, that Gods meaning or the Text is to be restrained to those two
Catholic Lights set up by him, in the front of his Tomo primero de la
conueniencia de las dos Monarquias Catolicas la de la Iglesia Romana y la del
Imperio Espanol, etc. Author el Mro fr. Iuan de la Puente, de la orden de
Praedicadores, Chronista de la Magd Catolica, etc. En Madrid en la Imprenta
Real. 161 n. Lor mandado del Roy.
book, in which he has taken upon him to add new devices and Mottoes to the
Shields and Scutchions of them both under one, the word Luminare maius vt
praesit vrbi, and dominetur Orbi: under the other, Luminare minus, vt subdatur
vrbi, and dominetur Orbi. But let him pass for a profound Sycophant. I hope
the Kings of the earth shall never come to that nonage, to make them Guardians
of their Crowns. Those lights are well where they are, and best shine in their
own Orbs. I fear they will be too dim to give light to all the nations of
the world; I am sure too hot and scorching for our Climate. Thanks be to God
we need no addition, we have one Luminaria magna of Religion and State,
shining like Lamps in the great assembly of Parliament; and a Julium sydus, an
imperial Star, whose peaceful influence has many years blessed our Land.
May it be long ere this Sun go down, or by his set, leave us in darkness
and mourning! Nor may there want a succeeding Ray, a Beam of that light to
shine in the circle of this Throne, so long as those Duo luminaria magna in
Heaven, the Sun and the Moon shall run their course!

Since then it is established per leges vniuersitatis, by the law of God and
Nations that the Lord must rule, and the servant obey, it were preposterous,
nay monstrous, that the [seruant should be greater then his Lord.] Let no man
whom Fortune has subjected and made a servant, be grieved at his lot, or
think too meanly of that vocation. To serve is no base office, nor is slavery
the badge of servants, but obedience, Servants obey 1. Pet. 2. 18.
your Masters: It is no neglected title of drudgery that alters man from his
creation, but a title of dependence that still referres to a superior, and as
man should do, looks upwards. Men and servants are names near a kin. There
was but one Author that made Man, and the same made Servants, even God
himself, whose decree was, That every Romans 13. 1. 2.
soul should be subject to the higher power. He then that is stubborn resists
notmans but Gods ordinance.

Serui are not slaves, but humiles amici, Sen. ep. 47.
inferior friends. Ye are my friends says Ioh. 15. 14.
Christ to his Disciples; they are Fellows, Immo conserut, si cogitauerts
tantundem in Sen. ibid.
vtrosque licere fortunae; nay they are Brethren, Non dedignetur fratrem habere
seruum Aug. Hom. 42. in orat. Dominic.
suum Dominus eius, quem fratrem voluit habere Dominus Christus.

There are no slaves but such as serve either their own or other men's crimes.
Serui nomen culpa meruit, sin brought Aug.
in the first thraldom; but since the glad tidings of liberty and release was
brought by Christ, who cancelled the Chirographum lethale, the deadly
Indenture, that none may think it an abject duty to serve, he the Lord has
dignified the calling by taking upon himself (...), the form of a Servant.
Phil. 2. 7.


Again, let not the Lords of the earth, whom sovereignty has lifted above the
common rank of men think so highly of themselves that they contemn all below
them, since that Lord or Master are not only styles of preeminence but of
care. For this cause a Master is called the Father of his family, and the King
is Pater Patriae, the father of his Country. In the Prophet you shall find
Dominus and Pater joined. Mal. 1. 6.
If I be a father where is my honor, if a Master where is my fear? Let them
remember that as they have many below them, so they have one that is far
above them, a Master and Lord Paramount, even Dominus Colos. 4. 1.
dominantium: that though they be gods on earth (dixi quod diiestis) yet still
Psalm. 82. 6.
but men, and breathe one common air: that though fashioned ex meliore luto,
of better clay, yet lutum, still but clay: and are eiusdem farinae, of the
self same grane, though sifted by birth and fortune from the branne of vulgar
men: For when all the sheafes in the field did homage to Joseph's sheafe, all
were but sheafes linkt in Genesis 37. 7.
one band of brotherhood from earth and from the womb.

But whither do I press this point? My Text is no plea of Jurisdiction, no
Charter to prove only the Masters prerogative above the servant: which though
it naturally arise from hence, yet is not this all. That is a granted Maxim:
our Saviors meaning is larger and implies that his Disciples being but
servants must not expect better measure at the hands of men then their Lord had
found. Non potest placere seruus cui Gloss.
displicet Dominus, so the Gloss; and therefore as they might not scorn or
think much to run those courses of hazard and reproach which he himself had
past, so neither take upon them out of pride to do more then he. Thus does he
express himself, If I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought to
Ioh. 13. 16.
wash one another feet: there he gives them an example of Humility; here of
Patience, [If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.] To
strengthen which persuasion he argues from this Axiom; [The servant is not
greater then the Lord.]

A just truth and not to be contradicted; but Rome denies it, and that great
Heteroclite in Religion, the Pope, thinks it too scant for him to be
circumscribed by presidents, either of the Apostles, though he calls himself
Peter's successor, or of Christ himself whose Uicar he is proclaimed.

He will ducke and complement as low as may be, style himself Minimus
Apostolorum, and seruus; yea lower yet, seruus seruorum, a servant of servants.
Yea, and yet the Fox wants attributes deep enough to earth his pride in. You
know what in another case Saint Augustine Aug. Ser. 10. de Verb. Dom.
says, Fabrica ante celsitudinem humiliatur, and fastigium post humiliationem
erigitur: it is true in this, those that will build high, lay deepest
foundations. Nor ever was insolence so high flowne, but before it took wing,
it raised it self from the ground. Brutus will kiss the earth, though his
thoughts aim at the government of Rome; so will the Pope lessen himself, and
contract his greatness into short titles, (as the Snake hides her length by
folding her self up into many gyres, and doubles) kiss the ground, even Obad.
1. 4.
when he means to build his nest in the Stars; when he aims not at Romes
alone, but the worlds supremacy.

Thus like a Falcon he stoopes lowest, when he means to soar highest, and his
ambition like a bullet spit from the mouth of a Cannon, first grazes and then
mounts. For behold, from these low foundations, from this flat and bottom of
dissembled humility, he has built a Tower loftier then Babel, on the highest
pinnacle whereof, as on a Pharos, the Banner and Flag of his Supremacy is hung
out; has cast up a Mount equal to Olympus, on the top whereof himself stands
like the Tempter upon Mat. 4. 8.
that (...) exceeding high hill, from whence he showed Christ all the Kingdoms
of the earth. Lo, from hence does he ouerlooke the world, and the Kingdoms of
it, and to maintain the Idol of his supremacy, with an Omnia dabo, sets them
all to sale, proclaiming unto the Kings of the Nations, All these Verse 9.
will I give, if ye will fall down and worship me. But amongst them if there
be any that refuse to adore this Golden Calfe, or question his usurped
supremacy, Res fisei Iuuenal.
est, straight he seazeth their Crowns, and, as due to him by forfeit,
bestows them most bountifully upon any who by force of Arms can get them.

It is not long since he gave away our Land upon the same quarrel (that I may
name no Germane examples, not of yesterday but to day) yet (thanks be to God)
the Title proved so difficult, and the possession so hard to get, that he who
thought it already his, was feign to disclaim the suit, and with loss of fame
and costs return home. Thus does he sit in Templo Dei, opposing himself
against, 2. These. 2.
and exalting himself above all that is called God, that is, all Kings of the
earth (who are styled Gods (Dixi quod Dii, and Christi Dei, Christ's, the Lords
Anointed) Psalm. 82. 6.
which will not acknowledge him their Head, as being impatient to hear of any
Deity equal or greater then himself. Nor against these only does he advance
himself, but he does (...) fight against the God of heaven, and his Christ.
Take a short survey of his practice, and you will find no greater opposition
betwixt the sides of the Diameter, nor larger distance betwixt the two points
of heaven, North and South, nor more enmity betwixt the words Christ and
Antichrist the^ their persons. Our Savior Math. 21. 5.
Christ, when he entered Jerusalem, came riding meekly upon an Ass, no
attendants but his Disciples, and a few poor Villagers; but Kings have walked
afoote Frederick. 1. waited on Pope Adrians stirrup.
whilst the Pope has rode, and Emperors, like Querries, waited on the
stirrup. Christ washed his Disciples feet and wiped Ioh. 13. 16.
them: but the Pope has caused Emperors to kiss his feet. Christ taught us
to give unto Caesar, Reddite Caesari: The Math. 22. 21.
Pope bids take from Caesar the things which are Caesar's; not the Tribute, but
Crown, and life too. Christ refused to be called good, (...) as holding it a
Math. 19. 17.
style fit for God alone; but the Pope is patient of a style so far above it,
as superlatiues can stretch him, Optimus Maximus; and Dominus Deus noster Papa,
Bzouius Annal. Tom. 13. Extra. Verbo Significasti. Tit. 14. cap. 4.
our Lord God the Pope.

Christ instituted a (...), Imposition of hands; but the Pope has practiced
(...), an imposition of feet: For Caelestine the fourth, crowned the Emperor
Henry the Sixth with his foot, and spurned it off again with his foot,
dismissing him with a curse of Excommunication: So as Christ laid his hands
upon them and blessed them; the Pope laid his feet upon the Emperor and cursed
him. Now judge their contrariety, and see if this seruus seruorum, servant of
servants, the Pope, take not more upon him then ever Christ the Lord of Lords
did. Finally the Popes (that I may omit the impiety of their own persons, some
whereof have been Arians as Liberius; some Nestorians, as Anastasius II. some
Heretics, as Syricius, Caelestinus, Platina.
etc. some Sorcerers, as Alexander VI, Sergius IIII. and 17. besides: some
Atheists, as Leo X. who called the Gospel Fabulam de Christo, a fable of
Christ) The Popes (I say) for these many Centuries of years have been such
professed enemies to Christ, that there have been no persecutions, Massacres,
Invasions, Powder-plots, but they have come out in a sort, cum Priuilegio, with
their allowance, their encouragement, their priuity. At their feet have the
garments of all those Jesuiticall Assassinates been laid down, as Stephens
executioners laid theirs at Saul's. Nor do we yet find better measure Act. 7.
58.
(look but to the other side of the sea, and then judge:) Nor can we hope
better, but the voice of the Ancient Churches by them persecuted, cries unto us
in the words of my Text, as Christ to his Apostles, [If they have persecuted
me, they will also persecute you.]

I Am arrived at my last point, which Third part. {If they have persecuted me,
they will also persecute you.} Calui. Harmon. Matthew. 10. 24.
needs no long discourse. Haec meditatione potius quam expositione indigent. It
is a matter fit rather for meditation then proof: and is a story acted, and no
supposition: so that our Saviors [Si persecuti, If they have persecuted me] is
now turned to an assertion, They have persecuted me. Since the quarrel in the
garden betwixt the Woman and the Serpent, the devil Genesis 3.
never wanted Seconds to take up his weapons against the promised Seed. God
told her, Ponam inimicitias, I will put enmity betwixt you; And did he not
keep Verse 15.
tutch? Mark the whole passage of our Saviors life, and tell me what day was
not to him a Persecution. So soon as he saluted the light, to avoid Herod's
bloody Inquisition, which pursued him, he Matthew. 2. 13.
was constrained to fly the land, and like a banished soiourner make Egypt his
abiding place. When Herod deceased, and he vocatus ex Egypto, reuok't, was he
yet secure? No, but in the house of his friends (as Zacharias) so used, that
Barbarians Zach. 13. 6.
would have dealt more mercifully. Amongst his own countrymen the Jews
vnacknowledged and unregarded, scorned, reviled, belyed. He has a Devil, He
is mad, He blasphemes; sometimes conspiracy to throw him headlong from a
Cliffe, sometimes to stone him. Thus was he shuffled up and down from coast
to coast, from the City to the field, from the Gaderenes to Samaria, from dry
land to sea, yet no sails able to make speed from his Persecutions. but Mare
nos repellit ad Barbaros, each shore he tutch't at, was an enemy, nor found
his wearines the benefit of a resting place, whereon to lay his head. As a
Partridge from the fowlers, so fled he from the cruel 1. Sam. 26. 20.
Priests and Scribes, who were [They] in my Text, the Actors in this
persecution: and like a Roe in the wilderness was Cant. 2. 17.
he pursued. Many darts thrown after him. Many toils pitched for him, for
they sought (...), how to take him in the snare: all which though he long
avoided, yet never did they give over the furious chase, till faint and weary
on the top of Caluary their cruelty ouertooke him, where with nails, and
spear they goard his harmless body, and bereaved that Just one of the life
they long had hunted after.

When the Principal is slain, partakers must look to bleed: nor can the
Army hope for mercy when the General is put to the sword. One life sacrificed
cannot appease an incensed enemy, nor could the life of Christ, though the best
among the sons of men, quench the bloody thirst of the Jews, but being
flesht upon the Leader, they are eager after the Heard, and having rent this
Lamb from the fold, they seek to worry the whole Flock. For the devils
commission was not like the command of the King of Syria, Fight neither with
small 1. King. 22. 31.
nor great, save only against the King of Israel: but as that in Zachary,
Arise O Zach. 13. 7.
sword and smite the shepherd, and not him alone, but let the sheep be
scattered: spare none, neither Lord nor Servant, Master or Disciple, but
extirpate all, down with the glorious Temple of Christ's body: Down with it
even to the ground, and Psalm. 136. 7.
let not one stone of that building, one Disciple survive to reedifie the
demolished Church. You see the sad Patrimony of the Apostles, and that (as Hugo
Cardinalis Hugo Card.
has it) Uenit bellum tanquam ad haeredes and imitatores eius; the war
descended to them by inheritance, and persecution was their lot and portion.
For so was the will of the Testator; [Jf they have persecuted me, they will
also persecute you.]

Sin is a fruitful parent, and never yet wanted issue, but as poison runs
successively through the veins, so have her agents drained through al
successions of time. The tyrannies of Gods enemies toward his Church never
ended where they began, and though the persons changed, the malice did not. As
in a Camp the word goes from Centinell to Centinell: so in this, Abyssus
abyssum vocat, one misery called up another: Psalm. 42. 7.
and as the Carthaginians hate to Rome was by the Fathers assigned over and
intailed to the sons; so was the cruel tradition of shedding the blood of
Saints delivered over by predecessors to their following generations, Finis
vnius Sen. Trag.
mali gradus futuri: one persecution has trod upon the heel of another, and
where the old went off, new Scenes of mischief have taken their Cues. The
Monarchies of the world have not shifted oftener their se^^s, then the Empires
of death and Persecution. The first persecution began in Egypt in the time of
Pharaoh; from thence it was derived to the Jews; when they failed, the Arians
and Eastern Heretics went forward with the Chase; and Vbi desinit
philosophus, incipit medicus, where these wrangling Sophisters of the devil
left, the Jesuits began. Those only the great Paracelsians of the world,
whose practice is Phlebotomy, to let States blood Uena basilica.
in the Heart-veine, and deal altogether in metals and minerals, Steel and
Gunpowder: Creatures so prodigiously dexterous in their art, that they are now
become the only Inuentories of mischief. All the shallow elementary examples
of treachery formerly practiced, serving to them, but as a garden of simples,
from whose composition they have extracted Quintessence of such speeding
operation, that it is able to make an Earthquake greater then Nature ever durst
own; and in a moment purge a whole Kingdom into nothing. Thus has the devil
his Infantry belonging to his Camp, and where the old Garrisons were worn
out, new supplies to make good their places, [They shall also persecute you.]

Persecution here is no single appellation of misery, but a compound of all
cruelty; I cannot give a fitter Emblem to express it then that possessed man,
Mark. 5. who dwelt among the Tombs, bound with fetters and chains: so mad
Mark. 5.
and raging does it run about the world, keeps its court amidst the graves,
and her pauillion hung about with the trophies of death, fetters, and whips,
rackes and strappadoes, halters and swords, stakes, and fire. Besides, this
has a name as numerous as his, My name is Verse. 9.
Legion (says the possessed) for we are many: so is Persecution Nomen
multitudinis, a collectiue name of Multitude, in it many Legions of ills, the
Burse of Tyranny, and (which speaks all) a full Inquisition is included:
Persecution of the body, and affliction of the mind, persecution at home,
persecution abroad, and not only Persecutio manus, violence offered to the
body, but to the Good Name by slanders and calumnies; For Non martyrium
Augustine.
sola effusio sanguinis consummat, nec sola dat palmam exustio illa flammarum:
it is not the sword alone, nor the fire which makes a Martyr. There is
Martyrium famae, Martyrdom of fame, as well as vitae, of life. A man may be a
Martyr without bloodshed; and sicca morte, by a dry death attain the Crown of
a Confessor; even by suffering persecution in his fame and honor, which is (as
Anselme calls it) Persecutio oris, the persecution of the mouth. Neither is
this less grievous then the former, it rather exceeds it, as far as the
price of fame is above life. Fear not those which kill the body (says
Christ,) this is more Math. 10. 28.
exquisite, and kills, if not the soul, that which is next in value, the Good
name.

One of these two mischiefs, Os gladii, or gladius oris, either the material
sword of the executioner, or (if not so) the sword of a two-edged lying tongue
has run through all the ancient Apostles, and most of those Haereditarios
Discipulos, Tertullian.
and Apostolici seminis frutices, later Apostles, who in their several ages
have succeeded in the Church. Christ himself was not free from it; was not he
branded with the name of an Impostour Math. 27. 63.
after his death? and the Disciples were Heb. 10. 33.
(...), made Theaters of misery in their lives, of scorn and infamy in their
deaths.

Thus did the Arrians scandalize the great Athanasius.

And, as executors unto them, the Romish Priests and Jesuits with their
frontlesse imputations, have striued to darken the glorious truth of our Church
and Religion, by traducing the Professors, and on their ruined credits sought
to build up their own rotten cause.

Luther was defamed for lewd life, and Bozius de signis Ecclesiae l. 23. c. 3.
conuersing with the devil, and that he had hanged himself. Bucer, for
denying Christ Lindan Dialog.
at his death. Oecolampadius, for dying Cochleus.
suddenly, when he was sixteen days sick in his bed. Calvin, for dying
distracted Hieron. Bolseic. in eius vita.
and desperate; an aspersion which my Author says, Bolsecke himself recanted
in the Synod with tears.

Beza given out for a Convert, and a reuolter from the Protestant Church to
theirs. All which so gross and false, that some with their own pens confuted
the calumniations cast upon them, and amongst the rest, Beza, after the report
of his death and conversion, published his own defense, and their periurious
falsehood, in a tract called Beza rediuiuus, Beza revived.

I have yet one instance of the selfsame quality, as false as that, though not
so well confuted. One indeed too many by that, and so dear, that I could have
wished He had not so soon been added to this catalogue of wronged Worthies:
But that wish is vain, and like Him, lost: and by that loss am I furnished
with what most willingly I would have wanted, a sad example. Your conceit
already looks through me, and my meaning is articulated in your apprehensions,
before uttered in words.

One he was, known to all enough, to me more nearly, as being tied to him in
double bonds of Canon and of Nature; Sometimes the Bishop of this See, or to
use the phrase of Saint John, the Angel Apoc. 2.
of this Church, though now taken up into a better Hierarchy, the society of
Angels in heaven. I had cause to think he now was out of the reach of
detraction, and too high fixed to be traduced, but I see floods of reproach
thrown after him by the Papists, as after the woman in the Wilderness.

For my own part, I thought once not to have meddled at all in this subject,
knowing that Rerum irrecuperabilium foelieissima est obliuio, unhappy losses
are happily forgot; much less with the slander raised after him, supposing it
too light upon the Balance, to poyze or sway any wise man's belief.

Again, I could not judge it but as very ridiculous, or malicious: if
ridiculous, I hoped, like a fume it would have vanished; For mendacia diu non
fallunt; Cyprian.
and, having arrived at nine days, the age of a wonder died in laughter. If
malicious, I held best not to take notice of it. For injury is no injury, if
not apprehended. Omnis iniuria in sensu patientis (says one:) to own a
scandal, crowns the revenge of the Author, whereas, neglected, it quickly
finds its own grave.

But I see, this spurious Brat has found too many Nurses, since it was
exposed, and like a Snow-ball by rolling is grown greater: Longa aetate non
infringitur, Minut. Felix.
sed augetur, and as it has acquired more age, so also with those that wish it
so, more credit. Therefore because impudent auouchings make wise men sometimes
doubt, and the ignorant stumble; and for that I would not with a guilty silence
seem to betray a Truth, or confirm their error, who take all for granted
which is not contradicted; I have at last adventured to speak: Not that I hold
my self fit or able for this task at any time, much less now; but only for
that I hoped what I should say might win more belief, as having been an ear
witness, and which is more, Oculatus testis, an eye-witnes of all his last
passages, and could bear record against his Accusers falsehood, as Saint John
did of the truth, Quod vidimus, quod audiuimus, 1. Ioh. 1.
etc? Yet alas what can I say! what proportion will words hold against
peremptory assertions? I have nothing to convince them but a plain vnglost
denial, Petilianus dicit, Ego nego; They say Aug.
it is so, I know it is not, and in a just case it is Rhetoric enough. Let
bad causes shroud themselves in suspected apologies, Truth needs no clothing,
but as a principle scorns proof or demonstration. Besides it were difficult
to prove a Negative, much harder to refute an untruth by the tracke: you may
as well descrie the Eagles path, or define that which is a twinne of the same
litter, non ens. Neither find I any such President from that Incarnate Truth,
Christ Jesus, who being accused by clouds of false witnesses, answered either
nothing at all, or very little, according to his own prescript, Let your
communication be yea, and nay. And yet if I would seek evidence Math. 5. 37.
to cast them, I would look no further then their own Jurors, but ex ore
ipsorum, from themselves fetch circumstance to confute them. For I never yet
knew any Lie so close built, but there was some loope-light for the Truth to
discover it. This is mendacium fenestratum, has many wide windows for you to
behold it.

First (you know) He, whose conversion they now urge, had been long an
eyesore to them, railed on by many of their Pamphleters, Parsons especially,
and that other unchristened Jesuit, (for he has no name, or else shames to
put it to his book) who thought it would be credit to his work, if he could
bring in the name of Doctor King, though but in the Rere and Postscript. Judge
then how can this Report cohere? to detest him living, to defame him sick, yet
claim him dead? Were it true, there is little policy to trust a reconciled
enemy: But being so false, it is most impious and diabolical to belie the
dead. For insidiari Genesis 3. 15.
calcaneo, which Gregory expounds to be Finem vitae, is the devils proper
passion.

Secondly, for the Author of his conversion they allege such a one, who sure
uttered words which no man ever heard, and acted feats which none could see.
For had he been a Substantive visible, or to be understood, and no Iugler, nor
dream, nor air, nor mere metaphysicall noiton, we, who were scarce ever
absent, should at one time or other have descryed him. But peradventure it was
a night-piece, and not fit to be perused by every light. Well then, apply
their own Ignis fatuus to it, and grant them as much as they can suppose, and
mark if it appear not far worse.

You must presume first Mutes only for the Actors in this Scene, thoughts or
wishes to have been Ambassadors in this parley; for what Mercury flew on this
errand? what servant or friend employed to disclose the purpose of his
Conversion to the Confessor? did he by inspiration know his mind, or venture to
him unsent for? that were strange, unless some walking Friar or Fairy from
Saint Omers, or Doway gave him intelligence; or else some whirlwind rapt him
and bare him to the house, as the Angel took up Habakkuk by the hair of the
head, and set him in Babylon.

Next, a prison door opened at all hours of the night, either by corruption
of the keeper, or by miracle, as it opened to Saint Peter: Free passage through
Act. 12.
each ward, access without impediment into the house, nay bedchamber of this
sick Patient; attendants either none, (which were unlikely) or sleeping;
Belike such as guarded the Sepulcher, whilst our Saviors body was stolen away
by his Disciples. Whether the servants slept or no, I will not dispute: sure I
am, the Tares are sown by Seeds-men, envious and dangerous, Seminaries and
Priests.

Thus you see, like Mathematicians, they draw a great many idle lines, have
many concessions to bring their conclusion about, and when all comes to issue,
their maine Agent proves Corpus Mathematicum, a mere imagination next to, yea
just nothing.

Nothing indeed, for bearing any part in this design: a man first (by their
confession) so unfit to reconcile any to their Church, that he is by them
disauowed for a Son, or Member of the Catholic Church; Thomae Preston
Appellatio. p. 8.
Neque authorem illius disputationis aut Ecclesiae filium aestimare. Besides,
they make him no less then a Persecutor, worse then Luther or Calvin, or then
a Reprobate. And secondly, such a one, who for his own particular had
professed to many, and often, that He had never set foot within the gates: yea
and disclaimed it utterly with a Non noui hominem, he did not know the face of
his suggested Convert. The foulest mouth of them al cannot disprove this
Personatus ille Schulkenius extra omnis modestiae, and charitatis Christianae
limits, tam horrenda crimina VViddringtono imponit, illumque tam inuerecunde
calumniatur, vt eum, quantumuis Ecclesiae Catholicae Roma nae se filium esse
sincere prositeatur, ipso tamen Luthero, Calui no, aut alio quouis
perditissimo, and in reprobum sensum dato homuncione deteriorem faciat,
illumque praeter manifestae haereseos crime, quod illi falsissime obijcit etia^
impijs. simis Christi Domini Apostolorum, omniumque Christi Martyrum
persequutoribus, and Ecclesiae Romanae sedisque Apostolicae hostibus iuratis
aequiparare non perhorrescat. Id. page 6.
. But they think belike all gaine-sayings are fruitless, since it is already
entertained at Doway for Orthodox, and by them licensed to the Press. So that
what before was only Fama volans a flying report, is now liber volans a flying
book. I confess it, and withal know the disadvantage, that there now stands
a whole Impression against me: yet let them know a Truth, though but breathed
into the air, carries more power then a printed Lie. If ever any, this is one,
and of the grossest edition. I now perceive, their intelligence is as false as
their quotations, and both as equivocal as themselves. The best is, this is
not the first Libell which has flowne from their press, witness the three
Conuersions, the life of Saint Francis, the story of Garnets straw, and of our
Lady of Loretto, Caluino-Turcismus, and that which outstrides the largest fable
in Ovid, the Golden Legend.

Yet I would be glad to do the Author al right; one thing I must commend him
for, that, in setting down the Conversion of this our Bishop, he is so brief,
following that rule of the Poet, -- Breue sit quod Juuenal.
turpiter audes; short styles best suite opprobrious and unjustifiable
subjects. For, like the Dog at Nile, he laps but fearfully, and straight
flies off. Neither do I so much blame him, he did but there, as in all other
parts of his book besides, show his skill in Poetry, and that he was a
Graduate in that eighth science which they beyond Seas have added to the seven
others, Art calumniandi, the art of slander; that he had studied Saunders,
Parsons, Cochlaeus, and Bolseca, better perhaps then Saint Augustine, or the
Scriptures.

Besides, being now invested a Priest, (and I know not whether Archpriest) it
is not unlikely but as Philosophers are bound to study Aristotle, so he to
read over and study Caiphas the high Priest, and by custom to let loose some
Barrabas, some pestilent Pamphlet to humor the Synagogue of Rome, and
advantage their cause: all which considerations do somewhat extenuate his
fault. But for the Surueyour of his book, Matthew Kellison, that would feign
have the world take him for a politic wise man, and a solid Critic, as
having measured out Religion by the Acre, and taken a Geometrical Survey of
it, I know not how to excuse him: certainly if he had been half so careful
to search the truth, as he was busy to survey Religions, he would never have
suffered himself to be so grossly guld with every fabulous Gazette, and idle
Corante that posts betwixt England and Doway.

I desire not to be mistaken; I come not hither to plead against them, nor to
plead for Him, whom they have so palpably injured. Let obscure names hire a
Panegyricke to varnish them over: fair and perspicuous Texts need no
dictionary or gloss to construe them; such I take Him to be. That He suffers
under their mis-report, hurts not him; it rather gives foil and luster to him.
It was the honor of dead Patroclus, that two Homer. Iliad.
armies fought for his Corpse: and it was the glory of Moses, that an
Arch-angell Jude Ep. verse. 9.
strove with the devil for his body: and if two Religions strive for him, as
the Council did for Paul, or that Vrbs septicollis, Act. 23. 9.
seuen-headed City contends for the new birth of his faith, as the seven Cities
did for Homers birth, can it less be then an honor, and such a one which
Christ vouchsafes not to all? Many have died, but Frustra peritura cadauera, as
subjects not worth a contending for, past in silence. Therefore the Apostles,
when they were conuented and imprisoned, Ibant gaudentes, they went in triumph,
Act. 5. 41.
greatly rejoicing that they were held worthy to suffer reproach for the name of
Christ, and for his Gospel. So that it is not his hurt; the hurt is, as Rome
meant it, yours, if you believe it; for by believing it, you make your selves
Authors of it. Qui ista credis, potes and facere. Tertullian.
If any should labor to persuade that Snow were black, his foul report could
not fully it; and though you might think him shameless that would auerre it,
you would take him to be mad that should believe it. Thus is his case more
miserable that is rashly credulous to deprauations of other men, then he that
first forged them The deviser of them knows they are false, nor can he by
telling make them true; but he who believes them, alters the property, and
dogmatizes them for truth. And as the Artizan, who casts or carues the Image,
is not the Idolater, but he that worships it when it is made, -- Qui colit ille
facit; so neither is he so much the liar that Martial.
tells the lie, as he that believes it being told. It is Saint Hieroms advice,
Ne obtrectatoribus Hieron. epist. ad Celantiam.
authoritatem de consensu tribuas, ne eorum vicium nutrias annuendo: Do not
thou authorize slanders, by giving credit to them, lest thou make the crime
thine. It shall be my advice to all that hear me, and to such as hear me
not, for Opprobrium non accipere aduersus proximos suos, not to receive or
credit Psalm. 14.
opprobrious calumniations cast out against our brethren, is one of the degrees
of innocence and happiness recited by the Psalmist. Do but remember, that if
God has denounced a woe against Psalm. 14.
those that speak evil of Good, Et iustitiam iusti auferunt ab eo, and rob
the righteous of their good names, he has also a woe for them, Qui furem
vident and consentiunt, who consent unto the theft.

But my persuasion is misplaced: you are not such before whom I need to clear
him of this defamation. I hope with modesty I may use Saint Hieroms Hieron. Ep.
ad Celant.
words, Aduersus obtrectatorum libidinem pugnat meriti magnitudo; he had
deserved better rank in your estimations then so. For did he so long run his
course through this Churches Zodiac, and as a true Diocesan visit each Pulpit
within your City (some of them oftener) and not only taught within it, but
(...), Luke 4. 14.
in all the adjoining villages where he lived; never allowing his numerous
affairs so much as a Sabbath or Sundays rest, whilst he was able? So; by his
unwearied industry, telling the world, that they which for gain, or ease, or
for ambition aimed at Bishoprics, mistook that weighty calling, since that
(as Theophylact Theophylact. in Ioh. 26.
speaks) Ministerium affert, non facit Dominum; when Christ made his Apostles
Bishops and Superintendents of his Church, he appointed the^ not so much to
Lord the flock, as to feed it. Did he all this, and with that zealous care,
that as a Torch he consumed himself to light others? and, when Himself
should fail, provided, so far as in him lay, for a succession in his Blood,
to set hand to the same plough; having dedicated (in his desire) all his Sons
(in act Two) to the Ministry of this Church, and by no means willing to hear
of any other course (though otherwise invited by Gracious offers for some of
them in particular) to be undertaken by them, save that function alone? And can
it be conceived he should, after all this, turn a shifter of his Religion? Let
me ask with better right then did Zedekia, 1. King. 22. 24.
When went that Spirit of God, which had accompanied him through all the
passages of life, from him? Great buildings, before they fall, give warning of
their ruin, by inclining some way or other; what argument did he ever give of
his Revolt? or that like Ephraim, having bin so long harnessed, so long
militant in Gods battles, so long a Captain in the Army, he should in the
last day of battle turn back, when he had now but one enemy to encounter,
Death? that he should forsake his Colors, or like a (...) and Renegado, recant
that faith which with much contention, and with loss of Spirits he so long had
maintained? Had his resolution wauered this way, how could he have disguized so
apparent a relapse from those reverend B. of Couentry and Lichfield. B. of Bath
and Welles. B. of Ely.
Bishops who were his familiar and frequent visitants; and especially his most
honored friend the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, who was with him on the
Wednesday before his decease? (...), is the old rule; the end of life ever
answers the beginning. If so, who can imagine that One, who began in
opposition to the Church of Rome, should end in Apostasy and reconcilement to
it? Nay, that good Father is confident, Mors mala putanda non est, August.
Ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 11.
quam bona vita praecesserit: It is incredible he that lived so well, should
make so inglorious an end.

Nor was this confidence in him any way abused; neither his end
disproportionate to his beginning. He that had so long taught others how to
live, was by his own infirmities tutord in the art of dying. It is not strange
he should be perfect in this lesson, since for a long time (to use the Apostles
words) He dyed daily; 1. Cor. 16. 31.
his sharp agonies having made his life but (...) no better then a living
death: unto this wholly does he address his thoughts, and admonished by his
increasing pains, as from the tongue of the Prophet, sent from God to summon
Ezekiah, he sets his house in order. Where first he resolves himself into his
principia naturalia, bequeathing his Soul to God that gave it, his Body to the
dust from whence it was taken: and not only so, but In principia fortunae, he
resolves his fortunes into their beginnings; acknowledging with all thankful
duty, that under God, our gracious Sovereign had been the maker of them. I
will not conceal his own words dictated in his last Testament. First, I
bequeath my soul into the hands of Almighty God, beseeching him for Christ
Jesus sake, my most blessed Savior, that as it has pleased him, even from my
mothers womb, to take me into his special favor and protection, and to
continue the same unto me thorowout all the passages of my life, especially
under my most gracious Ma^ter and Sovereign, the Instrument of his goodness
and bounty to me and mine, for these eighteen y'eres; and has vouchsafed me,
though the unworthiest of many, to be a Minister of his holy Word and
Sacraments: so it would please him in this my time of sickness and grievous
infirmity, to hold me up by his right hand, and to vouchsafe me the comfort
of his holy Spirit, that I may patiently endure this cross and affliction
which he has laid upon me. A Petition as soon granted as desired: nay I may
say as it is in the Prophet, Antequa^ clament, ego exaudiam. Esa. 65. 24.
God heard his prayer long before it was framed in this place. For from the
first beginning of his sickness, he was endued with such a spartana
patientia, well knit patience, that some of his Reverend brethren coming
purposely to comfort him, professed they found more comfort from him, then they
could bring: and though he might truly say with David, I am weary of my
groaning, and Psalm. 6.
Every night wash I my bed with tears; Yet never did any impatient murmr (it
was a religious boast in the Lord, vttred by himself) break from his lips
against that high hand which had so long humbled him: neither did that Petra,
rockestony disease grow so fast within him, but his Christian resolution
hardened as fast, and his faith built as firmly on the true Rock of his
Salvation Christ Jesus; with the Invocation of which Name he began and ended
the day, using most frequently those words of Saint Paul, Cupio Phil. 1. 23.
dissolui, and esse cum Christo, I desire to be dissolved.

But before he loosed from this shore, considering he was bound for a long
voyage, he was not unmindful, first to take in Uiaticum animae, the holy
sacrament; which he professed in the presence of some Sir Henry Martin his
Chancellor. M. Matthias Call licot. M. Philip King his Brother, John King his
second Son, and myself, etc.
especial friends, his wife, children, and family appointed by his own
inuitation to accompany him to that feast, as Christ to his Disciples, Luke 22.
15.
(...); his soul had greatly longed to eat that last supper, and to perform
that supreme Christian duty before he left them. Yea, he so hungered and
thirsted after that Bread of life, and that Cup of salvation, that though all
solid sustenance was become odious to his palate, now quite disabled from
taking it down, yet he professed, duty and Religion should prevail above his
weakness, and he would force himself to eat that sacred Bread, which as it
was the first he had in many days before tasted, so was it the last. His
Chaplain Doctor Cluet, Archdeacon of Middlesex.
ministered to him, who (let me not omit) having read the Confession, for that
purpose, was by him commanded to read it over again. Having happily
accomplished this service in all our hearings, he gave thanks to God, that he
had lived to finish that blessed work, (it was his own speech) and after a
short prayer, conceived by himself, he dismissed the company.

Such was his devout preparation, and so long did he observe the tedious Vigils
before the festival of his dismission; his day of Rest was now come, which, as
if reserved by Gods favor, was that very day his Savior did on, Good Friday:
and that time of the day when our whole Church was exercised in prayer,
according to the custom of that Day (near eleven of the clock in the
fore-noone) as if he had stayed to take the help and advantage of good men's
devotion to set him forward: a day, which might incite Prophets and Patriarchs
to desire to end on, being truly Dies meus (as Christ said) My Day: a good and
blessed day, John 8. 56.
and of all others most proper to crown and dignifie the end of good men.
Drawing now fast to his end, and ready to hoyse sail for another World, he
requests the valediction of our prayers at the parting. Our obedience forthwith
actuated his will; straight was his bed encompassed with mournful Clients,
ready to offer up a religious Uiolence to heaven for his sake. First, he
expressly causes his Chaplain, now his ghostly Father, to read the Confession
and Absolution, according to the ordinary for me of Common prayer in our
Liturgy. Which ended, and our prayers having taken a short truce, as awaiting
somewhat now from him, he bids the curtains to be quite thrown open, and
whilst we kneeled, not unmindful of his Episcopal office, to show he was
not so exhausted, but he had yet One Blessing in store, he distributes a
benediction round about, to every one of us there present; so that his Bed was
now like the Mount Garrizim, from each corner Deuteronomy. 11. 29.
whereof a Blessing resounded.

His speech here felt a stop; but neither our Prayers, nor His understanding;
for testimony whereof, desired by his Chaplain to make some sign, his heart
went along with us, and took the same course our Prayers poynted out, with a
most speedy hasted elevation of Hands he expressed that his Heart, like Elias
before the Chariot, yet kept pace with us, though his tongue could not: and
though he wanted Organs to eiaculate his Prayers, the eiaculation of his eyes
darted up to Heaven now supplied that want. There they yet fixed, as if either
he had with Stephen beheld the Heavens Acts 7.
opening for his admittance, or meant to mark that place whither his Soul now
bended, or else that his Body was emulous to have gone along with it: For we
might perceive, that like the two Disciples that ran to the Sepulcher, they
Joh. 20. 4.
both ran to seek Christ, but that Other Disciple outranne Peter; Anima
antecessit corporis moram, the Soul too swift for the Body, left it behind.
And yet that followed Ioh. 19. 40.
with the best speed it could make, and ligatum linteis, wound up in a bare
winding sheet (as far from superstitious Pomp, after it wanted breath, as
himself ever was whilst he had breath to reprove it in others, or to He
commanded in his Will, his body to be buried in the Cathedral Church of S.
Paul, without any Pomp or solemnities, only with a Tombestone with this
Inscription, Resurgam.
forbid it in himself) Introiuit monumentum, came unto it is Sepulcher, his
corpse being borne thither by men of eminent degree (...) Act. 8. 2.
and worth in our Church, like those who carried Stephen to his grave, Act. 8.
2. the very even before that blessed morning wherein those two Disciples came
to Christ's: This difference betwixt their Epitaphs; on Christ's Grave,
Resurrexit, he is risen; on this Servant of Christ's, Resurgam, I shall rise,
and in the mean, rest in assured hope to be partaker of the Resurrection of
the just. There now committed to the Earth by that Reverend and most Orthodox
Prelate, in Religion and learning equally absolute, my Lord Bishop of Couentrie
and Lichfield, Where also was present the Lord Bishop of Ely.
(who concluded the last Act of the entire affection mutually borne betwixt
them living, by honoring his dead Corpse with rites of Burial) does it
peaceably rest: and let me here rest. For in my own particular it must ever
be a part of my Prayer (and it is a wish I would not be so unthrifty to venture
but upon good assurance, nor settle it elsewhere) Sic mihi contingat viuere,
sicque mori: May my course of life be such, and may my end be like his. Or, if
it be too much ambition for me to crave Eliah's 2. King. 2.
spirit, that is, to live like Him, an humbler Boon shall content me, to
possess his Mantle; that is, to Dye in the profession of that Protestant Faith
in which he did.

I have touched upon a sad string; a subject to which affection and sense is
quick; I could not less in piety then (...), as Telemachus to his Father;
Homer. Odyss.
or as the Latins have it, Parent alia perficere, perform my last Parentall
Duty, and act these Justa, Rites; though not Exequias, Funerals to His
memory, which will longer survive in the breasts of good men. Nor could I more,
then in this sort Parentare iniuriis (out of so just a provocation as wrong
done to a Father) take that temperate Revenge of a Slanderer, as to disprooue
him. My Speech here finds a Deliquium, and Cupit dissolui, labors in the
period: Suffer it to gasp a few minutes, and it suddenly expires.

Let no man doubt, or waver, or think the worse of Religion, for that so noted
a Professor is traduced. These are stale tricks with our Adversaries, since it
has been long their practice, like the Lunaticke in Athenaeus, ever wont to
stand up on the Key of the City, if any fair Ship of rich burden (any
noted (...), vessel fraught with knowledge Acts 9. 15.
and true profession of the Gospel) had made to the Haven, to cry, It is
theirs, it is theirs. Again, let no man be confirmed, that this Scandal is
true, because they so peremptorily believe it. Such is their impious
Credulity, that it is grown a Maxim among them to believe any thing, were it
never so false, were it Contradiction, so it made any way for them: For those
very tongues, which out of malice gave out in time of his sickness, That
through impatience he had offered violence to himself; those very same, after
his death, out of the abundance of their Romish charity, would persuade the
world, he died Reconciled unto their Synagogue: for I may not call it Church,
unless it be Ecclesia malignantium, Ecclesia maledicentium. Nor let this Lie
prove more authenticke because Printed; that rather discredits and weakens it,
and you have now more cause to suspect it then before. It is a ground in their
Religion, that Unwritten traditions have Ad confutandos haereticos mator vis in
traditione quam in Scriptura. Canus Loc. lib. 3. cap. 3.
more authority then written Scriptures. And if so, why should not we take them
at their word, and make as slight and scornful reckoning of their writings,
as they of Gods?

Lastly, that none may wonder, or be perplexed, or through a nice misprision
suspect there could not but be some ground for this farre-blowne Calumny, let
him but [Remember the word that Christ said,] and what He Suffered, and then
all wonder will end in satisfaction. For who can think it strange that Christ's
Servants are slandered, when He their Lord and Master could not avoid the
poisoned breath of Slander? If His Innocence had no protection, but that He on
no ground at all was belyed by malicious tongues, surely on as little ground
will they belie any Disciple of His; [For the Servant is not greater then his
Lord:] And (says Christ) If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you.]

Why then, Sufficit Discipulo vt sit sicut Magister eius: Let it satisfy all
the world Matthew. 10. 25.
and his own fame, that this (now dead) Disciple has had but the same fate
and usage his Master had.

It is the glory of Imitation to counterfeit the life; and Art is most proper,
when it most resembles Nature. The Apostles were but Copies drawn from Christ;
their perfection therefore must needs be greatest, who come nearest to the
Original: And that Disciple is a true Disciple, who learnes not the Lesson,
but the Master, not only suffers for Him, but in degree and quality as like as
may be to Him. This is truly Discere Christum, to learn Christ; this is
Induere Dominum Jesum, to put on the Lord Jesus; this is to Partake the
sufferings of Christ. They who durst partake his sorrows, shall share with Him
in joys: they that are sicut in terra, shall be also sicut in coelis: For so
has the Spirit assured us. It was the Motto of his Episcopal Scale.
Si compatimur, conregnabimus; If we suffer with him in earth, we shall reign
with him in Heaven. Behold, a voice has bid me write, Blessed Matthew. 5. 11, 12
are ye, when men revile and persecute you, and say all manner of evil for my
Names sake falsely; Rejoice and be glad, great is your reward in Heaven.

TO THE READER.
HOw little I affect to be in Print, needs no Apology to any, who either know
already it was the desire of some my most Honorable friends, whose entreaties
were commands to me, or but consider the subject which first set me a work, a
Slandered and traduced Father: unto whom duty and necessity urged me to do
this right. And I clearly profess, if a true relation of his end may do him
right, I have faithfully performed it, and have given the world so just an
account of Him, tanquam Ephemeridem Deo traditurus, as if I should have made my
conscience last shrift to God. Whether I have uprightly stewarded his honor,
and my own faith, I leave to the strict judgment of any, who are able to
distinguish colors, and discern Truth from Imposture: being confident, as
innocence can make a man, that none are able to disallow the reckoning. Si
veredicam, Deus testis; si mentiar, Deus Vindex. As therefore the acquitting of
His integrity was the prime motive which entered me into this Quarrel, so now
the clearing of my own fidelity was a secondary motive for the publication of
it. First, that they might not think by false alarms and the confused outcries
of Report, to bear down a good cause, or so easily to triumph in their
supposed victory, as if none durst affront them; I thought good, in the mean
time, thus on the sudden to check the rumor, till happily some more deliberate
pen (which they shall not long, or vainly expect) may quite race it out. And
though this birth of mine were more hastily formed, I hope it will not be
untimely, for Truth never knew abortion; but, like a star newly risen to
discovery, has its being of old, though the observation was but late and
modern. Secondly, to let those calumnious tongues, who gave out my Revolt also
as well as my Fathers (both true alike) know, I have not yet so doted on their
part, or disaffected my own, as to leave my Country, or Religion; nor, I
think, ever shall, except my understanding, wits, and above all, the Grace of
God leave me: or their persuasions have the same power over me, as Mercuries
had over Sosias, that they can make me believe Ego non sum Ego, I am not the
Son of such a Father. And what in this case, on my own behalf, I write, is
likewise auowed on behalf of my second brother, JOHN KING, entered into the
same orders as my self; who also had his share in this lewd imputation, as
well as my self: for we are not more brothers in nature, then (by Gods mercy)
in this resolution. Thirdly, to take the liberty of adding and explicating some
remarkable circumstances, which better become a Margin then a speech. Lastly,
that though the slander has hitherto got the start, the Detection might, at
last be set in a course to overtake it. Which task, Sermo transiens, a Sermon
pronounced, could not so thoroughly effect, except it were also Sermo in
scriptis, written. A course no way improper, for scriptor praedicare dici
potest; Gerson de laud script consider. 1
A Writer is in some sort a Preacher; Certe si lingua silet, manus praedicat,
and fructuosius aliquando, quanto Scriptura venit ad plures vberior quam
transiens sermo; though his tongue be silent, his Pen preaches: and a Sermon
preached from the Press, sometimes edifies so much the more then from the
Pulpit, by how much the Report is carried further. So that the audience which
before was but Parochial, or at most Provincial, may by this means grow more
General and (as it were) Oecumenicall.

And now having committed it to the view of all men, I will not preiudicate, or
doubtfully forestall the belief of any. I make no question but all will rest
satisfied, except those wayward dispositions, who are resolved aforehand not
to be satisfied at all: Non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris; having banished
all reason from them without hope of repeal. Such, though unwillingly, I must
leave to their own hardened obstinacy, -- Stultos iubeo esse libenter, and
suffer fools gladly that will be so against my consent. If they can yet
flatter themselves with any advantage, this fiction may afford them, I shall
not envy them that Paradise, into which their fond imagination has put them.
I rather pity the poor shifts they are driven to, for the keeping of their
weather-beaten Cause a-float. All the harm I wish them is, that they would
leave off this thredbare trade of Calumny, especially toward the Dead, grow
better acquainted with speaking and writing the Truth, and not conuersing with
her at such a distance, as now they do. Or if they will needs be Architecti
mendaciorum, still hammering untruths; I would aduize them to lay probable
foundations, and choose such Materials as are more malleable, and (in the worlds
esteem) not so impossible for them to work upon as He they have here
selected. For every wood will not make a Mercury; nor is every good man a fit
mould to cast Them a Convert in. Farewell.

H. K.

THE EXAMINATION OF THOMAS PRESTON, taken before the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, at Lambeth, December. 20. 1621.
BEing asked, Whether he has not heard by report and brute abroad, that it
has been said of him, that he was with Doctor King, late Lo. Bishop of
London, a little before his death, and that he reconciled the said Bishop to
the Church of Rome, and therein performed unto him the office and function of a
Priest.

And being further asked, Whether he has not heard of a Book not long since
published, which is entitled, Protestants Plea, and Petition for Priests and
Papists, and that in the same Book it is said, that the forenamed Bishop did
humbly at the feet of a Priest confess his sins, receive Sacramental
absolution at his hands, and was reconciled to the Catholic Roman Church; And
being hereupon charged upon his conscience, and his Priesthood, to speak the
truth, whether he were the person spoken of by report, or designed by the said
book to perform such an office.

He answers, That it is true, that he has often heard, that such a Report
was spredde abroad concerning him, and many both Protestants and Catholics
have come unto him to inquire, whether that report and bruit were true or no.

And that he has heard, that in the book before named, some such thing is
delivered, and upon the day of this his examination he was showed the book by
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, wherein he found those things before
mentioned to be contained.

For the declaring of truth in all which, he protests before God, and upon
his conscience, as he shall answer at the dreadful Day of Judgment, that the
said Bishop of London did never confess himself unto this Examinate, nor ever
received Sacramental absolution at his hands, nor was ever by him reconciled
unto the Church of Rome, neither did renounce before him the Religion professed
and established in the Church of England, nor did perform any other
circumstance tending that way, as is in the said book of the Protestants Plea
delivered.

Yea he adds further, that as he has hope to be saved by Christ Jesus, he
this Examinate, to his knowledge, was never in company where the said Doctor
King late Lord Bishop of London was, neither did he ever receive letter from
him, nor did write letter unto him; neither did he ever (to his knowledge) see
the said Bishop in any place whatsoever, nor could have known him from another
man, and therefore affirms, that this bruit and report is raised concerning
this Examinate, and the said late Bishop, without any true ground and
foundation.

Being asked what he should think to be the cause wherefore any person
should raise this fame or report, he says, that from the beginning he did
conceive it to be nothing else, but that some, who did malign him, were
willing to disgrace him, or undo him, by bringing him in obloquy with the King
or State, where he remains a prisoner.

Being demanded, whether ever he has probably or credibly heard that any
other Priest did repair to the said late Bishop, did take his Confession, gave
him absolution, or reconciled him to the Roman Church, he protests, that he
did never credibly or probably hear of any such thing.

Being asked whether he has heard, that Mass has been said for the said
Bishop, in any part beyond the seas: he answers, that he has heard such a
report, but does not know any thing of certainty concerning the same.

Examinatur coram G. Cant.

Ego Thomas Prestonus qui supra, testor haec omnia esse vera.
Recognit. coram nobis 28. December. 1621.

T. Edmondes. Geo. Caluert.



In praesentia mei

Gulielmi Bakeri Notarij Publici.



Faults escaped in some Copies.
Page 3. lin. 20. read (...). page 9. lin. 16. page 11. lin. 8. and page 18.
lin. 18. read [The word that I said unto you.] p. 28. lin. vlt. in marg.
read, Rey. p. 29 l. 16. read, our Luminaria. p. 43. l. penult. read, Abyssum
inuocat. p. 44. l. 11. read, States. p. 45. l. 2. r. Inuentories. Ibid. l. 7.
Extracted a Quintessence. p. 54. l. 4. read, Notion

In the Epistle to the Reader.

Page 1. lin. 17. read, Sivera dicam.


