The Breuiary of Britayne.

As this most noble and renowned Island, was of ancient time divided into
three, Kingdoms, England, Scotland and Wales*

Contaynyng a learned discourse of the variable state, and alteration thereof,
under diverse, as well natural: as foreign princes, and Conquerours.

Together with the Geographicall description of the same, such as neither by
elder, nor later writers, the like has been set forth before.

Written in Latin by Humfrey Lhuyd of Denbigh, a Cambre Britayne, and lately
Englished by Thomas Twyne, Gentleman.

1573.

To the Right honorable, Edward Deuiere, Lord Bulbeck, Earl of Oxenford, Lord
great Chamberlayne of England: Tho. Twyne wishes long life, perfect health,
increase of honor, and endless felicity.
Nobility is a precious gift, which so glittereth in the eyes of al men: that
there is no one corporal thing in this world, whereof we make a greater
account. For so is it esteemed of all, desired of all, and reverenced of al.
Virtue, says TVLLY, and before him PLATO, if it might be seen with our bodily
eyes: doubtless it would procure merueilous love, and good likynge unto it
self, the show thereof would appear so faier, and amiable.

The uniting of which two most noble graces, with all other furniture of Nature,
and Fortune with in your person, right honorable, and my very good Lord, has
so bent my judgment, and brought me into such likyng, and admiration thereof
that I have rested no small time, not only not satisfied in being one of the
admiratours: but also desierus to be one of the participatours of those your
honors most laudable dispositions, whereunto I do now humbly submit my self.
And in token of my dutiful meaning herein: am so hardi, as to present your
honor with this simple traueyle, which I so term, in respect of my pains in
translatyng the same. Howbeit I am persuaded, that it cost M. Lhuyd, who first,
and not long since wroate the same in Latin, no small labor, and industry in
the gatheryng, and pennyng.

Regarding your honor to be amongst therest: a very fit patron for it, in
consideration, that being, as yet, but in your flower, and tender age, and
generally hoped, and accounted of in time, to become the cheifest stay of this
your commonwealth, and country: you would receive into your salf tuition, the
written name, and description of that Britayne, which, as it is in part your
native soil: so your duty bids you to defend and mantayne it. Here on, when
your hono^r shall be at lea sure to look, bestowynge such regard as you are
accustomed to do on books of Geographie, Histories, and other good learning,
wherein I am privy your honor takes singular delight: I doubt not, but you
shall have cause, to judge your time very well applied. And so much the rather,
for that in the study of Geographie, it is expedient first to know exactly the
situation of our own home, where we a bide, before that we shall be able to
judge how other countries do lie unto us, which are far distant from us,
besides that it were a foul shame to be inquisitiue of the state of forreyne
lands, and to be ignorant of our own. As your honor being already perfectly
instructed: is not now to learn at my ^ande. But for my part, it shall be
sufficient, that your honor would dayn to accept this small present, or rather
therein my hearty good will, which being no otherwise able to gratefie the same:
shall never cease to pray to God, that he would always direct you in the
commendable race of virtue, and learning which you have begun, augment your
honor with many degrees and in the end: reward you with immortal felicity.

Your honors most humble at commandment: Thomas Twyne.

THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLAtours to the Reader.
WHen I first took in hand this Book, (gentle Reader) and was determined to
translate it into English: I considered the great judgment, and learning of
the Author, and mine own simplicity, and unskillfulness. By conference
whereof: I was eftsoons driven from my determination. For I perceived how
dangerous a thing it was for me, who, God knows, am but a simple antiquarie,
and but slenderly practiced in the antiquities of this Island: to give forth
my absolute sentence in such matters as are in controversy, not only amongst
the most approved, and best learned ancient writers in this behalf: but also
between such as have been very well seen therein in our time, whereof some be
dead, and some be yet living. Which I saw yt of necessity I must do. As for
this one example, among many. Although it be not yet fully agreed upon, what
town in England the ancient name of Caleua does signify, and the place
thereof, be also as uncertain, as upon which side of the Thames it should lie:
yet followynge mine author so near as I may: I am enforced to determine some
way, I am sure not without mislikynge of many. The like reprehension I have
incurred, in the Englishyng of names of diverse places more, some English, some
Scottish, but especially, Welsh, or Britysh. In so much yt I was determined to
have set them down, as I had found them in M. Lhuyds Latin book which he,
for that he wroate in Latin: had, so nigh as he could, made them al Latin
words in sound, and termination. But being therein much lightened especially by
the help of the rightworshipfull M. Doct. Yale of London: I trust I have
deserved less blame in yt, then in any other one part of my translation, how
be it, for my little skill in yt tongue: I am the more I hope, to be borne with
all. And where as the author in the Latin copy, recitynge the peculiar
Letters, and the pronunciation of them, with the propriety of the British
tongue, in steed of a double letter, as DD, or a lettre with an aspiration, as
LH, would, for breuety sake, have them written with the same letter and a prick
under the foot: for want of ye like letters: we have throughout the whole
work, expressed ye same to that very effect in ye double letter, or with
aspiration, from place to place, where he has used ye same under pricked
letter. So that hereby, saving; for his conceit of writing: there is no error
committed at al. And herein I thought it needeful to admonish thee.

Moreover, if there shall happily appear any fault, by us now committed, either
in misnamynge any person, Town, or other thing, wrong placing of words,
evil allegation of writers, altering of the authors meaning by false
poynting, one word put for an other, or such like, the truth whereof I could
not exactly try out, by diligent animaduersion, or due conferrence in so short
time: I most heartily crave pardon, and must needs impute the most part thereof
unto the falsenesse, an disordre of the Latin copy, printed at Colone. Whose
errata, are more then I have commonly seen in a book of no greater quantity,
and yet if the Printer would have noted all: he should have noted twice so
many as he did, besides that there are many errata in erratis.

But perhaps some will merueile, what is my reason that I have termed this
work in English, the Breuiary of Britayne, since it is not entitled so in
Latin? To them I answer, that if they deem of the Latin title a right: they
shall perceive yt I have not strayed one jot from the authors meaning. For,
where he calls this book Comme^tarioli Britannicae descriptionis fragmentum,
that is to say, a fragment of a little treatise, or discourse of the description
of Britayne: waygh, and judge indifferently (good Reader) how much I have gone
byside the purpose.

And here peradventure, it may be looked for, according unto the custom of
some translatours, I should fine; and pick my pen, to set forth the
commendation of mine author, as in very deed, some of them had need to do.
But I fear me much, least in mine over rash attempt, in taking so worthy a
writer in hand, not being furnished with any greater skyll, and learning in
this his kind, then I am known to be: I have deserved just blame, and M.
Lhuyd, if he were living: would have desired me of less acquaintance.

Whose passing earnest traueile, in attaynyng skill, and knowledge: has
deservedly purchased unto him immortal fame, and so much the rather, for that
he has therein endeavored him self to do his country good, whereunto all men
are naturally bounden. And not only contented to take the pains for his own
knowledge sake, but willing to pleasure other thereby: has communicated the
same unto the world.

Which commendable example of his, I trust shall be a provocation unto some other
in this Realm, that have traueiled long time, and taken much pains in the
searching out of antiquities, and anncient Monuments of Britayne, not without
their great charges (Whose singular learning without suspicion of partiality,
I may not commend) to attempt the l^k^* (...) that they be hindered b^
(...)l^ng to do nothing th(...)tie ought to be furtherers, an(...) ^o others.
And for my part, I (...)en the pains with hazard of mine e^emation for the
English Readers sake, which understands not the Latin ^ongue. To whom I
thought it as (...)h appertayning, to know the state, and description of his
own country: as to the learned be he Englishman, or stranger. Only for
recompense, gentle Reader, let me have thy good word, and lawful favor: and
I ask no more. Farewell hartly, and enjoy it.

A friend, in praise of the Author.
THE British soil, with all therein that lies,
The surging Seas, which compass it about
In what estate of heat, or cold of skies
It stands, with many things of other rout:
Lhuyd in this book has put the^ out of doubt.
Which though in view, it be of body small:
in brief discourse it does comprise them all.
Ptolom his pen it seems he had in hand.
Sometimes in Seas, with NEPTVNE he did dwell
IVNO to skies plucked him to view the land,
Else surely could he not have done so well,
That thus so right of every thing does tell,
As though he stood aloft, and down did look,
And what he saw: wroat straight into his book
Each Hill, each dale, each water worth the name,
With Forests wide, and many a standing Wood,
Each City, Town, each Castle great of fame,
Each King, and prince spronge forth of noble blood,
Were bad his reign, or were it just and good,
So much as skild him for to touch therein:
To tell the truth he forced not a pin.
Thy country Lhuyd, is bounden much to thee,
Which make it unto us not only known:
But unto such as in far countries be,
Whereby thy fame the greater way is flowen,
And eke thy countries praise the more is growe^,
So by one deed two noble things are chanced:
Britayne, and Lhuyd, to heaven are advanced.
In Latin thou, the learned sort to please,
In single pain, a double skill did show.
In English Twyne has turned, for greater ease
To those, the ROMAN tongue that do not know.
The work is one, though tongues be twaynel trow.
The Latin thou, the English Twyne did twyst,
The learned laud you both, disprayse who list.
Finis.
Thomae Brounei Praebendarij Westminster. in Commentariolos Britannicae
descriptionis Humfredi Lhuyd Denbyghiensis, Cambri Britanni.
FLumine Lhuyde fluis, laxis effusus habenis,
Dulcis, and irrigno flumine LHVYDE fluis,
Nereides, viridesque Deae, pater Inachus aiunt,
Parnassi ex ipso vertice Lhuyde venis.
In mare dulcisono Lhuydus fluit amne Britannu^:
Clamant Cluydae flumina, Lhuydus adest.
Et nouus ille, nouis auxit faelicius vndis
Fontes, Annals, inclite Brute tuos.
Nomina vera docet Regionis, fluminis, vrbis,
Et cuiusque loci quae sit origo, docet.
Vt vere scripsit: sic vero interpret gaudet,
Sed Lhuydus Latij fluminis amne fluit.
Anglus hic interpres, Romanum iam facit Anglu^.
Scripsit vterque been: laus sit vtrique sua.
Ed. Grant, Scholemaster of Westminster: in commendation of this treatise of
Britanie, pende in Latin by Hu^frey Lhuyd, and translated into English, by Tho.
Twyne.
IF for to write of Brutus brood,
each Britaynes brain be bound,
For zeal he owes to country soil,
and eke his native ground:
Then Wales may boast, and justly joy,
that such a Britayne bred,
which has with serious search of brain
and toylyng travel spread,
Throughout the coasts of Britany,
and forrayne countries strange:
The lively fame of Brutus name,
that through the world does range.
That long lay hid in dungeons dark,
obscurde by tract of time,
And almost smouldred with the smok^
of ignorances crime:
But now reuiude and polished,
by Lhuyd his busy brain:
And brought to light, and former frame,
by his exhausted pain.
Whose diligence, and judgment great
I can but muse to see,
That with such skill does paynt
the praise of Brute, and Britanie,
That with such love to countries soil
does bring again to light:
The shinyng shape, and stately stamp
of that was darckned quight.
By whose endeavor Polidore,
must now surseace to prate,
To forge, to lie, and to defame,
king BRUTUS worthy state.
By whose great pains, proud Hector
must now leave of to babble,
Such vaunts: as of his Scottish soil, Scot,
he whilom seemd to fable.
By Lhuid their brags be beaten down,
their forgyng lies be spide,
And Britain needs must chaleng fame
that erst it was denide.
Lhuid finds forth her former fame,
and antique names does tell:
And does refute their forged lies,
that did of rancor smell.
Brutes worthy race is blazed here,
by trumpe of flickering fame:
And Lhuid, it is a flowyng flud,
that has reuiude the same.
Who, though enterred now in earth:
yet shall he never die,
But live amongs his Britanists,
by this his Britanie:
whose thread of life would god the Fates
had yet not sought to spoil:
Then had we had a larger scope
of Brutus sacred soil.
Go little volume, go thy ways,
by Lhuid in Latin pende:
And new attired in English weed,
by Twyne that thee does send,
To Brute his brood: a labor sure
that well deserves praise:
Go show thy self to Britanists,
whose glory thou do raise.
FINIS.
Lodowick Lhuyd, in praise of the Author.
GO on, be boulde, thou little book,
sound forth thy aucthours fame,
Advance the travel tried of him
that christened first thy name.
Thy state exilde, thy age unknown,
thy line that long was lost:
Is now returned, and known again
in ancient Britaynes cost:
From Scythia shore, from Phrigia feilds,
where long thy self have lain,
From raging Rocks, and crased cragges,
thou art come home again.
Thy patron graunde, and ancient Sire
Aeneas Troiane stout:
Did never toil on land and SeaS,
as thou have rangde about,
From Mountains high whereto thy self
alone wast wont to talk:
Lhuid, taught thy steps to tread in Court
with Princes wise to walk.
If then Solinus merit fame,
that Caesar's stirpe have pende:
The same ought Lhuyd of right to claim
that Brutus line defend.
If Curtius be aduauncde on high,
Alexanders fame to feed:
Then well ought Lhuyd commended be
to honor Hectors seed.
What praise had Liui then in Rome,
or Herodot in Greece:
That praise ought never Humfry Lhuyd
in native soil to leese.
Who, being alive: could Argos make,
with sugared talk t(...)e:
And now being dead, (...)t Argos make,
with hundred eyes to weep.
Who, though his corpse is clothd in clay*
in mouldred dust to lie:
In spite of Parcas, yet his fame,
does skale the empire sky.
And though that age out lives youth,
yet death does age exile:
Though fame suruiueth death again,
yet time does fame defile.
So youth to age, and age to death,
and death to fame in fyeld:
And fame to time, and time to GOD,
this Lhuyd knew well to yield.
Since then he found Misenus trumpe
to sound again the fame
That once was won, and then was lost:
extol each one his name.
And give him then his due desert,
enroll his noble mind:
That first have taught, his countrymen
their country state to find.
Finis.
Laurence Twyne, to his brother Tho. Twyne, in praise of his Translation.
ALL that which learned Lhuyd of late
in Latin did endite,
Of Britaynes race, their ancient state,
their guise, and countries rite:
Lo now in English tongue by true
report, and cunnings skill,
Twyne has set forth the unlearned sort,
their pleasure to fulfill.
Wherein who list to look with heed,
straight Britaynes state shall know.
And wherwithall this noble land
in ancient time did flow.
Lhuyds pains was much, in latin style
which wrote the same before:
But Brother, sure in my conceit
thou thanks deseruest more,
Of Britaynes, and of British soil,
which makst them understand.
A thing more meet (me thinks) for them
then for a foreign land.
Wherein as thou by toil, have won
the spurs, and praises got:
So reap deserved thanks of those,
for whom thou brakst the knot.
FINIS.
John Twyne, to the Readers of his brothers translation.
AS they of all most praise deserve,
that first with Pen did show,
To us the sacred laws of God,
whereby his will we know:
So, many thanks are due to those,
that beat their busy brain,
To let us learn our earthly state,
in which we here remain.
Amongst the rest that ever wroate:
none has of us deserude
Like praise to Lhuyd, who lo, his foyl^
has here to us preferred.
Wherein thou may the whole estate,
of this our native land,
What so is worthy to be known:
by readyng understand.
And, cause the aucthour wroate ye same
in tongue, enstrangd to some:
Twyne has it taught ye English phrase
in which it erst was dumb.
Accept it well, and when thou readst,
if ought thereby thou gain:
For recompense yield thy good will,
to him that took the pain.
Finis.
A Table containing the principal matters entreated of in this book, largely
digested into the Alphabeticall order, as follows.
AEstiones. Fo. 52 Albania, whence so called. 49 described, 47. Albion, why so
termed. 4 Anglysey in Wales. 57 Animositie of Britaynes. 62. their ancient
manners. 61 Arfon. 64 Aron martyr, where buried. 82 Attacotti inhabitours of
Albania, of Scottish original. 45 Augustine the Monk. 13. his intolerable
arrogancy. 71
B
Bardi. 7 Bath, how of old time termed. 18 Bedfordshyremen. 24 Benbroche. 78
Bernhard of Newmercate. 83 Bernicia. 28 Boadicia, or Bunduica, a valiant que^^
85. 89 Bodotua. 48 Boethius reproved. 21. 24. 33. 38. 49. 81. Bogwelth, or
Buellt. 83 Brecknock. 83. by what Englishman first subdued. ibidem. Brennus,
whose son, and brother. 53 why he slew himself. 54. what language his
Soldiers used. 54. his Court, or Palace. 72. was a perfect Britayne. 53
Brenni, where they dwelt. 55 Brigantes, were never in Scotland. 30. their
Cities names. 29 Britayne, why so named. 8. how divided. ibid. the Etimology
thereof. 8 Britayne the less, or the Second. 35 Britayne the first, second,
third, and fourth. 35 Britaynes how they celebrate Easter, 67. their
Ualiencie, 69 British names corrupted by ye Romans. 5 Britons nigh France. 10
Brustius cruelty. 83. his miserable death. ibidem. Bristow. 18
Buckynghamshiremen. 24
C
Cadeuenna. 73 Caesar, what he terms a City. 32 Caerbro castle in the Wight.
17 Caer Andred, by whom ouerthrown. 15 Caerlile. 47 Calice. 14 Cambria, why so
called. 49 Cambra. 53 Cambridge. 23 Camalodunum. 21 Camudolanum. ibidem
Cangorum where it stands. 66 Cantimanduas treason. 34 Cantorbury, why so
called. 15. metropolitan of England, and Wales, ibid. Caradoc described. 33
Cardigan. 75 Castle of Clun. 34 Castle of Dover. 14 castle of Emlyn. 79 castle
of Lion. 70 Cataracus, where he ^aught with Ostorius. 34 Catguilia. 79 Ceretica
described. 75. 79 Chepstow. 81 Chester. 27 Chichester. 16 Cicester. 19 City of
Legions. 82 Cities of Brigantes. 29 Clun castle. 24 Commendation of the Bathes
at Bath 18 Conouia, by whom builded. 65 Cornish, and Welshmen one nation, 18
Cornwall. 17 Crneltie of Brustius. 83 Cumberland, by whom in old time in
habited. 30 Cymbri 15
D
Danes came in. 13 Danica Sylua. 74 Dannij 30 David, how termed in British. 77.
translated ye Archbishopricke to Meneue. ib. Death of Brennus. 54 Death of
Brustius. 83 Deheubarth. 74. why worse then Gwynedh. 75 Deera, in old time
called Briga^tia. 30. 28 Demetia. 77 Denbigh. 66. described. ibidem. Deuani.
26. how called of old by the Romans ibi. Description of Albania. 47 Description
of Cambria. 49 Description of Caradoc city. 35 Description of Ceretica. 75.
79. Description of Denbygh. 66. Description of Tegenia, or Igenia. 68
Description of Wales. 62 Division of Britayne. 9 Division of England. 12
Division of Wales. 62 Division of Venodotia. 64 Divisions are dangerous. 93
Dorchester. 24 Doruentani, why so called. 27 Dover. 14 Dover castle by whom
builded. 14 Druydes. 42 Dunetus Abbot. 71 Dunwallon forsakes his kingdom. 68
Diverse kings possess^ diverse parts of Wales. 63
E
Edward the first, entered Wales. 58 Edinburgh, by whom builded. 48 Egbert first
Monarch of Lohegr. 19 Eluyl. 74 Elbodius archbishop of Northwales. 67 Emlyn
castle. 79 England divided. 12. by whom first so called. 13 Englishmen whence
descended. 12 Earls of Glocestre. 58 Etymology of Britayne. 8 Etymology of
Gaulle. 56 Euboniae. 49 Example of Gods judgment. 69 Exceter. 17
F
Famyly of Stuarts in Scotland. 34 Famyly of Grayes in England. 67 Famyly of
Fitzalanes. 72 Flauia. 35 Flemmyngs, driven out of their own country, what
place they possessed. 57 Flint town. 69 Forest of Deane. 74 Franci, whence
supposed to have spro^ge 53. France bounded. 56
G
Gadini. 47 Gloucester, by whom builded. 19 Golden number confuted, and
rejected. 68 Gwynedh. 58. whence the kings thereof so called. 64 Grancestre. 23
Gyldas reproved. 93 Gyldo. 42 Gylford. 16 Gyllus usurper. 42
H
Hamo with his. xii. knights. 80 Hastinge. 93 Hebrides. 49 Hengiscus sent
against the Scots, and Readshankes. 12 Henry the second vanquished. 92 Henry
the fourth. 59 Henry the seventh. ib. Henry the eight, 60 Henry Earl of
Lincoln, builded a castle. 66 Herald, last king of Danish blood. 25 Hereford,
where it lies 74 Herryng taking. 65 Hiberne^ses afterward called Scots. 44
Hierome Russelle reproved. 28 Hierhauts, and Hierhautrye by Welsh men
diligently retained. 7 Holt. 70 Hopa. 72 How many cities, so many kingdoms in
Britayne. 32 Huntingtonshire. ^4
I
Iceni, what region they inhabited. 23 Idiome, or propriety of the British
tongue. 3 Iernaei. 4 Islands about Anglysea. 64 Ilcestre. 18 Irishmen called
afterward Scots. 44 Irland. 49. by whom first endued with Christianity. 63
Julius the martyr, where buried. 82
K
Kennethus, king of Scots. 38 Kent. 14 Kynton. 74 King of Englandes eldest
son Prince of Wales. 59 King Arthur. 91 King of Powys, why swallowed into
the earth. 69
L
Lancashyremen, how termed of old. 32 Landas where it stands. 80 Landonia 47.
of the Readshankes how called. 48 Lhanydlos. 73 Lasciuiousnes of the Scots. 43
Latitude of Wales. 57 Legion cities site described. 82 Lemster. 74 Letters of
the Britaynes, their order, form, and pronunciation. 1. Leycestershyremen. 25
Lyncolnshyremen. 24 London, by whom builded, amplefied, the names thereof, 19. a
colony of the Romans. 20 Longitude of Wales. 56 Lucopibia how termed, and where
it stands. 30 Ludlaw. 74. Lychfyeld. 25
M.
Meatae. 48 Mailor divided. 70 Malmsbury. 19 Maluernhilles. 74 Manchester. 32
Mandubratius sent for Caesar into Britayne. 19 March, a kingdom of England. 27.
32
Authors, whose names, and works, are cited in this Book.
Ammianus. Annius. Antoninus. Appianus. Aristoteles. Athenaeus. Aurelius
Victor. Beatus Rhenanus. Beda. Boethius. Berosus. Caesar. Capgraue. Claudianus.
Crantzius. Diodorus Siculus. Dion. Eliote. Eutropius. Frossartus. Giambularius.
Gothus. Gyldas. Gyraldus. Haymo Armenius. Hieronomus. Hierono. Russellus
Herodianus. Huntingtonensis. Iuuenalis. Lampridius. Lazius. Lelandus. Lucanus.
Mayor. Mamertinus. Malmsburiensis. Marcellinus. Marianus Scotus. Marius Niger.
Mela. Meyerus, Orosius. Panuinius. Parisiensis. Paulus Diaconus Pausanias.
Plinius. Plutarchus. Polybius. Polydorus. Postellus. Ptolomaeus. Sextus Rufus.
Sidonius Apollinaris Spartianus. Solinus. Suetonius. Sigisbertus. Tacitus.
Regino. Rhicuallensis. Robertus Coenalis. Virgilius. Virunnius. Volateranus.
Vopiscus. Wilhelmus Paruus.
The Epistle of the aucthour. To the most adorned, and best deseruynge to be
reueren ced of all that love the knowledge of the Mathematics. Abraham Ortelius
of Andwarp.
DEARLY beloved Ortelius, that day wherein I was co^stayned to depart from
London: I received your Description of ASIA ad before I came home to my house:
I fell into a very perilous Fever, which has so torn this poor body of
mine, these. x. continual days: that I was brought into despair of my life.
But, my hope Jesus Christ, is laid up in my bosom. Howbeit, neither the
daily shaking of the continual Fever, with a double Tertian, neither the
lookyng for present death, neither the vehement headache without intermission:
could put the remembrance of my Ortelius, out of my troubled brain. Wherefore,
I send unto you my Wales, not beutifully set forth in all poinctes, yet truly
depeinted, so be that certain notes be observed, which I gathered even when I
was ready to die.

You shall also receive the description of England, set forth as well with the
ancient names: as those which are now used, and an other England also drawn
forth perfectly enough. Besides certain fragmentes written with mine own
hand. Which, notwithstanding that they be written forth in a rude hand, and
seem to be imperfect: yet doubt not, they be well grounded by proofs, and
authorities of ancient writers.

Which, also (if God had spared me life) you should have received in better
order, and in all respects perfect. Take therefore, this last remembrance of thy
Humfrey, and for ever adieu, my dear friend Ortelius.

From Denbigh, in Gwynedh, or Northwales, the. xxx. of August. 1568. Yours both
living, and diyng: Humfrey Lhuyd.

THE BREVIarie of Britayne, etc.
FOR so much as* in my last letters which I wrote unto you (right learned Sir:)
in the which I promised within few days after, to send you the Geographicall
Description of all Britayne, set forth with the most ancient names, as well
Latin, as Brittysh, wherein, I must much disagree from the opinions of learned
men: I thought it expedient, first in a few words, to disclose theffect of my
purpose to all, and by what arguments, and aucthoryties of the learned I am
moved, partly to change, and partly to ascribe unto other, (otherwise then
those which wrote before me have done:) ye names of Cou^treyes, Towns, Ryuers
and other places. Which before I take in hand to do: I purpose to entreat a
little of the knowledge of the Britysh tongue, of the signification of the
Letters, and the manner of pronouncinge the same.

Whereby the true name, both of the whole Island, and of many places therein, may
be manifest. The ignorance of which tongue: has driven many notable men to
such shifts, that endeuorynge to wind them selves out of one: they have
fallen into many more, and those more grosser errors.

The order, and signification of the Order, and signification of the letters.
letters is this, as follows.

A. B. D. E. H. L. M. N. O. P. R. S. T.

They have the very same pronounciation in the Britysh tongue, which they have
in the Latin well pronounced. C. and. G. have the same force, and
signification being placed before all the Uowelles: that they have before A.
and O, in the Latin tongue.

CHAPTER expresses the nature of. chapter called chi among the Grecians, and has no
affinity with the pronounciation in French, or Englysh of the same
aspiration, but is sounded in the throat, like Cheth in the Hebrew. Double DD,
as it is commonly written amongst our country men, or amongst the learned,
after this manner DH, is pronounced like the Greek Delta, or like the Hebrew
Daleth without Dagas. We use F, always for V, when it is a consonant, as
Lhanfair, is in reading called Lhanuair, for V, is always a vowell. In steed
of the latin F: we use PH, or Ff. We make I, continually a vowell as the
Greeks do, and is pronounced as the Italian I, or rather as as the barbarous,
and unlearned Priests in times past sounded E. We have also a peculiar Letter
to our selves, which the ruder sort fashion like LL, but the better learned
write with LH.

I am not ignorant, that the Spayniardes have in use LL, and so have the
Germans LH. As in the proper names of Lhudouicus, and Lhotharius the Emperor
in Panuinius: is evident.

But neither of thease expresses ours, howbeit, I take it rather, that ye
Mexicani, Mexicani*
which inhabit the newfounde world, do use that Letter, which the
Spayniardes express by LL, but because I was never amongste them: I doubt
whether it be so or not, for ours is sharp in the hissinge. For this letter L,
is pronounced with a strong aspiration, puttyng the tongue hard to the teeth,
being half open, holdyng the lips immouable, the right pronounciation
whereof: is not easily learned, but by much exercise. V, has always the
force of a vowell, and has almost the sownde which the French V, has, or
the Hebrew Kibutz. For V: we use single F, the consonant.

Besides the five vowelles, which the Latins use: we have other twain, wherein
we follow the Greeks.

First duble VV, and sounds not much unlike the Latin V, or to speak more
plainly: as the simple heretofore were wont in Latin falsely, and barbarously
to pronounce O. The last of the Letters, and vowels is Y, which we must
examyne, hard to be pronounced somewhat like Ypsylon, as the learned of
th'uniuersitie of Drford do pronounce it. L. X. and. Z. are nothing needful to
the writynge of our words.

For K: we use C, as we said before: we have also many Diptho^gs, in which both
vowels, yea: if there be three (as it chances often:) keep their full
sound, or some part thereof.

Having thus much forefasted of The propriety of the tongue
the nombre, and nature of the Letters: let us draw near to the propriety of
the tongue, where we must note, that like as the Greeks, and Latins, in
thendes of their words, have variations, and cases: so this tongue
contrariwise, has the same changynge in the beginning of the words. Whereby it
comes to pass, that even the best learned, through ignorance of the language
have been very much abused in the names of Provinces, countries, and other
things: let us therefore briefly run over this proprietye.

Every Britysh word, whose first radicale is P, T, or C, has in writing, or
discourse of talk to avoid evil sownde three variations, so that radicale P,
is sometime turned into B, into PH, and into MH. T, into D, into TH, and into
NH. C, into G, CH, and into NGH. as appears in these examples. An Head is
called Pen in our tongue, out of the head: o ben, or his head, i ben: with an
head, a phen: or her head, i phen: my head, fymhen.

Hear you see a strange mutation of this letter, when it is called in one
place Pen, in another Ben, in the third Phen. and last of all Mhen. Likewise
Fire in British is called Tan, out of fire, o dan: with fire a than, my fire
fynhan. In like manner C, is changed: for love is called in our tongue Cariad,
out of love, o gariad: with love, a Chariad: my love Fynghariad. Also B, with
D, and G, radicals: have their peculiar variations, as for example sake: Bara,
which signifies Bread, out of bread o Fara, where F. has the force of V
consonant: my Bread, fymara. And like as B. is changed into F, and M: so is D,
into DH, and N: as Duw, with us the name of God, which is so likewise
pronounced by the Frenchmen, (though it be not written with the same letters,)
out of God, o Dhuw: my God, Fynuw. G. in the first place vanishes away, in the
second place, it is turned into NG: as, Gwr, which signifies, a man: out of a
man, o Wr: my man, Fyngwr. Besides these: LM, and KH, have one only variation,
as: Lhyfyr, a Book: out of a Book, o Lyfyr. Mon, the Isle of Angleysey: out
of Angleysey, o Fonn: Rhufayn, Rome: out of Rome, o Rhufayn. The other be never
radicales, as: D, F, T, H, L, K. or else they be not changed: as PH, CH, N, and
S.

THis Foundation, being The description of Britayn
laid, which has troubled many learned men: let us now come to the
Geographical Description of the Island. And first of all, let us briefly lay
forth what diverse men have diversely written of the name thereof.

Aristotle, a grave Author, in his Aristotle.
Book, De Mundo, Of the world: which he wrote to Alexander: affirms that
there be two very great Islands in th`oceane, beyond Hercules Pillars, liyng
above the Celtae, which he calls Brittanicas, namely Albion, and Iernai,
which name of Albion, both ours, and also the Roman Histories do acknowledge
as very ancient, and derived from Albion, the Son of Neptune, there regnynge
about the year of the worlds creation. 2220. whereof (God willing) we will
speak more at large in another place. But, whereas some say, that it is so
named, by reason of ye white cliffes: it is plain ridiculous. And I wonder,
that men otherwise circumspect enough, could be blinded in such light, as to
have darkened all the names of places, and men, with latin Etimologies, or
deriuations: seeing it is well known, that the Latins at that time possessed
but ye least part of Italy. And that the Apuli, and the Calabri: spoke the
Greek tongue, and the Tusci: the Ethrus^an tongue, and almost the residue of
Italy was possessed by the French men* whereby, neither the Latin name, nor
their tongue was known to the borderers. Into which error: Robertus
Coenalis, a French man, very well learned, with diverse other, has fallen,
while he endeuoreth to set forth the names of countries, and cities of both
Britaynes, the Island, and the continent: in expositions, and deriuations from
the Latin Whereas th`author, forgetting himself: says in an other place, ye
first of all the Romans, Julius Caesar beheld yt part of France, and this
our Britayne, and that the same places were so termed by the ancient
inhabitants, before ever they heard of ye Roman name. Whereby I, as one not
sworn to mantaine the opinion of any man, but following Reason: the faithful
guide, and leader of the wife: do constantly avouche, that the deriuations and
deductions of the* antique names of Britayne, and the parts thereof: are not to
be sought out of the Greeks and Latins, but forth of the most ancient
Britysh tongue. For, how shamfully the Latins have corrupted the names of the
Kings, and places of the land, while they study for the finesse of their
tongue: it is manifest to al those, which being furnished with any skill of the
tongues: come to read the Roman histories. For so, very falsely, they have
called Hermannus, Arminius: Ernestus, Ariouistus: Dictrichus, The odoricus, and
the invincible king of Britayne Meurigus: they have called A^uiragus, and now
of late years, Polydorus has termed Rhesus, the son of Thomas, Rychard.

Since therefore it is evident, that we must not trust unto ye Roman names:
let us come to our own natural tongue, by means whereof, we shall bring the
true name of Britayne to light, which to accomplish the better: we must
something say before.

Caesar, which first of all the Romans CAESAR
has celebrated the name of this Island in the Latin tongue: called it
Britannia. Whom, almost, all other Latin writers imitating: have not changed
the same name. Notwithstanding, only Sir Thomas Eliote a Knight, S. Thomas
Eliote.
(whose learning is not to be contemned) has stand up of late amongst us,
who contendeth, not without good reason, and probability, that it was called
in old time Prytannia, which he proves by a very ancient Copy that he had
in his hands. But, where he says that it was termed so in Greek, for the
plenty, and abundance thereof: surely I (which do quite reject such
deriuations:) do not allow it, yet yeldyng rather to the name of Prytannia,
then Britannia, the authority of which ancient fragment: I will endeavor to
confirm with weighty reasons. But because in so doing, I shall appear to
bring forth certain paradoxes, and opinions not heard of before: the better to
satisfi^ both my countreimen the Britaynes in Wales, and others: I will lay
forth my purpose before all men's eyes, not cleauyng so precisely to mine own
opinions, but that if any man can bring me more better, and more certain: I
will quickly yield unto them. In the mean while (always reseruinge the
judgment of the learned) you shall have mine opinion.

When I chanced of late years, to come to the sight of Polydorus Virgilius the
Italian, and Hector Boethius the Scot, their British histories, whereof the
first maynfully sought, not only to obscure the glory of ye British name, but
also to defame the Britaynes them selves with sclandrous lies. The other while
he goes about to raise his Scots out of darkness, and obscurity, what ever
he finds that the Romans, or Britaynes, have done worthy commendation in
this Island: all that he attributes unto his Scotts, like a foolish writer.

Wherefore, being provoked by these injuries, that I might the better guard my
sweet country from such inconveniences, unto my small power: I began to peruse
all such ancient hystories, both Greek and Latin, as ever had wroten of
Britayne, or the Britaynes: causing not only all such sentences, but each
word also to be copied forth, to the intent that thereout, as of a thick and
plentiful wood: I might gather sufficient timbre to frame a British history.
And not only continued in readyng strange writers: but also the most antique
fragments of our Poets, which at this day (retaining therein, as in all other
things else, the old name) are called Bardi, together with Bardi.
hystories written in the British tongue, which of late so far as I suppose:
were by me first translated into English. And not only conferred the deeds:
but also the names of Kings, and places, in both tongues, where I have noted,
Prydain.
that Britannia was first called Prydain amongst us, as appears in the most
ancient books of pedegrees. Wherein the Welshmen are too too curious, having
amongst them continually certain regesters of pedegrees, and discentes (which
some call Hierhauts) Hierhauts
which perpetually do record in writynge and memory the names of parents,
with their children, contriuinge them into Tribes, as they were divided in old
time. They think as well of them selves, as either the Frenchmen, the Turks,
or Latins, deriuing their original from the Trojans. In these books (as I
say) it is many times found, that this Island was called Prydain: as Paun post
Prydain, that is to say: the cheefist Post or Pillar of Britayne. A certain
writer also, which wrote many hundredth years ago amongste the old valiant
Britaynes: shows the same, besides that the Poets, and those which they
call Bardi, at this day do frequent commonly that word, as: Post Prydain
olh, Pride a nerth that is to say: the pillar of all Britayne, the beutie and
strength. Moreover it is usually found in all our books: Ynys Prydain, that
is to say the Island of Britayne, and Phrainc a Phrydain, that is: France, and
Britayne. Whereby, those that understand the tongue, may easily gather, that
our Britaynes called this Island Prydain in their language, which the Latins
for the hardness, and evil sound thereof, have rejected, and have called the
country Britannia, and the people Britanni, for the more gentle, and pleasant
soundes sake. Which I will prove by these strong arguments followyng.

Every Britysh word (as we have said before,) whose first radicale is P:
has three variations in construction, namely into B, PH, and MH. The name of
Britayne amongst us, sometime begins with B, sometime with PH, and sometime
with MH. Wherefore the first radicale thereof must needs be P. And another
infallible argument thereis, that B is not the first radicale of that name.
Theris no British word whose first radicale letter is B: that abides any
change into P, or PH. But the name of Britayne among the Britaynes, (as the
propriety of the tongue requires) sometimes begins with P, sometime with
PH, as I have showed before: wherefore the name of Britayne has not B, for his
first radicale letter. Neither is it necessary that we^ should seek ye
deriuation of this name from the Greeks, since we may find the reason of it
in our own tongue, wherein, almost, all names of men, and places: are of them
selves significant. Pride, amongst us signifies comeliness or beutie: Cain,
signifies white. So yt by ye joining of these two words together, and taking
away C, in composition, for the better soundes sake: is made Prydain, that is
to say, a white, or excellent beauty, or comeliness. As who should say, the
first borderers thereto, called it a fair and fertile land. But, seeing this
is but a bare conjecture: I am not against it, but that every man hold his
own opinion. Neither am I ignorant, that some very well learned men, and
expert in the British tongue, do write the Islands name with B. which I think
they do, rather followynge therein the Latins, then iudginge the same to be
the true name, knowing the proofs which I have before alleged to b^ so
undoubtedly certain, that themselves cannot deny the^.

Perhaps, here will stand forth some enemy to the British name: saying, that
by these arguments, I do disprove both the coming of Brutus into this Island:
and Polydorus himself, with his Britysh history. But, god forbid, I should be
so impious, in such wise to despise the majesty of Antiquity. Nay rather,
when opportunity shall be offered: I purpose to confirm, (by bringinge forth
many weighty reasons, and authorities, which I have ready in stoare for a
British History) both his cumming: and also to establish the credit of the
British history. Nothing regardinge the folly of those, who, because they
find not the name of it in the Roman hystories: boldly deny that there is
any such in the world at all: seeing, unto those that shall read
Halicarnasseus, and Liuius, so much disagreyng, and also considering the
obscurity of the Latin name at yt time, when Brutus passed out of Italy, into
Greece: it shall easily appear, that through the default of writers, and
necligence of such as wrote afterward, (among whom Liuius, even of the
Romans themselves, is touched with want of trust) many things of greater
importance then ye departure of Brutus, are yielded to oblivion. And although
Caesar call the Britaynes (...), that is to say, borne in the same country
where they dwell. And Diodorus siculus says, that they were from the
beginning: yet, do I believe that Brutus came into Britayne with his train of
Trojans, and there took upon him the government of the ancient inhabitants,
and of his own men, and thereof were called Britaynes. For our cou^trymen unto
this day, do call a Britayne: Brituun, (which word comes not from the
ancient name of the Island Prydain, but from Brutus, the king) and our
hystories call the Britaynes in the plural number Brytaniaid, and Brython,
which words are derived from the name of Brutus. For, in deriuation of
words, our countrymen do often turn V, into Y, the ignorance whereof: did
very much trouble Leland.
my freende M. Leland.

But because this, which we have said, touching the name of the Island, and
the first inhabitants thereof, seems sufficient for our purpose: we will now
entreat of other matters.

Britayne, which more rightly, how Division of Britayne.
beit more strangely, ought to be called Prydain: is divided into three parts,
Lhoegria, Albania, and Cambria. Lhoegria, is called of our countrymen
(reseruyng as yet the old name) that same part of Britayne, which being
possessed by the English Saxons, and the Iuthi, peoples of Germany: is now of
all nations called England. For, when Britayne, by Maximus the Tyranne, was
bereft of all the youth, a great part whereof was slain with him at
Aquilaeia: the residew stoutly invaded, and possessed a part of France called
Armorica, sleayng, and driuyng thence the country dwellers. Whereby that country
at this day, is called by the name of the Less, and the Continent Britayne.

And here I must not let pass with silence, that BID the Englishman,
Volaterranus, and Polydorus Italians, were shamfully ouerseene, in saying that
this Island took his name of that other, being evident to all men, that the
same was termed Armorica, (which in our tongue is as much to say, upon the
Sea) and this ours, Britannia. Neither was there ever any of the ancient
Britaynes, or Britons in France (so far as I know) before Sidonius
Apollinaris, which lived a little after this migracion, that left any
remembrance of it.

But in an Epistle to Vincentius, of Aruandus secretary, which accused his
Lord of high Treason, thus he writes: This letter seemed to be sent to the
king of Goths, or Gutland, diswadynge him from peace with the Emperor of
Greece, and showing that the Britaynes, upon Ligeris, ought to be set upon. So
far he. But if, (as they dream) and also Coenalis, which has erroniously
followed them, ye Britaynes had possessed some part of France, before that
time, and such a part, as should have been called Britayne (as they do
affirm impudently enough:) it should not have escaped unspoken of, of all the
Roman writers, unto whom France was as well known as Italy. Howbeit our
countrymen say, that the Cornishmen, and those were one nation, Cornishmen.
which both the kings names, being like in both countries, as: Conane,
Meriadoc, (by which name a par: cell of Denbygh shyre in Northwales is called
to this day:) Hoel, Alane, Theodore, Rywallone, with diverse other, and also the
proper words, and names for all things almost one (although in their
ioynynge, and construction of speech they seem a little to differ, as it
chances sometimes in one country:) do prove manifestly. Our countrymen call
it in their mother tongue Lhydaw: which word seems to me to be derined from
the Latin word Littus, signifiyng the shore, as who should say it were a
country liynge on the shore of France. For like as the Latins do change D.
in all our words into T: even so our countrymen do turn their T, into D, and
do always, in words which begin with L: write them with aspiration, as:
Lhadron, borowyng the word Latrones, from the Latins, yt is to say in
English Thieves.

But to return again, from whence we have digressed: when, as I have said
before, the youth of Britayne was lead by Maximus into France, and those that
were left at home, were oppressed by the most cruel, and savage nations the
Readshankes and Scotts: lookyng for no succor from ye Romans, which were
then otherwise busied, about the year of our Lord, 450. They called Saxons.
unto them the Saxons, which were then practicing Pyracie on the coasts of
France, and Britayne, and gave them wages to aid them. And whereas some
write, that before that time, the Britaynes never knew the Saxons: it may
appear to be false out of sundry Authors. For Claudianus, where he
inueigheth against Eutropius, speaks of them in these words: about the
year of our Lord, 400.

What I may do, since thou my prince have bin:
Things not far hence can show, for Tethis does begin,
To wax more mild, since Saxons thou have quailde. etc.
Likewise, of the forteth Consulship of Honorius:

The Orchades were wet, with blood of Saxons slain. And in another place,
Britayn speaks

And me (she says) with countries
near about, who was destroyed
Almost, defenced well has Stilico.
By whose help now it is, that Scottish wars I do not doubt,
Ne do I dread the Picts, ne do I fear the Saxon rout,
By standinge on the shore, to see them come with doubtful winds. etc.
Also Sidonius Apollinaris, which wrote about their coming into England:
hansomly describes their Pyracie, in an Epistle to Lampridius.

We may behold the vvannish Saxons here,
Vsd to the Sea before: to dread the shore.
From of whose heads, where outward they appear
Their bittes content to hold not any more,
The shires their tops of hear do clip, and shore
So that their locks cut hard unto the skin:
Do make their head decreace, but face to win.
And in his Panegiricus unto Socer:

But also the Amorick coast, the Saxons pyracie
Well hoped for* to whom, the British salts but play it was
All naked, and with clouted boat, the graysh Sea, to pas.
Moreover, Sextus Rufus. in his book de Notitia Prouinciarum, of the knowledge
of Provinces: speaks of the Earl of the Saxon shore, alonge both the
Britaynes. These (I say) being sufficiently known to the Britaynes before:
they sent them against the Scots and Readshankes, under the conduct of
Hegischus.
one Hengischus. Whom, when they had overcome: they entered a Traiterous league
with them, and like false men, turned their face against their masters. And
having slain the whole nobility of Britayne by craft, at Ambrose hill, and
sendynge for aid from among the Englishmen, and Iuthj, being Germans: they
usurped ye same country which we call Lhoegria. And after almost infinite
battles: they drove the ancient inhabitants into ye ends, and edges of the
Island, and parted the same between themselves, deuidyng it into many
kingdoms, namely Kent, the South Saxons, the VVestsaxons, the Eastsaxons, East
Englishmen, the kingdom of March (whom Lazius, a man very well learned, and
well deserving of posterity: in vain seeks for, in Germany, supposing the
history of Bid to be written of the inhabitants of Germany, and not of
England,) and Northumberland, which was also divided into twain, Bernicia, and
Deira.

Whose kings, being Paganes: destroyed with fire, and sword all Churches,
Monasteries, and Libraries. And after that they had received Christianity, by
Augustine the Monk: Augustine Monk.
they fought many battles, both among them selves, and against the Britaynes.
Until that, about the year of our Egbert.
Lord 620. Egbert king of the westsaxons, being made Monarch of all, began
to rule alone, and first of al commanded that the country should be called
England, and the people Englishmen. Englishmen were a very famous people of
Germany, whereof the Captains, and chief of Saxony (as Crantzius reports)
were long time called Captains of Anglaria. And there remains yet (as I
have read) a Castle, where they sometime abode, termed now Engern, in the
frontires of Westphalia, between Osnabrugh, and Heruordia. Whereby it comes,
that our countrymen, retayning the first name: do call all Englishmen Saison,
and their tongue Saissonaeg, and know not what this words England, or an
Englishman means. Shortly after, the Danes over came the Englishmen, and
possessed this Land, until the year of the incarnate William bastard.
word, 1066: William bastard of Normandy, with his Normans, vanquishynge both
Englishmen, and Danes: usurped the country. From which stock almost the whole
nobility of this Realm, unto this day, do fetch their descent.

But let us return to Lhoegr, which Lhoegr.
in times past was environed with the British Oceane, the rivers of Seuerne,
Dee, and Humber, but now, since the Realm of England stretchefoorth beyond
Humber to Twede: we will also stretche forth the name of Lhoegr so far. And
although the Englishmen do possess beyond Seuern, Hereford shyre, the Forest
of Deane, and many other places: yet we hold, that they dwell in Wales, not
in Lheogr, and are taken almost every where of all other Englishmen for
Welshmen. But the river Dee, is accounted at this day one of ye ancient bonds,
saving yt in certain places, both ye people and the welsh tongue have incroched
more into England.

These things being thus presupposed: let us now descend, to the particulared
escription of Lhoegr, or England. In which the country called Cantium of the
Romans, of our countrime^ Caint, of Englishmen Kent: comes Kent.
first unto our view. From whence there is but a narow cut over into France,
to the haven Gessoriacus, which is now termed Bollen, as S. Rhenanus gathers
out of the ancient Chart of warly descriptions. And not only Marcellinus,
amongst the old writers, speaks of the sea town of Bollen, in the life of
Julian the Emperor: but also in his Panegiricus, called Constantinus, the
son of Constantius: these are found: Consta^tinus, ye father being made
Emperor, at his first cumming, with an innumerable fleet of enemies, pend out
ye fierce Oceane, and environed tharmy, which lay upon ye shore of the town
Bollen, etc. Coenalis affirms, the haven Gessoriacus, is Caslete of Fla^ders,
which town standing upon the top of an high hill, xiiij. miles from the Sea:
sufficiently declares the authors unskillfulness.

And, I take Iccius to be the same haue^, which now they term Caletum, for
Calitium, Calice. But I cannot agree Calice.
with those, which make Selusas of Flaunders, to be Iccius, being unlike, that
the Romans would have used so long a course by Sea, when they might have
passed over sooner, and more commediously, from that place. There were in Kent,
in old time: three famous Ports, well known to the Romans: Doris, Rhutupis,
and Lemanis. Doris, undoubtedly is the same, which both Englishmen, and
Britaynes, reseruinge the ancient name, at this day do call Dover. For we
call Water, Dover.
Dour, or Duur. And I am not ignorant, that the Douarians stoutly defend, that
their town, heretofore was called Rutupium, and that Aruiragus king of
Britaynes, builded there a noble Castle. Yet. I had rather give credit to
Antoninus, who speaks of both. And I suppose, that to be Rutupium, which of
the Englishmen is called Repcestre, nigh Sandwiche, not far from the isle of
Thanat. For that I land we call: Thanat.
Ynys Rhuochym, as much to say: Rutupina, whereof the shore deserved to be
termed Rutupinum, and the Port Rutupis. Lemanis, or as some call it Linienus,
is that River which is now called amongst the Englishmen: Rotler, Rotler.
and flows into the Oceane sea, nigh Apuldore. Moreover besides Rye and
Wynchel* sea.
these famous Ports: are Rye, and VVynchelsea, two towns, and farther within
the main land Durobreuis, and Durouernum, the same Englishmen do call
Cantorbury, that is to say: Cantorburie.
the court of the Kentyshmen, and with us Caergant, and is chief Metropolitant
Sea of al England, and Wales. The the other is termed Rofcester. But Antoninus
places Vagniacu^, between London, and Dorouernum, and between that and
Durouernum: Durolernum, but what names they have, at this day: I am not
altogether ignorant. Howbeit, it is manifest, yt these towns took their names
of Water, which is Duur in British, and Duriuerne amongst us: plainly
signifies water which flows out of a place where Alders grow.

Whereby I am persuaded, that the same town in times past thereof obtained his
name.

But, before I depart forth of Kent: I must briefly touch that great Wod,
whereof both British, and English writers have spoken. The Britaynes call it
Coed Andred, but the Englishmen Andedreswald. And Huntington affyrmeth, that it
contains in length: one hundredth and twenty miles, and in breadth thirty
miles, and that the worthy city called Caer Andred, and Andredecester stood
therein, which Dalla, king of the Southsaxons, utterly overthrew, so yt there
remains no token, nor rubbish thereof. The Kentishmen, and Southsaxons to this
day do call a place, where Wodde has been, Walden, Walden.
not knowing for all that, whence the word is derived. When others, but
falsely call it VVelden, others VVylden. For the English Saxons call a Wodde
Walden, as the Germans do now term a plain without trees VVolden, as in
these words: Cottiswolden, and Porke wolden it appears. Next unto the
Kentishmen, on the Southside of the Thames: are those, which in times past
were the second kingdom of Southsaxsons, and were termed Southsaxon, but is
now divided into two shyres, Southsex, and Southtrey. And I am of belief,
that Neomaguin was their City, where Gylford. Chichester.
Gylford now stands. Chichester, the cheifest City of Southsaxons, was
called Caerceri in British. After these come the Atrabates, which now are
called the people of Barkshyre, whose principal City in old time, was called
Walingford.
Caleua, but now VValyngford. Wherein I cannot consent to those, which call
Oxford, Caleua, standing on the North shore of ye Thames. There is also a
village named Cilcester, not far from Basinge, which before time was called
Caersegent, and Segontium of the Romans. Antoninus, also mentions Pontiu^,
which appears now to be called Readyng. Spynha^la^d nigh Neuberi. Neubery.
Reading. Thantique name of Spinae which signifies Thorns, continues to this
day in ye one side of Neubery, which is as much to say: as New court.

From whence, a good way of, upon the river Cunetio: stands a famous City
called Cunetio by the Romans, but Marlborow.
now Marlborow. Between these, and the Sea: lie the Simeni, whose
Metropolitan or chief City is Venta, which in fore times was a City of
great renown, and of ye Britaynes called Caerwynt, Wynchester.
of ye Englishmen VVynchester. And at the Sea, there is the great port, called
now Portesmouth, at whose Portsmouth. Portchester Southampton. The wight
mouth there stands a City, called of old Caerperis, but now Portchester.
Also Tris Antonis, an haue^, now South hampton, retaynyng the old name.

Over against these: lies the I Will of VVyght, celebrated by the ancient Roman
writers, and first subdued by Vespasian. The same is in length. xx. miles, and.
x. in breadth, in form like to an egg, in some places seven miles distant from
the main shore, and in others but twain. It has very rough, and craggie
Cliffes, it is very plentiful of Corn. The chiefest and only market town of
all the Island: is Newport. There is also a Castle called Newport.
Caerbro, that is to say, the tract for Caerbro Castle.
Nets, expressing the Britysh antiquity. The VVestsaxons when they had
driven away ye Britaynes, added the same to their dominion, until Cadwalla, a
Britayn, having slain Aruald: recovered it to him self. Englishmen call it the
VVyght, Britaynes term it Gwydh, which in our tongue signifies, perspicuous,
or easy to be seen, as: Gwydhgruc, that is to say, a perspicuous heap,
Gwydhfa, a perspicuous place, by which term, the most highest Mountain of all
Britayne, in Carnaruanshyre is called. The inhabitants of this Island are wont
to glory, that their country is destitute of three great discommodities, that
are found in other countries, to wit, Foxes, beggynge Friars, and Lawiers.
They are under the precinct, and dioces of Southampton. By the same Sea shore
alonge, follow the Seueriani, called now the inhabitants of VVylshyre, whose
cheef city is Caerseuerus, called also Caer C^radoc, and now by Englishmen
Sarysbury. Sarisbury.
Twixt these is S. Ambrose hill, celebrated by reason of the slaughter of the
Nobility of Britayne there committed. Also Shaftes bury known of old to the
Britaynes, by the name of Caerbaladin, and Caersepton. At the Westside of th^se
lie the Durotriges, called of us Durugueir, of the Englishmen Dorsetshyre men.
From whence more westerly are ye Damnonij, we call them at this day:
Dyfynnaint, which signifies deep, and narow valleys, and not of the Danes,
as some affirm. These are called in English Deuonshyreme^: and they lie
between two Seas, the Seuern, and the British Oceane. Their principal City
is Isca, called also AUGUSTA, before time, Caerwisk, of the water passing bie,
but now of the Englishmen, Excestre. Excester.
Howbeit I know well enough, that some affirm that before it was called by the
old Britaynes, Penuchelgoed.

Last of all comes Cornauia, of the Cornwall.
inhabitants, and our countrymen, called Cernico, of Englishmen Cornwall. Here
it is to be noted, that the Saxons did thr^st the Relics of the ancient
Britaynes into those streightes. Who, because they used the Britysh tongue,
which the Saxons understood not: they termed them Cornwalas, that is to say
Welshme^ of Cornauia, or Cornwall, as they called also our countrymen Welsh
Britaynes, after the German guyse. This is the true Etimologie, or cause of the
name, and farewell to them, which pleasinge them selves in the invention of the
name: do call it Cornu Galliae, to say, an horn of France, wherein
Polydorus, as in other things also: utters his ignorance. As for mine
opinion: very ancient books do confirm it, written in the saxon tongue, and
the name also, whereby those, which inhabit the country: do usually call it.
They speak the British language, and al their words almost, are found like
unto ours, but that they differ sumdeale in construction of speech. The
promontorie of Cornauia, now Cornwall, is famous amongst our countrymen,
commonly called Penrhyngwaed, yt is to say: the promontory of blood, which I
suppose to be called of Ptolomaeus: Antiuestaeum. Beyond the Damnonij, or
Devonshire men, nigh the course of Seuern: lies sometime the region of
Murotriges, we call it Guladyr haf, Englishmen: Somersetshyre, where are many
notable ancient places seen, as ye Mounts of Caermalet, otherwise called
Camalet.

There stands also Iscalis, now Ilcester, Ilcester.
and the Isle of Auolonia, whose City is Venta, now Brystow, but in antique
time ye Britaynes called it Caer oder in Nant Badon, that is to say, the City
Odera, in the valley of Badon. Another town of the Belgae, with Ptolomaeus,
Aquae Calidae, that is of hot water, with Antoninus, Aquae Solis, of water of
the Sun, the Britains call it Bath.
Caerbadon, the Englishmen Bathe, and is very renowned for holsom Bathes
Commendation of the Bathes at Bathe.
of hot waters. Of which thing I am a most certain witness. For when as by
the stroke of an horse which I had caught at Myllayne in Italy, I was
grievously pained with the Sciatica, continually the space of one whole year,
and having assayde the help of many excellently learned Physicians, was
nothing the better: I used these Bathes, but only six days, and was restored
to my former health. Between these, and the Thames head: were the Dobuni, now
Claudiani, whose chief town in old time was called Coriniu^, of the Britaynes
Caer Cory, the English Cicester. Gloucester.
men now term it Cycestre. And Claudia, commonly called Gloucester, a famous
City standing upon Seuern, the head of all the shyre: I suppose not to have
bin known to the Romans, but was afterward (as Gyldas reports) builded by
Glouy a Britayne, who, after that the Romans were driven thence: reigned
there, and not so named by Claudius Caesar, as hereafter shall be shown. In the
same shyre also, stands Malmesbury, called before time Malmsbury.
Caerbladhon. These shyres do make the third Kyngedome of Saxons, in
Britayne, which they call VVestsaxons: whose king was Egbert, who Egbert.
having subdued all the other: first of the Germans, obtained the Monarchy of
Lhoegr.

Thus having described the countries, that lie on the Southside of the Thames:
let us now come to the other in order.

And first over against Kent, on the other side of the Thames: lie the
Trinouantes, whose prince was Mandubratius, Mandubra tius.
or as other write Androgorius, our countrymen call him Aud^wy, the same sent
for Caesar into Britayne, and when he was come: asisted him with his power, and
followed him into Italy, and Thessalie. Their chief City The foundation of
London.
was builded by Brutus, and was called Troynewith, that is to say, New Troy,
howbeit there be some which call it Trenouantum, because Tree, signifies in
British, a Town. But afterward it was called of Belus, which dwelt there:
Dinas Beli, that is to say Belinus, Palace or Court. Last of all, of Lud,
brother to Caswallane, which wonderfully adorned it with beutifull buildings:
it began to be called Caerludd, and Lhundain, that is to say Luds City, and
also London. And I am not ignorant, how Polydorus seeks Trinouantu^ about
Northampton, but the authority of sacred antiquity is of more force with me,
then any bare conjecture of a strange, and unknown person. We yield these
names to London, although Ptolomaeus lay the^ nerer to the Thames, and the
negligence of the Transcribers has called London a City of Kent. And Marius
Niger: afterward the other part of the great bosom, for the other side the
Trinoua^tes do hold, into the middle whereof, the River Thames does flow.
Polydorus Virgilius the Vrbinate, goes about to prove out of Tacitus by
arguments of little force, that the Trinobantes, are Inlande people, when as his
reasons seem to prove the contrary. For where as he says: if the
Trinobantes had bin nigh London, Suetonius should have had no salfe passage
thither: Nay rather Polydorus, if it had bin in the midst of the Island, it had
been harder for him to have come to London, through the thickest of his enemies,
for his way lay through them from the Isle of Anglesey, from whence he came.
Wherefore it is more likely, that the Trinobantes, were inhabitants of Essex,
as all, saving a few obscure, and unknown writers do affirm. Who suppose,
that with the Iceni their neigh bours, which now be the people of Norfolk and
Nordouolke, they had conspired the death of the Romans, and had spoiled with
^^er, and sword, al yt ever was in their way unto Verolanu^, s^ayinge
threescore and ten thousand Romans, and were returned back again salfe, and
sound, before Suetonius coming, as Tacitus a^oucheth. And that their rage
extended not unto London: the cause was, as the same author reports, for that
London was a Colony of the Romans, and a great mart city of theirs, famous
for plenty of trauaylers, which resorted thither for tra^aque of Marchaundize,
aboundynge with vitayle, and stoutly defensed with munition, and garysons
against all adventures, as all men do know. Hereby it appears, how weak
Polydorus arguments be, especially who so well knows that part of England,
and that London was the City Trinouantum, which was afterward called Augusta,
as Marcellinus reports.

With these reasons being sufficiently instructed: I say, that the Trinobantes
inhabited that part of Britayne, which after the cummynge of Saxons: made up
their fourth kingdom, which they called Eastsaxons, and another called
Midlesaxons, whose principal city is London at this day, which sometime was
under the kings of the Mercij, or March. Ptolomaeus mentions a another
besides this city Trinouantu^, called Camudolanum, which I take to be all one
with Camalodunum, as I judge by readyng Roman histories, although Ptolomaeus
speaks of Camalodunu^, for it stood not far from the Thames, and was by
Claudius appointed ye first Colony of the Romans, and not near the Brigantes,
as Polydorus, much less in Scotland, as Boethius dreameth. And for the more
playnesse hereof: I think it good to bring forth ye words of Dion, who had
bin sometime Consul. Claudius, after that he had received the message: forthwith
committed the matters appertaynyng to the city, and the Souldieurs: to
Vitellius his college, (whose consulship, as also his own he had proroged for
six months longer) him self departed from Rome to Ostia, where he took
ship, and arrived at Massilia, and taking the residew of his journey, partly
by land, and partly by water: came too the Oceane, and passed over into
Britayne, and came to his army which lay by the Thames, looking for him. Whom
when he had received in charge: he went over the Water, with certain
Barbarians, which drew to him at his coming, ^e spread his Banners, fought,
and obtained the victory, and wanne Camalodunu^, the regal seat of
Cynobellinus, and took many prisoners, partly by force, and partly by yelding.
Hereby it appears euiuidently, yt Camalodunum stands not far from the
Thames, in which place Ptolomaeus places Camudolanu^. And I suppose, yt this
was the Colony of Claudius Caesar, famous for ye church, which they call now
Colchestre, the old name Colchestre.
being made, as I think, by ioynyng the water, and the Church together, a
common custom among the Britaynes, as Henlhan, yt is an old Church,
Lhanelwy, a Church standing upon the river Elguen or ye Church Elguen, which
the Englishmen and Bishops now a days, call (but not well) the Sea of S.
Asaphe. Besides an infinite number more, whereby I am persuaded, yt those places,
which in Latin begin, or end in these terminations Lan, or Lam: were of old
so termed of Churches, in ye British tongue. Moreover, out of this place of
Dion, it is gathered, how much a man without shame, yt Polydorus virgillius is,
who doubts not to affirm, Polidorus reproved.
yt Claudius Caesar, vanquished the Britayns without any battle, and most
imputently calls them dastards, whom Caesar himself, Tacitus, Dion, and
Herodian: term by these names, most warlike, cruel, bloudthirstie, impatient
both of Bondage, and injuries. But an infamous beggage groom, full fraught with
envy, and hatred, what dares he not do, or say? I omit his Scholemayster
Boethius, who, besides these lies, speaks of a mighty war, which Claudius
made upon the people of the Orchades, affirmyng the same to be true, too too
impudently. For thou may easily judge (good reader) how much Land and Sea,
the Roman Emperor with a great army, could march over in xvi. days only,
during which time he abode in Britayne, when Tacitus also, a most faithful
writer, affirms, that in the first years of Agricola: the Island of Britayne
was known, and the Isles called Orchades were Orchades.
then unknown, but first found out, and subdued by him. This, Dion testefieth
to be true, in the life of Titus the Emperor, neither speaks Suetonius
against it, where he says, that Claudius tarried in Britayne but a very few
days. Howbeit Eutropius, and after him Orosius, seem to think otherwise, not
knowinge exactly, how far distant the Orchades be from Kent. But since
reason, and truth, certainly persuade us to the contrary: let us stick unto
them, as unto two most faithful guides, neglecting the judgment of
Polydorus, with his Hector. Next to the Trinouantes: were the Iceni, whom I
suppose to have inhabited that region, which makes the fifth kyngedome of
Germans, which is the East Englismen, and their city Venta, which now of the
Englishmen is called Northwe^. And I am privy also, Northwey
that there are thought to be other Iceni in the West, but I think it more
probable, that these Iceni are put for Tigeni, of whom I will speak hereafter.
And the kingdom of East Englismen: comprehended not only the Iceni, but also
Cambridgshyre, whose chief city in old time, the Britaynes called
Grantcester.
Caergrawnt, the Englishmen Grantcester, of the water that passes bie, but now
corruptlye is commonly called Ca^bridge.
Cambridge, and is a noble Uniuersity, wherein florisheth all good learning. I Will
of willowes.
Not far of is the Isle of VVyllowes, not of Eeles as some have wroten. For
Helig in the British tongue signifies Wyllow trees, wherewith those Fennes do
abound. All these, in fore times were called Girui. Ioynynge to these are the
Parisi, whose chief City Pettuaria: is now begun to be called Peterborow.
Peterborow.

Beyond the Mydland Saxons, west ward: were the Catychlauni, now
Hertfordshyremen, and Buckyngha^shyremen, on the Hill, whose Cities are
Salinae, and Verolanum, whereof this last, took name of a river Were, for
before time it was called in British Guernhan that is to say, a Church
standing upon the River Ver, afterward Caer Municip, because it was a
municipin, or incorporate Town belonging to the Romans, Englishmen term it
Verlamcester, and VVatlyngchester. This Watlingchester.
City was destroyed, through the rage of the Saxons, how be it there remain
the tokens, and foundations of the Walls to this day, nere to S. Albans
Church, on the other side of the water. But, where as some do think, that
the Thames sometime ran that way: it is to be laughed at. Howbeit, it is
certain, that there was a great standing water hard by the City walls,
where now are pleasant flourishyng Medows in which, as I am informed: there
was an Anchor of a ship found of late, whereby, and also by the corrupt copy of
Gyldas, that conjecture is risen. After these, come the Oxfordeshyremen, on the
North side of the Thames, whose City is called by Englishmen Oxenford, our
countrymen term it Rhyd Oxenford.
ychen, that is to say, the Ford of Oxen, but what name it had in old time, it
is altogether unknown. Yet some affirm, that it is Caer Vortigeru, that is,
Vortigers City, and by him builded, whereto I cannot agree. For Gyldas writes,
that the same City was builded in the West part of the Island, and I think
it be in the kingdom of Wales, being called now after his name Gurthronion,
Our freende M. Leland the antiquarie, ernestly defends, yt it should be
called Ouseford, yt is to say, the Ford of Isis, against whom as one having
very well deserved of ye Britaynes, and much exercised in ancient Histories: I
dare not contend. For it is certain, that it stands upon Isis, and that
tracte of time corrupts the names of many places: it is also evident. But
whatsoever name it had at the beginning: it has a very bewtiful, A worthy
commendation of Oxford.
and helthsome situation, and a country which ministers althynges necessary
abundantly, and a most famous schole of al good learning, as all do confess,
which have seen the other Uniuersities of Europe. Not far from this City,
stood Caerdor, so called of the Romans, a City not unknown to the
Englishmen, a Bishops see, now called Dorchester, whereas the Thames Dorchester
discharges him self into Isis, from whence the name of Tamesis, the Thames
proceeds. Toward the North be the Buckynghamshyremen, and beneath them the
Bedfordshyremen, and more northerly the Huntyngtonshiremen, whose ancient
names are not known. After these are the Lincolnshyremen, of old Coritani, so
far as the river Trent, the Britaynes in old time called it Caerludcoy, the
Romans Lindum, the Englishmen Lindecolyn, Lincoln.
and at this day Lincoln. Notwithstanding, afterward, the Normans called it
corruptly Nychol, as I have many times noted in ancient charters, and
records of the Earls thereof, written in the French tongue, and all that
Province was called Lyndesey. Next Leycester.
unto these at Trent, be the Leycestershyremen, so called of Leicestre, which
in old time were called Caerbier. At the South: appear the Northampton
shyremen, so called of the River Auon which comes alonge by the Town, Auon.
for AVON in British signifies a River, and the Saxons hearing the Britaynes
so term Rivers: supposed that it had bin the proper names thereof, whereby it
came to pass that many notable Rivers in England were called by that name.
After these, at the West: follow the VVarwickshiremen, whose principal City
Caer Wythelin, was founded by Guythelnius, a King of Britayne, afterward of
the Roman legions which went no farther: Caerlheo^, lastly of a noble Britayne,
which beutified it with many fair buildings: Caergwayr, and of the
Englishmen is called VVarwike. Next after these are Warwik
the Staffordshiremen, amongst whom is Lychfeild a Bishops See, that is to
Lichfeild.
say, the Field of dead folk. For the Northern Englishmen, call death: Lych and
the unlucky night Ravens, Lych^oules. Some affirm that here, not in
Legancestre, Etheldrede king of Northumberlande, most cruelly slew two
thousand Monks, of the famous Monastery of Banchor, men excellently learned,
and such as (contrary to the custom of others) gat their living with
travail of their own hands.

Which blouddie war he would never An horrible fact of Augustines the Monks.
have begun, had it not bin at the motion of yt blood thyrstie Monk, whom
they call Augustine. The cause was, for that in some poynctes, they seamed to
disagree from the Church of Rome, and refused to be under the jurisdiction of
the Archbishop of Cantorbury, having already of their own the Archbishop of
Legion. This was the chearitie, and religion of that man, to make away such
good, and godly men as could not abide his intolerable pride. But touching
these matters: godwillynge, we will speak in another place.

On the otherside of VVarwykeshyre, are the VVorcestershyremen, next to the
Dobani, their City Vigornia, was of old time called of the Romans BRANGONIA,
of ye Britaynes to this day Caer Vrangon, and of the Englishmen is commonly
called VVorcestre, Worcester.
and is builded at the East side of Seuern. Where is to be noted, that all the
greater Cities, that lie upon the East shore of the Rivers, Seuern, and Dee:
were builded to resist the irruptions of the Britaynes into Lhoegr, that is
England: like as the Romans erected many notable Cities, on the West shore of
the Rhyne, to restrain the forcible invasions of the Germans into France.

Adjoining unto these are the Shropshyremen, whose ancient City is Vricouium,
called afterward of the Englishmen VVrekecestre, and short Wroxcestre.
VVroxcestre, all raised down to the ground in the Saxon war, from whose
relics four miles of: lies Salopia, the head City of all the shyre,
notable for two Bridges, and almost compased with the Seuern. The same in old
time was called Pengwern, that is to say, the head of a place where Alders
grow, and was the seat of the Kings of Powyse, from whence the English name
Schreusbury is derived, although I remember, that in ancient records,
Schreusburie.
I read it termed Salopsbury, and Slopesbury. Our countrymen call it Ymwythig
at this day. Next after these are the Deuani, or Ches hyremen upon the River
Dee, where as be certain Wells out of whose liquor: very good, and pure White
Salt is sodden.

Besides the City it self, famous for the Roman monumentes therein, which by
reason that the Roman Legio^s wintered there: is called by the Britaynes at
this day Caer Lheo^ ar ddourdwy, that is to say, the City of Legions, upon the
River Dee, for difference sake betwixt that, and another of that name upon the
River Osca. It appears out of Antoninus, that the same, in times paste was
called in Latin Deua, of the river which we term Dourdowy, to say, the water
of Dee. The Englishmen call it Legancestre, and afterward clippyng Chester.
ye name shorter: called it Chester, and the Citizens do glory, that they have
the body of Henry the fourth Emperor, whom they affirm to have yielded up the
Empire, and have betaken him self to an Hermites life.

And so are they likewise persuaded of Herald, who was the last king of the
Danish blood.

More East from these are the Doruentani, now Derbishyremen, so termed of their
cheifcitie Dwrguent, which is as much to say, as, white Water All these
shyres, and conuentes, with a great part of Wales, as far as the renowned
ditche of King Offa, (of which we will speak hereafter) made up the sixth
kingedome of English Saxons in Britayne, which of the river Merse was called
the kyngedome of Mercij, or March.

Here now I cannot sufficientlye merueile, how VVolfangus Lazius, a man
excellently learned, and very well deserved of all that be studious of
antiquity, in his great work of the Migration of nations, should be so much
deceived, as to say that the Mertij, or people of March, were Marcomanni, and
ye their kings Penda, Offa, with all the rest: reigned in the lower Germany.
Being most evident in all hystories, that there was never any such kingdom
there, and that these kings and peoples, whom he affirms to have dwelled in
Germany: inhabited that country of Britayne, which we now describe. Likewise,
while he endeuoreth to lynke together, the discentes, and pedegrees of the
Norman blood of the kings of England: he handles them so confusely, and so
far besides truth that it seems he never read, either the names, or order, or
deeds of ye kings: but it is rather likely, yt he learned the^ by hearesay of
some babbling unlearned fool, that had no regard of his good same, or
honesty. As a another has ^oone of late days, a man famously learned in the
Mathematikes, in his Geographical chart of this Island.

And besides these, Hieromus Ruscellus, in his Ptolomaeus lately printed at
Venice, while he goes about to set forth new names, correspondent to the
old: confounds places an hundredth miles distant one from another, namely A
foul error.
Colchester, and VVynchester. Neither in other places ar his gheasses any
thing more certain, wherefore, I exhort men not to trust him in this
behalf. There remains the seventh, and last kyngedome of Saxons in England,
which they termed Nordan Humbrorum, because it stands at the Northecoast of
Humber. The same was afterward divided into two kyngedomes, of the Deeres, and
Bernices. The kyngedome of Deera, contained all the country from Humbre, and
Trent: to the River Tyssa. Bernicia, reached from Tyssa, to the Scottish Sea,
which they call now Fyrthew, the Britaynes term this same Brennich, and the
other Deifyr. The inhabitants of this region, especially south ward: are
called Snotyngomenses, but now most commonly Notingamshireme^.

Next unto these are Yorkeshyremen, who, of the Romans were called Brigantes,
of whom Tacitus writes thus. Petilius Caerealis, fought many batailes whereof
some were not vnblouddy, against the City of the Brigantes, which is reported
to be the place of resort to the whole populous province, and obtained a
great part of the Brigantes, either by victory, or else by fight. All these,
the liyng champion of the Scottysh name, Hector Boethius, sticks, not to put
into his Gallouidia, and to prove the same by arguments, gathered out of
Ptolomaeus, and Tacitus.

But how much Ptolomaeus was deceived, trustyng to the report of others, in
describing the length, and breadth of places in Britayne: (for he writes, that
Scotland lies forth to the East, and that the farthest Promontorie thereof is
viij. degrees more Easterly, then any place of England, which in this
paralelle do make about 240 miles, which is altogether untrue, seeing England
stands more to the East, then Scotland ^^the,) is as clear, as day light to
all those that have tasted of Cosmography. But Ptolomaeus is to be pardoned,
being Ptolomaeus excused.
an Egyptian borne, and excellently well learned in Mathematicals, who has
done the best he could, but not foolish and impudent Boethius, borne, and
brought up no farther of, then Scotland. He speaks thus of Tacitus, that he
being a grave author, affyrmeth, that the Brigantes, were a Spanish brood,
dwelling in a far corner of Britayne, farther then any durst auouche, that at
his time the Britaynes had passed. O impudent face, where about did Tacitus
speak thus of the Brigantes?

He seems to derive the Siluri, by a color from the Spanish brood, because
they lie over against Spain, Gallouida, is farther from Spain then any Region
of England, or Wales.

And that in Tacitus time, the Brigantes were first known to the Romans: I
confess it, but he finds it not in Tacitus, and not mindful of him self,
(as it behooves a lier to be) he calls not to remembrance, that he wrote in
another place, that Claudius the Emperor, adjoined also unto his Empire the
Orchades, which lie beyond Scotland. But let us bid faythlesse Hector a dieu,
and let us now also, see what the ancient writers have written of ye Brigantes.
Ptolomaeus, recites the Cities Cities of the Brigantes.
of Brigantes: Eboracum, Epiacum, Calatum, Bimonium, Caturactoniu^, Rhigodunum,
Isurium, Olicana, with others. All men know that Eboracum, is that City which
the Britaynes call Caer Efroc, the Englishmen Euerwyke, and now short York.
Of the rest we do York.
but conjecture, as Bimonium to be Bincestre, Calatum, which Antoninus, and
Bid call Calcaria: to be Helicastre, now Tadcastre. Rhigodunum: Rippon, and
Olicana: Haligfex. And that Isurium is called Aldburg. There was never any man
yt dreamed, yt these Cities were in Scotland. But Antoninus ascribes the^ to
the Briga^ts, and places them in ye way which leads to London from ye Ually
Praetoriu^, for yt there was a valley from the river Soluathianus, to the mouth
of Tine: al do know. I conclude therefore, yt it is impossible, that ye
Brigants were ever in Scotland. In so much, that the remembrance of this name,
remains until this day, amongst us. For when we see any man not duly obeing
laws and commandments, him we call Chwaret Brigans, that is to say, one that
plaieth the Brigant. And like as they were rebels, against the people of
Rome: so does he contempne the laws of Magistrates, and of Elders. And surely
I am of belief, yt all Deera, before time was called Brigantia. Ptolomaeus,
places the Vernicones, and Taiazalos, between the Rivers Tine, and Tweede.
This country alonely now, refayneth the name of Northumberland, when al
Northumberland.
the region before time, from that river, to ye Scottish Sea: was called by yt
name. For there is no river in all Britayne yt has the name of Humbre, but
only ye water, into whom many notable streams do flow. Whereby our friend M.
Leland, not with out good cause supposed yt the same should be called Aber,
which among the Britaynes signifies an arm of the Sea, either swiftness,
or fall of any water, either into the Sea: as Aberconwy, Abertiui, Abertawy,
that is to say, the mouth of Conway, Tibius, and Tobius: or into some great
River, as Aber hodni, Abergeuenni, to say the fall of Hodnus, and Geuenus into
Osca. Moreover, we call mouths, and entrances of Rivers: Aber, without
adding any thing more thereto: as in Carnaruanshyre, between Conouium, and
Banchorium, in the same manner, so yt I think Aber, to signify as much as
Aestus does, which is the rage, fall, or force of Water, as is most agreeable
with Ptolomaeus. Above these, were the Damnij, whose chief City Antoninus
makes Vandagora to be, not far from the valley Ofdam, whereby I conjecture,
that they be those, which we call now VVestmerlandshyremen.

The Selgouij, and Otadeni in times Westmerland.
past, inhabited Cumberland. At the very brimme of the Uallie, stands a most
ancient city, Ptolomeus calls it Lucopibia: Antoninus, Luguballia, the
Britaynes, and Englishmen, term it Caerloyl, and it stands in the Frontirs
of the Nouantes. Not far from this City, as Malmsburiensis reports, there
was a Stone found with this inscription: In token of Marius victory, which
token of triumph: I suppose to have bin erected by Meurigus, (whom some of the
Romans have termed more aptly Aruiragus, othersome Marius) in token that the
Readshankes were there vanquished, Rodericus Readshaks vanquished.
being their king, which at that season, as the Saxons did, exercised Pyracie
in our Seas, until at length one part of them settled in Albania, and other in
France. And it is well known, that these countries, together, with Gallouidia,
so far as the River Cluda, unto the year of our Lord 870, were in ye
Britaynes possession, at what time being by the Scotts, Danes, and Englishmen
disquieted, with many batayles, and in the end their king Constantinus
slain, at Lochmaba in Ana^dra: they were enforced to return into Wales to
their countrymen, and dryuing away the English Saxons: forcibly challenged to
them selves the greater part of the country which lies twixt Conway, and the
water of Dee, which they possessed, and there appointed a kingdom, which of
the river Cluda, on whose shore they dwelt: is of our countrymen called
Struteluyd, of Marianus Scotus corruptly Streadiylead of the VVallanes. They
had many conflictes against the kings of England, as the same author
reports, until at length their last king dying at Rome: they submitted
themselves to the princes of Gwynedh. This Marianus, the chiefest
Hystoriographer of his time: one of late has caused to set forth in Printe,
being imperfect, and lacking the better part, of set purpose as him self
confesses, because of the ambiguitie of the British History. In like manner
Sleydan, while he turns his abbridgement of Frossard into Latin, being too
too much partial to the Frenchemen: either ouerpasseth with silence the most
noble and valiant deeds of the Englishmen: or variynge from his author,
reports them otherwise then Frossard has written. Wherefore me seems, that
the saying of Martial the Poet very well agrees with them.

That which now thou do turn,
O Fidentine: the book is mine.
But when thou turnest him ill:
then he begins for to be thine.
But this much by the way.

The last of the Northumberlandshyremen, and almost of all Lhoegr: follow the
inhabitants of Lancashyre to be entreated of, whom the River called of the
Englishmen Merssee: deuideth from the Kyngedome of March, Kingdom of March.
of whom the kingdom of March in England was so called. It is soon proved
out of Ptolomaeus, that these were called Ordouici, in old time.

For the Ordouici (says he,) lie more Southwest, then the Brigantes do.

Since therefore, that Yorkeshyre is the kyngedome of Brigantes: in vain with
Boethius, we seek them in Scotland, and much more in Northfolke with
Polydorus. Wherefore renouncing these fables: for my part, I am persuaded, that
the ORDOVICI, are not only the Lancas hyremen: but also the Deuani, or Ches
hyremen, and Shrops hyremen, being recompted of Tacitus for a great City. In
this A City.
place I call a City as Caesar does, an whole convent, or kyngedome. For
look how many Cities there are: so many kyngedomes in old time were in
Britayne, which severally wagyng battle against the Romans: were all the
sooner ouercummen. Amongst the Cities of these kingdoms: Ptolomaeus recites
Mediolanu^, called now Lancastre,
Lancastre. Mancunium as appears out of Antoninus: is called Ma^chestre.
Their king in times past was Cataracus, Manchester
whose fame was known above the Skies, who, the space of nine continual
years: very much molested the Romans with War, at length was taken by
treason of a Woman, and led to Rome in triumph. And Claudius the Emperor,
deserved no less praise for vanquishynge Cataracus: then did Scipio for
Syphax, or Lucius Paulus, for Perses, as Tacitus writes, two most puissant
kings, brought home in show to the people of Rome.

And here can I not marvel enough what came in mind to that Boethius, not the
Troiane, but the Scotte for.

Ahlas? what one was he, how far
from that same Hector? sore
He changed was, that in Achilles
spoils, came home before.
Impudently to affirm, that he was a Scot, seeing that there was no such
nation at that time in the world. But if there were: it was so enfolded in
darkness, that it was unknown to the Romans, and Britaynes, or as, Haymo
Armenius writes of a certain nation: it had so bleared the eyes of all
peoples, and countries, that the Scots were inuisibly conversant between the
Romans, and Britaynes. Polydorus also writes, that he was king of the
Ordulacae, when neither Tacitus, nor Ptolomaeus mentions the same, but Ann.
lib. 12
of the Ordouici. And Tacitus reports that he was not only governor of the
Ordouici: but also of the Siluri. Which Siluri dwelled not in Scotland, Siluri.
but in Southwales, as in another place it shall be proved more plainly. And I
remember very well, that a few years ago, when I was in the frontirs of Shrops
hyre with others, about certain business of my Lords, the right honoble Earl
of Arundell, where some part of his inheritance lies: I chanced to fall into
the view of a place, exceedingly well fortefied, both by nature, and art. The
situation whereof, was upon the top of an high hill, environed with a triple
ditche of great depth. There were. iij. gates, not directly but a shoshe the
one against the other, and on three sides, steep headlonge places, and
compassed with two Rivers, on the lift hand with Colun, or Clun, on the
right with Themis, which our countrymen call Teuidia, and accessible, but on
the one side thereof.

These things when I beheld: I understood by the inhabitants that this place
was called Caer Caradoc, that is to say, the city Caradoc, and yt there have
bin many fierce battayles fought there, against a certain king called Caradoc
who at last was vanquished, and taken of his enemies. For our cou^trymen ca^
not only walled Cities, and towns, but also al manner places which are
entrenched, and walled: by ye name Caer, as I will prove afterward by example of
many, and diverse places of Wales. Wherefore, when I perceived yt this place
was within the confines of the Siluri, and the Ordouici, (for it is scarce two
miles distant from Colun, or Clun castle, which is Colun castle.
the patrimony and enheritance of ye most noble and ancient family of Fytz
Alanes in England:) and that it so agreed in all points with the description of
Tacitus, yt nothing could be wanting: I dare boldly affirm, yt this is the
very self same place, in which Ostorius co^tended with Cataracus in bataile,
and vanquished him, from whence fliyng, and puttyng himself in trust to the
faith, and creditie of Cartimandua, the queen of Brigantes: was by her
betrayed. Moreover, yt name of Cataracus is at this day so peculier to the
welshmen: that many princes, and noble me^, ar called by yt name, amongst whom,
at yt time, Trahernus ye son of Caradoc, ruled Northwales: Fleanchus, (as the
Scots say) son to Banguho, after that king Macabaeus had slain his father:
by flight escaped into Wales, on whose daughter by secret access, (but
unfortunate, and miserable to the parents) he begat Walter, who was the first
of Stuarts.
the Stuarts in Scotland, that was of renown from whom, unto this day, the
kings of Scotland do vaunt themselves to have descended. But I suppose it
more likely, that he whom they report to be the nephue of Trahernus the Scot,
borne of his daughter, and his father a Scot, in Northwales, (a thing much
disagreeynge from the truth) rather to be one of Trahernus own children,
which by Gryffine, son unto Conane, together with Caradoc, Gryffine, and
Meylere Rywallons sons: was vanquished, and slain. And that this Walter
escaped by flight into Scotland, and there attained to great honor. And this
can be no great fraud or disgracyng to ye name of the Stuarts, that they are
descended from the blood of the most noble, and antique British kings, from
which also most honorable famely: the same Owen Tuder, grandfather to king
Henry the seventh of that name king of England: lineally descended by the
Fathers side, as we will declare in our description of Wales, and not from any
mean, or base degree, as false, and impudent Meyerus a Flemmyng, sticks not
to affirm.

NOW that we have The description of Scotland.
wandered over all England, called LHOEGR: let us next in order proceed to the
second Region of Britayne, which of our countrymen is called Albania, of the
inhabitants Scotland. This same in old^ time was of the Romans called the
second Britayne. For Sextus Ruffus recites five Provinces of Britayne, Maxima
Maxim^ Caesariensis.
Caesariensis, which I do take to be that part of Britayne, which by Julius
Caesar was made tributary to the Romans, to wit: Kent, the Kyngedome of
Southsaxons, and the Region of Atrabates. The second is Flauia, which by like
conjecture, being thereto moved, I suppose to be that, which by Vespasian, who
descended of ye family Flauia: was by him set upon, and subdued, that is to
say, the I Will of Wight, which afterward was made part of ye VVestsaxons king
dome. The third, I judge to have bin termed by ye name of the first Britayne,
which lies forth from the Thames to the Valley, or Trench. The fourth being the
less, and the second Britayne: compriseth Scotland. It remains then of
necessity, yt Wales be contained under the name of Vale^tia, which makes up
the fifth province. Howbeit Ammianus, writes, that, that province which by
Theodosius, captain to Valentinia V^lentia.
was taken, when he had driven thence the Readshankes, and Scots: was then of
the Emperors name called Valentia. And that the Britaynes inhabited these
Provinces: both our own, and the Roman writers have left in memory. Neither
was there ^uer any writer of name, that made mention either of Scots, or
Readshankes before Vespasia^s time, about the year of our Lords incarnation:
threescore and twelve, at what time Meurigus, or Maus, or Aruiragus reigned in
Britayne. For our Cronicles do report of a nation, which lived by Piracie and
rouyng on the Sea, cummyng forth of Sueuia, or Norway, having one Rhythercus
to their captain, and landed in Albania, wastyng all the country with robbyng,
and spoylyng so far as Caerleyl, where he was discomfited and slain by
Meurigus, and a great many of his men also, and those which escaped: fled to
their ships, and so conveyed them selves into the Orchades, and the Isles of
Scotland, where they quietly abode a great while.

They call them Phichtiaid, that is to say: Phichtiani in their mother tongue,
and so are they likewise called in the Scottish, and in their own tongue.

Wherefore, it is not likely, yt they were so called of the Romans, for paynting
of their bodies, since they were called by yt name, before yt they were ever
known to the Latins. Neither were they these: but the Britaynes, of whom
Caesar, and others do report, that they were wont to paynt their bodies Blew
with Woad, that they might appear the more terrible to their enemies. And with
us at this day (which seems to argue antiquity) Blew cou^er is called Glass,
by ^^as.
which name also that Herb not altogether unlike a Plantayne, very well
known now to Merchants: is called. Besides all this, the Romans which first
made mention of this people: termed them not Picti, but Pictones.

These as I have said before, after that they had taken heart of grass, and
were grown to some power: out of these Islands in their little Leathern Boats,
such as our Fyshermen do use now a days: alonge Scotland were want to rob
and sp^yie Shephardes, and Husbandmen. Until that about: the year of our
Lord. 290. when the Romans, and Britaynes were both encombred with civil
wars, for ye purple robe which Carausius woare, and after him Allectus: they
entered generally into Cathanesia, and Caledonia, and driuyng thence the British
sheapheardes, and heardsmen, and calling unto them the Gatheli, out of
Ireland, which are now called the Scots: were so bold as to provoke the
Britaynes in open war. For the Scots come of the Irish brood, as they them
selves, Scots original.
and others do know very well, and are termed amongst our countrymen by the
same name, to wit: Gwydhyl, which, as their own Hystories do testify: was
the most ancient name of that nation. And that the same nation came forth of
Cantabria, now Biscaya, and passed over the Sea into Ireland, and there chose
them a place of abode: both ours, and their own writers have left in memory.
But by what cause, or occasion they were called Scots, truly I do not know.
For I do quite reject the Aegiptian Fables of Scota. And the Scota.
self same language, and the very same manners, and behauior with the Irishmen,
and that they be called of the Britaynes by one name: declares sufficiently,
that they came from thence. For the Southernmen of them are not true Scots, but
borne, and begotten rather of Englishmen, whereof a great number, flyinge at
the cummynge of William Duke of Normandy: departed into Scotland, and do
boaste to this day, yt they come of Englishmen, where as they, and the
Englishmen, coumpte the other Scots but rude, and barbarous.

These nations, as I say, until that Honorius came to the Empire, which was
about the year of the Lord four hundred, and twenty: molested the North
part of Britayne with incursions, and robberies, at which time, having called a
power out of Ireland to help them (as Gyldas, and Bid do avouch) under
conducte of Reuda: established them selves a kingdom, in the West part of
Albania. But the Readshanks possessed the East region, whereas first they made
war against the Romans, and the Britaynes, and afterward with the
Englishmen, and Danes, sometime they were confederate, sometime they warred
diversely, until about the year of our Lord eight hundred and forty: all the
Readshankes were destroyde by Kennethus king of Scotts, in so much that their
name, and kyngedome ceased to be any longer in Britayne. Whose country the
Scotts added unto their own, which to this day is renowned in Britayne.

This much I had to say of the Scots and Readshankes, according to ye verity of
the hystory. Howbeit I know well, how Boethius, a most vain reporter of
Fables, impudently affirms, that they reigned in Britayne, three hundred
years before Christ was borne. And he feineth, that there were so many kings,
so many wars, by them most valiently waged against the Romans, so many
wholesome laws and statutes in Britayne by them instituted: as neither Lucian in
his Fabulous narrations, neither the author of the book of Amadis of Gaul,
nor witty ARIOSTVS in his Orlando Furioso, have ever commended unto us in
Fables. But to the intent that I may set forth the most beastly man in his
colors, and that the slight, and subtelty wherewith he endeavors to bleare
all men's eyes, may be displayed: I will briefly touch certain of his most
vain trifles, and such as all men of wit, and understanding may easily
perceive to be stark lies. And here I let pas Aegiptian fables, and of the
stock and race of Scottish kings in Britayne, before Caesar's coming. Where
he affyrmeth, that Caesar, was vanquished by the Scots, and fled out of
Britayne. Who afterward sent Ambassadors unto the Scots, and Readshankes, to
request their freindship, and that at last he conducted his Roman army in to
the Forest Caledonia. Also that Augustus sent his messengers, unto Metellus,
king of Scots to entreat him for peace. Moreover he makes Cataracus a
Britain, and son to king Cynobellinus (as Dion a most famous author
reports) King of Scotland. He sticks not to auouche that the Brigantes,
Siluri, and Ordouici, were Scots. He shows how dangerous the expedition was
of Claudius the Emperor, and describes great wars between him, and Canus
the king of the Orchades. He writes that Voadicia, the most renowned queen
Voadicia.
of Iceni, whose valient deeds against the Romans: Tacitus, and also Dion have
made known to the world: Veusius Earl of Brigantes, Cartimandua the Queen,
were all Scots. And finally, there is no one thing, wherein the Romans, or
Britaynes, behaved them selves courageously, or wisely in Britayne: which this
monstre does not ascribe unto his feigned Scots, and which at that time were
unknown to the world. And he has not only transcribed the mind: but also
whole sentences, and orations of Tacitus, into his book, always changynge the
names of nations, and cities, like a malicious falsefier, with out al shame, or
honesty. He says Caesar, and Tacitus wrote these things of the Readshankes,
and those of the Scots, and that these nations made such, and so many Wars,
when as in deed, the names of Scots, or Readshankes, are not at all to be
found in these most noble writers, And truly, it is not like, that Caesar,
being avery wise gentleman, when he had thoroughly learned the state, and manners
of the Britaynes, and Irishmen: would with silence have ouerpassed the names of
the Scots, and Readshankes, specially having sent Ambassadors unto their
kings. Neither is it probable, that Tacitus, a famous man, and very expert in
the state of Britayne, and other countries, when he describes the expeditions
of Agricola his father in law in to Britayne, and as it were depeynteth forth
the Sheyres, Peoples, Ports, and Rivers of that region by their proper names,
and makes mention of a certain Earl of Ireland, taken by Agricola: knew not
also the names of Scots, and Readshankes, with whom Boethius ^ayneth he waged
that war, when as in every place he seems to call ye inhabitants of Albion,
Britaynes. And it had stood much more with Agricolas honor, being a worthy
man, whom Tacitus also by his works endeuoreth to make more noble, to have
subdued unknown nations, and such as ^ead on man's ^leash (such as it shall be
proved, that the Scots were, long time after) rather then the Britaynes, which
were sufficiently known to ye Romans. Also Dion, a man which had been Consul,
and familiar with Seuerus the Emperor, and unto him dearly beloved, whilst he
declares his expedition into Britayne at large: not once speaks of the
Scots, or Readshankes, b^yng very well known to all men, that he conveyed all
his force and power into Albania, or Scotland. For, quoth Dion, the Meati, and
Caledonij, two diverse kinds of Britains: revolted from the Romans, and
Seuerus calling together his soldiers: commanded them to inna^e their
country, and kill all that ever they met, and thus he charged them in these
words.

Let none escape your hands away,
nor cruel blouddy broyle.
No tender impe, though in her womb
the dame there with do toil:
Let him not escape a woeful death.
When Seuerus came into Caledonia: he fought never a battle, neither saw he
any power of his enemies in a readiness, and so passing throughout all his
enemies land, having not lost in fight, but by water, and hunger, fifty
thousand men: returned unto his fellows. If the Scots had bin in Britayne at
that time: the reporter hereof, being a friend, neither after him Herodian, who
in sufficient long discourse has set forth that viage: would have defrauded
an Emperor so ambitious, and thirsty of honor, as Seuerus was, of his due
praise Wherefore it is as evident as noone days, that at this time, which was
about two hundred and two years after the incarnation of our Lord: the Scots
had no seat in Britayne. Over, and besides all this, neither Eutropius, neither
Spartianus, neither Capitolinus, neither Lampridius, neither Vopiscus, nor
Aurelius victor, who have all written the expeditions, and wars of the Roman
Emperors in Britayne: have in any plate made mention of ye Scottish, or
Readshank name.

Although therefore, I suppose that these arguments are sufficient, to
improoue, and condemn the ^eere trifles of Boethius: notwithstanding I will
lightly touch two of his Hystories, which by the author are setfoorth at
large enough, with words a foot and an half long. But I pray you,

When ye be let to look: your laughter (friends) you would refrain. In the
second book of his fables: he writes, how that Ptolomaeus Philadelphus,
king of Egypt, sent forth his orators unto Reutha, king of Scots, that by
the view taken, and report of his near countrymen, namely such as had come
lyneally from the Egiptians: he might understand the situation, and form of
the country, together with the conditions, and manners of the people, to ye
intent that he might set down the same in his work of Cosmographie, which
he had then in hand. Which orators being right courteously intertayned: were
afterward led through all the regions, and towns of Scots, and Readshankes, at
last being largely rewarded: returned into Egypt. O noble, and worthy deed
of a Gentleman, but most unthankful Ptolomaeus, and vnmindeful of so great
rewards. Who, after that he had sent his Ambassadors into countries so far
distant has left no shire, yea almost no town in all Britayne in that worthy
work of his unspoken of, (which was set forth, not by the king, but long
time after by another Ptolomaeus Pheludensis, a Philosopher very well learned)
only his well-beloved cosins the Scots, and Readsha^ks: he has left raked up
in their own darkness, neither once vouchsaued in his book, wherein he made
a most perfect description of all Albania, to express so much as their names.
Nay rather Boethius, it is a sin to believe, that such a king, when he had
sent thither his Legates, and recited all the Cities and people of Albania: to
have bin ignorant of the nations name, and in describynge the situation of the
Region, so to have varied from the truth. For he, which set forth that
noble work, about the year of our redemption one hundred and forty,
appears in no place to speak of the Scotts, and Readshankes, which at that
time were unknown to the world.

This being omitted: let us come to the second Fable, wherein (gentle reader)
whether I shall move thee to laugh ter, or lothsomnesse: I am uncertain. He
writes that one Gyllus usurped by Gyllus.
force the kyngedome of Scotland, before the coming of Caesar into Britayne,
who after that he had committed many cruel deeds: at length by Euenus the
lawful heir, one Cadallus being captain, was in Ireland vanquished in
blouddie fight, and afterward, slain. Of this slaughter, by reason that the
Irishmen, were afflicted, with the force and arms of the Albion Scots: the Poet
Claudianus, and other writers, have entreated. Whereby he makes the noble poet
Claudianus which lived under Honorius, 410. years after the incarnate word:
author of ye Scottish war against Gyllus, which unto him seems no
inconvenience, who, in other places most impudently fathereth his follies, and
fables upon Caesar ye Dictator, and Tacitus. In very deed, Claudianus has
written of the Gyldonicum war made in Africa by Masticelis, brother to Gyldo,
Gyldo.
cheiftaine therein, and of the expedition, which Honorius took in hand
against the brother that rebelled.

But I beseech you my friend Hector, tell me whether you affirm this gear in
jest, or in good earnest? that thereby we may judge of the residue? or whether
that you thought you could deceive all men with your lies? This Gyldo was a
Goth, no Scot, the war was in Africa, not in Ireland. This visible tyranne
lived in the year of our Lord 398. but their feyned and invisible Gyllus: is
devised to have flowrished. 400. years before.

Besides these insulse, and vnsauored lies: he affirms that all the
knowledge, and learning of the Druydes, Druydes.
came first unto the Scots, when as it plainly appears unto such, as are
excercised in the readyng of Hystories, that Philosophy, and the liberal
sciences were known to the Celtae, and Britaynes long before they were to the
Greeks, and Latins. But as touching the wholesome laws, and institutes, which
he falsely attributes unto the Scots: unto those which read Solinus, and
Mela, depayntyng forth the manners, and nature of the Irishmen: the truth S.
Hierom.
will appear. Likewise out of S. Hierome, whom we may better credit then
Boethius, it is evident, that at his time, that is as much to say, as, in the
year of our Lord. 400. the Scots were accustomed to eat man's fleash. For,
(says he) what shall I say of other nations, when as I my self being but a
young man, saw in France Scotts, which fead on man's fleash. And when as they
chance to find in the wooddes, any herds of Hogs, also any droues of
catayle or beasts: they use to cut of the buttockes of the Herds men, and
keepers, and the Pappes of women, accomptyng those parts for a most delicate
dish. These Scots, as though they followed Platoes common wealth: have no
peculiar wives of their own, but as their lechery moves them (says he) run
lasciuiously about, after the manner of beasts. This much S. Hierome.

Since therefore, it is certainly proved out of this true author, that they
were so barbarous at his time: it is not like, that so many hundred years
before as Boethius does feign, they were ruled with so many good laws, and
wholesome institutes. Neither do I, for my part, write this, to the intent I
would detract any thing from the Scottish glory, in so much as I know very
well that this nation, after that it had departed from barbarousnesse, and
embraced Christian religion, and obeyed laws, and rightes precisely like other
people: was so firmlye joined in league of friendship with our Britaynes: that
we read, how in many wars, th`one nation aided the other. I acknowledge
also, yt many things have bin by them done both wisely, and valiently in
Britayne, France, and Italy, and that the Englishmen, howbeit a strong
nation, seldom assayed the Scots in war, but yt they were always ready with all their force, to join with them in battle, which is no sign of a
cowardly, or heart less people. But I write this only to this intent, yt the
truth of ye history may be known, and yt the Scots themselves may contemn
this fabler, and hold them selves contented with this, that together with ye
Saxons, Frenchmen, and Englishemen, most noble nations: they were first known
to the Roman world. And now let us see what substantial, and approved writers,
whom both we, and they must credit: have transported to memory touching the
Scots, and Readshankes.

The first therefore, of the Romans, so far as I know: Mamertinus in his
Panegyricus, called Maximinianus, makes mention of the Readshankes, by these
words. And truly, not like as there is but one name of Britayne, so should
the loss be but small to the commonwealth, of a land so plentiful of corn,
so flowrishyng with numbers of pastures, so flowynge with rivers of metalles,
so gaynefull for revenues, so welbeset with havens, so wide in circuit. Which
when Caesar, first of ye Romans, and the beginner of this your name entered into:
wroate yt he had found another world, supposing it to be so big: that it
seemed not to be compassed with the Oceane, but rather to compass the Oceane
about. But at that time Britayne was nothing furnished with ships for War
by Sea, and the Romans, after the Punick, and Asiatick wars: had lately bin
busied against Pirates, and afterward by the Mithridatick fight: was very well
practiced by Sea, and Land. Besides, this nation was then but rude, and the
Britaynes being accustomed but only to the Readshankes, and Irishmen their
enemies, as yet but half naked: soon yielded unto the Roman arms, and
ensigns, that Caesar almost in all that expedition, could vaunt him self but
of this own thing, that he had sailed upon the Oceane. He affirms, that the
Britaynes only dwell in an Island, and terms them Hibernenses, Hibernenses.
who afterward were called Scots. Also another Panegyricus unto Constantinus
the Emperor, speaks of the Readshankes, called Pictones, as follows. For
neither he (speaking of his father Constantius) after such, and so many notable
acts, which he has done, vouchsaueth to get, not only the wooddes, and
Marises of the Calidones and other Pictones: but neither Ireland which lies
nigh, neither the farthest Tyle, neither yet the fortunate Islands, if there be
any such. Thus far the Panegiricus.

This he wroate about the year after Christ was borne three hundred and
twenty, at what time it seems, that the Pictones, or Readshankes began
first to inhabit the farther most parts of Scotland.

After him Ammianus Marcellinus, Lib. 20.
first of the Latins: made mention of the Scots, in the year of our salvation
364. In the tenth Consulship of Constantius, and the third of Iulianus, when as
in Britayne, by excursion and breakyng forth of the Scots, and Readshankes,
being wild nations, peace being broken: the places about nigh to the frontirs
were spoiled. And afterward in the life of Valentinian, and Valens, he says.
At this time, as though alarm Lib. 26.
were sounded throughout all ye Roman dominions: the most fierce, and savage
nations arose, and forcibly invaded their near neighbors. The Alemanni, or
Almaynes spoiled ye country of France, and Rhetia together. Sarmatae: the
Ponnoniae, and the Quadi, now Bohemans: The Readshankes, Saxons, Scots, and
Attacotti: much molested the Britaynes. And afterward. At that time Lib. 27.
the Readshankes being divided into two nations, Deucalidonae, and
Vecturiones, also the Attacotti, a very warlike nation, and the Scots wandrynge
vncerteinely about here, and there: wasted, and spoiled very much. And as for
the coasts of Gallia, they were spoiled by Frenchmen, and Saxons, etc. Hereby
it appears, in what darkness the Scottish state is drowned. For Boethius,
in no place makes mention of the Attacotti, who appear by this author to
have dwelled in Albania, and to have bin of the Scottishe race. Wherefore it is
most likely, that a little before that time, the Scotts, and Attacotti, (who
afterward vanished into the name of the Scots) forth of Ireland, and from the
Hebrides, the Readshankes Hebrides.
out of the Orchades, whereas they lurked before, by one consent entered into
Albania, and there provoked by war the Romans, and Britaynes, and that they
departed out of the field some time conquerers, and sometimes conquered. For
shortly after, Ammianus reports, that after that these nations were by
Theodosius, a valiant captain under Valentinian vanquished, and driven out of
the Roman province: they were at quiet. And this can be no disparedgment, but
rather a great glory to the Scottish nation, that rather at that time, then
before that, forcibly against the Romans will, they planted them seats in
Britayne. Which is proved not out of vain, and fabulous writers, such as is
Boethius, and other such like: but out of substantial authors, and such as
do very well know the state of Britayne.

After all these Claudianus a Poet, singularly learned, in diverse places
makes mention of these nation, as for example, of the Getick war:

A power also there came, against the
farthest Britaynes bent,
Which bridled has the Scots so fierce,
and notes with iron brent
Then failing: reads, whilst Readshanks
blood, and breath is spent.
And in his Panegyricus to Honorius:

The nimble Moors has he and Pictes
so termed by name full true
^ubdude, and he the Scots with blade
at randon did pursue.
And of the fourth Consulship of Honorius.

Were wet with Saxons slain.
The Orchades, and Island eke
was hot with Readshanks bayne.
And frosen Irland eke, dead heaps
of Scotshmen wept amayne.
Who did ever set forth more plainly, the natural country of both nations?
For he shows how Readshanks came from Thule, that is to say Islands of Thule.
the North, and the Scots but lately out of Ireland. And in another place, in
his Panegyricus: Britayne speaks unto Stilico.

And me (she says) with countries near
about who was destroyed
Almost: defenced well has Stilico.
When Irlands soil on every side
The Scots do move, and seas
with noysom sails do foam about.
By whose help now it is,
that Scottish force I do not doubt,
Ne do I dread the Picts, etc.
Hereby it appears manifestly, that at this time, yt is to wit, the year of
our salvation. 410. the Scots possessed no certain place in Britayne, but many
times used to make irruptions out of Ireland, and by little and little subdued
the North parts of the Island, and at length having driven thence the
inhabitants: established their kingedome there, under Valentinian the younger,
the year of God incarnate: 444. when as now the Romans had left of the charge,
and care of Britayne.

This much I had briefly to say, touching the original of the Scots, and
Readshankes. Now I will address my self, to the description of Albania or
Scotland. It is separate from England Albania.
by the River Twede, the hill Cheuiot, and certain little Rivers runnynge down
into the channel Soluathianus The first people which come to hand: are
Gallouidiani, of old time called by the Romans, NOVANTES, and not Brigantes,
as we have showed before. Ptolomaeus called their city Leucopibia, which we
term now Caerleil, and Caerleil.
stands in the entrance of both kyngedomes. Next unto these were the Gadini,
nigh the river Glota, which some do better call Cluyda, howbeit, that name, by
reason of the propriety of the tongue: is sometime pronounced Gluyda, whereby
grew that error of calling it Glot. Upon this Rivers side: sometime Glot.
there stood a noble City of the Britaynes, called Caer Alchuyd, or Archuyd,
that is to say: a City standing upon Cluyda, which is now of ye Scots called
Dounbritton, because it was restored again by the Britaynes, about the year
of our salvation. 800.

Above these, toward the East Sea, lies a region, which now is called
La^donia, and Mercia, March, but in times past Breunicia, and of the Pictes,
called also Readshankes: Pictlandia. The Maeatae are placed here by Dion. For
(says he) the Maeatae dwell beyond the wall, unto the Caledonij. Ptolomaeus
lays the Vacomagi beyond Tueda. This limityng wall (as Spartianus reports)
was first builded by Adrianus the Emperor, fourscore miles in length. And
Capitolinus is author, that Antoninus erected another made of Tur^es, between
the Britaynes. And last of all, yt Seuerus, by a trenche which was cast from
Sea, to Sea: divided the Roman province from ye other Britains all men do
generally agree. Whereby our countrymen call it Mur seuerus, that is to say:
Seuerus wall, and in another place Gual seuerus, Seuerus valley, at this day. In
this region stands Ede^burge, Edenburge
the seat of the kings of Scotland, sometime builded by Eboracus king of
Britaynes called also Castle Mynyd agnes, yt is to say: ye castle of S. Agnes
hill, and afterward the Castle of Virgins. The water there which is now called
Forthea, was called the Picticum Sea, and afterward the Scottish Sea, and thus
far stretched the kyngedome of Northumberland. Tacitus calls the same
Bodotua, howbeit Polydorus, so terms the River Leuinus, which out of the
lake Lomundus: flows into Cluyda. For (says he) Glota, and Bodotua two
diverse arms of the Sea, ru^nyng forth a great length: are kept a sundre with
a narrow piece of ground. Wherefore Bodotua flows not into Glota, neither is
it any river, but an arm of the Sea, therefore it cannot be Leuinus by any
means. Beyond these arms of the Sea: dwelled the Caledonij, the most
nobliest nation of Albania, where now the inlande Scots inhabit. At the East
part was Horestia, now Angusia, Fisa, and Mernia. At the West: were the
Epidij, and more toward the North, the Creoni. And after these the Canouaci,
where now Lennosia, and Argadia, and Lorna are. The Carini possessed
Loguhabria, the Logi: Strathnauernia: And at the other Sea coast, the Cauti:
Morauia, and Rossia. And the Cornabij, which are farthest of al, inhabited
Sutherlandia, and Cathanisia.

And whereas Boethius writes, that in the time of Claudius the Emperor, the
Moraui came by an whole Navy into Scotland: it is most false, as appears in
Hystories. For the nation of the Slaui whereof the Moraui took their beginning:
was altogether unknown to the world, until the time of the Emperor
Mauritius, about the year of our lord. 600. The Marcomanni also, and the
Quadi: inhabited those places, which afterward, the year of our Lord. 900.
being under Arnulphus: began by Zuentebaldus king of the SLAVI, to be called
the kingdom of Morauia.

Beyond Scotland, in the Germane Orchades*
Oceane: are the Islands called Orchades, whereof the biggest is called Pomonia.
And on the other side of Albania, in the sea Vergiuium, which the Britaynes
call Norweridh, as who should say the Irishe Sea, from whence I conjecture that
the antique name Vergiuium was derived: lie the Isles Hebrides, in nu^bre
Hebrides.
two and forty, of others called Euboniae. Euboniae.
The I Will of Anglisea is none of these, as I will show in another place. And not
far hence lies Ireland, an Island Irland.
also, which our countrymen call Ywerdhon, the inhabitants Verni. Whereby, in
my opinion, they do far better, which terms it Iuernia, as Mela, and Iuuenal
in his second Satyr, or Ierna, as Claudianus, and Dionysius, rather then
Hibernia, now Ireland. The Britaynes, and Scots do call the inhabitants by
one name, Guyddhyl.

THus having* ended the The description of Wales
description of Scotland, with ye Islands liyng thereabout: let us now proceed
to wales, the third part of Britayne. The same is divided from Lhoegr, yt is
England: by the Rivers Seuern, and Dee, and on every other side is environed by
the Vergiuiu^, or Iris he Oceane. And it was called Cambria, as our Chronacles
do report of Camber, the third son of Brutus, like as Lhoegr of Locrinus,
and Albania of Albanactus Cambria.
his other sons also. This same only, with Cornwall, a most ancient country
of Britaynes: enjoys as yet ye old inhabitants. The welshmen use the British
tongue, and are the very true Britaynes by birth. And although some do write,
yt Wales does not stretch forth on this side the River Vaga, or Wye: this
can be no fraud to us. For we have taken in hand to describe Cambria, and not
VVallia, Wales, as it is now called by a new name, and unacquainted to the
welshmen. In Northwales, the welshmen, keep their old bounds. But in
Southwales: the Englishmen are come over Seuern, and have possessed all the
land between it, and Wye. So that al Herefordshyre, and the Forest of Deane,
and Glocestreshyre, and a great part of worcestershyre, and Schreupshyre on
this side Seuern: are inhabited by Englishmen, at this day.

These regions, with certain corners of Fluitenshyre, and Denbyghshyre, were
sumtime under ye kings of March. And our countrymen, unto this day, do call
their near borderers Gwyry Mers, that is to say, the men of March.

For OFFA, a most mighty king of March, the year of the incarnate word seven
hundred, and seventy, to the intent that the bounds of his kingdom toward
ye Britaynes in Wales, might the better be known: caused a very deep ditch,
with an exceedynge high wall to be made, from the water Deuanus, a little above
the Castle called Filix, through ^ie hills, and deep valleys, Fennes,
Kockes, Cliffes, and Rivers, unto the mouth of the River wye, about an hundred
miles long. The same, reseruyng the old name (for of our countrymen it is
called Clauddh Offa, that is to say, Offas ditch) it may easily be seen of
all, throughout the whole coast. And all the towns, and villages almost,
which be on the East side thereof: have their names ending in these
terminations, ton, or ham, whereby it appears, that the Saxons, sometime
dwelled there. Howbeit now, the Welshman, in all places, beyond that ditch
toward Ihoegr: have planted them selves. The inhabitants of this region, are
called in their mother tongue, Cymbri. In which word, the force of the sound
of the letter B, is scarcely perceived in pronouncing.

And it is very likely, that this was the most ancient name, and that Cambria
a region of England, was thereof so called.

When I perceived that the Cymbri, Cymbri.
which fought with the Romans so many blouddy battles, were called by the
same name that ours are: it came into my mind, to inquire, and search what
good writers have thought of the beginning of that nation. And having read much
thereof: I found also very much, whereby I am so persuaded, that I dare auouche
that it was this our British nation. First the name is all one with ours, then
their tongue, which is a very great argument. For Plinius in his Plin. lib. 4.
cap. 13.
fourth book, and. 13. chapter says, that Philemo^ was of ye Cymbri, called
Mori marussium, that is to say, Mare mortuu^ the Dead Sea, unto the promontory
Rubeas. etc. And our countrymen call the Dead Sea, in their tongue: Mor Marw.
And as for these words: neither the Germans, neither ye Danes, neither
Suenones, neither the Slaui, neither the Lithuani, nor the Lyuones, do
understand them. Wherefore it is manifest, that the Cymbri were none of these
nations. But our Cymbri do speak so: wherefore it is evident, that they were
of the same name, and tongue.

Moreover, Plutarchus in the life of Marius: affirms, that they departed out
of a far country, and that it was not known whence they came, nor whether
they went, but ye like clouds, they issued into France, and Italy, with the
Almaynes. Whereupon the Romans supposed, that they had been Germans, because they
had big bodies, with sharp and horrible eyes. Thus much ^e. Since therefore
he has left their original unknown, and our Chronacles do testify, how
that the Britaynes had always great familiarity with the Northern Germans:
it is like enough that the Britysh Cymbri, passed over into Denmark, whereby it
was termed Cymbrica, and so ioynyng with the Almaynes: made war upon the
Romans and first vanquished Papirius, with his army in Illyrica. Afterward
overcame Aurelius Scaurus with his Legions in France, him self being slain by
king Belus, which name is also familiar amongst the welshmen at this day.
Besides that: Manlius, and Caepio, were discomfited nigh Rhodanus, when there
were. 12000. of the Romans slain.

In the end, at Athesis in Italy, they were overthrown, and almost al slain.
And those which remained after the battle: escaped into Germany, and were
divided into two parts. Whereof the one returnyng into Britayne: gave name to ye
country Cymbria, the other departing out of Germany: rested nigh to the Sea
Balteum, and afterward were called of the Germans, Aestiones, whose Aestiones.
tongue, as Tacitus writes, is like the Britysh. And to confirm all this: I
read of late in a most ancient fragme^t of the Britysh tongue, how that, long
since: there departed a very great army of Britaynes into Denmarck. Which
after many valiant Wars, stoutly made in most parts of the world: never
returned again.

But whereas diverse do affirm, that these were the indwellers of the Danish
Chersonesus: hereby it appears false, that the Danes long before that time,
possessed that land, as their Hystories do declare. Neither is there any
Danish, or Suetish writer, that ever made mention of the Cymbri. Othersome
affirm, that they descended of the inhabitants of Cymerius Bosphorus. But
neither the nations name, neither their manners, neither their kings names do
agree. Which if you respect ours: are all one. For Clodic, Lhes, Bell, Lhud,
Thudfach, Berich, by which the kings of the Cymbri were called, be very
common names amongst the Britaynes. Their neglectyng of gold, and silver, the
shape of their bodies, their sheildes, armor, swords, yea made of brass,
(whereof I saw twain, which of late were found in hollow rocks in
Northwales) their reverence toward women, and preistes, their custom to
sacrifice men unto Mercury: declares that they were British Cymbri. Neither
will I deny that, which many do write, that the Sicambri, and afterward
Sicambri. Franci.
the Franci, were of their brood, unless that their own Historicians
affirmed, that they were so called three hundred years before, of one Cambra
daughter Cambra*
to Belinus, which was king of Britayne, and married to Antenor their king.
Wherefore I conclude, that the Cymbri, either departed forth of Britayne about
that time: or else were the remnantes of the great army, which was gatherd in
Britayne, and France, and settled with Brennus in ye Marches of Greece, at the
same time. For it is undoubtedly known, that Brennus Brennus.
was a perfect Britayne, and brother to king Belinus, and son to Dunwallus,
which not only our Chronacles do testify: but also the countries name, where
the ambitious man fought with Belinus his brother, and was called of him
Brennich. Diverse rivers also amongst us called by that name, and also a most
ancient castle, standing upon the top of an exceedyng high hill in Gwania,
called Dinas Bran, that is to say, Brennus Court or Palace: are a very good
argument hereof. Besides this, there remain most ancient Rimes in the praise
of Cornwenna their Mother, because that when Brennus came forth of France,
with aid against his brother: with her naked breast, and pappes she reconciled
them together, which one has thus interpreted.

O out Ahlas, what means this?
do you my bowels harm?
What wicked cause does move,
two brothers powers to be so warm?
Cannot all Britayne you contain?
since it is very sure,
That both you twain, within this
womb of mine, did once endure?
May not your mothers tears,
nor torn hears from purpose pluck?
Nor naked doleful breasts,
in tender age, which both did suck?
Who then ioyninge their armies: ^anne over all France, and Italy, vanquished
the Romans, and took the city, and departed out of Italy, as Polybius
reports. And Belinus returned into Britayne, but Brennus with. 15000*
thousand footmen, and. 61200. thousand ^orsemen, as Pausanias writes: set
upon the Greeks. And having subdued the Macedonians, Thessalians, Thracians,
and the Poeonians: all the other people of ye Greeks he overthrew at
Thermopilae, in a most horrible blouddie battle. In fine, when as he was
about to sack the Temple of Apollo of Delphos: his army was wholly almost,
miraculously slain by ye fall of a mighty great cliffe, and a wonderful Rain
from Heaven. Wherewith Brennus being struck with sorrow: a most coragious
gentleman as he was: slew himself.

And I wot well, how Polydorus complains of ye supputation of years, when as
in deed, the time agrees very well with the British history. But where as he
makes two Brennus: that is altogether beside credit, since no writer before
him ever yielded the same to memory. And as concerning the true supputation of
the age of ye world, diverse authors have diversely written. Besides these
reasons, by their own tongue, which is the best proof that may be, we will
easily convince yt they were Britaynes, and that Brennus soldiers spoke the
Britysh tongue, we will likewise soon declare

Pausanias in his tenth book writes thus. Brennus had with him forth, 20400.
thousand horsemen, which were all fighting men, for the truer number of them
in deed were above threescore thousand, and two hundred. For there followed
every horseman, two servants on horseback. These, when their masters were
fighting: stood always in the rearewarde, and assisted them, that if by
chance they were unhorsed: they should se^ them on theirs, and if the man were
slain, the servant should succeed in his place, but if they were both killed
by force of fight: then was the third at hand ready to supply for them that
were dead. If the first, and chief had received a wound: one of these other
conveyed him out of the battle, and the third fulfilled the room^h of him
that was hurt. And this practice of fighting on horseback, they term in
their country language, Trimarchisia, for they call an horse Marcha. Thus far
Pausanias.

What can be spoken more plainly? Trimarchisia.
Our Britaynes at this day call Tres in the masculine gendre: Tri, and in the
feminine Tair, that is, Three. And an horse they call March. Whereby Trimarch,
unto them signifies three Horses. Hereby therefore all must needs confess,
either that the Frenchmen spoke the Britysh tongue (which almost all Hystories
do deny:) or that these were natural Britaynes. And afterward he says,
that the Frenchmen call a Shield: Tyren, in their country speech, which
word we do likewise use at this present, calling a shield Taria. Moreover
Atheneus writes, that the Relics of the Frenchmen, under Bathanasius their
captain: took up their dwelling about Ister, and after that were parted into
twain. Whereof the one were called Scordisci, and Scordisci. Brenni.
dwelled in Hungarye, the other by the name of Brenni: possessed part of the
Alps, by the mount Brennerus in Tirolensis shier, whom Appianus, calls all
by the name of Cymbri. Which do all show, that they were Britaynes. For
Bathynad, in our country language signifies a formed Judge. For Bath is
beauty or form: Ynad, with us, is a Judge, in authority next to the king.
For when Brennus was dead: they chose him to their captain. Farther, Yscar,
with us is to separate, and Yscaredic, signifies those which be separated.
Where of this part of France, when it departed from the residew: was termed
Yscaredic, from whence Scordisci is derived, retaynyng the name of Brennus
captain. And Brynn, in British is a Mountain, or Hill, of which word
Brynnerus was so called. Over, and besides this: Gatheli, or the Irishmen, when
as about this time, they departed out of Cantabria, now Biscay, wandering upon
the Sea, to seek new dwellings: called al Britaynes Brennach, of Brennus their
famous captain, by which name they call our countrymen to this day. And thus
much suffices to have said of Brennus.

But whereas some affirm, that the Frenchmen used the British tongue, by
certain French words cited by Rhenanus, Sidonius, and Lazius, it appears to
be most false. Notwithstanding The bounds of France
I can not sufficiently marueyle, that of the tongue of this most mighty
nation, whose bowndes are comprised by the Rhyn, the Pyrenei mountes,
Appeninus, and the Oceane: there is almost no show, or token to be found
remayninge. And that it was most ancient: it appears out of Berosus, Annius,
Giambularius, and Postellus. Whereby Etymon of Gallia.
Gallia, now France, was so called of Rain, which the Hebrews call GAL, and
the Britaynes Glaw, as who should say, berayned, or ouerslowed by the Diluge.
Notwithstanding the Spayniards, Spayniardes,
although they were afflicted by the Romans, the Catti, the Alani, the Vandali,
the Goths, the Sueui, and Mauri, or Moors: yet in Cantabria, called now
BISCAY, and ASTHVRIA* (for these are only the very true Spanyardes, and
Hiberi) they have preserved their ancient speech. For yt, which is commonly
called the Spanish tongue: is but a medly made out of the Latin, Gothish, and
Arabic.

But let us omit all these things, and return again unto our Cambria, called
Wales, which we in our mother tongue do term Cymbri. This, more then four
hundred years since, as Gyraldus has very well noted, the Englishmen, after
the fashion, and manner of the Germans: have called VVallia, that is Wales. For
when the ancient Almaines had sometime ioynyng next unto them of Forreyners,
the Frenchmen, whom they called VValli: it came to pass, that afterward they
called all strangers, and those which dwelt in other provinces: VValli, and
VVallisei. Like as at this present, as well Frenchmen, as Italians, and
Burgundians Walsh* and welsh
they call VValli, and al things that come forth of strange countries:
Walshe. This co^ntry I say, which (that I may use the words of Gyraldus) by
a false name, yet most frequented at these days, but less proper, is called
VVallia, Wales: conteyneth in length two hundred miles, and about one hundred
in breadth. For it reaches in length, from the Haven Gordwr in Mona, called
Anglysey, unto the haven Eskewyn in Venta: eight days journey. In breadth from
Porth Mawr, that is to say: the great haven of Meneuia, unto Rhyd helig, which
the Britaynes call Vadu^ Salicis, the Englishmen Wyllowford, about four days
journey. A land much aboundynge, and very well fortified with high Mountains,
low Ualleyes, great Woddes, Waters* and Fennes. In such sort: that from time
the Saxons first usurped this Island, the residew of the Britaynes, which
departed into those coasts, neither by the Englishmen long ago, neither
since by the Normans, could be altogether subdued. As for those, which betook
them selves to the South corner, which of their Captains name was called
Conauia, because it is not so well defensed: were not able to resist. For the
third part of the Britaynes, which do now remain, possessyng the Southerly
sea coast of France, a singular good country: was not translated thither
after the destruction, and conquest of Britayne: but long ever that, by
Maximus the Tyran. Who, after many sharp battayles, which the British youth
sustained under him during those wars: was with this farthermoste shore of
France rewarded, by the Emperors liberality. Thus far Gyraldus.

This country, sometime was inhabited only by the Britaynes, but after ward the
Englishmen began to possess it, unto Offas ditch, against whom the welshmen
made infinite wars, until the coming of VVylliam the Norman. Under whose
son Henry, the Flemminges being then driven out of their country, by breaking
in of the sea: took upon them the possession of Rosse, a province of Demetia.
Who, in many wars were provoked by the Princes of Wales, but always
valiantly defended them selves, and theirs, and at this day, differyng from the
Welshman in tongue, and manners: are yet in the same place recompted for
Flemmynges. The kings of England, especially Henry the First, the Second, and
Third of that name, calling unto them the Scots, Irishmen, and Cantabre
Gascons: did very much provoke, and molest this nation with continual wars.
But the Welshman, being divided under three kings, whom they called Princes
(which was the very cause of their destruction) defended them selves, and
their own stoutly. Howbeit certain Regions of South wales, as Rosse, Gla
Morgan, Wenta, Brechnocke, and part of Powys, by Robert, son to Hammon, and
certain Noble Erls of Glocestre.
worthy Earls of Gloucester, the Brussij, the Bohunes, Brian Gylford, Adam of
Newmercate, but specially by Roger Mountgomery, and his sons, Hago which was
slain in Anglysey, Robert of BELISINE, and ARNVLPH, which builded the Castle
of Penbroke, and the Fytzalanes, Lords of Oswastrey, and Clun: were quayled,
and tamed in many battayles, and came into the right, and possession of ye
conquerours. And Gwynedh, although that part thereof which lies on this side
Conway, was first weakened by the earls of Chester, and afterward by the
forenamed kings, which at ye River Cluda, sundry times wasted all with fire,
and sword: no^twithstandyng after the departure of the kings: they drove the
Englishmen thence, and raced their Castles down to the ground, and always
defended their bounds. Until the year of our Lord a thousand two hundred
fourscore and two: Edward the first of yt name, Edward the. 1.
leading a mighty army against prince Lew^lyn, and an other arriuyng in the
I Will of Angly^ey, and vanquishynge the same, from whence they entered into Aruon,
a region exceedyngly well fortified by natural situation, by a bridge made of
boats, in the very same place, where sometime Agricola lead over his
Soldiers. Where the two armies ioynyng together: vanquished a great multitude
of the Gascons, and Biernes, with diverse other noble men, and brought them in
subjection to the Englishmen. When as also at the same time, his third army,
under the Earl of Glocest^e, and Roger Martumar, sacked, and spoiled
Southwales, being accompayned with many Earls, and Lords of Wales, which
loved not the prince. Until that the prince him self, being forsaken by many
of his own men: was by the men of Buelt betrayed, not far from the river Vaga,
or wye, whether he came with a very few soldiers. And by one Adam Francton,
which faught under the conduct of Helias walwin: far from the residew of his
own power, being accompayned with one only Page, and unarmed, with certain
other noble men of that country, which had told y^ same before to his enemies:
was there slain most dishonorably. After whose death, the Welshman came in
subjection to the Englishmen, and had always afterward to their prince: the
king of Englandes eldest Prince of Wales.
son, or daughter, if male issue failed.

This king builded certain towns, and Castles there, which he compassed
with stone walls, and left garrisons in them to keep the Welshman in awe. And
provided by special laws, for that intent made, that Welshman should enjoy no
such liberties, nor freedoms, as they, and their posterity had granted unto
the Englishmen. But by many Edictes, and Decrees set forth against the
Welshman, especially by Henry the fourth (who by reason of a Henry the fourth.
Owen Glender.
Rebellion made by one Owen, which dwelt near the Valley of Dee, was very
highly offended with all that nation) the kings of England kept them under the
yoke of servitude, and abolishinge their own proper Laws: brought in the
English Laws, prouidyng by general commandment, yt no man should use the
welshe tongue in any Court, or School. Howbeit, the honor of the most
ancient tongue, so much prevailed, that not only the welshmen themselves: but
also the inhabitours of the English towns, through Wales, being now called by
the name of welshmen: do gladly frequent the same. And has removed the
bounds into Englandwardes, over the River Dee, chiefly since the beginning of
the reign of Henry the seventh, a most prudent Henry the seventh.
Prince: until this day. Who, lineally desce^dyng from his grandfather. Owen
Tudyr, a welshman, borne in the I Will of Anglysey: quite delivered all the
welshmen from such laws of bondage, as in other kings days they were subject
unto. And the most mighty Prince, king Henry the eight, his son: delivered
Henry the eight.
them wholly from all servitude, and made them in all poyncts equal to the
Englishmen. Whereby it comes Commendation of welshme^.
to pass, that laying aside their old manners, they, who before were wont to
live most sparingly: are now enritched and do imitate the Englishmen in diet,
and apparel, howbeit, they be somedeale impatient of labor, and overmuch
boastyng of the Nobility of their stock, applying them selves rather to the
service Their skill in service.
of noble men, then geuynge them selves to the learning of handycraftes. So
that you shall find but few noble men in England, but that the greater part
of their retinew (wherein Englishmen exceed al other nations) are welsh men
borne. For men chiefly brought up with Milk meats, being ^ymble, and well set
of body: are very apt to do any kind of business.

Besides, being somewhat high minded, and in extreme poverty, acknowledgyng
the nobility of their famely: are more given to the culture, and trimmyng of
their bodies (like Spayniards) then to riches, or the belly, and being very
apt to learn courtlike behavior: are therefore by the English nobility,
preferred before Englishmen. Howbeit also, of late they have very commendably
begun to inhabit Towns, to learn occupations, to exercise merchandise, to
till the ground well, and to do all other kinds of public, and necessary
functions, as well as Englishmen. And in this one thing surpassyng Their studies
in ler ning.
them, that there is no man so poor, but for some space he sets forth his
children to Schole, and such as profitte in study: sends them unto the
Uniuersities, where, for the most part, they enforce them to study the Civil
law.

Whereby it chances, that the greater sort of those which profess the
Civil, or Canon laws in this Realm: are Welshman. And you shall find but
few of the ruder sort, which cannot read, and write their own name, and
play on the Harp after their manner. And now also the holy Scriptures, and
daily service, are printed in their tongue. And like as this nation (as Tacitus
reports) being very impacient of injuries, was always at variance in
continual wars, and slaughter within it self: so now, through fear of laws
which they do very ciuilly obey: they strive in actions, and controversies
unto the consumyng of all their gooddes.

And thus much touching the manners, and demeanure of the Welshman at this
day: but now hear of their old, out of Gyraldus. Which writes thus.

If is a light nation, a sharp nation, rather then a rough, a nation wholly
given unto wars. For here, not only the noblemen: but all the multitude is
ready so arinur. For the Trumpet no sooner sounds alarm: but the husbandman
comes as spedely to battle from the Plough: as does the courtier from the
Court. For not here, as in other places. The Ploughmans toil in circle round
does run:

For in March, and April only, they steer once for Otes, but they fallow not
twice in Summer, and the third Winter after for wheatland. The most part of
the people is fead with Rudder beasts for the payle. They fead on Otes,
Cheese, Milk, and Butter, on Fleash more abundantly, on Bread more sparyngly.
They trouble them selves with no Merchandise, with no travel by Sea, with no
handycraftes, neither with any affairs else, saving Martial. And yet they
seek for preservation of peace, and their liberty. They fight for their
country, they labor for their liberty. For which, not only to blade it out:
but also to leese their lives they count it sweet. Whereby it comes, that they
think it shame to die in their Beds, and an honor to die in war. And these
being now the remnantes of Aeneas train: would run forth headlongewise in
Armur for their liberty. Of whom this is very notable to be marked, that many
times, being naked: they dare encounter with those which bear weapon, unarmed
with those which are armed, and footmen with horsemen. In which conflict, many
times, only through their nimblenesse, and courage of mind: they become the
conquerours. And are not unlike unto those in place, and nature, of whom the
Poet speaks.

Subject unto the Northen Bear, Lucan. li. ^

Most happy folk by their mischance,
on whom those heaps of fear,
And cheifest dread of death does
nothing daunt. Whereby does rise
To them a ready mind to run to fight,
and death despise,
Accompting for to spare life, that will
come again: great cowardice.
And in another place. A nation slenderly armed, trustyng rather to their
agilitie, then the force of their men. For if they be overcome to day, and
shamefully turned in to blouddie fight: notwithstanding tomorow they prepare a
new expedition, not mindful of their loss, nor shame. And although they
prevail not, when War is proclaimed with open meetings, yet in secret
ambushments, and breakynges in by night, they will vex their enemy. So that
being nothing troubled with hunger, nor cold, neither wearied with martial
affairs, neither falling into desperation by adversity, but soon ready to
rise up after a fall, and pressed by and by again to assay the peril of war, as
in battle easy: so in continuance of war hard to be overcome. Whereby
Claudianus, seems to speak of the nature of the same nation, saying:

If that their hearts you let a while, Ad Eutro. lib. 2.

To rest: so many slaughters they,
deuoyd of sense do seem
To take, and of small price the loss
of so much blood to deem.
Thus much he, and more, which shortly god willing, shall be set forth. Now let
us come to the description of the land.

This land, after the British destruction: The description of Wales.
was divided into six Regio^s: as I read of late in a very ancient book,
written of the laws of the Britaynes. For (says that book) after that the
Saxons had vanquished ye Britaynes, and obtained the Scepter of the Realm, and
the crown of London: all the people of Wales, assembled together at the mouth
of the River Deuey, to choose a king. And yno i Doethant Gwyr Gwynedh, a Gwyr
Powys, a Gwyr Deheubarth, a Reynnwc, ac Esylluc, a Morganuc. That is to say,
and thither came men of Gwynedh, and men of Powys, and men of Deheubarth, and
of Reynnucia, and of Syllucia, and Morgania, and they chose Maylgun, whom
others call Maclocunius of Maylgun of Gwynedh*
Gwynedh, to be their king. This was about the year of our Lord. ^60.
Howbeit, afterward, in the lamentable conflict against Ethelfredus king of
Northumberland: are recited the kings of Dynetia, which falsely they call
Demetia, of Guenta, of Powysia, and of Northwales. And in another place,
^ention is made of the kings of Stra(...) Cluyde. So that hereby it is easily
(...)ered, that this country was subject (...)iuers petikinges or Earls, unto
Rodericu^
(...)e of Roderike the great, who ob(...) the Monarchy of al Wales, the year
of our Lord, 843. deuidyng it into three parts, which he left in possession
of his three sons. For unto Meruinius (as Gyraldus terms him, to whom I
consent) his eldest son: he gave Gwynedh, to Anaraudus (whom some make the
eldest) Powys, and to Cadelhus the youngest: Deheubarth. And yt I may use the
words of Gyldas: Southwales was allotted to Cadelhus, with the blessyng, and
goodwil of all the people, which they call Deheubarth, which is as much to say:
as, the right side. Which, although in quantity it be far the biggest:
notwithstanding, by reason of noble men, which in the welsh tongue are called
Vchelwyr, that is to say, high men wherewith it abounds, which were wont to
rebel against their Lords, and to defy them in armur: it seemed to be the
worser. This division (whilst their posterity conte^ded among themselves, in
Civil war, and each of them alone with the Englishmen in external:) at last
destroyed the kyngedome of wales.

The cheifest of these kingdoms, which the inhabitants call Gwynedh,
Englishmen Northwales, and the Latin writers corruptly Venodotia: had in
Venodotia.
ancient time these limits. On the Weast, and North sides it has Vergiuiu^,
or the Irish Oceane, at the Southwest and by South: the River Deuye, Whereby it
is cut of from Southwales. On the South and East sides, it is severed from
Powys, and England with high Hills, and sometime with waters unto the force of
the River Dee. The same also was parted into four Regions, which contained
fifteen Cantredi, which signifies an hundred villages.

The principallest of these Regions, was the I Will of Anglysey, of whom we have
spoken in another place, and in the same was a kings Palace, the seat of
Northwales, in Aberfraw: whereof the kings of Gwynedh, have the name of ye
kings of Aberfraw. For in the laws of Howel Dha (yt is to say, good Howel) of
walls both king and lawier, which I have seen written both in the British and
Latin tongues: it was decreed, that like as the king of Aberfraw, ought to pay
threescore and three pounds for tribute unto the king of London: So likewise
the kings of Dinesur, an Matrafall, were severally bound to pay so much.
Whereby it appears, yt this Islands nigh wales.
king was ye cheifest prince of al wales. About Anglysey be diverse little
Islands as Ynis Adar, that is to say: the I Will of Birds sometime, but now it is
called Ynis Moylrhoniaid, to wit the I Will of Whales, in English Ysterisd. Also
Ynis Lygod, that is, the I Will of Myse, and the I Will Seirial, in english
Preestholme.

The second Region of Gwynedh, called Arfon, as who should say above Anglysey,
the best fortified part of all Wales. For it centeyneth the highest
Mountains, and Rocks of all Britayne, which we term Yriri, the Englishmen
Snowdowne, because they carry Snow. For height, and plenty of cattayle: scarce
inferior to the Alps. It has in it many Rivers, and standing Waters. Beyond
whose farthest promontory, called Lhynus, lies an i will, which Ptolomaeus
terms Lymnos, our countrymen Eulhi, the Englismen Bardesey, that is to say:
the I Will of the Bardi. In Arfon, oueragaynst Anglysey: stood an ancient City,
called of the Romans Segontiu^, of the Britaynes Caersegont, of a River which
passes thereby. But now out of the ruynes thereof, there is a new Town, and a
Castle founded by Edward the first of Edward the. 1.
that name, king of England, called Caer Arfon, that is to say: a Town upon
Anglysey. And not far from thence, oueragaynst Anglysey, lies the Bishops
See of Banchor. And upon Conway water, which there ebbeth, and sloweth:
stands Conway, of our country men called Aberconwy, a walled town builded
by the same king. Then follows Meridnia, with us Merionydh, and Gyraldus
calls it the land of ye sons of Conauius. The same (as he says) is the
most roughest, and sharpest of al Wales, having in it most highest
Mountains. The people use long Spears, wherewith they be of great force, as
ye Southwales men with their Bows, so that an Harnies cannot bear it of. So
much he.

The Sea coast there, by occasion of Herring^ taking.
great Herryng taking: is much frequented by people of diverse countries. In the
same stands the Town Harlechia, by the Sea side. And within the land: is
the great lake Tegid, through which the river Dee, which we call Douerduwy,
that is to say, the water of Dee: flows. Where it is worth the notyng, that
there is in that Ponde a peculiar kind of Fish, which is never found in the
runnynge water, neither the Salmons, whereof the River is full, do ever enter
into the Lake. In this country, and in Arfon, are seen great multitude of
Dear, and Goats upon the high Hills. And these two countries, of all Wales:
came last into the power of ye Englismen. Neither did ye people of this country
ever frequent domestical incursio^s, but before our time, always seemed to
obey laws rightfully.

The farthest, and last part of Gwynedh, is called of our cou^trimen
Berfedhwlad that is to say: the inward, and midland region, and is severed from
Arfon, by ye river Conway, of whom Antoninus, and Ptolomaeus do speak, under
the name of Nouius. In this, besides the forenamed River, stands a most
antique city of the Britaynes, called Dyganwy in Rosse, of the Englishmen
Gannock, and Gannock*
famous in Tacitus by the name of Cangorum, whereof the people of that country
were called of the Romans CANGI. And Ptolomaeus mentions the Promontorie of
ye Iangani, which they call now, Gogarth. A place so fortified by nature: that
it can scarce be taken by ma^s strength. This city (as I say) was the seat,
and Palace of the later kings of Britayne, when, as now their power began to
quayle, as namely of Maylgun Caduanus, Cadwalla, whom Bid, terms a most
cruel Tyranne, because he persecuted his enemies very fiercely, and of
Cadwalladar, who was the last king of Britayne, of the British blood. This
City, the year of our redemption: eight hundred and sixteen Cananus
Dyndaythuy, reygnynge in Wales, was stricken with lightnynge from Heaven, and
burned in such sort: that it could never be afterward restored: howbeit, the
name remains to the place to this day, out o^ whose rubbish: Conouia was
builded. Henry Lacey Earl of Lincoln.


Moreover, in this Territory, in Rhyfaniacum: Henry Lacey, Earl of Lincoln, to
whom the conquer our thereof, Edward the first, gave that land: erected a very
stout Castle, not only by natural situation, but also by a Wall of wonderful
thickness, made of a very hard kind of stone, in my opinion the strongest,
and best defensed thing in England. Addyng also thereto, a town walled about,
which by the ancient name he called Dynbech, although those which came
afterward, termed it Denbigh. This fine Town, and my sweet Denbigh.
country, being compassed welnigh about, with very fair Parkes, and standing
in the entrance of an exceedynge pleasant Ualley: abounds plentifully with
all things, that are necessary to the use of man. The Hills yield Fleash,
and white meats. The most fertile Ualley: very good Corn and grass. The
sweet Rivers with the Sea, at hand: minister all sorts of Fish, and Foul.
Strange Wynes come thither forth of Spain, France, and Greece, abundantly.
And being the chief town of the shyre, standing in ye very middle of the
country: it is a great market Town, famous, and much frequented with wares,
and people, from al parts of Northwales. The indwellers have the use of both
tongues. And being endued by kings of England, with many Priueledges, and
Liberties: are ruled by their own laws. The valley, nigh whereto this Town
stands: is termed amongst us Dyphryn Clwyd, that is to say: the Ualley of
Clwyd. It is almost eighteen miles in length, and in breadth in some place
four miles, in other some six. On the East, west, and South sides: it is
environed with high Hills, on the North with the Oceane Sea. In the midst, it
is cut in twain by the River Clwyd, whereof it takes name, into whom, diverse
other little streams falling out of the Hills: do discharge them selves, by
reason whereof: irriguous, and pleasant Meadows, and plentiful pastures do lie
about the banks thereof. In the entrance of which Ualley: Ruthyn an ancient
town, and Castle of the Grayes, from The famelie of Graies.
whence the most noble famely amongst the Englishmen took beginning: is to be
seen. And not far from the Sea: stands Rudhlan, in Tegengyl, sometime a
great Town, but now a little Uyllage. In the same Province is a Cathedral
Church, of our country men called LHANEL WEY, of the Englishmen, S. Assaph,
builded S. Assaph.
between two Ryuers, CLWYD, and ELWEY.

I remember, that I have read, that there was one ELBODIVS Arch Elbodius.
bis^hoppe of Northwales, preferred unto that honor, by the Bishop of Rome.
Who first of all, the year of our, Salvation, seven hundred three score and
two: reconciled the Welshman to the Romish Church, from which before, they
had disagreed. For the Britaynes, imitatynge the Asiaticke Church: celebrated
their EASTER from the fourteen day of the Moon: unto the twenty. When the
Romans, followynge the Nicene counsel: keep their Easter from the fifteen,
to the one and twenty. Whereby it comes to pass, that these Nations, have
celebrated that Feast, on diverse Sundays. But let the Bishops take regard,
how far they do err from the Decrees of the NICENE Counsel, while they
follow that uncertain rule of the motion of the Son, and Moon, which they
call the Golden The Golden number, reproved.
Number, being therein very fowly deceived. Which thing, in times paste, was
objected for a crime, against the Britaynes, by the over superstitious Mounke
Augustine, and likewise by Bid, which to much attributed unto such ti^les,
in so much that for the same cause: he durst term them Heretics: But now,
howbeit under curse of the Nicene counsel, it be otherwise commanded: it is
rejected by the Prelates them selves, and the whole Church of Europe. But let
us return to our purpose.

In that place, where the Sea of S. Assaph is: was sometime a College of
learned Agonists, yt I may use Capgraues words, celebrated for multitude,
under Centigeme a Scot, which was called Elguense, or Eluense, of a River.
This Province Tegenia, is called of the Latins Igenia, and after, being
vanquished by the Englishmen: began to be termed Tegengel, that is to say: the
Englishmens Tegenia. Afterward being inhabited by Britaynes, cu^minge forth of
Scotland, and driuyng the Englishmen thence: with the Ualley of Clwyd, Ruthyn,
and Rosse, make one kingdom, which Marianus calls Streudglead, our
countrymen term it Stradclwyd, that is to say: the soil of Clwyd. For this
word Strat, with the name of some River joined thereto, does usually signify
amongst the welsh men, a vein, or soil of land, nigh to a River, as Strad
Alyn, Strad Towyn, with many such like. Their last prince called Dunwallon,
forsakyng his kingdom, Dunwallo^.
when the Danes afflicted all Britayne: departed to Rome, the year after the
incarnation, 971. where shortly after he died. In Tegenia, is a well of a
meruaylous nature, which being six miles from the Sea, in the parish of
Kilken: ebbeth: and flows twice in one day. Yet have I marked this of late,
when the Moon ascends from the East Horizon, to the South (at what time all
Seas do flow) that then the water of this Well diminishes and ebbeth. And not
far from this place, is the famous Fountain taking name of the superstitious
worshyppinge of the Wenefrides well.
Uirgin VVenefride, which boiling up suddenly, out of a place which they call
Sychnant, that is to say a dry vallye: rayseth forth of it self a great
stream, which runs immediately into Deuanus. This water, besides that it
bredeth Moss, of a very pleasant savor: is also most wholesome unto man's body,
both for washyng, and drinking, and of very good taste, in so much that many
being washed therein: were cured of diverse infirmities, wherewith they were
borne. Moreover, in Tegenia: there is a certain ancient monument of an old
building, in a place called Pot Vary, sometime renowned by Roman letters and
Arms. The town which they call Flynt, standing upon the water Flint.
Deua: is known not only to be the head of Tegenia, but also ye whole shire.

After the description of Gwynedh, Powisia.
let us now come to Powys, the second kyngedom of Wales. Which in the time of
German Altisiodorensis, which preached sometime there, against Pelagius
Heresy: was of power* as is gathered out of his life. The king whereof, as is
there read, because he refused Gods judge meant*
to hear that good man: by the secret, and terrible judgment of God, with his
Palace, and all his householde: was swallowed up into the bowels of the Earth,
in that place, whereas, not far from Oswastry, is now a standing water, of an
unknown depth, called Lhunclys, that is to say: the deuouryng of the Palace.
And there are many Churches found in the fame Province, dedicated to the name
of German. The City of Schreusbury, in old time, was the Princes seat of
this Kingdom. But when the Englishmen had taken it: it was translated to
Mathraual, a place five miles from Pole, of Powys. This Region had on the
Northside Gwynedh, on the East from Chestre, unto Herford: England, on the
South, and West the River Wey, and very high Hills, whereby it was disioyned
from Southwales. And because ye land was plain, and near to England, and much
vexed with continual War by Englishmen, and afterward by the Normans: this
part of Wales did first experiment the yoke of English subjection. Which
brooding stout men, and such, whose nature could not abide to be at rest, but
given to Murder, and excursions: not only procured infinite trouble unto the
kings of England: but wrought also great injury unto their neighbors the
Welshman. But afterward, being parted between two brothers, as was the
custom of ye Britaynes: it began to wax weak. And ye part, which lies on ye
Northside of Tanat, Murnia, and Seuern: befell unto Madoc, whereof it was called
Powys Fadoc. The other part came both in name, and possession of Gwenwynwyn.

The first lost the name of Powys, for being subdued by the Normans: it came
into the power, and right of the conquerours. The first region thereof Mailor,
is divided into twain, by the River Dee, namely the Saxon, and Welsh, whereof
the first: appertains unto Flyntshyre, and the other unto Denbyghshyre, in
the which stands the Castle of Lion, Castle of Lion.
now commonly called Holt. And not far from thence, are seen the rubbish and
relliques of the most notable, and famous Monastery of Banchor, while the
glory of the Britaynes flowrished. In the same were two thousand, and one
hundred Moonkes, very well ordered, and learned, and divided into seven sorts,
daily seruyng God. Amongst whom, those which were simple, and unlearned: by
their handie labor provided meat, and drink, and apparel for the learned,
and such as applied their study. And if any thing were remainyng: they
divided it unto the poor. That place, has sent forth many hundreds of
excelle^tly well learned men, amongst whom, it has also vomited forth to the
world, the most detestable Archeheretick Pelagius. And afterward, through
Pelagius.
the envy, and malice of Augustine, not the Bishop of Hippo, but the most
arrogant Moonke, and the most cruel execution of his Ministre Ethelfrede:
worthy men, of far more perfect order then he was of, were made away, and A
wicked deed.
the whole house, from the very foundations, together with their most noble
Liberary, more precious then Gold, was raised down, and destroyde with fire,
and sword.

It were ouerlonge to repeat, what Agustine the Moonk.
Latin, and British chronicles do report, of the intolerable pride of this
man. For when he, sittyng in his regal seat, disdayned to rise up unto the
British Bishops, which came unto him humbly, and meekely, as it became
Christians to do, they beholdynge the same: both judged, and said, that he
was not the ministre of y^ most gentle, and meek lamb Christ: but of
Lucifer, as they had learned in ye holy scriptures, and so they departed home
again. For which contempt, and reproach, and partly also, because they agreed
not in some poynctes, with the Archbishop of Cantorbury, which he had
appointed, and with the Church of Rome, he so stirred the hate of the
Englishmen against them: yt shortly after, as I said, by Ethelfred, through
the aid, and help of Ethelbert king of Kent, provoked thereto by Augustine:
the Mounkes which desired peace, were most cruelly slain. And afterward the
Britaynes, under the conduct of Brochwell, king of Powys: were vanquished.
Until that at length, being aided with power from Belthrusius, Duke of
Cornwall, Caduane king of Northwales, Meredoc, king of Southwales, and hartned
forward by the Oration of their most learned Abbot Dunetus, Dunetus.
who commanded, as our Chronacles report, that every one should kiss the
ground, in remembrance of Note this place.
the communion of the Body of our Lord, and should take up water in their
hands forth of the River Dee, and drink it, in commemoration of the most
sacred Blood of CHRIST, which was shead for them. Who, having so Communicated:
they overcame the Saxons in a famous battle, and slew of them, as Huntyngton
writes: a thousand threescore, and six, and created Carduanus their king,
in the City of Legions. Next ensue Yale, and Chyrk, hilly countries. In this
last, stands that antique Castle, which at this day, is called Brennus
Palace. And these apperteyne unto Denbighshyre. But more to the North: are
Stradalin, so named of the River ALYN, and Hope, of Fluitenshire.

Toward SCHREVSBVRY, lies Whitting ton. Fitzalanes
VVhittington, and Oswastrey, a noble Market, and enwalled round, at the
charges of the FITZALANES, a most ancient famely of England, whose
inheritance it is, and these belong unto Schropshire. Above these in the
West: are the Edeirnion men, joined now unto the Merionydh men, upon the River
Dee. And all these, at this present, are called Gwynedhij, or men of Gwynedh,
for the name of ye me^ of Powis, is perished amongst the^. The second Region
of Powys, contained the same Province, which now only enjoys the name of
Powys, and sometime stretched very wide, but now contains only three
Cantredes, lyinge wholly on the Northside of the River Seuern, which is the
second river of Seuern.
Britayne, falling from the high Mountains of Plymnonia, and risinge forth of
the same head, with Wey, and Rhydwely, and runnyng throuhh Arwistli, and
Kedewen in Powys: makes speed to Schreusbury, and so flows forward through
Brydgenorth, VVorcestre, and Glocestre, from which, not far of, it ebbeth
and flows, and between Wales, Deuonshyre, and Cornwall: bears name of the
Seuern Sea. Our countrymen term it Hafren, and not Seuern, as the Englishmen
do. The chief town, and kings seat of Powys, called Matrafal: retayneth the
ancient name, howbeit the buildings be defaced, and worn. And one mile from
Seuern: stands a Town, the only market of all that Region, of the Englishmen
Pole, of the Welshman called Tralhung, that is to say, the town of the
standing water, so called of the Lake whereto it is nigh, where there stand
aloft two Castles, builded sometime by the Princes of Powys. This princedome,
came by inheritance unto a woman, called Hauisia, who being married unto one
Carleton, an Englishman: made him Lord of Powis, from which house, at length
it descended unto the Grayes, in the North. Next unto that, stands Cadeuenna,
a new town, above whom, toward the risinge of Seuern,: are Arwistle, and
Lhanidlos, countries well known by reason of the Towns. And more by West, and
by North, at the head of Deuey, Mouthuy, now a portion of Merionedh, and
Kefelioc, known by the town Machaulhaith. On the other side of Seuern,
beneathe the Region Kerey, there is a Castle by a little Town, which Welshman
call Trefaldwyn, that is to say, Baldwynes town, but the Englishmen term it,
Roger Mountgomer.
Montgomery, of the builder Roger of Mont Gomer. From this Town, all these
Regions being joined together: are called Montgomershyre, a country brooder
sometime of noble horses: now it sends forth but few, and by the forenamed
Roger, and his sons, very valiant, and warlike gentlemen: very sorely
afflicted, until that Robert being accused of high Treason: was enforced to
fly his country. The region is hilly, and by reason of plentifulnesse of
Pastures: very good for grasinge of Cattle, aboundynge with many waters, and
bringing forth tall men, very well favored, much addicted unto Idleness,
and unprofitable games. Whereby it comes to pass, that you shall find many
ritche English Farmers amongste them, when as the Landelordes themselves,
which will take no pains: do become very poor. These six shyres, namely
Anglysey, Aruon, Merionydh, Denbyghshyre, Fluitense, and Montgomershyre:
Englishmen comprise under the name of Northwales.

There remains yet that part of Powis, which stretched sometime unto Wey,
whose first Region takes name of the River Colunwy, and of the Castle, and
possession of the Fitzalanes.

Next to Melienyth, and Gurttrenion, hilly countries, and at the South,
RADENOR, called of the Welshman: Maisifod, head of the shyre. Ioynyng unto
these, are the Eluil, with the Castle of Pain, by Wey, which our country men
call Gwy. Beyond al these, are Prestene, which we call S. Androwes Prestenia.
Church, and Kynton, with the Castle of Huntington. And upon Themis, of us
called Tefedioc* stands the fair town, and Castle of Ludlaw in
Schreupshyre, Ludlaw.
in old time called DINAV, the work of Roger Mo^tgomer. And above yt: the
castle of Wigmore, ye patrimony of Wigmore Ca^^le.
the Mortumars. And at Seuern: Bridgenorth, and Beaudely, in old time very well
known, by the castle Tyrhil* And on ye Southwest side, upon Logus, which we
call Lhygwy, on a passing fertile plain: stands Lhanlhieni, of the Englishmen
Lemstre. And not far thence, is the ancient City Henfford, that is to say^:
an old way, of Englismen, in old time called Ferleg, now Hereford, standinge
upon Wey, or more truly upon Gwy.

Toward Seuern: are Maluern hills, and in the very corner between Seuern and
VVey, not far from the town of Rosse: is that renowned Woodde: which of the
Danes, is called the Forest of Deane. These Regions, with all Herefordshyre,
beyond Wey, before they were possessed by the Englishmen: in old time, were
termed in British, Euryeynnwc, and the inhabitants Eurnwyr, of which name
there remains yet some signification apparent, in one place of Herefordshire.
For that, which the Englishmen called Vrchenfeld: the Welshman called Ergnig,
and afterward Ergengel. And no marvel, since the least portion thereof,
retayneth now (as I have said) the name of Powis.

There remains the third kyngkingedome dehubarth
of Wales, of the English called Southwales, of our countrymen which inhabit
the land: Deheubarth, that is to say: the right, or South part, for so we use
to term the South. The same is wholly compassed with the Irish Sea, the stream
of Seuern, and the rivers Wey, and Dyuei. And although the country be very
fertile, and the land ritche, and far more bigger then Gwynedh:
notwithstanding, as Gyraldus says, it was compted ye worser. And yt not only,
because Vchelwyr, yt is to say: the nobliest, and cheifest men, refused to obey
their kings: but also by reason yt the sea coasts thereof, were continually
molested by the Englishmen, Normans, and Flemmynges. Whereby the Prince, was
compelled to forsake Caer mardthyn his seat, and to apoyncte the principal
place of his regalitie, at Dinefur in Cantremawr. And, although these princes,
were of great authority in Wales: yet after yt Rhesus, the son Rhesus.
of Theodore, the great, was slain, through the treason of his own men: they
were no longer termed Dukes, nor Princes, but Arglwydhi, that is to say,
Lords. Until at length, through Civil Wars, by deuidyng of their lands
amongst many, and also by external (while the Englishmen endeavored to possess
all by force, and craft:) they were so weakened, that after the death of
Rhesus, the son of Griffith, a very noble, and valiant Gentleman: they lost
both the authority, and name of Princes, and Lords.

Now let us descend unto the description of the Province, whereof the first
Region, which comes to hand: is yt, which Gyraldus calls Ceretica, our
countrymen Ceredigion, the Englishmen Cardigan. Where it is to be noted,
Cardigan.
as in all other, yt C, and G, have the force of Cappa, and Gamma. This region
on the North, has the Irish Sea, on the East, the river Dyuei, whereby it is
deuiued from Gwynedh, and toward Powis, very high Hills, on ye South,
Caermyrthyn, and on the West, Dyfetia.

Their tongue (as Gyraldus affirms) The welsh tongue.
is esteemed ye finest, of all the other people of wales. And Gwynedh: the
purer, with out permixtion, coming nearest unto thauncient British. But the
Southern most rudest, and coursest, because it has greatest affinity with
strange tongues.

The sea coast of this part: Rychard Richard Clarens.
Clarens, a very noble man, coming in with a navy, and buildyng Castles at
the mouth of Teifi, and Vstwyth: possessed it for his own, and leaving
garrisons there: returned into England. But when he understood that his men
were besieged by the Welshman, being boldned by his great power: he intended
by an over rash enterprise, to go aid them by land. But, at Coed Gronus, not
far from Abergeueni, he was slain with all his army, by Ierwerthus of
Caerlheon. And so those Fortes returned again unto their old lords.

I suppose that the mouth of Ystwyth, is of Ptolomaeus called Rotossa, and
Tibium: Abertius, but yt, through necligence of the transcribers: they were
confounded into one. Not far from this place, stands Lhanpaternfawr, that
is the Church of Paternus ye great, which in old time was had in great
veneration. For welshmen, above all other nations, were accustomed to reverence
Churches, and attribute much honor unto ecclesiastical persons. For (as
Gyraldus reports) they used not once to touch the most deadlyest foes they
had, and such as were accused of Treason, if they escaped unto ye church. Yea,
not so much as their enemies cattle, if they fed in any Pastures, or Leazes,
which appertayned unto the Church. Moreover, when they be armed, and going
unto battle, if they fortune to meet with a Priest on the way: they will cast
down their weapons, and require benediction with a stoupyng head. In the same
Region, is a place, in which (they say) under Deuus feet, whom in Lantine
they call DAVID,
David, while he inueyhed against the Pelagians: the earth bellowed, and rose
up in an hill, which they term Lhandewybreuy. In the other part of ye Regio^
is the principal Town of the Shyre, upon the river Teify, which we term
Aberteifi, to say, the mouth of Teifus, the Englishmen call it Cardigan. This
River only of al Britayne, as Gyraldus reports, abou^deth with Otters, but now
our countrime^ know not what they are. The bare name which is Auanc: they take
for a Monstre of the water.

Passing forth alonge, by the same Sea coaste: there comes unto our view, a
Region of ancient time, termed of our countrymen Dyfed, of Ptolomaeus,
Demetia, for Dynetia, in English, VVestwales, and now Penbrokeshyre. The same
reaches from Sea, to Sea, the farther Promontorie whereof: Ptolomaeus calls
Octopitarum, a little declinyng from ye word Pebidion. By the Northern Ocean, a
long lie: Trefdraeth, and Aberguain, and Cilgaren, within the main land, and
in the west Angle, is the Bishops See of Meneue, sometime famous with an
Archbishops see. For Deui, who is called David, translated the Archbishopprick
from the City of Legions, where it was of antiquity: into Meneue. Afterwhome,
there sat there, five and twenty Archbishops, whose names are found in
Gyraldus. The Sampson.
last whereof, called Samson, in the time of a grievous Plague of Pestilence then
reignyng: fled into Armorica, or the less Britayne, with his palle, where
being chosen Bishop of Dole: he left there his Palle, which his successors
have enjoyed unto this day, before whom the Archbishop of Turo has prevailed.
But ours, by occasion of the Saxon war, and their own poverty: lost their
ancient dignity, notwithstanding al Bishops of Wales, were consecrated by
the Bishop of Meneue, and he of them, as his Suffraganes, until the days of
Henry the first, when as Bernhard, was consecrated by the Archbishop of
Cantorbury, and used him self long time after as Archbishop, until in the
end: his action fell at Rome. This much Gyraldus.

Neither was there any Bishop of Meneue before Morgenew: which was the.
xxxiii. from David: that tasted any fleash. And he, the very same night, when
he first tasted fleash: was slain by Pirates. This Church has been very often
spoiled, and destroyed by English, and Danish Pirates. Here, in the valley
Rosea, was borne the great Patricke, who endued Ireland with the Patrick.
Christian faith. Hauerfordia, which they call now West Hereford, is dista^t
from this See: xxi. miles, in old time called of the Britaynes, Aberdaugleddaw
that is to say: the mouth of two swords. For so the chiefest Ryuers of all
Britayne, which make any haven: are termed. Englishmen call the same Milford,
and some Alaunicum, by the Latin name. The Welshman call this Town now
Hulphordh, and the Haven reserueth his antique name. Upon the same crook, or
bosom: stands Benbrock, head of the shyre, the work of Arnulph Montgomer,
which Girarde of VVyndelesour valiantly defended against Rhesus, son to
Theodore. And after that peace was established (as Gyraldus reports) he took
to wife Nessa, the daughter of Thesus, on whom he begat worthy issue, both
Male, and Female, by whom, both the Sea coast of Wales, remained unto the
Englishmen: and the force of Ireland was afterward vanquished. At ye South Sea
lies Tenbigh, as Englishmen term it, but welshmen, Dinbegh Ypyscot, that is
to wit, fisshyng Denbygh, so Denbygh.
called, for difference twixt it, and the other, which is in Gwynedh. This same
part of Demetia, or Dynetia, is at this day possessed, and inhabited by
Flemmynges, sent thither by Henry the first* The people being stout, and rough:
defended them selves, and theirs: valiently against the Welshman* And although
many times, especially by Cadwalader, Conanus, and Howell, sons of Owaen
Prince of Gwynedh, and Rhesus, son to Gryffeth of Northwales, and lastly by
Leweline the great, as Parisiensis terms him, who had in his army thirty
thousand men: they were almost destroyed, and sleyne: yet have they always
recovered their strength again, and unto this day are known from Welshman by
diversity of their manners, and tongue.

The third Province of Southwales, Maridinia: takes name of Maridunum, a very
ancient City, whereof both Latin, and Greek writers make mention. By which
name, it was so called and known, long before the birth of that very well
learned man, whom the Englishmen corruptly call Merlin, but our countrymen
Merdhin. Merlin.
Neither did the City take name of him: but he of that, whereas he was borne.
We call the same Caer fryd^in by reason of propriety of the tongue, whereby
we change M, into V, the consonant (for whom our countrymen do use F) in the
Castle, and City of Merdhyn. That same Ambrose, who was borne of a noble
Uirgin (whose fathers name is of purpose suppressed) for his passing skill in
the Mathematicals, and wonderful knowledge in all other kind of learning: was
by the rude common people reputed to be the son of an incubus, or a Male
Devil, which in similitude and likeness of men, do use carnally to company
with women.

This Town, as Gyraldus, writes, was in old time compassed round with a
fair brickewall. And upon the river Clarus, which Ptolomaeus, terms Tobius,
we Towi: is said that the kings seat and Palace of Southwales was builded,
until that it was taken by the Englishmen. After what time it was removed
unto Dynefur upon the same River, a place very well fortefied with woods, and
hills. In this Region, by reason of the strong situation of places: ye
princes of Southwales, made welnigh their continual abode. Which was divided
from Ceretica, by the River Tifey, by whose side: Emlyn Castle.
stands the noble Castle of Emlyn. On the other sides, it is environed with
very high hills, and with the Sea.

Toward the Sea: is Catguilia, now Cydweili, a country sometime possessed by
Mauritius of London. Next whom lies Gwhir, which joins unto Morgania, with a
Town at the mouth of Tawai, of us Abertawai, of Englismen called Swansei.
Morgania, of Englishmen Glamorga^, of us called Morganwc, and Gwladforgan, that
is to say: the country of Morgan, of one Morgan, Morgan.
which was there slain by his Auntes son Cuneda, who was king of Lhoegr more
then two thousand years since: so called. It lies on the Seuern Sea, and was
always wont to be rebellious against his Prince. Wherefore, when it refused to
obey his true, and lawful Prince: by the just judgment of God, Treason and
Rebellion always punished.
which always reuengeth Rebellion, and Treason: it was enforced to come in
servitude unto strangers. For about the year of our Lord, one thousand,
fourscore, and ten, when Iestinus, son to Gurgantus, Earl of Morgania,
refused to obey Rhesus, son to Theodore, Prince of Southwales, and sent
Aeneas son to Cediuorus, sometime Lord of Demetia, into England, to take
muster of Soldiers, and there received a great army under the conduct of one
Robert, son to Hamo, and ioynynge with other Rebels out of WENTA, and
BRECHINIA: met with RHESVS in Black hill, and there slew him. And so payinge
the Englishmen their Wages: discharged them. But they, taking regard unto the
goodness of the soil, and the great variance which was then amongst the
Welshman: as inforetime the Saxons had done: they turned their force of Arms
against those, which entertained them, and soon displaced them wholly of all
the champion, and the best of the country. Which HAMO divided amongst Ham^*
twelve knights, which he brought with him, reserving ye better part to
himself. Who, buildynge there certain Castles and ioynyng their power together:
defended their Farms, and Lordeships which they had possessed, and taken.
Whose heirs peacebly enjoy ye same, unto this day. But Iestinus, scarsly
reserved to him self, and his: the hillye country. The twelve knights names
were these, London, Stradlyng, Sanct The* xii. knights names.
John, Turberuille, Granuille, Humfreyuille, Sanctquintin, Sorus, Sullius,
Berkerolus, Syward, and Fleminge. In this province are, NETH upon a River of
the same name, Pontfayn, that is to say, Stone bridge, Englishmen falsely call
it Cowbridge, Lantwyd, Wenny, Dynwyd, Towns and Castles, besides Caer Phili, a
most ancient Castle, and Fortress. Which, as report goes, was erected by
the Romans, and Caerdid, the principal town of the shyre, standing upon the
river Taf, English men term it Cardyd. And not far from thence is Landaf, to
say: a Church standing on Tauus, ennobled with a Landaf.
Bishops See. Next unto this region lies Wenta, under Momuthshyre.

This, in old time was called Siluria, which may easily be proved, contrary
unto the ridiculous authority of Boethius, and Polydorus.

And first to begin with Tacitus, who affirms, that the Siluri lie over
against Spain. But these are far more near Spain, then any part of
Scotland: wherefore it is more like, that they dwelt here, rather then in
Scotland. Moreover, whereas, in a fair discourse, he describes the expedition
of Agricola, against the Albani, or Scots, and there recites all the people,
and nations of Albania: he never makes mention of the Siluri, which was the
most Warlike nation of them all. And undoubtedly, if they had bin in Scotland:
he would never have passed them over with silence. Considering also, how he
tells that there were exceedyng great Forestes in Siluria, the tokens whereof
remain as yet in VVenta.

Ptolomaeus also, and after him Marius Niger, lays the Siluri, next unto the
Demeti, and Maridunum, but somdeale more Casterly. Besides these authorities,
the most ancient book of the British laws, mentions Syllwc, a province of
Wales, whose inhabitants we must needs call in the British tongue: Syllwr,
whereby they were of the Romans termed Silures. And one part of VVenta, is at
this day called Gwent lhwc, leauyng out one silable, as though it were, Went
silluc. Also Chepstow, a fine market Town in Chepstow.
VVenta, before a few years since passed: was called by the name of Strigulia,
which seems to come somewhat near to Siluria. Moreover Antoninus, a very
grave author, makes mention, how Venta of the Siluri, was not far from this,
toward the ferrie, or place of passedge over the Seuern. Wherefore it were but
a jest, hence forth, to seek for the Siluri in Scotland. And although that
Plinius writes, that out of the Region of the Siluri, over into Ireland, was
but a very short cut: we must thus take it, that at his time, Britayne was
not sufficiently known, nor the people of Albania long after that, subdued.
Whereby, when certain of the Romans, as Englishmen use now a days, had passed
over into Ireland, out of Southwales: others, which never saw Britayne:
supposed it to be a very short cut. In this Region is situate the most
ancient, and noble city of Legions City of Legions.
which our countrymen call Caerlheon ar Wisk, that is to say: the city of
Legions upon Vsk, for difference sake, between it, and the other, which is
builded in Northwales, upon the River Dee. Of whom Gyraldus writes thus: The
same was an ancient, and noble Town, the tokens whereof remain as yet, an
huge Palace, a Giantlike Tower, goodly Bathes, and Hot houses, Relics of
Churches, and places like Theaters, compassed with beautiful Walls, partlye
yet standing. Also buildings under the ground, conductes, secreat passages,
and vautes under the earth, Stews framed by wonderful workmanship. There lie
two martyrs Julius, and Aron, which had churches dedicated unto the^. There was
also a Cathedral Church of an Archbishop, under Dubricius, which fell to David.
This much he.

Also on the otherside of Vsk, in the way which leads to Strigulia, ar seen
ancient Ditches, and the remnants of town Walls of the Siluri of Venta,
which now also they call Caerwent, to wit: the City Venta, whereof ye name grew
to the whole country. At the mouth of Wey, which we call Gwy: is a famous
Market Town, in old time Strigulia, but now called the Castle Castle of Gwent.
of Gwent. The Earls Martials, and their heirs of this place, did very much
weaken the state of Wales. Not far hence is Monmuth, of us Monwy, so called
by the meeting of Mona, and Wey together, the head of the whole shyre. Above,
at Osca: are the Castle of Osca called Brynbuga, and in the upper Venta, at the
meetyng of Vsk, and Geuenna: is Abergeuenny, the Lord whereof, Brienne
Guilford: wrought much Brienne Guilford.
mischief against the VVenti. But afterward, VVillus Brustius, Lord of
Brecknoc, under pretense of love, and freendship: called the nobles of Wenta
into this Castle to Feastyng, and Banquettynge. Who coming thither, with
Sesylius, son to Dunwallan, chief A cruel deed.
man of all that Region, and his son Gryf fith, suspectyng no deceate, and
unarmed: were euerychone most cruelly slain, by Brustius gward, which were put
ready in armor for that purpose. And afterward suddenly breaking into
Sesylius house: the unmerciful Butchers, murdered the young Infant, Cadwaladar
his son despiteously, before the Mothers face. Whose sons notwithstanding,
taking the Castle, and having sleyne Ranulphe Poerius, with many other noble
men: at Lhandyuegad manfully reue^ged their fathers death. But BRVSTIVS, being
reserved unto greater mischief: was famished to A just revenge.
death, with his Mother in the Castle of VVindelesour.

And here, I thought good to note, that the name of Sesylius, being common
among the Britaynes and welshmen: ought to be written not with C. (which
always expresses the nature of the English K,) but with S. For else it should
be read amongst the Welshman: Kyllius. There remains yet the last Inland
Region of Southwales, which makes the shyre of Brechnock, the head whereof
Brechnock, or as the Welshman term it Aberhodni: stands in vsk, upon the
fall of HODNI. Bernhard of Newmarcat, first of all Bernhard of Newmercate.
Englishmen, by force of arms subdued the same. Above this Region, lies
Bogwelth, which they term Buellt, a rough, and hilly country, reachynge from
VVey to Tobius. Beneath, is Ewias, woonne by the power of Paganus, the son of
John. Which afterward was parted in twain, Herold, and Lacey. And not far
thence: is Haya, well known by Roman monumentes, called TREGELLI, that is to
wit: the Town of Hasels.

These seven Shyres: Credigion, DWETIA, called also Demetia, and Penbrokes
hyre, Caer marthyn, Morganic^, now Glamorgan, Gwenta called also Mon mouth,
Brechenoc, and Radenor: are by Englyshmen ascribed unto Southwales.

Thus much when I had written of the true, antique, and now accustomed names of
the Regions, and cities of Britayne: I determined here to have ended, least by
this my unpolished, and barbarous writing: I should become tedious to the
impatient Reader. But when I called to my remembrance, how Polydorus Virgilius,
whose works be in all men's hands, does in all places nippe, and gyrde at the
Britaynes, endeuorynge in words, to extenuate the glory of the British name,
and to obscure them with a perpetual blot, in his history often termynge them
a cowardly, and false generation: I thought it worth the travel, to bring
forth a few authorities, out of the books of famous writers, and approved
Hystori^graphers. Whereby the indifferent Reader, may easily judge, what credit
is to be given to the said Polydorus. And that such as are of the learned
writers, of the state of Britayne: either he read them not, or else (yt is more
like) being incensed with envy, and hate of the British name: passed them over
with silence.

Caesar him self, who first all the Romans, Caesar.
made mention of Britayne, how be it, no man is accounted an upright Judge in
his own cause: confesses, yt at the first encountre, the Britaynes fought
valiantly against the Romans, and that they troubled them very much and
afterward, that the Legion which was sent for provision of Corn, and Uitayle,
was so pressed by their enemies: that they could scarce endure it. And that at
his coming, for fear (as he says) they retired. And that I may use his own
words: Caesar supposinge it to be an unfit time, to provoke the enemy, and
to give him battle: kept him self in his own place, and after short time,
brought back his Legions into their Tents. This retreat some termed a flight,
which may also be proved, because that shortly after, when it was paste
midnight: he took shyppyng privily, and departed out of Britayne. Neither was
this the power of all Britayne, but a band of Kentyshmen, suddenly gathered, as
appears Kentishmen.
in his hystory.

After this, in his first book, he shows, yt the British wagonners fought
stoutly upon the way, and in another place that they entered forcibly into his
Camp. And that the Roman Cohortes or bands, being ^feard, when Laberius the
Tribune was slain: salfly returned back again. Which, what other can it
signify, then that they escaped by flight? He confesses also, how
Casiuelanus, by the falling from him of Mandrubatius, and certain his Cities:
was especially moved, not by battle wearied, to send Ambassadors unto him,
to entreat of Peace. All these things spightfully Polydorus, dissembleth.

Also Diodorus Siculus, who wrote Diodorus Siculus.
in the time of Augustus, says: It is reported, that the inhabitants of
Britayne, are Aborigines, that is to say, first borne in the Country, leadynge
their lives after the manner of men, in old times. In fight they use Chariots,
such as is said, the ancient worthies of Greece, used in the battle of
Troy. In behavior, they are simple, and upright, far distant from the craft
and wiliness of men of our age, Their fare is nothing excessive, nor costly,
far from the deintie delicates of ritchmen. Thus much he.

Tacitus also, a worthy writer, does Tacitus.
wonderfully commend the puissant deeds of Cataracus, against the people of
Rome, and confesses, that after the taking of him: they were oftentimes
^oyled, and discomfited by one only city of the Siluri. And, as for Venusius,
whom he writes to have been fierce, and hateful against the Romans: he
reports, that he vanquished, not only the Romans: but such Britaynes also as
aided them. His words be these.

The kingdom to Venusius, and unto us remained War. And after it follows,
that he cannot deny, but when queen Boadicia (whom Dion terms Bundwica) was
deservedly exasperated: Boadicia.
she caused. lx. and ten thousand Romans to be slain. Whose courage more then
manlike, and noble deeds worthy to be extolled with praise unto Heaven, and
equivalent to the acts of renowned Emperors, and Captains Tacitus, and also
Dion, me^ of great name have celebrated in fair, and large discourse. And in
the life of Agricola.

In wishyng for dangers, there is like boldness in Britaynes, and Frenchemen.
And when they come unto the pynche, in refusinge of them: like dasterdnes.
Howbeit, the Britaynes resembling more hardiness, as being such, whom
long rest, and peace had not yet made soft, or effeminate.

For we have heard also, that the Frenchmen have flowrished in wars. But
shortly after, cowardice crepte in through Idleness, whereby they lost both
manhood, and liberty, which likewise befell to the vanquished Britaynes, the
residew whereof remain yet, such as the Frenchemen were.

They are strong on foot, certain of them do fight in Chariottes, the
driuers whereof are coumpted the worthier. Whose clientes, and servants do
fight and defend them. Infore time they were prepared for kings, but now
through favor, and faction: every prince has gotten them.

Neither were there any thing more profitable for our use, against strange,
and valiant nations: sauinge that they do not generally sauegard, and defend
all. It is seldom, that two, or three Cities do join, to withstand their
common danger, so that whylst they fight severally: they are overcome
universally. Also in another place.

The Britaynes do muster, pay tribute, and fulfill other commaundments of the
Empire, without stay, or grutchynge, so that there be no injury offered, which
they can hardly abide. And now they be subdued to obey, but not yet to be
slaves. And a little afterward.

But now they begin to enstruct the children of Princes, in liberal sciences,
says Agricola. And to prefer the wits of the Britaynes in study, before
the Frenchmens. That they, which of late detested the Roman tongue: do now
desire to be eloquent therein. Afterward, the majesty of our attire, and our
Gown was commonly worn, and by little, and little, they came to the imitation
of our vices, and superfluities, as to have Galleries, Bathes, and to use our
nysenesse in feastyng.Which amongst the unskillful was termed, humanity, when
as in deed, it is part of seruilitie.

Dion Cassius, a man that had bin Consul, among other things has left this in
writing unto posterity, of Caesar's expedition into Britayne. The Britaynes
durst not set openly upon the Romans, because they kept diligent watch, and
ward, but they took certain which were sent, as it were, unto their
friends, and confederates Region, to provide victayle, whom they slew all,
exceptyng a few, which Caesar coming with speed: rescued. Then began they to
assault the Camp, wherein they prevailed not, but were repulsed, not without
slaughter on their side. Howbeit, they never took peace, before that they had
been many times put to the worst. Caesar, contrary to that he had purposed:
ended the war, requiryng yet more pleadges, of whom notwithstanding, he
received but few. So Caesar returned in to the continent, and such things as
were unquiet during his absence: he appeased, gayning nothing to him self,
nor to the City of Rome out of Britayne, but only the glory of the expedition
taken in hand.

Which both he himself did very much set forth in words: and the Romans
extolled wonderfully at Rome. In so much, that in consideration of these
deeds, so happily atcheeued: they decreed a supplication, or thanks gyuyng of
twenty days. And in another place.

The Britaynes calling forth their fellows, and communicatynge the effect of
their intent unto Suella, who amongst all the Petiroyes, or Earls of that
Island, was of greatest power: they marched unto the Roman ships where they
rode at anchor. With whom the Romans meetynge: at the first encounter, were
troubled with the Wagons, but anon making a lane amongst them, and avoiding the
Wagons: they cast their Darts against the enemy, which came runnyng in
sidelonge upon them, and so restored the battle.

After this battle, both parts stood still in the same place: and in
another conflict, when the barbarous people had overcome the Roman footmen:
yet being discomfited by the horsemen: retired back to the River Thames.

Moreover Herodian, in the life of Seuerus, writes thus of the Britaynes. For
diverse places of Britayne, (says he) by common wasshyng in of the Oceane, do
become Marish. In these Marshes therefore, the Earbarous people do swymme,
and wade up to the belly, not regardyng the mierynge, and durteynge of their
naked bodies. For they know not ye use of garments, but they arm their bellies
and their necks, supposing yt to be an ornament, and a token of riches, like
as other barbarous people do Gold. They paynte also their bodies with diverse
pictures, and shapes of al manners of beasts, and living things. Wherefore
they wear on nothing, least thereby they should hide the payntyng of their
body. It is a very warlike Nation, and greedy of slaughter, contented only
with a narow Shield, and a Spear, and a Sword hangyng down by their naked
side. They are altogether ignorant of the use of the breastplate, and
headpeece, taking them to be a let unto them, in passing over the Fennes, and
Marshes.

Besides these: Eutropius of ye French war, writes thus: Caesar passes over
into Britayne, having thereto prepared. lxxx. ships, partly for burden, and
partly to fight, and makes war upon the Britaynes. Where, being first
wearied, with a sharp battle, and afterward falling into a cruel tempest:
returned into France, and so forth. And afterward. Again, at the beginnynge
of the spring: he sailed into Britayne, where at the first encounter of the
Horsemen, he was vanquished, and there was Labienus the Tribune slain, and at
the second battle, with great peril of his own men: he overcame the
Britaynes, and constrained them to fly.

Suetonius Tranquillus, affirms, that Vespasianus overcame in battle, two
mighty, and valiant nations of Britayne, and yt he faught thirty times with
the enemy, which is a token of no cowardly, but of a most stout, and warlike
nation. Eutropius also in the. ix. book of his hystory writes thus. When
notwithstanding War was in vain made against Carausius the Britayne, a man
very expert in martial assayres: in the end peace was concluded. And Sextus
Ruffus, recityng Bands of Britaynes.
the Roman Legions, among the Legions of the master of the footmen: reckneth
up Britannicians, and British, and among the Legions Comitalensis the second
British Legion. And again among the Legions of the master of the horsemen: the
French Britons, and again, Britons. And afterward, with the worthy, and
approved earl of Spain: the invincible younger Britons. And in an other place,
he numbreth the younger British carriars, with the Earl of Britayne.

But what shall it be needful, to tu^n over the works of so many learned
men, that the glory of Britayne may appear? When as so many puissant kings,
so many invincible captains so many noble Roman Emperors, spronge forth of
the British blood, have made manifest unto the world, by their noble acts, well
worthy immortality: what manner men this Island brings forth. For, what shall
I speak of Brennus, the tamer of the Romans, and Brennus.
Greeks, and almost of all the nations in the world? What of Caswallan, to
Caswalia^.
whom, as Lucane reports: Julius Caesar did turn his fearful back? What
Cataracus
of Cataracus, who molested the people of Rome with war, the space of. ix.
years? What of Bunduica, that valiant Bunduica.
manlike dame? Who, to begin with all, and for han^^ll sake, slew. lxx.
thousand Romans. Of whom such fear invaded Rome, and Italy: (as Virunnius
writes) as never the like before, neither at coming of Brennus, nor of
Hannibal. What of Aruiragus, the Aruiragus
invincible king of Britayne? Who, in despite of the Romans, which were
Lords of all the world, preserved his liberty? What of those noble
Captains, which faught thirty times with Vespasian? Who also with sorrow, and
angwise of mind, killed Seuerus, the most valiant Emperor, because he could
not overcome them? What (as I say) shall I speak of these? when as Britayne,
has yielded forth, and communicated to the rest of ye world, Constantinus
Constantinus Magnus.
Magnus, not only a most valiant, and fortunate Captain: but yt more is, a
perfect goodman, and the first Emperor of the Christians, instructed by Helene
his Mother, a Britayne also. How much France, and Italy for their delivery
from Tyrannes are indebted unto Britayne for this man, which was brought forth
out of the midst of the bowels thereof: all men do well know, only Polydorus
excepted, and William Petit the Monk, his scholemayster, of late brought to
light (unworthy ever to have seen light) by the slaunderers, and detra^tours
of the British glory. And, for as much as, a certain Fre^chman of late days,
and also an ancient Greek author, of the name of Mayor, affirm yt he was
borne at Dyrachiu^, called now Durazo: I mean to bring forth the most
ancient words of the Panegyricus, which was pronounced before Constantinus,
himself. O (says he) most fortunate, and now above all lands, most blessed
Britayne, which did first behold Constantinus the Emperor. Nature has
worthily endued thee, with all benefits of air, and soil, in whom is neither
overmuch cold of Winter, nor heat of Summer. Where there is also such
plenty of Corn: that it suffiseth for the use of Ceres, and Liber, that is to
say: for Bread, and Drink. Where are also Wooddes without wild, and cruel
beasts, the Earth without hurtful Serpents. Contrariwise of tame Cattle: an
innumerable multitude, stroutyng with Milk, and laden with Flieses, with all
other things necessary and commodious for our life, very long days, and no
nights without some light, whylst that vttermoste playnes of the Sea shore
rayseth no shadow, and the show, and aspect of the Stars of Heaven, deo
exceed the bounds of night, that ye Sun, which to us seems to go down:
appears there but to pass by. Good lord, what a thing is this, yt always
from some furthermost end of the world, there come down new powers from God,
to be worshipped of all the earth? Thus far he.

What of Bonosus, out of the captains of the bounds of Rheticus, a Bonosus.
more courageous, then fortunate Emperor? What of Carausius Augustus,
Carausius.
who, the space of seven years together, ware his princely Robes, contrary to
the will of Iouius, and Herculius?

What of Allectus Caesar, for subdueynge Allectus.
whom: Mamertinus seems to prefer Maximianus before Caesar Julius whose
words I will not stick to allege. And truly (says he) and so forth.

After him sprange the Emperor Maximus.
Maximus, a Britayne, and nephew to Helene, a man both stout, and virtuous,
and worthy of Augustus, but that in his youth, leadyng an army against
Gratianus, whom he vanquished: he had sacked his country. Who by Helene his
wife, daughter to Euda: left his son Victor Emperor. And as Paulus Diaconus
writes, Bitayne also acknowledges Marcus, and Gratianus, the Emperors.
Moreover Constantinus, with his Son Constans, when Gratianus their countriman
was slain: were created Emperors in Britayne, in name like to the above
said, but not in happiness, against whom Gerontius their Captain (of whose
death there are extant very ancient British Rhymes) made another Maximus then
ye first was, Augustus. And after all these: Ambrosius Aurelius, is by
Panuinius, accounted ye last Emperor of the British blood.

Besides these. xij. Emperous: Britayne has also brought forth to the world
the most puissant, and invincible King Arthure.
king, Arthur, whose everlasting renown, and most noble deeds: our freende
Master Leland, has set forth, and made more apparent by infinite
testimonies, and most weighty arguments against the gnarrynge, and doggysh
mouth, and hatred more then ever was Vatinians, of Polydorus Vrbine, and of
the gresie Monk Rhicuallensis, more conversant in the Kitchen, then in the
hystories of old writers.

And not only our countrymen: but also Spayniardes, Italians, Frenchmen, and
the Sueones, beyond the Sea Baltheum, (as Gothus reports out of their
Hystories) do celebrate, and advance unto this day, in their books the worthy
acts of this puissant king. Caduanne also, who from prince of Gwynedh, became
King of the Britaynes, and his son Cadwalla (whom BID calls a Tyranne,
because he persecuted the Saxons with cruel War) whil^st the BRITISH Empire
was in decayinge: were valient Kings. And after the Brityshe destruction,
there rose up noble gentelmen in Wales, not to be debarred of their due
praise: as Rodericke the great, and his Nephue by his Rodericke the great.
Son Howell, surnamed GOOD, both famous as well in war: as peace. Also
Gryffith, the Son of Lhewelin, the Son of SESYL^IVS* who most stoutly
defended Wales, his native country. And after him Owayn, prince of Gwynedh,
who most hardely withstoode at COL: Henry the second, the Henry the second.
most mightiest king of all that ever reigned in England, thrice entering into
Wales with great armies, whose son also he slow in Anglysey, and the greater
part of his army, as Gyraldus reports. And his nephew likewise, borne of his
son, Lewellyn the great whose innumerable triumphs (that I may use the
words of Parisiensis, the Englishman) do require special treatises.

And not these only: but also the Cornishmen, Cornishmen.
being the remnantes of the old Britaynes, as they are the stoutest of all
the British nations: so are they coumpted to this day, the most valiant in
warlike affairs. Neither yet the Brito^snigh France.
Britons, which dwell nigh France, a nation of the same brood, do any whit
degenerate from their forefathers When as they* did not only many hundred years
prosperously defend, amongst the thickest of stout, and sturdie nations, those
seats which they had purchased with their manhood, and prowes: but also have
vanquished the Goths, and Frenchmen in great battles, and stoutly withstoode
the most mighty prince Charles the Main, put to flight the army of his son
Jews the Emperor, which was sent against them, under conduct of Murmanus,
overcame Charles Caluus then Emperor, and king of France in open fight,
twice vanquishynge his army, Numenius being king, the Emperor privily
flyinge thence, leaving there his Pauilions, and Tents, and all other his
kinglike provision, as Regino writes. But Herispous, son to Numenius,
compelled the same Charles, to make shamful, and dishonorable truce with him.
Whom Solomon also, son to Herispous, a valiant, and warlike gentleman,
enforced to retire back, when he was coming against him with a mighty army.

But when Solomon was dead: the Deuisions are dangerous.
Britons, through desire to reign, and contention who should next be king:
fell unto Civil wars among them selves, as Sigisbertus says, and so they
were constreyned to leave of ye destruction, and over runnynge of France,
which they had determined.

What shall I speak of the noble deeds of Vrfandus, an invincible captain,
Hastinge.
against Hastynge the Norman, and Pastquitanus the Briton? Of Iudicael also,
and Alane, who manfully drove the Normans out of their coasts, which pitifully
wasted, and spoiled all France? What shall I need to touch such Wars, as
they made long after, upon the kings of France, being therein aided by
th^impregnable power of the Englishmen, since it is well known to all men,
that it was always, a most potent nation?

And, that I may at length stop Polydorus Gyldas.
mouth, together with his Gyldas: thus much I say, that if he stick in any
point unto him: he was no Hystoriographer, but a Priest, and a Preacher. Whose
custom is very sharply to inueigh against the faults of their hearers.
Wherefore, if we seek authorities out of Sermons, as Polydorus Vrbine has
done: What Parish, what Town, what nation, or kyngedome, may escape infamy?
What has Bernhard written of the Romans? Thus surely, terming them impious,
unfaith full, seditious, dishonest, traytrous, great speakers, but little doers.
These things are by Deuines spoken in the Pulpit, according unto their manner,
yt the like faults might be amended, and the life reformed, not that the
Romans, or Britaynes were such in deed. Neither is there any man, unless he
be a shameless Sycophant, that lies in wait for all occasions to dispraise, and
accuse, which will go about by wrestynge of sentences forth of the sermons of
preachers: sclaundrously to tax, and infamously to note, any whole covent,
shire, city, or people. Wherefore, let such idle, and ill disposed
sclaunderers, leave of, and suffer the true renown of Britayne appear to the
world, neither judge me, good Reader, of two sharp a tongue. Seeing (so god
help me) neither envy of any foreign name, neither thyrst of vayn glory,
neither hatred of any nation but alonly ye love of my country, which is evil
spoken of undeservedly, and desire to set forth the truth: have provoked me to
write thus much.

And touching this rude, and disordred little treatise: truly I would not have
suffered it to have come to light, had I not well hoped, that all learned men,
would accept this my endeavor in good part, and also take occasion by this,
which I have rashly enterprised first: to handle the same matter more at
large, in fair discourse, and finer style. And if they shall think any thing
herein, spoken over sharply, or not well advisedly: I submit my self to ye
judgment of those, that be better learned, and if I be admonished of my
faults: I promise to amend them, when occasion shall be given. Thus fare you
well.

Certain Welsh, or rather true British words, converted into Latin by the
Author, and now translated into English.
Ac with. Aber, force, or rage of water. Armorica, upon the Sea. Arglwydhi.
Lords. Auanc, an Otter. Auon, a River. Bara, Bread. Bath, beuty, fo^^, or
cu^lines Britunn, a Britayne. Brynn, a Mountain or Hill. Caer, a City. Cain,
White. Cariad, Love. Clauddh, a Ditch. Dha, Good. Dinas, a Court, or Palace.
Deheubarth. the right side. Duw. God. Duuer, Dewr, and Dwr, Water. Dyphryn, a
Ually. Dynfynnaint. deep, and narow valleys Fa, a Place. Fie, Mine. Flynt. a
Flint stone. Celli, Hasell trees. Glass, blew color or woad. Glaw, Rain.
Grwc. an heap. Gwr. a Man. Gwadh, a Country. Gual, a Ually. Guent, White.
Gwydh, Perspicuous. Helig, Wyllow trees. I, His. Lhan, a Church. Lhradron,
Thieves. Lhydaw. the Shore. Lhyfyr. a Book. Mam, a Mother. March, An horse.
Maur, Great. Mur, a Wall. Mynyd. an Hill. O, forth of. Pen an Head. Phrainc.
France. Phrydain, Britayne. Porth, an Haven. Pride, beauty, or cumlinesse.
Rhyd. a Foord. Rhufain, Rome. Saison, an Englishman. Saissonaeg. English.
Strat. a soil. Sychnant, a dry Ually. Tair, Three, fem. gendre. Tan, Fire.
Taria, a Shield. Tree, a Town. Tri, Three, masc. gendre, Ynis, an Island. Ynad.
a Judge, next ye King Yscar, to separate. Yscaradic. Separated.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Richard Iohnes: and are to be sold at his shop,
ioynyng to the Southwest door of Paul's Church.


