THE COPY OF AN EPISTLE SENT BY JOHN KNOX ONE OF the Ministers of the English
Church at Geneua unto the inhabitants of Newcastle, and Barwike.

In ^^e end whereof is added a brief exhortation to England for the spedie
imbrasing of Christ's Gospel hertofore suppressed and banished.

MATTHEW. CHAP. VII. ^uerie tree, which bringethe not fourth good fruit, is
hewne down, and cast into the fire.

AT GENEVA. M.D.LIX.

MATH. x. Who so ever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my father which is in heaven: but who soever shall deny me before men,
him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven.

^^hn Knox to the inhabitants of N^wcas^le and Barwike and unto ^^her who
sometime in the Realm ^nglande prof^ssed Christ Jesus, and (...) be returned
to the bondage of (...), wishes true, and earnestre^ancely the power and
operation ^at same spirit, who called from ^he Jesus the only pastor of our
(...).
IF the reason of man shall be called to judge what fruit ensuethe the payneful
trauail of Gods most faith^^ll servants, who at his com^andement study to
repair his ^itie, and to purge his temple, ^^t only shall their labors be
^stemed for a time to be vainly ^pent, The reason of man is not able to judge
of the wonderful works of God toward his Church.
but skarsely shall the wisdom of God through man's ^ashe judgment escape
condemnation, nether shall the verity of his promesses be free from suspicion
of falsehod and vanity. For to man's reason nothing appears more absurd,
folishe nor unreasonable, then yt God (whose power no creature is able to
resist) shall send fourth his messingers to perform his work and will, The
preaching of the word seems folishnes to the world.
and that the same shall be so impugned, that their building in their own eyes
shall be overthrown, and destroyed, and that the natural man can not se how the
promesses of Christ Jesus, made to his Apostles, and under their names to all
true preachers of his holy Gospel, in these words can be prouen constant, and
true. I have (says he) appointed you to go and to bring fourth fruit, John.
15.
and that your fruit shall abide. The stabilitie and truth (I say) of this
promise does not suddenly appear, but rather the plain contrary. For if the
fruit of the Gospel and glad tydinges preached be first in this life the glory
of God (I mean such good works as may declare the spirit of regeneration)
shining in man after that he be planted in Christ Jesus, and after this battle
the joy prepared for Gods children: if these (I say) be the fruits of Christ
Jesus preached, then appear the most part of trees to be destroyed before the
time of fruit does approach. For some by tyranny and violence are rooted out
from the society of earthely creatures before they begin to flourish, and so
is their fruit to ma^s judgment impeaded and hindered, some are blasted and
wythered with stormy winds and some are corrupted either by vermin, or by
venomous humors proceeding from a corrupt fountain, so that the fruit of none
almost does appear to our eyes. To speak the matter simply and without
figure, the men that appeared to the faithful laborers to have been planted in
Christ, who callethe him self the very vine, and those, that profess his
truth, the vine branches, are subject to so many tentacions, that skarsely
emongst a thousand does one take root and bring forth fruit with patience.
Notwithstanding such, as by ty^annye and violent persecution are suddaynly
rest from this life, do nevertheless produce and bring forth fruit delectable,
and pleasing in the sight of him, who has appointed an end to the trauayl
and miseries of his dear children, The death of the martyrs (...) ^reaseth
the age and mal^ce of the reprobat aga^st Christ Jesus* and for time tro^bleth
the hearts of the cle^^.
albeyt this fruit to the natural man is so sow^e and unsavory, so hard and
unpleasant, that the only sight of it, not only gyuethe occasion to the
reprobat to utter their venom and malice against Christ Jesus: but also for a
season it vexes and tormenteth Gods most dear children. For as the one does
insolently rejoice as thoghe God did favor and mai^tein their tyra^nye, so
does the other indiscreetly lament and pronounce wrong judgment, esteminge,
that more it should stand with Gods glory and honor, and more also with the
profet of his Church, yt such, as to whom he has of mercy granted
notable graces, should rather be preserved in life, then permitted and given
over to the wicked appetites of cruel persecutors Howbeit as ye fruit of these
trees is best known to God alone, so is it justified and approved by him
whatsoever the folishe wisdom of the natural man shall judge in the contrary.
Esai. 57.
For the prophet Esai pronounces that the just perishes (so does it appear
to ma^s judgment) and yet that no man puts it in heart, that is does
earnestly consider it, that the men of mercy are taken away and the world
nevertheless does rejoice and tryumphe. But the holy ghost assigns an other
cawse, The fruit and benifite of death unto the just.
that the just is taken away before that his eyes behold greater miseries, that
he enters into his peace before that Gods vengeance begin to be powered
forth upon the proud and disobedient, Esai. 57.
and so does their fruit abide and continue, not only to their perpetual joy,
but also to the comfort and consolation of the afflicted yt suffer for
righteousness sake even to the^de. For ye same God yt of mercy had respect to
their infirmity, and so did prevent the dangers that might have apprehended
them, providing also for his Church above the expectation of mortal man, will
not despise the sobbes of his ^fflicted now in these most wret^hed, and most
wicked days. But of these trees and of their fruit I cease at this time
farther ^o speak, because that the dolo^ous. estate of many that be alive
^awsethe me some times to give thanks unto God for the happy deliverance of
such as constantly departed in the Lord, whether it was by persecution of
tyrants, or by natural death.

Consider with me dear brethern (I speak to you of New Castle and Barwicke)
your miserable estate and most dolorous condition. Your profession did once
declare before men, The outward profession of Newcastle and Barwike in the
time of the Gospel.
that ye were branches planted and ingrafted in Christ Jesus, whose holy gospel
(which is the power of God to the salvation of all yt believe it) ye appeared
to have received with all reverence and gladness. Romans 1.
The displeasure of your natural and carnal friends, who then were ennemies to
Christ Jesus and to his eternal verity, some of you did patiently bear. Ye
feared not to go before statutes and laws, yea openly and solemnedly you did
profess by receiving the sacraments not as man had appointed, but as Christ
Jesus the wisdom of God the father had institute to be subject in all things
concerning religion to his yoke alone, to acknowledge and auouche him before ye
world to be your only law gyuer, sovereign prince and only savior. Thus I
say ye appeared at that time, to have been the delicate plants of the Eternal,
the workmanship of his own hands, and the trees that in season and time
should have produced good fruit in abundance. But o alas how are ye changed?
how are ye corrupted: whi^^ervnto are ye fallen? and how ^aue ye deceived the
expectation ^f those that then did labor in ^la^^inge and watering you, and
^ow do sobbe unto God for your ^^gratitude, calling with tears unto his
mercy for your co^uersio^ and that unfeigned repentance ^ay suddenly appear in
you. O miserable change, that ye who were once fervent professors of Christ
Jesus and of his gospel, should now ^e subjects to Antichrist, geui^ge
obedience to his false, and deceuable doctrine. O grievous fall and more the^
grievous, yt from ye dignity of the sons of God (which prerogative ye had by
grace and not by nature) ye are become slaves to Satan, iustifiing by your
presence most abominable Idolatrye. If ye se not the danger which hereupon
depends, ye are more then blind, and if ye se it, and study not with al
diligence to avoid it, ye are not only folishe, but altogether bewitched and
enraged. God did not call you from darkness to light, he did not send his
son Christ Jesus unto you, contemning and refusinge many thowsandes, more
noble, more wise, more ancient, and more puissant then ye are or ever were: God
(I say) did not so familiarely communicate him self with you in his only
beloved son Christ Jesus, to the end that ye at your pleasure and appetite or
for the fear of wordly men, for losing of goods, or corporal life should
return to darkness, that ye should refuse to serve that soueraing prince in
the day of his battle, Philip. 2.
before whom all knees shall bow. But contrariwise that according as ye were
called to ye participation of light, that so constantly ye should walk in ye
same that as ye were appointed souldyers to fight against Satan the ^rince of
this world, and against ^is progenye, ennemies to Christ Jesus, so should ye
boldly abide ^n the rank, in which God had placed you, being farther most
^ertenly persuaded, yt he that ^lieth the battle and denies Christ Jesus
before men, shall be denied before his heavenly father, Matt. 10.
yea also yt such as refuse not father, mother, sister and brother, are not
worthy of him: and moreover yt such as do not boldly confess him before this
wicked generation, shall never be confessed to appertain to him, nor to the
glory of his kingdom, when he shall be acco^paned with his angels. Which things
I thought once had been so depely grafted in your hearts, that albeit angels
from heaven should have persuaded you to the contrary, yt ye should have holden
them accu^sed, and so in that behalf have rejected their persuasion and
doctrine, as a poison most pestilent, which is death and damnation to all that
receive it. For so did ye once profess and such was my hope of you, yt so in
heart you had determined: for Christ Jesus was not preached amongst you without
his cross. The Gospel of Christ has ever the cross folloing.


How often has it been bett in your ears that the servant can not be above the
Lord: Matthew. 10. John 13. Act. 14.
that the members must be conformed to the head, that by many tribulations we
must enter into the ki^gdome of God: that all yt will live godly in Christ
Jesus must suffer persecution, 2. Timo. 3.
and that pa^tly because Satan the prince of this world can never be so
brydeled during this battle, but that he will strive to recover strength, and
partly because that sin remains in us he is permitted to sting with his
venomous tail, when his head is bruised. Was not this doctrine ^ommon unto you?
Yea have ye ^ot hard ofter the^ once, that your ^yes should se Christ Jesus
perse^uted in his pore members? that ^is verity should be oppugned? that
superstition, lies and Idola^rie should prevail and have the ^pper hand? that
the kindome of heaven, the true preaching of his Euangil should be taken from
you ^or the ingratitude and stubbur^es of men, who more delyted in ^arkenes
then in light? None of ^hese things at that time did ^ppeare strange unto you,
nether ^yd they discorage you, but ye ^emed (being admonished what ^aunger it
was to refuse Christ Jesus) most steadfastly to cleave to ^he verity,
notwithstanding that ^he whole world should have refu^ed the same.

How often have ye assisted to Ba^tisme? how often have ye been par^akers of ye
Lords table prepared, used and ministered in all simplicity, not as man had
devised, nethe^ as the kings procedinges did a^ low, but as Christ Jesus did
institute, and as it is evident, tha^ Saint Paul did practice. The^^ two
sacraments* seals of Christ Euangil, ye commonly used, baptism for your
children, and the table of the Lord to your own^ comfort, and for the open
confession of your religion. And so often I say dear brethern did y^ witness
before me^, and swear before God, that ye would dye (...) Christ Jesus, to
the end that y^ might live by him: that ye would refus^ the doctrine of men,
and the participation of all Idolatry* and would constantly stand, and
stickfast to that religion, which then ye p^ofessed, and approved But o alas
what miserable ru^ne has this suddayne and sho^^ storm made of that
building^ (...) was beg on amongst you? The winds have blown and the flodes
are come, and the walls are fallen in one heap (God grant that the fundatio^
abide) the fire is come, but in you alas is nether found gold, silver, nor
precious stone, but all is brent, and all is consumed, so that if I shall judge
the fruit of my pore lobors amongst you by mine own judgment reason or
apprehension, I should judge my self, and my labors accursed of God, for that
that I se no better success. O consider dear brethren, what grief it is, that
in such a multitude none shall be found faithful, In the time of persecution and
trial not one was found faithful and constant.
none constant, none bold in the cawse of the Lord Jesus, whom so boldlye
before they had professed.

God is witness, and I refuse not your own judgments, how simplye and
uprightly I conuersed and walked amongst you, though in his presence I was and
am nothing, but a mass of corruption, rebellion and hypocrisy: yet as
concerning you and the doctrine taght amongst you, as then I walked, so now do
I write in the presence of him, who only knows and shall reveal ye secrets
of all hearts, This rule oght of all preachers to be observed.
yt nether for fear did I spare to speak the simple truth unto you, nether
for hope of worldly promotion, dignity or honor did I willingly adulterate
any part of Gods scriptures whether it were in exposition, in preaching,
contention or writing: but that simply and plainly, as it pleased the merciful
goodness of my God to give unto me the vttera^ce, understanding and spirit, I
did distribute the bread of life (I mean Gods most holy word) as of Christ
Jesus I had received it. I soght nether pre-eminence, Behold wherein the
preachers of Christ should rejoice.
glory, nor riches: my honor was, that Christ Jesus should reign: my glory,
that the light of his truth should shine in you: and my greatest riches, that
in the same ye should be constant. Let him amongst you that is farthest
declined, convict me if he can, if that ever he did perceive me by crafty or
unlawful means to seek the substance or riches of any, yea if I have not
refused that, which by diverse has been offered, and that also by the commone
opinion might lawfully have been received. But to what purpose is this recited?
Is it to brag of mine own justice? or yet to defend mine own innocence? not
so dear brethren, not so (for what I acknowledge my self to be before God, I
have already confessed) but to let you understand, that if I have this
testimony of conscience as concerning my office, ministry and doctrine, and
am notwithstanding wounded almost to the death for that that my labors have
not better succeeded, If he that is innocent has this fear, how oght the
offenders, to tremble?
what oght to be your fear, lame^tacion, and trembling? I fear that God has
cursed me because he has not better blessed my labors amongst you, and yet in
that behalf have I the lot, and sort common with the most part of Gods true
Prophets, and the condition like with saint Paul to comfort me in my greatest
desperation. 3. Reg. 19.
For Helias did think that he alone amongst the Israelites was left a live
truly to worship God. And Paul did complain that all that were in Asia had
left him. ^ Timo. 3.
He did se in his own days his beloved Church of Gallacia bewitched by false
^^a^hers, and also that most notable Congregation of Corinthus, short^y after
his departure from the same, he saw divided in sects, corrupted in life,
given to deba^e, contencion and strife, yea, to be infected with most
pestilent heresye, I mean with ye denial of the resurrection of the dead.
These and other like exemples ^eache us how Gods most true and paynefull
servants have be^e frustrate of their expectation and so humbled before God,
whose fruits I have to pull, and as it were by violence to draw me from the
bothome of hell, to the which some times I sink for remembrance of your fall,
and for my other offenses against God committed. But these exemples can not so
remedy my wound, ^ut that from time to time I ^ele the prick of Gods heavy
displeasure. And oght you the^ to live void of all fear, as men that had
nothing offended? My conscience does nether accuse me, that amongst you was I
a false prophet, mercenary nor idle person, and yet I quake, I fear and
tremble, remembering your horrible fall, and oght you to rest, be quiet, and
rejoice, against whom Gods vengeance is so plainly pronounced? For if no
Realm, no Nation, City, nor particular person traitorously declinyng from
God, and obstinatly remaining in rebellion after the truth known and
professed, has escaped Gods vengeance, flatter not your selfs, as that your
treason and rebellion should or can be ouersene by his justice, which from the
beginning is one, and to the end shall remain inviolable.

Repentance is the (...) to find mercy.
Many have offended, and upon repentance have obtained mercy and grace: but I
dema^de and ^ske, who co^te^ning mercy offered, (...) as the Apostle speaks,
dispi^ing the lenity, and long suffering of God, has in the end escaped
vengeance. Your treasonable fall is manifest, but the signs of your repentance
do not yet appear, and therefore I say flatter not your selves, as that ye had
made pactio^ with death, with hell and destruction, as the Prophet Esai
accuses those of his time, Esai. 28.
who disdainfully did answer, when he called them to sackcloth and ashes, that
is to show forth the tokens of true repentance and conversion unto God. In
despit (I say) they answered, Esai. 5.
Let the counsel of the holy one of Israel come: in the mean time, let us
eat and drink, and make merry days, for to morrow we shall dye, if the words
of these bablers (so were Gods servants termed) be true, and take effect.
Esai. 22.
But we are out of danger: destruction nor death shall not apprehende us. The
accomplishement of their visions are far of: Jerusalem is the pott, and we are
the flesh, meaning thereby, that they would dye and live in their native
country. But the prophets boldly against such proud contempt did affirm,
that their leage and covenant made (as they supposed) with death and vastacion
should be dissolved and broken. For the floods of vengeance should carry them to
perdition: Esai. 28.
strangers should inherit their land, and they should dye in miserable
bondage, in a land polluted with all Idolatry, because they refused to serve
the Lord their God in the land, which he had given to them in possession, and
because they would nether give reverence nor credit to his servants the
prophets, whom from time to time he sent unto them. Ezech. 11.
And farther the prophets did affirm that those po^e afflicted servants of
God, who c^uelly were murthe^ed i^ their presence by those cruel persecutors,
that the^ bare dominion in tyranny, were only they amongst the Is^aelites,
that should dye with honor in their own contrie. As for the rest, they should
either be led captives, or else dye by hunger, pestilence or sword and so leave
their names in ex^ecration and contempt to the posterities foloinge.

Beware dear brethren that ye be not like to these me^ in stub^urnnes in
contynuance of sin and in contempt of grace. Ye have declined, yea, and
traitorously fallen back from God, and from his verity once professed, as
they did: but beware (I say) that ye defend not your impiety, that ye
contemn not the threatninges of God, promising to your selves felicity and
life, when he by his word, and holy prophets pronou^cethe against you woe,
death and severe judgment. For then be you most assured, that ye shall not
escape yt irreuocable sentence of God, once pronounced by the mouth of Jeremy
in these words: Every nation like unto this shall I judge says the eternal.
Iere. 5.
Then shall you feel in the end, how horrible and fearful it is to fall in
the hands of the omnipotent. Then shall ye grope and wander to and fro seking
remedy, but shall find none: ye shall be like blind me^ in extreme darkness, ye
shall stu^ble, ye shall fall, ye shall cry and rore for anguishe, but none shall be
able to releaue your miseries, all creatures shall be ennemies unto you because
you have despised ye goodness and mercy of him, who so loui^glye has
entreated you: first in openinge unto you ye true knowledge of him self, and
now after your horrible defection so mercifully calling you to repentance
again. O call to mind, dear brethren, that fearful sentence pronounced
against that fig tree, Luke 13.
which did occupy the ground, but was unfruitful. The request and earnest
supplication of the gardener could obtain no more, but that he might dig
abowte her, and lay donge to the ^ootes thereof the space of one year, but
the^, if it produced no fruit, he was compelled to give place by his own
sentence to the wisdom and justice of his lord, who would not suffer such an
unprofitable tree to occupy place in his chosen and delectable garden or
vineyarde. This was not spoken by Christ, nor meant (dear brethren) of dead
and insensible trees, but under yt similitude most lively is painted and set
forth, what shall be ye end of those, that by vocation and external profession
are planted in the Church of God, John. 15.
and so made members of Christ Jesus? who is the very vvnestocke, and such as
do profess him, are called branches grafted in him. This similitude (I say) do
the express what shall be the end of such, as bring not forth fruit in him, to
wit, they shall be cut of ye stock, whom by baronnes they dishonor, they shall
wither and dry, and so be cast on the fire to burn for ever.

I have no pleasure (God is witness) to threaten you, much less to pronounce
plages and Gods severe judgments against you, but seeing and considering your
horrible defection from God and from his verity known and professed, ^ dar
not cease to exhort you to ^epentance. For although I should ^epe silence, yet
should stones ^ccuse your unthankfulness. If ^ should flatter you and speak
ac^ordi^g to your appetites, No vain excuses or flattery of the preachers can
turn away Gods vengeance.
saying ^as we can not redres the in^quitie of these times, we have (...)
pleasure in Idolatry, we are ^orye, that the blood of innoce^ts ^s shed in our
land, we would ^e content that true religion ^hulde be used, but wicked men
^ow bear dominion, and therefore we must serve and obey the ^yme: when God shall
please to ^estore his truth we will be gladd of it, but in the mean time we must
obey the laws set forth by ^ur superiors: God knows ^ur hearts, and we
trust he wil^e merciful unto us. If on this ^aner (I say) I should flatter you
^aying pillowes under your hea^es, who already do sleep in a deadely security,
should ye therefore escape Gods vengeance? No no dear brethern, but by such
means be you assured that Gods indignation is more kindeled, both against the
people, and the prophet. For when al are coniured against his truth, then must
his just judgments revenge his own cause, and therefore brethern suffer the
word of exhortation, suffer it I say with trembling and fear, not esteming
the threatninges pronounced against the disobedient forth of the book of God
to be voice^ sparsed in the ay^e, The threatninges of Gods prophets are
effectual.
which suddenly shall euanishe and take no effect. God forbid, that such
cogitatio^s remain and prevail in your hearts, for then have ye refused God,
with whom ye can have no society, except ye embrace, and receive his word,
which threatens no less damnation; death* shame and destruction to proud
^o^temners and obstinat refusers of grace and mercy offered, The word of God
has two offices.
then that it does promise salvation, (...), honor and immortality to ^he
penitent sinner, and unto such (...) unfeignedly mourn for their ^aynous
offenses against God committed. It behooves you therefore, dear brethern, to
give this honor to your God, that the viritie of his word be not measured by
the weakness, frailty or infirmity of the instruments, which most commonly
he uses in publicatio^ of the same. For his ministers are men subject to
infirmities, but the word, which they preach, is the power of God to
salvation of all that believe and obedie^tly embrace the same. His ministers, as
they be the sons of men, of nature are they liars, instable and vain, but
his eternal word, which he puts in their mowthes, and whereof they are
made imbassadors, is of such truth, stabilitie and assurance, that albeit
heaven and earth should euanishe and perish, yet shall it abide and remain for
ever, Matt. 24.
and that in such sort, that the same men, who blinded by prosperity and
carnal affections, could not believe God speaking by his ministers, are often
compelled in their own bodies and in their posterities folowinge to feel the
stripes and sustain the plages, Such as will not acknowledge God by his word
shall know him by his judgments.
which they contemned, when they were first pronounced. The prophet Zachary,
accusing the Jews of his time of negligence, in reedifiing the temple after
they were delivered from ye captivity and bondage of Babylon, sayethe, where
be your fathers, to whom the prophete^ spoke? and where be the prophet that
spoke to your fathers? are not the one and the other dead? But my words and
statutes (says the Eternal) which I have commanded to my servants the
prophets, have not they apprehended your fathers? insomoche that they
converted and said, Zach. 1.
As the Lord of ^ostes has determined to do unto us according to our ways and
according to our imaginations, so has he done. By which question and words
the Prophet evidently affirms that, which before I have said to wit, that
nether the mercy of God promised to the penitent, nether the severe
punishementes pronounced against the stubborn and (...) oght to be measured by
the weakness and condition of the m^s^^nger, whom God sends: The word is
not to be measured by the m^^s^ng^r, but by the power of God that sends it.
but that whatsoever they bring fo^the of Gods book against iniquity and syn,
and chiefly against Idolatry (which seperateth man altogether from God)
shall be holden so constant and so true, as though God from the heaven had given
witness to the same by the presence of his own majesty. The me^ to whom
Zachary d^d speak, had never seen Esai ye prophet, yea, Esai him self was
dead long before his prophetie took full effect: notwtstanding as their fathers
felt the plagues, which he pronounced against them and against that famous
City Jerusalem for the bloodshede and Idolatry in the same committed: so were
the eyes of their children, to whom Zachary speaks, witnesses, yt Gods
wrath was in perfection powered forth upon their fathers, which also did abide
upon them, eue^ unto that day, that the Prophet did admonish the^. For they
saw Jerusalem lie (...) and waste, as the Caldeies had left it, they saw the
ruins and miserable stones ouercouered with powder of that bewtifull and holy
temple of God, which by Solomon was builded. They farther felt them selves in
poverty and bondage of strangers. For albeyt they had obtained liberty to
return to their country: yet perceived they their condition (...) little
amended. Their e^nemies were more strong then they, 1. Esd. 3. 1. Esd. 4. 2.
Nehe. 4.
even in their own land. Their work was imp^aded, and they did live in
greater fear, then those which still remained in dispertion* and thus I say
were both their fathers and they compelled to confess in the end, that the
words of the prophets were no vain threatni^gs. For the fathers did feel in
a strange country the heavy yoke of bondage the space of 70. years, after
that the bodies of many thou sands had fallen upon the edge of the sword, and
the eyes of the children did see the force and vehemency of Gods wrath once
kyndled. Of one thing be assured, The same God that spoke in times past by his
prophets, speaks as effectually now by his messingers.
dear brethern, that the self same God, who then spoke by his prophets, does
now speak to you by his messingers, how contemptible soever they be in your
eyes. and fa^ther be assured, that in all his proprieties he remains
immutable for ever and ever, and therefore persuade your selves, that what he
hated in the^, he can not love in you, and what he punished in them, he can not
spare nor pa^do in you. In them he hated murder, deceit, oppression,
licencious life, declyning from the true religion and manifest Idolatry
committed and suffered in all their land. In them he punished (and that most
extremely) defense of their sins, contempt of mercy and persecution of his
prophets. If these things be common amongst you, as alas they are to manifest,
flatter not your selves, as that your prosperity should long continue, no
brethren but rather let the sharp judgments of God, all ready executed
against the like offenders, put you in mind, that ye plagues and vengeances,
which are contained in his holy Law, and which your ears have often hard, do
presently ha^ge over your heads: that the blood of Gods innocent children,
which cruelly is shed in your land (whereof ye are all guilty by reason of your
permission and silence) does continually cry in the ears of our most just
God, None can excuse the^ selves of the innocent blood, that keep silence in
such cruel murders.
How long shall it be, o Lord, A^o. 6.
that thowe wilt not revenge our blood upon those that dwell in the earth? that
the tears of the widows oppressed, of the orphelines left comfortles, of
prisoners wrongefully tormented, and of the banished, who sustain hunger and
other calamities in strange contries, only because they would avoid such
abominations, as amongst you are committed. Ye oght, I say, to be most
assuredly persuaded, yt ye lamentable voices of al these have so beaten the
ears of our God, and that the tears, which in anguishe they powered forth,
have so replenished and fylde the bottel, which hangethe continually in the
eyes of the almighty, that he has sworn by his own holiness, that he will
arise in his hot fury, that he will revenge their cause (and that spedely) and
that he will also confound his ennemies the persecuters of his Church, as fire
co^sumeth stubble and straw.

No time will I appoi^t to these the judgments of our most just God, but this I
fear not to affirm in the assurance of his spirit, who of mercy has called
me to be a minister of his word and verity, that as ye have hard the ^ayes
of these present dolors forespoken, when ye could fear no such dangers to
come. For Barwike and Newcastle be you both witnesses, Barwike Newcastel
how often and how plainly ye have hard affirmed, that ye light, which the most
part hated (or at least did not follow) should be taken from you, and that ye
for your unthankfulness should be left in uttermost darkness to your
destruction: yt strangers should bear rule over you, and that ye should of al
nations be most miserable and accursed of God, because ye did not know the time
of your merciful visitatio^. How often have ye hard proclaimed in your ears, O
England if you dydest know the honor, wheru^to this day thowe art called: if
thou dydest consider the graces and benefits of God this day offered unto the,
thou should be most happy and most blessed of all realms. For within thy
la^d has God erected his sanctuary, builded his temple and chosen his
habitation and dwelling place. England was once made the sanctuary of God*
which is a title most honorable and blessed.
From amongst you has God by the power of his word driven out deuilles,
superstition and Idolatry: but alas for thy unthankfulness thy God will depart
from the: he will give the over again to the bondage of Satan. In lies thou
delitest and therefore shall the verity be taken from the. Which sentences and
threatenings albeyt then ye feared not, yet dare ye not deny in Gods presence,
howsoever ye dissemble in the face of the wicked world, but that amongst you
spoke the Spirit of truth, how weak that ever the instrument was, whom it
pleased his wisdom to use for your advertisement, as your eyes do this day
behold the acco^plishement and execution of one part of Gods most just
judgments. For the verity, Because the multitude deliteth rather in lies,
then in truth therefore fall they suddenly to errors.
in which a small nombre did delight, is taken from you, and Idolatry, which
many gaped for, is erected to your confusion and shame. God has removed the
presence of his glory from you, and the devil has take his full possession.
As this part (I say) of Gods judgments, w before were pronounced, is executed
in your eyes, so shall some of you, that this day behold the tyranny that is
used, mainteyned and permitted amongst you, likewise behold the terrible
plagues and severe judgments of God powered forth in full perfection, The
plagues of God shall apprehend even such as by silence and flattery con^ent to
the murder of his (...)
not only upon the cruel murderers, but also upon such as by silence, and
flattery consent to their impiety. If ye be not more then blind, ye may
evidently se ye pote^t hand of God displayde and stretched out against you.
Does not the suddayne and miserable fall of Calice, Calice, called the key of
England.
sometimes called the keye of England, yea, and ye open door into forrayne
countries, move you to consider, what is Gods powere, and how easy it is to
him to overthrow all the pride of man in one moment? If it move not others, yet
let it move the, Barwike let the suddayne fall of thy sister move the to
repentance.
o Barwike* she was thy sister, and your condition was one, except yt as in
strength, order and civil policy thou wast nothing comparable: so in theft,
debate, hatred and all iniquity thou did far surmount her and yet she
has dronke^ the cup of Gods vengeance, Note
because yt being admonished, she did not repent: and shall or can thou escape
the same, if thou continue, as thou have begun? No, albeyt man and angel
would promise the assurance, thy pride shall be beaten down to hell, thy
treasonable defection from God shall be punished, as before has been pronounced
in thine ears, except yt by spedy repe^ta^ce thou prevent Gods judgments.
And therefore, dear brethren, if yt ye intend or think to escape Gods
vengeance, his heavy hand and hot displeasure, delay no time to retu^ne unto
him, Psalm. 32.
call upon him while he is nie, seek him unfeignedly, while he is to be found,
harde^ not your hearts, when he rebukethe your unthankfulness. Now he offerethe
him self unto you, now he is near, now he is to be sound, while he callethe
you to repentance by his messingers and word. Which occasion and opportunity
if ye omit, as Gods justice shall shine in your punisheme^t and just
condemnation, Iere. 11.
so shall it be, yt you howl and cry for anguishe and pain, and yet shall
find nether counsel nor comfort. for so does God often revenge the contempt
of his graces offered.

Proud Esau, after he had sold his birth right and had confirmed the ba^gan
with a solemned oath, did eat and drink regardyng nothing his own
folishenes, nether rightly did he esteem (for the time) the honor and dignity
which he had lost. But after, when he perceived that his father (even against
his promise and determined purpose) would still bless Jacob, Gene. 27.
he ^^ett, he fumed, he accused Jacob, he reasoned with his father, he begged
but one blessing and that with tears, with roringe and lamentable cries: but
all was in vain, he found no place of repentance: the door of mercy was shit
up by his former contempt, he bowled and cried, but not for his syn and former
unthankfulness, he begged blessi^g, but his eye being fixed upon this present
world, he remained accursed before God, burni^g in hatred and imagining murder
and the death of his brother, whom God had honored with his spiritual
benedictio^. This history (as by ye Apostle we are taght) is not written for
Esau only, but for ensample and admonition to a^l those that prefer the
profane and contemptible pleasures of this earth to the benediction and
inheritance promised to Abraham and unto his seal. All are Esau children that
prefer earthly pleasures to spiritual blessings.


Enter in judgment with your selves, dear brethren, and consider earnestly,
what exchange ye have made. Ye have refused and ^enied God the father and his
dear son Christ Jesus, and so ye whole joy and comfort of his kingdom: ye
have quit ye portion of your inheritance and have despised ye benedictio^
promised to such, as should abide in the truethe to the end. And what reward
have ye received? a measse of pottage, yea, much less, if the matter shall be
well considered. For the favor of your Queen accursed by God, ye fre^dshipe of
the counsel destitute of wisdom, and your wretched and miserable lives,
compared with ye things, wc ye have lost, are much inferior to the pottage,
for ye with Esau sold his birthright. For his appetites and lusts were sacia^
for a time, but I am assured that your bellies, for the which ye have refused
God, are more e^ptie, the^ they were before. Now are ye compelled to feed ye
proud Spanyard both within and without your co^try. Tax follows tax and one
exaction calls for an other. The lands and inheritances must pay at pleasure
of ye parliament* ye mouable goods can not escape valuation and censure, The
fruits of (...) reign
where oppression and extorsion bear rule and dominion. These are ye great
benifites, wc of Iesabel ye have received for refusinge of God and bowing at
her commandment to Baal. But let it be yt you had received sinse your revolt
and falling from God ye greatest riches, ye greatest honor, ye greatest
victory, and the most established rest, yt ever nation had sinse the
beginning: yet had ye changed your former glory for a mease of pottage. For do
ye not know yt al these things shall cuanish as a dream in the night ceaso^?
And as concerning ye preservation and safety of your lives, for yt wc ye have
refused God, who only is ye auctor of life, ye day shall shortly come, when ye
shall prove this sentence of Christ Jesus to be true in experience, Math. 10.
To take away life is only in the pow^^ of God that gave it.
that whosoever to keep or find his life denies Christ Jesus before me^, shall
lose his life both corporal and eternal. For as your Iesabel can nothing
without the will and permission of him, who is omnipote^t: so can nether she nor
you retain nor hold the breath in her nor your most frail bodies, when that
most potent Lord shall say, Return to dust o ye unthankful sons of mo^tal
men.

Seeing it is so (dear brethren) that Gods judgments ye can not escape
humble your selves be times before that his vengeance be armed to your
destruction. If ye continue in this deadly security, regarding nothing what
honor ye have lost, it shall be to late for you to howl and cry, when your
blessing (...) in your own cares be given to others. Repent therefore betymes,
and as ye have openly declined from God by refusal of his v^^itie so let your
co^uersio^ be manifest by remouynge from amo^g^^ you all ki^de of Idolatry.
This I know appears to you so impossible to be performed, (...) ye judge me
rather to mock you ^ne^ to exhort you to repentance by this mea^es. But, dear
brethren, God easily bring the^ to pass that, which to ma^^ reason is
impossible.
consider with me, that the things, which to man seem most impossible, are
easy to our God to (...) to pass, if we will refuse our selves, and only give
obedience to his commandeme^tes. Impossible it appeared to the afiliated
children of Israel, that they ^oulde be delivered from the tyranny of Phorao
and from the bondage of the Egyptians. And ^n very deed their yoke was
augme^ted and their burdens made more grievous, many days after they had at
Moses commandment asked liberty to make sacrifice to the living God^. But
were they despised or frustrate of their expectation in the end? or did such
as suppressed them or assisted their king in persecution of Gods people, escape
ve^gea^ce? Gods power is not diminished.
we know the contrary. Behold the means to atteyne Gods favor and mercy.
The hand of our God is no more feeble now* then it was then* his good will and
love remains one at al tyme^ toward such as depend upon him. Acknowledge
then your sins, mourn for your vntha^kefulnes, absteyne from Idolatry, call
boldly that the liberty of Christ Jesus, of his holy gospel preached may be
restored unto you, consent not by your silence to the sheding of the blood of
innoce^tes, which for the testimony of Christ's truth is shed amongst you in
great abundance, but boldly bear witness, that injury is done unto them, and
so shall you know shortly in experience, that God is no vain promiser of
support to such, as shall be iniustly oppressed, especially for the cause of his
Euangil. But alas dear brethern (I speak to you, of whose boldenes I once
reioysed, and for whose fall, God knows, I now mourn) if ye shall continue in
rebellion against God, because ye dare not displease men, as ye shall not escape
damnation eternal, so shall ye feel in your own bodies, yea, the bodies of your
posterity after you shall feel, that his prophets have not vaynely threatened
bondage and thraldo^ against the inobedient. And be you assured that by
mainteyning of Idolatry you shall never attein to that quietness, which ye seek
in this earth, but contrariwise God shall plage you, God many times plageth
even by such as men seek to please.
eue^ by those whom ye study to please. Therefore in few words to conclude if
ye intend to escape Gods severe judgments, and if ye look to find ^o^
favorable, other to you or yet to your posterity, sleep no longer in your
syn, consider from what honor you are fallen, what danger hangs over your
heads, remember how fearful and horrible it is to have God your ennemie, and
in deep consideration thereof, call for mercy, study unfeignedly to rise
again, profess the truth, which ye have denied, remove to your power
iniquity f^ome amongste you, and abstain in your bodies from Idolatry
committed, and maynteyned by your wicked rulers. And in so doing, as ye shall
daily increase in knowledge, and strength: so shall ye find grace, which ye
have not deserved, and that by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
omnipotent spirit so illuminate your senses and understanding that clearly ye
may se, what is the riches of yt glory, which God has prepared for such as
unfeignedly love him, and how horrible are the torments, which the slaves of
Satan (I mean Idolaters, and such as for fear refuse the known verity) shall
suffer with the devil and with his angels without end.

Farther of my mind concerni^g your duties in these most ^olorous days, ye
may understand by my appellation and by mine admonition to the nobility and
communaltie of Scotland. God grant you his holy spirit rightly to consider
and boldly to follow the way, which leads to life everlasting. Ame^. From
Geneua the.x. of Nouembre M.D.LVIII.

The days are so wicked, that I dare make special commendations to no man.

Your brother with troubled heart John K^ox.

A BRIEF EXHORTATION TO ENGLAND FOR THE SPEDIE IMbrasing of Christ's Gospel
heretofore by the tyranny of Marie suppressed and banished.

HEBR. CHAP. VI. The earth, which drinkethin the rain, that often comes upon
it, and brings forth herbs meet for the^ that dress it, receaueth blessing
of God: but that ground, which bears thorns and briers, is reproved and is
nie unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

AT GENEVA.

M.D.LIX.

TO THE REALM OF ENGLAND and to all ^state within the same John Knox (...)
true repentance to be (...) God the father of our Lord I (...) Christ with the
Spirit of wisdom, d^^r^tion and true understanding.
AFTER that I had somewhat considered what from the beginning have been the
great mercies of God toward his afflicted people, In delivering them out of
the bondage of Egypt and captivity of Babylon Jeroboam and Rehoboam Kings of
Israel and Judah with their posterities.
and what also have been his severe judgments executed against such, A^^lo^^
and M^nasses. 2. Par. 24. 4. King. 2^
as either preferring darkness to light did follow the devises and inventions of
men, either that enraged by the malice of Satan, have declared them selves open
ennemies to God and to his verity reveled: I thought it my duty in few
words to require of thee, and yt in Gods name o England in general ye same
repe^ta^ce and true co^uersio^ unto God, yt I have required of those, to whom
before particularely I wrote. For i^ very deed when in dolor of heart I wrote
this former lettre, Apoc. 3.
I nether looked nor cold believe, yt ye Lord Jesus would so suddenly knock at
thy gate, Prou. 1.
or call upon thee in thy open streets, John. 14.
offering him self to pardon thy iniquity, yea to enter into thy house* and so
to abide and make his habitation with thee, who so inobediently had rejected his
yoke, Hebr. 10. Luk 11.20.
so dis^ainfully had trodden under fore the blood of his testament, and so
cruelly had murdered those, that were sent to call the to repentance. This thy
horrible ingratitude considered, I did rather look for punish^mentes and
plagues universally to have been powered forth, then for mercy by the sound
of his trumpet, so suddenly to have been offered to any within that miserable
isle. But when I did more depely way, that such is the infinite goodness of
God, and that such be also the bright beams of his most just judgments,
that when soever he takes into his protection by the conuenant of his word
any Realm, Nation, Province or City, As he did the sead of Abraham.
so that of mercy he becommethe to them co^ducter, teacher, protector and
father, that he never castethe of the same care and fatherly affection, which
in his word he does once pronounce, until they do utterly declare the^ selves
unworthy of his presence* when this (I say) I did consider and way, I was in
judgment somewhat reformed. For I find yt such was his care and constant
love to ye whole sede of Abraham (I mean of those yt descended of Jacob) yt
albeit in many things they provoked him to anger, yet did his infinite goodness
ever find and make a way, by y^ with his mercy was se^sibly felt of yt people,
eue^ in their greatest extremities. For not only did he often pardon their
offenses, In casting out 7. nations be^or them and deliueryng them from their
oppressors.
long keep them in the land, wc he had promised, and given to the sede of
Abraham, but also he was with them in fire and in water: yea when they were as
rotton ca^ions buried as it had been in their graves in Babylon, Genesis 12.13.
Psalm. 66. Esai. 43.
yet did he lay in pledge the glory of his own name for their deliverance,
Ezech. 20. Esai. 42.43
yea and faithfully above man's expectacio^ did he perform it. Es^r. 1. N^he. 2.
for he brake down the pride of Babylon, and so did open the prison, Esai.
14.43.
and brake up the gates of iron, which held them in thraldom. Esai. 48. Esai.
42.
And why so? he him self does answer, sayi^g, For mine own names sake will I
do this, and my glory will I give to none other, etc. And so this his love and
fatherly care was so constant and immovable, that nothing could utterly
change it from the people, Matthew. 1.
until his dear Son Christ Jesus did come of them and amongst them to
notify and declare that sovereign felicity promised to Abraham, Genesis 12.
I mean that all nations should be blessed in his sede, with was Christ Jesus,
who coming amongst his own was of the^ rejected, denied, refused and
shamefully put to death upon a cross betwixt two thieves. John. 1. Luk 13.
And yet so tender was Gods care over them, that before their polluted and
wicked hands were externally almost washen from his blood he sent unto them
the message of reconsiliation, Act. 1.
not only to those that were at Jerusalem, but even to such as were dispe^sed
amongst the Gentiles, Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles preached first to the
Jews.
as in the Acts of the Apostles is plainly witnessed. Act.
13.14.17.18.19.21.22.28.
For this prerogative had ever the Jews, that first to them were offered the
glad tydinges of the kingdom, unto such time as they declared the^ selves by
open blasphemies, continual resistance, and cruel persecution, most worthy to
be deprived of that honor. This long sufferance and careful calling of that
unthankful people proceeded from the same fountain, from the which their first
vocation did proceed and flow, that is, from his eternal goodness, which did so
long fight against their malice, that all creatures must justify God in his
fearful, Gods fearful judgments upon the Jews even to this day.
but yet most just judgments once executed and yet remaini^g upon that
rebellious people.

The same order I se does God keep with thee o you happy and most unhappy
England. happy, not only because thy God by his own hand has often deliuerd
thee from corporal bondage of diverse and strange nations, as of Saxons,
Romans, Goths and Danes, Gods unspeakable mercies bestowed upon England.
but especially for yt that by ye power of his eternal verity (and that of his
fre grace with out ^^y deseruyng) he did of late years break and destroy the
intolerable yoke of thy spiritual captivity, and brought the forth as it had
been from the bothome of hell and from the thraldom of Satan, in which thou
wast holden blinded by Idolatry and supersticion, to the feloship of his
Angels and to the possession of that rich inheritance prepared to his dearest
children with Christ Jesus his son. Matt. 25.
But o unhappy and more then unhappy, that have declared thy self so
unthankful and rebellious to so loving and so merciful a father, who fy^st
gave thee life, when thou did lie polluted in blood, and dead in thy sin
and now does offer him self to be thy God, Ezech. 16.
governor and father, The shameful defection of England.
after that thou most traitorously conspiring with Satan by solemned oath
haste renounced his verity. O unhappy and more then unhappy art thou (I say)
if that this thy treasonable defectio^, and Gods loving kindness, yet callig the
to his favors, does not pearce thy heart with unfeigned repentance. For as this
mercy and love of the God far surmou^^eth the^ each of all me^^
understanding* so can not his just judgments long delay to power forth
those horrible vengeances, which thy monst^ous unthankfulness has long
deserved, if thou ^as God forbid) now shutt up thine ears, blind thine
eyes, and so harden thy ha^t, that nether thou will hear, se nor understand
the gravity of thy fall, and that inestimable goodness of thy God thus lovingly
calling the to thy ancient honors and dignity again, I nether dar nor will
cease now by my pen (be it never so rude) to cry unto the that, which
sometimes from the mouth of my Master Christ Jesus I have pronounced in the
hearing of many: that if thou shall not know this merciful visitacion of the
Lord thy God, Gods mercies once again offered to England.
and so prepare thy self with a penitent and tha^kful heart to receive, yet
while time is, his large graces offered, that then thy habitatio^ shall be left
desolate, Ezech. 12. Zach. 7.
and where thowe have of long time been the delectable garden planted by the
Lords hand, thou shall become a barren wilderness, apt for nothing but to be
brent and consumed by fire.

The warrant of this my proclamation and sentence (how folishe and vain so
ever it appear to ma^s reason) I have not by conjecture nor opinion of man, but
from ye mouth of my God thus speaki^g by Moises: Beware (says he) that
amongst you be not a root yt buddeth forth gall and wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29.
so that when he shall hear the words of this execratio^, shall yet promise to
him self felicity in his heart, saying, peace shall be to me although I walk
after the lust of mine own heart, etc. The Lord will not be merciful says
Moises to such a one, but the fury of the eternal, and his hot displeasure
shall brust forth against such a man, and upon him shall lie (that is
continually abide) all the execrations, that be written in this book, and the
Lord shall blot out his name from under ye heaven, etc. Thus far speaks he
against particular men, and against the whole multitude he proceadethe in this
manner: The generation foloinge your sons, which shall arise after you, and the
stranger, that shall come from a far country, when they shall se the plagues of
this land and the incurable diseases, by ye which it shall languish and consume
as it were by brimstone and salt burning the whole land, so that it can not be
sown, nether yet in it does any herb spring up nor rise, etc. then shall all
nations say* why has the Lord done thus to this land? o what is the wrath
of Gods great fury? and they shall answer, For because they have left the
conuenant of the Lord the God of their fathers, which he did make with them,
when he brought them fo^the of Egypt. Idolatry was the cause of those horrible
plagues.
For they have gone and served other Gods (I say) whom they knew not, and
therefore was the fury of the Lord kyndled against this land, so that he brought
upon it all the execratio^s and curses written in this book. And the Lord in
his wrath, fury and great indignation has wrooted the^ out of their own
land, and has dispersed the^ in an other land, as this day does witness
etc. This same is written with greater circumstances in the book of Leuiticus,
Leu 1.26.
which place if ye consider with this, and considering Gods eternal verity to
have his effect in every age and nation, which so does offend, then shall
thou see, o England, Iere. 7.
that this is the judgment which thou shall not, nor can not escape, if
spedily thou repent not thy shameful defectio^ and with all humility return
to the Lord, whom so traitorously and so publicly of late days thou have
refused. For these severe judgments once executed against Israel and Judah may
be to thee, 4. Kin. 25.
who once have professed thy self subject to God, and have unthankfully
departed from his service, Let the just punishements of other nations (...)
the, o England, to repen^^^ces
and yet of mercy is called again: to the (I say) may those severe
judgments be a mirror and glass, in which thou may behold what shall be thy
final and miserable destruction, if by unfeigned and spedie repentance thou
remove not the vengeance, wc hangethe over thy head. And to the end that
better thou may try and examine thy self, I will shortly touch the stubburne
inobedience of that people, the long patience and gentle dealing of God with
their most miserable and lamentable destruction.

Three hundredth years and mo from the departure of the ten tribes from the house
and royal seat of David did Judah provoke God to displeasure, now by
Idolatry, In this time reigned Rehoboam, Abiah, Ioram and 10 others, all
Idolatrous kings.
now by hill aulters, now by co^federacie and joining of hands with wicked
princes and ungodly nations, 4. King. 14 15. 3. King. 16. 4. King. 8
by whom they were ever drawn from depending and trusting upon God to the
vain trust and confidence of men. Against these and other vices from time to
time did God send his prophets to call them to repentance and did also raise
up some times good and godly Kings to make public reformation as towching the
religion. 2. Para. 19.
But what reformation was found in life, 2. Para. 17.
manners and conversation, what reverence did the multitude bear unto God, how
was the religion imbrased in their hearts, and how long was it retained in
such perfection as was commanded, the prophets do teach, and histories bear
witness and plainly affirm, that even in the days of the most godly Kings
(of Ezechias and Josias I mean) the Scribes and Lawiers did write deceytfully
to thrust out the weakeons from their cause, La^iers. Esai. 10. Iudge^ and
Prince. Esai 1. Esai. 5.
to spoil the wydow, and to oppress the orphelin. Their Judges were bribers,
and their princes were partakers with thieves. They said that evil was good, and
good evil, Esai. 57.
they would have pleasing things spoken unto them* and commanded, that no
mention should be made of the holy one of Israel. for his word was a burden
unto them. Iere. 23. Nobles.
Of the Nobility some were traitors, some auaricious, some unconstant as
waueri^g reeds, some gredy dogs and insatiable wolves, Esai. 56.
deuoring the pray whersoeuer they might catch it. The people of the land
were deceitful, Commons.
all handy crafts, merchandise and vittayles were corrupt by their covetous
practices. They were ready but to sclander and oppress the pore, the nedy and
the stranger. The coniuration of prophets was in the midst of them, even as a
roaring lion, etc. They healed the sores and botches of the people, princes and
gouerners with unprofitable plasters and laid soft pillowes under the heads of
such, Prophets and prestes.
as securely slept in all iniquity. The prestes had violently rent in sunder
the Law of God, they had profaned his sanctuary by their own inventions, and
by reteining such a myxed and inuenomed religion, as from old Idolators they
had received, The corruption and mixture of Religion.
and that because it pleased their kings, Ezech. 8.9.
chief rulers, and gouerners, it must needs be good and please them. Ezech. 22.
They made no difference betwixt that which was holy and clean (because it
proceaded from God) and that which was profane and filthye, which wicked
Idolaters had invented and devised. The pastors finally were become dumme
dogs, Pastors.
their watchemen were bli^de given to excess, slowth fulness and sleep, and to
be short; they came to that corruption, that the Lord did seek a man to repair
the hedge again, and to stand in the gappe before him, Ezech. 22.
that the land should not be wasted, but yet he found none. for all were
declined, all soght their own advantage, no man called for justice and equity,
no man was judged of faith and verity. They brought forth coccatrise eggs,
Esai. 59.
their fete ra^ to mischief, they made have to shed innocent blood, Behold, o
England, this universal defection, compare it with thy former and yet present
state, and be warned.
they nether knew, nether yet would know the way of peace, but to such
horrible confusion came all things, that the verity was banished, and
whosoever departed from iniquity, was made as a pray to all men. Which
things, when the Lord did consider, and did see, that none would set them
selves, no man (I say) that opponed him self to so horrible iniquity: his
own arm gave him salvation, and his own justice did hold him up, etc. he
powered forth (after diverse plagues) his fury upon that nation at once, and in
the hot fire of his anger did he consume them, and so did reward their wicked
ways upon their own heads, as before was threatened by the mouth of Moises.
Deuteronomy. 18.


These testimonies and many mo (which to avoid prolixitie I omit) we have of
the prophets, how corrupt was the whole body eue^ in the days of the most
godly Kings, yea, even in the days, when the plagues were upon them. And the
histories do witness, that no sooner did ever any Idolater rise, but that so sone
from the highest degree to the lowest, from the prince to the Prophet (a mean
nombre except) were all ready to obey, Such as th^^ price is, such commonly are
the people.
what soever was commanded by such as were placed in honors and authority.
The history does farther witness, that the princes of Judah after the death of
Iehoiada, by whose wife Ioas was preserved in that most cruel murder of all
the kingly seade made by Athalia, and by whose most faithful diligence the same
Ioas was in the seuenthe year of his age made king over Judah: 2. Para. 24.
the conuenant and leage, before broken by Idolatry, was renewed again betwixt
God and the people, 4. King. 11.
and betwixt the people and the king: to wit, that the one and the other
should be the people of the Lord, by renewing of which co^uenant unhappy and
cruel Athalia was killed, This had been thy bounden duty o England in the
days of that most execrable Idolatre^ Marie.
the people did enter into the house of Baal, brake it down with his altars
and images, even to powder, and finally before ye altars of Baal did most
justly kyl Matha^ Baals great priest: after ye death (I say) of Iehoiada, by
whose godly providence all these things were brought to pa^^ se ye princes of
Judah came and bowed the^ selves unto the King, making no doubt this petition
unto him, that they might have the religion, Note this practice and the
success thereof
which long had been retained amongst the Kings of Judah, even from the days of
Solomon, and yt they should not be so straytly bond, as the conuenant made by
Iehoiada commanded* so they would not return (as may appear they did allege)
to Baal, but stand content with their hylaltars, their thickets of wood and
ancient Idols. And that this was their petition the history gives plain
light. For it says, And the King hard them: and they leauyng the house of the
Lord the God of their fathers, served thickets, and Idols, which thing albeyt
it did so displease the Lord, that he sent his prophets sharply to reb^ke
their unthankful defection, yet was there no redress. For the King, princes
and people were conspired against God, and so from Idolatry proceeded to cruel
murder, as the histories does witness in the days of Achas. The same
abominations remained in all estates. For Vrias the high priest him self at
the commandment of the King builded an altar as the King had sent him a
pattern from Damascus, 4. King. 16.
and so left the altar of the Lord, and brent sacrifice upon that great altar,
etc.

In the days of Ezechias (that zealous and Godly King) what were the hearts of
the nobility and people toward Gods true religion, it may appear by the
sequel. For streght after his death does the whole multitude return with
Manasses unto Idolatry, abominations and cruel murder, yea even while the
King did live, that treasonable traitor Sobna; Sobna Treasorer.
e^nemie to God, to his true whorship and to his prophets, was treasorer and
in highest authority.

Jeremy and Ezechiel do witness that the p^inces, prophets and people were so
corrupt even to the very day of the destruction, yea, and after the same, that
Zedechias (of nature by all appara^ce not very cruel, but yet faint hearted for
lack of faith was compelled at their commandment to put Jeremy in prison and
to give them permission to put him to death at their pleasures, whose life by
Gods mighty providence yet preserved, and being called to the presence of the
king, to whom he gave in Gods name most wholesome counsel, yet durst not the
King for fear of his princes nether follow the same, Iere. 36.
nether yet let them understand what communication was betwixt the Prophet and
him.

Ezechiel in his vision saw the people and princes declined from God, and did
also hear these words spoken by God: The iniquity of the house of Israel,
and Judah is great above measure, the earth is full of blood, and the City full
of defection. Ezech. 8.91
For they have said, The Lord has left the earth, and the Lord seethe us not.

After that most miserable destruction of Jerusalem, when a remnant of the
poor people and Nobility (who had escaped the edge of the sword) were left in
the land with the prophet Jeremy and with Godolias the son of Ahikam, Iere.
40.
their old venom of rebellion against God and his reveled will was nothing
purged. For albeyt that the princes, Iohannan the son of Carea; and Iezanias
the son of Hoseas with the whole people had promised unto Jeremy by a
solemned oath to do whatsoever the Lord should command unto them by his
mouth: yet when he commanded the^ in the name of the Lord to abide in the
land and not to carry the people to Egypt, they nether feared, nor ashamed to
say unto him, thou speak a lie, the Lord has not sent the to us,
commau^ding that we should not go to Egypt, Iere. 43.
etc. to Egypt will we go, Iere. 44.
and we will serve the queen of heaven, etc. even as our ancient kings, and
fathers did before us: and so in despite of God, of his prophet, and of his
word reveled unto them departed from the land, which the Lord had given to
the seade of Abraham, unto Egypt infected with all Idolatry. And thus from
their original they continued in rebellion eue^ to the end, when they did
utterly forsake God. for what soever they pretended, it was nothing else, but a
plain denial of God, of his leage and of his conuenant, to contract
familiarity, alliance or peace against his plain precept with that nation,
from whose tyra^nie God had before deliuerd their fathers. And therefore he gave
them: most strait commandment, that they should never return to that bondage
again.

How long and how pacie^tly did God fight against this their rebellion, is
easy to be understand by the histories and prophets: but how severe in the
end were the plagues and just vengeance powered upon the kings, princes and
people, Behold ye fruits of Idolatry.
did very Ethnickes the^ selves give testimony and record. Their land and
cities were spoiled, burnt and left desolate: women for hungre compelled to
eat their own children. Often were they brought in thraldom and subjection of
strangers, and finally the glory of the Lord was removed from his sanctuary,
4. King. 6.
wc he him self did swear yt he would profane by reason of their great
abominations. Ezeh. 9.
And so he did, for it was brent, Iere. 39.
the vessels and ornaments of it carried to Babylon, the whole Nobility of
Judah, and the Kings sons were killed in his own presence, after which most
miserable sight his own eyes were put out, he led to Babylon, where he
remained prisoner until his death. Those that departed to Egypt did never
return again to Jerusalem, Iere. 43.
but perished most miserably, as the prophet did threaten.

^
This is the glass, this is the minor (o England) in which I would, that daily
thou should behold, what shall be the final end of those, that do abuse the
long sufferinge of God most mercifully calling all to repentance. If thou shall
think thy self pure and clean from any of the crimes, which before is noted
in that people, alas thou shall declare thy self more then impudent. For all
other your iniquities omitted, this your last and universal turning from God by
the open denial of his Gospel professed, declares you from the highest to the
lowest manifest tray tours against his godly majesty. It is you all together,
who most cruelly have shede the blood of a number of your brethern and sisters,
Reave. ^.
with from under the alter cry to be revenged. There is no person giltles in
Gods presence, who has bowed their knees to Idolatry (what soever excuse
they list to pretend) but as al are Idolaters, so are and shall be reputed
murderers before God, wc do not wash away that infamy and innocent blood by
unfeigned repentance. The names of so many as could be now gotten, are annexed
in the end.


No other assurance will I require that your plagues are at hand, and that
your destruction approaches, then that I shall understand that ye do justify
your selves in this your former iniquity. Absolve and flatter you who so list,
God the father, his son Christ Jesus, his holy angels the creatures sensible
and insensible in heaven and in earth shall arise in judgment and shall condem
you, if in time ye repent not. The cause yt I wrappe you all in Idolatry, all
in murder and all in one and the same iniquity, is that none of you has done
your duty, none has remembered his office and charge, which was to have
resisted to ye uttermost of your powers that impiety in ye beginning. The
duty of England when Idolatry was first erected.
But ye have all followed the wicked commandment, Oseas.. 5.7.
all have consented to cruel murder, in so far as in your eyes your brethren
have most iniustly suffered, and none opened, his mouth to compain of that
injury, cruelty and murder, I do ever except such, as either by their death,
by absteyning from Idolatry or by avoiding the Realm for the iniquity in the
same committed, did give testimony, that such an horrible falling from God
did inwardly grieve them. These I except, but all the rest, even from the
highest to the lowest I fear no more to accuse of Idolatry of treason aginst
God committed, and of cruel murdering of their brethern, then did Zacharias
the son of Iehoiada fear to say to the king, princes and people of Judah, Why
have ye transgressed the commandments of the eternal? It shall not
prosperously succeed unto you, ^ Para. 2.
but eue^ as you have left ye Lord, so shall he leave you.

And albeyt my blood should be shed for this my affirmation, as his was, yet
having the testimony of a good conscience, that I speak not nor write not of
private malice against any person, I will still cry as before. For at your
hands (onles that spedely and unfeignedly ye repent) shall God require all the
blood, not only which lately has been shed by your most wicked permission,
but also of all those, that for the same cause have suffered from the beginning.
Math. 23.
Tremble therefore, By true repentance you shall escape Gods vengeance.
fear, confess and unfeignedly repent, that ye may escape the vengeance
prepared. Your humiliation, confession and repentance may now obtain no less
of Gods great mercy, then did Josias, his nobles and people in the same case,
4. Kin. 3^
to whom in all things you are so like, as one bean is to an other. For no
crime is so heinous, which God will not cast in the bothome of the sea, ad
bury in perpetual oblivion, if you with unfeigned hearts turn to ye Lord your
God, whom so grievously you have offended.

This conversion and repentance requires no dout a reformation, remouyng and
suppressing of all abuses, all wrong, all violence, all oppression and fraud
how long, in whom and by who^e soever they have been mainteyned, practiced or
permitted. But remitting all such things, as be without the religion, to
such as God shall farther move with his holy spirit to instruct you, I say
that your conversion unto God and unfeigned repentance requires two things.
Two things required in ye ^eformation (...) religion.
First, that the religion and true honoring of God may be at once brought to
that purity, which his word requires. Secondarely, that order may be taken,
so far is in you lies, that the same religion, which God approuethe, may be
kept inviolable amongste you for ever, and that the people universal may be
instruct in ye same.

For the first point touching reformation of religion you must at once so
purge and expel all dregs of papistrie, superstition and Idolatry, that thou
(o England) must judge and hold execrable and accursed, what soever God has
not sanctified unto thee by his word, or by the action of our master Christ
Jesus. The glisteringe beauty of vain ceremonies, the heaping of things
perteyning nothing to edificatio^, Vain ceremonies, and such as serve not to
edification, oght to be abolished.
by whomesoeuer they were inverted justified, or mainteyned, oght at once to be
removed and so trodden under the obedience of Gods word, that continually this
sentence of thy God be present in thy heart and ready in thy mouth, Not that
which appears good in thy eyes shall thou do to the Lord thy God, but what
the Lord thy God has commanded thee, that shall thou do: add nothing to it,
diminishe nothing from it.

Let not the King and his proceadinges (what soever they be) not agreeable to
his word be a snare to thy conscience. O cursed were the hearts that first
devised that phrase in matters of religion, whereby the simple people were
brought to one of these two inconveniences: to wit, that either they did esteem
every religion good and acceptable unto God, (...) prince (...) parliament
(...) to do (...) thing in (...) matters of religion without the assurance of
Gods word.
which the King and parliament did approve and command, or else, that Gods
religion honor and service was nothing else, but devises of men. O England,
England, let this blasphemy be first of all others removed. For how horrible
is it to remember that the religion, and honoringe of the eternal God shall be
subject to the appetites of folishe and inconstant men* Let Gods word alone be
the rule, and line to measure his religion. What it commandethe, let that be
obeyde: what it commands not, let that be execrable because it has not the
sanctification of his word under what name or title soever it be published.

Halt no longer on both parts: let not these voices prevail in your
parliament: This to our ^^gement is good and godly, The voices and counsel of
such as are nether hot nor cold.
his the people can well bear, his repugnethe not to Gods ^orde, and when the
people be ^etter instructed, then may we ^rocede farther etc. O dissem^ling
hypocrites, plain messin^e^s of Satan. Now I do write, which some time I
have said to our faces, that whatsoever God in matters of his religion) has
^ot sanctified by his expressed word, the same, I say, before his ^aiestie
remaynethe execrable, ^olluted, and defiled and so in few words, this is the
first point, which your true conversion requires: to wit, that his only word
reform his religion.

The inviolable preservation of Gods religion (which is the second point)
requires two principal things: the one that power nor liberty be permitted
to any, of what estate, degree, or authority yt ever they be, None oght to be
freed from the yoke of discipline, nor permitted to decline from ye religion of
God.
either to live with out the yoke of discipline, by Gods word commanded, either
yet to alter, to change, to disanull, or dissolve ye least one i^t^ in
religion, which from Gods mouth thou have received. But let his holy and
blessed ordinances, by Christ Jesus to his Church commanded, be with in thy
limittes and bonds so sure and established, None compellinge Gods people to
Idolatry oght to be permitted to reign over them.
that if prince, king, or Emperor would enterprice to change or disanul the
same, that he be of the reputed e^nemie to God, and therefore unworthy to
reign above his people, yea, that the same man or me^, that go about to
destroy Gods true religion once established, and to erect Idolatry, which God
detesteth, Deuteronomy. 13.
Idolaters oght to be put to death.
be adjudged to death according to Gods commandment: the negligence of which
part has made you all (those only ^xcepted, whom before I have ^xprest)
murderers of your bre^hern, deniers of Christ Jesus, and manifest traitors to
Gods so^eraigne majesty. Which hor^ible crimes if ye will avoid in ^yme
cominge, then must ye I mean the princes, rulers and people of England) by
solemned the renew the co^uenant betwixt God and you in the same form ^s Asa
king of Judah did in the li^e case.

They made a co^uenant (says ^he history) that they would seek ^he Lord God
of their fathers with all their heart, 2. Para. 15.
and with all their soul, and that whosoever ^hulde not seek the Lord God of
^srael, he should die the death, ^hether he were great or small, man or woman.
And they did ^weare unto the Lord with a ^reat oath, and with the sound ^f
trumpet and of shaumes, and of this oath did all the Jews r^ioyse. For with
their whole ha^ they did swear, and they sog^ God with unfeigned affection and
he was found of them, The Lord is found of all them, that vnfaynedlie seek him.
an^ the Lord gave them rest on eue^ side. This is thy duty and this the
only remedy (o England) (...) stay Gods vengeance, which (...) thou have
deserved, and sha^ not long escape, if his religion (...) honor be subject to
mutation an^ change, as often as thy rulers lis^ or as by reason of death they
sha^ be changed and so this bries^ is the first thing, which tho^ must with
invocation of God^ name provide for establishing of his true religion.

The other part, touching the instruction of the people, stands much in the
faithful, diligence of those, to whom the charge of preaching shall be
committed. But when I remember tha^ horrible confusion, which before was
maintained even by those, which would be esteemed chief pillars of religion, I
do more fear to be plain in this matter, then in all that, which before I
have spoken. For it may be that in speaking the simple truth I may displease
those, whom willingly for no earthly profet I would offend. Nevertheless seeing
the cause is not mine, but perteyneth to Christ Jesus, and to the feeding of
that flock, which so earnestly and tenderly he did commend to Peter, John. 21.
and to all his faithful pastors to the worlds end, what soever man shall
judge, I dare not cease in Gods name to require of you a severe reformation of
those things, which were before utterly disordered. Esai. 56.
And first in the name of the Lord Jesus I require of you, No du^m dog^ nor
poisoned papiste oght to have any charge of Chris^^ ^^ock.
that no du^me dog, no poisoned and pestilent papist, none, who before has
persecuted Gods children or obstinately maintained Idolatry, be placed above
the people of God to infect and poison (for other profet they shall do none) the
souls of those, whom Christ Jesus has redeemed with his precious blood.
Secondly that-benefice upon benefice be heaped upon no man, but that a
sufficient charge with a competent stipend be assigned to the workman. For o
how horrible was that co^fusio^, Plurality of benefices reproved.
that one man should be permitted to have 2.3.4.5.6. or. 7. benifices, who
skarsely in the year did so often preach: yea, that a man should have the
charge of them, whose faces he never saw. Let that pestilence, proceading from
avarice, be utterly avoided. Let not men at their pleasures preach when and
where they list, but so sone as a Godly order may be established, let the
parts and bonds be assigned to every one. London in times past was
indifferently provided for, London.
but alas what barbarous ignorance was in the rest of the Realm.

Thirdly let no man be charged in preaching of Christ Jesus above that, which
one man may do, I mean, that your Bishoprikes be so divided, that of every
one, as they be now (for the most part) be made ten, and so in every City and
great town there may be placed a godly learned man with so many joined with
him so preaching and instruction, as shall be thought sufficient for the bonds
committed to their charge. The utility whereof you shall understand within few
years greatly to redou^de to the profit of ye simple flock. The great
dominions and charge of proud prelates is the invention of Antichrist.
For your proud prelates great dominions and charge (impossible by one man to
be discharged) are no part of christ's ministry, but are the maintenance of
the tyranny first invented and yet retained by the Roman Antichrist.

Fortely that diligent head be taken, that such, to whom the office of
preaching is committed, discharge and do their duties. For it is not, nor will
not be, the chanting or mumbling over of certain psalms, the reading of
Chapiters for mattens and even song, or of homelies only, be they never so
godly, that feed the souls of the hugrie sheep. Christ Jesus him self, his
holy Apostles, and that elected vessel Paul do teach us an other lesson, all
commanding us to preach, to preach, and that to preach Christ Jesus crucified,
The office of (...) Ministers.
etc. What efficacy has ye lyuinge voice above ye bare letter red, the hungry
and thirsty do feel to their comfort: but the other makes for master parsons
purpose, who reteining in his hands a no^bre of benefices appoints such in
his place, as are altogether destitute of the gift of preaching. But let all
such belly gods be whypt out of Gods holy Temple. Philip. 3. Matt. 20.


Fiftely let none, yt be appointed to labor in Christ's vineyearde, The
ministers of the w^rde oght not to exercise any civil office or to be entangled
with the affairs of the Realm.
be entangled with civil affairs, and as ye call them, the affairs of the
Realm, except it be when the civil magistrate and ministers of the word
assemble together for execution of discipline, wc is a thing easy to be done
without withdrawi^g any person from his charge, if that, wc is before
expressed, be observed. For as touching their yearly coming to the parliament
for matters of religion, it shall be superfluous and vain, if Gods true religion
be so once established, that after it be never called in controversy.

And as touching execution of discipline, Discipline must be executed without
respect of persons
that must be done i^ every City and Shier, where ye Magistrates and
ministers are joined together without any respect of persons, so yt the
ministers, albeit they lack the glorious titles of Lords, and the deuelish
pomp, wc before appeared in proud prelates, yet must they be so stowte and so
bold in Gods cause, The Ministers must be stowt and bold in Gods cause albeit
they want the glorious and vain titles of Lords.
that if the King him self would usurp any other authority in Gods religion,
then becomes a membre of Christ's body, that first he be admonished according
to Gods word, and after, if he contemn the same, be subject to the yoke of
discipline, to whom they shall boldly say, as Asarias the high priest said to
Vsaias the king of Judah: 3. Par. 26.
It is not lawful for the, o Vsaia, to offer incense, but it apperteyneth to
the prestes the sons of Aharon, who are consecrated to burn it. Pass out
therefore, for thou have offended, 4. King. 26
which thing shall not redounde to thy glory, etc. This is the duty (I say)
of all Christ's faithful ministers, whenever any man, be he king or
Emperor, usurps to him self authority against God, to rebuke him openly, to
resist and gainsta^de him to the uttermost of their power, whom the Lord by
the spirit of his mouth and power of his word shall co^founde, even as he did
the pride of Vsaias, if they be strong and valiant in Gods cause.

Now last (omitting things of no less importance to your wisdoms) for the
preservation of religion it is most expedient, Schools to be universally
erected.
that schools be universally erected in all Cities, and chief towns, the
oversight whereof to be committed to the magistrates and godly learned men of
the said Cities, and towns, that of the youth godly instructed amongst them a
seade may be reserved and continued for the profet of Christ's Church in all
ages.

An answer to two obiectio^s.
It remains briefly to answer to two things, wc may give you occasion to ^aint
in this the Lords wo^ke. First the lack of workmen to put things in such
order as is requisite: and secondly the fear of tumult and sedition within
your selves, or invasion of foreign Nations. In Gods Name I fear not to affirm
that nether the one nor the other shall hurt you in the end, if you with your
whole hearts seek Gods glory to be promoted, and all sorts of abominations to
be rooted owte. For if you pray with earnest affection, he shall indue such as
ye know not with wisdom and knowledge to rule in his Church to the comfort of
his flock. There be mo laborers, then the eyes of man sees, that profitably
would work in the Lords harvest. And as for fear of ennemies, they may with
Choron, Dathan and Abiron conspire against Moises and Aron, Number. 16. 2. Para.
20.
with the Moabites and Ammonites against Iosaphat, 2. Para. 32.
or with proud Sinnacherib against Ezechias and afflicted Zion. But rather or
thou shall de confounded, if with a perfect heart thou seek the Lord thy God,
Number. 16. 4. Kin. 20. 2. Par. 32.
rather (I say) shall the earth open and devour such rebels, rather shall thine
ennemies every one murder other, and rather shall ye Angels of the Lord fight
for thy deliverance, or the work be hindered and perish in thy hands.

But if thou, o England, for any respect delay thy repentance and conversion
unto God, if thou shall still foster in thy bosom the generation of vipers, if
thou shall retain in honor and authority such, as have declared them selves
ennemies to God and to his eternal truth not by any infirmity, but of
determined malice and set purpose, to murder and destroy Gods chosen children:
if finally thou shall not study to wroote out and cut of such rotten members,
as can do nothing, but infect the whole body: then call I to witness against the
both heaven and earth, Deuteronomy. 4.
that I and others the servants of God, who faithfully and in time have wa^ned
thee of thy duty and vengeance to come, Be warned o^ England, if you w^lt
escape Gods ve^gea^ce
are and shall be clean from thy blood, which shortly shall perish, if thou
contemn the admonitio^s of Gods messingers. To late it shall be for thee to
howl and cry, when the flame of Gods hot displeasure shall begin to burn. It
will not the^ be ye flattering intiseme^tes and vain policies of such, as s^ke
more the^ selves then Christ's glory, that will exti^guishe it. No, it shall
burn and shall destroy the head and the tail, the prince and the false
prophet, the root and the branches of such impiety. Be warned therefore, if
thou list escape vengeance, which is already prepared for the inobedient.

But o you that in sorrow of heart see these abominations, Such as unfeignedly
fear the Lord shall find comfort in their greatest danger.
that lament and do not pollute your selves with them, let your hearts rest
upon the Eternal, who shall be to you a rock and a strong castle of defense.
Although the heaven and the earth should be confounded, yet shall his mercy
deliver you from danger, and in very experience and joy of heart ye shall singe:
o Lord, thou art our God, Esai. 25.
we shall exalt and confess thy Name, for thou have done wo^derous things. Thy
counsels are profounde, far of to man's judgment, but yet are they true and
sure. The strong tenthes and the palaces of the proud have thou brought to
ruin, so that they shall never be restored again, and therefore the strong
people shall glorify thee, yea, the Cities of tyrannous nations shall fear the,
etc. Behold this is our God whom we have abidde^, he has saved us. This is
ye Lord, whom we looked for, we shall rejoice and be joyful in his salvation,
etc. This (I say) shall be the song, which in experience of the Lords
deliverance your hearts shall sing, even when Gods most severe judgments shall
in your eyes be executed against the ungodly, and therefore call thou for
strength to continue to the end.

A PRAYER.
GOD the father of our Lord Jesus Christ by the power of his holy Spirit so
illuminate and so move your hearts, that clearly ye may see and perfitly
understand, how horrible has been your fall from his verity, how fearful and
terrible it is to fall into his hands without hope of mercy, and what is that
his unspeakable mercy, which yet again he offreth unto you, and that it may
please his eternal goodness to indue you with such wisdom, prudence and
fortitude, that seeing his good pleasur in his word reveled, without all fear
ye may follow the same to the aduaunceme^t of his glory, to the consolation of
his afflicted Church, and to your everlasting comfort through our only
mediator, redemer, peace maker and lawgeuer Christ Jesus our Lord* whose holy
Spirit rule your hearts in his true fear. So be it.

From Geneua the 12. of January. M.D..LIX.
THE NAMES OF SOME PART OF THOSE most faithful servants and dear children of
God, which lately in thee and by thee (o England) have been most cruelly
murdered by fire and imprisonment for the testimony of Christ Jesus and his
eternal verity, whose blood from under the altar cries loud to be avenged
on them, that dwell upon the earth, Revel. 6.
as before is mentioned, besides a great nombre of Gods children who under the
pretense of treason suffered for Christ Religion.
THE YEAR M.D.LIIII.
At London

At Country
Laurence Saunders preacher.
At Hadlay.
Roland Tailor preacher.
At Gloucester.

At Carmarden

At London
Thomas Tomkins weauer. At B^^ndwood
At Horndon on the hill
At R^yley
Year 1555.
At Braintrie

At M^^ulden

At Danberie

At Colchester

At westminster
hand was first cut of for striking a p^este in his zele being at mass.
At westchester.
George March preacher.
At London

At London

At Chelmisford

At Cockshall
Thomas Hawks.
At Ratcheford.

At Railey
John Erdley. Nicolas Chamberlayn.
At Manyngtrie
Thomas Osmunde.
At Harwitch

At London
John Liefe prentis.
At Cantorbery in one fire
John Franks Minister. Nicholas Sheterden: Humfrey Middleton.
At Dartforde
John Wade.
At L^wes
Dirick Ha^man.
At Steuenyng
John Lander.
At Chichester
Thomas Euerson. Richard Hook a lame man.
At Rochester
Nicholas Hall.
At T^^bridge
Joan Polley
At Reading

A^ Saint Edmondsbury

At Vxbridge
John Denleye gentilman.
At Stratfordelowe
Warens widow.
At Cantorburye
Richard Collier. Henry Laurence. William Hopper. William Stere. Richard
Wright.
At Tauntou

At Saint Albons
William Baumeford.
At Vxbridge
Patrick Patingham.
At Stanes
Robert Smith.
At Stratford

At ware
Thomas Fusse.
At Safronwalden

At Barnet
William Hailes.
At Ipswitch

At walsingham

At Chetford
Thomas Cobbe.
At Yexford
Thomas Coe.
At Cantorberie
James Tuttye. George Catner. Robert Streter. Antonie Burward.
At London

At Litchfeld
Thomas Haywarde. Thomas Gorway. Tyngle died in Newgate prison Richard Smith
died in Lowlers tower and was buried in ye fields
In Lowlers tower
died George Bing. William Androwes.
At Couentrie
Cornelius Bungaye.
At Ely
William Wolsey weauer. Robert Pigot painter.
At Oxford
Hugh Latymer before Bisshope of Worcester.
At Cantorberie

At Cantorbury
Gregory Painter.
At Colchester

At London

In London
Barlet Grene gentilman. Thomas Brown. John Tutson. John went. Agnes Foste^.
Joan Lasheford.
At Cantorburie
Anne Albright. Joan Soalle. Joan Painter. Agnes Snode.
At Ips^wytche

At Oxforde

At Salisburie
Maundrell. Coberley a tailor.
Year 1556.
At Cambridge

At Rochecter
Hirtpoole. Beches widow.
At London
Robert Drakes alias Gyen Minister. George Ambrose. John Cauel. Thomas Spurge.
Richard Spurge.
At Colchester
Christopher Lyster Minister. Richard Nicholl. John Spenser. John Hamon. Simon
Join.
At Gloucester
Croker.
At London

At Stratfordebowe
John Vprise a blind man.
In London
Joan Horn maiden. Elizabeth Thaeuel.
At B^ckels in Saffolke

In the Kingesbenche

At Jews
John Osewarde. Thomas Read. Thomas Abington. Thomas Hoode minister.
In the Kings benche

At Lecester
A marchantes servant.
At Stratfordbowe
Rodulphe Iacson. William Holiwell. Thomas Bower. Laurence Parmen. Lion a
Coyxe. Henry Wie. John Dorefall. John Rothe. Edmonde Hurst. George Searles.
Elizabeth Peper. Agnes George.
In the Kingsbench

At Edmondes B^rye

In the Kingesbenche

At N^berie
Asken. Julius Palmer.
A^ Grenested
John Forman. Mother Try.
At Darbie

At Mas^^eld^
Thomas Rauendalle a showmaker. a corier. Nicolas Holden weauer.
At Bristow
A young man a gloouer.
At Newent
John Horn.
At wutton vnderhedge in Glostershier
A woman.
In Canterbury castle
Died John Clarcke. Dunstone Chettenden. Archer. Polkins wife. William Foster.
At Northampton
Three died in Canterbury castle and were buried in the fields.
At Cantorberie
Thomas Fynall. Fynalls servant. And. 3. mo.
At Ashford
Two.
At wie

Year. 1557.
In London
Henry Ramsey. Thomas Sturley. Stanleis wife. Hydes wife.
In Saint George fields.
William Mo^rant. Thomas King.
At Maidstone
Applebie waeuers wife. Alyns wife. Manings wife. Elizabeth a blind maid.
At Brystowe
One.
At Cantorberie
Nicolas White Nicolas Perdier. Barbara Final wydow. Bradbridges wydow. Alice
Bendens wife. Wylsons wife.
At Jews
George Steuhen. Margerie Morris. James Morris her son. Dionyse Burges.
William Mainerd. Alexander Ho^smares servant. Thomasin Atwoods maiden.
Ashdounes wife. Groves wife.
In M^ydst^ne prison
Died one Ambrose.
A Norwiche
And a woman.
At Colchester in the fornoone
Vines wyff. Elizabeth fookes with. 3. mo.
There in the afternoon
4. mo.
At Colchester
Bowmers wife.
At Rochester
A man. A woman.
At Norwitch

At Lytchefeild

At Islington
James Ans^o. Ma^gerie his wife. Richard Rothe.
In London
Sparrow. Richard Gybson gentilman.
In London
Margeret James.
In London
John Deuenysh woolwynder. Haghe Fox ho^ier.
At Hantington

At Colchester
Day. Agnes George.
At Norwitch

Died in N^wgat and were buried in the field
Thomas Tyler. Matthew Wethers.
In London
Henry Pond. John Holydaie. John Flonde. Raynold Louonder. Roger Holland.
Thomas Sowtham.
At Bramford.
John Slade
At wynchester
Bainbrigge gentleman.
TO THE READER.
IF the examinations and unjust accusations of these our dear brethern with
the names of their wicked accusers, false Judges and cruel tormen^e^s had been
sent unto us as these few names were, we would most gladly have done our
diligence, that the wonderful con^^a^cie of the one, and the great rage and
cruelty of the other should have been witnessed unto ye world. which thing
nevertheless we mind hereafter more largely to perform to the glory of God,
to the comfort of this Church and to the perpetual co^fusio^ of those
murderers and members of Satan, whom the Lord shall confound by the glorious
coming of our Savior Jesus Christ.


