A CONFVTATION of the Popish Transubstantiation.

Together with a narration, how that the Mass was at sundry times patched and
peeced by sundry Popes.

Wherein is contained a brief sum of the reasons and Arguments which those
render, that will not receive the Mass.

Translated out of French into English by PETER ALLIBOND Minister of the word
of God.

Read, and then judge with discretion.

2 Thessalonians. 2.11. And therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe lies.

Printed at London by Thomas Scarlet for Thomas Man. 1592.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE CHRISTIAN AND INdifferent reader, Grace, mercy and
peace.
THou have in this little Treatise (gentle Reader) these two things delivered
unto thee.

1 First, here is showed that howsoever our adversaries, the Papists, do for
the maintenance and upholding of their abominable Mass, pretend antiquity,
and long continuance of time: that yet the Mass was at sundry times collected,
and patched up by diverse Popes: some adding one thing, some adding another, as
they thought good in their foolish imaginations. Wherein they deal with us as
the Gibeonites did with Joshua, who for to save their lives, sayned themselves
to be ambassadors, Ios. 9.4.6.
and that they came from far, craftily bringing with them old shoes, old
sacks, mustie bread, etc. desiring Joshua therefore to make a league with them.
Into whose dealings if Joshua had looked thoroughly, he should have found them
to have bin but counterfets, and dissemblers. So notwithstanding that the
Papists vaunt and fay, that their doctrine, and their positions come from far,
and are (as they say) of great standing and antiquity: yet if we look
thoroughly into the matter, and examine all things by the touchstone of the word
of God, which is the trial of all truth, we shall find their Popish
Assertions to be untruths, new vpstarts, and counterfets.

They further object unto us, that we depart from the Church, and have (as they
say) a new innouated doctrine. True it is that we are departed from them, as
Moses departed from Egypt, because they are departed from God and his truth.
And for the newness of our doctrine (as it pleases them to term it) it is
evident that our doctrine and religion, both in the whole, and in the
particulars thereof, has the warrant, and antiquity of the holy Scriptures.
Abraham's servants dug wells for their masters cattle: aster the death of
Abraham the Philistians stopped them: Ge. 26.16.16
the servants of Isaac did afterward dig them anewe, so that the wells might
in some sort be said to be new, because they were newly dug: So our
religion, with some may be thought to be new, not that it is so, but because
that it was of long time stopped and covered by the Popish Phylistians, and is
now (the Lord be praised for it) discovered and found out, by the holy and
faithful servants of the Lord. For it is one thing to say that a thing is new,
because it was never in Esse before, and it is another thing to term a thing
new, because it is newly repaired. And thus (good Reader) thou see how our
adversary may be answered in his objection.

2 Now for the other part of this Treatise, there is contained in it a strong
confutation of Transubstantiation: wherein the Author (who both for his name and
person is unknown unto me) uses very sufficient and forcible arguments, to
confute their opinion, so that I need not to speak much of that, and yet
somewhat I will be bold to ad: namely, that if their assertion for the real
presence be true, then there will this absurdity ensue, to wit, that Christ
at his last supper had two bodies. For if (as our adversaries say) that the
bread was his body, it is evident and plain, that he sitting with his
Disciples, and performing the parts of a natural man, by his speech, gesture,
and eating, had a humane body: so that if they affirm the former (which they
can never prove) we dare aver and justify the latter. This is one of our
adversaries shifts, that if any object unto them, that it stands not with a
humane body to be in diverse places at one and the selfsame time, they answer
it and say; that this is done myraculously, by means of Christ's glorification:
but then what will they say unto this objection; for the bread in his last
supper: for either they must confess that the bread was not his body, or else
that a body not glorified may be in diverse places, at one and the selfsame
time, for this was done before his glorification, resurrection, or death. There
was ever betwixt Christ and us this difference, Heb. 4.15.
to wit, that he ever was without sin. There is now further since his
ascension, this dissimilitude, namely, his glorification: and yet it is neither
that that he has not, which we have, namely sin: nor that that he has, which
we have not (though by faith we be fully assured of it) namely, glorification,
that do take from him the true parts of a natural body, and of his humane
nature. The women, namely, Marie Magdalen, Ioanna, Mary the mother of James,
and others, coming unto the sepulcher of our Savior, and to bestow their
odors upon him, and to embalme him, it was said unto them by the two men
standing by the^ in shining vestures, Why seek ye him that lives among the
dead? he is not here, but is risen. And so much more may it be said to our
adversaries, why seek ye him really in the bread? Luke 24.5, 6.
he is ascended, he is not there. S. James says, Ye ask and receive not, Iam.
4.3.
because ye ask amiss: And so the poor papists seek and find not, because
they seek amiss: For it is plainly said that the heavens must conteyn him
until the time that al things be restored which is to be understood, 1. Kin.
8.27. Act. 3.21.
not of his divine nature (which the heaven of heavens cannot conteyn) but of
his humane nature. And to conteyn in one place, namely in heaven, and to be in
many places in earth, are contraries: therefore that place in the 3. of the
Acts, being understood of Christ's body, as it must needs be, will not permit any
real presence.

And thus much for the sum of the book, which is very short and small, and
therefore I must frame the boulk of mine Epistle, answerable unto the quantity
of the Treatise, lest the work should be like unto an Owl, more head than
body: or for fear lest the porch should be bygger than the Church. I have bin
the more bold and willing at this time, to take from this Treatise the veyle of
an unknown tongue, and to publish it, both because at this time the Papists
are very rife and ready, with their seducing Seminaries and Jesuits, to delude
and deceive the people with their Masses and tromperyes: and also to manyfeste
unto others the fondness of their opinions: that so men may look upon them,
as upon rocks, to avoid them.

And thus (Gentle Reader) I request thee to take in good part this my poor
labor, heartily wishing that God might be glorified, and that thou might
receive instruction and profit by it, which is the thing I aimed at, so I crave
it for my labor, and pains taking. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord P. A.

A SHORT SVMME of the Reasons and Arguments that those render, which will not
receive the Mass.
THere is very good reason that we should answer those that demand of us why
we will not join with them in the Mass. For (as S. Peter says, in his first
Epistle and third chapter) We ought always to be ready with meekness and
reverence, 1. Pet. 3.15.
to answer every one that shall demand of us a reason of the hope that is
in us.

And howsoever we may easily allege and propound many things, both out of
the holy Scripture, and also out of Counsels, to prove that the Mass (which
is now sung and used) was not ordained of God, nor of the holy Apostles: yet
for the avoiding of prolixitie and tediusnes, we will for this time produce and
cite some such easy and plain arguments, as we shall be able; trusting in God,
that men of upright and indifferent judgment will neither despise nor condemn
them, before that they have diligently weighed and considered them. We in the
mean space offering to answer more largely, if in case any be not content
with this our answer.

First, there is not any man that fears God, but will herein willingly
accord and agree with us: namely, that it appertains unto God only, to
establish laws and ordinances for to govern his Church by, It belongs unto
GOD only to establish laws in his Church.
and that neither angels nor men ought to intrude or thrust in themselves, to
devise or prescribe in the Church any service for Religion, but that that GOD
himself has commanded. And that he in Deuteronomie straightly forbids us,
that we shall not any of us do that that seems good in our eyes: Chap. 12.8.
but to take heed to his Commandments, to do them; and whereunto we are not
in any sort either to add or to diminish. Deuteronomy. 4.4. Prou. 30.6.

God has sent his son into the world, and has said of him; This is my
well-beloved Son, in who^ I am well pleased, hear him. Mat. 17.9.
He has in his Church fully taught thee the will of God his Father, concerning
things necessary unto salvation, as he himself testifies in S. John saying;
Hereafter call I not you my servants, John 15.15.
for the servant knows not what his master does: but I call you my friends,
because that I have made you know all that, that I have heard of my father.

He himself has preached the gospel: afterward he gave commandment to his
apostles to preach the gospel throghout the whole world; Mar. 16.15.
he commanded not any thing concerning the Mass: the Apostles have not spoken
one word thereof. Nay further, a man shall not find this word Mass
thoroughout the whole new or old Testament.

Now then, if the Mass were of such great weight and importance, as some
account it to be: saying, that without it we cannot be saved, and that he is
condemned which believes not in the Mass, and that all they must needs die
which will not go unto it: the Apostles should greatly have failed in
forgetting and omitting such a point; forasmuch as they have spoken of many
things which seem not to be of so great importance, 2. Cor. 11.5. 1. Tim.
2.9. 2. Pet. 3.3.
as of the covering of women, of their hair, of the trimming of their heads,
and other attires.

To allege that, that some do, to prove the Mass: namely, that our Lord
Jesus, in going about to celebrate his last supper, said, Hoc est corpus meum,
it is not sufficient. The difference betwixt these words Hoc est corpus meu^,
and the Mass.
For there is a great difference between these words Hoc est corpus meum, and
the mass: yea though they speak of their mass when it is at the best, as
they use to sing it at this day.

Neither is it requisite that the poor force that is in these four words, Hoc
est corpus meum, being shuffeld and thrust into the midst of their mass,
which is nothing else but a massy or confused heap of patches and pieces,
brought, and gathered together by diverse men, and that at sundry times: should
make us believe that the Mass is therefore good, and that it was ordained of
God, because it has these four words in it. For if one should so argue, he
might easily so set open a door unto all heretics and deceivers, who at all
times have well known in such sort to take some sentence out of the holy
Scripture, to iumble, and to mingle it amongst their false doctrine, that so
they may thereby seem to give it some color of truth.

We will not deny, but that our Lord said these words, Hoc est corpus meum, but
we deny that ever he said Mass, nor S. Peter, neither yet the Apostles, as it
is easy to be proved.

First, the Priests, I mean those which are in some sort learned, cannot
deny, but that the Mass, even from the beginning to the end of it, The Mass
was grounded by diverse Popes, and that at diverse times.
has been made by sundry Popes; and that at sundry times. They well know that
Damascen the fifth, which was made Bishop in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ,
368. did put into the Mass the Confiteor, etc.

Gelasius of Afric, who (as Nauclerus says) was made Bishop of Rome in the
year 415. made the hymns, collects, responses, the graduals, and prefaces of
the mass, and set all in order, and added unto the Mass, Veredignum, and
iustumest. etc.

Symachus also, who was bishop of Rome in the year of our Lord, 502. was loath
to forget, but likewise added his patch: for he ordained that every sunday,
and solemn feast day of the Martyrs, they should sing Gloria in excelsis deo,
etc.

Pelagius also, being Bishop of Rome in the year 158. he added thereunto
his piece: for he added the commemoration, or remembrance for the dead.

This Pope added many pieces to the Mass: and in his time it took the name of
the Mass.
Gregory the first made the singing in the quire, and the tuning or setting of
the Mass. Also he ordained that the Kyrielieson, and the Alleluia should be
song nine times, and that the Pater noster should be song with alowd voice,
over the consecrated Host, and he added unto the canon of the mass, Dies
nostros in tua pace disponas.

Sergius, who was in theyere 588. he ordained that these words, Agnus Dei
should be song three times in the Mass, before the breaking of the bread.

Gregory the third, he secretly added unto the mass, Quorum solennitas hodie
in conspectu tuae maiestatis celebratur, Domine Deus noster, in toto orb
terrarum.

Nicholas the first of that name, caused the sequences to be added to the
mass.

It cannot be denied, but that Sixtus, the first of that name, added unto the
Mass these words, Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabbath.

Innocent, which was in the year 405. added the kissing of the paxe.

Leo, the first of that name added, Orate pro me fratres. And he added also,
Deo gratias. And further, by prescript headded this, Sanctum sacrificium
immaculatam hostiam: and this moreover, Hancigitur oblatione^.

Celestine the first, he made and ordained the Offertorie.

Alexander the seventh Bishop of Rome, The beginning of unleavened bread.
in the time of Adrian the Emperor, in the year 120. did now begin to violate
and break the ordinance of Jesus, and ordained that the bread should be
without leven, and not common as it was before. Distinct. 93. chap. Si quis.
And also he commanded to mingle water with the wine in the holy supper. De
consecratione. distinct. 2. in capit. de Sacramento. And he first added unto
the Supper, Qui pridie quam pateretur. This does very evidently and plainly
prove, that Jesus Christ made not the Mass, seeing that so many men have
intermedled in the making thereof.

Furthermore, this great addition or piece, Teigitur clementissime pater, which
is one of the principal pieces of the Mass; in which portion is mention made
of the Pope, of the Bishop and of the King, does evidently prove, that Jesus
Christ made not the Mass: for in his time there was neither Pope nor Bishop.

The communicants also, wherein is mention made of the holy virgin, of the
apostles, and of many saints, which were long since the apostles time, as
Saint Cyprian, Laurence, Grisogon, Cosme, Damian, and others, do plainly show
that Jesus made not the Mass. S. Peter put not himself in this number: for
then they would have said, that he had sought his own glory.

There is yet one special piece of the Mass, which begins thus, Nobis
quoque peccatoribus; wherein is mention made of certain apostles and saints,
both men and women mingled one amongst another, as of S. Barbara, Perpetue;
Agathe, Lucie, Agnes, Cecilie, etc. who came, and were in the world, a long
time since the death and suffering of our Lord. So far of was he from making
the Mass, which some affirm: that we may easily see the contrary, as
appears by that which has bin already said.

As for those words which they call Sacramental words; to wit, Hoc est
corpus meum: they do in no sort make for the Mass. For when Jesus Christ
said, This is my body, this is my blood: his purpose was not to say, as do
the Priests, which give men to understand thus, to wit; that the bread is not
any longer bread, and that the wine is not any longer wine, but are changed
into the true substance of the flesh and blood of Jesus: but says simply and
plainly This is my body, and calls the bread and wine, in the holy Supper,
his body and blood, in the same sense that before he called the Paschall Lamb
by the name of the Passover, saying in S. Luke, I have earnestly desired to eat
this Passover with you. Luke. 22.15.
Now we know well enough that the Lamb was not the Passover, but it was a
true Sacrament of it, that is to say, the true visible sign of that
deliverance which God wrought for his people Israel in Egype. Exodus 12.13.26.27.


So, after that Jesus Christ had eaten the Lamb with his Apostles, which Lamb
he called the Passover, for the reason and cause aforesaid: now at that very
same time, he ordained the holy Supper to succeed the Lamb being the
Sacrament of the old Testament, which was to have an end at his death and
passion: and called the bread his body, and the wine his blood; as if he
should have said, I have at this Feast eaten with you the Paschall Lamb, which
Lamb was appointed of my Father in remembrance of that deliverance that he
already made for your fathers in Egypt: but this new Sacrament which I appoint
unto you, is the Sacrament of my body and of my blood, which is given for you
on the Cross, to deliver you from everlasting death: and as the Lamb in the
Passover was a sign of their deliverance in Egypt; so hereafter this
Sacrament shall be unto you a perpetual remembrance of my body and of my
blood given upon the cross for you, as appears by the very words of Jesus,
saying; Do this in remembrance of me. Luke 22.9.
As often as ye shall eat this bread, 1. Cor. 11.26
and drink this cup, you shall show the Lords death until his coming. In
which phrase or manner of speech we are to take heed: for the apostle says
not, When you shall eat of this body, and when you shall drink of this blood:
but he says When you shall eat of this bread, etc. So when our Savior Christ
gave the cup, he did not say, I will not drink hereafter of this blood: but he
said, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, Mat. 26.27.
until I drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father. Moreover, we
may easily see by the words of Jesus Christ, to wit, I will not drink
henceforth of the fruit of the Vine; that he himself eat the Supper with
his Apostles: if then the bread were changed into his body, and the wine into
his blood (as many affirm) then should Jesus Christ have eaten himself, which
is a monstrous absurdity to say.

Furthermore, in saying, This is my body, we are to take heed how we
understand these words, not according to the letter or carnally; for he that
will take them so (as some would) should make Jesus Christ a liar, and which
should have said a thing which could not be accomplished: for, giving the
bread, he said, This is my body which is given for you, etc. and yet the
bread was not hanged on the cross for us.

Therefore, to the end that we be not deceived, we are to take good heed
to the interpreting of the words of the holy Supper, and not every one of us
to expound them according to our own fantasy: but to have recourse unto the
words of Jesus Christ, who says, The flesh profits nothing, but the spirit
quickens; John 6.63.
the words which I say unto you, are spirit and life.

So also, Jesus Christ is not a kind of fleshly meat to nourish our bodies;
but is a kind of spiritual meat for to give life unto our Souls, which are
nourished even by the very substance of Jesus Christ in the holy supper:
although in respect of his body he be on high in the heavens, as the article
of our Christian faith teaches us: which is done by the means of faith, which
is, as it were the mouth of the soul. Neither is it needful, that he should
bodily descend unto us here below on the earth, for to give nourishment unto
our souls, no more than it is needful that the Sun should come down, which
without any passing out of his set place, cease not therefore to make us
partakers of his heat and light: so is it with Christ; otherwise, it would be
to small purpose to lay hold on the incomprehensible virtue and power of Jesus
Christ. Of which power our adversaries falsely speak so much against us, as if
that we should go about to deny it: although it appear evidently, that we
think and judge better and more reverently of it, than they do For they
cannot believe that we may be nourished with the body and blood of Jesus,
unless that he bodily come down from heaven, in, and under a morfell of
bread, and to be subject unto mustines, and to be eaten of beasts and vermin,
as oftentimes it comes to pass: a thing which they cannot deny, that such
consecrated bread, which they call Corpus Domini: that is, the body of the
Lord, has been found rotten and mustie in a cubbard, and part of it has been
eaten of rats and mice.

Moreover, if the bread and wine in the holy Supper should be really changed
into the flesh and blood (as some say) then would it follow that Jesus Christ,
should be meat for the infidels and unbelievers, as well as he is for the
faithful, which would be another great absurdity, contrary unto the things
that are taught by Jesus Christ in S. John, Ioh. 6.51.53.54.55.56.
John. 6.

To this may be added that that Saint Paul says, to wit, that he calls it
not flesh and blood, 1. Cor. 11.27.
but bread and wine, saying, Whosoever shall eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation. Also, the holy
scripture says not, that Christ ought to come to put himself into the bread
and wine used in the Supper, after that the words are spoken: but it says,
When you shall eat this bread, 1. Cor. 11.26.
and drink this cup, you shall show forth the Lords death till his coming:
that is to say, until his bodily coming at that his last judgment.

Nay further, if the bread and wine of the holy Supper should be changed into
flesh and blood, then should there be no sacrament in the supper. For, as
Sacrament (as they themselves cannot deny) is a sign of a holy thing, so
that the sign is not the thing it self. There is a very great difference
between the Truth, and the sign of the same Truth.

The truth of the Sacrament, is this, Jesus Christ crucified for our sins;
the sign is this, Bread and Wine, which are called the Body and blood in the
Supper: because they are the true and undoubted signs of the body and blood
of Christ: as it is a phrase very usual, not only in the holy Scriptures,
but also in profane authors, that the name of a thing is put for the sign,
which represents the thing it self. In like manner, when the priests say, that
the bread and wine in the Supper do by virtue of the Sacramental words (as
they call them) loose the true substance of Bread and of wine to be changed
into the true substance of flesh and blood (which thing consists only in
opinion, and not in experience) herein we say that they destroy the Truth of
a Sacrament, and we may justly call them Sacramentaries, because that by their
perverse and froward opinion, they do overthrow and annihilate the sacrament
of the holy Supper, by supposing, and putting in the room and place thereof,
that that they have devised in their own heads.

As indeed they are not able to prove this word Mass, throughout the whole
holy Scripture, neither yet that the holy Prophets and Apostles did at any
time use it: so shall they never be able to prove this word
Transubstantiation (that is to say, the changing of one substance into
another) by no author, either Greek or Latin: but that it is a word that the
schoolmen have forged and coined in their own fantasy. Now, if they hereupo^
allege the ancient Doctors, we are notignorant (God be thanked) how they have
spoken, and are able for this purpose to allege many sentences even of those
ancient Doctors which make for our purpose, but that we purpose and labor to
be brief.

And if that they object and allege unto us, that there are many good things
in the Mass, as Pater, i. Father, the Gospel, the Epistle, etc. Herein do
they not say any more, than that that other mockers, and deceivers may say
as well as they. For as we do see that good and wholesome meats, are spoiled
and spilt, by means of a small quantity of poison being mingled among them;
and as the gold and silver being mingled with iron, brass, lead, or other
base matter, or mettalls, for to falsify the coin thereof, are justly
condemned, and those likewise which make such counterfaits: so, in like manner
we say, that those good things, whereof we have before spoken, being put and
altered from their true and natural use whereunto God has appointed them, for
to be iumbled and mingled amongst such a huge Chaos and heap of unsavory
things, cannot be indeed acknowledged for good, until they be drawn from
amongst those unsavory things, no more than can a ring or signet of gold in
the midst of a dunghill.

And if that God the Father, and his son Jesus Christ had known that such
good things should have been so applied for the salvation of this poor
world, they no doubt had been sufficiently wise to have given notice and
commandment of them, and not to have left them to the discretion of these men,
and many other things, which we have omitted for breuities sake: who thinking
to do better than GOD; have in so doing (by their own inventions) abused
this holy mystery unto the great dishonor of God, and also to the pernicious
hurt of the bodies, souls, and goods of many men.

To be brief, if after the words of consecration (as they call them) the
bread and the wine in the holy Supper, should be changed into the flesh and
blood of Christ (as many do affirm) this should yet no whit make for their
Mass: as we shall easily know by a brief conferring and comparing of the
Supper and the Mass together; which we will here decypher and descrie,
setting the holy Supper by it self, and the Mass by it self.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 1 Jesus Christ, he himself ordained the
holy Supper.

THE MASS. 1 The Mass was compyled and made by many Popes, as we have before
showed.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 2 Christ did not change his habits or
garments to celebrate the Supper.

THE MASS. 2 The Priest disguiseth himself he knows not how, to sing his
Mass.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 3 Christ took common bread, used at the
Table at his Supper.

THE MASS. 3 The Priest must have a whole cake, baked betwixt two yrons.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 4 Christ made his Supper at a common Table.

THE MASS. 4 The Priest must have a consecrated Table (as they call it) to
wit, an altar; wherein there must be a certain quantity of Relickes
enclosed in a cupboord, in the midst of the altar, which they call the
sepulcher: or at the least, if the altar be not consecrated, then must it be of
marble. Furthermore, he must have napkins as matters of substance, or as it
were standerds in their Mass, as Durandus laboreth very well to show in his
book called Rationale diuinorum.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 5 Christ when he made his supper, he preached
and taught his Apostles.

THE MASS. 5 The Priest muttereth out a certain number of prayers, turns
and trimmeth his altar, turning sometimes his back, sometimes his belly unto
the people, and goes from one end of the table to another, singing sometimes
high sometimes low; sometimes he lifts up his hands, and sometimes he
kisseth them; one holds up his train, holding in his hand a burning torch or
a taper; me think that such a sight should make a sad man change his
countenance.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 6 Christ in administering his last supper,
spoke in a known language, common, and used in the country.

THE MASS. 6 In the Mass they speak in a language, that the greatest part of
the Priests themselves do not understand: which is clean contrary unto that
that Saint Paul teaches 1. Corinthians. 14 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. where he shows,
that in the Church we are not to speak any other language, but that that the
people can understand.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 7 In the Supper, Jesus first brake bread, and
then afterward gave it to his Apostles.

THE MASS. 7 In the Mass, the Priest turns this order vpside down: for
first he says a few words over the bread, and then breaks it when it
pleases him: but Jesus brake the bread, and then spoke the words.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 8 Christ said, Hoc est corpus meum.

THE MASS. 8 The Priest he adds Enim, saying, Hoc est enim corpus meum.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 9 Christ said, Take and eat.

THE MASS. 9 The Priest he shows the bread and wine unto the people, without
giving it unto them, but like a greedy glutton keeps all unto himself.
Which is not only contrary unto the ordinance of Jesus Christ, but is also
against the custom of ancient men and times, as appears by Canons set down
(as some suppose) by Anacletus and Calixtus; where it was ordained (upon pain
of excommunication) that in the Supper all should communicate, after the
consecration was performed. So likewise it is set down in the Canons
attributed to the Apostles, and likewise in the Council of Tholose. Whereupon
it does evidently follow, that the Mass (such as is now used) was not ordained
by Jesus Christ, neither yet celebrated by the holy Apostles: and further,
that those which see it, and now partake in it, are all excommunicate; because
they are not partakers in the Communion, but the Priest only takes all to
himself, contrary to the ordinance of Christ, and of the ancient Fathers.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 10 Christ gave not only the bread, but also
the wine, saying, Drink ye all of this, as Matthew 26.27.

THE MASS. 10 The Priest gives to the common people but the bread only, and
not the wine; which is wholly not only against the institution of Jesus
Christ, but also against the custom of the ancient Fathers, which lived after
the Apostles, who communicated in both kinds, and condemned all those which
communicated but in one, as it appears in their consecration did. 2. cap.
Comperimus, where it is said, that all those which received not the Sacrament
in both kinds, are infidels and church-robbers, and those likewise which
refuse either the one or the other kind.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 11 As touching the wine in the supper, Christ
mingled nothing with it.

THE MASS. 11 The Priest mingleth Water with the Wine, which is the ordinance
of a sinful man, as we have before showed.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 12 Christ gave the bread by it self, and the
wine by it self.

THE MASS. 12 The Priest breaks the bread in three pieces, one piece whereof
he lets fall into the wine, and so mingleth the^ both together.

THE HOLY SVPPER of Jesus Christ. 13 Christ ordained his holy Supper, in
rememberaunce of his death and passion, and that but once giving his body and
blood upon the Cross for us.

THE MASS. 13 The Priest he says Mass in remembrance of saints both me^
and women, and for the recovery of things lost: Also he says Mass for
beasts, as for oxen, horses, asses, and for other beasts that are sick,
because men give him money for it. And in so doing, he is in stead of a
plaster or a drug for every disease. He says further, that he offers up
Jesus Christ, and presents him unto God the Father, for the sins of the
quick and of the dead.

We might allege many other reasons why we would not join, and consent to
the mass, which was never ordained by Jesus Christ, nor song by his Apostles,
neither yet by the ancient fathers, which lived in the world a long time after
them; and further, that the Mass is a mere disguising of the holy Supper, and
a plain derogation from the death, and suffering of Jesus Christ. Yea and if
we are to believe ancient Councels, there shall we find that those that will
hear the mass (as it is now song) are excommunicate, as we have already
sufficiently above showed: yet for breuities sake we will for this time
content our selves with these things that are here mentioned.

And for conclusion, we receive and embrace that that S. John says; John 20.31.
to wit, that that which is written in the gospel, is written that we might
believe that Jesus is that Christ, the son of God; and that in believing, we
might have life through his name. The mass is not written in the gospel,
whereupon it follows, that we are neither to believe in it, nor to look for
life by it.

Moreover, the Apostle says unto the Hebrews, Heb. 9.2^.
that Christ was once offered, to take away the sins of many: he does not
say that Christ is offered up many times, for to take away sins, but that he
has been offered once. By consequence whereof the priest is a lier, because he
says, that he daily offers up Jesus Christ in the mass, for the quick, and
for the dead.

Furthermore, Heb. 10.12.
the same Apostle unto the Hebrews says; that we are sanctified by an
offering once made by the body of Jesus Christ, he does not say, being many
times made.

And further, 14.
in the same chapter he says, that with one only offering has he consecrated
for ever them that are sanctified.

To be brief, S. Paul in the 20. Chapter of the acts of the Apostles,
protests, that he kept nothing back from them that was profitable for their
salvation; but he makes no mention of the mass, therefore the mass made
nothing for their salvation: for if it had, S. Paul would have spoke of it, and
not omitted, or forgotten such a point.

And in the same chapter he says I have kept nothing back, (...).
but have showed you the whole council of God: there is no mention made of the
mass, therefore the mass is not the council of God, but is a new invention
of men, which is set instead of the true service of God.

Wherefore, we do justly, and for good cause, reject and refuse it, and will
in no sort ioyn in it, but by many degrees rather, love and desire to cleave
unto, and firmly to rest upon the ancient and catholic faith and law, which
God from time to time gave unto our ancient fathers without any cleaving unto
that, which is but an heap of news, set abroach by themselves: some thinking
thereby to do well, others being led by ambition, and to show themselves,
others to continue their memorial amongst men, and others to get unto
themselves the goods of men, as daily experience shows us: for as much as
they say not mass for the poor, whether they be quick or dead, but only for
the rich.

And further, admit that the number of Idolaters and deceivers were greater
than it is, yet we rather desire to follow the will of God, with the small
number, as did our forefathers, Noah and Lot, than to perish with the
multitude: and to walk in the straight and narrow way, which leads unto
salvation, than in the wide and broad way, which leads men unto destruction,
Mat. 7.13. Now I beseech the God of all mercy to have pity upon his pore
children, to enlighten them by his holy spirit, and to make them worthy both
to understand, and to follow his heavenly will.

Certain Arguments, very strong and true, against the Sacrifice of the Mass.
The first Argument.
EVery divine service, instituted by the authority of man, with out the word
of God, is wicked: the sacrifice of the mass has no commandment from God,
for Christ in his supper commanded none other thing, but the communion and
participation of his body and blood, as the Evangelists do show, and as S.
Paul does witness 1. Cor. 11.24, 25. For these words, take, eat, drink,
cannot be understood of any other thing, saving of that whereunto they tend:
to wit, of the body and blood of Christ, which are offered unto the faithful.

An objection of the Papists.
Christ and his Apostles taught more things than are writ; so that we are not
only to believe that which is in the Bible: but many more things are to be
believed which the Church has received and approved, which yet
notwithstanding, are not expressed in the scripture.

The Answer.
It is a blasphemous speech, to say that the Scripture is not absolute and
perfect. John 20.30.
For, as for that that S. John says, to wit, that Jesus did many other
things, which are not written: he afterward adds, that there is nothing
omitted that concerns our salvation, saying, 31.
These things are written that ye might believe, that Jesus is that Christ,
that Son of God, and that in believing ye might have life thorough his name.
So does Cyrill expound this place in his twelfth book chap. 68. saying; All
things are done by the Lord: but those only are writ, which suffice both for
manners and for doctrine. Chrysostom upon the first chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, speaking of all the words and acts of Christ, does not say, I have
writ all: but, I have writ all that is necessary unto salvation. So S. Paul in
the second to Timothy, Chap. 3.15. says, That the Scripture is able to make
a man wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. As for
that that the Apostle says to the Corinthians, Other things will I set in
order when I come: 1. Cor. 11.34
and that to the Thessalonians, Brethren stand fast, and keep the instruction
which you have been taught, either by word, or by our Epistle, this does not
prove that the Apostles taught any thing which was not written. 2. These. 2.15.
And Tertullian wishes that all traditions might be compassed or measured by
the writings of the Apostles, saying; Their doctrine conferred with that of the
Apostles, shall show by the diversity and contrariety thereof, that it is
neither from the Apostles, nor Apostolical. And S. Hierome upon the 23. of
Matthew says; That which has not the authority of the Scriptures is to be
rejected, because it is not to be approved. For the Church has not power
either to make new Articles of the faith, or to change the institutions and
doctrine of Christ, or of the Apostles: seeing that the holy Ghost has not
reserved unto himself this prerogative, but says by S. Paul his chosen
vessel, Gal. 1.8. as it were admonishing and warning every man; If an angel
from heaven shall show you any other thing, than that which we have declared
unto you, let him be accursed. If the Mass were a thing so necessary as our
adversaries would have it to be, no doubt Jesus Christ and his apostles would
have said some thing of it, considering that they have spoken even how servants
and children are to live. Forasmuch therefore, as Christ and his Apostles have
not taught any thing concerning the Mass, it is therefore evident, that it was
not used in the Primitive Church, as ouraduersaries do falsely allege.

Another Argument.
It is of necessity, that the Priest which purges and takes away sins, be
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the
heavens, which needs not daily, as Aarons Priests, Heb. 7.26.27.
to offer vpsacrifice, first for his own sins, and than for the sins of
the people: and further, that he be without infirmity; the Popish priests are
far from being such, and Christ only is such a one, therefore Christ only
remains the Priest of the Church, who takes away sins, and saves, and
sanctifies all those that believe, and admits not of any vicegerent, or
vicar in his Priesthood.

Another Argument.
No sacrifice which purges or cleanses, is without blood. Hebr. 9.22. Without
shedding of blood there is no remission: the Papists say, that in the Mass
sins are purged and cleansed, and that it is a sacrifice that purges;
therefore of necessity it must follow, that the Mass must be a sacrifice
with blood. Which, if it be so, then this will follow, that Christ is not
entered in once only into the holy places by his own blood. And again on the
otherside; If the sacrifice of the Mass be without blood, then is it not of
the same substance as was that of the Cross; for the substance and the ground
of the sacrifice of the Cross is this, to wit, Christ taking upon him the
wrath of his Father, turning it from us, giving up his body unto death, and
shedding his blood for us.

Another Argument.
Christ offered up himself once, and cannot be offered any more: for this is
the nature and quality of his Sacrifice. Other sacrifices are offered by
others, but this sacrifice, which is the son of God, cannot be offered but by
himself, and that but once, which, without question, is not again to be
iterated. The adversaries then do greatly and grossly deceive themselves, when
they say that the son of God is offered by their priests.

Another Argument.
The son of God, by one only oblation has for ever made them perfect which
are sanctified: and this oblation is applied unto every one by his own faith,
in laying hold upon it. Therefore it is not needful that the Priest should
apply it, by his oblation or offering. For if over and besides this sacrifice
of Christ, the sacrifices of the priests are necessary; or if the sacrifice
of the Cross be insufficient, and serves not to any purpose, unless it be
applied by the Priest: then will it follow, that Christ by his one only
oblation has not purged and purified all the believers. But it is most
certain, that the oblation of Christ is sufficient unto salvation for ever,
and for all the believers, Heb. 6.26.27.
so that it needs not to be iterated or performed again: neither is it
applied by the Mass, but by Faith and by the Sacraments, being ordained and
appointed by Christ unto that end. Therefore, etc.

Another Argument.
Where there is forgiveness of sins already, there need not to be any
more oblation for them: that is to say, after that sins are pardoned,
Sacrifices cease: but in the new Testament there is a full and perfect remission
and purging from all sins by the death of Christ: therefore all purging
sacrifices cease and have an end in the new testament only there remains
the sacrifice of praise and giving of thanks, and a memorial or remembrance
of that Sacrifice once offered on the Cross; which remembrance is performed
in the Supper of the Lord.

FINIS.
The true Sacrifices of Christians.
1 I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies, a
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
serving of God,

Romans 12.1. 2 Offer unto God praise, and pay thy vows unto the most high.

Psalm. 50.14. 3 The sacrifices of God, are a contrite spirit, a broken and a
contrite heart o God, thou will not despise.

Psalm. 51.17. 4 To do good, and to distribute forget not, for with such
sacrifices GOD is pleased,

Heb. 13.16.
