THE IVDGMENT OF AN VNIVERSITY-MAN CONCERNING M. William Chillingvvorth his
late Pamphlet, in Answer to Charity Maintained.

Imprinted with License, Anno M.DC.XXXIX.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL my Noble Friend N.H.
SIR,
I must ever acknowledge my self obliged in term's of Friendship to satisfy
your so reasonable demand, which is only to show you my opinion concerning a
late borne Treatise, The Religion of Protestantss a safe way etc. For your own
part you profess you are satisfied already for the matter it self, that
nothing solid or substantial can come forth, for the defense of so bad, or
offense of so good a cause; but the world (you say) cries it up, and you would
gladly see it disabused. Indeed, as concerning the vulgar acceptance, I
understand no less, and withal I remember how the Father, or Grandfather of
this, was the popular applause and acclamation for a while, and those vpcryes
coming often to my ears, I said as often I confess, -- O saclum insipiens,
and infacetum! Grieuing together with some little indignation, that of true
judgment in writings of this nature, there appeared so great penury and
barrennes in this Land: though I was not ignorant that very many were to be
found of either University, whose more solid erudition and understanding
decry'd it as fast, though not so loud.

But before you have my censure of the work it self, I shall acquaint you
with the common voice (if perchance you have not hard it) concerning certain
circumstances of the Work; the why's and wherefor's, the motives to these
enterprizings and aduocating for other men: and first of all concerning his
ioint-printing and coedition of his Adversary with his own work, some said it
was square and fair dealing; other's that it was a prodigious conjunction, no
loss then the Hippocentaure; others that this committing himself with his
Adversary in the same volume, would cause an odious comparison, disaduantagious
to the Author.

Sic interpositus vitio contaminat vncto
Vrbica Lingonicus Tyrianthina Bardocucullus.
Sic Aretinae violant Chrystallina testae.
Sic niger in ripis errat cum forte Caeystri
Inter Laedeos ridetur coruus olores.
Sic vbi multisona feruet sacer Athide lucus,
Improba Cecr^pias offendit pica querelas.
Vindice nil opus est, aut charactire malign^,
Stat contra, and cuius tua sit mihi pagina clamat.
Which superlatiue difference they observed (as I conceive) rather in the
spirit of writing, then in the wording. And namely they observe that his
personal reproaches, his style of contumely, compared with the civil and mild
composure of his adversary; his iocularie and geering humor, with the others
grave and serious menage; his fraudulent and sophistical syllogizing, with his
plain and regular discourse; his lurking, and scotizing, and affecting
obscurity, his ouercasting with mist's of subtle interpretations his
adversaries plain words, seeking or making the Knot where it is not,
paralleled with the others opennes and endeavor to give day to truth; lastly
his immethodicall structure and digesture of the whole work confronted with
the others perspicuity and light of order, will appear in this neerenes and
vicinity much more contemptible, then if they stood aloof, and at distance in
several impressions.

Yet others say again, that even in this he was wise, and provident in his
generation: yea that surely some higher power directed his design; as the
Goddess of wisdom is said to have carried the arrow drawn at the breast of
Menelaus upon his belt, and so of no force to wound as was intended, but yet
enough to occasion continuance of the War, and the ensuing victory of the
Grecians; that by these two provisions divine and humane, of God and M. Chapter (if
this commission be not yet more odious then the former) many things are
effected commodious to all sides.

To his adversary; whose work by this opportunity is every man's money, and in
every man's hand's Cum Priuilegio, has his protection from his adversary; and
out of a strange mistaking Charity, is permitted to fight under his Shield,
like a little Teucer under his cozen Ajax buckler, shooting not only at the
common enemy, but even at Ajax himself, out of a like confidence perhap's
that, having combatted himself, and having been too hard for himself so
often, he is unconquerable by any other, Nec quisquam Aiacem poterit superare,
nisi Ajax.

Commodious to the reader, who has the ioint-impression at an easier rate both
of price and pain's; has now no more to do, but turn the leaf, and (if he
please) sing a new song: yet with this odd's, I confess, that while he read's,
or hardly read's the Catholic volume miserably contracted like another Homer
into a nut-shel; he beholds the Protestants Attorney like a new Edgar under
sail, gloriously swelling in displayed Characters, Vt populus tumido gaudeat
Antimacho.

Gainful lastly to himself, who by this co-impression becomes more vendible,
and makes a more swift return of the commodity; his friends buy him more
greedily, out of an appetite and curiosity to see the man, committed face to
face with his adversary, how manfully he bestir's himself. The friends of his
adversary perhap's conuinc'd with the evidence of his discourse and
deductions, will be covetous to see what can be said to these; how such
arguments will be cleared; how the Advocate will vnty the Gordian Knot like an
Aristotle, or like an Alexander: All men I think, after so large and lowed
promises of an utter confutation will be desirous to understand, Quid dignum
tanto ferat hic promissor hiatu.

Thus all sides, a man would think, will be pleased, and he, the author of
this co-impression, most of all; who having been at great charges, and having
his money out upon the work, would gladly, no doubt, see it back again,
together with the fruit of his expectation. And to say sooth, who sow's but he
would reap? who plant's a vineyard but he would eat the fruit thereof?

I have met with some other Censurers, who in my judgment proceed too far this
way, taking the boldness to penetrate those adita, those very conclaues of men's
intentions. And, whereas there are to be considered two ends in every
artificial work, the one intrinsique, the other extrinsique, the former the
end of the Art, the later of the Artist; this being so sacred, that he might
justly interdict all ingresse to any mortal man, might paint two snakes at the
entrance with this Epigraphe, -- Sacer hic locus, extra etc.

Yet to such an Hyperbole of presumption are men arrived in this age, that
enter they will like any Purseuant, into the very in-roomes, and bowels of the
most secret counsail's and designs of other men. But while by glossing his
intention they will seem forsooth to excuse him, in my opinion, they do but
geere him; who, as though they had heard what he spoke in his heart, take upon
them to personate him in his own words.

What I do in this writing for Protestant's, I do it not, out of malice; nor
out of any ill will toward the cause I impugn, no nor good will toward the
cause I propugne: but, (vt verum fabuler,) to deal plainly with you,
reflecting upon my self standing thus neutral between two potent factions, and
being now as weary as any Posthorse with Canterburying so often from Thebes to
Athens, and from Athens to Thebes, and by all these iourney's and
defatigations, having gained nothing by either but sweat and jealousy; calling
often to mind the wise sentence of Salust, Frustra niti, neque aliud se
fatigando, nisi odium quaerere, extremae dementiae est; it is mere madness to
take pains to no purpose, to make no other purchase, but displeasure; I
resolved upon a course how to endeare my self unto one, and the rather to that
part, which professed most faith, as the most likely to believe me. But these
truly I hold to be but idle comment's and surmises, wholly Heterodox from his
true meaning and intention.

As that likewise of some others, that by these so many his turn's and
return's, he affects a Name, to make himself known to the world, upon that
knowledge and diffamation to raise his fortunes; or to lie like a football
between the Goales, to become the ambition of Competitors, -- Multorum spes
inuidiosa procorum: and then, a Qui plus, qui potior est ad dandum etc. win me,
and wear me.

Now this Fescennine liberty of Censure, for mine own part, I utterly dislike.
For I love the man, and wish he may so come off after all these changes, that
he may not be loved without a riual. And it is well, yea surely a singular
argument of Gods goodness and providence, that the things in nature most
necessary for man's use, are the readiest at hand, and the most obuious
acquest: as even here, for this advocate, I hold it much more easy to become a
good Christian, then to be thought so. And if it be true which one says, Nec
vixit male qui viuens moriensque fefellit, He has not lived amiss whom no man
know's how he has lived or died; I am in good hope he may yet live and dye
well, and begin then to be Magnus coram Domino, great in Gods ey's, when he
shall be little in the ey's of men, especially in his own.

To return now to the matter in hand, permitting these and many the like
censures to his verdict who has one common key to unlock all closets of hearts,
to whom alone that office belongs, it shall be far from any presumption of mine
to pass any censure upon these extrinsecall ends. The fines Artis alone, shall
be my aim; so far forth as to discover in this work, or rather in some part
of it, what is pernicious of it self, and of force to do more harm then he
perhaps intends. If more then this, any personal touch of censure chance to
fall from my unwilling pen, meeting with his like humor and begotten of it, as
simile gignit sibi simile, like begets the like, heat produce's heat, and fire
produce's fire; and as his personal humor running along through his discourse
(indeed a very salt humor) may cast some salt into my pen, I shall hope that a
reasonable defense or excuse may be presumed from any indifferent man, even out
of the consideration of these Premises; wherein also I can easily maintain a
very honest intention, as to show the man himself in a convenient distance
from himself, for that indistancy of the object is wont to hinder sensation.
In the mean time verily it may seem an incredible effect of a prodigious
Philautie, or Authadie, or what else you will please to call that dark and
cloudy affection, able to put out the light of the sun at midday, if it could
reach it, that a man otherwise rational, yea who makes reason his Oracle, his
Card, his Cynosure; witty too, yea an idolater of wit, should owe so little to
either, as not to have discovered his own, so many gross follies errors,
vanities, indecencies, yea inciuilities; besides his so many frauds and
shifts, and Paralogismes and fallacies, his wilful and affected mistakinges
and misunderstanding his Adversary, and the like, for which his conscience has
more to answer then his wit; and that after making so large an ostentation of
all kind of literature, he should do nothing else in all, but abuse all; and
fall so short of the expectation of those who knew him, that now they can by no
means know him, in his Work. For my own part, I have been so charitable as
to think the Work none of his who entitles it; or his so altered, and
Sophisticate, that he may justify the disclayming it: Therefore as conceived
such upon good grounds I shall make the more bold with it.

Now then only to satisfy your entreaty, what I have here censured in general
terms, I shall apply to particulars as they lie in my way, while I run along
with this whosoever, or incerti generis Author; but yet so, as to be at
liberty, to take up when I list. For I am not matched with him; and I doubt
not, but he has met with his match: yet perhap's, I shall take up so, as it
shall appear I might have made it good to the last.

M. CHILLINGWORTH his Title to his Preface.
The Preface to the author of Charity Maintained, with an answer to his
Pamphlet, entitled a Direction to N. N.
I HAVE observed this ordinary Tapinosis, or phrase of degradation, very
frequent in Protestant writers against the Catholic: but if withal they have
Christened it a Popish Pamphlet, I dare say, it is more then half the
confutation. Now feign would I know how many rhemes of paper may vindicate a
Book from the contempt of a Pamphlet? In my opinion a large volume in folio
may be a Pamphlet in substance, and a Manual book of a very few sheets may
contain the weight and worth of an ample volume. True, if Glouers and Grossers
be made judges, your swelling volumes are more useful for such occasions. They
should do well to send them thither, where they shall be valued according to
there bulk, -- Ad vicum vendentem thus and odores
Et piper, and quicquid chartis amicitur ineptis.


But the Printer will be paid according to the number of sheets, and good
reason. Therefore you have purchased with your purse a title of Honor to your
Work above a Pamphlet; therefore he will not call it Pamplet, but I may, who
take by weight of wit, and substance, that of ink and paper. And to deal
plainly and seriously with the man, if all the Parerga's, or impertinences of
his book were culled out, and the solid remains bound up by themselves, this
would be a very Pa^phlet indeed, much less then either of the two so termed by
him, M. C. or by his Patron D. P. Howsoever if a Golias chance to be defeated
by a little David, had it not been more credit for him to have called him a
Giant then a dwarf? Thus much for the Pamphlet.

Preface. I came (says he) with such a mind to the reading of it (Charity
Maintained,) as S. Austin before he was a settled Catholic brought to his
conference with Faustus the Manichee.

Answer. He could not compare himself amiss with any thing unsettled.
Neither in my judgment, could he stand by S. Austin in comparison with any
decorum otherwise then as invested with this formality, not settled.

Pref. For as he thought, that if any thing more then ordinary might be said in
defense of the Manichean doctrine, Faustus was the man from whom it was to be
expected; so my persuasion concerning you was, -- si Pergama dextra
Defendi possunt, certe hac defensa videbo.


Ans. And why so? behold his Rhetorique in his witty gradation.

Pref. For I conceived, that among the Champions of the Roman Church, the
English in reason must be the best, or equal to the best. as being by most
expert masters trained up purposely for this war, and perpetually practiced
in it.

Ans. Now Sir, if you withdraw this base, or corner stone, will not all this
imaginary structure of discourse, this aerie conceit fall flat to the ground? I
deny then, then in reason the English must be the best, or equal to the best;
their training-maisters are the same, their practice for this war, that is,
disputes of Controversy concerning faith, less then others have. For the
Catholic cause has the same Adversaries in some other Countries, and those
very many, and (as the opinion of most men is) more able Champions for
Protestancy then the English; with these the encounters of Catholics of those
Countries are more frequent, more public, because more secure and free; all
which considerations make this first Assumpt and Fundamental conceit
incredible.

Secondly, that (purposely, and perpetually practiced) if I deny, how will he
prove it? which the Roman Orator accountes great weakness of discourse to bring
in for proof that which is either confuted, or silenced with a Nego, a direct
denial.

Pref. Among the English, I saw the Jesuits would yield the first place to
none.

Ans. I deny that he saw this; or if he did, it was a false vision: he saw it
with eyes of a deluded imagination, not of true Judgment; well he deserves to
be numbered with those, for ought I see, of whom the Prophet Ierem. Thren. 2.
Prophetae tui viderunt tibi falsa, and stulta: thy Prophets have seen false
and foolish things. Concerning the viderunt tibi assumptiones falsas, this is
one of the number of false Assumpts which this Prophet saw, that the Jesuits
would yield the first place to none.

Pref. And men so wise in their generation as the Jesuits are, if they had any
Achilles among them, I presumed would make choice of him for this service.

Answ. In which words, as likewise in the former, though I find but little
salt, yet I discover not a little gall: he would have you take notice of the
Jesuits arrogance, and their presumed or pretended wisdom. Now, a man would
wonder how he became so inwardly acquainted with the Jesuits. Sure this man is
not he of whom it is said, Sapientis oculi in capite su^, a wisemans eyes are in
his own head; but his eyes seem to dwell in other men's hearts, where they are
so busy, that they are blind at home. And would any man think that this man
was never Catholic above two months at once, who knows the Jesuits so well?
or is this some end of an old song which he singes by rote, and thinks not
what he singes?

Or how knows he the Jesuits conceived any such difficulty in answering D. P.
that some Achilles was to be sought forth, to encounter him? Was he such a
Hector? O but have patience to ascend step by step to the top of this
gradation, there shall you find M. C. himself enthroned in the clouds: for if
with so much ado, an Achylles were to be found for such a Hector, who shall be
the man, that after much enquiry, shall be supposed an equal match at least
for this Achylles? Now what Don Q -- is this, who having raised an imaginary
Castle in the air, will go fight against it himself and batter it? or become
another Paris in conceit, shoot at his aerie Achylles, hit him in the heel,
and, if his heart be there, kill him. But see, I pray you, see him building his
castle, and fortifying it with strong assistants, and how he backs his Achylles
with his many bands of Myrmidons before he will vouchsafe to encounter him.

Pref. I had good assurance, that in framing this building, though you were the
only architect, yet you wanted not many diligent hands to bring you in choice
materials toward it: nor of many careful and watchful eyes to correct the
errors of your work.

Answ. If he had indeed so many watchful eyes employed in correcting his
errors the more happy he; and he, this Advocate, the more unhappy, who of so
many eyes as surueyed his work, had not one Watchful; as may appear by the
innumerable errors which have escaped their corrections, that a man would
wonder what Mercury had pip't them all a sleeep. But what of all this? Marry
that which follows, out of this presumption or preimagination of such a
castle, or such an Achylles, with his so many bands of Myrmidones, and
watchful eyes coming against him, he had great reason to expect the utmost
that could be done or said in defense of the Roman.

Pref. And to assure himself, that if his resolution not to believe it, were
not built upon the rock of evident grounds and reasons etc. now the wynd, and
storms, and floodes were coming which would undoubtedly overthrow it.

Ans. Note his Rhetorical and grave exaggeration; that no small matter, not
wind alone, nor wind and storms, no not wyndes and storms and floodes could
be able to overthrow this rock of Resolution M. Chapter Now if you would say
notwithstanding all this, this rock of resolution has been shaken at the
least, and that again and again, and again and again, for every wynd once,
or perhaps as many times as there are collateral wyndes too, or storms and
tides in the year; for if he be the man he is thought to be, a new Academique
or so, he may alter his resolution as often as he list, so he follow only what
seems more probable, for the time, the day, the hour etc. O, but now his
Resolution if become rock, neither is this so incredible a thing but that an
Academique in Religion may believe it, as verily as he belieues any point of
Christian Faith. For both Pliny and other good authors tell us, of some
certain things of a soft and fluide nature, which in time, yea and often on a
sudden, become hard, yea very stone and rock: which for the greater
confirmation you shall hear out of Ouides Metamorphosis, who had he lived till
now, might have added this rock of Resolution to the number of his changes.

Victa racemifero Lyncas dedit India Baccho;
E quibus, vt memorant, quicquid vesica remittit
Vertitur in lapides, and congelat ae^re tacto.
I pray good after so much rocking and reeling he be not rock't a sleep, and
become as deaf as a rock, nor by any wynd or storm of divine threats or
floods of reasons and persuasions any whit more moveable, toward Religion,
Quam si dura silex, aut stet Marpesia cautes.

So that now to question his constancy of resolution in this kind, were to
question the constancy of the Moon which changes so constantly every month.
Notwithstanding I would have you to take notice of the constancy of his
discourse, and how easily he falls of from his rock within three lines (I
know he may do so, and yet be constant and true enough to his new Academiques:)
for having immediately before professed his rocky resolution upon evident
reasons, not to believe the Roman Doctrine, he adioynes forthwith.

Pref. Neither truly, were you more willing to effect such an alteration in me,
then I was to have it effected.

Answ. How stands this rock of resolution upon evident grounds not to
believe, that is, not to be altered with willingness, yea so much willingness to
be altered, especially that evidence supposed by him to be such as no wynd etc.
no force of reason, or persuasion could overthrow? Unless in saying his
Adversary was not more willing to effect such an alteration, then himself to
have it effected, he thought perhaps that his adversary had no will at all to
effect any such alteration, as of one so often altered already, that to alter
him again would not quit the cost; conceauing that after another alteration,
he would be still more easy to be altered then ever to be settled; who goes
about to settle the wynd, or fasten it to any one corner of the world, or any
thing else governed by the wyndes, windmils, or weather rocks, or the like.

Pref. Yet because he makes show of some desire to go the right way to
eternal happiness, though whether this way lie on the right hand or the left,
or straight forward, to him it is indifferent.

Answ. I will tell him my opinion; which is, that his way lies neither on the
left hand, nor the right, nor straight forward, no nor backward (though this
last was not well omitted by him in his distribution, as lying nearest to the
right way) but rather indeed straight downward: as if you would settle a
wether-cock in one constant positure, the readiest way will be to take it down,
and place it on the ground.

This was the way S. Paul was put into (though his alteration by the way, is no
Apology for this Atturneyes so often iterated and reiterated alterations:) he
changed with the change of the whole world. Ecce ego noua facio omnia; in
Christo neque praputium, neque circumcisio est aliquid, sed nona creatura: and
it was his fault he changed no sooner; nor was it yet indeed a change. For who
will say he is changed, who conuertes with him, who is never changed, in quo
non est mutatio nec vicissitudinis adumbratio? But this way, Act. 9.
I say, was downward; Cadens in terram audiuit vocem etc. Falling flat upon
the proved, lying now eauen with himself, that is, with dust, earth, and
nothing, there he hard the voice of his direction; which eauenesse of place,
and center of truth he ever after kept, both in life and doctrine; qui
existimat se aliquid esse, cum nihil sit, ipse se seducit; he who thinks he is
something, being indeed nothing, he beguiles himself. At what time also he
became blind, that he might see. For he was rather indeed shown then made
blind: he regained his sight by the imposition of hands of Ananias, without
further dispute; who if he would have disputed with him, he could have done it,
and remained blind still, with a resolution built upon a rock of more evident
grounds, then any M. Advocate has to build upon.

He would if he had been of his humor, have questioned the credit of all those
visions, as being perhaps (he would say) illusions, or at the least not
infallibly true; and then what could flow from those Principles more strong and
infallible then the Principles themselves? And suppose they were of infallible
authority; well then he was to persequute no more; or if he were to be a
Christian too, yet why was Baptism necessary? why Circumcision not sufficient?
why such a Christian as Peter or John? See (would he say) how many Syllogismes
you are short of the Conclusion you would infer. Thus might he have vanished
away (...), in his disputes, and have proved rather a Vessel of Contention,
then Election. And yet after all, might have returned with this or the like
glory, that he was now more confirmed in his belief of Iudaisme then ever; or
with somewhat like to this, Ego exprobraui agminibus Israel hodie; date mihi
virum vt ineat mecum singular certamen: I have braued the hosts of Israel
this day, challenging the best man among then to single combat of dispute with
me. I have heard of some such Braues of the new Academy, who had little cause
of any such glory, and who have found their match more then once: but they are
so wise as to make their Adversaries silence, or secrecy their advantage.

And yet I verily think you need not go far to match this Goliath, this
Pythagorique Transmigration: do but match him with himself; if he fight not
with himself, yea if be not to hard for himself, almost in every page, and in
some oftener then once or twice, I dare be bound to answer the forfait. As even
namely in this place, having boasted his resolution built upon a rock, not to
believe the Roman Doctrine, very soon after he professes he retains a
Trauailer's indifference, which way of religion to take of so many way's as are
now in the world. When will this indifferent Trauailer come to his iourneys
end, who is not yet resolved of his way, nor know's yet whether he be in it or
no? Yea, and if he prove true to his principles, will always be thus
indifferent. So that if he have gone twenty miles to day on the left hand of
truth, he will go to morrow as many on the right, if he meet with a more
apparent, or howsoever more prevailing reason, which may be nothing else
perhaps but a better friend, or some greater commodity, or the like. The third
day you shall have him gone as far a third way; the fourth, a fourth way, and
so forth: and a thousand to one after many years, you shall find him very
little advanced in his way; Inque Academia vmbrifera, nitidoque Lyceo; In some
Colledge-groue, or Cloister, there you shall have my indifferent Trauailer,
disputing of Religion (...).

But where is now that invincible Resolution? Was it only a negative Resolution
not to believe the Catholic doctrine? And has that of all others deserved so
ill of him? Indeed he lost his fellowship by it; but I presume the Catholic
would have given him a better, had he but held out his years probation. Yet
now it seeme's he is resolved upon evident grounds to be an indifferent
Trauailer to all other Professions, but never to believe himself again,
whatsoever he can object for the Catholic. No, he has believed himself that
way twice already, and has deceived himself: therefore now he will never more
dispute that question with himself again, but with this resolution before
hand, either to confute, or not to believe himself.

But to return to that expected Achylles which this Advocate had fancied,
Electum ex millibus, the choice Champion of thousand's, what becomes of him?
Marry this, (which we may suppose to have been the drift of this Chymerique
discourse) he has met with this Advocate, a stronger Giant then he, who has
despoyled him of all his confidence, shown him his weakness.

Pref. True, some snares he found and colour's, which might deceive the simple,
but nothing that might persuade, and very little that might move an
understanding man, and one that can discern betwixt Discourse and Sophistry.

Answ. Now to show this weakness in his adversary, is indeed to vanquish him;
and himself must need's be supposed this Vnderstanding-man who has discovered
it: so that he has made his adversary an Achylles to great purpose, to make
himself a greater Achylles. in defeating him. Which success that he nothing
doubted, hear his words.

Pref. In short I was verily persuaded that I plainly saw, and could make it
appear to all dispassionate and vnpreiudicate Judges, that a vein of
Sophistry and Calumny did run clean through his book from the beginning to
the end.

Answ. Now Sir, if this charge be true, which even a passionate man, if not
wholly blinded with passion will presently discern to be most false; then is
this very obiecting of a throughout continued Calumny, and Sophistry, a
Gigantique victory indeed: but the point is yet to prove. And yet I will not
urge upon him this way, but for once will do him the curtesy my self to prove
evidently that what he says is true. For his answer, as being indeed a very
mine of Sophistry and Calumny, (as it shall manifestly appear) and by this
ioynt-Edition running through his adversaries book, it will easily follow by
true consequence, that a vein of Sophisty and Calumny runs clean through
the said his Adversaries book from the beginning to the end.

And this is the business I undertook, dear Sir, whereby to satisfy your
request concerning my judgment, which shall appear in actu exercito, by what I
shall note unto you out of my observation in these two kinds especially, of
Sophistry and Calumny; for to follow him a long in his quoted authorities of
Books, as I could not do it, having neither those books at hand nor
opportunity to procure them; so I make no doubt but it will be fully done by a
better Champion, though no Achylles neither; but one, I dare say, who might
seem a dwarf standing by this Giant, if selfeconceipts might pass for true
presumptions.

Calumnies and Sophistries of M. Chapter gathered out of his two Answers: And first
out of his answer to the Direction given him by the Maintayner of Charity.
SECTION I.
AS among men, Soph. Elench. c. 1.
says Aristotle, some are of a healthful complexion and constitution, some
are not but seem to be so: and of mettalls some are true gold or silver,
others may have the likeness and luster of either, but yet are neither: so of
rational Discourses, some are indeed and really true discourses, some are only
apparently such.

Now, says he, because to some men it is more gainful and aduantagious, to
seem wise and knowing, then to be, and not to seem; therefore such men make
choice rather to seem to do like wise and skillful men, then to do it only,
and not seem to do it. The Sophister is such an one, one who trade in false
coins of Discourse or seeming knowledge, (...). Because the return indeed i^
quicker then in true gold of lawful argument's, and it is easier to deceive
the most part of men by fallacious inferences then to convince understanding
men by true Conclusions.

The end and scope of Sophisme, Soph. c. 3.
is Victory, intimated by the Philosopher in that word (...), ambitious of
Victory: and a further end of this victory is some desired purchase as of
riches, honor, or the like; which are purchased thus at the cheapest rate, as
that which is bought with copper, or the like counterfeit trash, comes cheaper
to a man, then what he buy's with current gold. For this cause therefore the
Sophist serves himself of such fallacious and adulterate forms of
discoursing, which having only the false face of true Syllogismes, are indeed
mere Sophismes and Paralogismes.

I have no mind to introduce in this place an odious comparison between these
two, the Author of this answer, with his Antagonist: yet they who know them
both, will be able I think to make some probable conjecture, to whether of the
two this character of a Sophister (...), a trader or dealer in, or for
commodities may seem the more proper to him, who has solemnly renounced and
diuorc't all traffic with the world, not only by profession, but by a total
and actual dispossession: or to him who having added to the inclination of
corrupt nature, the poyse and sway of a bad repentance, is fallen back upon the
world with a greater swing; who conuerseth daily with trade and traffic,
seeking to improve his fortunes by all the thriuing ways he can. Therefore so
often, and so lowdly to declaime against his Adversaries Sophistry and Calumny,
I cannot imagine impudence enough in him to do it; but an exigence rather and
necessity, to remove from himself by his pretended dislike and detestation of
these vices, all opinion of them to withdraw men's eyes from beholding them in
himself, where they are most palpably to be seen, and to derive the just
hatred of them upon his Adversary. 1. Callumny, and Sophisme.
So while he most proclaims his adversaries sophistry, even then, and in
that, he imployeth his master piece of a most sophistical Calumny; which I
note as his primitive and original Sophisme and Calumny running throughout his
whole Work from the beginning to the end, as shall appear by the sequel of
particulars. But withal I am to premonish you, Sir, that you are not to expect
to find all these fallacies, within the number of Aris^^tle's, who were he now
alive and would undertake to reduce them to those forms of Sophismes described
and observed by him (and he was a man of no small observation in this kind, and
had inherited the observations of many others) I am verily persuaded he would
have found himself reduced to greater and impossible, the^ ever he had meddled
withal. But now to prosequute our history of Fallaci^'s and Calumnies.

It is a Fallacy, a Non-cause for a Cause, where dissembling the true cause or
causes, which he could not but know, of his Adversaries (as he call's it)
tergiuersation, 2. Fallacy.
in truth, Refusal to give him (as he says) a fair, but more likely a foul
meeting; he would impose upon the world, that the cause was his Adversaries
diffidence and distrust in the cause of religion which he defends. But hear
his Challenge, or Protestation to this purpose.

Pref. Which Protestation (says he) by God's help, I would have made good,
that if you, or any other that would undertake your cause, would give me afaire
meeting, and choose out of your own book any one argument, whereof you were
most confident, and by which you would be content therest should be judged of,
and make it appear that I had not, or could not answer it, that I would
desist from the work which I had undertaken, and answer none at all.

Answ. And is not this a Goliath indeed? Date mihi Virum; give me a man;
excepts no man. And observe withal his Rhetorique of a most Hyperbolical
Confidence: Choose (1) ou^, of your (2) own book, (3) any one (4) argument,
whereof you (5) were most (6) confident. (Solane perpetua me, reus carpere
iuuenta?) But first, Sir, if confidence might carry the cause, there were no
dealing with this Champion. Secondly it is an unreasonable postulate that the
force of all the rest should be judged by the defense of any one Argument, or
(much more) by the ability of any one defendant: neither is every man best able
to defend his own best argument, though he may live to see the worst
sufficiently defended, though not after the manner which he prescribes. But
suppose that one argument chosen out, what shall be done next? make it appear.
To whom? that he had not, or could not answer it. But when? and how answer it?
For the time being undetermined, when can it appear that he cannot answer it?
and the manner of answering not expressed, how shall it be made appear that he
can answer it after no manner whatsoever. Experto creed etc.
For he who know's M. Chapter will never believe that he will ever be brought to
such a non plus of answering, that he will not be able to answer at least,
It Is alye, or call his adversary Knau^; or swear, t'^s as he says; challeng
his adversary to swear the contrary etc. No doubt he has many ^hi^t's and
suits of answers, and that none will fit, who can tell?

But now at length, what if? when all this were made to appear. Marry then he
would desist from the work, and answer none at all; as much as if he had
said, if his mouth were stopped, he would hold his peace. O but now, en crimen,
en causa, lo the crime and cause which he expostulates with his Adversary.

Pref. That having by all the arts he could possibly devise (being Master I
dare say of more then seven) provoked him to such a trial, accumulating
threat's too, that if he refused it, the world should be informed of his
tergiuersation; notwithstanding all this, he has perpetually and obstinately
declined it.

Ans. What challenge could be devised more picquant and irritant then this? and
then what greater testimony of Cowardice, then not to answer such a challenge?
therefore he adds very consequently.

Pref. Which to my understanding is a very evident sign, that there is not any
truth in your cause, nor strength in your arguments.

Ans. Whereupon, as having gotten the victory, proved what he intended, that
his Adversary conscious of a bad cause had refused the trial, he triumph's out
of Scripture.

Pref. Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the
light, least his deeds should be reproved etc.

Ans. But does not this Fallacy, especially set off with such confidence, make
a goodly flourish and show of truth? and is it not well followed by the sophist?
Now to detect this Fallacy is indeed to shame it: and therefore falsehood is
wont to hide it self behind some curtain of apparent Truth; draw the curtain
aside and the monster appears. It Is a secret vicer or loathsome sore, -- Quod
lato balteus auro
obtegit. --
Now I dare presume there is no vulgarly understanding man, acquainted only
with the circumstances, time, place, persons diversely affecting and qualifying
these men, the Advocate and his Adversary, who cannot of himself imagine other
most just causes of this so guilefully traduced refusal to give a meeting (if
there had been any such offer or provocation to trial or meeting, which his
adversary denies) and by this discover the fallacy. Nor could the advocate
himself out of his little experience of the condition of such men which he
might have gathered in the space of half a year or there about, while he was
connumeratus in nobis, one of our number (as S. Peter said of Judas,) be
ignorant of other causes.

As for his protesting and setting it under his hand, he has protested so
often, that no man I think will ever hereafter give credit to his Protestancy.
As on the other side, no man I doubt would believe he were a Catholic, though
he would set that under his hand again; for which cause no man I know has
greater occasion to practice that singular virtue of selfe-content, or
self-repose in the testimony of his own conscience, and more truly to say
secretum meum mihi, my secret is mine own; for no man, sure, that know's him,
will offer to take it from him: his Religion will be a mystery whatsoever it
be; yet even by this passage you may conceive how little need he has of any
rule but Scripture, who has so special a talent in interpreting and applying
it to any purpose, as though it were wax, or clay, as soft as himself, in the
hands of the Potter, capable of any form, or use, -- Argilla quiduis
imitaberis vda: or a sword for every sheath; an Advocate for every cause. For
by this Scripture with his comment, he might teach the Jews, if need were, to
argue against our Savior, that this was an evident sign there was no truth in
his cause, since he hid himself, when their Forefathers made inquiry after
him, surely to dispute with him, to pitch upon one point (at least they might
pretend so, and be angry if they were not believed) Quousque tollis animam
nostram, situ es Christus dic nobis palam: Lo the point which they would have
pitched upon. But when, I say, he would not be found, (though at other times he
had been) nor give them a fair meeting, they might have retorted, and beaten
his own sword to his head, (a trick which this Advocate could have taught
them) he who does evil, hates the light etc. They might likewise have
concluded the weakness of the Christian cause, by the premises of the Apostles
fear and hiding themselves propter metum Iudeorum, for fear of the Jews.

Well then, the Advocate, I will not say, is deceived, but would deceive; for
not all that fly the light hate the light; Fallacy, Light Equivocal.
nay rather many fly the light because they hate darkness. For I hope it is
not yet out of our memory, or the memory of our Fathers, that many by
committing themselves to light have been committed to darkness.

But howsoever, is this to fly the light, or trial of light, to deny you
personal meeting? I would gladly know who more offer's himself to light, he
who appears in presence of forty or twenty perhaps in some private Chamber;
or he who comes forth upon the stage of the world? For I would ask the man
what is it he pretend's by this provoking to personal appearance? Would he
dispute with his adversaries body, his face, his eyes, his forehead? Grant that
this Attorney has the harder forehead; has nor his adversary reason to eschew
the encounter? Or would he commit with with wit, learning with learning? etc.
If so, he cannot but know that the silent language of one Pen is louder and
further hard then the clamorous dispute of twenty Coursers: and he who prefers
a writing, before a speaking judge, should, me think's, in good coherence
choose to be judged rather by his pen, then by his tongue. For though the
Apostles tongue he grantes, were as good a rule as Scripture, yet he who is no
Apostle (at least of the last twelve) nor has received their spirit, though a
cloven tongue, must by virtue of his Principles, and does acknowledge Scripture
a better judge then speech.

If he love the light indeed, he should more love the greater light; If in
confidence of his cause he desire to manifest his doctrine, he does best in
making choice of such a light, as wherein he may appear not only to a few but
to many; nor to the present in place alone, but to the absent too, nor only to
the present but to future ages. For though he can speak lowed for a need, yet
he will scant be heard over the Thames disputing in Holb^rne, nor in
Westminster though in the vacancy: but the voice of his Pen may be hard as far
the Sequana, and Po^, and Rhenus, and Tiber, and Beti^, Et Tagus and Ganges,
forsan and Antipodes. And truly if he presume himself an equal match for so
great undertakings, what should he do else but manifest himself to the world,
and disabuse it. Exalta in fortitudine vocem tuam, tu qui euangelizas Sion; you
who euangelize Reformation to the Church of God, exalt your voice by the
strength of your Pen; the voice of your tongue will prove too weak, were it
the voice of ten Stentors. If verily he affect notice, and manifestation of a
truth so presumed, why will he choose to print those his weighty disputes,
rather in the air, then in written monuments, if he please, of brass, yea to
out-liue the life of brass or marble? The truth is, he wrongs his discretion
by seeming to think otherwise, and so shall he who belieues he does; nor his
love of light could not choose but be ambitious of this greater light; yet
howsoever he shows the folly of his fallacy in twyting his Adversaries hate or
fear of light, who has chosen to encounter him in the greatest light; even in
the eye of the world.

The Application of this sentence of our Savior, Qui male agit etc. to the
Socinians.
SECT. II.
THE Atheist, or the Embryo of Atheist, the new Academy, hates the light
indeed, and therefore dixit insipient in cord suo etc. he has said it in the
silence and secrecy of his own heart, where no body hears what he says but
they who are one heart with him. They lurk in silence and obscurity, although
they walk at midday in open view, in the market place; yet still they fly the
light; they whisper in corners, they will not speak plainly what they think,
what they believe; they sculke in Allegories and false pretenses, casting ever
and anon clouds of doubtful questions, over the most clear and orthodox, and
received Doctrines. Then they steal upon you in the darkness, until by little
and little they leave you no light of any positive truth, no faith, no grace,
no supernatural bliss; no Sun above the Moon; no God above the God of
nature, and reason; confined within the necessity of the one, and the short and
narrow marches of the other.

Yet all this while this implicit or disguised Atheist holds fair
intelligence with our Protestant, salutes him courteously, takes him familiarly
by the beard, as though he would kiss him, mean while with a flash of his
sword through his side, powre's out all his entralles of faith and charity. The
poor Son of Abigail observed not the sword, hanging in a false sheath of
counterfaite Religion, whence it could easily slip out; no more is this
poisoned dagger of Socinians observed, hidden in the sheath of Protestancy, or
pretended joining with them against the Roman; wherewith while he flee^es in
the face of Protestancy, he gives it the deadly stabbe, even through the sides
of Papacy.

These are indeed those Lucifugae, those fly-lights, those rational Batts;
that sana ratio; that sober mystery of iniquity, negotium perambulans in
tenebris, the business that walk's in darkness; in tenebris and in regione
m^rtis, in the misty and darkesome coast of sin and heresy. These not daring to
appear unto the world in the light of print, in their own guise of doctrine
and principles, least so ugly Monsters should affright even heresy it self; in
covert of his wing, and in his nest hatch forth those griping Harpies, Socinian
problems, that ravish religion out of the world, defile and pollute all that is
pure and holy in Christian Faith with their doctrine of Naturality, sauou^ing
of nothing but flesh and blood etc. Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec savior
vlla
Pestis, and ira Deum stygys sese extulit vndis
Virginei volucrum vultus, foedis^ima ventris
Proluuies, vncaque manus etc. --
Would God would open the eyes of these our Countrymen, especially our
Universities the two ey's of this kingdom, who unwittingly and unwillingly (as
I verily presume) are made the stalking-horses to this Godless Academy, this
Progeny of viper's, this issue of Heresy; but which coming to light, will kill
that too, and extinguish that little remnant spark of whatsoever belief or
acknowledgment of a Christ, of a Savior, of mankind: quaerunt extinguere
scintillam meam, quae relicta est, vt non supersit viro meo nomen and reliquiae
super terram; seek to abolish and raze out of all notice and memory the very
name of Christ, and Christianity. So may the holy Church complain of this
Gigantique race in behalf of his spouse, who died to redeem mankind, whom
these men seek to murder again in his seed and offspring.

It were again to be wished, that even this Antagonist would bring forth to
light those works and workmen of darkness in their own likeness, (he can do it)
that men might fly them as they would the Devil appearing in their shape. Mean
while let him take notice that this Fallacy joined and conuolued with the
Calumny of flying the light, is detected; Calumny, I say, as objected to his
Adversary, but, as retorted upon himself, a solid and grounded presumption;
who if he be no Protestant (as I know no reason, why he should be rather
believed, when he says he is, then when he says he is not) then what he is,
or where to find him, what man can tell? Oro, si tibi forte non molestum est,
Demonstres vbi sint tuae tenebrae.
For if you say, he walks in the Ministerial habit of a Protestant; so has
he lately done in the lay-garment of a supposed Catholic. If you have seen
him lately write and talk Protestant; so has he not long since wrote and
talked Catholic; but so also has he talked Anti-trinitarian, and
Antichristian, not only Anti-protestant, and Anti-papist. When shall we see
him in his likeness, that we may say, here, and this is he, while every one that
does evil bateth the light, neither comes to the light, least his deed's
should be reproved etc.

Another Calumny of M. Chapter refuted.
SECT. III.
ANother calumny of the Advocate is this. Preface. That his adversary finding
him proof, forsooth, against his batteries (his persuasions to surcease from
writing) took up (says he) the resolution of the furious Goddess in the Poet,
madded with the vnsuccessefulnes of her malice, Flectere si nequeo superes,
Acherenta mouebo. For certainly those indigne Contumelyes, that mass of
portentuous and execrable Calumnies wherewith in your Pamphlet to N. N. you
loaded not only my person in particular, but all the learned and moderate
Deuines of the Church of England etc. could not proceed from any other
fountain.

Answ. But first, and by the way, how was he found of proof against those
batteries? Certainly by his Answer to the reason of such surcease conveyed
unto him (as he says) by an acquaintance of both: which was this in effect,
that he easily contemned those motives of his Adversary, which were very
proper motives of the Devil and his instruments, Pref.
to tempt poor spirited men out of the way of conscience and honesty, but very
incongruous for either teachers or lovers of truth. But if he were indeed
desirous he should not answer Charity Maintained, one way there was, and but
one, whereby to obtain his desire: which was, by a far conference to be
written down on both sides, conuincing (says he) my Understanding, that any
one part thereof, nay any one argument in it, of moment and consequence to the
cause, was indeed unanswerable. To which demand he received (as he says) no
other reply but this, that his Adversary would have no Conference with him but
in Print.

Ans. By which very words of the Advocate you see clearly intimated the very
contradictory of what he objects against his Adversary, that he flies the
trial of light; whereas, by his own confession, he appeals from a less to a
greater light, from a private conference to a public manifestation in print.
For which appeal, besides the forementioned, he might have other just causes;
among the rest this one consideration, how the passages of such a Conference
might be written, and afterward caused to be printed by this Challenger, with
how great advantage to himself he might justly suspect, by the aduantagious
and vnfincere proceedings of some others of this Advocates quality, in some
former like Conferences yet in fresh memory.

Which fear and equity of Appeal to public testimony by print, is yet
further confirmed even by this passage of his Preface, wherein this Complainant
is not ashamed to publish to the world to his advantage what had privately past
between him and his Adversary by the intermise of a common friend to both, to
whom it was with all secrecy entrusted; both for this reason wherein the
Plaintiff is become his adversaries Apology, as you see, and those many others
fitter to pass in silence, his refusal of Conference other then in print, was
and is most reasonable, and will satisfy all discreet and impartial men,
whether this Advocate will or no.

But now besides all this, the condition annexed to this so vehemently urged
Conference is most ridiculous, and indeed so manifestly cutting off all hope of
any fruit to be reaped by it, that any prudent man will easily understand,
that all this instancy and importuning of a Conference, is nothing else but a
fair flourish, a vain brag, an ostentation of valiance and confidence in the
quarrel. Forsooth the effect of this Conference should be to convince his
Understanding (in which word it pleases him to play as with a fether) who was
resolved (quoth he) not to be a Recusant, if I were convicted. Verily like
enough; he would fall off once more from Recusancy, rather then stand to the
conviction. But what if his stout Will should prevail so much with his
Understanding, as never to yield it self conuinc't, although it were? Again
the argument might be of it self conuincing, and yet not convince his
Understanding, which might proceed from the weakness of his Judgment, who would
then say (as he is wont) that his Adversary walks in clowd's, if his argument
should conclude out of principles of Scholastique Divinity, invested also in
terms of the Schools, such as he would not be able to see through them the
strength of the argument; then would he glory in his ignorance, and employ some
pretty Phrase or other whereby to geere at Schoole-termes; and what then?
Soluuntur risu tabula. -- And yet a simple conviction shall not suffice; but
his understanding must be so conuinc't. How so? Forsooth, that some argument of
his Adversaries book were indeed unanswerable; wherein is employed a condition,
if you mark it, of a strange la^itude; for if he could not answer it to day,
he might to morrow, if not to morrow, the next, or the next day, the next
month, the next year etc. for all is indefinite here; or if he could not
answer it at all, were it therefore unanswerable? Were there an understanding
in the world, or could be, yea of Man or Angel, which could answer it, then it
should not be unanswerable; unless he would be so good as to grant out of his
bounty, that what he could not answer in this cause, neither man nor Angel
could; so that it must of necessity stand or fall with him. What then should
have been the issue of this so vehemently solicited conference? marry this:
after a while should have issued forth Cum gratia and Priuilegio, some worthy
Treatise containing a relation of the Conference held betwixt the Jesuit M. H.
and W. Chapter Master of Arts of the University of Oxford etc. Wherein the Jesuit
had as certainly been discomfited, as Turnus was sure to be vanquished by
Aeneas, Virgil writing the History.

Now to return to the consideration of those indigne Contumelies and execrable
Calumnies etc. Calumny.
Which I shall not doubt to note as a fallacious Calumny of this Advocate, who
would make the world believe that to be Contumely and Calumny which is no such
thing. For if the substance of what is written by his Adversary be a truth, at
least in the sense of the writer, not in tended any way to traduce or
disparage, but as a discourse and inference of a truth; where is then the
Calumny? Besides, if there be nothing harsh, or insolent, or uncivil in the
expression of this truth; where is the Contumely? where is the portentuosity,
or execrability to be discerned? unless perhaps out of the exuberance of his
spleeny Rhetorique he will needs phraze it portentuous, execrable, indigne
Contumely, whatsoever his queazy stomach cannot digest with patience?

And how then could such a stomach digest these so crude Expostulations cook't
with so much bitterness and gall of a Satirical Iuuectiue? I make doubt whether
any other could but he who can digest his own vomit. For I dare avouch, even
in these few lines, wherein he expostulates this wrong, there is more of the
portent, and Calumny etc. to be found, then in both those Treatises (as by him
supposed) of this his Adversary. Nor was it a little gall, and rancor which went
into the seasoning of those words of his, proper motives for the Devil, and his
instruments to tempt etc. Upon whom he plays, with these instruments in
consort with the Devil, is no hard ridle to read, nor work for an Oedipus:
yet it had been fair dealing to have pointed out some one or more
particulars, out of that mass of portentuous and execrable Calumnies etc. But
he was wiser then so; he knew whatsoever he should have pointed at
particularly, would have appeared no such portent to any wise man; he thought
it better, to hope his Reader would be either so curreous as to believe him
upon his word; or so negligent, as not to examine him, or confer the places.

A Calumny objected, retorted upon the Obiectour.
SECT. IV.
IF that be one of those execrable Calumnies wherewith he complains that
himself, together with the learned and moderate Deuines of England are laden,
by his Adversary; who sticks not (says he) to fasten the imputation of
Atheism and Irreligion upon all wise, Pref.
and gallant men, that are not of his own Religion.

Ans. If his Adversary neither say so, nor can by any truth or candor of
interpretation be understood to mean so, then is this objection of a Calumny,
his Calumny who obiecteth it; and surely he has taken great pains to small
purpose, to load himself and his friends so heavily; for unless he will needs
pluck it from those shoulders whereon his Adversary imposed it, he has no cause
so to groan under the burden. For the words of his Adversary whence he
forces, and violently writes this execrable Calumny are these: Direct. Chap.
1.
They are strangers to that wise and gallant nation, who imagine they can be of
any religion, if they will not be Catholic. Out of which testimony concerning
the Italian nation, to make it odious, he frames this discourse as virtually
included in it; A wise and gallant nation can be of no Religion, if not
Catholic: The Italian is a wise and Gallant nation, Ergo the Italian can be
of no Religion, if not Catholic. To which I answer; this universal
proposition, a wise and gallant nation etc. is wonderfully strained, and indeed
with no truth or ingenuity forced out of that particular, the Italian a wise
and gallant nation, can be of no Religion if no Catholic. For he might, and
should in good Logic and honesty, take this proposition specificatiue, not
reduplicatiue, as thus, the Italian a wise and gallant nation etc. Not thus:
The Italian, as it is a wise and gallant nation, or, because it is a wise and
gallant nation, precisely so, that these words wise and gallant, may be taken
as Epither's or adiections of propriety, supposed to be acknowledged in that
Nation, at the least, according to some eminency in those kinds, as Homer so
frequently applying that Epithete (...), neatelybooted Greeks never surely
intended by that, to make their neat boots any cause of their sacking Troy, or
any the like effect.

Yet if in our case these attributes wise and gallant be supposed in the
writers intendment, to have some influence into that negative (the Italian a
wise and gallant nation cannot be of any other religion) yet it should not
follow, that wise and gallant, were the adequate, or the necessary cause of
that negative. Whence it will not follow that every Nation wise and gallant, or
all wise and gallant (yea as wise and gallant as the Italian, which equality
not withstanding I believe might be denied to some other nation without any
contumely, or disgrace, or any wrong done them) should be said to be either
Catholic, or of no religion. For though wise and gallan^, be granted a great
part of the cause why the Italian cannot be of any other religion, yet this
being but the partial cause, some other wise and gallant men may be of some
religion, or Sect, though not Catholic.

But yet suppose, that wise and gallant, were (which cannot be granted) the
adequate cause, and of necessity inducing such an effect, and of force to draw
out the conclusion to whomsoever applied: as thus; That such and such are wise
and gallant men, Ergo Catholics, or of no religion: Or thus; And they not
Catholic, Ergo of no religion; where shall this Calumny light? For first you
must subsume the minor, before you can determine the Calumny, for it can be no
Calumny but where it falls.

Well then, I will subsume it for him, make him some part of recompense for his
pains taken in framing his Adversaries discourse, so very often into
syllogism's, such as he pleases. But thus I do it for him, and thus he must
subsume; otherwise, for ought I see, his Execrable Calumny etc. will prove but
smoke: Wise and gallant men can be of no religion, if not Catholic; But I,
together with the learned and moderate Deuines of England, are wise and gallant
men: Ergo I, with them, can be of no religion if not Catholic.

Behold here the indigne Contumely, the Portentuous and Execrable Calumny,
squeezed out of his Adversaries words merely by racking them to the worst
sense, and torturing them, forsooth, that M. C. or the learned Deuines of
England are not wise and Gallant men; this is now the worst he can make, yea
and worse then he can truly make of those his Adversaries words, so Tragically
inflamed. Now truly I may have been mistaken, but I should not easily have
believed that M. Chapter would have taken it so very grievously, to be ranked with
those wise and Gallant men. But such is now become his zeal of Religion (great
pity, no man will believe it) that he had rather be esteemed not wise and
Gallant, then of no Religion. But why, think you, has he so misalleaged his
Adversaries words? Instead of these, This wise and Gallant nation can be of no
religion if not Catholic, he has them thus; as though his Adversary said,
wise and Gallant men can be of no religion, if not of his. O, he would not
seem to grant his Adversaries religion, or that of the Italian nation,
Catholic: for he would feign retain unto his cause, the name of Catholic;
as both he and his associates are wont now of later day's to nickname
themselves, Catholics, and laugh at one another, I suppose, for so doing. For
this name (Catholic) can no more stick to their profession, then were it
printed in wynd or water: but either they are Catholics, or no: if no, why do
they say they are? if yea, what is it to them, that they who are not
Catholic, are of no religion?

Again, either these men conceive of Catholic Religion as the Italian does,
or no. If no; then the Italians being of no religion if not Catholic
concerns them nothing; if they conceive a like, then it is no disparaging
imputation to say they are of no Religion if not Catholic. The Italian is
supposed by this writer and others who know them, so wise and vnderstand^^g, as
to make this discourse; of all Societies of men who profess Christianity,
this, the Roman Catholic, is most probably the true Religion; he is withal
supposed so Gallant that he will not profess a religion which he judges none,
or not true. Whence he concludes thus: Either this is the true, or none; and
then again, Either I will embrace this or none. Now if these men have the like
conceit, if they make the same Antecedent, then the Consequent falls likewise
upon them; if I say, they be alike wise and Gallant, without any disparagement
at all; where is now the indigne Contumely, or Execrable Calumny? For what
other thing is this to say, but that he who will not be of that religion, which
he belieueth the only true, will be of none. Otherwise this must needs proceed
from some baseness, if having rejected the religion which he judges the only
true, if any true; he embrace notwithstanding, or seem to embrace some other
Sect, or Profession which he has in his judgment a fortiori rejected, in
rejecting the Catholic.

And let this Advocate turn himself which way he list, and play his part in
Tragical Rhetorique in the Eye of the world, to stir up Passion in the
beholders, and so to blind them; neither he, nor any else who know's the Roman,
and can compare it with any other, as now he can, shall ever be thought to be
of any religion, if not Catholic: yea, and maugre himself, if he but dare
enter into his soul, seriously and sincerely, all passion and affection whence
partiality may arise, thrown aside, he shall not choose but acknowledge the
Roman of all other, for ought he know's, the most probable.

In th^mea^e time he will halt between God and Belial; sacrifice to neither;
suspend his opinion; sustinere assensum, as the Academiques were wont to say,
and consequently suspend and defer all service and worship of God; whom, where
he is he know's not, with the Papist, or Protestant, or Greek, or Turk; no nor
how he would, or should be served, under what notion or name of Deity. So what
he serves and worships as God for ought he knows, is an Idol: as the Arrian
God, to the Roman is an Idol, so must the Catholic (...) be to the Arrian:
and the God of Calvin, positive Author of sin no less then of grace, is an
Idol to all Orthodoxe Christians: and so of the rest.

Let the Samaritan erect as many Altars as he will, and accost Jerusalem by
imitation of empty Ceremonies, as much as he list; all this notwithstanding,
while he adores not in Jerusalem, Joan. 4.
he adores he know's not what. Nos adoramus quod scimus, quia salus ex Iudais
est: For the time is come long since when true Adorer's adore the Father, in
spirit and truth; Whence it follows that they who adore him not in spirit and
truth, adore not God at all; for it is not enough to exhibit the external acts
of adoration and religion, shooting them as it were at randon, as you would
say, let them fall where they are due, wheresoever that be, with the
Catholics or Protestants, or Caluinistes, or Anabaptists, or Arrians, or
Donatists etc. for this must be a rational and voluntary Sacrifice, or worship,
to love whom we adore, and know whom we love; for we cannot love whom we know
not, and therefore our love of God must flow from true faith and belief in
God, without which we cannot know him.

From all which appears that this very obiecting of a Calumny, and Contumely
is it self both calumnious and contumelious, both in substance and quality. In
substance, as being a false crime objected; and then in quality of expression,
amplified with great bitterness of speech, in a studied inuectiue, and
Archylochian style. Strange intemperancy of a man, who had not so much power
and command over himself, as to refrain from Calumny and Contumely, at the
least, while he reprehended it.

Several Calumnies of M. Chapter
SECT. V.
HEnce now from this so bitter inuectiue against one falsely supposed Calumny
of his adversary, he flows into a copious conglobation of true Calumnies of
his own against his Adversary and his Cause, while he employeth, for the more
enforcing of his arguments, or indeed filly fancies and surmises, his figure
Pretermission: as to pass by first; to say nothing secondly; not to object to
you thirdly; nor to trouble you fourthly. In all which, first, secondly,
thirdly etc. he does nothing else indeed but trouble, entertaining his Reader
with mere impertinencies; nor answering any thing directly to what his
adversary writes.

Pref. To pass by first (says he) that which Experience iustifies, that
where, and when your religion has most absolutely commanded, three, and then
Atheism has most abounded.

Answ. Now, this is a very Preuarication accompanied with a Calumny. For what
could be said more against himself in confirmation of what his Adversary
writes, and he complains of; that the more wise and Gallant spirits can be
of no religion if not Catholic? For every man knows where Catholic
Religion has most absolutely commanded, Calum. against Cath. Rel.
and yet commands, and which he himself sufficiently intimates in these very
words, which is the very thing his Adversary avouches, saying, they are
strangers to that wise and Gallant Nation etc. And this confirms furthermore,
that those Eminent spirits conceived the Catholic of all other the most
probably true; for could they have judged some other Sect to have more
probability of truth in it, they would rather have embraced that, then have
fallen flat into Atheism: therefore their falling thence immediately into
Atheism, is an argument of that former discourse, which I have supposed
probably to have passed in their secret discussions: or this, or none true.

Add unto this, that in that Nation, where our Religion has and does most
absolutely command, those wise and Gallant spirits, were best acquainted with
the doctrine taught in it. Whereupon blinded with pride, or passion, or wicked
life, being not able to discern the color of truth, by the light of the
sun, they despaired to discern it, by candlelight.

And it is, I confess, an experience grounded upon great reason, both of
nature and manners. Waight's which fall from higher places, force their descent
through middle obstacles more strongly, and therefore fall lowest. None but a
Judas called to the eminency of Apostle-ship, could have plunged himself into
such a depth of desperate treason, as to betway to death, the Author of life:
whom when I consider how soon he fell from the spirit of his vocation to be a
calumniator fratrum, a Devil, as our Savior himself call's him, I am induced
to think, he became an Apostle for no other purpose, but to know our Savior
and his doctrine, and then betray him.

And verily I could easily believe, that of the number of those who profess
Christianity, more turn Atheists of those who have been Catholics, then of
those who never knew Catholic religion; as those who have been b^rne and bred
in Lutheranisme, Caluinisme, or the like; because from so low a place, they do
not easily fall so far; Qui iacet in terra, non habet vnde cadat. Who lies on
the ground, he falls no lower, unless perhaps they have taken these in their
way from the Catholic: for if they have so, twenty to one, unless they be some
duller spirits, they stay not there, howsoever they make show of such
profession; but after some short space of entertainment, they go on their
journey from thence, to Adiaphorisme in religion; where having spent some time
in good fellowship with all professors, until they have consumed that little
remnant stock of Christian, or whatsoever else belief of a God, they steal
away after a while from thence too, keeping on directly in that road, until
they arrive to the very next Inn, and the very last, adjoining to the Ferry
upon the bank-side of Death and Damnation, commonly called stylo veteri,
Atheism; now of later years, the new Academy, or Socinianisme.

By this the Advocate may see what he has gained to his Cause by this objected
Calumny. Forsooth, that revolt from Catholic religion renders it self at
last into Atheism, or Socinianisme; where such reuolters, I make no doubt,
would be glad to meet him; for there (men say) this indifferent Trauailer
dwells; though they say again, he has shift of habitations, and his judgment
often changes lodging, but that is his ordinary, and more constant rendeuous.

Calumnies against Miracles.
SECT. VI.
THe next Calumny and second in number of the Pretermissions strikes at Heaven,
(and expect that he will have a fling at God himself before he has done) by
moving iealousy and suspicion of all miracles, and histories, and records of
Saints; whiles he would make men believe the Catholic Church approves
forging of Miracles, and lying Legends (so he writes) which is indeed a
notorious Calumny: and had he not made so much have in running back from the
Catholic, as though he had come thither only to fetch fire of faction; he
might have acquainted himself better, with the practice of the holy Church, in
this very point of Miracles, and relations concerning Saints. He might have
admired their exactnes of scrutiny, and all the way's of industry to find out
the truth; and to reject whatsoever has the face or least show of counterfeit
or unsound; Knowing well that neither truth can be of any durable consistency
with falsehood; (they expel one another even naturally, as light and darkness,)
but besides this, Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis
Roma caret. --
the Catholic Church needs no such subsidies; the pillar of truth craves no
support of lies and forgeries: She has in her Archiues, records and evidences
of this kind, so authentic, so authorized, so testified, that blindness it
self by no other Exorcisme but that of manifest truth, has been compelled to
see them, and confess them. No otherwise then those Ministers of Pharao,
digitus Dei hic est. But give them leave to question Saints and miracles, who
questionles had never yet any; no not when the time most required them, to
countenance their extraordinary mission, when they ran out of the Church to
reform it, or, as to cry fire, fire, when they carried it in their bosoms.

Calumny against holy Ceremonies.
SECT. VII.
THe third pass, or figurative omission, in these word's Not to object to you
thirdly, is a spurn'or kick, as he goes by, Pref.
at the weak and silly Ceremonies, and ridiculous obseruances (so he) of the
Catholic Church.

Ans. Indeed if they were only Ceremonies without the substance whereunto they
relate, they were surely silly Ceremonies, but if every least Ceremony include
a mystery, greater then has ever entered into his little weak state, or
understanding; who is then ridiculous but he who laugh's at what he know's not,
yea even therefore because he knows it not. Yet had the man but stayed to have
learned his Catechism among us, he might have known the use and meaning of
our Ceremonies: now having come into the Church, as Cato came unto the Theater,
only to go out again; what marvel if he return a ridiculous censurer, of
what he only saw and understood not? Such post-hast were hardly tolerable in a
Spy, much less in one who comes to see and censure. Of whom, if I should
ask, what in particular were sylly and ridiculous in those ceremonies, or
whether the Church has not authority to prescribe Ceremonies; if the Church of
England allow of ceremonies, no whit more substantial then the Roman (to say
no more) will he be strong enough, think you, to find out a disparity? Or,
will he rebel against all? I believe, by these and many other the like
passages of his book, the Chayres who have subscribed it, little observed how
loud an All-arme is sounded to mutinies, and seditions, and rebellions, against
all Church-gouernment.

But now, alas, even this may seem a thing ridiculous indeed in us, who
reprehend his laughing and deriding the waiting Gentle-women, or maids of
Honor, who geeres the Queen her self. For did he allow of any such thing as
Religion Queen of virtues, he would not grudge her due attendance and
observance of holy Ceremonies: nor would he (I think) be so unmannerly as to
find fault with such, as please the Queen.

Calumny against Ecclesiastical Persons.
SECT. VIII.
A Fourth Calumny, with which he will not trouble us, is: Pref. A great, part
of your doctrine, specially in the points contested, makes apparently for the
temporal ends of the teachers of it; which I fear, is a great scandal to
many beaux Esprits among you.

Answ. Surely the acknowledged doctrine of our Lord and Savior makes in great
part for the temporal end's of the teachers; and will these beaux Esprits, M.
Chapter with the rest of the Session of wits, make Christian doctrine their
scandal for that? Qui vos audit, me audit, he who obey's you, obeys me; if it
be rightly understood and believed practically, is of force to subdue the world
to the Governors and teachers of the Church and Christian doctrine, by a far
more eminent obedience and command, then whatsoever dominion of temporal
Sovereignty, or whatsoever subjection of men to men. And that Pasce oues meas,
understood as it ought, not of feeding only but of ruling too, is a more large
commission granted to S. Peter, by God himself (from whom all just Empire and
Commission is derived) then Augustus Caesar ever enjoyed, even then when he
styled himself Emperor of the world; as we may suppose by that Edict which
issued forth by his order, vt describeretur Orbis, (...), all the inhabited, or
known world; which may seem, to have been the language of that age, that
made him equal sharer of Empire with Jupiter, dividing the scepter and sway of
all nature betwixt them two. Tu secundo-Caesare regnes.
Te minor latum reget aquus orbem.
Tu graui curru quaties Olympum etc.
And yet all that power and jurisdiction reaching from East to West, extended
to the body only and exterior subjection, and commanding the subjects purses
etc. For it is but a flattery of the Poet, -- Victorque volentes
Per populos dat iura. --
Whereas the Empire of the Apostles extendes indeed, to the command of souls:
yea from this East their kingdom begin's, from thence they reign even unto
the West of mortal bodies: which servile nature being subject to the soul,
becomes his subject who commands the soul. Augustus could imprison, banish,
or confine bodies; souls he could not. Illa per immonsas spaciatur libera
terras,
Caesar in hanc potuit iuris habere nihil.
He could lay bodies in fetters and chains; but the Apostles were endued with
power to fetter, and enchaine, or to enlarge souls from fetters of sin, quas
Satan alligauit, which Satan bound. And are our beaux Esprits of the new
Academy scandalized at this? We will give them yet further matter of scandal,
quite pluck out the ey's of Envy, if she have any left.

For of the Church, and of the Governors, and Doctors of the Church, we read
the Prophesy of Esaias fulfilled in the Catholic Church: Qui sunt istiqui ficut
nubes volant, and sicut columbae ad fenestras suas? who are these that fly as
Cloud's, and as Doves to their window's? Me expectant insulae and naues in
maris principio, vt adducam filios tuos de long. For the Iland's expect me,
and the ship's of the sea, that I may bring thy sons from far. But that
which fallows makes for the temporal end's of the teachers, those flying
Cloud's etc. who bring to their nest's the spoils of their Conuertites or
Proselytes, together with them argentum eorum, and aurum eorum etc. their
silver and their gold.

Thus we read how the first Christians sold their whole estates; laid down the
prices of all at the feet of the Apostles, that they might from thenceforth
receive, as from God, by the hands of their Gouernor's, the supplies of their
necessities. But was not this a gainful trading to the Apostles? And were not
their fortunes fairly improoued? Could they ever have so enrich't themselves
by fishing? Luc. 5.
Praeceptor per totam noctem laborantes nihil cepimus; laboring this whole
night we have taken nothing. And were not those nets well sold? Nor were they
content with part (O scandal of Socinians!) they would have all, and punished
exemplarly some who reserved part of their money's to themselves for their
private uses.

But yet, let them hear further, to their greater scandal, Rumpatur, quisquis
rumpitur inuidia: Let him burst, who swell's with envy. Et aedificabunt filij
peregrinorum muros tuos; Jsa. Ibid.
and reges eorum ministrabunt tibi: and the Children of strangers shall build
thy wall's; and their Kings shall minister to thee. Behold the fruit and
harvest of their preaching; those (...), word-seeder's, Kings become their
Vassalles; yea and commanded under pain of perdition, to be so. Gens and
regnum quod tibi non seruierit, peribit; the nation and kingdom that shall not
serve thee, shall perish. Et venient ad te curui filij eorum qui humiliauerunt
te, the posterity of those who have persequnted thee, shall come unto thee upon
their knees. And yet more plainly and fully, and suges lac gentium, and mamilla
regum lactabere: and thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and thou shall
be nursed with the milk of Kings. Had these happy changes and fortunes appeared
to this Advocate, as probably possible to be achieued by him, if he should
become one of those teacher's of such doctrines, I am verily persuaded he would
have made one, yea and a very busy one; and would have flow'ne as fast, as any
of his fellow-pigeons, to a benefice. Howsoever, they who know him well, will
not easily believe he disliked such points of Catholic doctrine, because they
carry before them a face of gain, to accrue to the teachers of them; nor will
they believe he is so very an enemy of gainful doctrines, who know how many
Irons of thrift he has in the fire at once, and some in the water.

A further solution of this Calumny and Fallacy.
SECT. IX.
But now to show more plainly that this pretended scandal is but a fallacious
Calumny, I deny, that points of doctrine are therefore to be disliked, much
more to be reputed scandalous, because they make for the temporal end's of the
teachers, if they be not made for those ends; if those temporals be only the
material not formal ends, that is, not the ends intended by the author of
those doctrines, but only shadow's or concomitants of the true and formal end.
Otherwise these tender Socinian consciences might as well stumble at the choice
of Solomon, who having the choice given him of what he would wish, made choice
of wisdom: optaui, and datus est mihi sensus, inuocaui and venit in me
spiritus sapientiae. I wished and sense was given me, I inuok't and the spirit
of wisdom came into me. O, but did he thrive by this gift? venerunt autem
mihi omnia bona pariter cum illa; all felicities, all good things came to me
together with it.

Nay to seek the kingdom of heaven makes for the temporal ends of the
seekers: Primum quaerite regnum Dei etc. first seek the kingdom of heaven and
all these other commodities shall be added as the over plus. Will he reprehend
the seeking of the kingdom of God for this? or the forsaking temporal estates
to follow Christ in a higher way of perfection, because the gain and return
is a hundred fold in this life? and therefore makes for the temporal ends of
such men? And are these our beaux Esprits? Are these the learned new Academy,
that cannot make this distinction between making, and being made? or are they
rather indeed, en bon Francois, in plain English, dull and earthly Spirits?
and (which least they would hear) not Wit's, but silly Fellows? Who if they
could once resolve upon a God, or any such, not only omnipotent, but free
agent, who could do and give what he pleased; should rather betake themselves
with Solomon (who had, I think, as good a natural wit, as the best of the new
Academy, and showed a much better in making such a choice, and in the
acknowledgment of his own weakness and want) betake themselves, I say, to
their prayers, that they might receive the spirit of Wisdom from heaven;
without which spirit, no marvel if they have no palate of heaven, nor (as
being indeed merely Animals) any relish of spiritual things: But neither
indeed do they believe there is any such thing, as holy spirit; Et quem non
inuenit vsquam
Esse putat nusquam.


Concerning different opinions among Catholics, the Advocates Fallacy and
Calumny.
SECT. X.
AFter all these Rhetorical pretermissions of temptations into (so he writes)
and principles of Irreligion and Atheism in Catholic doctrine, as
considerations which he will seem to esteem of less moment, thereby to
prepare your expectation to some more weighty: Only I should desire you (says
he) to consider attentively when you conclude so often from the differences of
Protestants, Pref.
that they have no certainty of any part of their religion etc. Whether you do
not that, which so magisteri ally you direct me not to do, that is, proceed a
destructive way etc.

Ans. Now this Pretermissio^ is no figure, but a fraud and Fallacy; for his
adversary directs him, not to proceed a mere destructive way. Now this
restrictiue particle (mere) fraudulently left out is no figure, but a fallacy
of pretermission; and makes indeed a kind of Nonsense in his Adversary, where
there is a good and plain sense. For whosoever will throw down the doctrine
of another, must proceed a destructive way; but he who does nothing else but
throw down and builds nothing, as he who does nothing but overthrow doctrines
of religion, and holds nothing prositiue in religion, at least in coherence
of his doctrine, he proceeds a mere destructive way; and a mere Antimachus he
is; an Ismael, son of Agar, secundum carnem genitus, a child of the flesh;
and therefore (as every Socinian does) persequutes the freeborn child, the
issue of the Spirit; but what says the Scripture? Eijce ancillam, and filium
eius, non enim erit haeres filius ancillaecum filio liberae; cast forth the
handmaid, and her son, for the son of the handmaid, shall not coherit
which the son of the freewoman: Indeed, one house could not hold them. Why?
because Ismael was terrae homo, a fierce conditioned man, manus eius contra
omnes, and manus omniam contra eum; his hands against all men, and all men's
hands against him; which is in effect to say, he proceeded a mere destructive
way. And I pray you, is not a Socinian such an Ismael? whose hands are up
against all Professors of Christianity, since his reasons, and principles tend
(as his Adversary charge him) to the overthrow of all Christian Profession,
no less then of Catholic religion? And does he not deserve that all
Christian hands should be employed about his ears, with unanimous consent to
extinguish such a Giant?

But, does the son of Sarai proceed a mere destructive way? he dares not say
it, as bold as he is: therefore he only says, he proceeds a destructive way;
wherein he does well, and as every confutant must do, otherwise he does nothing.

Pref. But his adversaries Arguments (so he retorts) objected against the
Protestant tend to the overthrow of all religion; because (says he) as you
argue, Protestants differ in many things, therefore they have no certainty of
religion; so an Atheist, or a Sceptique may conclude as well; Christians and
the Professors of all religions differ in many things, therefore they have no
certainty of any thing.

Ans. I know well, these are the ordinary Socinian Topickes, (which this man
has by heart), whence they are wont to argue themselves out of all religion.
And it is a very Socinian and Atheistical argument indeed, that is, a foolish
one; as foolish as this; Every man is a man, therefore no man is a Christian.
For though every man be a man, and therefore subrect to error, some more, some
less, some in one thing, some in another, whence difference of opinions
arises, and uncertainty is concluded; yet some men are Christians, and as
such, in matters defined to be of faith, not differing, nor uncertain.

They should deduce thus if they would conclude to the purpose they intend:
Christians in points of faith, defined by their Church to be such (the
definition of which Church they hold as their rule of faith) disagree among
themselves, therefore they have no certainty in points of religion; then the
solution is ready: I deny that such Christians, who rely on that authority of
the Church defining, as all Catholic Christians do, disagree in any point of
religion so defined; therefore this inference of uncertainty from the
differences of doctrines in points of faith falls heavy upon the backs of all
Sectaries, nor can be shaken off; but touches not the Catholic. Whence they
should conclude if they were indeed wise and gallant, either the Catholic, or
none: Not as they are wont, there is difference of opinions and doctrines among
Professors of Christianity, between Lutherans and Caluinists etc. and the
Catholic from them all; therefore there is no certainty; therefore no
religion at all; and therefore lastly, I will be an Atheist, or Socinian.

Whereas if these Sceptiques would be feriously sceptique indeed, that is
serious inquisitors of truth, and not make it their whole life and business ever
to seek and never to find, like those sylly and sinful women of whom S.
Paul, semper discentes, and numquam ad scientiam veritatis peruenientes, always
learning and never arriving to the knowledge of truth; nay if they did not set
down for their last arrest, despair of ever knowing, with those foolists
Sceptiques and Pyrhonians; lastly if they could be persuaded that they hear
what they hear, or see what they see; certainly they might see and discern a
vast disparity between these two kinds of differences; the differences of
Sectaries among themselves in most substantial points of faith; and those of
Catholics discepting and discussing difficulties occurring, as yet vndecreed
and undetermined by authority; as children of truth never ceasing to inquire
after it where soever it be; and ready to embrace it when they find it,
proposed unto them, either in the obscure light of infallible Authority, or
that of vision in Eternity.

Calumny concerning Transubstantiation, and the B. Trinity.
SECT. XI.
ANother maine tentation and principle of Irreligion he has taken pains to
transport out of Arabia, this son of Agar; where he has met with his fellow
Atheist, or Socinian.

Pref. Again, I should desire you to tell me (says he) ingenuously, whether
it be not probable, that your portentuous doctrine of Transub stantiation
ioyn'ed with your forementioned persuasian of, no Papist, no Christian, has
brought a great many others as well as himself to Auerroes his resolution;
quandoquidem Christiani adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis:
since Christians adore that which they eat, let my soul go with the
Philosophers.

Answ. I think his Adversary will not spare to tell him ingenuously, that he
is persuaded, a very small matter may bring a Socinian to be as very an
Atheist, or Infidel, as that Arabicke Leeche Auerroes: and in phrasing the
doctrine of Transubstantiation portentuous, he shows himself brought as
near an Infidel, as a Jew can be, with whose spirit he seems so ingenuously
to sympathize; quomodo potest hic nobis carnem suam dare ad manducandum? how
can this man give us his body to eat? And yet even hence (by the way) out of
this very testimony of Auerroes, you may perceive that this doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or howsoever the real and corporal Presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, so, as it was conceived to be truly eaten, was the
common doctrine of Christians of those times, not only of the Roman Church.

Concerning which doctrine, and those words of Christ, Nisi manducaueritis etc.
it is probably thought that Judas was one of those, who said, durus est hic
sermo etc. This is a hard or harsh language etc. Yet furthermore those words of
our Savior at his last supper, when he instituted this Sacrament, accipite and
manducate, hoc est enim corpus meum: take and eat, for this is my body, are so
clear for Transubstantiation, that this very Advocate is known to have
retorted, after his manner, upon occasion of some one pressing him to know his
opinion concerning the Trinity, that there is no so clear testimony of
Scripture for the Trinity, as for Transubstantiation. Which answer of his,
joined with that which he avouches so often in this Pamphlet, that the
Scripture, not the Church, is the rule whereby to determine points of faith,
makes the B. Trinity no less portentuous, then Transubstantiation; since it
is certain there is no mystery of faith more seemingly repugnant, and more
apparently subuerting the prime and most received axioms of natural Reason
and Philosophy, then this of the B. Trinity.

And is not this a portentuous discourse of this Advocate, and a prodigious
Calumny, trenching so deeply upon the Deity it self? And is not he, the
author of this, a very Portent, and Prodigy, under the guise of Christian
profession, worthy to be shipped for some unknown Land, where his breath may
infect none but savage creatures? nor make the hair of Christian Professors
stand stiff by hearing such blasphemies, from his mouth? as I have heard some
one say, his hair did, who may one day write his Character, if he have not
already done it, in his very wittily Symbolizing Sceptique.

Mean while, if this Auerreist have made the like Arabic resolution, to trust
his soul with Philosophers rather the^ with such Christians; and if he make a
proper choice of Philosophers, and suit himself fitly, he may then in very
good consequence of doctrine and conformity to his principles, sing every
month In noua fert animus. No man will expect his Pithagorique soul in one
shape of Religion long: Fiet enim subito Sus horridus, atraque Tigris,
Squamosusque Drace, and fulua ceruice Leana:
Aut acrem flamma sonitum dabit, atque ita vinclis
Excidet, aut in aquas tenues delapsus abibit.
And then, Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? With what knot shall I hold
fast this form-varying Proteus? Marry thus it follows: Sed quanto ille magis
formas se vertet in omnes
Tanto, Nate, magis contend tenacia vincla,
Donec talis erit mutato corpore, qualem
Videris incepto tegeret cum lumina somno.
For you shall have him one while Arian, another while Nestorian, now Pelagian,
now Hussite, now Caluinian, then Arminian etc. But only hold him fast
throughout all his changes, yea the more he transforms and transfigures draw
the knot harder, until at length after many and many a Metamorphosis, he come
about to the very same shape, wherein first you took him sleeping in Socinian
security; only waking in his nimble fancy, wherein he shapes as many
discolored forms of Religion, as there are colors appearing in the Rainbow,
or the Peacock's train; wherewith he plays according to the gaiety of his
humor and frisk's from Religion to Religion, like a squirrill from bough to
bough.

His fallacious calumny concerning Prudentiall motives.
SECT. XII.
HIs immediately ensuing demand, Whether our requiring men upon only probable
and prudentiall motives to yield a most certain assent unto things in human
reason impossible etc. Preface.
be not a likely way to make considering men scorn our Religion; is a
fraudulent Calumny as he would have it understood; which is, that we exact this
most certain assent out of Motives only probable and prudentiall, as the
principal cause, or motive of such assent.

Nor could he be ignorant, (if he deserve the opinion I have conceived of him)
that these motives are proposed and understood by Catholics, as persuasiue
and inductiue only, or as preuious despositions to faith, which is the gratuite
and supernatural gift of God; and therefore cannot flow from any humanely
voluntary, or natural, or sublunary Cause: yet he who made all things ex
nihilo sui, of nothing, or of no preexiste^t Being in themselves, and can
therefore even in reason more probably make any thing of some thing; qui fecit
medium fornacis quasi ventum roris flantem; who made thefiery furnace
refrigeratiue to the martyrs, howsoever this were done; qui fecit lutum ex
sputo etc. who contrived eye-light out of a plaster of dust and spitle; who
made wine of water; and the like stupendous effect's not contained in the
natural force or efficiency of such causes; can likewise serve himself of
inferior means and dispositions toward the producing of some supernatural
effect, in the soul of man; or assume them, and join with them, or them with
himself, to such effects.

When therefore, these probable or prudentiall Motives attentively considered,
have wrought in the souls of men first an opinion, that such a doctrine may be
true; then perhaps a liking of the doctrine, out of such motives: after this,
the spirit of God inwardly concurring and moving along with these motives, a
kind of pious inclination or willingness to embrace such a doctrine, if they
could be persuaded it were true; and this, notwithstanding all reasons and
countercheck's of flesh and blood or whatsoever temporal regards to the
contrary, through a desire to serve God, as he would be served; it is then the
immediate work of Gods grace, to endue, and as it were, to inform such a
soul with divine faith; by heavenly endowment the understanding becomes
eleuate and raised to a height, above the sublunary sphere of natural reason,
to a certain proportion with divine and supernatural objects; by this
enabled, as it were, with vndazeled eyes of Eagles, to look upon the sun.

Now when they say, the assent to the Conclusion cannot be of greater firmity
or certainty, then is the certainty, force, or firmity of the Premises, which
are supposed only probable and prudentiall motives; they sever the Premises,
and take them as considered in themselves alone, not as they are indeed, in
their Elevation and Conjunction with the supernatural power of grace.

For when they say, the Conclusion is qualified by the Premises, weak if the
Premises be weak etc. nor only so, but even the weaker of the two, leads the
way in this mark of reason and discourse, and the Conclusion follows that,
not the stronger, which it cannot follow passibus aequis, with equal stepp's,
and which therefore must employ no more strength then the weaker, that the
Conclusion may follow both. This is true when the Premises have only an
univocal and natural influence into the Conclusion: that is; when they impart
only that force or value to the Conclusion, which they hold of their own, and
proper in right and title of nature or naturality: but where their in^^uence
is, as I may say, supernatural, dispositiue to a highter form or Act, the
tenure whereof is only arbitrary, and as it were at will of the Lord of
Virtues, due upon no consideration of any natural exigence or Covenant; and is
therefore an Equivocal influence, as of causes inflowing indeed not only by
their own force but in virtue of their principal cause and agent, which is
supernatural: then in all good reason they concnrre, by proeuring an effect
proportionate to that principal and supernatural cause; nor improportioned to
themselves, as considered in that conjunction and sublimation.

Neither ought this to seem strange in supernatural influxions of causes; for
even in the course of nature, and in good Physiologie, an accident which is a
far inferior nature, may produce a substance, as heat (yea even then when it
is separate from the substance of fire) produces fire: the reason; because
although as heat, or as an accident, it holds an inferior place in nature,
yet as it is the naturally-ioynt instrument of fire, in virtute causae
principalis, in, or by virtue of the fire, it produces fire: so likewise those
motives only probable, though as such unable of themselves, by reason of their
improportion, yet in virtue of their principal agent, or prime moouer (which
is the holy Spirit operating and moving in the soul) and conioyn'd and
sublimed by that prime mouer or agent, they may, and do dispose to the
producing of an infallible assent: but of this point he will offer a more
proper occasion to speak hereafter.

But now, this is some part of the Calumny, that we require things
contradictory and impossible to be done: Pref.
and is this indeed an impossible requisite, that we require a most certain
assent to beyielded to things in human reason impossible? for with this he
charge us.

Answ. To which I answer, it is falsely supposed by him, that those things
whereunto we require a most certain assent, that is, an assent of divine
faith, are in human reason impossible. For if they be true, they are not in
human reason impossible, though they have the semblance or appearance of
impossibility in humane reason. No truth is untruth to human reason; therefore
no truth is impossible in human reason; for I suppose that distinction, of
Truth Philosophical, and Truth Theological, many years since expuls't the
University. For truth, in the whole latitude, being the object of reason and
understanding, it cannot be that any truth should imply impossibility, or
repugnance to human reason or understanding; no more then that any thing
corporally visible, can inuolue contradiction or impossibility to be seen by a
corporal eyesight. Therefore if they be vntruth's, let them be conuinc't to
be vntruth's; if they hold those things to be impossible in human reason, which
are above human reason, no marvel if this Advocate believe not the B.
Trinity. He will say, perchance, now he belieues it; but how? for I ask him;
Does he yield a most certaineassent, that is, an assent of divine faith, to the
B. Trinity, as that God is one God in three really distinct persons? If he
believe it not with certainty of divine faith, he belieues it not as a
Christian: If he do believe with that certainty of faith, then he yield's a
most certain assent to a thing as impossible in humane reason, as any other
point of faith required to be believed with a most certain assent. But why do
I ask him? It appears even by these words, as well as by his words of mouth;
uttered upon the forementioned occasion, that he indeed belieues not the B.
Trinity, no nor Incarnation, nor Resurrection, nor any such thing impossible,
in his style, to humane reason, with any such certainty of assent, as makes a
Christian, and distinguishes him from an Infidel, or Socinian.

It appears furthermore by what he writes in this place, that he would have it
sufficient, to believe such mysteries, with a lower degree of Faith. Now either
this lower degree of faith, is divine faith or no. If divine, then the assent
arising from such faith, is a most certain assent; or an assent with certainty
excluding all deliberate positive doubt concerning the object of faith. If that
lower degree be not divine faith, then it is not only a Iower degree of faith,
as differing from some other divine faith, only in degree of certainty, or
secundum magis and minus, according to more or less certainty, as heat
differ's from heat, and more white from less white; but it is different in the
very species or kind of faith; as divine faith, from human faith, which differ
even in definition and Essence of faith: Therefore the Catholic requiring
divine faith, and teaching, not, this Iower degree of faith, but this indeed,
no divine faith to be insufficient for the acquiring Eternal salvation;
requires no more then the Apostle does, where he says, fine fide impossible
est placere Deo, without faith it is impossible to please, or serve God;
meaning that faith, which in that very place is by him described to be,
sperandarum subctantia rerum, argumentum non apparentium; the substance of
things to be hoped, the argument of things not appearing, which no man can deny
to be divine faith. Now to require such faith, (besides the necessity of it)
cannot possibly move any scorn to religion, Pref.
but is rather most fit and congruous to beget a more honorable conceit, and
due Veneration of divine mysteries in faithful souls. For those other, who
out of an excess of an Hyperbolicall Pride, will seem to scorn whatsoever
stand's without their sphere; or, because they are not, will suppose there are
no Eagles; we can expect no less from them. For this indeed is that verbum
crucis, pereuntibus stultitia; that word of the cross, folly and matter of
scorn to those who perish; 1. Cor. 1.
ijs autem qui salui fiunt, id est nobis (says S. Paul) virtus Dei; but to
them that are saved, that is to us, it is the Power of God. And he who tell's
them (which this Advocate takes so hainously that he makes it some part of his
Apology for Atheism) that they were as good not believe at all, as believe
with a lower degres of faith, Pref.
meaning human faith only; says no more but true, that humane faith can never
aspire to the purchase of supernatur all hopes; and that therefore, in regard
of everlasting Salvation, if it grow no higher, it becomes fruitles and lost
labor.

As if a general pardon were proclaimed for all such who should make their
personal appearance in such a Court or Palace before the king, upon such a
day, or within such a space of time; a man should say, it were as good stay at
home, as to go to the Court only, and never enter or appear in presence of
the king; because the pardon was granted to such personal appearance made, not
to such a journey made: for so likewise Salvation and pardon of sins is
proclaimed and promised to such a faith as should enter those adita, those
sacraries, or treasuries of divine hopes; not to such as cannot, and will not
enter, but stand without, S. Leo, Sermon. 7. de Not.
in the mist of humane reasons, or in the smoke of worldly wisdom, unable to
ascend into that presence of Majesty.

And yet there (forsooth) will they stand by this Aduocat's advise, nor go one
foot further, or higher, then they can see the way in that mist; and will yet
(I think) contest with divine Wisdom, yea and quarrel too, if he vouchsafe
not to come down a degree lower, and pardon them upon equal terms; or show
them some conuincing reason why it should be necessary to clymbe up those
stairs of divine faith; or why they should not sufficiently deserve pardon by
taking so much pains in coming as far as they could upon the plain and
eauen ground of reason; and why his Majesty should annexe unto his pardon, such
impossible and contradictory conditions, as to require a voluntary, and
certain assent, to things in humane reason impossible, that many moderate and
considering men, who would otherwise come readily, and sue forth their pardons,
according to his Proclamation, hearing of these conditions, fly back, and
believe that there is either no such pardon to be expected, and that, this is
but some forged Proclamation; or that surely it is, or should be granted, upon
reasonable terms, and such conditions, as may suit with men's abilities; that
conditions of this impossible and contradictory nature are likely to make
considering men scorn all pardons, and all religion. So they with their lower
degree of faith; where I leave them disputing with God at the foot of the
stairs, and proceed. For thus is follows.

The Church compared with Scripture.
SECT. XIII.
Pref. LAstly, I should desire you to consder, whether your pretense, that
there is no good ground to believe Scripture, but your Churches infallibility,
joined with your pretending no ground for this, but some text's of Scripture,
be not a fair way to make them that understand themselves, believe neither
Church nor Scripture?

Answ. This Cavil or Calumny we might retort as he is wont, almost totidem
verbis, as thus; Whether their pretense that there is no good ground or rule
whereby to determine what is truth in doctrine of faith, but Scripture, joined
with their pretending no ground for this, but some text's of Scriptures,
together with every man's natural reason interpreting it, which is as errant a
guide, and diverse, as the head's of men; be not a fair way to make men that
understand themselves, believe neither their doctrine, nor their Scripture? But
what is this to him, who cares not how his argument reflects upon himself, so
it wound the Catholic? who will be content like another Samson, or Eleazar to
be crush't to death, under the ruin of his Adversaries: Trahere cum pereas
inuat, -- he is content that the ship be shot through and through, wherein he
sails with the Catholic; nay, this would be his glory, Solus nequis
occidere, nobiscum potes. But what, if we be deceived all this while? What if
he be not the man, Achylles himself, but a Patroclus in his guise, and
fighting in his armor? while he, with his Socinian Myrmidons, stands aloof
out of shot; or if he fight, and fall with Protestancy, he will revive and
revenge himself in Socinianisme? What, I say, if all this arguing for
Protestancy against the Catholic, be nothing else but a cunning undermining
to blow up both? Or what, if this Switzer in religion, fight only for pay? To
day for Holland, to morrow perhaps for Spain? but if the war and service
grow hot, he willl serve neither, he will return home, and sleep safe, in the
new Academy, and in a whole skin. Notwithstanding because this arrow howsoever
flying from heart, or hand only, for Religion, or for Pay, being shot against a
rock, not entering there, may chance to glance, and wound some stander by, who
is neither rock, nor rocky; it will not be amiss to fore-arme such, by
fore-warning them.

It is false then, which he presumes Gratis, that we pretend no other ground,
for the infallibility of the Church, but some texts of Scriptures; nor is our
doctrine so incoherent to it self, but as before, and without Scripture, the
Church could truly say, Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis, it has seemed
good to the holy Ghost and to us: So if no Scriptures were now, the same Church
guided by the same holy Ghost, might truly say, Visum est spiritui sancte and
nobis: yea and this very doctrine that the same holy Ghost, Spirit of truth,
speaks in the Church, we are taught not only by this and those other texts of
holy Scripture, but a priori, by the Church, upon whose credit and testimony we
receive this Scripture.

For thus I urge: Where was this Scripture, where the whole Gospel, before it
was written? Was it not first in the Church, in the souls and spirits of the
Apostles and disciples of Christ, wherein they were written by the fingar of the
holy Ghost? nay the presence of the holy Ghost (says S. Austin) was that
Scripture, or Scriptures written in their hearts. De spir. and lit. c. 21.
Austin) was that Scripture, or Scriptures written in their hearts. Quid sunt
leges Dei seriptae in cordibus, nisi ipsa prasentia spiritus sancti qui est
digitus Dei? What are law's of God written in hearts of men, but the presence of
the holy Ghost, who is the fingar of God? And this Scripture of hart's, was
foretold by the Prophet Hieremy: Cap. 31.
Post dies illos (after those days, that is, in the time of the Gospel,)
dabolegem meam in visceribus eorum, and in cord eorum scibam eam: I will give
my law in their bowels, and write it in their heart. There was then the
Scripture, the Word of God, the Gospel: There, I say, as in the Autographon,
the authentic, the original instrument; out of that authentic and
original, transcribed and copied out in parchment's or papers. If then, every
transcript, or copy retain's the credit of a true copy or transcript, so far
forth as it is found agreeing with the original; it follows, that whatsoever
we receive upon the authority of Scripture, we receive it first from, and upon
the credit of the Church: And what we read, or understand as Scripture, is to
be compared with that authentic, least it may prove a false copy, which we
presume to be Scripture, or the word of God.

Since then the holy Ghost, even to the consummation of the world, resideth in
the Church of Christ, according to his promise; it follows evidently, that
the word of God is in the Church, as in the Authentic and Original, but in
writings of ink and paper, only as in Copies and Transcripts. What madness
then, what gross absurdity is this, to believe the Copy rather then the
Original? Or with what sense can any man pretend to understand this Copy or
Transcript, as written with ink and paper, better then by the living voice of
the Author himself of that anthentique and original, the Church? Since in the
Church of Christ, and only there, resides the Author of holy Scriptures,
perpetually and successinely writing them, and the verities contained in them,
in the hart's and souls of Christians, members of that Church, as they are
united by unity of one faith, and charity with their head Christ Jesus.

Whence it follows furthermore, that to say we receive the Scriptures from the
Church, but not the sense and meaning of them, is to speak contradictories.
For both the meaning and understanding of Scriptures is in the Church, and only
there with certainty and infallibility of interpretation, where that spirit
dwel's, which alone can interpret infallibly, his own authentic. And
besides, not the letter written, but the sense and meaning of the writing, or
the Verities therein contained, are the Scripture or word of God. Therefore if
they receive not these from the Church, they receive not the holy Scriptures
thence; but a mute and dead writing, a riddle, to be read according to each
man's fancy and conjecture.

For as no man knows what is hidden in the heart and soul of man, but the
spirit which is in man: so no man can probably presume to understand those
hidden Verities, and that wisdom of God, occultat am in mysterio, hidden in
mystery, howsoever appearing in words, but the spirit of God. First therefore
Christians are to inquire where that spirit is the Author of Scripture, and the
door by which we must enter into the Scripture; (for he that presumes to
enter another way, as by the way of human reason and discourse, Philosophy, or
the like, as by a posterne, is worthily suspected to be a thief in Religion;)
it is he, who opens the sense and understanding of men, extending it to a
more large sphere of capacity, which natural reason shu^'s up and confines
within the narrow bounds of natural principles, and discourse upon them.

We are to enquire, I say, (if we are yet to seek) where this spirit resides^
and since we treat this business with such as pretend to be vmpir'd by
Scriptures, to them we say, as Christ to the Jews, Joh. 5.
scrutamini scripturas, quia vos putatis in ipsis vitam aeterna^ habere; Search
the Scripture, for there you think to have life eternal. Where that spirit of
truth was promised to continue by our Savior, there certainly it is to be
sought, and found, and only there. There I say, where Christ would be nobiscum
omnibus diebus vsque ad consummationem saculi; to continue with us to the
worlds end, from that time, omnibus diebus, all the day's of posterity; not by
times, or inter-spaces, or intermission of his presence, nor with them alone to
whom he then personally directed his speech, who were not to continue all the
day's of future ages, unto the worlds end; (and which could not be understood
of them, as after their death invested with immortality, and in possession of
eternity, wherein there is neither plurality of days, nor consummation of
time;) but with their progeny, and the offspring of their Faith, who were to
believe in Christ by them: and whom he joined with his Apostles in his prayer
for them, Joh. 17.
(and sure his prayer was heard) vt and ipsi vnumsint etc. That they also may
be one, by unity of faith and charity, vt credat mundus, that the world may
believe; not this age of men alone, but in that sense wherein he commanded
that the Gospel should be preached to every creature, and believe: What?
quiae tu me misisti; that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Enquire then, what
Society of men that is, who in succession to the Apostles, and from their times
in all ages, have taught, and still do teach, that Christ is the son of God;
who, even in this last age of us and our Fathers, have taught this, to the East
and West of Indians etc. and when you have found that Society of Christian
professor's, when you have found out the sun, in the clearest midday, know
that you have found the Church of Christ, and with that the word of God, the
Scriptures, the Gospel, together with the true and infallible interpretation
of these.

For this Society of men is indeed Epistola Christi, the Epistle, yea and
Gospel of Christ, 2. Cor. 3^
written non atramento sed spiritu Dei viui, not with ink, but with the spirit
of the living God; and this Scripture is that qua legitur ab omnibus hominibus,
which all men read; not only such who can read the Scripture written in Hebrew,
Grecke or Latin etc. but even such as cannot read at all. For as this Scripture
is written not with ink, but with the spirit, in the hearts of Christians; so
it appears not in the exterior traict's of Characters, but in the exterior
profession, and lives, and Christian virtues of Christians: There, I say, it is
read even by such, who know no letters.

For as in the creation of Nature, that creating and conseruing power of God
omnipotent, his wisdom also, and goodness are imprinted in all the works of
nature, and all creatures from time to time, together with their being,
receive that stamp and impression, which they exhibit to be read by all
intellectual natures, in one most legible language of nature, common to all
nations; according as it is said, Caeli enarrant gloriam Dei etc. So in
regeneration, and in the progeny of Grace the author of Grace Christ Jesus, is
read and understood in his work, and word of Grace, his creatures of grace,
which is the Church of Christ; which by that spiritually and supernaturally
creating power, receive the print and characters of Christ Jesus, and his
truth, in their hart's and souls first, which afterward's they manifest in
their lives and professions, and much more in the death's; whereby they
proclaim him, and the truth of his doctrine to all ages, to all nations, with
the last and lowdest voice, of blood; like to that voice of our dying Lord, who
crying with a loud voice gave up the Ghost. O tooto dull and deaf ears, which
the singar of God has never opened, which cannot hear a voice so loud; and
those blind eyes, which read not those letters, that most legible Scripture of
Catholic truth, written in the blood of all ages, since Christ redeemed the
world with his; and those inominate, and unlucky birds of night, who flying the
trial of the day shining in the Church, as in the Tabernacle of the Sun, run
into covert, and obscurity of dark Scriptures, the common rendeuous, and
retrait of all Heresies; which they do no less absurdely and preposterously,
then as if in question of right and title grounded in law, they would appeal
from the suruiuing lawmakers, to his written laws; as they would say, give us
your Law's in writing, and then leave them to us, we will not learn of you the
understanding of them: for so, this euer-suruiuing Lawmakers is the holy Ghost,
presiding in the Church in all judgments and questions of faith; from whom
there never can be any just appeal; the Scriptures his laws which are written
primarily and principally, in the souls and hart's and understandings of this
Church. In which Scriptures, no Heretic, or Alien can pretend any right or
title of interest at all, no authority nor ability of understanding them.

Therefore although we debate right and truth by testimony of Scriptures,
against the unjust usurpers of them, to take from them those stoln'e weapons,
and recover them to the true titler's, as even in this claim of infallibility
of the Church: yet this truth we learn not immediately of the Scripture
written, but receive it a priori, from the original of the holy Ghost, written
in that one, composed of many, homogenious by faith and charity; that one
soul, I say, and unanimous spirit of the holy Church of all ages. For as in
our natural body, one and the same in diuisible soul, informs, and
enlifeneth the daily new acceding and aggenerate matter of nourishment: so this
spirit of truth informs, as it were, and animateth with the spirit of Grace
and truth, not only the whole mystical body of Christ all at once, or once for
all, but successively every acceding and newborn member of the Church.

As therefore in process of natural growth, we do not properly learn that we
are reasonable ereatures; but by the very having a reasonable soul, and the
use thereof, we know it: so Catholics do not properly learn, that the
Catholic Church is inerrant, or infallible, but by being Catholics we
believe it. For of this truth I do not see, but in a true sense I might say;
Est hac non scripta, sed natalex: quam non didicimus accepimus, legimus; verum
ex natura ipsa arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus: ad quam non docti, sed facti;
non instituti, sed imbuti sumus: A truth not written for us, but borne in us;
which he have not learned, nor acquired, nor read in books; but by a second
nature of Grace we are instantly possessed of, we have sucked it, and expressed it;
for which we have been made, not taught; endued with it, not schooled to it.
Therefore I should not doubt to avouch, though the whole rabble of flesh and
blood, and heresy reclaim, that it is (understanding it in equality of
proportion) no less innate and connaturall to a Catholic man, as such to
believe that the Catholic Church is endued with infallible authority, then it
is natural to a reasonable man, as such, to know he is endued with a
reasonable soul.

Therefore as he should be thought an absurd and senseles man, who should go
about to persuade a man by reason, that he has not a reasonable soul: so is
he worthily judged an impertinent, prattling Sophist, who endeauours to argue a
Catholic out of his belief of a Catholic infallible Church: which stone
notwithstanding, I know this Advocate never cease to roll, and I could wish
he would reflect, how he may have deserved that Sisyphian penance, howsoever
thus I understand, Saxum sudat voluendo, neque proficit hilum. He rowles the
stone, and sweats for his pains: not those text therefore of Scripture, which
this Sisyphus presumes, but the visible Church, the spouse of Christ, his
purchase of blood; not a lease for term of years according to the tenure of
servile Agar, and her issue, which became void: but an everlasting in
heritance, according to the tenure of Covenant made with the progeny of Sarai,
the house of Israel, and the house of Judah, an vnabrogable and term'les decree,
firm and durable as the constitutions of Nature, Hierem. 32. In quam traditi
estis etc. Romans 6.17.
as the course of sun and moon. This spouse, I say, has delivered us this
truth; or rather has borne and bred us in it, we have sucked this milk from
her breast, (...), rational and fraudlesse milk, conformable to reason, though
above it; and therefore consummating reason and extolling it; food for the
Children of Obedience, vt in eo crescamus, that we may grow by that in stature
of grace, and Christian perfection; from which breasts and milk of Christian
simplicity, no errant Sophister shall be of power to remove us; though he
attempt it never so confidently or impudently, by adiuring us, Thus he adjured
a certain Catholic.
as we will answer at the last day, (arrainged, I trow, at the Socinian Bar,
to be tried by certain select Judges, or a grand Jury of Pyrrhonian
Sceptiques, or the new Academy, who will never pronounce any arrest, or
sentence at all:) but what? to suspect the doctrine of the Catholic Church,
to question her authority; to call those so many Doctors, the starr's and
light's of all Christian ages, who have always taught and supposed this truth,
so many martyrs who have obsigned it with their blood; to call them all to
their answer, forsooth, for their holding or teaching this doctrine; and to
give this Switzer a meeting* and conuincing, so that he leave prating; which
done, they may return whence they came, and he to write the Conference, and
pen his own Paan, with an i^ triumph; tu moraris aureos curru^.

Calumnies against Protestants in general, imputed to his Adversary, proved to
be the Calumnies of this Advocate, obiecting them.
SECT. XIIII.
HEnce now he undertakes to purge the Protestants in general from Calumnies,
by which he pretend's they are highly injured by his Adversary; in which
purgative way, I will take the pains to go along with him, with hope to lead
him after a while into the illuminatiue, wherein he may see his own Calumnies
really and subiectiuely inexistent in himself, while he labors to show them
in others, in whom they are imputatiuely only, or, as falsely fancied by him:
but by this means, you shall have him perpetually in Calumnies and Fallacies;
for where he finds them not, he makes them: which I will so note in the pursuit
of his discourse, that I will make no choice, but take them up as they offer
themselves in his own order of prosequution; to the end it may appear, that
whenever I shall cease to pursue him, I do it not for want of further matter
of the like nature, in the remnant of his Volume; but rather for want of
patience in my self, nor without cause, fearing it in the reader. For I
confess a writer more pregnant in this kind of plenty, or lying more open to
exceptions and reprehensions, I have never yet found any; notwithstanding if
part of these which I shall note for Fallacies or Calumnies, may seem
perchance not altogether so notorious as to deserve so black and foul a mark;
yet he has given me a Precedent in himself, to call a Calumny whatsoever I
think untruly objected.

But yet I will not range so wildly, nor indeed so far outcompasse the true
notions and significations of words, as this Advocate every where does; but I
will call a Calumny a false crime objected, or a false reproach, especially
amplyfied and exacerbated after a reproachful and Calumnious manner. As even
this immediately following in his Preface, where he notes for Calumny these
words of his Adversary; Cap. 2^
The very doctrine of Protestants, if it be followed closely, and with
coherence to it self, must of necessity induce Socinianisme. This, if it be a
true charge, is no Calumny; it should therefore have been proved untrue, which
this Champion neither does, nor can do. But what he says. Fallacy!
I will briefly gather up, if first I shall have given you notice, of one
piece of Fallacy, of which he serves himself very often; which is to conceal
and pass over in deep silence, what most concerns him to take notice of, as
though there were no such thing.

With whom therefore I would expostulate in few words, Tantumne est abs re tua
otijtibi, aliena vt cures? do your own occasions permit you so much leisure,
as you can take care of other men's affairs? Unless you will answer me,
perhaps, since you are fallen back from the Catholic, Haeretici nihil a me
alienum puto. As though you held your self interessed, in every quarrel with
the Catholic; for otherwise, what do those Calumnies against Protestants in
general concern you, if you be none of those Protestants with which your
Adversary charge you more then once? and namely in his former Chapter, that
you reject all supernatural infused Faith, that this you profess and
endeavor to prove: which doctrine, without doubt, is your acquittance and
exemption from all those Calumnies against Protestants, no less then from all
Christianity. -- Hoc ad te pertinet Ole. This concerns you; why do you not at
the least deny it? But if you had a scruple to lie, I confess your silence is
so much the more pardonable. But then withal your silence will be interpreted
Confession; for if you be a Christian, and not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, you are obliged to purge your self so far forth, as by denial, to say
you are no Infidel, no Atheist, no Socinian, when you are published in Print
guilty of these crimes; which notwithstanding you cannot truly say, until you
retract and recant that doctrine, of no supernatural infused faith.

And now, men condemn you not, because you make a scruple to deny a truth, or
to lie; but because you make no scruple to be a Socinian: not because, I say,
you will not deny a truth, but because in truth you maintain a lie. Which
makes me verily think, that the more wise and learned heads of your famous
University, had no voice in choosing such a Proctor for Religion, as in a war
against a Christian Nation, they would never approve the calling in the Turk
to aid.

His pretended Calumnies cleared, and retorted.
SECT. XV.
NOw return we to those general Calumnies, as pretended against Protestants,
from which he will with all the power of his zeal, assoile them, and stand in
their defense (with is more then he does for himself) even then and there were
he is assaulted most strongly; so faithful and true will he show himself to
the service he has undertaken; to vindicate the credit, of his (...). his
Rewarders, and Maintainers; for his own, he makes less reckoning, I would he
did; it is not so far spent, but that it is recouerable both to health and
strength again; but now, after he has kis't the ground, thus he onset's.

Pref. Your Calumnies in general are set down in thesewords: The very
doctrine of Protestants if it be followed closely etc. This I say confidently,
and evidently prove by instancing in one error, which may well be termed the
capital and mother Heresy.

Answ. And verily what he says, he does indeed evidently prove to any man who
has eyes, and opens them; for otherwise the blind-man walking in the clearest
sunshine, walk's still in darkness. But his answer to this, forsooth:

Pref. In all which discourse the only true word you speak is: This I say
confidently.

Answ. Thus said, he flings forthwith from the matter, his Adversaries proofs,
quite out of the way? which I observe as his notorious Fallacy, reducible to
that of Aristotle, an affected ignorance of the Elench, the true and Logical
reproof of his Adversaries Argument; his perpetual Sophisme; and as the very
soul of his volume diffused throughout, -- Et magno se corpore miscet. which
otherwise had been as very a Pamplet in bulk, as now in substance.

For what is it to the solution of his Adversaries Argument's to heap so many
Calumnies upon the Pope, and those so many most false and inconsequent
Consequences, what import they to that purpose? But these turning's and
windings are very shift's; much like to those of the fearful Hare, but
cunning; which pursued by the hound's, leap's in here, and out there, with a
hundred trauerses and doublings confounding the sent. Some one perhap's may be
at leisure to track him, and follow him, through all his Meander's, and
Labyrinth's of discourse, until he find the Minotaure, Semibouemque virum,
semiuirumque bouem, that Amphibion, that riddle in Religion, and show him to
the world: he is a copious Argument indeed, a wide field wherein a man may
sooner loose him, then find any right way out. But his Calumnies and Sophismes
are my task; and these yet, which way soever he takes, and in all his
digressions and bypath's he is not unmindful to sow most plentifully: as even
in this barren place, where he new-molds his Adversaries reasons into a
Syllogism, as it pleases himself, such as he can most easily play upon, and
such I dare say, as never came into his Adversaries dream; nor is indeed any
probably deduction from his discourse.

Pref. Who would not laugh at him (says he) that should argue thus: Neither
the Church of Rome, nor any other Church is infallible: Ergo the doctrine of
Arrius, Pelagius, Eutyches, Manichaeus, was true doctrine?

Answ. Thus he laugh's at his own jest, and it is indeed ridiculous, and
ridiculously patcht' up, out of his Adversaries words, where he says, that
from the formentioned capital Heresy all other heresies follow at ease. But
thus indeed he might have collected, had it pleased him to be serious in
amatter of such consequence, rather then to make it his disport.

The perpetually Visible Church of Christ, according to Protestants, is not
infallible: Ergo, for ought they know, or can convince, the doctrine of
Pelagius, Manichaus etc. is true doctrine: and this will prove indeed a solid
and strong Enthimeme; whence a manifest absurdity even in the doctrine of
Protestants is concluded out of this their maine principle, that the Church of
God may ^rre in proposing things untrue to be believed as divinely revealed;
and then further, if this absurdity fall directly, and in true consequence from
that principle, it must necessarily follow according to the very elements of
Logic, that the principle it self is absurd and untrue.

For by that received Axiom, Nothing gives what it has not, though it may
happen that some Premises or Principles may inflow some less absurdity into
the Conclusion, then is contained in their proper notion and efficiency;
because the absurdities hidden in the virtue or force of some principle, are
not discerned in their whole latitude by every understanding, as being not able
to penetrate and sound the Principle; yet a greater absurdity they can never in
flow, be the understanding never so comprehending: it follows then, that this
maine principle of Protestancy is as absurd and untrue, as this Consequent is,
or perhaps much more; and this inference offering it self most readily, and
evidently enough, resulting in his Adversaries discourse from that principle,
this Advocate is so far from impugning it, that he seems to take no notice of
it; but shapes his adversaries Argument in his own fancy, such as he can deal
with all; combats an imaginary Foe, -- Proque viro, nebulam; or like an Ajax in
his rauing fit, wreak's his fury upon a silly sheep instead of an Ulysses. Now
in this mood, while he has hay in his horns, he is an unfortunate man who
comes near him; he lays about him like a Hercules furens; spares not his own
Mother if she come in his way: and because no body comes, he falls most
desperately upon his own Chimera^es; as Fornication to be legitimated
hereafter by the Church, not improbable; and the whole Communion to be taken
away from the Laity.

Ah tender and compassionate Soul! how he zeal's for his brethren! And where
was this pitiful zeal, or zealous pity, when together with
Transubstantiation and real Presence, the whole Communion was taken away, not
only from the Laity, but from the Clergy too: no more remaining in that
Sacrament, then what you may call for at home. Now truly this is a ridiculous
Calumny, not worthy enough to come from a ioynd-stoole, much less from a
divinity Chair; to complain of taking the drink away from the Laity, when
themselves have left neither meat nor drink, neither for Priest, nor Laity.

Howsoever the Catholic Church gives the cup too, no less then the
Protestant; for either in the Protestant cup there is something else then
wine, or nothing else. If nothing but wine, this is also given to our
Catholic Laity when they communicate; i^ somewhat else, what else, the real
Presence and Transubstantiation once denied? Some ingredient perhaps of a
strong imagination, working with this, or the like spell, creed quod habes, and
habes. And how can any man tell that our Laity cannot imagine as strongly, as
they can? Or if they cannot, it is but a fancy difference; and if but a vain
and idle fancy, what have they gotten more then the Catholic? A matter of
nothing, to cool their wine withal.

His Calumny concerning Worship of Angels, Traditions, Latin service etc.
SECT. XVI.
AFter this he strikes at the worship of Angels, to be revenged perhaps of the
striking Angel that slew the firstborn in Egypt; then at Traditions, and
teaching men's commaund's for doctrines, Latin-seruice, Images etc.

Verily I can hardly believe that M. Chapter had a stomach strong enough to digest
these many, and many times sodden Crambes, enough to kill forty masters;
Occidit miseros crambe repetitae magistros. and I could easily suspect some
other had a great hand in the cookery, and ingested a great part of these
ingredients. And is all our expectation come to this? after his ingenuous
acknowledgment, when time was, that Charity maintained could not be defeated by
any forces of Protestancy; nor by any of those accustomary attempts and
practices, and that notwithstanding he had a way, and had found where, and
wherewith he could invade them strongly, and beat them from their former
hold's; which was to say in effect, Dicam infigne, recens adhuc --
Indictum ore alio; --
Now, after all this to come forth in a thredbare suit, patcht' up with old
shred's of a number of stale Arguments, and Objections, Vilia vendentem
tunicato scruta popello; such as in his first Protestancy he would not have
stoopt' to take up. Well then I see, any disgrace is credible enough in him,
who has thrown away his Target: and see, I pray you, what the famine and
penury of a starved cause may do; Job.
Quae prius nolebat tangere anima mea, nunc prae angustia cibi mei sunt; what
heretofore my soul loathed, now for very need, is become my food.

The truth is, he was resolved upon other provision when he made this quarrel
his enterprise; nor was he ignorant of these hard exigents, and these narrow
passages whereunto the Protestant cause has been, and is daily driven by the
Catholic; therefore he had determined with himself to draw him forth into
the wide Champian, and spacious plains of Socinianisme. Now being cros't in
his course ( sic visum Superis, so the Gods would have it) he is fallen into
the ordinary beaten way of his Anti-Catholique Ancestry, and (which I assure my
self, not long since, he heartily disdained) now he can vouchsafe to gleane
after them. And howsoever, since Nonconformity is now become out of all way of
profit and preserment, to say as they say, and think with himself; Pref.
therefore (to use his words) seeing we see these things done by him, which
hardly any man who knew him, could believe he would do; what wonder, if he go
forward still like to himself with as little modesty and moderation, as
hitherto. For now he can call Catholic Honor, and Reverence toward the
Images of our Savior, or his Saints, Idolatry; and the legal proceeding of
Catholic Countries against Heresies by them adjudged capital crimes, Murder:
and forgets in what coast of the world he writes this; and whose heart he
wounds through the sides of Catholics: and how pretense of Heresy and
pretense of Treason is laid by him to the charge of so many laws and statutes
lately provided in such cases, which remain in force of unrepealed decrees.
And may not this man write any thing, so he write against Catholics? But can
any man believe that M. Chapter his first defection from Protestancy was so blind
and headlong that he considered not whither he went? Or that he knew not the
Catholic doctrine concerning the use of Pictures, a Question so commonly vexed
and ventilated among Protestants? Or is he the only Animal that in all
spontaneous commigrations foreknow's only the whence, but not the whither? Or
was he so wicked and irreligious, that he would make choice of Idolatry? Or
conceived he so meanly of the Profession for which he is now become so
desperate a Whiffler, that in his judgment he placed it behind Idolatry? Or is
lastly the Catholic use of pictures become Idolatrous, since he recoiled
secondly to Protestancy? And with his revolt from it, is the Catholic
doctrine revolted from it self? And may we not then justly fear a general
Apostasy in the course of nature, if M. Chapter should chance to turn once more?

Xanthe retro propera versaque recurrite lymphae. His Calumny, That Catholics
execution of Heretics is Murder, discussed, and retorted.
SECT. XVII.
Pref. Devises have been invented (by Catholics) how men may worship Images
without Idolatry, and kill innocent men, under pretense of Heresy without
murder.

Answ. This point was not to be slightly passed over, containing a notorious
and fallacious Calumny; wherein also if you observe well, you shall espy the
Socinian mole working underneath: Do but command your eyes a little patience.

If Heresy be only the pretended cause, what is the latent and true Cause which
is pretexed or veiled under the name of Heresy? What is that causa
precatarchica, that chiefly and prineipally, though covertly moving cause, if
this be the evident and apparent cause only? As when in the age of our Fathers,
some lost their lives, under pretense of Treason, it was easy to assign the
true cause, practice, or profession of ancient Religion made treagon by new
Laws. Let him likewise declare unto the world the true cause, or causes
pretens't and cloak't with the crime of Heresy, in the procedures of Catholics
in those their capital sentences and executions upon Heretics, other then
their wilful obstinacy in maintaining heretical opinions.

I suppose now, that Heresy is punishable by death, even in the opinion and
practice of chiefest Protestants Calvin, Beza, Bellarm. de laicis l. 3. c. 22:
and others; being also the known and received doctrine of Fathers and
Councels, grounded upon express testimonies of holy Scriptures. And this, a
man would think to be the opinion of this Advocate; for even in that he terms
the killing of innocent men, under pretense of Heresy, Murder; he should seem
to intimate that death executed upon Heresy, not the pretended, but the true,
and primely moving cause, is not Murder, nor killing of innocent men. As he who
calls Death for Treason only pretended, Murder, supposes that Treason it
self truly so named, is justly punishable by Death; will he then say, that
those opinions were not indeed Heresies, but falsely supposed such? or only
made criminal under the name of Heresy, and as such, or instead of such
punished by death? Which being never yet proved, but rather the contrary
conuinc't by all the Arguments and profes whereby any opinion can be conuinc't
heretical, is in no wise now to be assumed.

And yet further, if those opinions have been fore-iudged or fore-damned for
Heresies; Catholic posterity having those precedents, and according to those,
sentencing alike the very same Heresies, cannot surely with any probability, be
said to have proceeded to capital condemnation of such opinions, only under
pretense of Heresy. And if, notwithstanding all those precedents of Antiquity,
authorities of Fathers, Councels etc. defining such opinions to be Heretical,
what in after ages has been done according to those precedent Decrees, and
Definitions, may be yet traduc't to a coulorable proceeding against such
doctrines under pretense of heresy: why may not likewise, in the civil
Government of all Christian Commonwealths throughout the world, capital
proceedings against many crimes in this present age, according to Precedents,
and Laws of former times, be brought back into dispute, and Judges of Assizes
condemned for their pronouncing capital sentence against such delinquents, and
such and such demeanors, under pretense of capital Crimes, being indeed (would
these men say) no crimes at all, or not justly punished with death?

And surely, I believe it will be hard for any Christian, in consonancy to
Christian doctrine, to think that laycke and secular Precedents and Statutes,
may not with as little scruple be recalled into question, as Ecclesiastique
Decrees; or to give a reason. why the authority of a National Synod, Senate of
Parliament, should be more inviolable then the authority of an Occumenicall
Council; especially if we consider and believe, that this later authority,
both in regard of matter and form, the things decreed, and the manner of
decreeing, is of a nearer approach and access to divine Law's, and Ordinances,
then the former.

If then, Sentences and Judgments conformable to Senatory or Parlamentory
Statutes must not be esteemed colors and pretenses only; much more the
sentences and executions of the Church, in conformity to Ecclesiastical orders
and Constitutions, cannot but absurdly be presumed to be only pretensions,
veilings and maskings of some hidden mystery of malice or policy. For when the
true cause is both apparent, and of it self sufficient to authorize the
proceeding of the Magistrate; what need of masking and cloaking causes, when
whatsoever hidden or concealed cause is less valid, and a less sufficient
warrant for such proceedings, then those public and noterious Decrees and
Laws provided in such cases?

His Fallacy discovered, his supposall of no Heresy, according to Socinianisme.
SECT. XVIII.
Notwithstanding all this he has yet an evasion, though a very secret and
close one; somewhat like to the escapes of those amorously pursued rivers which
Poet's fable, under the ground; whence, we simple men, while we think to
follow him in open view, and above ground, after the vulgar sense and
acceptance of words; run far wide, and short of his meaning, when we think we
are at his heels. For if I be not much mistaken, he is even now closely
lurking in Socinianisme, while we follow him in the known way of Protestancy.
Now in good Socinianisme, or true Atheism, all Heresy as supposed criminal,
and in the odious and ordinary acception of the word, is only a color and
pretense, having in it self no reality or substance of crime. For these
Nullifidians, as they know no such virtue as Faith; so they acknowledge no such
Vice as Heresy. For in their Sceptique or Pyrrhonian way, all assensions are
but opinions, all Visa are but (...), all Vision but Apparition.

Will you have the Character of a Socinian? Take it in brief, and for this
time in part. He is a thing, that neither see's, nor hear's, nor smelles, nor
feels, nor tast's any thing, nor understands any thing; but is only so
affected, as though he saw, heard, felt etc. He is therefore, a quasi animal,
and a quasi man, and a quasi Christian; nothing without a quasi, or a quasi
nothing, and a quasi any thing. He will give no judgment at all of any thing:
he will not say the Crow is black to day, for fear he may say to morrow this
a swan; nor that honey is sweet to day, least it may seem gall to morrow. For
all objects affect their senses, not by what they are in themselves, but as the
senses are formerly affected; which affection or disposition may vary daily;
which variance or mutation, because they foresee not, therefore they can
promise you no opinion of theirs for to morrow, no more then the Wether-cock
can tell you which way it shall stand when the wind blows next.

They deny as peremptorily as they can, that there are ten Predicaments; for
whatsoever may fall under sense, or understanding belongs to one Predicament
(...), nothing but relation: So Faith then with such men is but a Fancy, as the
object that beget's it but a phantome, a thing not so, but only seeming so.
Ask him then what he think's of any Christian, doctrine, whether he believe
three persons one God, the Son of God Incarnate, or that he was borne of a
Virgin etc? rather then he will seem headlong, or a spend-thrift of his
judgment; rather then he will be thought so unwise, he will (as a less
disgrace) be thought no Christian: therefore he will answer you so very
readily, as you shall see, he does it easily, (...). It Is no more so, then so;
Or neither so, nor so. With this brief sentence of absolution, they quit all
Heresy; nor will it be profane in them, to whom nothing is holy, to say to
Heresy, smiling sweetly upon her as she stand's at the bar, mulier vbi sunt
qui te accusant; nemo te condemnauit? woman where, or who are thy accuser's?
and her to answer, nemo Domine, none but Papists, my Lord; no Socinian, my
Lord: Neque ego te condemno, nor do I condemn thee; thou art as true to me as
the most Orthodoxe opinion of Christianity, Vade in pace.

Fallacy of Division.
SECT. XIX.
ANother Fallacy I meet with even in this place which we may rank with
Fallacies of Division. For where his Adversaries discourse has his Arguments
or reasons of proof in joint connection, and immediate subsecution of his
Position; there this Sophister seuer's and deuides the proof from the
Position, disioynting and dismembring them into so many senerall and disparate
propositions, without any relation or discursiue consecution of the one from
the other: which Fallacy though it may seem to fall naturally from the spring
and spirit of Heresy, and Schism, which in their very Notion and Etimology
import diuison; yet I make no doubt, but it was voluntary here, and of choice,
having in it the Authors ends, which were, I doubt not, to weaken his
Adversaries discourse; as if he would vnty the faggot, the more easily to
break the single stick's, which in the whole faggot he could not do.

His adversaries position was this: The doctrine of Protestants followed
closely and coherently to it self, induces Socinianisme; and particularly
their doctrine denying infallibility of the Visible Church of Christ. This
proposition he proves immediately: For if the infallibility of such a public
authority be once impeached, what remains but that every man is given over to
his own wit, and discourse etc. This reason he sorth with declaring, and
confirming by other reasons with close compacture, and consistency of
discourse, because it was strong, ( -- Pede pes, iunctusque viro vir,) he
fraudulently dissolues and discomposeth; hoping perchance by a semblable
slight and finesse, the like fortune and success of that one suruiuing Roman
Champion, against the three Albane Curiaty, whom by a guilefull flight, having
divided by competent distances, he return's upon them so singled, and slew them
one after another, whom in joint combat he durst not deal withal.

Which hope notwithstanding has frustrated this Champion; nor could he indeed
in reason expect the happy success of the Roman combattant, who fight's
against Rome, against whose Faith the power of hell shall not prevail. Do but
cast your Eye, if you please, upon these reasons, even as they lie apart and
loosely, and of purpose scattered by this Advocate, Inuenies etiam disiecti
membra Quiritis; you shall find in every limb a Catholic verity, too strong
for him to break though single. As where his Adversary says; for if this
infallibility be once impeach't etc. he omits the connecting particle (for)
importing a reason of the immediately preceding position, thus: You say again
confidently, that if this infallibility etc. Pres.


Again when his Adversary adioyneth in confirmation of this reason; For if the
true Church may err etc. we are still deuolued either upon the private spiret
or else upon natural wit, for determining what Scriptures contatu^, true or
false doctrine etc. He has it thus: You say thirdly with sufficient
cousidence, Pref.
that, i^ the true Church may err etc. Where his Adversary adds in further
confirmation of this; And indeed take away the authority of Gods Church, no man
can be assured, that any book of Scripture was written by divine inspiration
etc. this man thus: Pref.
You say fourthly with convenient boldness, that this infallible authority of
your Church being de^yed, no man can be assured etc. Where you may also observe
a false trick by the way, to make his Adversaries words carry a more odious
sound to Protestant ears: for he says not, take away the authority of our
Church, but, take away the authority of the Church of God; which he therefore
the rather says (God's Church) then (our Church) because he takes not that
here as granted by the Protestant, that our Church, is Gods Church; but only
shows here the necessity of an infallible Church, which soever that be.

Nor will it help this Advocate, that soon after his Adversary as it were
directing his speech to Catholics, calls that Church, our Church; for to
Catholics this needed no further proof, who believe it already. Whence with
them he might presume it, as granted, according to that of S. Paul, sapientiam
lequimurinter perfectos, we utter wisdom (divine truth) among those who
believe it; reserving that doctrine (that our Catholic Roman Church is the
true Church of God,) to the proper place, as to be proved against Protestants.
But you shall take him very often faultring in this Fallacy. Fallacy:
ante-dating his Adversaries order, and therefore seldom answering to the
subject in hand; whereof hereafter instances will occur very plentifully.

He will say perhaps, he has fore-inserted his Adversaries discourse entire,
and as it lye's in his own Book; but to this I say again, he answer's is not
as it lies there, but misordreth it, to his advantage, even as formerly ordered
by himself. For according to fair play and ingenuous behavior, although he
might do well, in answering the whole discourse by retaile, or by parts; yet he
should have taken notice of the relation and connection of one part with
another; and so have answered reason's as reasons, positions as positions, and
not have made every reason, a position. I know he has learned to analize a
Discourse better then so, and would esteem it poor Anatomy, only to dissect
limb from limb, joint from joint, and never show the natural commissure and
compacture of limb with limb, and joint with joint: nor distinguish them
according to their true Nomenclature, and their several, both proper,
absolute, and relative functions.

But he, as though the dissected were only bellua multorum capitum, a beast
with many head's; so he lectures upon legs, thighs, belly, eyes, ears, arms
etc. all under one appellation of Head, as though all the parts and members
were heads; for just so he has anatomized his Adversaries context of speech,
making every part, as it were a several head; and why? Because as in a
natural body, by reason of that due order and composure of members, a certain
mutual intelligence of influences and sympathies of the members between
themselves is entertained; of which mutual intelligence and influence depends
the life and vigor of every part, and ioindy of the who^e body: so in the body
of a rational discourse, there is the like influence of one part into another,
and one part vpholds and strengthens the other: and to take away this mutual
correspondence and relation, is to take away the very harmony of discourse; and
none who know's what he does, will do it but he who intends to mar the
music, or loves discords and iarrings better then harmony.

For to this purpose which I have said (what other can be imagined) he has
divided those reasons and confirmations of his Adversaries position, into so
many heads or propositions, distinguishing them not only by numbers, as, you
say first, Pref.
and you say again; you say thirdly, then fourthly, then fifthly; but also by
severally varying the odious phrase; as you say confidently enough; then, you
say with sufficient confidence; thirdly, you say with convenient boldness;
fourthly, you say with confidence in abundance, when all is indeed but one
thing said, the Proposition with some few proofs adjoined. Yet the favorers
of his cause and person, would easily pardon this poor piece of Sophistry, or
wave it at the least, had he achieued his intent by this; but now Cuibone? what
has he got by this? -- Nihil omnibus actum
Tantorum Impensis operum. --
With so much ado, with so great expense of honesty and ingenuity laid out upon
a miserably Fallacy, to do nothing, is intolerable: had he yet overthrown
those scattered forces, or made something of his own dissections, more then a
dissector of an ox can do; now for my part, I had no other drift, but only to
note his Fallacies and Calumnies; and to do more in showing his weak attempts,
upon these disranked and dissected parts, as they are singly encount'erd by
him, would prove an enterprise, much more easy then needful. Yet because I
have shown his insufficiency against his first Prosection, which is his
Adversaries Position, whereof the ensuing members are (as I have said) the
proofs; I will only employ a dash of pen upon what he has against the rest,
and the rather because I assure my self that even in these too, I shall meet
with Calumnies, and Fallacies; these being indeed as the very soul, or the
natural, and proper language of his pen, without which it cannot speak.

His Answers to his Adversaries Arguments, Fallacious, or none.
SECT. XX.
Pref. YOu say (says he) again, if this infallibility be once impeach't,
every one is given over to his own wit and discourse. To this he answer's by a
distinction: Given over to his own wit and discourse, not guiding it self by
Scriptures, he denies this to be consequent to infallibility of the Church so
impeach't; given over to discourse, that is, right reason ( sanaratio say the
Socinians) grounded on divine revelation, and common notions, and consequent
deductions from them, he denies this consequent to be inconnenient, though it
follow of the infallibility of the Church denied.

Answ. Now this evasion his Adversary foresaw, and therefore barred the
passage, which bar this nimble Advocate slily skip's over, taking no notice
of it. The bar of prevention was this; And talk not here (so his Aduersatie)
of Scripture, for if the true Church may err either in defining what Scripture
is Canonical, or in delivering the sense and meaning thereof, we are still
deuolued either upon the private spirit, or esse upon natural wit, and
judgment. What place then for discourse guided by divine revelation, in
col^erence of their doctrine, who take away the means of knowing what
revelation is divine? Either materially in regard of the Canonical Scripture;
or formally in regard of the true sense and interpretation of such Scriptures,
whereof neither the one nor the other can be afcertained without the infallible
authority of the Church, the only means to arrive to this certainty.

Wherefore if the man be in his wits, he will find out his guide, and know him
to be a sure guide, before he put himself into his journey; otherwise both the
guide and guided may fall into a ditch, whence neither his Logick-rules, nor
all his consequent deductions, with twenty ropes to boot, will ever be strong
enough to pluck him out. Now the only guide which guides reason by Scripture
is the holy Spirit, the only true and sure interpreter of holy Scriptures. This
holy spirit is not promised to any private man, but to the Church it is
promised; therefore in this Church is infallibly to be found: whence he that
follows this company of men, not only follows not a company of beasts, Pref.
which this Advocate would insinuate the Church may be, but he follows the
holy Ghost, guiding the Church.

But by this you may see the man miscrably tortured by unavoidable truth, even,
maugre himself, forced to confess what his Adversary teaches, and even here
relaps't into his dilemma which he may seem to have laid of purpose to catch
him; for he is fallen upon the Scripture as interpreted by every man's natural
with and judgment, or the private spirit; By which touchstone, the Private
spirit with his Logick-rules etc. he will also try every spirit, 1. Joan. 4.
and by his ignorantly applying the words of the Apostle (Believe not every
spirit) to this purpose, shows plainly, how sure an Interpreter he is of holy
Scripture, together with his right reason, and common notions, and
Logick-rules.

For surely in good Logic the universal and distributi^e sign omnis, all,
every, imports number and multiplicity, therefore he says, Believe not every
spirit but try the spirits; as if he said, of many spirits believe not every
spirit; because the holy spirit is but one spirit, from which one spirit,
spirits and every one of spirits are participations and derived spirits. Now
that one spirit (which is so one, that it cannot be a part of number, like as
divine unity, or the unity of divine nature, is no part of number) that one
spirit I say, is not to be tried; for it cannot be but a true spirit: otherwise
no spirit could be known to be true, if that one spirit could befalse, which
is the only rule whereby to try all spirits; but of the multitude of spirits,
or partaking spirits some do, and all may, lie. Of which number of lying
spirits, are the Apostate Angels fince their defection from the spirit of
truth; and those false Prophets in whose mouth's those lying spirits were
speakers. Such also were those Pseudoprophets, upon occasion of whom S. John
forewarneth Christians not to believe every spirit, but to try spirits. And who
were those false Prophets or Apostles, those lying spirits? They were those of
whom he had said before, that they had been in the Church, and were gone out
of the Church, and therefore became lying spirits, oftentimes actually lying,
always inclined and prepared to lie, and so never to be believed.

For as that first revolt from God, the spirit of truth, was the original
cause why those mutinous spirits became lyar's: so Apostasy from the Church of
God, in whom the same spirit of truth presides, is the general origin, and
extraction of all false Prophets and Heretics. As therefore that one prime
spirit, is none of those spirits, every one of which is to be tried, but by
which every numerable spirit is to be proved: so the spirit which guides the
Church, is not a spirit to be tried, but that by which every private spirit must
be examined, and tried. In which sense also it is most truly said, Prima Seeds,
the prime sea is judged by none: therefore it is true again, that the Church of
Christ, the Catholic Church, is the only competent judge of it self,
according to that received principle of natural reason, rectum est iudex sui,
and obliqui: what is straight of it self, both shows it self to be straight,
and what is crooked, to be so. He therefore who will presume to reform the
Church in doctrine of faith, wherein the spirit of truth is her guide and
teacher, Dauiel 12.
he shall be the star, which would give light to the Sun, but none of those
who shall shine in perpetuas aternitates.

For I would ask any man, only sober, and in his wits, if the Church of God
may have erred, either in determining Scriptures, or the true meaning of them,
(which point concerning Scriptures I specify, to prevent all refuge to trial
by Scriptures) by what other spirit shall this spirit of the Church be tried?
And I would gladly look upon that face of Impudence, that would assume to it
self, what it denies to the Church of God: and when I shall have found him, I
shall know for certain, that he is one of those Antichrists, of whom the same
Apostle, Et nunc Antichristi multi facti sunt. Ex nobis prodierunt: Joan. 2.
and 4.
and even now many are turned Antichrists; they went out from us. Yea by this
very brand, I will know them, this indeleble character of antichrist, to go
out of the Church, and then to question the spirit and doctrine of the Church.

It would be worth their labor, yet once to show, when the Church of Rome went
out of the Church of Christ, where she left it at her departure; as we show,
what Church Arrius went out of, whence Pelagius, and Nestorius etc. whence of
this later age, Luth^r, and Peter Martyr, and Calvin, and the rest. Yet besides
this character of a false Prophet, which is his terminus a quo, the whence they
go out, the Apostle has given us another, their terminus ad quem, the whither
they go, going out of the Church; Multi pseudoprophetae exierunt in mundum;
many false Prophets are gone out into the world; and yet more plainly: Ipsi de
mundo sunt, ide^ de mundo loquntur* and mundus eos audit: They are of the
world, they are become worldlings, the world is their talk, flesh and blood
their discourse; intimating even by this, that Heretical doctrine; is carnal
doctrine, the language of corrupt Nature, the discourse of flesh and blood, and
therefore the world harken's to their doctrine, as being of a carnal spirit,
symbolizing with these teachers.

Indeed, the Society of Christians, is not the world, nor any h^m^genious part
of the world; of whom therefore our Saviors words are truly understood, V^s de
mund^ nonesti^, se^^g^ ^ligi vo^ de mundo; you are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world. Whence the whole mortal kind of man is
sufficiently divided by these two names, the World, and Christendom; therefore,
that going out of the Church, signified by those words, prodierunt ex nobis,
they went out from us, could be no whither else, but into the world, there
being no third place, or family of mortal men to go unto; therefore all
Heretics are a part of that faction, the World; and therefore being endued
and swayed, and guided by the spirit of the world, which is a lying spirit,
they cannot be competent Judges or Examiners of the spirit of the Church, or
any doctrine of faith, or interpretation of Scriptures. But as the Church
Triumphant shall judge the world and condemn it, and shall not be judged by
it; so the Church now Militant, is invested with the like authority and
jurisdiction toward mortal men of this world, to judge and condemn the
world, that is, all those who are severed from her Society, and not to be
judged by them. Her doctrine therefore is the sole Judicature both of it self,
and all other crooked and oblique opinions. Wherefore the counsel of S. John
to try spirits, is to try them by the spirit and doctrine of the Church; for
unless the spirit of the Church were supposed the spirit of truth, they could
not have been judged false Prophets for going out of the Church, no nor for
opposing the doctrine of the Church.

Moreover, that by which another thing is tried, as by a rule, must needs be
supposed more perfect in regard of Judicature, then the thing tried: but it is
absurd to think that the spirit of a private man is more perfect in nature of
Judicature, then the spirit of the Church; therefore S. John never advised
private men to try the spirit of the Church.

Lastly, this very command or advise, Try every spirit, is the advice of the
Church it self, in the person of S. John a principal pillar of the Church;
but no man can be so silly, as to think that the Church advises private men,
to try her spirit (and least of all can Heretics challenge any such
authority.) Heretics also are subjects of the Church, even in that, they are,
at the least, characterically Christians, which character of subjection they
can never wipe out whersoeuer they run; they are ever subjects, though rebels;
therefore their calling the Church to question and trial, is mere presumption,
and an act of rebellion. No Catholic presumes to try the spirit or doctrine
of the Church; nay every Catholic tries his own spirit and doctrine by that
of the Church; therefore a Catholic, as such, has no private opinion of
faith, but all Catholic, that is, the same with the whole Catholic Church.

The Catholic makes no choice of doctrines of faith but takes such as are
given him: he is Gods beggar, and therefore no chooser. Ego autem mendicus sum
and pauper, I am a beggar and poor. Thus every Catholic is taught both to
say and believe. The Heretic makes choice of what he will hold with the
Church, takes what he list's, and refuses what he list's not take. And this is
to be even Etimologically an Heretic, and an Heretic formally, no less in
what he takes, then in what he refuses. For what he takes he chooses to take
upon his own discretion, not upon the credit of the Church, nor formally from
the Church: therefore he is an Heretic in all, even in the points of divine
faith, which he holds with the Church, not of the Church; and therefore
holds nothing with divine faith, because he is still a chooser of what he
holds, and so an Heretic.

Another Text of S. John, by this Advocate corrupted, and misinterpreted.
SECT. XXI.
WHat this all-trying spirit can do of himself without the spirit of the
Church, will appear by his singular talent in interpreting Scriptures; nor
shall I swerve from my subject in this way, for I shall demonstrate that all
his interpretations, are Sophismes, wily and fallacious detorsions of
Scripture, from their true sense, to his own crooked ends.

Pref. S. John (says he) gives a rule to all Christians to make this trial
by, to consider whether they confess Jesus to be the Christ, that is, the
guide of their faith, and Lord of their actions. So he.

Answ. The words of S. John are these; In hoc cognoscitur spiritus Dei etc. In
this the spirit of God is known; Every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ to
have come in fleth, is of God; and every spirit that dissolueth Jesus is not of
God; and this is Antichrist. The affirmative part of which copulate sentence,
as some other the like occurring in the Epistles of S. John, is to be
understood in sensu formali, as thus. Every spirit which coufesseth Jesus
Christ to have taken flesh, as confessing this truth is of God, who is the
author and warrant of this truth; therefore of him who confesses this
supernatural truth, it may be truly said, Caro and sanguis non reuelauit hoc
tibi, flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, being a truth above the
conceit of flesh and blood; which restriction to a formal sense, is both
sufficient, and often times necessary for the verifying of many the like
sentences of ^oly Scripture. Wherefore although the negative, to deny Jesus
Christ to have taken flesh, be a sufficient note whereby to discern a false
spirit; yet the affirmative, to confess Jesus Christ to have come in flesh, is
but a part of the rule. The other part is the character of Christian Charity,
as the same Apostle teaches in the same Chapter; Omnis qui diligit, ex Deo
natus est: Every one that loves is borne of God; therefore these two rules we
find conjoined in the precedent Chapter; hoc est mandatum ^ius, vt credanius in
nomine silij eius Jesus Christi, and diligamus alterutrum. This is his
commaundment that we believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ, and that we
love one another; for in these two virtues, indeed a Christian is consummate.
For faith in Jesus Christ, the son of God incarnate, includes all points of
faith, because it implies the belief of all that Jesus Christ has taught, or
teaches, either by himself, or by his Church, according to that saying of of
his, Qui vos audit, me audit: in which sense also the affirmative proposition
of the Apostle, Every one who confesses that Jesus Christ came in flesh etc.
has a true construction, even without restriction: but then it is nothing to
the purpose of this Advocate, who by this rule would exclude the necessity of
belief of other points of faith proposed by the Church, to make this
confession of Christ to have come in flesh, the rule whereby to try spirits. As
therefore that other cognoisance of a Christian, mutual Charity, according to
that of our Savior, In hoc cognoscent omnes etc. all men shall know you to be
my disciples by this ensign, or character of mutual love, excludes not that
of faith, or the confession of the son of God Incarnate, from being a rule
whereby to discern spirits, and to know who are true Christians: So this rule
of Faith in Christ, excludes not that of Charity, and neither of them, nor
both exclude a third, given by the same Apostle, Qui nouit Deum audit nos; Cap.
4.
qui non est ex Deo, non audit nos: in hoc cognoscimus spiritum veritatis, and
spiritum erroris. See here an express rule, to try spirits by: He who know's
God, hears us, he who is not of God, hears not us: in this we know the
spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. Now it is most absurd to think, the
force of that rule to be limited and confined with the age of the Apostles;
therefore by that (us) is understood the Church: or if they were to be heard of
posterity in their writings, we cannot hear them so without an interpreter;
which interpreter as before has been proved, can be no other of infallible
authority, but the Church.

Now that the Apostles were to continue in their posterity of Apostles,
Evangelists etc. that is, Preachers and Teachers of Christ's Gospel, Doctors,
and Pastors etc. ad consummationem Sanctorum, until the number of Saints were
consummate, that is, to the end of the world, appears plain by the words of
the Apostle to the Ephesians; Ephesians. 4.
therefore to the hearing and believing those succeding Apostles, Doctors etc.
is extended the obligation of succeding ages. For can we be so senseles, as to
think, those succeeding Doctors have imposed upon them the obligation of
teaching, and not other Christian subjects the obligation of hearing? Or was
our Savior so imprudent an Oeconomus, or dispenser of his gift's and talents,
that he would furnish those, whom he had designed hearers and learners in his
Christian school, with greater sufficiency for discerning spirits, or greater
assurance of not erring, then those, quos dedit, whom he appointed to be their
Masters and Teachers? Obedite prapositis vestris and subiacete ijs; obey your
Prelates, and be subject to them. And wherein are they Praepositi, Prelates, or
Governors? Certainly in those things, for which they must render account to
God; which are things appertaing to their souls; for they are to render
account for your souls, says the Apostle in that place. To them therefore
appertain spiritual instructions, and all spiritual directions; to them the
trial and discretion of spirits. Or, shall the subjects first try their
Prelates spirits, yea the highest Prelature and authority on earth, before they
obey? Is this to be directed, or to direct? Or, who is here, the Prelate, he
who is tried, or he who tries? And, is not this gross Anarchy, and Confusion?
Have these spirits any conceit of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy? Or do they
believe there is any such thing, as Order and Subordination in the greatest
Empire and kingdom upon earth, the Church of God?

By what has been said, it appears that S. John, by giving that rule of
trial, the Confession of the son of God in flesh, never intended to exclude
other rules. Therefore this is a miserable and fallacious consequence which
this Advocate insinuates, saying; S. John gives this rule of trial, to
consider whether men confess Jesus to be the Christ, not whether they
acknowledge the Pope to be his Vicar. Ergo, to examine whether they
acknowledge, this is no part of trial. This consequence I say, is no better
then this; We must try men's spirits by considering whether they confess Jesus
to be the Christ. Ergo, not whether they confess that Christ dyed for the
sins o^ the world; or whether he rose from death or no etc. Now has not this
man good reason to rely so much upon his neuer-failing rules of Logic, in
matters of Faith, who makes such goodly consequences? I can in charity believe
he has more Logic then he makes show of in this work, otherwise I see no
obligation he has to rely upon it so confidently.

You may likewise note his skill in Logic by this other consequence, Pref.
which he likewise insinuates. S. Paul says, try all things, and hold fast
that which is good: Ergo, we must try all things after this manner, which S.
Paul teaches not; we must try all things by our own spirit, or the Scripture
interpreted by our own spirit, with the help of neuer-failing rules of Logic.
Or thus, Try all things: Ergo, try even that by which all things are to be
tried. Try the spirit of the Church; try the spirit of God; for without this
spirit of truth, which we know not where it is but in the Church, it is most
certain that neither Scriptures can be understood, nor any other certain rule
imagined by which we may try any spirit, or doctrine of faith: So the advice of
the Apostle should be de impossibili, of a thing impossible, if he advised us
to try all things, by any other rule. And as well might this Logician infer,
out of this principle, try all things, thus; Try all things whether they be
crooked or straight by that which is certainly straight: Ergo, try that which
is certainly straight, by that which may be crooked. And as well he might infer
thus: Season all things with salt: Ergo, season salt too; for with what other
thing shall salt be seasoned? Si sal euanuerit, in quo s^lietur? So likewise,
if that all-trying spirit may err, by what other spirit shall it be tried?

His fallacious Interpretation of a text of S. Peter, 1.3. verse. 15.
SECT. XXII.
AFter he had abused the testimony of S. Paul, it was to be expected S. Peter
should not escape. He would be their second Nero, join them in the execution
of a moral death, much more tyrannical then that of Nero; which though it
could divide their souls from their bodies, yet it could never sever their
souls from Christian truth, and a truth which themselves had taught; the
inseparability of truth, and divine authority from the pillar of truth.

Pref. I say no more (says this Advocate) then S. Peter says, in commanding
all Christians to give a reason of their Hope.

Answ. But the truth is, S. Peter says not so, nor is it probable he had any
intent to engage Christians in a greater obligation then Christ himself had
imposed, which was only to confess him upon due occasions, never to deny him,
or the truth of his doctrine. S Peter's words are these, Dominum autem
sanctificate in cordibus vestris, parati etc. Sanctify our Lord in your hearts,
all way ready to give satisfaction, as the Latin version has it, (...), ready
to exhibit your Apology to every man who requires a reason of your Hope. Now,
who sees not a large difference between giving a reason, and requiring it; or
between exhibiting an Apology, or other satisfaction to him who requires a
reason, and giving him a reason: There are other way's of satisfaction and
Apology, besides giving a reason, at the least particular reasons for the
several doctrines of faith, as this Advocate seems to require, who would have
nothing believed, but after a particular trial and discussion of it. So he
that answered only, Christianus sum. I am a Christian, was no way reprehensible
by this advise, or precept of S. Peter. Is not he ready to Apologize, to defend
his religion, who is ready to die for it? which a man may do without giving any
other particular reason of his belief, by his only confessing, or professing
it upon fit occasions.

Or if he understand an obligation imposed by the Apostle upon all Christians
to give a reason of their belief; what means he? That every Christian is
bound to give, or be able to give a reason of every point of Christian belief?
How is it credible, that such a moral impossibility should be of obligation?
Or does he indeed suppose, that no Christian is bound to believe more, then
that whereof he can give a reason? Now then, shall he say with truth, I believe
in God the Father, with the rest as follows in the Apostles Creed? For surely
he inbound not to say, he belieues what he belieues not; and as sure it is, he
is not able to give a particular reason of every article of this Creed. The
Socinian will say, he is bound to believe no more, What says Much. whom in
this Treatise of his, we suppose a Christian, until he declare himself a
little more expressly, and a very little will serve the turn?

But let him form his discourse out of this text of S. Peter; Every man is
bound to give a reason of his belief, or Hope: Ergo, Every man is bound to
give a particular reason for every point of his beli^fe, or Hope when will he
make good this illation by his never failing rules of Logic? Again if every
Christian were charged with this obligation, to give a reason to every one
requiring it; what kind of reason should that be? Must it need's be a
conuincing reason, and satisfaction, not only in it self, but respectively in
regard of the requirers understanding, or disposition? What if he be a Jew, or
Infidel, or Socinian? shall I believe no more then that whereof I can give a
conuincing and satisfactory reason to a Jew, Infidel, or Socinian? Let him
tell us, what kind of reason he requires, that we may know the obligation he
lays upon us. In the mean time, I doubt not to auerre and prove that the
meanest Catholic is able to give a more satisfactory account, of every point
of Catholic faith, then the most learned Protestant can, of any one. As thus,
why do you believe three Persons one God? because, says the Catholic, I
believe the Catholic Church, which teaches me so to believe. And so of the
rest.

Now because no Protestant gives, or can give this reason, in coherence with
his Protestant principles, of necessity he gives a worse, if any. For whether
his reason be his own, or any other humane discourse whatsoever, independent
of this authority of the Church, or secluding it; or be it Scripture, yea
Canonical Scripture, interpreted by himself or any private Spirit, he gives
no better an account, then an Arrius, Eutychius, Donatist etc. has, or might
have given, in defense of their Heresies. Thus much concerning the abused
authority of S. Peter.

Words of our Savior fallaciously abused.
SECT. XXIII.
HEnce he proceeds with some pretty Rhetorique and method of blasphemy (if
you mark him,) as having first profaned the testimony of S. John, after him
S. Paul, next S. Peter the Vicar and Viceroy of Christ in the Christian world,
-- Iam proximus ardet
Vcalegon, --
the very next house is a fire; it was not probable he could stay himself in
this precipice. Lastly therefore he prophaneth Christ himself: so truly may it
be said of Heresy; Inclinata est ad mortem domus ^ius, and ad infer^s semitae
ei^s; Prou. 2.
Her house is hanging toward death, and her path's lead to hell.

Our Saviors words are these; Luc. 12.
When you see a cloud rising from the West, you say, we shall have rain, and
so it happen's. And when the Southwind blow's you say the summer appreaches.
Hypocrites, know you to discern the face of heaven and earth; and do you not
discern this time (of my presence or coming?) But why also do you not
discern what is just by your selves? That is, as if he had said, you who are
so skillful, as to read the prognostic signs of the heavens, and by them
foretell future events of weather or seasons; why do you not by your selves,
that is, by those internal signs and tokens of your souls, remorse of
conscience, secret inclinations, and other the like indicatures of what is just
or unjust, why do you not by these discern what is just? And what affinity
has this discourse of our Savior with this Advocates application, that
therefore, every man must of himself examine and try by his own discourse, or
Scriptures interpreted by himself, what is true doctrine in points of
supernatural belief? What tokens or prognostics have men for these? What
light of natural reason, or what indicature of inward motions, or natural
inclinations, show the truth of supernatural mysteries?

And not without some Fallacy has this interpreter made choice to translate,
Fallacy.
iustum, (...), right, rather then just; why of your selves judge you not what
is right? because right, has a more apparent reference to matter of doctrine
in this positure of words (of which doctrine he would have every man to be his
own judge) then just has, which rather implies a relation to moral actions.

Another sentence of our Savior abused.
SECT. XXIIII.
TO as little purpose, and with as much violence and irreuerence, are those words
of our Savior. If the blind lead the blind etc. applied by him. For whether in
probability follow the blind, they who follow the Church of God, as their
guide, to which is promis't the spirit of truth; or they, who follow either
their own private spirit, or natural reason and discourse, or the Scripture
interpreted by these, which is to them as blind, as the interpreters of it? But
by these goodly expositions, and applications of Scriptures, you see how
substantially they are furnished, for examining and trying spirits, and
doctrines of faith by Scriptures, and natural discourse, and neuer-failing
rules of Logic. And, Good Sir, would a man ever wish, that any man should make
himself more ridiculous, then to take neuer-failing, or infallibility from the
Church of God, and give it to Logick-rules? This is to rob Peter indeed, but
sure it is not to pay Paul.

His false Logic, or misapplication of Logick-rules.
SECT. XXV.
Observe now forth with, in the close of misapplyed Scripture, his fallacious
misapplication of Logic precepts, and Dialectique form of discourse. Great
confidence, no doubt, he had in the ignorance, or negligence of his Reader. He
hoped to lie hid in these brakes of thorny and intricate Paralogismes, to
appear only in gay flowers of soft language, Mollit sermones suos extranea;
Pron. 2.
so Heresy is wont to soften, and file her language. Howsoever he gives me a
warrant by his example, to syllogize his loose Periods, and shape them into
Logicall-formes. Which, for my part I profess to do, with much more fidelity
then he does; wherein I will appeal to the judgment of other men, yea and
especially of those his more learned and more sober Co-academiques.

Thus then he argues: Discourse truly so called misguideth no man: Drawing
conclusions out of Scriptures by good consequence, is discourse truly so
called. Ergo, drawing Conclusions out of Scripture etc. misguideth no man. To
this I answer, that although Discourse truly so called misguideth no man, ex
vi formae, by that form of lawful discourse; yet ex vi materiae, in regard of
the matter, it often does: But, drawing of conclusions out of Scripture by good
consequence is discourse truly so called; this I distinguish. Drawing them out
of Scriptures formally taken, that is, truly understood, and this by good
consequence, is discoursetruly so called, I yield; Out of the Scriptures taken
only materially, that is, out of the words of Scripture falsely interpreted, I
deny it. For it is only an apparent and fallacious discourse; therefore not
discourse truly so called.

Now, to his Confirmation: The principles whence we draw these conclusions,
that is, the holy Scriptures are agreed on by all, to be infallibly true; what
is that to the purpose, if it be not agreed, in what sense they are true?
Therefore I say, the premises may be true, the consequence lawful and good,
and so the conclusion true, according to some sense of the premises: but
because that sense may be a false sense, though the premises of themselves be
true; therefore the discourse, or whole Syllogifme may deceive and lead into
error; yea even so much the more, because the consequence is good.

But his Adversary has told him, in the 4. Chap. of this Pamphlet (so he,
still like to himself, nibling, and detracting from his Directors credit) That
from truth, no man can by good consequence infer falsehood. He tells him, what
S. John has told long since, Omne mendacium ex veritate non est: no lie is
consequent from truth; which is most true, as understood formally, no lie is
consequent of truth, as it is truth; but from a material truth, a lie may
follow. The Scriptures are always materially true, that is, true in themselves,
and from them as true, no falsehood can be consequent; but they may be, and are
commonly falsely sensed and interpreted, and that purposely, by Heretics;
therefore from them as falsely interpreted, falsehood may, and does follow, even
by good consequence.

Well then, to open the Fallacy (Vlceris os) and so to let out the corruption:
Scriptures falsely interpreted are not the Word of God, but the word of man,
the false Interpreter; therefore they who are guided by Scriptures so
interpreted (and now the word of man) may be misguided, and are so, even by
those Scriptures (now not holy, but profaned by man.)

His fallacious Answer, or Evasion to his Adversaries Arguments, conuincing
the necessity of an infallible Church.
SECT. XXVI.
Pref. YOu say thirdly with sufficient confidence. If the true Church may err
in defining what Scriptures be canonical, or in delivering the sense thereof,
we must follow either private spirit, or natural wit, and judgment, and by
them examine what Scriptures contain true or false doctrine. Thus the
Advocate: and what says he to this? All this (faith he) is apparently untrue,
neither can any proof of it be pretended.

Answ. Just so, Bellarmine thou lie. Behold an Alexander loosing the Gordian
knot. What? can no proof be pretended? Surely a sufficient division or
enumeration of parts, has been esteemed a sufficient proof, as excluding out
of the thing divided, whatsoever is not contained in some part or member of the
division; as if Bachelour. Master Doctor, be a sufficient division, or
enumeration of the Degrees given in the University, he who is proved to have
taken no one of these degrees, is sufficiently proved, to have taken no degree
in the University. His Adversary argues thus; The authority which must
determine what Scripture is Canonical, or what is the true sense of such
Scripture, is either the Church of God, or private spirit, or natural wit, and
judgment. Not the Church, according to Protestants, therefore either the
private spirit, or natural wit etc. If this division be good, then the
inference is apparently true; if it be not good, let him show the insufficiency
of the enumeration. Yes.

Pref. Other direction we have (says he) besides either of these three; and
that is, the testimony of primitive Christians.

Answ. Ridiculus mus! But do you mark the subtility of the Logician, how
sliely he euades and shifts the necessity of being directed by a true Church,
or by the spirit, or by natural wit? We have befides these, the testimony of
primitive Christians. And do those primitive Christians make a fourth member in
this division of direction, distinct from the other three? What difference
between primitive Christians, and primitive Church? and then, what difference
to our purpose, between the primitive Church, and the true Church? which is
the Church, to which his Adversary challenges this right of direction. So
himself apparently grants, what he so desperately avouches to be apparently
untrue, and whereof no proof can be pretended. Wherein I also note a Fallacy
of fact, Fallacy.
and fraudulent dealing; his endeavoring to make his Adversaries doctrine
odicus to the ignorant Reader, by his confident or impudent reiection of his
reason, and branding it with this Censure, all is apparently untrue etc. when
afterward he grants in effect all. Surely he hopes his Adversary will be so
blind as never to perceive this grant, while he says not the same his
Adversary does, in the same words. For instead of his adversaries true Church,
he has Primitive Christians; and why not Primitive Church? as well might you
ask the Devil, why not holy water? The very word (Church) is Exorcisme to all
Heresy, as the name of JESUS to infernal fiends.

Another pelting fallacy you may observe, Fallacy.
even in the same period. We have other direction (says he) besides the
private spirit, and the examination of the contents of Scripture. As though his
Adversary had placed examination of the contents, in the number of directions,
whereby to examine what is contained in Scripture: as though he had proposed the
very same examination, the guide or director to it self. And why this? Because
he had something which he could except against this examination, of contents, by
showing how it may fail in direction. But what then? Who gives this
examination the office of Director? Not his adversary. Nay rather, because it
may fail, and may meet with many difficulties, hence his Adversary infers
the necessity of a Director, by whose assistance Christians may make this
examination of Scriptures, and be assu^^d what Scriptures are to be received,
or rejected etc. Who, or what then, is this true guide or director? The true
Church, says his Adversary? What says the Advocate? Not the true Church; no,
by no means, nor can any proof of this be pretended. The Church? mera
Chymera; he will take heed of saying so. Well then, what other thing if not the
true Church? No other thing, forsooth, but another Word. What? the Primitive
Christians? Do you mark how near he came to the Church, and yet escaped it?
Not the Church, not the true Church, not the Primitive Church, but primitive
Christians. O Scotus! O subtility of distinction! most true; the very name of
Church overthrows Protestancy. But why not again primitive Church, as well
as Primitive Christians? He knew a primitive Church will infer a deriuatiue
Church; it carries in the very common notion and obuious signification of the
word, the nature of a Body, a Society, a Society of Christians, the kingdom of
Christ; in that Church and kingdom, order and subordination, command and
subjection will by necessary sequel, force a necessity of perpetuity and
visibility; in which propriety it must differ from the Synagogue. This is
therefore a terrible hearing to Protestancy, a Church; Terribilis vt castrorum
acies ordinata, terrible as an army in battaile-array.

Now, for Primitive Christians, they imply no such order, no such coordination,
or subordination, as of a body, and therefore as so many scattered sheep, they
might wholly dye in their own ashes, not Phenix-like survive in their
posterity; which to affirm of a Church of Christ, his established
Commonwealth, or kingdom, purchas't by right of Conquest, with the inestimable
price of his blood, is not only Heretical, but most impious and profane;
since neither the Synagogue and Law of Moses, became euacuate, or abrogate via
corruptiua, by a corruptiue desition; but past into a Church and Evangelical
Law via perfectiua, as Christ was the perficient, not the corruptiue end of the
Law: Non veni legem soluere, sed adimplere etc. I came not to dissolve, but to
fulfill the Law etc.

Some other fallacious Euasions, in answer to the same position of his
Adversary.
SECT. XXVII.
IN the very next Paragraph I meet with another Fallacy which I have also
touched before.

Pref. You say with convenient boldness, that this infallible authority of your
Church, being denied, no man can be assured, that any parcel of Scripture was
written by divine inspiration; which is an Untruth, for which no proof is
pretended, and besides void of modesty, and full of impiety.

Answ. And I pray you observe his notorious method; his Censure is, for the
most part, the preface to his Answer: when he has first struck his Adversary
on the head, or wounded his reputation, with some calumny, or contumely; then
he will dispute the matter not only cooly, but very coldly, as you shall see. In
the mean time, since he is so liberal of contumelious and reproachful
language, if we spare him, it is mere gratuite grace, no merit of his, not so
much as of congruity; nay it may seem much more congruous, to show the man his
error, where he may see it better then in himself. For I believe it will
appear to any understanding man, even by the Genius of his style, that he has
drunk more liberally of Narcissus Well, then of Aristotle's, as near as it
springs. Whence I do not see, but his President way be my Apology; and very
Charity will require, that some sprinkling of salt be employed upon his so
great insulsity. Now mark the Fallacy.

His adversary says, Take away the authority of Gods Church, no man can be
assured etc. For (Gods Church) this Attorney changes (your Church) as though
his adversary preassumed, what is in question with Protestants. Which he
purposely does not, but only shows the necessity of a Visible Church, and
infallible authority shereof. The fallacy of this change has this intent, to
make his adversary more odious for his preassuming and antedating; as also,
that he may impugn him more easily, where he contends not; which he does
almost every where; never strikes where his Adversary wards: So he seldom or
never argues, or answers to the matter in hand.

But why now is this an untruth void of modesty? Because says he, the
experience of innumerable Christians is against it; who are sufficiently
assured that the Scripture is divinely inspired, and yet deny the infallibility
of your Church, or any other.

Answ. What? Even of Gods Church? For this is the authority, this the Church
which his adversary namely and only asserteth. And where is the immodesty? Is
it immodesty in a Catholic to prove the infallibility of the Church of God?
his Prime principle of Religion? and that, by an argument, which this (no
Church) can no otherwise answer, but by railing at it, as with his Lucians
(...)! O execrable! For who are those innumerable Christians? Are they not the
adversaries of the Roman Church, and only they? And is it immodesty in a Roman
Catholic, to defend and prove the contrary to that which the Adversaries of
that Church would prove, and do teach, whereby to overthrow that Church, and
with that all Christianity? But to show him the weakness of his argument, I
form the like: Innumerable Christians are sufficiently assured, that no man
can be assured of any parcel of holy Scripture otherwise, then by the
authority of the Church of God; Ergo, M. Chapter who denies them this assurance, is
void of all modesty.

And now again, why full of impiety? Pref. Because, says he, if I cannot have
ground to be assured of the divine authority of Scripture, unless I first
believe your Church infallible, then I can have no ground at all to believe it.

Answ. I expected he would say, then I willbe a Socinian. But still you see him
in his Fallacy ( Your Church, for, Gods Church.) And why then has he no ground
at all, upon that supposall?

Pref. Because, there is no ground, nor can any be pretended, why I should
believe your Church infallible, unless I first believe the Scripture divine.

Answ. Still, Your Church. Sure, we shall never bring him back to Gods Church
again. Now, quite contrary I say there is no sufficient ground (to omit
pretenses, and permit them to his Hyperbolicall style) why men should believe
the Scriptures divine, unless first they believe an infallible Church of God.
For, to reuolue to the first birth and parentage of holy Scriptures; whence
have we them? who told us they were divine? have we not the new Testament (to
instance in this part) from the Evangelists and Apostles? And were not they the
Church of God? and has any other told us they are divine, and of divine
authority, but they primarily, and their posterity after them? Can any man
expect a more certain testimony concerning his own, or any other man's birth,
then from the mother who brought him forth into the world? Was not the holy
Scripture conceived of the holy Ghost, as it were in the womb of the Church?
Yea those souls and spirits of Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, in which those
Scriptures were conceived even formally as divine, together with the truth
contained in them, were they not before those Scriptures were brought to light?
And could any but they, or upon their credit believe those Scriptures were of
divine issue; conceived, I say, in those spirits divinely inspired and
illuminated? yea and from them flowing, as from a vital principle, actually,
and actiuely inflowing into those conceptions, together with the holy spirit
of truth?

Whence also it follows evidently, that those divine truth's cannot be the
formal conceptions of any soul, or understanding, not endued and elevated by
this spirit of truth; with which spirit since no man can assure himself to be
endued, and yet every Christian ought to believe, as certain, that the Church
of God is endued; therefore every Christian ought to receive those divine
truths contained in Scriptures, together with the Scriptures themselves, from
the Church of God, whose lawful issue, and offspring they are.

Neither can this in reason seem to a Christian any whit derogatory, from the
majesty of the divine word, to be conceived in the spirit of man; no more then
it was, from the Majesty of the Son of God to be conceived in the womb of
the B. Virgin Mary: and that, as there the Eternal Word was invested with
humane flesh; so here in these spirits of men, as in the womb of the Church,
the Word of God, sown by the holy Ghost, should be invested with humane
notion, and brought forth to light of the world, in the guise of humane speech
and voice. In which sense we may interpret that testimony of the holy Baptist,
Ego vox clamantis, I am the voice of the crier; as his voice was the inuesture
of that Word of the holy Ghost crying in the desert, by which it was conveyed
to the ears of mortal men: so is the voice and declaration of the Church, the
means by which the Word of God, and all Truth contained in it, is conveyed to
our souls and understandings. And as that cry of the Holy Ghost was first
conceived in the spirit of the Baptist, then uttered by his voice to the world:
so these Scriptures were first conceived in the Church, those Apostolical
spirits in which they were first imprinted, and invested (if I may so speak,)
by the operation and Energy of that fire which appeared in tongues, afterward
uttered upon due occasions in words and writings. As therefore those of that
time heard the voice of that crier in the desert, from the mouth of the
Baptist; so all Christians hear, and must hear the word of God, and divine
truth, by the mouth of the Church.

Well then, what this man so confidently auerreth, that there is no ground, yea
that no ground can be pretended, why we should hold Gods Church (for so he must
say, if he say any thing against what his Adversary says,) infallible, unless
we first believe the Scripture divine; I as confidently deny. And for as much
as respects priority, or antecedency of belief, since the Scripture, as I have
said, is no other word, but what the Church has, and daily does utter unto us,
whether historical or dogmaticall, or howsoever first conceived in the
understanding and spirit of the Church; it follows, that as we have received
it upon her credit, telling and teaching us, that it is divine; so we must a
Priori, believe the Church, as infallible witness or reporter, before we can
believe the infallibility of Scripture which she reports: it follows also,
that we must believe the Church interpreting the Scripture; for it is
incredible, that any other man should better understand what I speak according
as I have conceived, or what I mean by the words I speak, then I my self,
the speaker, who only intend to utter my conceit.

It follows yet further, that although there were no Scripture, and these
Christian Verities had descended to us only by Tradition, and by the testimony
of former ages, transmitting them successively from Christ, to this present
age; we should be bound to believe the Church: that is, that continued
succession of men, believing those Christian Verities; unless we will say, there
was no obligation upon men, to believe in God, and to worship him according to
that belief, before the time of Moses, before the Scriptures were. For, was
not Circumcision obligatory before Moses? and was not the posterity of Abraham
obliged to believe and practice that tradition, as of divine authority? of
which our Savior says: Moses dedit rebis Circumcisionem non quia ex Moyse
est, sed ex Patribus.

He will say, You prove the Church infallible by Scriptures, your Scriptures
must be first believed infallible. I answer we prove this out of Scriptures
against such as profess to believe Scriptures, not the Church, as out of their
own principles; it follows not thence, that we first believe the Scripturs
divine or infallible. For though in method of confuting such Adversaries, we
begin with the Scriptures, yet in the method of believing, we begin from the
Church, upon whose credit we believe the Scriptures to be divine; and according
to this method, commencing from the Church, Christian faith was first
propagated among nations, and embraced by Heathens.

Nor will it be to the purpose to reply, that Heathens were induced to believe
by reason of miracles. This I say, is not to the purpose, how the Church gained
this credit; but hence it is inferred that in regard of Christian Belief, the
Church had the Precedence before Scriptures; that is, the Church was believed
before the Scriptures were believed. Wherefore, to conclude this point, if it
be impiety, not to believe Scriptures, (as no doubt it is) yet it is an impiety
no way deducible from this doctrine, that the belief of an infallible Church,
is precedent to the belief of Scriptures. But it is not hard to conceive, by
the very carriage of the business, as he handles it, what he drives at in all
this discourse: which is indeed to euacuate all authority, both of Church and
Scriptures, and upon the ruins of both, to build the Godles Socinianisme.
Therefore all inferences which may seem any way to perplexe Christian
doctrine, or force it into straits, are his advantages.

It was the prudent industry of the Roman Consul, to provoke Catiline, whose
secret practices and designs upon the Commonwealth he had understood, into
open war and rebeilion; for he supposed, no Citizen would then appear in
his defense, or make the oppression of a Tyrant his quarrel: As no man would
approve the fyering of the house wherein himself were, or wracking the ship
wherein he sailed himself. I suppose likewise, if this pretended Champion for
Protestancy, were once discovered, and stripped to the naked truth of what he is
indeed, that is, as I have said, a very Socinian Mole, vnderworking even
Protestancy it self, and all Religion; no Protestant who has any zeal of the
Religion he professes, would ever be seen in his patronage, nor willingly, I
think, in his company: nor would he vouchsafe, the ordinary greeting or
salutation, as good morrow, Ep. 2. Joan.
to him who acknowledges neither day nor morning of Christian religion; or,
God save you, to him, who doubts whether there be any such thing as God and
Salvation: nor would they think him fit, to converse among Christians, who
has disputed himself out of all terms of Christian commerce, and
conversation.

His Calumny, concerning Protestants reputed Atheists etc. by Catholics.
SECT. XXVIII.
Pref. YOu say fifthly and lastly (says this Advocate) with confidence in
abundance, that none can deny the infallible authority of your Church, but he
must abandone all infused faith, and true religion, if he de but understand
himself.

Answ. This Advocate himself, is no small part of proof of the truth of this
Hypothetique, who since he has relaps't from this doctrine of infallible
authority of the Church; has withal disclaimed all infused faith, as his
Adversary has charged him, upon information more then credible; wherein (that
is in abandoning both) I confess he has proceeded, no less consequently then
irreligiously. But what of this?

Pref. This is (says he) agreeable to what you have said before, and what out
of the abundance of your heart you speak very often, that all Christians besides
you, are open Fools, or concealed Atheists.

Answ. For my part, I have never known any Catholic use any such inciuility
of language. Neither do I think any harbors any such conceit, of all other
not Catholics, that they are either open Fools, or concealed Atheists:
though I can easily believe, the common opinion of Catholics to be, that a
Socinian is a concealed Atheist at the least; and so in consequence a fool:
For the fool has said in his heart, There is no God.

Now, that which follows in this Paragraph, I will only retort, and disoblige
my self of a duty, -- Mutato nomine de to
Fabula narratur. --
All this, the Advocate writes with notable confidence, as the manner of
Sophistes is (which manner he is very well acquainted with) to place their
confidence of prevailing, in their confident manner of speaking: but then for
the evidence wherewith he should maintain so great a confidence, it is as
invisible, as the Religion he defends, from the time of Luther upward.

His fallacious Recriminations.
SECT. XXIX.
HItherto we have seen, what this Advocate had done he tell's now what he
could do; which we must suppose to be more then he has, or will do. -- O
parce viribus vsque tuis. As if he had a mind to recriminate and charge
Papists, that they lead men into Socinianisme, he cold certainly make a much
fayrer show of evidence then his Adversary has done.

And truly, I believe he has met with an Adversary, that will easily yield
him the priority in making fair shows, without any show of repugnance at all.
But now he falls into the puerility of a most triuial Rhetorique: you shall
see him fight as like a Parthian as you would wish, doing most, what he makes
show least to do; fight's, as he flies away, and will be found I believe, --
Parthis mendacior. For thus he colors and florishe's his Sophisme.

Pref. If I had a mind to recriminate, I would not tell you, you deny the
infallibility of the Church of England. Ergo, you lead to Socinianisme. Which
is altogether as good as this: Protestants deny the infallibility of the Roman
Church. Ergo, they induce Socinianisme.

Answ. Yet because, this (I would not tell you) is no real pretermission, or
passing over in silence, what he would say, but a saying it, after a more
aduantagious and Emphatique manner of speech, then if he had said it
positiuely, and in plain terms; as the flight of warring Parthians is no
serious and intended flight, but a more dangerous fight, under show and
pretense of fear and flight: therefore we must understand these words
according to the direct and positive sense; as though they were couch't in this
form. This argument, You deny the infallibility of the Church of England,
Ergo, you lead to Socinianisme, is as good as this; Protestants deny the
infallibility of the Church of Rome, Ergo, they induce Socinianisme. Wherein I
note first, his most familiar Fallacy of wilful ignorance and mistake of his
Adversaries Argument, and the Elench; who never inferred leading or inducing
into Socinianisme, out of the denial of infallibility of the Roman Church, but
out of the denial of some infallibility of Judgment, and authority of a
Visible Church to determine of Scriptures and their interpretation etc. For he
knew well, that if there were any other such infallible authority to determine
such differences, it should not then follow that they who disclayme the
authority of the Roman Church, should have their only remaining refuge, to the
private spirit, or natural judgment etc. Wherefore having not yet excluded all
other infallibility, no nor disputed it, he assumeth not infallibility of the
Roman Church, or the denial of that, as inducing Socinianisme, but the denial
of all infallibility of whatsoever Church.

Therefore if this Logician would have played fair, and not more like a
Sophister then like a Scholar (which very appellation, in my judgment,
carries with it a face and promise of ingenuity) he should have framed his
Adversaries Argument as it lies in him, or at least, so as it might appear
the same in effect, and not seem to have his whole attention applied to
shift's and advantages: thus then he should have formed it, Protestants deny
infallibility to the Church of God, Ergo, they induce Socinianisme, and then
have compared it with this his own recriminant, Papists deny the infallibility
of the Church of England, Ergo, they induce Socinianisme, and then, -- Macte, O
cum compare compar: Not a nut more like an apple; He had paralleled it fair
indeeed.

Secondly in comparing the English with the Roman Church, Fallacy.
he seems, no doubt, to take the Roman as a particular Church; fraudulently
affecting not to know, that by the Roman Church, Catholics understand all
Christian Churches, making one with the Roman by obedience and subordination to
it. Whence (by the way) Catholic Roman Church, is no Bull, as I have heard a
Dux Gregis among them, was pleased sometime to say it is.

And yet again, how long has the English Church made a part separate from the
Roman? Look back into her cradle of extraction, or distraction rather, and
blush not. What was the original cause? and yet blush not. Well, say we what
we list to all the Churches I know, there is none more Visible then the
Protestant; some man yet alive may have seen her quite through from her first
birth, or appearance, even to this age; but yet, what was the cause of the
distraction? Causa mali tanti etc. -- But I know this Advocate will easily
shift all this; he will grant, for a need, True; the generation was Equivocal,
yet it might be Honorable enough; Ex malis moribus bonae leges etc. of evil
manners, good Laws etc. I know his common place. Howsoever, in my judgment, the
comparison has something of the odious.

But what has this Retrograde to do with the Infallibility of the Church of
England? He has profe'st the infallibility of it so far, as to deny to
subscribe the English Articles of faith and doctrine; wherein the authority of
this Church may seem to appear, of as great force as wheresoever. He may have
since been wrought into some other opinion, by the skill and industry of some
such Artist, as know's well how to deal with so pliable a nature; (Vdum and
molle lutum, nunc nunc properandus, and acri Fingendus sine fine rota;) -- Or
that other, (though no Doctor, yet a master of Art, -- ingenique largitor,)
Persius proem.
one who can teach such towardly scholars, wit; yea thrifty wit (a precious
lesson in this age of prodigality) may have persuaded him to conform.
Howsoever now he will do her this honor by way of Restitution, as to say, she
is no more Fallible then other Churches are, no then the Church of Rome.

Yet let them have made of him what they can, or what they list, a Vessel of
Honor, or Contumely, (since by their all-sufficient Canon of Scripture, they
are unquestionable for what they do, or make, of such matter) yet I assure my
self, he will never be able to make good this comparison, or parity; until he
make it evident, when, and how that notorious change entered into the Roman
Church, whence the Church of England received Christian Religion: how, and
when, I say, the Roman Church Apostated from her self. For until then, we
shall never cease to extol in comparison her first birth and entrance, first
sown and planted by Apostolical euangelizing; then watered with the blood of
two principal Apostles, as is extant upon record of irrefragable testimony:
then, the entrance of the same Religion from thence propagated, into other
nations, together with the entrers and founders of the same; all, men of
known and eminent sanctity: to extol I say these entrances of the Roman
Religion, in comparison with the infamous ingredientes of defection from that
Church, into some of the same Nations, achieued by men, or monsters rather, of
most celebrated infamy, and stigmatized Worders.

Had the Church of Rome needed reformation, were these likely or probable
instruments? a Friar with his dis-nun'd and de-uirginated Concubine? Or a
second branded, and inusted Institutor? Or that third Poet of his own bi-sexe,
and heterogenious Loves? -- Felicia tempora, quae ves
Moribus opponunt: habeat iam Roma pudorem.
Happy times that have such reformers: now Rome has cause to blush.

Most certainly, the wisdom of God never made choice of such Apostles, who
says, Qui mihiministrat me sequatur; he that does my service, let him follow
me. All, moral and Christian Virtues, especially contempt of the world, and of
all interest and respect of flesh and blood, vsher'd and accompanied the
entrance of the Roman Catholic Religion, wheresoever it entered. Many well
known, and notorious vices paued the way to novel Heresies, and entered with
them; yea, grew from the very root's and principles of them. Which very
Parallel, and one point of comparison whosoever shall have duly considered,
and seriously waighed, let him, in gods Name, dispute parities of the Church of
England, with the Roman Church.

The rest which follows in this 16. Paragraph concerning the Popes
infallibility, is nothing else but rauing language, the ouerflowing and
exuberance of his pregnant passion. To which it is full enough to answer in
this place, That the Pope never has, nor ever shall define vice to be Virtue,
or the contrary; nor oblige men to believe Antichristianity Christianisme, or
Christianity Antichristian; nor lead men, by any such doctrine, into
Socinianisme, into Turcisme, yea (these are the man's word's) unto the devil
himself, if he have a mind to it.

Yet I confess (give him his due) this was no ill ordered consecution, from
Socinianisme to Turcisme, from Turcisme to the Devil; though perhaps the
progress might have been better gisted thus: From Turcisme to Socinianisme,
from Socinianisme to the Devil; at the very middle door of which three, I
hear this Advocate dwell's, if any chance to enquire of him, -- Domui paries
communis vtrinque, divided from either with a common wall; so that his mutual
intelligence with both, is both facile, and credible.

His concealed Arguments for Socinianisme.
SECT. XXX.
ALthough this Attorney of Protestants would seem to deserve of them his fee,
yet he will not fail to advance his own cause, or his most, own
Socinianisme; which is, I doubt, his finis cui, his most intended affair.
Wherefore as he labors in behalf of Protestants to weaken, yea to abolish
all infallibility of the Church of Christ; so he endeauours out of the
doctrines of some Catholics, to vnnerue the testimony of Scriptures, upon the
authority of which the whole fabric of Protestancy is pretended to rely.

For who sees not what advantage, he with his Socinian Academy will draw from
hence? As thus; Doctrines of Christian faith, according to Protestants, cannot
be proved by the Authority of the Church, for that authority with them is
errant. Again, some of them, in the opinion of Papists, cannot be sufficiently
proved by Scriptures, as that maine point of their faith and hope, the mystery
of the Trinity; therefore if we harken to both, or believe both (since whether
rather to believe we know not) it can no way be proved. Whence, with a
Diagorus, the surnamed Atheos, or a Protagorus, concerning any such thing as
Trinity, and soon after, as Deity, they will return a Non liquet, it is not
certain.

For me, who have enterprized the discovery of his Fallacies, together with
some hidden driftes and mines alone, it shall not be necessary or requisite to
pursue his several testimonies of Catholic Writers; they will do it, no
doubt, at the least so far forth, as they shall deem it needful, who
undertake the answer of this great Pamphlet; though, I verily think, it will
prove magis operosum quam operae pretium, the harvest will never render the
seed, in so barren a field. And I do not know, but a man may suspect he had a
mind to entertain his Adversary hastening after him, in examining his
witnesses, were it but to slow his pursuit; like as Medea scattered her
brothers bones in her flight from her Father, to retard their speed who eagerly
pursued her, while they stayed to gather them up: Yet was she never sure so
peevish a shrew, as to quarrel with them, for not gathering them up clean, as
this Advocate does in behalf of his Clients scattered bones; which
notwithstanding I certainly think, his adversary either has done or would
have gathered to a bone, if he had thought them indeed his bones, and not
rather some other watery, or aerie substance.

Only after a more short and general way, I answer, as concerning those
Scriptures, out of which (as he says) some of our Writers deny, that the
Trinity can be conuinc't; ad hominem, thus: M. Chapter himself has denied in the
hearing of sufficient witnesses, that this point of Christian belief, can be
proved out of Scripture, and said, that it can less be so proved, then the
Catholic doctrine of Transubstantiation, which he with his Agonothe^'s the
Protestants, constantly deny possible to be proved by Scriptures. Whence thus I
argue: M. Chapter says the B. Trinity cannot be proved by Scripture; he, the same
denies, that any point can be held as of divine faith, but what is proved out
of Scripture; therefore he denies that the Trinity is to be believed as of
divine faith: Ergo, he belieues not the B. Trinity as a Christian; therefore he
is none. So by his own doctrine, he leads himself to Turcisme, or
Socinianisme, or, to the devil himself, if he have a mind to it.

Moreover I answer: those Catholic Writers, no doubt, from those less
express and conuincing authorities of holy Scriptures, less I say conuincing
of themselves, abstracting from the authority of the Church, applying them in
confirmation of this mystery, gather a necessity of acknowledging the
infallible authority of the Church, without which, notwithstanding holy
Scriptures, we should be in doubt how to believe some principal point of
Christian belief. The necessity of which authority, appears yet more
evidently, even by what he quarrels concerning the doctrines of Eusebius,
Origin, and those other questioned and controuled by the like authority of the
Church. Against which authority no faculty of wit, and understanding, no
eminency or glory of science and erudition could prevail; no not martyrdom it
self could protect any error against orthodoxe belief, or escape the censure
of this supreme Judge on earth.

What he says of Cardinal Peron informing the world of some Errors of those
Ancients; Calumny, against Peron.
if he mean the world knew them not before, discourers great plenty of
ignorance in himself: if he knew it without his information, he says nothing:
for could not Socinians, who devour Christian Libraries to no other end, but
to digest them into scandals, read the very same in others of far more ancient
authority, then this most learned Cardinal?

In that the Arrians would gladly be tried by the Fathers before the Council
of Nice, they show their heretical spirit; which always flies from the
authority of a Visible, Vocal, and living Judge, to the mute copy of Gods, or
man's word; as here, to defunct authors who left behind them their private
opinions in things at that time not expressly defined; which is indeed to fly
to their own interpretations, both of Fathers and Scriptures; from a public
authority, to which a never failing assistance is divinely promised, to some
particular or single opinions of private men, to whom no such assistance was
promised. But whither will not a thief fly from the sentence of authority
which can condemn him? And whither not, an Heretic from the Church? And who
doubts, but the Church of Christ, is most representatiuely, and jointly, and
unanimously in a general Council, as a kingdom in a Parliament or full senate;
in which mystical body then, as ever, yea then more effectually and actiuely
then ever, the holy Ghost, as the soul informing, moves and directs.
Whither flies he then, who flies from this Church, but from the spirit of God?
Quo ibo a spiritu tuo? Whether shall I fly from your spirit? True, he flies
from Christ, but escapes him not: from him a Savior, to him a Judge, from his
Mercy to his Justice; si desceudero in infeinum ades: if I go down to hell,
you are there.

And is this the Socinian scandal, or is this any way leading men into
Socinianisme, that the Church of God assembled together of purpose to examine
or determine some question of faith, has defined the contrary to some doctrine
or opinion of some private Doctor, or Doctors? who as such, whatsoever they
preiudged, could not say, as the Council could; Visum est spiritui sancto and
nobis; it has seemed good to the holy Ghost, and us? You see then the weakness
of this Fallacious Calumny, yet strong enough to cast a mist before the eyes of
the unlearned, or vnpassioned Reader; the number of which sort, because it like
to affoard him most voices, their applause and approbation is the triumph he
aims at.

His Sophistical Calumny, concerning differences of Catholic Doctors, in
questions undefined.
SECT. XXXI.
ANother occasion or inducement to Socinianisme pretended by this Advocate, are
those different opinions of Scholastique Deuines in points of doctrine as yet
undetermined by the Church: this is also one of those, a thousand times recoct
Crambes; like some cold Service daily brought in, only to furnish up the table,
until it grow moldy, and meat for no body.

But what is this toward the disabling or disparaging the authority of the
Church in points now defined, and no longer disputed as dou^^full? Will the
Socinian hence argue thus; In some points of doctrine undecided some Catholic
Doctors disagree among themselves: Ergo, in points decided they have no
certainty? Who sees not the inconsequence of this illation? If they differ
concerning the modification of divine Prescience, and the different respect and
habitude which it has to future events, necessary or contingent, ablo^ute or
conditional; will they out of this variance infer the uncertainty of divine
prenotion, or conclude that God foreseeth not at all? But yet, see how he
concludes for the Socinians.

Pref. The Dominicans, says he, maintain on the one side, that God can
foresee nothing, but what he decrees: The Iesuit's on the otherside, that he
does not decree all things.

Answ. Iungentur iam Gryphes equis: he will make these one, and other sides to
meet in one syllogism, and so be no more sides at all; and then no different
doctrines at all; which is the quite contrary conclusion to what he assumeth:
Reflect setiously upon these different propositions of the Dominicans and
Jesuits, and you shall find them contradictories, and so impossible to inflow
into one Conclusion true or false, by any lawful consequence. For, ex nihilo
nihil, and contradictories annihilate one the other.

Now this proposition God foresees nothing but what be decrees, is in effect
equivalent to this, God decrees all that he foresees. Again, God decrees not
all things, as ratione materiae, equipollent to this, God decrees not something
which be foresees; for the question being stated of things future, or which
shall be, both sides grant that God foresees them; the difference between them
is, h^w he foresees them.

Now let any man commit the two propositions as joint premises, and see whether
from that complexion or commission the Socinian conclusion can any way result.
Nay you shall find it generally true which I have said, That two Contradictions
can never join in any such commission, to produce a third proposition, as
truly consequent from them: but see them now committed, and observe how ready
and obuious the Conclusion will be, which the Socinians draw from them.
Dominicans. God foreseeth nothing but what he decrees.
Iefuits. God does not decree all things.
Socin. Ergo, God does not foresee all things.
In what mood and figure, Logician? But what Socinian syllogizing is this, to
join two propositions of contrary doctrines and repugnant in themselves, in
one formal complexion of premises; and out of those to infer the conclusion?
Is it wonder if of so monstrous a conjunction of premises, a prodigious
conclusion be brought forth, the conclusion being the natural issue of the
premises? Might he not as well conclude from two propositions, the one of
Catholics, the other of Arrians, in like manner, thus? Cath. The Son is
consubstantiall with the Father.
Arr. The Father is greater then the Son
Socin. The Son is less, and equal to his Father.
An obuious conclusion, says the Socinian; as though he would say, Fairly
encounterd, and kiss it. For out of this absurd conclusion, he will further
question, whether there be any such thing, as Father and Son in God; and
soon after deny it.

But if the Advocate will go back upon every such occasion of encounter, he
will show no more wit then his horse, that being in the way from the
University, would needs be so courteous, as to return back with every horse he
met. And I verily think as small an occasion, and as weak a motive, will draw
this man back to Socinianisme, as the horse to his manger; although perhaps the
manger may have been the strongest motive to both retrogressions; and though
perchance again, the Socinian horse knew better whither he returned, and did
it with a stronger resolution, then his rider; howsoever he might pass, for a
sufficient Hieroglyphique of a Socinian, who is ready to turn in his way of
opinion every day, with whomesoeuer obuious, who shall give him a reason of
change stronger in appearance, then the former that guided his journey.

Again; if he will still float and swim in Socinianisme, until all
differences of schools be attoned, he may, for ought I know, dye as he lives;
and well may he deserve to swim after death too, sowed up into a
lether-sacke, and so cast into the sea, to be deprived of all the elements at
once. I need not tell him for what crime that punishment was decreed: But if he
will not believe, there is any such thing as divine Predestination, until it
be on all sides agreed, whether it be ex praeuisis meritis, or no: or that
there are any divinely Elct until he can be certified, why Jacob rather then
Esau: if he will buy no pots, until the Potter yield him a co^umcing reason why
he made some pottes for baser services, other for more honorable uses: nay if
it will not satisfy him to say, there was use for both kinds, but will further
urge; but why of this clay, of this very piece of clay, a pot of base service?
since he know's by his own experience the Potter could have made it a pot of
Honor, for so the Poet says, -- Argilla quiduis imitaberis vda; soft day will
take any form: It, I say, he will stand stiff upon these terms of dispute,
he will never fasten upon any opinion of Divinity, nor buy any pots; nor, had
that pot been so stiff when it was clay, could the Potter ever have made it a
pot of any service whatsoever.

The truth is, Christian Religion was never brought into the world by coursing;
and such Coursers, unless they change their course, are too clamorous and
quarelsome to expect admittance into the school of peace. S. Paul will tell
them, in plain terms, (...) etc. if any man seem ambitious of Victory, in
contention of dispute, we have no such custom; he may do well to matriculate
himself, in the new Academy, among those Pyrrhonian Sceptiques, whose life and
religion is nothing else but dispute. Of whom S. Paul may seem to speak
(...), they before, and fool their souls away in disputes. (...), says S.
Chrysostom there; in the darkness of discourse, and natural reasons: as they
are called by S. Leo, Terrenarum caligo rationum, mists of human reasons; which
is notwithstanding light, and the only light with Socinians. Against whom the
Propher Esaias pronounces a curse, Quiponunt tenebras lucem, and lucem t^nebras,
who impose the name of darkness upon light, and call light darkness; as they, who
esteem natural reason, light, and the doctrine of faith, darkness: Vaequi
sapientes estis in oculis vestris: Woe to you who are wife in your own eyes,
that is, the eyes of natural reason; who aspire to the knowledge of
supernatural ^uth, by the light of nature; therefore every Socinian is a
foolish Icarus, -- ceratis open Dedal^a
Nititur pennis, vitree daturus
Nomina Ponto.


His Fallacious application of this his Adversaries Position, From truth no
falsehood, in true consequence.
SECT. XXXII.
Pref. I Might lastly adioyne, says he, that you fettle for a rule
unquestionable, that no part of Religion can be repugnant to reason; that from
truth no man can by good consequence infer falsehood, which is to say in
effect, that reason can never lead any man to error.

Answ. This is in effect, and really, a false gloss; but rather indeed it is
in effect to say, that reason can never lead any man to error from a truth by
good consequence: which is all one, as to say; no false Conclusion can flow by
true consequence from true premises as such; which his Adversary said not
unawares, as this Advocate would have you think, but advisedly and knowingly,
and which the very walls of their Logique Schools proclaim.

Pref. And after you have done, you proclaim to all the world, that if men
follow their reason and discourse, they will (if they understand themselves) be
led to Socinianisme.

Answ. This is indeed nodum in scirpo, to seek a knot in a bulrush: as though
what his Adversary says, were any preuarication against the former principle
(from truth, no falsehood, by good consequence:) But this Advocate cannot touch
a line of his Adversaries discourse, but he must sophisticate it one way or
other. His Adversary says indeed, that no man can deny the infallible
authority of the Church, but he must be left to his own wit, and way's, and
must abandon all infused faith, if be understand himself aright: Is this the
same, as to say, that if men follow their reason and discourse they will be led
into Socinianisme? or rather, that if they follow reason, having rejected the
authority of the Church, which is to follow reason, where reason cannot guide,
or where reason is blind, they will at length be led away from all true
religion, and thenceforward to Socinianisme, or whither he list?

The ground of which discourse, may be this, or the like: Natural reason, as
such, apprehends not supernatural truth, because such truth is above reason,
though not repugnant to reason; yea rather, every truth is reasonable, and
conform to reason truly conceauing. For which cause Christian Doctrine is
called by S. Peter (...), rational milk: and according to true Metaphysicke,
all truth has consistence within the sphere of a reasonable Understanding,
therefore no truth can be repugnant to reason: yet as the Moon, though
otherwise light by the illumination which it has from the Sun, by which we
see by night; yet if it be opposed to the Sun, or interposed between the
sun and our eyes, becomes both dark it self, and endarkneth the sun to us:
so Reason standing in opposition to Faith, and that divine light of day whence
it receaues that little night-light which it has, is both it self in darkness,
and depriues our souls of the light of faith.

Whence it comes to pass, that Reason thus endarkned, takes Falsehood for
Truth; or from a material Truth, divine revelation misconceaued, and so not
Truth, infers an untruth even by good consequence. Hence now from
misconceauing Reason, or Reason opposing supernatural Truth, springs a
mutual repugnance between true religion and false, or misconceauing Reason,
not submitting it self to supernatural Faith. Nor yet does it cease to be
Reason and discourse truly so called, though misapplied; for to conclude
consequently out of a false principle, is no less an act of discourse, then to
infer truth out of true principles.

Wherefore notwithstanding this Advocate his tooto early and antedating
Triumph, these two Propositions of his Adversary may stand together peaceably;
That no part of religion can be repugnant to Reason, as Reason vndeluded, as
containing it self within due limits, as in due subjection to that supreme
light whence it is derived; as submitting it self where it is too weak; as
suffering it self to be guided, where it is blind; to be enlightened, where it
is dark; to be raised to a competent stature or proportion, where it creeps,
unable to raise it sel^: all which conditions are conformable even to natural
reason. This, I say, may stand with this other, That from Truth, as truly
conceived, or formally Truth, no untruth can be inferred by good consequence;
and lastly both these two may admit this third into society of coherence; That
if men sollow Reason, where Reason is dark and blind, and weak, and in a word
cannot guide, they may be led into error; and from error to error, until at
length they fall into utter darkness of infidelity and Socinianisme. Of
Socinianisme, I say, a most devilish, and perhaps of all other the most
dangerous Idolatry; as being most nearly allied to the soul of man, borne as
it were in his bowels; nursed and nourish't by selfeloue; cheris't and
confirmed, and growing daily in greater strength, and equal stature with Pride
and Self-conceipt.

For this Supremacy, even in spiritual command, being once granted to
natural Reason, with authority to direct and vmpire in spiritual affairs
(which authority and power God has reserved to himself, that is, to the holy
Ghost, whose kingdom is the Church) what follows, but that the holy Ghost is
deposed, Reason enthroned in his Chair, where it commands absolutely, without
all dependence or subordination to God, from whom it never received any such
authority. Thus Reason is made the God of such men; and because so made, a very
Idol; and all Socinianisme is Idolatry, yea the last, and lowest, and basest I
dolatry; and whither Heretical Idolatry d^uolues at last; for every formal
Heretic is an Idolater, and every Socintan a worse then he. A most proud
Dwarf, a Pygmalion, wholly contracted and confined within himself; whose
Reason is all his says; and consequently his Hopes of no larger extent; and
his Charity enspheared within the same compass, the objects or natural
reason: Whose will is nothing else but self-loue, referring all he does, to his
proper interest and regard, which is indeed, the highest place of pride: then
which the first Precedent of pride, the creature that first showed it to the
world; he, in whom pride was first ideated; from whose Pride, as from the
original source, all the pride of temporal, or spiritual Ambition, all the
pride of Schism, and Heresy, and Socinianisme, and Idolatry are shares, and
dimanations; ascended no higher, when he said, ascendam and ero similis
Altissimo; I will ascend, and be like the most High.

Thus you see (to return his own Epiphonema thither whence it came, to his
due and proper place, that is upon himself) with what probable matter he might
furnish out, and justify his accusation, if he should charge his Adversary with
leading men to Socmianisme: yet observe I pray you, his pitiful
condescendence in the close; the clemency and temper of his victory, in the
much which he says he could do, and the very little which he does.

Pref. Yet (notwithstanding all this) I do not conceive I have ground enough
for this odious imputation: much less should you have charged Protestants with
it, whom you confess to abhor and detest it.

Answ. Now this is the misery, and indeed the point of difference between him
and his Adversary: that he conceaues he has not ground enough for this odious
imputation, and therefore imputes it not. His Adversary conceau's he has; nor
vainly conceau's, but know's and prou's it, and therefore charge them with
it, that deserve it; to the end they may cease to deserve it, and abhor it,
not only in it self, but in the necessary cause of it.

Many a one loves the Father, who loves not the child; yet that beloved
Father, is the parent of that unlovely child. What if the Raven abhor her
young ones; or the Bear perhaps her whelp's? yet both these are the natural
issue of both effect's, as they are the brood and progeny: so are they images
and resemblances of their causes, wherein the face of causes may be seen as in
a mirror. And for what other end are lookingglasses made, then to reflect, and
show the face whereof they present the image?

Let him first clear his maintainers from this imputation, that Socianisme is
the effect of Protestancy; or let him show at least by solid arguments, that it
is not the natural issue of Protestancy, but as a monstrous birth not intended
(I do not say by Protestants, but by Protestancy, according to a Physical and
necessary, though not a moral and expressly voluntary intention,) or lastly
that the generation is merely casual and occasional: Then let them say, they
detest and abhor it, otherwise their detestation is like theirs who detest
the shame of sin, but love the sin.

Nor is it indeed worth God a mercy to any man to abhor Socinianisme; for it
has certainly a most vggly and deformed aspect to any eye that has ever looked
Christianity on the face; yea, I verily believe, if we could see a damned fiend
without the sin of Socinianisme which made him one, he would seem a much
more tolerable Spectacle; yet this Cha^pion is very confident that he can arm
the Mother against the Child, and commit them in deadly Duel: he can do much
in this kind, and so could she, of whom one said, Tu potes vnanimes armare in
proelia fratres: Thou can set brothers together by the ears. And if the
Son chance to fall in the war, we have his epitaph at hand -- Nati sepulchrum
est ipsae Parens, the mothers womb his tomb. For I am assuredly persuaded
their ends are (...), confatall; he will die like a Sampson, or like an Eleazar
perhaps, suo sepultus triumpho, buried in his triumph.

Pref. O. but Protestants will fight against Socinianisme, her proud Impe, not
with broken reeds (so this Advocate) and out of the paper foriresses of an
imaginary infallibility.

Answ. So I believe, but out of a paper fortress of real fallibility; which
he has raised them in this Volume, which I dare say will prove a doughty
Fortress, while he maintains it, especially so armed, if not with broken
reed's, a reed tho; and such a reed of resolution, as I trust a little wynd may
shake it, if it blow in the right corner, and often has. But well then, with
what weapon's shall we expect them in this more then Civil War, between
mother and son?

Pref. Mary they will fight, with the sword of Spirit, with the word of God?

Answ, With the word of God! Fight against Socinians with the word of God! O
rem ridiculam, Cato! I undertake this combat for the Socinians; -- mecum erit
iste labor, I will act this part for once, -- Sedeant spectentque latini; let
the Papists hold their peace and look on.

Will you, a Protestant, prove to me a Socinian, that the son of God took
flesh and became very man? very God, and very man? and this out of Scripture,
the word of God? Convince my reason first, that this is infallibly the word of
God, which you call Scripture. I say convince me this, as infallible. If you
think to convince it by the testimony of Tradition, which is of men; and if
that may be infallible, then the Papist Churchs Tradition descending from age
to age, may be infallible; which you with me deny. Therefore since the
Conclusion can have no more certainty, then is derived into it from the
Premises, it can be no more infallible, that this Scripture is the word of God,
then that this testimony of Tradition is infallible.

Now truly, I would go some miles on bare foot to hear such a dispute, wherein
the Protestant should undertake to convince the Socinian, that their Bible is
infallibly the word of God, especially all testimony of Tradition of the Church
secluded; which if they would admit, they would deny infallibly. Yea should the
Protestant convince it morally infallible, that this Bible were the word of
God; yet such a moral infallibility should never be proved to the Socinian, to
be greater, then that those Decades entitled of Liuy, are indeed the works of
Li^y; and consequently this infallibility could never amount to the
irrefragable certainty of divine Faith. He would urge them further with
differences of Translations, and those no petty differences, but very
substantial, and concerning points of faith. How would they prove it
infallible, that their Translation is authentic, and the word of God?

Should I yet grant out of a Socinian supererogation, or superarrogance rather,
or out of confidence and animosity, or an itch of dispute, or out of curiosity
to try how well the Protestant can use this Goliah's sword, of which he so
braueth, Non est sicut iste, None like this, Pref.
(and surely, were I of the Socinian humor, this very motto, non est ficut
iste, would put a strange itch of glory into my fingars, to be at him, and
either to spoil him of his Non est sicut iste, or to break it in pieces:) but
should I grant, I say, for disputes sake, that the Protestant Bible were
infallibly the word of God, yea and that infallibly rather then the Roman, how
would the Protestant convince his interpretation to be the true sense and soul
of that word? Why this Protestant-Interpretation infallibly rather, then that
of some Arrian, or other Heretic, denying that point of doctrine in question?
Most certainly should I hear of any such Protestant who would enter into such
a Duel with a nimble Socinian, such as I know some, I should rather transfer
the motto of the sword upon the swordman, Non est sicut iste; of all the Wise
of Gotam, non est sicut iste, there is not such another, who goes about to
hedge in a Socinian with the leaves of his Geneua Bible.

You may please to observe by the way; that ( Goliath supposed the Type of the
Devil, as David of Christ; this sword, the word of God, taken from the Devil
who prophanes it) although this sword wherewith David kill's Goliath, be a non
est sicut ist^, for good, in a David's hand, that is, in the hand of a true
Christian, the spiritual issue of David; yet in the hand of a Goliath, a
Philistin, an Heretic, it is a non est ficut iste, for bad: therefore all
Heretics have made this weapon their choice, wherewith to fight against
Catholics. Wherein this champion vaunting his confidence, boasts nothing
else but the customary glory of all H^^etiques: yet if he ^ight with a Socinian
as very a Giant as himself, he will find this sword will do him little service.

But thus now, having florish'^ a while with his Goliah's sword, and only
shown the blade to the Socinian (who is nothing terrified with it) then
fairly sheathing it again, as having done great fea^'s, he concludes with his
wonted acclamation, and a Plaudite to himself.

^ref. Thus Protestants in general (says he) I hope are sufficiently
vindicated from your Calumny; I proceed now to do the same sernice for the
Deuines of England.

Answ. But if his service for the Deuines of England, prove no better, then it
has done for the Protestant^ in general, in this his vindication; I do not
see what great reward he can expect from either. But I rather believe, that had
some D^uines in England, more difcreet and provident then others, had their
heads in the consultation, he might have stood in the Fair until night with a
Nemo nos conduxit. Nor can I doubt but many of them considering, how this
Champion comes appointed into the field, how furnished with circumstances
requisite for such a combattant, will often say, Non tali auxtlio etc. -- Now
the choice as it is made, in my judgment, Plus fellis quam mellis habet, has
more of the Waspe then of the Be, more Passion then Providence; yet I, for my
part can excuse the indiscretion of the Elector's (if any censure it so) by the
policy of the choice. I can suspect they were prudent to make use of this
Neutrall, already pres^ for any service; to interpose him between them and
their adversary, to receive the blow's; or like an out-worke to intercept the
batteries; who if he fell, yet he should have done them the service to have
stood the assault for a while, and kept off the enemy from the City wall's
while they fortified within: the loss could not be great of an already Perd^:
Quod perit, peri^ss^ duca^, -- What Is lost already, give it for lost, and there is
an end. For their own reputes, they had foreseen an eu^sion whereby to
assoyle them. -- He knew you best. -- He came lately from you. -- His very
abandoning, and reabandoning your cause, after a nearer acquaintance may take
off something from the credit of it in the opinions of many men. Howsoever, he
was a man of service: -- he wanted employment to set him a work. If any man will
say it was Charity Mistaken, the mistaker will desend it, they doubt not, with
more credit, then ever it was impugned.

Now the thing, wherein he professes, or prostitutes his service to the
Deuines of England, is, his vindicating of them from the Calumny (as he says)
of his Adversary. What calumny? Forsooth, his imputing unto them insufficiency,
or inability to deal with Socinians by way of argument. The reason of their
insufficiency in this behalf given by his Adversary, is; that their studies and
learning, lie another way. But hear it rather as alleged and glossed by this
their Advocate.

His falsely supposed Calumnies against English Deuines, rejected; and the
supposall proved calumnious.
SECT. XXXIII.
Pref. THeir learning (you say) consistes only in some superficial Talent of
Preaching, languages, and cloquution, and not in any deep knowledge of
Philosophy, especially of Metaphysics; and much less of that most solid
profitable, subtle, and (O remridiculam, Cato, and iocosam!) succinct method
of Schoole-diuinity.

Answ. Thus far the Advocate, making himself merry upon that word (succinct)
calling up the severity of Cato, to laugh with him at the ridiculous
application. Yet he should have done better, in my judgment, to have summond a
Democritus, who would have laughed at any thing. For Cato, I dare answer for
him, though he laughed to see an Ass eat thistles, he would never have laughed
at this.

But since neither of these are now at leisure to laugh, who together with
godles Socinians, and other Infidell's experience long since in the eternity of
their woe, the truth of that Prophetique commination, Luc. 6.
Vae vobis qui ridetis nunc, woe to you who laugh now, because they laugh't
when, and where they should have wep't; I think it not amiss to call out some
Grammarian from Eaton, or Winchester School, to show the Logician his little
skill in Grammar, leaving it behind through his too to hasty posting to Logic;
who, I believe will make it manifest that the Iester is the veriest jest, and
the most pregnant Topique of ridiculous, -- Captatorque; dabit risus Nasica
Coran^. Well then, this Adiunct, or Epithete (succinct) as applied to
Schoole-diuinity, largely and voluminously treated by some Deuines, is geered
by this Logician, as very incongruous. Be the question therefore thus stated;
Whether, notwithstanding this diffusion of treating in large Volumes, the
method of Schoole-diuinity may be fitly enough phrazed succinct? The Logician
denies. Against whom I exhibit my Grammarian Courser, though without his Hood,
or Formalities of a Graduate: which ceremony (were he a Graduate) though
laudable, yet I suppose to be obligatory only in the University; and who,
though he has not learned to conclude in Dialecticall form, in actu signato,
as by rule of art; yet he shall speak reason, in Logical, that is, reasonable
consequence, in actu exercit^, as by rote of nature. The method of
Schoole-diuinity may be fitly termed succinct, notwithstanding the foresaid
diffusion, Ergo falleris.

This he proves, commencing from the Quid nominis, as he has learned in
Tullies Offices. What is succinct? It is according to our classick authors and
teachers of Latin speech, that which with us, girt, tuk't up, gathered up, or
the like. In this sense, a Giant may be succinct, if he be girded, as truly as
the Pigmy; the widest Heaven is thus succinct, with all, or any of the five
Zones: nor yet is either the Heaven more narrow, or the Giant of less bulk,
because he is girded: nor had that Nymph, -- ritu succincta Dianae; or that
other -- nodoque; sinus collecta fluentes, their garme^t's any whit shrunk, or
of Iesse, or shorter measure, because they were tuck't up, or close girt to
their body: nor was she whom the Poet describes -- succinctam Pharetr^, either
she, or her Quiver less, by reason of her so girding it about her.

Yet you must give me leave to call this kind of wearing, or arraying succinct,
as well in English as in Latin, since the manner of wearing, is the same in
either language. It is, I say, succinct in the manner, though not in the
matter; as if Homer's Ilias may be so malignantly printed, that it may be shut
up into a nut-shell; in that case we may truly say it is succinct, in the
manner of impression and compression, though as large in the matter. And a
Nestor I hope, or a Glaucus shall be as prolixe in their Haranges, and as
tedious; and as many skirmishes about the body of Patroclus, or about the
fiering the Grecian ships etc. as if it were printed in a most large and
legible Character, as yours M. Attorney, in folio. Ergo, succinctnes of method
may very well stand with the large treatings of Schoole-deuines, without any
ridiculous incongruity at all. This much the Grammarian could say.

Now to return to our own doctrines of faith, or explications of those
doctrines which heretofore lay dispersed and loose, in the monuments of Holy
Fathers, as they wrote upon several occasions of emergent Heresies in several
ages, and never reduced into one body, by due order and method, could not then,
and so scattered, be truly termed succinct: the same, now gathered together
and ingirt (in one Pandect or Su^me) by an orderly prescript of method, may be
worthily and co^gruously called succinct; and the method likewise so co^prizing
and summing, a succinct method: yea though those doctrines and explications
thus methodically summed, be either in number or largenes of treating, even
more ample and diffuse, in regard of matter, then they were in those Fathers;
yet still the method is succinct in regard of the manner. As, if a hundred load
of Hay, or (if that be fitter for his purpose) straw, were laid up in one rick
or barn, which laid before scattered in the fields or meadows in a thousand
cocks, though the hay, or straw be the very same in quantity or number of
load's, yea though it were Iayd together which some other load's that never
grew in those field's or meadow's; yet no man will deny, but that hay, or straw
so rick't, or hows'd, lye's now in a more close manner, and a narrower room,
then as scattered in the fields or meadow's: which more narrow and close
compression, and collection, is in effect the same with our succinctnes of
method in School-diuinity. Would Cato laugh at this? No, Cato would be more
wise then so. The Socinian may very properly, and in good consequence of his
Philosophy, laugh at his own jest, whose religion is nothing else but the
adoration of his own conceit.

You have hard part of the Calumny against the Deuines of England, their want
of Schoole-diuinity, which being by this Advocate only laughed at, and so rather
confessed then consuted, becomes the Calumny of the charger. Hear now his
gloss, or comment upon this supposed Calumny.

The second part of the Calumny, concerning the studies, and learning of the
English Universities.
SECT. XXXIV.
THe Protestant Attorney pursues his charge of Calumny in these words:

Pref. Wherein you have discovered in your self, the true Genius, and spirit
of deiraction.

Answ. See how knowingly, and expertly he speaks of this Genius of detraction,
as though it were his familiar. But his reason.

Pref. For taking advantage from that, wherein Envy it self cannot deny, but
they are very eminent, and which requires great sufficiency of substantial
learning, you disparage them, as insufficient in all things else.

Answ. Now truly I make no doubt, but very many of either University have these
talents in great eminency: and no marvel, if we consider either so many and
choyee wits, as in so great a multitude of Pretenders; or those excellent
means, wherewith they are endowed for all kind of good litterature. Wherein, I
dare presume to say, they are incomparable with any other University of Europe;
and only comparable between themselves, as one eye with another in the same
face, without disparagement to either. Which Excellency would be in these kinds
far more apparent and testified to the world, that neither Envy nor Truth might
deny it; especially in those yearly confluences of hearers and witnesses,
summond by the celebrity of report, as it were to the Olympique Games, and
spectacles of learned Arts (so that it might be said of them, as some^) me it
was of ancient Rome, Famam Rome tuae non pudet historiae,) if the care and
industry of the Electors, were rather to grace those public Exercises, by the
Excellency of the men, then the men by those Exercises.

As for their talent in preaching, let them before they boast, be sure whether
Envy do meddle with it, at least foreign Envy, if domestique do; and then show
us their commission for preaching: Quomodo pradicabunt nisi mittautur; how
shall they preach unless they be sent? Sicut scriptum est, quam spec^osi pedes
etc. how fair are the feet of those who preach those good tidings, who preach
peace; signif^ing by this sequel and connection, that the speciosity, neatnes,
or cleanes of feet, that is, of affections requisite in such a Preacher, must
proceed from the grace and spirit of that divine mission and commission. The
quite contrary of which effects, has been manifestly seen and observed, and
notoriously known to the world, in the preaching of a Luther, of a Calvin, and
the like: their preaching was without mission, therefore were their feet so
foul as the impressions of their footsteps, extant upon record, do clearly
testify.

Therefore also the aim and scope of their preaching was not peace, but mutiny
and rebellion, and defection from their Mother Church, and from spiritual
obedience; from Samuel to Saul; in whose abiection, and excussion of whose
anthority, they withal abiected and shook off God himself, and in Saul, and
with Saul f^ll to Idolatry. For he who shakes of that obedience, which God
has established in his Church, enthroneth another God; that is, the power, or
the creature, upon which he transferreth his obedience which he owes to God,
which is Idolatry. Upon which breach and defection, followed forthwith that
deluge of all mischief, and inundation of Vices, ouerflowing those nations,
wherein Religion had been in greatest flourish. Lo, the effect of their
mission-Iesse preaching.

Upon these grounds the examine must go, whether it were or no, detraction to
say, their learning consists in a superficial talent of preaching; or whether
he might not have denied it to be preaching at all, according to the ordinary
acceptance of the word, as by Christian use it is consecrated and dedicated,
to signify Evangelical Annunciation, or the Embassy of God to men: unless
perhaps in attributing a superficial talent of preaching, he implicitly meant
to deny the substance; as indeed, that kind of preaching can have nothing else
but superficiality, being deuoid of the substance, which is divine truth and
spirit. It were therefore to be wished rather, then disliked by this Ad^ocate,
or his Clyent's, that they were envied, ((...)) Pindar. Pyth. ^d. 1.
and not pitied, that so goodly a superficies, so much exterior grace of wit,
should want the body and interior worth, and substance of divine truth wherein
to subsist.

Well Sir, after all this bravery and presumed excellency of preaching etc. if
this prove a true imputation of insufficiency in those Deuines, when they are
pressed by Socinian Arguments, who are therefore either caught themselves by
their illaqueations, or give occasion to the Socinians of their greater
obfirmation; or to others to be drawn into the same infidelity: If this, I
say, be truth, yea, and a known and testified truth, and so neither Calumny
nor detraction; how will he excuse that insufficiency, or at the least, deny it
to be a great cause of the propagating of that contagion? Or lastly (which be
pretends to do) vindicate his Maintainers from this aspersion? Hear how
substantially he does it.

Pref. As if, forsooth, because they dispute not eternally, Vtrum Chymaera
bombinans in vacuo possit comedere secundas intentiones; or, Whether a million
of Angels may not sit upon a needles point; because they fill not their brains
with notions that signify nothing, to the utter extermination of all reason and
common sense, and spend not an age in weauing, and vnweaning subtle webb's,
fitter to catch flies, then souls; therefore they have no deep knowledge in
the Acroamaticall part of learning.

Answ. This is his answer. Whence you may suspect, that Brasmus was his last
Acr^ama, from whom he eame to write this with his pen, full of salt, and
sarcasme, to cast upon the faces of all Schoole-deuines: and you may note, as
in passing by, how, even here, as every where, what he blame's in his
Adversary, he out-doe's it himself; and by this very passage of many, you may
observe how familiar he is with the Genius of Detraction, which comes from him
so easily, that I durst almost excuse him, and say he takes no notice of it, (
-- Vsque adeo a teneris assuescere magnum est:) as some Orpheus play's and
sing's by the rules of art which he reflect's not on. As for this question of a
Chymaera, it is, no doubt, wholly Chymerique: and whether it may have been the
subject of some Quadragesimall coursing, I cannot tell. I have known as mad a
question canuas't there in my day's (as concerning a Pridian, and a Postridian)
which some Diuinity-chaire may yet remember. And yet, me think's, I could
propose this question to be maintained by some witty Inceptor, or Commencer,
affirmatively thus: -- Virum Chimaera bombi^ans in vacuo, debeat comedere
secundas intentiones? -- Affirm.

Then for the more luculent and fraudlesse process in this grave problem, I
would first clear the terms from ambiguity. I would understand by Chymaera, a
Socinian; and him (that you might be able to look upon the monster, with less
fright and horror, mask't or vizar'd in Protestantisme) then bombinans in
vacu^, that is, busy in disputing to no purpose; nor with hope or intent to
determine any truth; or, bombinans in vacu^, buzzing his imposture in some idle
and vacant ear; or again, bombinans in vacu^, buzzing and disputing against
all principles of Divinity, and Philosophy, that there is vacuum in nature,
that God is not every where, or that it is not certain whether be be any where.

And then, whether this Chymaera, ought to feed only upon second Intentions?
whether he ought in conformity to his Principles to be content with such
Commons? or whether he ought to take commons in any College of the University?
The two former he should hold affirmative, the third negative. For according to
all those who truly believe there is a God, all food and nourishment of bodies
has subsistence and being from him; nay rather, it is God that feeds and
nourishes in all sorts of viands: but in the way of Socinians God himself
has no subsistence, according to whose principles, all that concerns God or
Deity, is doubtful and uncertain, or only appearance and imagination: But in
this doubtfulnes, imagination etc. there is no reality or subsistence of truth;
what remains then of God, and consequently what feeding remains but only
upon second Incentions, vnreall notions etc? And certainly, he may seem very
insatiable, whom all, that God is, with him, cannot satiate; therefore he
ought to be satisfied with second Intentions; therefore he cannot in equity
complain if his College send him to the Logic or Metaphysick Schools, to
take up his Commons in Notions, and second Intentions.

Add unto this, that it is directly against the first intention of the
Founders of Colleges, that any Socinian should have Commons there; therefore
he must feed upon second Intentions. The Antecedent I prove; for those Founders
endowed their Colleges with means and maintenance only for such who believe
in God, yea and in Christ too, as themselves all believed: therefore it is
contrary to their intentions, which were real intentions, that Socinians should
have any Commons there at all: Ergo -- Chymara bombinans in vacu^ debet
comedere secundas intentiones.

His geering of Schoole-termes, and Angels upon the needles point.
SECT. XXXV.
COncerning the place of Angels, or the coexistency of more Angels in the same
material place; though much might be said in a more high way of Theory and
Acroamatique abstractions, and tenuity of Notions, and sublimity of
Speculation, whereby I could show that the man only raues, and geeres his own
Ignorance: yet both because I seem now to know his diet, that he feeds more
grossly; and also because he insinuates some weakness of brain; least I should
be accessory to the utter exterminating of his reason (though it seems to me a
strange matter to exterminate, or banish that which dwells no where, as a
Socinians reason has no residence, nor can indeed be resident any where; a
shrowed property, and adangerous obstacle to be interposed between any such
pretendent, and a Bishopric, or a Chair;) yet I will not venture to perplexe
him in such mazes and labyrinths of intricate subtilities. Yet here I could not
choose but wonder at the inconstancy of the man, that he who professes so much
honor to Logic, who relies upon it with such confidence, that he attributes
more infallibility to Logick-rules, then to the Church of God, should so
slight, and auile second Intentions, and Notions, which either, as mental or
vocal, are the very style, and idiome, and mother tongue of Logic. For what
other thing are Predicables, and Predicaments, Syllogismes, and Enthememes,
Categoriques, and Hypothetiques, and the like? Nay what one of all the seven
liberal Sciences, can subsist, or uphold it self in due honor, or disuulgar
it self without those proper and several notions and terms of art? And are
the notions of Scholastique Divinity, the only notions that signify nothing?
What if they signify nothing to him that understands them not? do they cease by
that, to be significant? If the Sun in the clearest shine, discover no
colors to the blind; is it not therefore retectiue of colors, to those that
use eyes?

I would gladly know of him those notions, or any of those in common use of
Catholic Schools, that signify nothing. If he have met with any such, or
rather any by him supposed such, he might have done well, before he threw his
Censure head long, to advise with the Doctor of the Chair, who would have
instructed him in their true signification: whose patience, and modesty of
condescendence to this Advocates Ignorance, I cannot but take notice of, who
would dissemble such adisparagement of his faculty, in Schoole-diuinity, and his
use of such terms and notions proper to such schools. Howsoever these are not
the webs wherewith we pretend to eatch souls: No. We rather employ S. Peter's
nets to this end, to whom, and the rest of the Apostles it was said, Facia^^
ves fieri piscateres hominum, I will make you fishers of men; which nets are
the doctrines of Christian faith and manners, tied to his chair; which are the
nets indeed, wherein not flies, but birds, yea even Eagles have been, and are
caught, in every Region under the sun.

But the doctrines of Heretics, and disputes of Socinians, are indeed (...)
thin, and weak cobwebs: wherein only flies, 2. Pet. 2.
light and weak spirits, instabiles anima, irresolute souls, are entangled;
and whom so taken in the web, the skulking spider, that all enuenoming
spirit, suddenly inuades and kill's with his poisonous doctrine. For they are
Heretics and Socinians, who having sucked from the most fragrant and
sovereign flowers of holy Scriptures, the honey which they convert to poison,
spinne it out of their own brains and bowel's, their own natural reason and
discourse; and weaue it into nets wherewith to catch such souls. But such nets
are cast in vain before the ey's of birds, those Orthodoxe spirits who fly
above, or even through them; carrying away together both the web and webster,
dissipating both into the air, by discovering them.

And truly though all Heretics, may be called Spiders and their doctrine
Cobwebbs; yet most of all Socinians, with their, not doctrines, but doubts.
Upon whom therefore were the Goddess Minerua to pronounce again sentence of
execution, she would not doom them to hang till they were dead; no, but as
when she condemned her Emulatresse Arachne. Viue quidem, pende tamen improba,
dixit. Live, but hang; for the life of a Socinian is wholly pendant in opinions,
alway's hanging, and no better worth.

You have seen his purgation, how effectually he has vindicated his Deuines
from the pretended Calumny, even so, as I have related; but that in his very
transition from this Paragraph, he has left behind him the impression of a
Socinian pride.

Pref. But I have too much honored (says he) the poorenes of this
detractation to take notice of it. Answ. Whence also (as from many other the
like traict's) you may conceive in what spring he has washed his face, who
thinks he honors whersoeuer he daignes to take notice. If content be riches,
he needs to purchase no more; rich already, and happy enough, who does so
easily please himself; only poor and unhappy in this, that he has no rival
in his Authadie.

His Calumny and Fallacy concerning the declining of Protestancy, intimated by
his Adversary.
SECT. XXXVI.
HEnce he passes from a pretended Calumny, to not so much as a pretexible or
colorable Accusation, but something which he fallaciously phrazeth Accusation,
and is no such thing. For what fool can think any man accuses, or blames
that thing, which no man can doubt, but he wishes?

Pref. Your other part (says he) of your Accusation, strikes deeper, and is
more considerable; and that tells us, that Protestancy waxes weary of it
self; that the Professors of it, they especially of greatest worth, love
temper and moderation etc.

Answ. Is this an Accusation? Can his Adversary possibly be conceived to blame
this? Why then does he so deprave the clear sense of his Adversaries words,
but only to make him odious, even to them, whom he commends for their better
inclination toward antiquity and truth, for their temper and moderation?

Which simple relation of his Adversary, exhibited without all bitterness of
speech, or any offensive style, see how he exulcerates? With what bitterness of
a black Censure, as though he had dip't his pen -- succo nigra loliginis, --
or, in fell amaritudinis, in the gall of bitterness, as S. Peter said to Simon
Magus an Apostata from the Church of God; and who after his Apostasy returning
to his trade, deluded many by his encharmed wing's of pride and imposture.
Hear his own words after his Adversaries, even as related by himself: and (as
you are a lover of truth and true judgment) take the pains to compare them.

Pref. Which scurrilous libell (says he) void of all truth, discretion, and
honesty etc.

Answ. And is not this indeed scurrilous railing? void of all truth,
discretion, and honesty? For does this man deserve to be speared? or to be
treated calmely, who tempests so rudely? who rides with so loose a bridle of
passion, or no bridle at all, that he out-runs even himself, and self-knowne
truth. And yet after this he enter's into his Adversaries bosom, to ravish
thence a concealed thought, contrary to what his words carry before them, and
contrary to his very thought.

Pref. For did you conceive (says he) such inclination of men of worth and
learning to your party; can any man imagine, you would proclaim it and bid men
take heed of it?

Answ. I answer, No: he would not, nor does he any where bid them take heed of
it, but take notice of the unsettled condition of all Heresy, which either
falls further into Turcisme, Socinianisme, Atheism etc. as we see it has in
many part's of the world, which have laps't from the Roman: or else floates for
ever, and turns round as it were in an incessant wheel of Error's, much like
the wheel of Fortune, and not a little in conformity with that; until they
return to the pillar of truth, and partake the firmity and weight thereof from
the spirit of truth which resides there; whose special gift all stability and
ballast of souls is; without which they are as light as that chafe which the
unquenchable fire shall burn, or as that dust, quem proijcit ventus a facie
terrae.

But, what wonder (to return thither whence we have a little digrest) if he
make a quite contrary construction of his Adversaries words, since he cannot
believe himself, who has so often belyed himself.

Pref. Sic notus Ulysses? do we know the Iesuit's no better?

Ans. Yes Ajax. you know them, and they you.

Pref. Are they turned preuaricator's against their own cause?

Ans. I am sure you are; Take which cause you will: and even here (good Sir)
mark if he turn not preuaricator even against himself.

Pref. Are they likely men to betray and expose their own Agent's and
Instruments; and to awaken the eyes of Iealousy, and to raise the clamor of
the people against them? Certainly your zeal to the Sea of Eome, testified by
your Fourth Vow of special Obedience to the Pope, proper to your Order, and
your cunning carriage of all affairs for the greater advantage and advancement
of that Sea, are clear demonstrations, that if you had thought thus, you would
never have said so.

Answ. Here, before I pass any farther, it will not be absurd, I think, to
give him a companion; to couple him with John Done, whose words in his book
which he has entitled with his own Name, (Pseudo-martyr) are so like these of
the Advocate, as if they had been spit out of the same mouth. Hear some
passages of the Deans, to this very purpose. Psendom. cap. 4.
But all your labor is to understand the present state of kingdoms, and where
any ouerture is given for the Popes advantage, or wherein any opposition or
hinderance is interiected against his purposes. And again: If they be, as they
say in their Constitutions but bacula senis, the old man's staves, the old man
is the Pope; they are bound to say once a week one mass to their Geuerals
intention, though they know not what it is. And of this general intention the
center and basis is the advancement of that Sea, about which these Planetary
monks have their course and reuolutions. And yet more. But the Iesuit's in
this latter age, have found the use of the compass, which is the Popes will
etc. They are more severe maintainers and increaser's then any other of those
doctrines of the Roman Church, which we noted to beget this inclination (that
is, to Martyrdom.) Thus far the Deane.

Answ. Now, would I know who exorcised these spirits? Who forced them by any
torture to proclaim these so high praises of their adversaries? what have the
Iesuit's deserved of these men, that they should be so honored by their
testimonies above all other Orders or Professors of the Roman Catholic
Church? For at least, to those who acknowledge subjection to the Roman Sea,
whose approbation without doubt they covet more, then of any other, they
testify their supreme praise and commendation. For what more highly commendable
in the judgments of all such Catholic spirits, then their so vigilant service
and obedience to him, whom they jointly believe to be the Vicar of Christ? What
more admirably laudable, then to be the staff of Christ Jesus, in the hand of
his Deputy on earth; then to make the advancement of his Church, the Basis and
Center of their intentions?

But then chiefly, by what so commemorable merit of their Order toward these
men, mere aliens and strangers to them, can they have deserved those divine
Elogies and Encomions, fitter to be celebrated in the honor of the Apostles
themselves, to whom indeed they are most due and proper? The Iesuit's must
needs blush to hear themselves so dignified, as to be called Planetary monks,
or which is all one, Apostolical monks; for these Planetary monks wander no
whither, but whither they are sent with the same commission of the Apostles,
established by those words, Euntes in mundum vniuersum etc. going into the
whole world, preach this Gospel etc. And he was (sure) a Planetary monk, 1.
Cor. 4.
who said of himself and his Coapostles, and instabiles sumus, we have no
settled habitation. Now for these Planets, to have their courses and reuolutions
about the same center with the Apostles, the advancement of the Church and
Gospel of Christ is so high a point of glory and dignity, that the Apostles
themselves aspired to no higher.

Now would I know, I say, again, who made these pen^ their ennemies trumpets?
Or who blew them, or played them to what tune he listed? Are they not ashamed of
such preuarication? But you may pardon them, they did it against their will's;
they had no such interition; in a word, digitus Dei hic est; they were
exorcised. Nor have we cause to glory, they will say: If we praised you with
truth's; yet we pepperd you with lies.

Thus has this couple preuaricated, as you see, unwittingly and unwillingly.
True; which may be their Apology for any good they do for any Catholic
Profession, at any time: A Comicall, a Parmenian benevolence; Plus hodie boni,
feci imprudens, quam sciens anto
hunc diem vmquam. --
I have done more good to day unawares, then ever I did wittingly in my life.
As for any preuarication of his Adversary, if his words offer a preuaricating
sense, that is, disaduantagious to the writers cause, it is an ordinary lapse,
a very usual oversight, as not to observe all advantages in the speech or
writing of other men; so not to foresee, or avoid all disaduantages in his
own. I assure my self he pretends no exemption from the common condition of
mortality, (...)
which is (incertae prouidentia nostra) failing of providence, and caution in
many things, wherein natural sagacity of wit, or judgment carries the torch, if
he have neither swaru'd from the prescript of Faith, nor Charity. If otherwise
he have incurred some disadvantage, I verily think, he will be content, rather
to seem less provident, then so cunning a dissembler, as this Adversary would
make him. Notwithstanding, the ground of this preuarication laid by this
Advocate, is indeed an untruth of his own, which is this: that.

Pref. As the Samaritan's saw in the disciples countenance, that they meant to
go to Jerusalem: so you pretend (says he) that it is even legible in the
forehead's of th^se men, that they are even going, nay making have to Rome.

Answ. This had been preuarication indeed; but they are the words which this
shameless Attorney infoist's, and masketh in a different Character, as continued
in his Adversaries discourse, and as his words, who has no such. Now for that
latent, or pretexed meaning, or intention which this Advocate, this
Politique-would-be would seem to have deciphered in his Adversaries writing,
it is altogether as improbable, as the interpretation is malicious: whereby
while he pretends to free him from one preuarication, much less he endeauours
to wind him into a greater.

For what greater Preuarication indeed, or what folly more disaduantagious to
his cause, then to have gone about to seem angry, yea enraged (as this
Interpreter intimates) against those, whose approaches to Catholic Religion
in some exterior expressions, he describes? -- Sic notus Ulysses? Was ever Ajax
more mystaken in Vlys^es, even then, when he raued with madness? Was there any
policy to endeavor to alienate such men of that temper and moderation, yea
and learning too, to staue them off, to beat them from the doors, whose
reentrance into the house, he couets above all things? O yes, forsooth.

Pref. You foresaw your time of prevailing, or even subsisting, would be short,
if other Adversaries gave you no more advantage, then these do.

Answ. O Policy beyond the moon! We are more likely to prevail with such, or
subsist by such, who wish us all extirpated, whose daily outcries for so many
years, have by all means endeavored to awake the Laws; who attempt daily to
raze out all monuments and memory of Catholic Religion; who are so far from
brooking the name of sesuit, that they are enemies to the name of Jesus; all
impressions of which they would deface both in print and picture. With these we
can hope to prevail, by these subsist, rather then with men of temper and
moderation; as though all advantages which gave us argument or matter to write,
though we write in our own blood, were our greatest booty and content. O
gross Policy! but O witty discoueryl though to find it out where it lurk't
under a pretended folly of preuarication, -- (Sic notus Ulysses?) as very a
Ulysses as he was, this slye Advocate, this Palamedes has detected him.

Now all the wit of antique and modern discoueries (huic herbam porrigito,
palmam date) yield primacy to this. Battus into an Iudex, or Touchstone, is a
stale and fabled metamorphosis. -- sub illis
Montibus, inquit, erant, and erant sub montibus illis.
They were there, under those hill's (quoth he) and so they were. Here is a
Battus who has discovered what was never hid; has exposed to public view
the invisible Eele. And has not the man reason to glory in this discovery?
Judge you, whether he has or no? And in further conformation of his own
persuasion, that he has indeed found out the Nilus-head, retected his
Adversaries drift's and policy, and laid them open to the world, that no man
can doubt, but it is the very meaning of the riddle which this Oedipus has
read; hear how conuincingly he argues it, Pref.
out of the silliness and poorness of his Adversaries suggestions, and
partly the apparent vanity and falsehood of them. So he.



Pref. What if out of Devotion toward God; out of a desire that his should be
worhipped, as in spirit and truth in the first place, so also in the beauty of
holiness: what if out of fear, that too much simplicity and nakedness in the
public service of God may beget in the ordinary sort of men a dull and stupid
irreuerence etc. I say, what if out of these considerations, the governors of
our Church, more of late then formerly, have set themselves to adorn and
beautisy the places where Gods honor dwells, and to make them as heavenly as
they can, with earthly ornaments; is this a sign they are warping toward
Popery?

Answ. To all which I answer, what if his Adversary blame none of all these
either things or considerations, but rather like them well? What if he infer
out of all this, no such matter as any real or intended approach to the Roman
Church? No, it is manifest enough what he inferr's, which is that which writes,
and expresses in words plain enough, that Protestancy is subject to
perpetual changes. And in a more general way he infers the powerful working
of truth, which will infallibly, in time become victorious. The reason; because
all truth has existence and subsistence from, and in God; it is his Word:
whereas error and falsehood spring originally either from the frailty and
ignorance of man, or from the malice of the Devil, whose work all Heresy and
Falsehood is. To dissolve which work of the Devil, the consubstantiall Word of
the Eternal Father became man, that man in him might become victorious over
all falsehood and Heresy, which is the doctrine of flesh and blood, the school
and Iesson of the world, which makes a party against Christian Religion.

Pref. Again; What if (says he) the names of Priests and Altars so frequent
in ancient Fathers though not in the now Popish sense, be now resumed?

Answ. I would feign know when he will be so good as to show us the different
sense of these names in the use of ancient Fathers from the now Popish sense?
Never. But at the least by this nominall Conformity, the Church of England is
put in a state, by this regard, more justifiable against Bapists then before,
being hereby enabled to say to Papists, (whenever these names are objected)
we also use the names of Priest and Altars, and yet believe neither the
corporal presence, Pref.
nor any proper, or propitiatory Sacrifice.

Answ. But to omit that the ancient Fathers most frequently mention a Proper
sacrifice too, yea and a real and corporal presence of Christ his body and
blood in, that sacrifice of the Altar, wherein the Priest is sacrificant; and
that all these things and names are equally frequented by the use of ancient
Fathers; it were well to consider whither this evasion will lead us? to wit,
into the very Hell of Sonanianisme. Will you prove the Fathers believed the
Trinity? Why? Because there is frequent mention in them of three Persons,
Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost. We Socinians also use these names, and yet
we believe not the Trinity, in the now Popish sense: nay they might apply this
evasion to whatsoever mystery of faith, now generally believed by Christians,
and of frequent mention in the holy Fathers.

Pref. Lastly (says he) what if Protestants be now put in mind that for
exposition of Scriptures they are bound by a Canon to follow the ancient
Fathers, which whosoever does with sincerity, it is utterly impossible he
should be a Papist.

Answ. There spoke a Jewel: Behold the Phoenix newly hatched in his ashes, and
already flush; now this was well flowne surely; he was resolved to strike home.
And an Hyperbole flies from him with as great facility as an even Truth; but I
know his shift, that the Fathers had some private opinions, which the Church
has antiquated, and Catholics now hold not orthodox; therefore they, who
follow them (will this Advocate say) cannot be Papists. But this consequence is
not worth a rush; for those Fathers never held those opinions in opposition
against the Church, but were alway's ready to follow what the Church would
determine in those points of doctrine, as then undefined, like as they most
readily embraced all her doctrines already defined. By which two Catholic
properties their actual conspiring in things defined, and preparation to
conspire in things to be defined, they were truly Papists; and whosoever
fallows those Fathers in this, it is utterly impossible he should not be a
Papist.

The rest ensuing in his vindication of English Deuines is partly nothingelse
but animosity of denial, and offering as it were, to course sense with reason;
to prove by reason that the eyes of men see not what they see, or see what they
see not; partly mere impertinences, nothing to disprooue that change and
alteration which his Adversary describes, but neither censures, nor reprehends
at all, as this Sophist would make men believe. which done; then after his
solemn manner of conclusion, he triumph's, sicut exaltant victores capta preda
quando diuidunt spolia; as victor's are wont to exult having gotten some booty
when they divide the spoils. For even so he deuides his presumed victory
amongst his friends, giving every man his share.

Pref. And thus, my friends, I suppose, are clearly vindicated from your
scandal's and Calumnies.

Answ. No doubt as clearly, as those were truly Calumnies and scandal's; which
were either none, or they were his, and of his own making, as I suppose I have
clearly proved.

His Answer to some personal Imputations.
SECT. XXXVII.
Pref. IT remains now that in the last place I bring my self fairly off,
from your foul aspersions.

Answ. Thus the Advocate, now his own Clyent. But by his leave if this method
can stand with the order of Charity, which (they say) begins at home; sure it
does not with the order of good Rhetorique, according to which order he should
first have removed his personal preiudices, that he might be heard more
favorably in the behalf of his Clyents, or friends. God himself may seem to
have prescribed this order: Peccatori autem dixit Deus, Psalm. 49.
quare tu enarras Iustitias meas? God said to the Sinner, why do thou preach
my righteousness? God himself would not be justified by a sinner. Which very
words of the holy King, when that great Origin, after his lapse, moved by some
entreaty of friends to say something out of the Chair, had chanced to fall
upon them, at the first ouerture of the book, are reported by some, to have
drawn tears from his repentant silence instead of speech of explication. By
this rule then, he should not in the last, but rather in the first place have
justified himself, that so, all rubbs of exception against his own Person,
being taken away, his justification of other men, might have found a smoother
way to the accepta^ce of indifferent judgments. But I can as easily pardon his
failing in the rules of Rhetorique, as of Logic, of which he makes so loud
profession, and which he has taken for his Cynosure in Religion, in place of
the Church of God: yet if he affoard us but truth, in any method or order
whatsoever, for my part, I can be satisfied.

Let us now behold how he wipes off those foul aspersions. They are only a
number of false and impious doctrines petty charges, which he says, he will
not name in particular, and in that professes his own discretion and
providence, not to assist his Adversary, in spreading of his own undeserved
defamation. And yet, for all that, some man would think so many and mighty
imputations, should deserve an Apology. Now in one word (and that a word which
no Socinian cares for) he answers all.

Pref. Whosoever teaches, or holds them, let him be Anathema: Again. The sum
of all those charges cast up by your self, is this: Nothing ought, or can be
certainly believed, further then it may be proved, by evidence of natural
reason; whosoever hold's so, let him be Anathema.

Answ. You have his Laconique Answer to all. Now, Sir, if the man be yet a
Socinian (as the presumption that he is, is very grave and grounded) what has
he said, in saying, let him be Anathema? What weight has this imprecation in
the Socinian school? Truly as much as a feather blown to and fro by the wynd,
a fancy, an opinion, alterable with every change of imagination, nay with every
alteration of affection. So, what is Anathema to day, Cell. lib. ^. c. 5.
in the worse sense, an imprecation or execration, may be to morrow Anathema in
the better sense, that is, a consecration; what to day is a curse, way be a
blessing to morrow. Nor is it easy to conceive, in whether sense he takes
Anathema, by way of cursing, or blessing. For I vehemently suspect, he never
meant to curse the fauourer's of those opinions, to whom, I doubt not, but he
wishes, as to himself; yea and whose deferts toward himself, have gained no
small interest and title to his well wishings; wherefore what he says, He who
holds so, let him be Anathema, may in the Socinian intendment, be no more but
this, he who hold's so, long may he live.

Yet for a more expesse discharging himself from all imputations of this
nature, namely of such as charge him with denial of supernatural Verities,
what says he? marry, He belieues all those book's of Scripture which the
Church of England account's Canonical, Pref.
to be the infallible word of God.

Answ. You see the Resolution of his Faith into the Authority of the Church of
England. Where you may note, that he says, not that he belieues it infallibly,
or that those books are infallibly the word of God, but that they are the
infallible word of God; where that (infallible) is a mere fallacious
Pleonasme, a redundant and superfluous accession to the word of God. Whence it
follows only, that he belieues this with a fallible Faith, and therefore no
divine Faith; which he does consequently to his principles: for holding the
motive of his belief, that is, the authority of the Church of England, as of
all other Churches, to be but fallible and capable of error, his belief can
have no greater assurance then that motive has. But then it follows, that he
has no infallible assurance of these Books, that they are the word of God:
Ergo, he has no assurance that the contents of these Books are supernatural
Verities, or Verities at all: Ergo, with this may stand his denial of
supernatural Verities.

And that you may Understand that he belieues the aforesaid Verities, with a
Socinian faith only, he joins in one and the same tenure of belief, things
evidently contained in those Canonical Books, with things probably deducible
from the same. Whence thus I argue. If he belieues, as his words express,
things evidently contained in those Books, with no more assurance, then he
belieues things even probably deducible thence; then he belieues neither with
assurance of divine faith: Ergo, he belieues them not as supernatural
Verities, to the belief of which, humane faith can never ascend, as being out
of the reach and extent of all such Faith: therefore, as yet, and by this
profession, he has not cleared himself from the imputation of Socinianisme,
and Infidelity.

An Act of Parliament, the motive of his belief. His fallacious refuge.
SECT. XXXVIII.
Pref. FVrthermore I acknowledge all that to be Heresy which by the Act of
Parliament, primo Elizabethae, is declared to be so.

Answ. With this acknowledgment may well consist the denial of all
supernatural verities, according to my former deduction. And this is surely a
strong presumption that he belieues an act of Parliament, with no greater
assurance, then the decrees of a General Council: yea, and that he belieues
the Parliament rather then a General Council, shows that such his belief is
grounded upon his affection, not his judgment; for no poyse of judicial
motives can preponderate, or sway him rather toward a Parliament. Wherefore
since none of these motives, or authorities yield him assurance, that such
contents of Canonical Books, are supernatural verities, it follows no way
out of his belief of these, that he belieues any supernatural verity, as
such: Ergo, notwithstanding this profession, he is a Socinian still.

Which, though it be so, yet I will not do him wrong, nor say he has effected
nothing by this his sincere profession and acknowledgment. But what has he
done? Forsooth, he has cuningly put himself under the wing's of the State; he
has retired himself into the sanctuary of Protestancy; by this means he has
engaged them in his quarrel, whose religion he professes: so that whatsoever
inconvenience, as irreligion, nullity of divine faith, lastly Socinianisme it
self, shall be deduced as consequent out of his disclaiming the authority of
the Cath. Church, and acknowledging a Parlamentary religion, and authority in
determining Canonical Scripture, and declaring Heresies, must fall first upon
the English Protestants, and must be answered by them. Thus while he endeauours
to bring himself off fairly from those foul aspersio^s, he draw's them on
whom he pretends to vindicate: and thus he brings about his own ends, and
covertly aduanceth his own design, which is to ruin all Religion.

His fallacious Hypocrisy.
SECT. XXXIX.
WHat he talks of retaining liberty in points which may be diversely held satua
fides compage, the iuncture or structure of faith remaining safe, is a
ridiculous Hypocrisy in him, who endeauours by his doctrine and principles to
demolish the very foundation of Christian Faith, which is the infallibility of
divine Revelation; I mean, the infallibility of that authority which declares
it to be such; and consequently, that unquestionable certainty upon which
Christian Faith relyeth being taken away, not to leave one stone upon another
in this earthly or militant Jerusalem, in the building of Faith. And can you
have further patience to hear any more of his Sophistique Hypocrisy? For he
know's, that all Christians would spit defiance in his face, should he not
seem to speak somewhat like a Christian.

Pref. Yet thus much I can say (quoth he) which I hope will satisfy any man of
reason that whatsoever has been held necessary to salvation either by the
Catholic Church of all ages, or by the consent of Fathers, measured by
Vincentius Litinensis his rules; or is held necessary either by the Catholic
Church of this age, or by the consent of Protestants etc. That, against the
Socinians, and all others, I do verily belicue and embrace.

Answ. Can any man believe he writes what he thinks, if he understand what he
writes? For who doubts but the Catholic Church of all ages has held the
belief of an infallible Church, as a point of Christian Faith? For how could
the Catholic Church gathered together in General Councels, anathematize and
condemn whosoever refused to subscribe to her decrees in points of faith, had
not the same Church supposed her self to have infallible authority for all such
decisions and decrees? Therefore he who belieues what the Catholic Church
holds necessary to be believed, belieues this.

Now observe in these very words (by the Catholic Church of this age, or, by
the consent of Protestants) how he makes the Protestants a member of his
division a part from the Catholics. Wherein also he preuaricates egregiously,
granting to the Roman Church that attribute of Catholic, which has ever
distinguished the Church of God, from all Heretical Societies and
Separatist's; and giving to his Protestant, the particular name of Separation,
which has ever been held a special character of Heresy. Now it is evident,
that the Catholic Church of this age as distinguished from Protestants, holds
this point as a point of faith, and necessary to salvation, That the Church of
God is endued with infallible authority for determining questions or doctrines
of Fayth^ which very point he constantly denies. Therefore it is false, that he
belieues (if he believe as he writes) whatsoever the Catholic Church of all
ages, or the Catholic Church of this age, holds necessary to be believed.

His Purgation concerning temporal respects, as Motives to his change of
Religion.
SECT. XL.
Pref. ANother great and manifest injury you have done me, in charging me to
have for saken your Religion because it conduced not to my temporal ends etc.
Whereof if you could convince me, by just and strong presumptions, I should
then acknowledge my self to deserve that opinion etc. that I changed not your
Religion for any other, but for none at all.

Answ. His Adversary seems to charge him, that having forsaken the Catholic,
he finally plunged himself into Socinianisme: now this Advocate confesses in
these words, that Socinianisme is no religion, which notwithstanding in the
very same page he ranketh in the number of Christian professions. For now he
grants, that if he can be convinced, to have changed the Catholic, for
Socinianisme, he has changed it for no religion at all. It is true, that this
his change for Socinianisme can be proved no otherwise, but by his own words
and actions, which if they have upon several occasions, before many witnesses
proclaimed his judgment concerning points of Christian Religion, to harmonize
with the doctrines and principles of known and professed Socinians; surely these
are presumptions strong enough, at least as strong as can be expected, in
question of judgment and opinions of men.

But now, to the substance of the charge he says nothing; only he attemps to
disprove the motives: that is, to prove those temporal ends, to have been no
motives of his change; which yet is more then he does, or can do. Therefore in
behalf of those presumed ends, and in confirmation of that presumption, thus I
argue; only supposing first, that he was in his wits when he made the change,
that it was voluntary; and then secondly that no man in his wits, and
voluntarily makes any change but for some end or ends; then thus: Whosoever
may out of his own words and demeanours be convinced to have changed religion,
for no religion, may be convinced to have changed for temporal ends: But M.
Chapter may be convinced out of his own words etc. to have changed religion for no
religion: Ergo, for temporal ends. That Catholic religion is Religion, or a
Religion, himself grantes; That Socinianisme is no Religion he often seems to
grant, and howsoever, it is easily proved: That he changed the Catholic for
Socinianisme, his own words, and actions, and written doctrines testify
evidently enough. Now, that no man changes religion for no religion but for
temporal ends, is, I think, undeniable. For can any man be imagined to
abandone all religion, for an everlasting end? What? to be the talk perhaps of
posterity supposed never to end? As he who is said to have burned Dianas Temple
at Ephesus, to be diffamed throughout the world, and after ages, for his
villainy and irreligion? But let us ponder his reasons, by which he refutes this
presumption of temporal end's.

Pref. How is it possible, that I should have deserted your religion for end's,
and our of desire of preferment; since I refused (which also you impute unto
me) to subscribe the 39. Articles; that is, refused to enter at the Common
door, which here in England lead's to preferment.

Answ. This is easily answered by saying; Some there are who enter, Joh. 10.
and not by the common door; no nor by the door. Again those temporal ends
might be many other, besides Ecclesiastique preferments; from enjoying which,
this refusal of subscription could not exclude him. But yet again (says he)
bow incredible is it, that you should believe, that I forsook your religion as
not suting with my desires and designs, Pref.
which yet reconciles the enjoying of the pleasures and profits of sin here,
with the hope of happiness hereafter?

Answ. This is manifestly false, that Catholic Religion reconcileth the
enjoying of sinful pleasures, or profits of this life, with hope of eternal
happiness: but rather professes and protests with S. Paul. Neque fornicarij
etc. 1. Cor. 6.
neither Fornicators, nor I dolaters, nor aduouterers, nor the effeminate etc.
shall possess the kingdom of God. Yea further, the Catholic Church
denounces Anathema against all such, as Luther, Calvin, and the rest, who
reconcile Justification with deadly sin, either by non-imputation, or
soli-fayth etc. therefore of the Church it may be truly said, Non enim qui
operantur iniquitatem; in vijs eius ambulauerunt; for they who work iniquity
have not walk'^ in her ways (of doctrine.) Catholic doctrine denying all
possibility of consistency to mortal sin with sanctifying grace, precludes
all such sin from hope of enjoying eternal happiness: therefore he whose
hopes aim at any such reconciliation, has made a choice better suting with
his desires, by changing the Catholic for Protestancy.

Pref. But the profession of Catholic Religion proposes as great hopes of
great temporal aduancements to the capable servants of it, as any, nay more
then any religion in the world.

Answ. But what then, if it proposed no such hopes to him? If in so great a
multitude of capable servants, and those of ancient and tried service and
fidelity, who for that cause might very well expect to be preferred before him,
a late Proselyte, nor sufficiently tried; what, I say, if by reason of this
interposall of so many just pretenders, advancement from that profession stood
aloof to him, and proposed to his hopes at a vast distance, with little
probability of approach in any short space; which proposition so qualified,
could be but a weak attractiue to a spirit ambitious that way. And then, what
if he saw a shorter way to such advancement, proposed to him at home, and
extended toward him, even over the seas by a full and able hand: Valor.
Flaccus.
as when Glory appeared from the transmarine shore to that Grecian Prince
Jason, with a laurel in her hand; was it then incredible, that if the motives
to his change were temporal ends, he would lay hands on the most likely
means, and most conducing to those ends? If he will give us leave to believe
he had such ends, since we cannot choose but believe it; sure he will give us
leave to think he was no fool. Both which supposed, the presumption of his
Adversary is just and strong enough, that he quit the Catholic for temporal
ends.

Pref. But it is incredible, that if he had such ends, or desires, he should
make choice of Socinianisme, Because (says he) Socinianisme explicates the
law's of Christ, with more rigor, and less indulgence and condescendence, to
the desires of flesh and blood then Catholic doctrine does.

Answ. How true this is I will not here dispute, but give it true. So did the
Manichaans, so the Donatists, so the Tertullianists, so some other Heresies
explicate some points of Christian doctrine, and some sentences of Scripture,
more rigidly, and more repugnantly to flesh and blood, then the Catholic
Church did; and therefore those Explicator's were Heretics, and their rigor of
doctrine Heresy, because a man may be an Heretic us well, for the more, as
for the less.

But what is this to the surpose, that Sucinianisme explicates the Law's of
Christ with greater rigor, if it bind no man to believe them, or to believe
that they are the law's of Christ the Son of God, and therefore obligatory;
but leaves every man free to his own reason, to believe so much of them as he
think's fit? where is then the rigor? So the doctrine of Calvin explicate's
the laws of God, the Ten Commaundments not only hard, but impossible to be
kept: Lo, the rigor of explication; Lo.
but therefore he bind's no man to keep them: Lo, the indulgence of
application.

That Socinianisme is the readiest way to temporal Aduancements.
SECT. XLI.
ANother reason of incredibility, that if the Motive to abandon the Catholic
Church, had been temporal respects or ends, he would have embraced
Socinianisme, is this as follows.

Pref. Socintanisme is a doctrine by which no man in his right mind, ^an hope
for any honor or preferment, either in this Church, or state, or any other.

Answ. This I deny, and avouch the quite contrary, which is this; that in any
Protestant, or not Catholic State, a Socinian is most capable of advancement.
My reason; because Socinianisme binds no man to profess it publicly, nay,
it imposes no obligation to any exterior act whatsoever, which may yield the
least sent, or suspicion of it; nay rather by the maine principle of it, (sana
ratio) right reason, such as they term right, which so appears to every man
in particular, they are obliged to exhibit no sign or show at all, which may
hinder or cross their designs: therefore Socinianisme obliges rather to all
exterior conformity.

Since therefore all Heresy is subject to change and alteration, alterable by
the authority by which it stands; the Socinian of all other is most ready to
change with it; and to conform himself to any Church, or state whatsoever; as
the wax as yet unprinted is capable of any impression; and the Eye having in
it self no color, receaues the forms or idols of all colors. Therefore in
such a Church or State, no Sect is endued with so great advantages as
Socinianisme is, which can without any difficulty or demurre put on the guise
and livery of any profession. The Socinian can be a Puritan to day, to morrow a
Protestant, the third day an Arminian, and the fourth an Arrian; and after, so,
or so; or neither so, nor so.

Nor can I doubt but this is indeed the very principal cause why so many make
this choice. For the Socinian is the only He, who sails with every wynd,
whiles other professors, some out of tenderness or scruple, iniected by the
principles of their doctrine, dare not yield to the countermaund of secular
authority; others out of animosity of opposition, or, as it were, the pride of
their choice, will not conform; others out of the extreme hate of what they
fear (the hate, I say, of that truth which they fear will prevail) will not
come in; and while all these, either by their not yielding, or by direct
opposition, run hazard of their fortunes, yea lives and liberty; the
smooth-faced Socinian arides every change; derides the folly of
Non-conformants; swims aloft like a Cork; falls and rises with the waves;
whatsoever storms against religion, or be the seas never so rough, he will
never drown: in brief, he is the one Pamphylus and Eutrapelus of times and
fortunes, the only State-humourer, and State-complyer. He might pass for a
very wiseman in some heathen Philosophy; a very Atheist in Christianity. And
tell me now, is not this man in the high rode-way of preferment, if (which he
must, if he be true to his principles) he can but keep his own Counsel, or
impart it only to his confidents?

Add unto all this, that wheresoever rules of Policy or Reasons of State sway
the Government, more then rules of Piety or Religion, the Socinian will be
thought the fittest instrument for employment in State-affaires; who will be
wrought to any circumstance of advantage; who will undertake, yea and make good
way through all those difficulties which neither Religion nor Honesty would
venture upon. For who can question the advantage which he has over a
Religion-bound Conscience, who himself has either none, or a Socinian one,
which is so flexible and changing with every turn of fancy or affection,
varying with every variety of occasion? All which demonstrates (to use his
word's) that this foul aspersion is no false one; or at the least not so
cleanly wiped out, but that notwithstanding all his purgations and
compurgations, it stick's as fast and deep as ever it did.

The Advocates misconstructions of his Adversaries Direction, declared to be a
just and charitable Admonition.
SECT. XLII.
AS for the fountain whence this Advocate supposes these aspersions to have
proceeded from a heart (says he) abounding with the gall and bitterness of
uncharitableness, Pref.
and even blind with malice toward him; I verily think whosoever knows both
parties, will never believe this censure, neither as proceeding from the one,
nor as against the other. The Censurer will never deserve so much credit as to
be delieued; nor the Censured so much discredit as to be suspected of so much
malice. Besides that (as I am informed) his Charity and curtesy extended to
this plainant in time and place, have deserved a better construction, were he
not grown now so forgetful of all that he learned among Catholics, that he
has forgotten to construe Charity in any Christian language, either words or
deeds.

He might have construed this foul aspersion, (which he so call's) no
aspersion at all, but an Admonition, and a needful one, least others might
receive infection from his contagious pen. He might have interpreted it as
proceeding from Zeal, not a perverse Zeal (as his words are) to his
superstition, which himself, this Advocate, immediately after call's the
Catholic Cause. Now to call the Catholic cause, or Religion, superstition,
is indeed (to use the phraze of the Chair) a very Bull.

And howsoever he construes it, out of his own not Zeal (which were a mere
Solecisme in Socinianisme) but his over, and over, and many times perverted
judgment; yet other more sober and understanding men, comparing this Admonition
with the profession and function of the Admonisher, will interpret it a duty,
or a necessary Charity.

They I say, who shall consider, that the prudence of Almighty God over his
Church, has for all times deputed certain men to the charge and office of
Guardian, of Watch, of Sentinel, according to that of the Prophet, Jsa. 62:
Super mures tues Jerusalem constitui custodes etc. Upon thy walls, Jerusalem,
I have placed watchmen; will not only hold them worthy pardon but praise too,
who discharge this office faithfully: which follows in that place, Tota die
and nocte non tacebunt etc. Day nor night they shall not be silent. And if men
of that charge and prefecture be worthily honored with the appellation of
Angels; to them most fitly may be applied what the other Prophet says; Angelis
suis Deus mandauit de te etc. God has charged his angels to guard thee etc.

Yea were the Incumbent of such a Ministry never so mean of quality, yet the
obligation falls upon him with his function, to signify the approach of the
thief or enemy: Ezech. 33.
and they who shall hear this sound of signification, are likewise bound to
take notice, and stand upon their Guard.

And yet if there be any who shall hold, either their own, or other the like
watchments silence or conniuency in these occasions of impendent dangers, their
greater prudence or discretion; yet even this their prudhominy, or caution may
be so much the more exensable, if their stilnes be supplied by the barking of
others. And for this cause, they will (I think) at the least excuse, if not
cherish such, who by discharging them, undertake the whole burden of Envy and
peril upon themselves.

But to such a minister who has apostated, and reapostated from Religion (take
which you will) who has delegated any such authority? Unless he will take it
for his warrant, which is written in the Canticles, Posuerunt me custodem in
vineis, Cant. ^
Vineam meam non custodiui: they have appointed me a keeper in the vineyards,
my own Vineyard I have not kept: surely almighty God gave him no such keeping.

And howsoever he think's the prejudice of his Person so often false and
faultring in Religion, should in equity be no disparagement to his doctrine, or
disadvantage to his Plea; yet it is certainly so great and just a prejudice,
that it discharges all men from giving ear or credit to his reasons,
whatsoever they be; and whatsoever he argues to the contrary in this place,
might as well Apologize for the Devil; who no doubt could urge as strong and
pressing Reasons; against any profession of Religion, as this Adnocate has
either learned, or can learn of him; and yet I suppose no man is bound with
indifference to hear Reason from the Devil; no, although he preach Gospel.

Yea I dare presume to say, had Christ himself been preiudged in the opinions
of indifferent and understanding men, by the like presumptions, so strongly and
clearly made good against him, the not acceptance of the Jews had been at
the least excusable. Which he himself not obscurely fignified by his appeal
to themselves, Quis ex vobis arguet me de peccate? Who of you can charge me
with any sin? as supposing that a sufficient warrant of their recusancy, if
they could justly charge him with any sin, much more if they could have
charged him with so grievous a crime, as Infidelity, or Socinianisme.

For who can belioue him who is presumed not to believe himself? For be his
reasons never so strong, yet he will be supposed able to answer them, since he
belieues not the doctrine built upon those reasons.

No. Sir, it cannot, it must not be otherwise; this prejudice must in reason
staue off all belief, until it be removed. And if either Bellarmine could
have been proved a Jew, or Peron an Atheist, as easily and as credibly, as
this Minister-Aduocate (who by these base adiections, seeltes to fly-blow their
worthily memories with suspicion) can be proved a Socinian, Calumny.
which is implicitly both Jew, and Atheist; their works and writings would
have as little credit and authority, as themselves faith and religion.

Wherefore the Christian Reader (that the stream of this Ministers discourse
turned another way, may serve to good use, Vt cursum muta^it iniquum fragibus
amnis
Doctus iter melies, --)
knowing that his Salvation, depends upon his impartial and fyncere judgment
of these things (now to harken to Orthodoxe and seriously Christian Doctors,
rather then to Renegado's and T^aitor^ to all states of Religion, and to bend a
more inclinable ear to Virtue then to Vice, is no partiality at all) will
guard himself I hope from such impostors, and will regard the person also, not
only his reasons; and who it is speaks to him, not only what he speaks;
knowing that if the Devil utter some truths, even in those truths he
conceales a false and devilish meaning: and after that he has gained credit
by the attractiue splendour of some true doctrines, he will hope to be believed
even when he lies; and so howsoever appearing first in the inuesture of light
and truth, he will prove an Angel of darkness and Imposture.

It has been the usual Practice of all heretical writers, to embellish
their discourses, with as many verities as they could possibly inculcate,
without apparent contradiction or repugnancy. Even this devise begot not a
little esteem, to the Answerer of Charity mistaken; he had employed his care
to make his work popular and taking, by the intermedling of many Catholic
truth's; this was it, which so much commended it to the vulgar Reader, whose
capacity could not sound the incoherence and inconsistency of those truth's
with the fashood's, which he principally intended to bring into credit, by
consorting thom with those: therefore when he heard his work so popularly
applauded, he might have said with great truth, and modesty, as she who hearing
her self highly praised for the hair she wore, said Nescis quam pro melaudat
nunc iste Sicambram.

The rest which follows in this Prefatory Answer to the Direction, and
immediately precedeth his Conclusion, is a brief recollection (as it seems) of
what is scattered in his ensuing Volume, trust up together with a number of
points, fastened all to one chief point, and maine head of Doctrine, which is
indeed a most false Principle in the sense he pretends; That all things
necessary to Salvation are evidently contained in Scriptures. Whence it will
follow, that the belief of the B. Trinity is not necessary to Salvation, as
which, in this Advocates opinion (as I have noted heretofore) is not evidently
revealed in the Scriptures.

And yet grant this principle true; it will follow, that the authority
determining Controversies of faith, cannot be the Scripture, but the Church;
for it is notorious that some Her eticall doctrines have been grounded upon
some ineuident passages of Scripture, and those vented as doctrines of faith,
and therefore as necessarily to be believed, or at the least not rejected by an
express misbeliefe.

Again, some parts of Scripture may have an evident construction to one, which
to another may be dark and obscure; then the doctrine inferred upon that
evidence, will be of faith to him to whom it is evidently contained in
Scripture; to another who will deny the evidence, because he see's it not, it
will not be so: What authority then, other then the Church shall determine the
true sense of this part of Scripture, evident and ineuident, especially (which
may often fall out) if no other more evident Scripture, can be brought in, as a
witness of greater authority to clear the doubt?

Here then the doctrine of Fundamentalls and not Fundamentals, will be good
for nothing, but to bring in more Fayths, yea contradictory Fayths; since all
points of Faith are Fundamental, so as necessarily to be believed by him to
whom they are evidently contained in Scripture; and none fundamental to him,
to whom they are not evidently contained in Scripture, and therefore not
necessary to be believed.

And if you say, that such points evidently contained in regard of some
understanding, not evidently to another, are none of those which are commanded
to be preached to all men (which evasion this Advocate may seem to have
reserved,) how will this be proved? since our Saviors command is in general
terms this, Praedicate Euangelium hoc omnicreaturae. Preach this Gospel to
all the world; he says not, these, or these points of the Gospel, and no
more. And yet again: Quod aeudistis in aurem praedicate super tectae, what you
have heard in secret, preach it publicly.

But especially when any controversy concerning doctrine of faith arises, and
some Heresy is authorized by some supposed evidence of Scripture, then the
contrary truth is to be preached and published to the whole Church, least that
Heresy should be embraced for a truth of Faith, or the word of God; yea God
himself pretended the Author of that untruth, or Heresy, which pretense is a
very high and lowed Blasphemy.

By which may appear the gross and palpable absurdity of this Ministers
doctrine, legitimating as it were all Adulterate and suprious Doctrines, and
Heresies, by saying; Nothing that is obscure can be necessary, to be
understood, or not mistaken. Which is indeed one of his capital Principles,
and a chief support of his doctrine.

For I ask, Is not the mistaking, or misinterpreting of some parts of
Scripture the very source of some Heretical doctrines? and those Scriptures
the greatest strength and color, that gives credit and countenance to such
Heresies? Is not then, the not-mistaking of such Scriptures necessary, even as
necessary, as it is that such doctrines should not prevail, or win credit by
the authority of those Scriptures? For though the true understanding of some
obscure parts of Scripture be not necessary, yet it is necessary that such
obscure parts be not so mistaken as to warrant Heresy by their authority.

If therefore out of that first principle, by this Minister presumed, a
thousand other absurdities follow, such as those, by him deduced howsoever,
(for I will not examine the regularity of those deductions) what is this to the
matter in hand? For this was not the Direction or Caveat given him by his
Adversary, that he should not answer out of this principle of Protestancy; but
that he should not out of those other specified by his Director, those Socinian
principles, which even Protestants abhor.

The Conclusion of his Preface, with his fallacious Apology for himself.
SECT. XLIII.
HE concludes after his self-plauding manner, as I have often noted before.

Pref. And thus your Venom against me, is in a manner spent.

Answ. Which words I take notice of also here, that you may observe with me
the spirit of his style perpetuate throughout his whole work; and with all,
the difference between it and his Aduersari^s Pen; and then tell me whether
this be not the spirit of a Spider indeed, which finds venom even where none
is; whom therefore (that is, Aduocare and Spider) I shall not doubt to join in
one and the same Word; which mall be this, for the time.

Inueniam, aut faciam.
I will find it, or make it.
Pref. Now only two little impertinenties remain: the first, that I refused to
subscribe the Articles of the Church of England: the second, my mortues which
first induced me to forsake Protestantis^^e.

Answ. So he; and to the first he answer's in effect this.

Pref. That the doctrine of the Church of England is so pure and Orthodoxe,
that whosoever belieues it, and lives according to it, undoubtedly he shall be
sau^d. That there is no error in it which may nocesutate, or warrant a man, to
disturb the peace, or renounce the Communion of it. Which acknowledgment he is
persuaded is the only thing intended by subscription.

Answ. By this you see he has now leueled his way to Ecclesiastical
preferment; so that, if hereafter you hear he has accepted any such
commodity, you many know he did it upon better consideration. The scruple he
had concerning subscription is vanished into the air, whither the rest of his
scruples will follow in their turns. It may be that scruple was but a
melancholique Dream, such as he conceaues Luthers conference with the Devil
might be. He is now Materia prima, for any benefice, Chair, Prebendary,
Chanonry, or what ye will: you may conjecture who has had the tempering, and
working of this pliable clay; he was a Master in that feat you may assure your
self, if not a Doctor, and this his Maisterpeece.

To the second impertinency concerning his motives he answere's: Pref.
That it is more impertinent and frivolous then the former; Unless (says he)
it he a just exception against a Physician, that himself was sometimes in, and
recener^d himself from that disease which he undertakes to cure; or against a
Guide in a way, that at first, before he had experience himself misto^ke it,
and afterward^ so and his error, and (...) it. That (...) Micha^^ de Montaigne,
wassurely of a far different mind, for he will hardly allow any Physician
competem, but only for such diseases, as himself had passed through; and a
far greater then Montaigne.

Answ. (I pray you by the way take notice of this, as not spoken by chance, or
without due reflection, least any man should question whether authority were of
greater weight in the Socinian balance, Jesus Christ, or Michael de Montaigne.)

Pref. Even he that said. Tu conuersus confirma sratres tuos, thou being
converted confimre thy brethren, gives us sufficiently to understand, that they
which have themselves been in such a state, as to need conversion, are not
thereby made incapable. of, but rather engaged, and obliged unto, and qualified
for this charitable function.

Answ. He might have added to this, that the Hollander's (men say) make
special choice of such men, for Pilot's, and Masters of ships, who have
formerly wrack't many ships in the time of their Maister-ship.

Now truly, this might pass for a pretty Problem or Imperrinent to be
disputed in the Qu^dlibets; and I do not see but like a Boole it would run
either way, or be shot like an Arrow at either But. Yet surely for the
Physician he would grant him a very strait commission, and confine his
practice within the compass of a very few cures: or else if his Pattents were
for both sides-Trent for example, he would make his body a very Apothecaries
shop which had tried the Poisons of most kinds of druggs. And I do not know why
a Physician so qualified, that is so generally infected and diseased, might not
give a man a sickness, as soon as a cure.

Howsoever (to run along with him in the same way) if his own diseases in a
Physician; or mistaking the way in a Guide; or the many shipwrack's of a Pilot,
may make either Guide, or Pilot, or Physician more competent in their several
professions; surely this Minister is the man who has been sick of every
Religion; and has mistaken every Way; and has ship wrackt every ship he has
sailed in: Ergo, who can doubt but the choice of such a Guide, such a Pilot,
such a Phyfician, is very proper and warrantable?

For his Conversion, though some will perhaps deny, that face his first turn
to the Catholic, he has ever been in any such state, as to need conversion,
who has been ever since in motion: yet if Conversion may make a man, not
incapable Of, but rather engaged and obliged Unto, and qualified For this
charitable function, of converting his brethren; surely this man has been
converted to, and from every Religion, and so has brethren on every side. For
I believe he has had more Conuersions in one year, then the Sun has
Tropiques, yea perhaps as many more.

Since therefore the special advantages of his Person for such an employment,
are so paliable; he may seem to wrong him, who would go about to disable him
from being a fit Advocate of the Protestant cause, even by that which most of
all enables and qualifies him, for this charitable function.

Nay, what will you say, if these very Motives themselves, which first drew him
to Catholic Religion, now objected against him by his Adversary, as to
disparage him, prove his advantages (so wonderfully do all things concur to
advance his designs?) For let the Papist take them in the worst sense he can;
as that these Motives were indeed divine immissions, or as embassies from God
himself; will it not then follow in very good Logic, Genesis 32.
yea and Divinity too, Si contra Deum fortis fuisti, quanto magis contra
homines praeualebis? If thou have been strong, and invincible against God
himself, how much more easily shall thou prevail against Papists?

FINIS.
HEAVTOMACHIA.
M. Chillingworth against himself.
AFTER so many Triumphs over foreign Adversaries, there remained only the
last Complement to a consumma^e Victory, to overcome himself. This he knew
well to be the highest flight of Fortitude, the Nonplus-vltra, or
Hercules-Pillars of true valor. Pindar.
-- (...)
(...).
What lies beyond this, is inaccessible and imperuious, both to Wise men, and
to Fools. Now if this Errant-Knight-Aduocate for Protestancy, this Hercules,
or Ulysses (if he had rather so) this (...), (as he, Multorum mores hominum qui
vidit and Vrbes,) no less trauaild in Religions then Regions, if in this last
Adventure he acquit himself bravely; he may prove a spectacle, I think, no
less grateful to the God's, then that Cat^, cum ad^ersa fortuna compositus
(as Seneca says) matched with an adverse fortune, and at the length out of a
true Stoique-valour, killing himself.

And surely they who enjoy so much leisure in the long vacancy which Epicure
has granted them, should more laudably, a man would think, employ some part
of their everlasting Holyday in beholding this Monomachie, or sole-fight, then
in those petty Homerique skitmishes, wherein the Europe and Asia of Frog's and
Mise were committed. Certainly, this is a warring of much greater admiration,
-- Periculosa plenum op^^ alta, and of as doubtful, as dangerous a die;
wherein, if it would please the Godd's, even as in that Batromyomachia, to
divide themselves into factions; I believe it would appear a very dubious and
perplexed election, since here, in the very same man, the left hand is matched
with the right, whether of the dwellers to maintain. For it is considerable,
in this place, that although several defiances, in the space perhaps' of two
years more or less have past to and from between these Champions, and
thereupon some private and clandestine depreliations, nor yet those without
some noise of tumult, nor without some blood and sweat in the encounters; yet
to the trial of an open combat, now at length they have condescended; urged
unto it (I suppose) by the long and greedy expectation of many, who had
certain knowledge of their intergrudges, and professed Enmities.

And for that indeed the left hand had received some disgraceful affront from
the right, which he might seem by his long conniuence willing to pocket up and
dissemble; and though the right taking the advantage of the first blow, might
have struck more home; yea and have dealt the left such buffet's that it should
never have been able to hold up a fingar in the cause again: yet howsoever the
right hand has imposed such wounds, as the left, I am persuaded, will never
cure with credit.

And though the difference be now the business (as I hear) of another Court,
wherein while it depend's, it may seem preposterous for a private man to
vmpire it; yet since it is an affair of that grave consequence, that many
heads and judgments may seem to be needfully entertained in it; and again a
subject of that Pregnancy, that many hands may find therein both work and
weariness enough: for both these causes, I have been moved to go something
with the right; for the left, as running upon his own ground, and homewards,
he will have Abettours ten for one. And no marvel, for even since the right
has been the right, and the world has been the world; whenever it has
had any difference with the left, it has ever been cast by number of voices,
though not by weight: yet because I verily believe the right will be the wynner
at the last, though long first, I will be content in the mean time to be
another Cato, for the rights sake, and to say, Victrix causa placet Superis,
sed victa Catoni.
The conquering cause the God's approve,
But Cato does the conquered love.


Of the number of M. Chillingworth his Motives.
HIS Motives are in number Ten; nor can I think this casual, or unadvised, or
that this very number of Motives was void of mystery. A less exactness and
providence could not be expected from him, who does all by line and level; of
Logic natural, or artificial, and the Canonical Word. Therefore I hope I
shall do him no wrong in thinking he had a purpose to consecrate his Motives,
by a mystery of number. I shall also make bold to conceive him so learned, as
to know the great virtue and efficiency, which not only the School of
Pithagoras, but the rety^ing Cabalists, and learned Rabbius, yea the holy
Fathers themselves attribute to numbers, and even namely to this number of Ten.

Whence I will imagine he had here regard to the Decalogue of Divine
Commandments, in conformity to which he proposed to himself his Decalogue of
Motives. Perhaps he considered with all the reward of such man, whose integrity
of observance and obedience to those Commaund's should receive singali
denarium; which denarius diurnus Anagogically understood is life ever lasting,
that one entire day of Eternity, uninterrupted by night, or intermission of
happiness. And this Decalogist may have cause to fear (though other cares at
this time, by land and water, divert his fear, or employ it otherwise) least
at the numbering and counting day, this very Decalogue may be objected against
him, Nonne ex denarie connenisti mecum? Was not your agreement with the
Catholic Church, ex denari^? out of your own Decalogue of Motives? But now,
he says, he repents the bargain.

There was also to be considered in this number a mystery of congruity. Noe^
was the tenth Generation of man, and Noe^ signifies Rest. So in the tenth
Motive, it seems this Moveable intended to rest, and move no further, as all
motion's render themselves to some term of rest; unless you will except the
Circular, and the motion of such men who move in a Circle, of whom the
Prophet, Psalm. 11. Jud.
in circuitu impij ambulant; Wicked men walk in a Circle: and as those cloud',
of which S. Jude, nubes sine aqua quae a ventis circumferuntur, dry cloud's
without all moisture of divine Grace, as (*) Socinians.
those who have no Grace, so much as in their Catechism: what more dry and
Graceles cloud's then they? and these are hurried round omni vente dectrinae,
with every blast and change of doctrine; whose Religion has no residence.
Ephesians. 4.
And such a one is he, who having arrived to the truth, by ten step's, or
Motives, by ten I say, the pause and period of number, falls back, and begin's
a new account, Semper ad vsque december numero crescente venitur; Because,
denarius est omnis numerus (says the learned Mirandula) the tenth is all
number: for, thus far, his march and motion was as the progress of the just
in the path of light; Prous^b. ^
Iustorum s^mitae quasilux splendens, procedit and crescit vsque ad perfectum
diem: the path of just men as a shinning light proceed's and increase's still,
until the noone or perfect day. This noonday, or perfect day is the term and
period of this progress; this that denarius diurnus, the day of divine Truth,
as obscurely revealed, to be believed in this life, to be enjoyed in the next
in the clarity of blissifull vision. For this tenth of everlasting day, is the
place and residence of the eternal Beatitude of mankind; of which S. Austin,
Attend, Sermon. de decimit.
quod creatura decima inter intellectuales creatur as est homo; quia Angeli in
nouem ordinibus consistunt, decimus vero ordo est hominum. Observe, that man is
the tenth in number of intellectual creatures; for there are nine orders of
Angels, the tenth order is of men.

Now, this unhappy man, after much study (I doubt not) and pains taken in the
search of truth and Religion, having now happily advanced his progress and
Motives to this number of Perfection, and to the hope of communion with
Angelical Hierarchies; even there, and then, like unto Lot's wife, or the
fabulous Orpheus, transgre'st the covenant and looked back, -- ibi omnis
effusus labor: --
There all the labor was lost; or as the Greek proverb has it, Hydria in
foribus, the pitchard broken in the very entry or threshold. And now the
mystery of the sacred number foully betrayed, of those ten goodly Motives,
nothing remains to him the Mouer, but the number; the soul and spirit now
departed they move no more then a carcass, and may therefore not vnfi^ly carry
before them in their title. Nos numerus sumus. (We are a number.) Yet even
these, though unnaturally massacr'ed by him who gave them light, (Natis
sepulchrum) Notwithstanding may perhap's, revived to lfie, be Motives again,
and move others, who will entertain them, though their pitiless Parent has
cast them off. And because I conceive this resurrection may be achieved
without a miracle, I will presume to attempt it, though weakly; a stronger
spirit will perform it more effectually.

1. Motives. 2. Remotiues. 3. Promotiues, or Replicants.
I. Motive. BEcause perpetual visible profession, which could never be wanting
to the Religion of Christ, nor any part of it, is apparently wanting to
Protestant Religion, so far as concerns the points in contestation.

I. Remotiue. God has mayther deo^eed, nor foretold, that his true doctrine
should de facto, be always visibly professed, without any mixture of falsehood.

I. Promotiue, or Replicant. If by this restrictiue (de facto) you understand,
that such visible profession of unmixed, or pure Truth, was only so decreed or
foretold, that, de iure, it should be so, that is, of right there ought to be
always visible profession, of true doctrine, without any mixture of falsehood;
but that de facto such unmixed doctrine to be so professed indeed, was nether
decreed nor foretold.

Against this, I reply in behalf of your Motive. This were no Privilege at all
of the Christian Church; for de iure, of right, not only the Church, but the
Synagogue too, was so make profession of true doctrine, without mixture of
falsehood. Nay, de iure, even the Gentiles should have worshi'pt God according
to truth, without falsehood; and those Philosophers should have taught the truth
which they understood concerning God, without mixture of untruth, for the
contrary of which they are condemned by S. Paul. Romans 1.
What, was then the effect and intent of the spirit of truth, so sent, as to
continue to the end of the world, in the Church of Christ? Was it only to
impose a duty, and obligation upon the Church, to teach truth, without
falsehood? And was the Church to be Columna veritaetis, the pillar of (...) de
iure only, not de fa^^o? Who can safely leave, or rely upon that Pillar which
only should stand, but may as well fall, as stand?

Was this the purchase that cost the dearest blood of the Son of God, a duty
only, and a deeper damnation of the Church not corresponding with this duty?
Was this the love of Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 5.
toward his dearest spouse so great, that he would die for her, to the end he
might sanctify her, and wash her in the lauer of water in his word, that he
might exhibit to himself a glorious Church, having neither spot, nor wrinkle,
nor any such thing? And is all this come at length to a de iure, not de facto,
to a what should be only, not a what is?

And is this that state of beauty no less permanent then spotles? wherein
time, which withers and wrinkles all the beauty of fields' and flowers' (aruit
foenum and cecidit flos) should cause no fading or impayring, because, 1. Pet.
1.
Verbum Domini manet in aeternum, that word of truth is everlasting, which as
the form and soul of beauty, in this glorious spouse, should never abandon
her?

Now, does Christ Jesus thus sanctify his Spouse, or no? has he purchased her
this permanent Beauty, or no? If no; then is he frustrate of his design, which
was to espouse unto himself, a Church which should de facto, indeed, not
deiure, of duty only, be ever Holy; for though it be placed in the particular
choice of every single man, to be holy, or no, thus, and in such sort, that no
man is, or shall be holy, or virtuous of force, or against his will, or not
freely; yet it is not in the particular choice or power of any particular man,
or men, no nor in the malice of Hell it self, to effect, that Christ Jesus
shall not have a holy Church on earth, even to the worlds end.

For this was the intent of his precious death, and bloodshed, vt
sanctificaret, that he might de facto fanctify his Spouse; that he might
acquire unto her a perpetuity of beauty, not a duty only, to preserve it. And
this intent can never be frustrate: and yet it should be, if the spouse of
Christ, should only, of duty, always be holy, but were not so indeed.

Or, tell me, is she spotless, who should have no spot's, but has them? Is
that a fair face, which should be so, and is not? has she no wrinkles, who
should have none?

Rem. But God has neither decreed nor foretold that his true doctrine should
de facto be alway's visibly profess't, without any mixture of falsehood.

Prom. What? because he has not foretold it to you, who have lost your ears
of hearing, or have stopped them with humane reason? or dwell too near the
Catadupa, and the noise of waters? or converse with bleating or bellowing
cattle? in fine, have your attention taken up in the traffic, care, and tumult
of earthly commodities, that you cannot hear the music of the Sphear's, or
the harmony of heavenly Truth? And have all men forfaited their ears, since
you have been deaf on the left ear, or forgotten what you have heard
heretofore with the right?

But to other men, it has been told, and foretold in all the languages of the
world; they have heard it foretold in those words of Esaias: Esaias. 35.
Eterit ibi semita and via, and via Sanctorum vocabitur; and hae erit vobisvia
directa etc. and this shall be a direct or straight way, so that fools shall
not mistake it: But Socinians are no simple fools, they may mistake it. Now if
this way be humane reason (humanum est errare) nothing human, as such, is
exempt from error. If the Scripture be this way, the wisest may err in
interpreting it, and then it is no way; or at least not the way of Saints, nor
the true and straight way when a false interpretation has distorted it. But
the doctrine of the Church is that Via Sanctorum, the way of Saints, wherein
the spirit of truth residing according to promise, interprets holy Scriptures,
which then becoms a way, and a straight way, wherein a Fool shall not err; 1.
Cor. 3. Ibid.
a Fool, I say, who has made himself a fool, that he may be made wise by
Christian wisdom, which is folly to the world, and to Socinianisme, as the
wisdom of the world, and Socinian Reason, is madness and folly to God, and
Christian Religion.

Again they have heard foretold in those words of our Savior, Math. 28. and
16.
Ecce ego vobiscum sum etc. and those other. Et portae tuferi non praualebunt
aduersus eam, the power of hell shall not prevail against it, the preservation
of the Church of God from error of doctrine, from all falsehood of heresy. They
understand it decreed by God, Ephesians.
and foretold by S. Paul: Et ipse dedit quosdam Apostoles, alios prophet as
etc. ad consummationem sanctorum, in opus ministerij, which work of ministry,
necessarily supposes visibility of the Ministers and ministered, in
adificationem corporis Christi, for the edifying, or building up the body of
Christ, which is his Church; the members whereof being to accede throughout all
ages to this mystical body by the Visible ministry of those Visible
ministers, Prelates, Teachers, and Governors, infer a necessity of true
doctrine, visibly taught, or to be taught them, by those their Prelates;
without which truth of doctrine, they could not be the regenerate issue of the
spirit of Truth.

They have likewise heard the Church of God called by S. Paul; 1. Tim. 1.
Domus Deiviui, columna and firmam^ntum Veritatis, the house of the living God,
the pillar and proppe of truth. Of the house of God it is said, Domum tuam
decet sanctitudo Domine, Psalm. 92.
in longitudinem dierum; sanctitude becomes thy house O Lord, for ever; which
fanctitude consistes in the rectitude of the understanding and will of man,
rectified by truth of doctrine, both in faith and manners. Ibid.
And this is sure that visible house wherein S. Timothy was to be wary, and to
know how to converse, for the edification and example of others, who should be
eyewitnesses and eare-witnesses of his doings and sayings.

This Church is also the pillar and proppe of Truth; which proppe or pillar
surely shall stand, while truth has need of a proppe, which shall be in order
to mankind, while man is mortal, obnoxious to error, and lapse in question of
divine truth. To this pillar of Truth, Isa. 59. Johan. 14.16. Johan. 16.13.
the spirit of God is by special Covenant tied, to the worlds end; or is
himself this pillar of Truth; and that spirit of truth, which shall teach the
Church, and by the Church, omnem veritatem, all truth, that is, all necessary
truth; which necessary truth, certainly, excludes all falsehood in doctrine of
faith and manners, which are the points in contestation between the Catholics
and Protestants.

All this, and much more the Fathers and Doctors of the Catholic Church, have
heard and believed, as foretold and decreed by God, concerning the Visible
profession of true doctrine in the Church of Christ, without any mixture of
falsehood, and the continuance of such Visible Profession de facto, not de iure
only. Nor, if you can gloss these Scriptures to anothersense, shall they cease
for that, to tell us this truth, to whom the Catholic Church does so
interpret them; and who, as sons of obedience have learned to turn the deaf
ear to all exotique interpretation, yea and to all natural reason and
discourse, when it impugnes this authority: as you Socinians are deaf to
supernatural truth, when it sounds a note above the reach of your reason.

Wherefore, since this your answer is in effect no otherwise a confutation of
your first Motive but by a flat denial; I do not see but it may move still,
with as much force as ever; yea and live again, to fight against the Father,
and that with more equity, then he fights against his Mother. And all this I
have said, supposing he means by his (de facto) as I understand him, and as I
have some reason, more then every man knows, to think he mean's: If he mean
otherwise, when he shall vouchsafe to come out of the Clouds, and appear in
his true meaning, he shall be answered otherwise.

II. Motive. Because Luther and his followers separating from the Church of
Rome, separated also from all Churches, pure or impure, true or false then
being in the world; upon which ground I conclude, that either Gods promises did
fail of performance, if there were then no Church in the world, which held all
things necessary, and nothing repugnant to Salvation; or else that Luther and
his Sectaries, separating from all Churches then in the world, and so from the
true, if there were any true, were damnable Schismatics.

II. Remotiue. To the second. God has neither decreed, nor foretold, that
there shallbe always a company of men free from all error in it self
damnable: Neither is it always of necessity Schismatic, to separate from
the external communion of a Church, though wanting nothing necessary. For if
this Church supposed to want nothing necessary, require me to profess against
my conscience, that I believe some error though never so small and innocent,
which I do not believe, and will not allow me her communion but upon this
condition: In this case the Church, for requiring this condition, is
Schisma^icall, and not I for separating from the Church.

III. Promotiue. Gods decree concerning the perpetuity of a Visible and
infallible Church on earth, to the end of the world, has been foretold many
ways, as has been declared in part in the former Promotiue, and more fully
and plainly by many Catholic writers: and the contrary is here assumed with
too to great boldness, but without all proof, or possibility of proof.

That such separation from the Church is schismatic, is evident; for schism
being the breach of union in Charity, as Heresy violates the unity of faith; to
separate from the external communion of this Church, is to show you are fallen
out with the Church, with which you refuse to converse in Ecclesiastical
conversation; as he who flies the company of a man with whom he has been
formerly familiar in way of civil conversation, is supposed to be fallen out
with him. Then again, this separation is very sca^dalous, as yiedling a just
presumption that such a Separant is in his judgment an Heretic. Now, to
scandalize wittingly and knowingly (as such a Separate cannot be ignorant that
this is a true cause of scandal, or if he be, he is wilfully ignorant) is to
violate the law of Charity, and this especially when you separate from a Church
wherein nothing necessary to Salvation is wanting, as you make the supposition:
But if this Church wanting nothing necessary (as you suppose) require you to
profess against your conscience that you believe some error; then (say you)
your Separation is lawful.

But either this error required by the Church to be believed, is in your
conscience an error of doctrine concerning faith or manners, or no: If yea;
then in your conscience somewhat necessary is wanting to that Church, that is,
the contrary doctrine of truth. If it be no error of doctrine concerning either
of these, but only some opinion held or practiced as indifferent; then
certainly the Church will never urge you to believe it: and then again you may
choose whether you will believe it or no: and then lastly you should have no
cause for this, to break with the Church, or divide your self from her
Communion. If you say, in the judgment of the Church it may perhaps be held
indifferent, yea perhaps a necessary point of doctrine; but to my conscience it
is an error in faith or manners: Now this I expected, and this I knew you said
in your heart: so then I say again, in your judgment and conscience the Church
is wanting in some necessary point of true doctrine.

And here now I appeal to the sentence of any sober and indifferent
Christian, what greater pride can be imagined, then that any private or single
man should have a conscience repugnant and refragatory to the conference of the
Church of God? What sober Christian. I say, reflecting duly upon such a
conscience will not doom it mere insolency and arrogance? True it is, no pride
of man can be a Paragon with the pride of formal Heresy: this is indeed that
Pes superbiae, that foot of pride, by the length and bulk whereof you may
conjecture how Gigantique a monster an Heretic is. For which cause all
Orthodoxe Spirits have learned to pray with the Church, Psalm. 35.
Non ^eniat mi^ipes superbiae, and manus peccatoris non moucat me: this foot of
pride, this suggestion of Satan, may it have no access unto my soul, and the
hand or pen of such a sinner let it have no power to move or draw me from an
humble belief: Ibi ceciderunt qui operantur iniquitatem, expulsi sunt, nec
potuerunt flare, there, and in that pride Apostat-Angels fell, and with them
Apostat-Christians fall from the Church, expulst and eiected thence; or, by
reason of their pride they could stay no longer there.

For after this pride growing daily more in an Heretical conscience, has at
length extinguished the spirit of God, stifled all his Inspirations, and
Motives; then the same spirit of God expulseth that Satanicall, and mutinous
spirit out of his family which is the Church of Christ: bandites, and throw's
him forth into the open field of professed Heresy, 1. John. 2.
vt manifesti fiant, that they may be known for Heretics, and warred
against, as open rebels; that their conversation may be eschewed by weaker
Christians; their Herefies laid open and beaten down, by the more learned; to
be buried at last, in the ignominy and oblivion of their infamous Ancestry, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
whom our Lord Jesus from age to age has, and will kill with the spirit of his
mouth.

And now after their eiectmens and expulsion, they pretend the equity of their
separation; when it is indeed their Iniquity which has separated and expelled
them; qui operantur iniquitatem, expulsi sunt etc. As when God and the Apostate
Angels, by reason of their pride, became two factions, (if I may so say) the
immensity of heaven was too strait to contain both. Quaemare, quae terras,
quae totum possidet Orbem
Non caepit fortuna duos. --
So an Heretic when he makes two with the Catholic, they cannot stand
together under one roof of the Church; expulsi sunt nec potueruntstare; the
Spirit of God, as being the predominant spirit in the Church, and in right of
possession, expels the other incompatible spirit of Pride.

But yet, Good Sir Remouer, is it possible so gross a folly should escape your
reflection, as you manifest in the close of this your answer? for thus you
write; That if this Church (wherein nothing necessary to Salvation is wanting)
will not allow you her Communion but upon condition etc. in this case the
Church for requiring such a condition, is schismatic, not you for separating.

Now for my part, I truly should have had a very great Scruple, to have
imprinted upon your reputation such a character of a prodigious pride, as you
have here displayed with your own hand and pen. For as I have intimated
before it is certain (yea, and to surmise the contrary, or draw it within
suspision or iealousy, is mere litigious cauilling) that the Church will never
require the belief of so small and innocent an error, as includes no
prejudice or falsehood against Catholic faith, or manners; and if it include
any such, it cannot be small or innocent. Yet put the case, that the Church
should require of any single or private Christian, that he would for peace sake
condescend with the whole Catholic Church, to the profession of some point of
doctrine, which even in his judgment were but a small and innocent error, but
in her judgment an Orthodoxe truth though not yet defined; and would advise him
to depose his single conscience, in this point, wherein he could not possibly
be supposed to have any conuincing evidence, especially against the torrent and
unanimous consent of the whole Church; and that finally in case he would not
submit, he should be excommunicate and held an alien from the Church: were it
not a strange pride in such a man, to say: No, he could not, and so would not
depose his conscience; that he know's he is in the right, and the whole Church
in an error, (for thus we must suppose according to the sense of this Motive,
that Luther stood out single against the whole Church) and that therefore
unless the Church will allow him her Communion upon his own terms and
conditions, that is, without obligation on his part to any such profession of
doctrine, or practice of the whole Church, he would disclaim her communion and
proclaim her schismatic, for requiring from him any such concurrence with
her, in any such practice, or exterior conformity.

Although (by the way) Luther, for whom he apologizeth, opposed the whole
Church, in points of faith then already defined; when those errors (if errors)
were neither small nor innocent, being now imposed upon Christians to be
believed, even as they would believe God himself: I say, no error so imposed,
or so authorized could be small or innocent; but if an error at all, a most
grievous and damnable imposture. Or if they were true doctrines, and then also
defined by the Church, then Luther and his sectaries, by not believing them,
and for separating (according to your former discourse) from that Church, and
all the Churches of the world, and so from the true, (if there were any true)
were damnable Schismatique^. Therefore this part concerning Luthers Apostasy,
as urged in your Motive, remains yet unanswered.

And yet further let us consider your Apology for this Apostata, personated in
your self. In this case the Church not allowing me her communion is
schismatic, not I for separating. Reflect seriously upon this discourse,
whether it be, not only unchristian, but incongruous and illiterate, nor worthy
to have dropped from a Grammarians Pen, much less from a master of Art's, or of
a Chair. For if Luther, or any such, whom you act in this defense, were ever
in the Church, from which he separates, he was in it, as a limb, or member in
the whole body; for example, as an arm, or leg, or thigh etc. Now in case of
separation or division between the body and any member, do we say the body is
divided from the leg, or arm, or the leg or arm from the body? Schism is
division or separation; the Church, say you, is Schismatic for requiring the
aforesaid condition. From whom, or what, schismatic? from whom, or what
divided? Is the Church divided or separated from you? What? the body from the
leg? as, if you suppose it incurably gangrain'd, and then, -- Immedicabile
vuluns
E^se re^idendum est, ne pars syncera trahatur;
But shall the body in this case be cut from the leg? quis ita l^quitur? is
not this very language schismatic, and separate from all Catholic use of
common sense and speech? Does the Church separate from you in not condescending
to your single opinion; or you from her, in not submitting to her Catholic
doctrine? The Church held the same doctrine, for which you separate from her,
before you came to her: you found her possessed of this doctrine, you leave her
so possest', and standing where you found her; Who, separates in this case? You
stood for a while joined to a pillar; you fly from the pillar: what, is the
Pillar gone from you, or you from the Pillar?

Nay I say more, were it indeed an error, which the Church should urge you to
profess, and which because you refuse to profess, you forsake the Church; yet
not the Church, (if we speak properly) but you are the Schismatique, or
Separant, Schismatique or Separate alway's denominates the inferior, or
subjected part: for who are now the Separatist's in England? They who exact
conformity, that is, the Governors of the English Church, or they who refuse
to conform? Do you not see that by the very like discourse, the
Non-conformant's may conclude the Conformant's to be Schismatics? Nay might
not the Heretics of all ages, even those who opposed the doctrine of the
primitive Church, have returned the Schismatic upon that Church? Yea upon
the College of the Apostles themselves, for requiring the belief of some
doctrine, which those Heretics believed not, and which in their deluded
conscience was error? For could not every Nicholait say as much; You require
of me to profess against my conscience, that I believe some error which I
believe not, otherwise you allow me not your communion: you for requiring this
are Schismatic, not I for separating from you, rather then to condescend to
this your condition?

Nor truly do I see, why a private subject might not as well stand out against
the King and Parliament, refusing to subscribe, or obey some decree or order
established by full consent and authority of both Houses; pleading in defense
of such his recusancy, that the order or decree is an error in the State; and
alleging perhap's to that purpose some old Charter or record, misapplyed by
his own private interpretation, disagreeing from the common intendment and
declaration of the Lawyer's and Judges of the Land; and then being for such his
contumacy censured, proscribed, declared rebel or Traitor to the State, unless
he would come in, and acknowledge his obedience and conformity to that order,
or Law; still pretend, that such a Law is no Law, but an abuse of authority;
and say, that if they will not allow him the Name and privilege of a true
subject, but upon such condition, that by his subscription he profess against
his conscience, his consent to an error in government, to which he consent's
not, or acknowledges for law what he belieues not to be law; in this case they
for requiring such a condition are rebell's and traitors to the state, not he
for disclaiming it.

And I believe the disparity will not easily be assigned; neither will it ever
be proved, that the Temporal and Laick authority of any State or
Commonwealth, in order to civil Government or Command, is more sacred and
inviolable, then the authority of the Church of God, in regard of determining
doctrines of faith, or in order to Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions.
Whence it may seem a matter worthy the consideration, that this spirit of
doctrine has in the very bowell's of it, the very Embry^ of all seditions and
rebellions: such, as if it live to grouth, and strength of age, may prove such
a monster as may import in time, the confusion, and Anarchy of all State and
Government. Verily it will appear, as I think, very manifest, that any
refractory or rebellious subject may accommodate this discourse to the
maintenance and defense of his rebellion, with very good congruity; yea and
finally retort the Traitor, or Rebel upon the Prince, or Authority which
proscrib^s or censures him.

III. Motive. Because, if any credit may be given to as creditable records as
any are extant, the Doctrine of the Catholics has been frequently confirmed;
and the opposite doctrine of Protestants, confounded with supernatural, and
divine miracles.

III. Remotiue. To the third. If any credit may be given to Records far more
creditable then these, the Doctrine of Protestants, that is, the Bible, has
been confirmed, and the Doctrine of Papists, which is in many points plainly
opposite to it, confounded with supernatural and divine Miracles, which for
number and glory outshine Popish pretended Miracles, as much as the Sun does
an ignis fatuus; those I mean which were wrought by our Saui^ur Christ and his
Apost^^^. Now this book, by the confession of both ^^des, confirmed by
in^umerous miracles etc.

III. Promotiue. Before I move any further, I think it best to close with you
here. I have already often said, and must say it often, that the Socinian
judgment is no judgment at all, nor any arrest of sentence, but a very wave of
a floating sancy, and giddy affection; which swelling now, and appearing big,
soon after break's upon the shore; and another wave of opinion follows,
grown from another fancy, which is the Trident that moves and commaund's in
the Socinian Ocean. Not long fince, when, I know not now, what wynd moved your
phantastique affection, toward the shore of Catholic truth; then, if any
credit might be given to as creditable record's as any are extant etc. after
that, the wynd changing, and another affection flowing from a new fancy, see
how this Trident has turned your judgment to the quite opposite shore; and
now, if any credit may be given to records far more creditable, then these.
What? have you now found out records far more creditable then these, which are
as creditable as any are extant? then it seems these records far more
creditable are not extant? and yet you have found them out. Or are they now
extant, which seven or eight years fince, when your Motives were conceived,
were not extant? Good Sir, put them out; to the print; to the stationers; with
all possible speed; London and Oxford will come together by the ^ares, for the
commodity; but be not rash in promising to either, least a more liberal offer
make you resent. They will off, at any Price, you may compass another purchase
by the gain of the commodity, especially coming forth with the recommendation
of a most plausible title, as, Record's for protestancy never extant in print
before, set forth by M. Chapter lately Roman Catholic, now Attorney, or ad^^cate
for Protestants. The first edition etc.

But now, in earnest, let us examine these Records of superlatiue credit,
whereby the doctrine of Protestants, that i^ the Bible (do you mean the bible
it self, or the doctrine of the Bible, for there is great difference between
^^ese two?) and ^othaps you will not easily find, out of your Records, how the
Bible it self has been so miraculously confirmed, that is, declared by
miracles, that this Bible is the word of God; and yet you say, This book
confirmed by innumerous miracles. I suspect you meant to be obscure, and yet
willing to have it so understood, that the Book it self has been so
confirmed, that your appeal to it might appear more specious. But then, I
dare be bold to say, that the Bible, that is, the Scriptures translated by
Protestants, shall never be proved to have received any confirmation at all, by
any one piece of a miracle; therefore in this sense what you say, is a mere
vaunt void of all truth: whereas again, if as translated, and set forth by
authority of the Catholic Church, it has ever been miraculously confirmed;
this is a confirmation of Catholic authority, and a shame and confusion of
all Sectaries who reject this authority.

But I will be so favorable as to construe your meaning such, as you can make
good with most ease: as that the Protestant-doctrine is the doctrine of the
Bible, (which is no more then every Heretic would say of his doctrine, rather
then submit it to the Censure of the Church;) which Protestant and
Bible-doctrine has been confirmed jointly by miracles, outshining all Popish
miracles, as the Sun does ignis fatuus. In which place, I will only specify
one doctrine of Protestants, and insist upon that; which is, That the Church of
God may err in definitions of faith, or that it is not endued with infallible
authority in order to such definitions.

Now, when will you be so good as to prove unto us, that this negative
doctrine, has been confirmed, and the contrary doctrine of Papists confounded,
with supernatural and divine miracles? When will you show us, out of your more
creditable records then any extant, that those miracles of our Savior and his
Apostles, were wrought in confirmation of those doctrines wherein you oppose the
Catholic Roman Church? Nay when will you prove that any one of those
miracles, were not so many testimonies, of some point of doctrine which the
Roman Church professes and teaches at this day? Come; leave your brauing; d^
not always ^ly with a Simon Magus in the air of verbal ostenlation; -- Quid
cessas? An tibi Mauors
Vent^^a in lingua, p^dibusque fuga^ibus istis
Semper erit?
Come down, and instance in one point of difference between us and you, which
point held by you in opposition to the Roman Catholic, has ever been
countenanc't by any least miracle of our Savior or his Apostles? or the
opposite doctrine of Catholics confounded by the like testimony. For if you
make not this appear by your sun of Evidence, those divine and supernatural
miracles; what will remain for your confirmation, but ignis fatuus?

I know your Sanctuary; when you have tossed and turned all your creditable
records and evidences, you will show us forsooth, that those points of faith
which you have received, and hold of the Catholic Roman Church (though the
tenure be merely Heretical, that is, of voluntary choice; because it pleases
you to hold some such as import no restraint, or that some face of truth may
appear, like the face, and song of Siren's, to draw men upon your rock's of
pernicious Heresies,) those I say, you will prove to have been attested and
confirmed by those miracles of our Savior and his Apostles: which will help
your cause nothing at all, but rather weaken it, when by such testimony of
miracles you can confirm no other doctrine, but what you have received from
us. Neither yet are those doctrines yours, which you can prove to have been so
confitmed: I say, no otherwise yours, then those things which you have stolen,
or keep by force, from the right owners; therefore they are with you as
children rauish't from their mothers bosom, and the company of their brethren,
by the Turket or M^ret, with whom they remayn so sequestered perforce, daily
testifiyng by their sighs and groans, the tyranny of their restraint, and
their defire to return to their Mother and brethren. After this violent manner
are those Catholic doctrines with you; and thus are holy Scriptures in your,
not custody, but captivity, both of them entertained by you to no other end,
but to be slaves and servants to your own children, the peculiar d^^trines of
your Schism, to carry torches before them, to gain, ^ome reputation of light,
to those works of darkness.

Although for Scriptures, as I have said before, and say again, no Heretic
has them properly; that is, as they are the word of God, which they are not
but as truly interpreted; for which truth of interpretation, he can pretend no
warrant, or title at all. For the Scriptures are not only the word of God, but
the word of the Church, which having first conceived them by the holy Ghost,
the spirit of truth, brought them forth to light, and bequeathed them from age
to age to the children of her obedience, made partakers of the same spirit; and
therefore they only can discern them to be the word of God; which is only
discernable to those, to whom it is spoken, or revealed by the same spirit;
which is only in the Church of Christ, the one mystical body of Christ; which
is also called the spirit of Christ: and therefore is not to be found in any
other Body, or Society of men; for then, Christ should be the head, or heads of
more bodies, which is absurd blasphemy.

And as the Church of God alone, is endued with this spirit of discretion,
whereby she discernes what Scripture is the word of God; so this Church alone
has the spirit of interpretation of Scriptures, and she alone can certainly
say, this is the sense and meaning of this Scripture; who can truly say, this
is Scripture: as only that Daniel cold declare the interpretation and meaning
of Nabuch^donozors dream, who could tell him what he had dreamed, which none
of those Wizards, or Sorcerers, or Enchanters could do, who yet professed they
would interpret the dream, so he would tell them what he had dreamed; But the
wise King believed them not, qua sun^ per Allegoriam dicta.

But here, good Sir, I must tell you as a friend; I am ashamed to s^^ a man of
your expectation and hopeful promisings, to come forth in this threadbare
livery of old Heretics; this appeal from Church to Scriptures. There was
never so putide an Heretic which having once cast off the authority of the
Church, could not find some refuge or sanctuary in the darkness of Scripture;
having also together with that authority excussed, taken to himself the
freedom of interpreting Scriptures. Belie us it, Sir. it is, and ever willbe a
maine presumption that you draw under the same yoke with former Heretics,
when you can not get out of the same Cart-rout, which they have track't before
you.

Et monstrata di^ veteris trabis ^rbita ^ulpa. For first, you have gone out of
the Roman Catholic Church; so they: from the authority of that Church you
appeal to Scriptures; so they: then you interpret Scriptures according to
your single understanding, without any other living guide or Vocal authority;
so they: being gone out, you turn all your power of Pen-gall, against that
Church, whence you went forth, so they. But neither you, nor your patrons, nor
Apostles convert any nation to Christian faith; nor they. You reduce few
sonles, from sinful courses, to better life; nor they. In the whole number of
your Patriarchs, you cannot name one Saint; nor they. I see how you have
consociated your self and your Clyent's with the known Heretics of former
times, I would gladly know someone distinctiue sign, by which you discern and
vindicate your selves from the formal character or character's, marks, or
brands of ancient Heretics. In the mean time let us examine the remnant of
this Remoti^e.

Rem. This book etc. foretell's me plainly that in after ages, great signs
and wonders shall be wrought in confirmation of false doctrine.


Prom. But has it fore told you, that in after ages no true miracle shall be
wrought in confirmation of true doctrine? If not, it has foretold you nothing
to the purpose you pretend.


Rem. And that I am not to believe any doctrine, which seems to my
understanding, repugnant to the first.


Prom. W^^ch seems repugnant etc. to your understanding? Most ridicul^us (...)
no such thing was ever foretold you by the Book of Gods Word; you dreamed it.
But that doctrine is not to be believed, which to an infallible understanding
(which is the understanding of the Church, which is guided by the spirit of
truth) is not only seemingly, but really repugnant to Apostolical doctrine.
But still you put us in mind of your Character; your appeal to your own
understanding; you will not out of this Cart-rout.


Rem But that true doctrine should in allages have the testimony of miracles,
that I am no where taught.


Prom. Are you any where taught the contrary? Or that the testimony of miracles
promised by our Savior, is confined within a certain compass or period of
time? Has the Church only a lease of miracles for term of year* and if it
has when expired that term or lease? Unless you can tell us this, for ought
you know, it is yet in being. Now the promise of our Savior being conceived
and expressed in plain words, and those of an indefinite and interminate
signification, without all limitation to time or place; by what authority
presume you to confine it with in the malignant bounds of your understanding,
or assignement? The words of our Savior are these; Amen, Ioh. 14. Mar^. 16.
amen dic^ vobis etc. Verily, verily, I say to you, he who belieues in me,
shall do the works which I do, yea greater then these. The very like has S.
Mark, and elsewhere.


Rem^t. Besides setting aside the Bible, and the tradition of it, there is as
good story for miracles wrought by those, who lived and died in opposition to
the Doctrine of the Roman Church (as by S. Cyprian etc.) as there is for th^se
that are pretended to be wrought by the members of that Church.


Prom. It is false, that S. Cyprian dyed in opposition to any then defined
doctrine of the Roman Church. Secondly prove, that any of those miracles were
wrought in confirmation of any such doctrine, as opposed the doctrine of the
Roman Church; otherwise you say nothing.


Remot. Lastly it seems to me no strange thing, that God in his instice should
permit some true miracles to be wrought, to delude them who have forged so many
etc.


Prom. Now certainly you are a strange Advocate, and will shame your Clyents,
do what we can. In truth, by what I have heard, blasphemies are no strange
things with you who swallow them with as much ease, as Mithridates was wont to
take poison, and as easily they come from you. Yet first, I note your
illiterate manner of expression in saying, that God permits some true miracles;
as though true miracles were wrought by Gods permission only, not by his
positive concourse and direct intention: by reason of which positive concourse
it is truly said of every true miracle, digitus Dei his est, the fingar of God
is here, as being his work alone: so his alone, that no power or force of
nature, has any natural influence into it; and whereunto nature may seem to
affoard nothing else but a certain non-repugnance, and submission to the
prerogative power of God; and which therefore, rather Nature thou God may be
said to permit.

And tell me now, good Sir, seems it not strange to you that God should
positiuely and directly work a true miracle in confirmation of a falsehood?
(for if it be in confirmation of a truth, then it deludes not) that God should
truly lie, in the language of fact and reality, saying by his miracle. This is
true doctrine, which is false; or, this is Virtue, which is Vice, or the like?
For although Almighty God may permit the abuse, and wicked application of some
supernatural work, whereunto he concurreth positiuely, as when he concurs
positiuely with the Priest, consecrating to some mischievous end (if we will
imagine so great impiety,) yet it follows not, that God can concur
positiuely, to other miracles, with him who intends imposture or confirmation
of false doctrine, by them. For the power of consecrating given to the Priest,
is a permanent, resident, and consistent power, like unto the natural
faculties of man, wherewith as by virtue of a former pact and law of nature,
God concurreth positiuely, in order to the natural efficiency, or exercise of
those faculties, and to the Physical entity of their effects, howsoever
oftentimes morally, and formally sinful: which law and covenant supposed, the
abuse of such natural power, is the sole work and attribute of man, only
permitted by God.

But the power of other miracles, not appropriated to function or Character, or
such as to which God has not obliged himself, by any former compact with any
man, either to conserve that power in him, or to concur with it, to any
miraculous effect, is in no man resident, but rather fl^ent, and errant, as
holden of God by a free, arbitrary, and inobligatory tenure; therefore without
breaking, or frustrating any preeedent Covenant, or decree, God may withdraw
his concurrence to such miracles especially if at any time maliciously
designed: and in this case since he may withdraw himself, me thinks it stands
not with his justice and goodness, not to do so. And here may seem to have
place, that saying of the ancient, Qui non vetat peccare, cum potest, iubet.
For to this kind of miracles, if God should concur positiuely, he should
seem to concur directly to the abuse of the mischievous application, which
God forbid we should ever say or think with Calvin.

But now, seems it not strange to you, that of a mere delusion and imposture,
it should be truly said, digitus Dei hic est? Could any voice of mortal man
reach to so high a note of blasphemy, but a Socinian, which reaches even from
Hell to Heaven? Though now again it seems to me no strange thing, that God in
his justice and providence, should permit such blasphemies to fall from the
pens of such Advocates, that the manifestation of them may disabuse the world,
and awake their negligence and security, who suffer themselves to be guided in
the affair of their Soule-saluation, by such godles and graceles Blasphemers.


IV. Motive. Because many points of Protestant doctrine, are the d^^ned
opinions of Heretics, condemned by the Primitive Church.

IV. Remotiue. All these were not Heretics which by Philastrius, Epiphanius,
or 2. Austine were put in the Catalogue of Heretics.

IV. Promotiue. What kind of answer is this? All those were not Heretics
etc. Ergo, it is not true that many points of Protestant doctrine are the
damned opinions of Heretics, that is, of some Heretics condemned by the
primitive Church? Or thus: Some doctrines are not Heresies, which Philastrius
numbreth with H^resies (for so Bellarmine has noted,) De Script. Eccles.
Ergo, these doctrines of Protestants are not Heresies; or, no doctrines of
Protestants are. Or thus: Ergo those doctrines of Protestants which you in your
Motive observe to have been the damned opinions of old Heretics, or those
very Heresies which Philastrius supposes to be Heresies, and are not. Now is
there any air, or relish of true Logic, either natural or Scholasticall in
these Paral^gicall consequences?

V. Motive. Because the Prophecyes of the Old Testament, touching the
Conversion of Kings and Nations to the true Religion of Christ, have been
accomplished in, and by the Catholic Roman Religion, and the Professors of
it; and not by Protestant Religion, and the Professors of it.

V. Remotiue. Kings and Nations have been, and may be converted by men of
contrary Religions.

V. Promotiue. Kings and Nations have been, and may be converted by men of
contrary Religions. Ergo, it is not true, that the Prophesies touching the
conversion of Kings etc. have been accomplished by the Catholic, and not by
the Protestant Professors. This inference every Logician, or man of common
sense sees, has no force at all. But again, the force of the Motive consists
in this: That those Prophesies concerning Conuersions, have been actually
fulfilled, in, and by the Catholic Roman Church; which is indeed a weighty
inducement to believe that to be the true Church, foresignified by the spirit
of God, wherein those signs wherewith God has fore-marked and predesigned the
true Church, are evident to be seen: then contrariwise, if those signs and
marks of the true Church, are not to be found in the Protestant, this ought in
reason to induce a man to believe that the Protestant is not the true Church.
For where the connection between the sign and the thing signed, is
indivisible, there the inference is good, proceeding from the destruction of
the sign, to the destruction, or denial of the thing signed or signified. As
to say, here is not the indivisible sign: Ergo, here is not the thing
signed. This I say, supposing such infallible Connection, which in this case
ought to be supposed such divine prediction, and the veracity of God being
presupposed, which tyeth the sign and the thing signed together by an
inviolable and indissoluble knot. I say further; that it is false, that Nations
have been converted to the true Religion of Christ, by men of contrary
Religions; which thus I demonstrate. Those contrary Religions, or Professions
of Religion though they might be both, or all false; yet both or all could not
be true; as the Roman Orator says well, pronouncing universally of dissenting
opinions. Now, of the true Religion converting men to the true, there is no
question; but of the contrary or repugnant to the true. Thus I argue: Either
the Professors of a false Religion, taught and preacht' according to their
false principles, or doctrine; and then by those, they never converted any to
the true Religion; or else they taught true principles and true doctrine of
Christian faith. If so; then, if by those true Principles etc. they converted
men to Christian faith, though themselves were not true Christians, yet they
converted, as agreeing and consenting with the true Religion, not as opposers,
or as men of a contrary Religion. As if a heathen should baptize by applying
the matter and form of baptism, with intention to do what Christians are wont
to do, by the like application; then not Heathenisme, but Christian Religion
baptizeth by a Heathen.

Nor can this Argument be retorted by the Protestant, for it will easily be
made to appear that Catholics have converted Nations, to, and by those
doctrines wherein they dissent from protestants: whereas neither Protestants,
nor any other oppugners of the Catholic, will ever be found to have converted
Nations by preaching the doctrine wherein they disagree from the Catholic:
but moreover as for the Protestants, they never converted any, neither by their
disagreeing, nor agreeing doctrines.

Nay even this confirms (if at any time it so fall out) the truth and efficacy
of Christian Religion, and the accomplishment of those prophetique Predictions,
when even the alien, or opposer of true Religion, who can achieue no one
Conversion to Christianity by his own repugnant doctrine, can, and does effect
it, by virtue of Christian Truth: which, I say, this supposed, that any such
Precedent may be cited out of antiquity of some Conversion to Christian
Religion wrought by an alien Professor; though the entire Conversion of a
nation, by any such separate instrument, I believe, has no Precedent in
ancient memory. For the reasons which I have touched heretofore, and, in a
word, according to the ordinary and connatu^all course of divine proceedings in
such affairs, Non hos elegi^ D^minus, See the Examples commonly alleged
answered also in Authors.
God is not went to make choice of such men to be his (...), (as S. Paul, and
after him S. Denis speaks) his cooperators or co^di^tors in the reduction of
souls. This is too great an honor to be coserred upon an alion, or enemy of
Religion.

So then, your fifth Motive stands yet fast, and irremoued by you, like to some
pillar which raised in the Church by some Architect, stands there fixed and
firm, even when the workman is gone far away, yea now perhaps dead and
rotten; or as, while many a weary person leaning upon that pillar finds case
and rest, the drunken Artist receaues no ease at all from it; but reeles and
stagger's in the wide field, until he fall dead drunk upon the ground, or into
some ditch etc. Just so M. Advocate, -- Hac a te non mult^m abludit imago, this
is no bad picture of your self.

VI. Motive. Because the Doctrine of the Church of Rome is conformable, and the
doctrine of Protestants contrary, to the doctrine of the Fathers of the
Primitive Church, even by the confession of the Protestants themselves; I mean
those Fathers who lived within the compass of the first 600. years, to whom
Protestants themselves do very frequently, and very confidently appeal.

VI. Remotiue. The Doctrine of Papists, is confessed by Papists contrary to the
Fathers in many points.

VI. Promotiue. Nether will this Motive be removed with so weak a push, which
thus I confirm. It is untrue, that any learned Papist confesses, that the
doctrine of faith of modern Papists, is contrary to the doctrine of the
Fathers in any point of faith the^ defined by the Church. If from some they
differ in some point now defined, then not defined; this is no formal
contrariety in points of faith; that is, as they are points of faith obligatory
to belief, which they are not before they be defined by the Church: which being
the sole infallible interpreter of divine revelation, by propounding any point
of doctrine as divinely revealed, makes it now formally the object of necessary
belief, which was before only materially such.

But neither again in regard of such differences is this contrariety of some
opinions, between the modern Papists, and some of the ancient Fathers, any
formal opposition. For since they so held those disserent doctrines then
undefined, as being ready to let them go, when the Church should define the
contrary; even in virtue of this readiness or preparation of mind, they held
implicitly, and in a sort equiualently, the very same which we now hold, after
the definition of the holy Church. But the Protestants Appeal to those Fathers
of the first 600. years, is a very brag and imposture of a Jewel, not worth
one barley corn: Campian.
Neque hoc sibi, suisque vulnus inflictum Laurentius Humfredas tacuit. For
since in this vno tertio, in this middle term of submitting all our judgments
and doctrines to the authority and decision of the Catholic Church, we join
with the Fathers both of those 600. and all succeeding years, eue^ to this
present age; we cannot but meet in the conclusion of whatsoever doctrine of
faith.

As contrariwise, for want of this concurrence in one third, or middle term,
all hopes of Protestants or any Sectary whatsoever, ever to join with those
Orthodoxe Fathers, is spes Hypocritarum, a vain presumption, rather then any
solid hope, as of such, who covet to make some show of agreement with those
Peers of Christian Religion, thereby to procure applause, and approbation to
their Heresies: being so far indeed from any true agreement, or harmony with
them, that they jar, even in what they hold with them; even in those very
doctrines wherein they say the same which the Fathers say. The reason: because
in all those doctrines of Fathers, this transcendent condition of a prepared
and prompt submission, to whatsoever determination of the Church, is so
permeant, and pertinent, and transfused throughout all their doctrines and
sentences, as the very soul, and consistence of them; so that whatsoever
doctrine of Heretics wanting this ingredient of a Catholic Submission, and
Relation to the Church, can never be the same doctrine, nor agreeable with that
of the Fathers, though it seem never so much the same in words: though
invested, I say, in the same language and exterior signification; yet even so,
they are but wolves in vestimentis ouium, in the skin and garments of sheep:
which skin they put on, for no other end, nisi vt mactent and perdant, to kill
and massacre the souls of such, who believe they are Orthodoxe, because they
speak the language of the Fathers.

This is then the distinctiue sign, the spiritual mark and cognoisance,
which infallibly proclaims them to be Heretics: this pertinacity in any
single opinion of faith, yea in any one the least point of faith; this standing
our against the authority of the Church, and refusal to submit, destroys the
whole form, the very constitutiue and distinctiue Character of a Catholic
subject. Howsoever he appear in all other points of Christian doctrine an
Angel of light, by this you shall discern him, as by a cloven foot; with this
submission no Heretical opinion, can make a man an Heretic: without, this,
the whole Apostolic Creed cannot make him a Catholic, (si per impossible)
if it were possible, that such submission should be wanting in him who belieues
entirely the Apostolic Creed.

VII. Motive. Because the first pretended reformers, had neither extraordinary
commission from God, nor ordinary mission from the Church, to preach Protestant
doctrine.

VII. Remotiue. The Pastors of a Church cannot but have authority from is, to
preach against the abuses of it, whether in doctrine, or practice, if there be
any in it etc.

VII. Promotiue. Extraordinary mission or commission is immediately from God:
Ordinary mission or Commission is that which issues immediately from man,
placed in authority under God. Now to prove an ordinary mission or commission,
is easily done by producing the testimony of that authority which sends, or
grants the commission. Extraordinary missions cannot be proved or manifested
by ordinary manifestations; and being not proved, cannot oblige to acceptance,
or belief. Now since to reform is an act of power and authority; and all
power and authority is from God, whether mediatly or immediately, hence it is,
that no such act, can be legal or regular, and so effectual and valid of it
self, without mission or commission, that is, without receiving such power or
authority to reform, from him, who has power to give it; that is, from God
himself immediately, or mediatly from his Officers.

Since then those pretended Reformers had, or could prove no such mission or
commission, neither immediately nor mediately from God, hence it follows,
that they had none at all: no authority. Psay, at all to reform the Church:
Ergo their pretended Reformation, was an illegal, and irregular act of
presumption.

It is true, a Commission may be of two kinds respectively to circumstances: It
may be either an express and formal commission, or interpretatiue only. The
express and formal Commission is that, which I receive expressly granted by
superior authority: Interpretatione I may call that, which though I have not
expressly received from such authority; yet I prudently and vndoubtingly
suppose would be granted me in such circumstances of time, place etc. if the
Superior had notice of them: upon which supposed and prudently presumed grant,
yea and direct will of the Superior, I execute such an act of authority, as to
reform, reprebend, teach, preach etc. Thus much premised: let us now consider
this Remotiue, or anti-Motine, what weight it has in balance, with the Motive.

Remot. The Pastors of a Church cannot but have authority from it etc.


Promot. Beware of false dealing in the very entrance: A Church, denotes a
particular Church. The Catholic (which is the Universal Church, the whole
mystical body whereof particular Churches, and every A Church are parts and
members) is improperly styled A Church; but properly The Church: as The spouse
of Christ, not A spouse, as though he had many spouse^^ Vna est columba mea,
perfecta mea; with which one Church, or perfect Spouse, particular Churches,
yea particular souls are his Spouses, as they are one with her.

Now it is true, that the Pastor of A Church, has authority from The Church,
to preach against the abuses of that particular Church when it swarueth either
in doctrine or manners, from the law's or doctrine of the Catholic Church, to
which it owes Conformity. But then again the Pastor of A Church, is the
sheep, not Pastor of The Church; therefore his preaching against The Church,
is without all authority or commission, either from God or man; nay it is a
prodigious presumption for any Christian subject to preach against the doctrine
or practice of that Church, as against abuses, whose doctrine and practice, is
his rule whereby to know what is abuse in either. For of the preposterous way of
making the Scripture the Rule to discern such abuses by it, enough has been
already said, how absurd and groundless it is; especially when the point of
doctrine which is imputed or traduced as abuse, is concerning the Scripture it
self, or the true meaning or interpretation thereof, which no private Spirit or
particular Pastor, has authority do determine, against the Church.


Remot. Neither can any Christian want an ordinary commission from God, to do a
necessary work of charity after a peaceable manner, when there is no body else
that can, or will do it: In extraordinary cases, extraordinary courses are not
to be disallowed.


Promot. Commission immediate from God, as granted to any subject with out all
mediation, yea or approbation of his ordinary Superior, cannot be an ordinary
commission; therefore it is not to be admitted or accepted, yea, or believed,
without Precedent, proof, and manifestation, that it is from God, by
extraordinary signs and testifications. Again; to undertake such a
reformation, without any ordinary commission, or yet extraordinary, duly
manifested to be such, and that in opposition against ordinary authority,
cannot be peaceable; for peace cannot be where order and subordination is
violated: therefore, non est pax impijs, dicit Dominus, wicked men enjoy not
peace, because in, and by them as such, due order is subverted. For this cause
also, this cannot be a work of Charity, being an act of dissension, and
rebellion, and therefore of it self destructive, and subuersiue of Peace and
Charity.


Remot. But when there is no body else, that can, or will do it etc.


Prom. When Martin Luther ran out of his Monastery, and ran into a Nunry, made
a strumpet of a Nun, and forthwith turned rebel, under the color of reforming
abuses in the Roman Church, there was not indeed another to be found, so very a
miscreant, who could, and would do the like work of unchristian Charity,
although the breach now made, he was seconded by others: true; and most
effectiuely, by that burned Sacrifice of Geneua, who for his merit, might have
been an holocaust. Hem! Correctores! Behold the Reformers of the Roman Church
with the true mark's and brand's of their extraordinary Mission, -- Habeat iam
Roma pudarem. blush Catholic Rome, for your abuses laid open to the world by
these innocent Hieremies, these extraordinary Committies, or Missioners; For in
extraordinary cases, extraordinary courses are not to be disallowed.


Remot. If some Christian Layman should come into a Country of Infidels, and
had ability to persuade them to Christianity, who would say be might not use it
for want of commission?


Prom. No man would say it, that I know: and as you M. Advocate put the case,
you speak Law: for in this exigent, interpretatiue Commission from the Church
to any Layman, (your self, for example) has place; for the Church gives leave
to any man to persuade Christianity, especially in such circumstances of
necessity; yea and to make Christians too, by baptizing. But now the
application: What advantage has your plea from this? Who can interpret, that
any man has a Commission from the Church to preach against the same Church?
This can be no ordinary commission, as I have proved, nor extraordinary of any
effect, or authority, until it be manifested by extraordinary testimony, which
can be no other but true miracles.


VIII. Motive. Because Luther to preach against the Mass, (which contains the
most material points now in controversy) was persuaded by reasons suggested to
him by the Devil himself disputing with him: so himself professes in his
Book de Missa priuata, that all men might take heed of sollowing him, who
professes himself to follow the Devil.

VIII. Remotiue. ^^thers conference with the Devil might be, for ought I know,
nothing but a melanchely dream etc.

VIII. Promotiue. -- An qui amant ipsisibi somma fingunt? Surely it is you who
dream that Luther dreamed, because you would have it so; otherwise you cannot
choose but know by him, that he dreamed not, if you will believe him, who
sutely knew whether he were waking or sleeping when the Devil cour'st him;
otherwise you make the Devil a very dull and Phlegmatique courser. I have seen
much coursing in my days, but never knew any man who slept while he was
cours't; yet I cannot but admire your judgment, and discretion, that you rather
believe Luther in what he teaches against the Church, then what he testifies
of his own certain knowledge: but this was properly and prouidently added by
you (for ought I know) for I think you were not present at the disputation;
no, you were then but an Embrie of Protestantisme; no nor so much, but only
existe^t in virtute causarum; so, for ought you know, it was nothing but a
melancholy dream. Yea and perhaps, for ought you know, he wal'kt too in his
sleep, when (as he confesses of himself,) he oftentimes walked with the
Devil in his bedchamber; that some of his Devils with whom he conuersed so
familiarly, were brave Devils, Doctors of divinity, Doctors of the Chair
among the Devils; this he dreamed too. Now I verily suspect these were the
disputant Devils, who disputed him out of the Mass: and being such great
Doctors of Divinity, sure, they would scorn to take hold of such an advantage
to dispute with him while he slep't. For they, no doubt, intended a victory,
which had been none if he had been a sleep while they disputed; therefore I
verily think, he was broadwaking, as he himself teaches.

But did he indeed, trow you M. Advocate, eat so much salt with the Devil, as
he says he did? It little appears by this* or did he but dream he eat salt,
too? For surely, he was a very freshman in divinity, who would be driven out of
his says by a dream; or because he could not defend it againnst the Devil
waking, he sleeping. But since you reserve so many euasions to escape this
Devilish disputation with Luther, as not denying that he had such a
Conference, even waking, with the waking Devil, but that it might be
otherwise; and then again (for ought you know,) we will press you no further
with this; yet when you made this Conference of Luther with the Devil your
Motive, not to believe Luthers doctrine, authorized or suggested by the Devil,
you then knew no more, then now you know, that is, for ought you knew, it might
be but a melancholy dream: so this part of your Motive stand's in the same
force which then it had.

Remot. But if it were real, the Devil might persuade Luther from the mass,
hoping by doing so, to keep him constant to it.


Prom. Certainly you have taught the Devil a lesson of Policy, for which he
will think himself obliged to teach you many. In the mean time, this is a
very transcendent answer, and applyable to many a solid blasphemy. If the
Devil had persuaded Luther to preach against the Blessed Trinity, (as
whosoever preaches or teaches against it, may be presumed, I think, to do it
by his persuasion, and somewhat to this purpose I have heard whispered of a
certain Socinian, who stickles for Protestancy) why might not a Socinian, or
Antitrinitarian answer to this likewise, that the Devil persuaded him this,
to keep him more constant to the belief of the Trinity? So likewise if Arius
were said to have been persuaded by the Devils arguments to preach, or write
against the Equality, or Consubstantiality of the Son of God, with God the
Father; why might not the Arian to whom this should be objected, answer, the
Devil did it, to keep him more constant to the belief of Consubstantiality?

Sir, I am sorry you are become so private and inward with the Devil, that you
can diue into his intentions, and acquaint your self with them, better, then
he who had eat so much salt with him; who had his company at bed and board, as
daily, and as nightly, as his own reueyled Catharine. But do you not see, what
a gappe you lay open to a most outrageous blasphemy, when you teach Heretics,
to make the Devil a Gateghist, and an Apostle of Christian doctrine; and what
he does himself, he might do by others, his instruments? So then the offspring
and posterity of those Heretics who denied, that the son of God suffered
death upon the cross, might be said to have been persuaded by the Devil to
preach that denial, to the end to keep them closer to the belief of Christ's
Passion.

Now, I see you so wholly taken up in your extraordinary missions, and
extraordinary Courses, that I doubt you will reject, or deride what I shall
propose concerning the Devils ordinary missions: Otherwise I should hope to
move you to believe, that the Devils Apostles doindeed believe the Devil, and
execute his charges and commands in preaching false Doctrines. And as S. Paul
could say, S^io cui credidi, I know whom I have believed; so could Luther: and
that he was not God whom he believed, may partly appear, by that his ingenuous
acknowledgment so notoriously celebrated, Nec propter Deum incepi, nec propter
Deu^definam; I began not for God, nor will I end for God. For as the spirit of
God, yea and holy Angels, have their seeret immissions, influxions, impulsions
upon the souls of good Christians, and work them by degrees, to conformity of
their understandings and wills, to theirs; in such sort, that those holy
Conformists deserve themselves to be called Angels, as we read of S. Baptist,
and others; by reason also of which Conformity, it is said in general terms,
qui adharet Deo, vnus spiritus fit cum eo; he who cleaves to God, becomes one
spirit with him: so has the Devil his ordinary immissions, illusions, and
suggestions into a foul, which, deadly sin wrought up at length to the
ripenes of some desperate heresy, or infidelity, has opened unto him, and
delivered him the keys of the heart, and all the doors of senses; who
forthwith takes possession, and revels there, and commands as in his own;
until at last by his daily and customary instigations, suggestions and
illusions, he has affected the like Conformity of judgment and affection; and
brings such a man to so near a resemblance and similitude of himself, that
he may worthily be called a Devil, as Judas was by our Savior: Non^e ego res
elegi duodecim, and rnus exvobis diabolus est?

I have read a sentence of Trism^gis^us to this purpose, Quand^ damon in
h^manam ins^uit animam, semina propria notiouis inspergit, when the Devil
inflow's into the soul of a man, he spawn^^ the seeds of his proper notion
there; and who can expect from such seed, or spawne, any other but a Diuellesh
frye, which shall resemble the parent in notions and affections? and shall
therefore execute his will, not as, aliud agentes, or, praeter intentionem, not
intending it, as the Devil oftentimes executes Gods will, but with the very
same intention, and affection; as our Savior not obscurely teaches, Vos quae
vidistis apud Patrem vestrum facitis, Joan 8.
you do as you have seen, and learned of your father. And again, Vos facitis
opera Patrisvestri, you do the works of your father: and that they do them
willingly, purposely, and intendingly, he expresses more plainly in the words
following; Vos ex Patre Diabolo estis, and desideria Patris vestri vultis
facere; the Devil is your father, and you will accomplish his desires.

Now certainly if ever he had an obsequious child or servant with whom he might
deal confidently and openly, not covertly, persuading one thing and intending
another; Luther was the man in whom he might confide; Theolog. Tigur. Confessed.
Germ. Hospinian. histor. Sacrament.
and who would run whither he would bid him go, and preach on the top of the
house, what he had learned of him in his Closet; and that de facto he taught
false and reprobate doctrines, the most learned Protestants testify.

These things put together and confidered; that the Devil is the author of
lies; that he has his false Prophets, by whom he preaches them for truths;
that he has them at his commau^d etc. we have reason to make the Devils
dissuading the Mass, and his persuading Luther to preach against it, some
probable Motive (as you heretofore) to persist in the received doctrine of the
Church, rather then to be persuaded by the Devil, to the contrary doctrine of
Protestants.


Rem. Or the Devil might persuade Luther from the Mass, hoping that others
would make his disswasion from it, an argument for it, (as we see Papists do)
and be afraid of following Luther, as confessing himself, to have been
persuaded by the Devil.


Prom. You indeere the Devil still more and more, by the honor you do him.
First you have made him an Apostle, and preacher of true Christian doctrine (as
you suppose it,) and now you make him also a true Prophet, who foresaw the
Catholics would not believe his doctrine, and so would persist in their
former belief. They do not believe him indeed; nor you, who teach the same
doctrine which the Devil did. And I hope, Sir, you will pardon our scruple;
our scruple, I say, to believe the Devil rather then the Catholic Church. If
you do not pardon us this, indifferent men will think you unreasonable, who
expect we should pardon you, who make a scruple to believe the Church, rather
then the Devil. What would you have us do? You know, Sir, according to the
principles of Sceptiques and Soctuians, opinions are carried to and fro upon
the wheels of affections some men are more scrupulous then others; and some
make a scruple of one thing, some of another, as they are diversely affected
toward she matter of their scruples. Catholics (for this is a Catholic
scruple, not flowing from any single, or particular fancy,) stand affected
toward the judgment of the Catholic Church; therefore (according to the
Sceptique way of Philosophers) they make a scruple to follow the devils
doctrine, and to fly from the doctrine of the Church^ you, out of a contrary
affection, make a scruple to relinquish the Devils doctrine, to follow the
Church. -- Quot capitum viuunt, totidem studiorum
Millia. --
Well Sir, you may live to remember you had a fair warning given you by your
self, to take heed of following him, who professes himself to follow the
Devil. So this eight Motive sta^ds yet in force, and may move others; yea, and
will one day, I dare say, moon you too, at least to a Phrygian repentance.


IX. Motive. Because the Protestant cause is now, and has been from the
beginning, maintained with gross falsifications, and calumnies, whereof their
prime Controuersy-writers, are noteriously, and in a high degree guilty.

IX. Remotiue. -- Ilia^^s intra ^^tres peccatur and extra. Papist's are more
guilty of this, then the Protestants. Even this very Author, in this very
Pamphlet, has not so many lea^es, at falsications and calumnias.

IX. Promotiue. To this ninth Remotiue, I know some will say, -- Iliac^s intra
mures mentitur and extra: Within and without the Treian, or Roman wall's he
does the same thing; he deserves the whetstone, in his own judgment; and
therefore he gives and takes it to himself, as is manifest by the Parallel of
his Motives, and Remotiues, in those, within; in these, without the wall's. Let
us first declare what we understand by falsifications: the same, which you no
doubt understood in your Motive, when it moved you, that is, testimonies or
authorities of Scriptures, Fathers etc. falsely alleged; Sentences or
doctrines of Scriptures, Fathers, or whosoever quoted and cited as theirs which
are not to be found in them. Of which kind of falsifications our Catholic
Writers from the beginning of Protestancy, have discovered almost innumerable,
and those unanswerable, and inexcusable, whereof your self, Sir, when you were
intra mures, at least in inclination, or show, or I know not how, were a part
of testimony, and an eye-witnes, (or else you verified my Verse.) And even
concerning this very Writer, whose sword and buckler you are now, there are who
remember your observation, when you said, malum omen, having met with a
manifest falsification, in the very beginning of his answer to
Charity-Mistaken; though now, you are become, -- Recantatis amicus
Oppr^brijs; --
since he is in your books, and your commodity in his Cellar's -- Vincunt and
benefacta feras. Verily such false and fraudulent dealing in a bufines of this
religious consequence, and therefore to be treated with all reverence and
religiosity, ought to be a strong Motive, to lead any prudent and indifferent
man, into iealousy and suspicion of such a cause, and the maintainers of it;
that neither the cause is the cause of Truth, which needs the patronage and
defense of lies; nor the maintainers, men of a conscientious spirit, who can
take upon them, the impudence, to be the public Authors of such.

Therefore the Catholic Writers have taken pains to manifest these
falsities, not in gross, as you do here; but by retaile, particularly, and
namely, as hic and nu^^: here they falsify, in this sentence, in this very
authority, misalleaged, where no probable mistake can be their apology: which
if you could do, as they give you example, you would have done it; you, who
have made calumnies, of sober Verities, sophismes, of plain and evident
deductions, you would not have omitted to lay hold upon some of those so many
falsifications, to have made your Adversary as odious, and faithles, as you
could wish. But you have found none, you can object none, particularly, and
namely, no not one. You know, you cannot do it, and even here you falsify your
own testimony. I demonstrate you cannot do it, because you do it not; which in
you, who attempt to do more then you can, to all advantage of your cause and
disparagement of your Adversary, is indeed an evident demonstration; as many
falsications etc. as leaves, and nor show one? O ridiculous Hyperbole, and most
negligent Calumny! we see those leaves, we see your most, prying perusal of
them: nor blame I that; but you who have the ey's of an Eagle, or Aesculapian
snake, by which you see the least mote in your Adversaries eye, could so great
a beam have escaped your notice or discovery?

And for the number of Calumnies which you object (and those jointly with
falsifications) and this purposely, because you can easily by your wilful
mistaking, and misinterpreting your adversaries words, make up some number of
Calumnies, where there are truly none: (so that if pretended falsifications
stand but as Cypher's, yet they will serve to double, or treble the number of
both) yet I dare avouch, let any man compare this your Adversaries little
Pamphlet, with your great Pamphlet, his falsifications and calumnies will stand
like Cypher's with yours, to make yours numberless. Yet howsoever, you have
not purged your prime Controuersy-Writers, whom in your Motive you consure as
notoriously guilty of falsifications and calumnies: no, this aspersion stick's
fast upon them still, nor will it be wiped of, by casting the like upon others:
Clodius accusat Maches, Catilina Cetheges. Yet neither those Machi, nor
Cethegi, are therefore guiltless, because Clodius, or Catiliue are guilty of
the same crimes; and this, were the accusation, or crime by you objected
against protestant-Writers, by you the same, truly recriminated in Catholic
Authors. And all men know by experience, that even in false crimes, it is much
more easy to sprinkle any man's reputation with discredit, then to wipe it out
again.

X. Motive. Because by denying all humane authority, either of Pope, or
Councels, or Church, to determine controversies of says, they have abolished
all possible means, of suppressing Heresies, or restoring Unity to the Church.

X. Remotiue. Lot all men believe the Scripture, and that only; and endeavor
to be^^eue is in the true sense, and require no more of others: and they shall
find this, not only a better, but the only means, to suppress Heresy, and
restore Unity etc.

X. Promotiue. It Is easy to perceive that you have tasted honey with Ion^tha^,
since your return from Troy, your eyes are now so open, and illuminate: when
you have eaten more fully, you will do meruailes. Nor is this a petty marvel,
that you have recovered, what was abolish't, and have reduced not only to
possibility, but to existence and actuality, the means of suppressing Heresies
etc. without either Pope, or Church, or Councel^; which, before you had tasted
honey, seemed impossible to your understanding.

The secret forces and virtues of nature, say the Alchymist, and natural
Magician, are discovered by vexation of Nature. After much vexation and toyling
of your brayn and body by your so many turn's and return's to, and from
Religion, you have found at length the Ariadne's thread, of a most manifest
direction. Which thread of direction, so often offered to your hand's, spun out
of the bowell's of all Adversaries of the Catholic Church, as ordinary as
cobwebb's, I wonder much how you saw it no sooner. It is evident, you have
tasted honey.

For what more ordinary Rendeuous of all Heretics then Provocation from the
Church to Scripture? But, no; we are deceived; for in this way of discourse,
wherein you reject all ordinary means of suppressing Heresies, you take a
shorter course to abolish Heresy it self; yea to exterminate the very name and
essence of it e rerum natura, out of the world, nay out of the understanding of
man, that there shall not remain the very notion or definition of it; which is
a more universal and total abolition and suppression, then if the whole world
were regested and reconfounded into the first Chaos, or nothing, of it.

For how can there be, or ever have been any such thing as Heresy in coherence
with this discourse? For was there ever Heretic who could not pretend his
endeavor to understand the Scripture in the true sense? yea, and sufficient
endeavor, (excluding the authority of the Church, Councels etc. by employing
all the forces of his natural wit and personal abilities? and who can say he
employed not his endeavor by all these? Then this endeavor only supposed,
though he believed the Scriptures in a false sense, and upon that false sense
grounded false doctrine, even repugnant to Christian faith, yet he was no
Heretic by you; nay they did him wrong who would molest him any further, or
require any other belief at his hands.

Who can say now, that Arius was an Heretic? or Eutyches an Heretic? or
Manichaus an Heretic? Who can say that any of those anciently condemned
Heretics endeavored not sufficiently, by all other means, within the
compass of their abilities (Pope, Council, and Church excepted) to find out
the true sense of the Scripture, or to believe it, in the true sense?

Remot. For he that belieues the Scripture syncerely, and endeauours to believe
it in the true sense, cannot possibly be an Heretic.

Promot. Who shall now be able to judge, or condemn any Heretic? After what
manner shall he frame his indictment? Who shall be able to convince a sincere
Professor, him or her, who professes sufficiently his endeavor, to believe
Scripture in the true sense, by his most daily versing and conuersing with it,
his most punctual citation of Book, Chapter, and Verse; who will hardly
exchange an ordinary salutation, but in the Scripture Phrase; who I say shall
be able to convince his want of endeavor to believe the Scripture in the true
sense, especially being required to believe that only, and no man living, nor
nothing else? who can condemn him for an Heretic, whatsoever he believe, or
believe not?

Tell me Advocate, is this the way whereby to meet in that one Rendeuous,
Ephesians. 4.
of which S. Paul, Denes occuramus omnes in vnitatem fidei? these as many
several beliefes, as several, or diverse, or contrary understandings of the
Scriptures? these so many ways, some on the left, some on the right hand, some
forward, some quite backward, besides a thousand subdiuisious of so many
several ways of doctrines and interpretations? Where fall they into one way?
Yes; you point me out the very place, where after many wyndings, and Meanders,
they fall as rivers into one Sea, that is the Scripture endeavored to be
believed in the true sense. But good Sir, Scripture in all those senses is not
Scripture, is not the word of God; nether does any man's endeavor to believe it
in the true sense, make it the word of God, as it is understood, in a false.

But it is the word of God, you will say, perhaps, to them who conceive it so.
But so might Baal, and Astaroth, and Ieroboams Calves be Gods to those who
believed they were; so there is no Idolatry at all. And certainly as well no
Idolatry, as no Heresy: and heresy it self is a spiritual Idolatry. So every
falsehood as believed to be reueald by God, and warranted by holy Scripture is
an I doll of the Understanding; and an I doll as such, is nothing, S. Paul.
has no real subsistence, is a mere fancy or Chymera. What an unity then of
faith, will this be, consisting of so many diuisio^s? what a strange harmony
composed of so many iarring discord's? may not a man dream as good a Faith,
and as good an unity of religion as this is? -- Cuius, velut agri somnia, vana
Finguntur species, ut nec pes, nec caput rui
Reddatur forma.
Furthermore it is manifest, that such an unity of faith, cannot stand with
trne Unity of Charity. For even naturally affections of the will follow in
proportion of sympathy, the judgments and dict a men's of the Understanding. So
dissension of judgments has ever been, and is, and will be the seed and
parent of inter-warring, and hostile affections, as between the Lutherans and
Caluinists.

Moreover, Charity is candida and rubicunda, of a light and fiery constitution,
Ignem veni mittere in mundum; and sent it was in fiery Tongues. Now, Candor and
Heat are so natured and tempered according to physiology, and experience it
self, that they sever, and disiect, and dissolve Heterogenious copulations,
which dark cold amasseth together: So divine Charity, where it grows from
the root of united faith, dissolueth not only contradictory doctrines in
points of Faith, with which it cannot consist on both sides; and that by an
instantaneous mutation, as the sunshine dispels darkness in a moment; but more
and more as it increases, attoneth differences of less consequence, as
interposed clouds, impeaching greater heat, and radiancy of Charity.

Remot. And if no more then this were required of a man, to make him capable of
the Churches Communion; then all men so qualified though they were different in
opinion, yet notwithstanding any such difference, must be of necessity one in
Communion.

Prom. Lo, you the Man, who I foresaw would do meruailes: and is not this a
compelle intrare strangely interpreted? A great business has been made in
requiry after lost-sheep, such as had strayed from the flock of Christ; such as
our Forefathers have always supposed Heretics to be; so much a do, so much
wearines in laboring their reduction, so frequent and earnest prayer, and
pealing heaven with sighs and groans of a Christian zeal and Charity; so
much fasting and voluntary maceration, directed to that end; so many hazardous
expeditions and adventures in this spiritual quest, of such as have attempted
their recovery to the very loss of their blood and lives: Now all this is
proclaimed folly and lost labor; our Forefathers silly Babes, and sons of
Ignorance, compared with a late borne Doctor, dropped out of the skies, God
know's how, to fetch back those lost sheep, though never so far straggling a
sunder; never so opposite, and oppugnant; and even whether they will or no, to
make them of necessity of one Communion and one Church: Nay, wheresoever they
be, never so far from the fold, yet they must be within it of necessity; he
has found a means to incircle them with an Ocean, with an Amphitrite of
Scripture, yea to ingird them with the very strings of a Geneua-Bible.

Nor will he fetch in those above ground only; he will rake Hell to find them
out, and bring them into his Churches Communion, even maugre Hell, and maugre
themselves, were it not only to be out of Hell for the time.

For what say thou Arius? Had thou not Scriptures for for thy opinion? Yes;
and did thou not endeavor to believe them in the true sense? Yes. Come,
thou art a good Christian; thou must be one in our Communion, thou have been
injured, furto sublatus es e terra Hebraeorum, Genesis 4.
and hic innocent in lacum missus es, the Papists eiected thee by a prevailing
faction, and now hither they have sent thee, to be the Devils Prisoner.

And thou Donatus; thou could not abide the Pope no more then I. What say
thou, did thou believe the Scriptures? Yes; and did thou not endeavor to
believe them in the true sense? Yes. And had thou not Scripture for thy
doctrine? Yes; very good Scripture: Iudica mihi etc. vbi pascas, vbi cubes in
meridie; by this Scripture, and by the elevation of the Pole, and the meridian
line, I believed the Church could not but be in Africa, and if in Africa, then
surely in part Douati. I promise you, a very good Christian; you have both
Scripture, and right reason grounded upon Scripture, and your deduction is
according to the neuer-failing-rules of Logique; at least you thought so, did
you not? Yes M. Advocate. And that thought, or judgment of yours was never
co^uinc't with any argument, which in your judgment was unanswerable? No, I was
never so silenc't, but I had something to say. So, you remained still
vnconuinc't? To my dying day, Sir. Good Sir, neither do I go about to convince
you, you are as good a Christian, as I am, for ought I know. Let me alone with
the Papists; I Will presume to re-enter, and re-enrole you in Communion of
Christians: let them do what they can, you shall be postliminie restitutus: I Will
break a hole in the Church wall, and bring you in that way; and if the worst
come to the worst, and if the Papists will be unreasonably obstinate, you shall
be one of our New Academy, and geere all Religions.

Pardon me M. Advocate, if I seem to personate you in this Dialogue; if I make
bold to entertain you in the behalf of those anciently styled Heretics: your
Charity, as widely extending (I suppose) as your faith, has created in me a
just Presumption, that you will reject no Clyent so qualified, as your self
have described. Within the limit's and precincts of which description, I verily
think, there never was so very a Terrae filius, so very a Giant, of so ignoble
and obscure extraction, no man ever so out-lawed, or bandited out of all
Christian Communion, of all those fore-damned Heretics, but he could make it
appear, that he had lived and dyed, and consequently, a Diocesian of your
Church.

But even these are too narrow marches for your Charity, it will extend it
self yet further: Turks, Jews, Infidels, and Heathens too, so they believe a
God, as shall appear hereafter; all which, no doubt, you will oblige unto you,
no less then him, or those who gave you thanks, for showing them a way to
heaven without Faith.

THvs far I have played the Promooter, (if any man will take this occasion to
call me so) but then let him remember, that I am his Promooter, whom we may
suppose to have been the first Moouer in these Motives; which, as all moving
Verities may truly say, in ipso viuimus, and mouemur, and sumus. Act. 17.
Then let him who list, call me Gods Promooter. Iglory in this name. I profess
it nor will I be ashamed of my Profession.

Thus even the Apostles, as they were his (...), his cooperators, or
coadiutors, so they were Gods Promooters: N^me autem vestrum patiatur quasi
homicida, 1. Pet. 4.
aut fur, aut maleficus, aut alienorum explorator ((...) I think, we may
interpret it an Informer.) Let no man suffer himself deservedly to be called
such a Promooter, si autem vt Christianus, non crubescat, if as a Christian
Promooter, let him hear it without blushing: For this is our confort as daily
as the crime, 2. Cor. 6.
vt Seductores, and Veraces. This, by way of Prevention.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader.
THE faults which have escaped in printing (by reason of the uncorrected copy,
and employing of strangers not skillfull in our language) I hope are not very
many, nor yet such, as may not easily be corrected, by thy judicious Reading.


