Just in the Cloud does lovely CUPID stand,
With Quiver at his side, and Bow in hand:
Which shows when his swift Arrows pierce the heart,
The wound must cured be, by Love, not Art:
And MARS the God of War to give renown
Unto desert, does here true Valor crown,
VIENNA Natures pride does parallel,
VENUS her self, who did her sex excel.
The joined hands to the Spectators show,
That Valor does to Beauty homage owe.
And with the stately Steed that stands in view,
Sir PARIS did great troops of Foes subdue.
The Castle strong and cruel Iaylors key,
Are Emblems of a Princes misery.
If that the bars were red and Scutch'on white,
The Coat would show who did this Story write.
VIENNA

Noe Art, Can Cure This heart
Where in is storied, ye valorous atchieuements, famous triumphs, Constant
love, great miseries, and final happiness, of the well-deseruing, truly noble
and most valiant knight, Sr Paris of Vienna and ye most admired amiable Princess,
the fair Vienna.

London Printed for RICHARD HAWKINS and are to be sold at his shop near
Sarjeants Inn in Chancery Lane



TO HIS WORTHY Brother in law, Mr. RICHARD MINSHVLL, all health and happiness.
MOre Rich-art thou in mind then Mines,
but Myn-shall be the joy of heart;
Since still thy love with mine combines,
and smells of Nature more then Art:
For blood with blood, and sacred writ,
Such knots of love in Love has knit.
To thee therefore J only send,
this Spiders Web so vainly spunne,
Which my best thoughts to thee commend,
since what is done, for thee is done:
If any tax my idle brain,
Say once a year fond fools do reign.
M. M.

To the Reader.
NOt with intent to pass the speaking Press,
Or challenge Praise of any more or less.
This Book was writ, the Author for his pains,
Did neither aim at merit, praise, or gains;
To gratify a well deserving friend,
This Story feigned, at vacant hours was penned:
Which though now to the world exposed it be,
The Authors heart is from vain glory free.
THO. CROKET in praise of the Authors Work.
IF graver heads should hold it to be vain,
that thou (well struck in years) do write of Love,
Say thou the finest dye soon'st takes a stain,
and soundest Wits light subjects often prove:
But thou have temp'red so thy Love with Arms,
with Knightly prowess, and with Martial feats;
That thy smooth style (like sweet bewitching charms)
compells all sorts to read without intreates:
Then blush not since thy Pen such Art has shown,
as proves the difference 'twixt Love and Lust;
And stirs up Valor almost overthrown,
whose Arms lie cankered with consuming rust:
But rather glory in thy taken pains,
for which the world indebted aye remains.
THOMAS CROKET.

To the deserving Author.
Whilst Paris thy great Rape shall be renowned,
Or Troy it self on earth has any sound;
That in thy breast did foster such a flame,
To waste the Town, and yet preserve the Name:
So long (Sir Paris) thy chaste fires shall last,
Which (though not with such fury) burnt as fast;
And whilst the City of Vienna stands,
A virgin Town maugre the opposite bands,
Of insolent Turks vnravish'd by their steel,
And never their invasiue Arms to feel:
So long a date Vienna thou do give,
To him whose Pen has made thee ever live.
Tho. Haywood.

VIENNA here presents to you,
Both Love and Valor, great and true,
And in this Story you shall find
Pregnant conceits to please the mind:
Which read, and view, and reap the gains.
Then thank the Author for his pains.
R. R.

THy pleasing Story gives most true content,
to all that have survay'd thy witty Lines:
For thou to Mars and Venus grace have lent,
and in thy Book both Love and Valor shines:
For which, let Martial Knights and Ladies fair,
say, and say truth, that this is past compare.
T. M.

THy Mars-like Paris, and Vienna fair,
most pleasing do appear eclipsed no way:
Who viewes the same, thou needst not doubt or fear,
for it is decked in Wits rich array,
There Is such new pleasing ways to please the mind,
That all, that read the same, content will find.
Samoth Egnirawniam.

SInce graver wits (so much) thy Book commend,
Whose censures do my judgment (far) transcend:
Why should not I rest silent, and admire;
Knowing my skill answers not my desire?
The reason is, I (rather) will improve
My ignorance, then to conceal that love,
Which duty prompts to speak, which still dothlive,
To honor thee, since praise I cannot give
To equallize thy pains in study spent,
Which now (most fluently) in complement,
Shows the exactness of a sollid brain,
That makes so small a volume to contain,
Love, Valor, Fortitude; what not that is rare?
But in thy (pregnant) Lines composed are?
Wisdom, Conceit, Art, Learning, Knowledge, Wit,
Do grace thy work to make it exquisite:
Time shall proclaim thy worth to future days,
And Fame perpetuate thy living praise.
Io. Egnirawniam.

AS most esteem of Jewels for their worth,
And prize them high, though not in gold set forth:
So virtuous minds when they this Story view,
Admire and say (for it) great thanks is due:
If others cannot add (to it) like praise,
Time vows to store such worth for future days;
My Pen here stops, yet Natures stream runs so,
Rivers will ebb to th'Sea from whence they flow.
Mat. Egnirawniam.

IF duty did not bind, desert would move
my Art-lesse Pen thy Story to commend:
Since better plots of Valor, Art, Wit, Love,
to Momus view, the Press did never send.
Ralph Egnirawniam.

ANd I the last, but not the least, whose Love
to thee, and thine, is tied in treble bands;
For marr'age, blood, and friendship which may prove,
our constant buildings are not on the sands:
Therefore with thanks for this thy well wrote Story,
Though mine it is: yet thine shall be the glory.
Your Kinsman, Brother in law, and Friend, Richard Mynshull.

VIENNA.
WIthin the Principality of Viennois, whilome there lived and ruled; as
Daulphin, a most renowned Prince, no less esteemed for his admired wisdom,
then highly honored for his respected greatness; But so absolute was he in
opinion, so perverse in disposition, and so severe in government, that he made
his will his God, and rigor his law. This Daulphin had but one only Daughter,
whose exquisite beauty was so beautified with rarest virtues, that men honored
Nature as a God in her perfections and held her more then a woman in her
virtues. Amongst many Knights that then followed her Fathers Court, there was a
most well deserving aged Knight (who was known to be as sufficient, as he was
sufficiently known) named Sir Ioques, who had but one only son called
Paris, whose but budding years, decked with Natures pride, and honored with
timely Knighthood, well challenged renown for his right, Venus for his friend,
and Fortune for his servant. But it fortuned (so Fortune would) that this young
Knight casting casually his careless eye aside in Court, espied the young
Princess, the fair Vienna, (for so after the City was she called) talking
with her selected and endeered friend the Lady Izabella, whose gracious
demeanor he so devoutly noted, and whose unparalleled beauty he so feelingly
admired, that openly commending the one, he secretly affected the other. Many
were the unwonted thoughts that now troubled his troubled mind, and more then
many were the unquiet and universuall cares that now attended his new
entertained desires. Still he gazed, and gazing sigh't, and sighing grieved
that so he gazed, yet could he not cease to feed his hungry eye, nor durst he
once be seen to look on her, one whom he could not but look. For as
commanding love did flatter his aspiring hope; so the remembrance of Phaetons
fall, did dismay him with a deadly fear. And fear he did, least that just
disdain should beget in her bitter revenge, and black revenge should bring
forth untimely death.

Thus in seeking to pass the mean, poor Paris dyed for being so mean, and
in this disconsolation, glad he was to smother his sorrow to his greater
grief, not daring to acquaint any but La-nova his second self, his companion
in Arms, and the sole secreter of all his secrets. To him, and none but him,
did he in sorrow bewray his love, and in love bewail his sorrow.

La-nova pitying his case, dissuaded him from the danger of Jxions love, least
with more repentance he vainly with Apollo pursued Daphne. Heavens forbid
(said he) my Paris eye should with the Eagle soar against so bright a Sun;
or that your desire should with the Be delight in such flowers, which being
sucked, will yield more poison then honey. Ah Paris, Paris, seek not to obtain
that with care, which you cannot keep without danger. To desire to be a King,
is no Just title of a Kingdom; and to say you love her, no sufficient desert
to win her. Desire not then beyond thy reach, least thou fall in thy hope.
Nay, admit that her chaste conceits would entertain Venus deceites, yet
follows it not, that Jove's royal bird would prey on silly Flies. Alexander
would deal with none but Kings, nor Vienna with any but Princes; low shrubs
wither ever at the Cedars root. Beware Paris, least coveting with Icarus to
soar above the Sun, thou be punished in his pride under the Sun. Thy
deserts are I confess many, and meritorious, but the state of her estate
stands not with thy indignities; men are wey'd by the abundance of their
fortunes, not by the worthiness of their virtues. Then wade no further in this
fourd, but let Armours, not Amors, be the subject of thy thoughts, since the
Camp affoords honors, and the Court such dangers.

Paris thus dehorted, resembled the Palm Tree, that the more it is pressed
down, the more it striveth upwards, so the more his friend misliked of that
he desired; the more he desired what so his friend misliked. Such was the
unresistable force of his inlimitable affection, that in spite of reason he was
enforced to do homage unto passion. For where Love is predominant, there all
other affections attend on it. And therefore he concluded still, and ever to
love her; but still, and never to let it be known to her. To approve which,
he requested La-novas company that night secretly to give Vienna music, who
seeing his unremoveable resolution, vowed himself to his fortunes. The same
night when quiet sleep possessed each weary eye, he and La-nova taking either
of them a well tuned Lute, went directly under Vienna's window, where sweetly
striking their pleasant strings, Sir Paris thus chearefully warbled out his
Ladies praise.

Though present times allow of former age,
And yield the pride of grace to Jove's fair Queen,
Though Iunoes grace, did please each gazing eye;
And all men thought like grace was never seen:
Yet were J judge, to judge of sweetest grace,
Your grace, for grace, should have the chiefest place.
Though Pallas patroness of Wisdom be,
And wisest heads do homage to her shrine:
Though Doctors draw their learning from her brain,
And all men hold her sacred and divine:
Yet should J judge of Wit, Pallas should find,
Your Grace should wear the Laurel of the mind.
Though Paris, Venus, doomed, for fairest fair,
Of Goddess three, that strove for beauties pride:
Though Gods, and men, confirmed her beauties Queen,
And every eye, did honor Vulcans bride:
Yet might I judge; my judgment should be this,
Venus was fair; fayrer Vienna is.
Then leave your strife, strive not you worthy wights,
Yield beauties prize, unto my Princess Praise:
Blush Trojan, blush thy Hellens bue is stained:
Cease, cease, you Knights, your Ladies praise to raise:
Since so my Love, excells those Goddess three,
That all excelled for grace, wit, and beauty.
Vienna pleased with the tune, but more with her praise, was moved with desire
to know who they were, that so sweetly sung, and so affectinately honored her;
but do what she could, she could not know them by any means, which much
grieved, but more troubled her disquieted thoughts. Still she conferred and
talked with Jzabella of that heavenly harmony, and ever she commended, whom she
knew not to commend. For Paris having ended, where yet he had not begun,
convayed himself away as privately as might be. But the next following night
they went again with doleful Recorders, on which they carefully sounded.
Paris unknown, thus plainly made his passion not his person known.

How should J joy, why should J sing,
That naught but woes, and sorrows bring?
What is that God of torments great?
What is his name? where is his seat?
Below, O no? there is not hell;
On high; fie, fie, there bliss does dwell.
Look in my eyes, let Judgment show,
Where that place is of endless woe:
Behold my heart, fresh bleeding still,
Where grief does live, and Love does kill:
Then see, ah me; where sorrows dwell,
It Is Love, I prove; that men call hell.
Love is that God, that men torments,
With raging woes, and sad laments:
My heart his seat, where he does reign,
With great contempt, and proud disdain
This, this it is; makes love a Hell,
Then Care, prepare, to ring my knell.
Farewell most fair, Beauty adieu,
J dare not love, but honor you;
Stars fixed so high, dimmes my weak sight,
J may not gaze on Lamps so bright;
Which proves, and moves, my tongue to tell,
That Love, proud Love; is worse then Hell.
This sorrowful Song ended, the Music ceased, and Paris returned to his
Chamber. But Vienna who attentively had listened to this careful Ditty, knew
not well by his over-passionate conceit, and alluding and insinuating Song,
that Love had made her a Mistress, and Fortune had sent her a servant. Yet could
she not imagine who he should be, but much she was discontented that so it
should be, her Princely towering thoughts were not subject to Subjects fancies,
nor would she admit of servill servants. And therefore because she would punish
their pride in their presumption, she went the next morning secretly to her
Father, and told him how that the two passed nights, there had been some (not
known to her) that had bestowed Music on her, under her Chamber window, and
how that one of them the first night revealed his love in her praise; and the
second night bewailed his affection in his own grief. And therefore she
humbly requested him, that he would command a privy Watch to be made that
following night, that they might be discovered in their follyes, and she live
acquitted of such vain fancies.

The Daulphin discontent that any in his Province should so proudly presume to
build his nest in the Sun, gave in secret charge, that six of his Guard
should watch as that night, to apprehend and bring them before him the next
day. All which was done accordingly: And Sir Paris not misdeeming any cross
adventure, came as he was wont with La-nova, to offer the sacrifice of his
consecrated Music to his devoted Saint. But they no sooner tuned, but they
were near over-turned. For the Watchmen fearing their escape, thought to make
them sure by laying them on the ground. But Sir Paris, provided always for all
perils, seeing such rude entertainment, and holding them but for straglers,
armed his whole endeavors to return them condign thanks for their so
unseasonable courtesies, in so much that with La-novas furthering aid he
wounded most of them, made them all to rely more on their legs then their
hands. So that being left alone, they easily recovered their Chamber, without
being discovered of any, which so much incenst the Daulphin, that leaving the
reins of his unlimited anger to his then enraged will, he commanded that
secretly twenty men well appointed, should the next night lie in ambush to
apprehend them.

Now Sir Paris holding that their late disturbance was rather casual, then
occasioned, went, in his unsatiable desire, the next night again. But no
sooner had they taken stand, but that they found themselves entrapped in the
snare; which they finding unresistable, yielded without resistance. The Watch
glad of their apprehension, held themselves so secure of them, that not
regarding (the night being dark) what they were, they carelessly went along
toward the Castle, until they came by a narrow Lane, that turned into the
heart of the City, whereunto Sir Paris all suddenly thrusting La-nova
forceably, took by force a Halberd out of the next Watchmans hands, and
stepping into the Lane, kept the entrance from them all. The Watchmen now grew
more furiously wrathful, then advisedly bold, and so confusedly assaulted
them, that Sir Paris laying the first three on the ground, the rest
(over-hastily still pressing forwards) stumbled, and fell upon their
Companions, so many, and so thick, that themselves bard themselves from the
entrance, which advantaged Sir Paris and La-nova so much, that having time to
turn them to the next turning, they got to their Chamber before they were
descryed, or could be well pursued. The Daulphin understanding the next morning
of the uprore, and of their escape, was much malecontented in himself, the
Court wondered at the accident, but Vienna now recounting their undaunted
courages, with their noble qualities, conceived them to be men of high esteem,
and now more favorably, and affectionately did labor the knowledge of them,
but never after durst they presume to venture the like adventure again, which
much grieved Vienna, and more incensed the Dauphin, who being frustrated of his
expectation politickly, yet plotted this devise.

First, he caused a Crystal Shield, and a Chaplet of gold to be made, both,
passing fair, and rich, then delivering them to Herald, he commanded him to
take them, and to carry them throughout all the City, and by sound of Trumpet
proclaim a solemn Iusts (free for all comers) to be kept 40. days after:
And that he that should win the honor of the day, should by Viennas hand be
crowned with the said Chaplet as Victor, and receive the said Shield as the
best deserving Knight. By this mean means, the Daulphin thought to find out
the unknown Lover. For it was an Article of his belief, that in honor of his
Daughter, he would (as a Knight) make trial of his fortune; and as a Lover
disclose himself, in his devise; where by observance (the instrument of
knowledge) might well discover him. Great preparation there was made on all
sides, and diverse Knights and Barons of sundry Provinces, came as well to see
the admired beauty of Vienna, as to win renown for renowned Chivalry.
Amongst whom at last, though not least in worth, came Sir Paris, and La-nova,
well mounted on white fiery Steedes, suitable to their white plain Armor,
without either mark, or devise: For neither, neither durst use for fear of
being discovered by them. But the day, and the Daulphin being come. Vienna was
set (richly roabed in Arabian Bisse) on a fair tapistred scaffold, the Chaplet
on her head; and the Crystal Shield standing before her at her feet; so that
she seemed another Pallas in a second Venus shape. Many Knights amazedly beheld
her, most desired her, all admired her Thus when each hungry eye had fed, but
not filled his covetous sight, the Herald standing up (after the summoning
sound of Trumpet) bad every Knight do his best devoyre. Then desire of honor,
armed each martial heart with double courage and every Knights courage was
redoubled with hope of honor and Vienna's favor: So that the Iusts grew
great, and both nobly did each Knight, especially La-nova bare him self. But
Sir Paris whose unknown prowis was not yet fully proved, seeing a Burgonian
proudly brandishing his Lance before Vienna, for the honor which yet he bare
away from all, was so enraged with choler and jealousy, that fiercely
spurring his hot ready Horse, he so forceably charged, and overcharged him in
the encounter, that he laid the Burgonians pride in the dust; which Vienna
noting, noted him for the most redoubted, and best merriting Knight of them
all. Still her eye followed his fortune, and still his fortune was remarkable,
and pleasing to her eye. For never ceased he Iusting, nor never Iusted, but he
over-turned some one, in which performance he was applauded of every one. Such
was his heroical fortitude, and such his quick delivery, and manly carriage of
himself, that in the end there was left none, whom he had not overthrown, nor
any overthrown, that would re-assay to overthrow the overthrower. Thus stood
unvanquished Sir Paris, like invincible Hercules expecting a charge; but in
finding none he found his own discharge. So that the Heralds (with Trumpets
sounding his praise) brought him to the scaffold, where the fairest fair, and
gracious Vienna graced his victory, with setting the Chaplet on his head, and
giving him the Crystal Shield, she blushing said: Receive noble Knight thy
most well-deserving honor, and heavens make thee happy both in thy designs,
and thy desires. Sir Paris more proud of her words, then of his reward,
received them at her hands, with more pleasing content then Paphos Queen did
the golden fruit, and humbling himself on his knee, he obsequiously
reverently, yet fearfully, kissed her hand, and laid his other on his heart, in
token that he was hers in all service; and so rising up he made a low
obeyzance, and both parting, both of them looked back at one instant upon each
other; a true record, that their liking hearts rejoiced in the sight of either
other. But Sir Paris being come to the rest of the Knights, departed with them,
and as they rid each one toward his several home, he and La-nova took an
occasion to light to mend their Saddles, the rest passing carelessly on, which
they seeing, took the next turning, and so were gotten away before they were
mist, and mist before they were known. The Daulphin thus deceived by him he
meant to deceive, was much agreved; so were the Knights that they could not
tell by whom they were vanquished; and so was Vienna, that she knew not by whom
she was honored. She thought and ever looked that he should have discovered
himself, that he might the better be respected of her, and the world take
further knowledge of him and his merit. But the clouding of himself, assuredly
assured her, that he, and none but he, was the man, that so sweetly (under her
window) sang her praise; that so dolefully recorded the passion of his
tormenting love; and that so valiantly forced to flight her Fathers Guard; His
secret departure, argued (she thought) so much; and his invaluable valor
showed no less. Desire now, of she knew not what, made her love she knew not
whom: often she wished she knew him; still she talked of him, and ever she highly
commended him; but her wishes were but vain thoughts, and her words but as
alluring winds.

During this their discontentments, The Duke of Vandoume (now called Vendosome)
being brother to the issulesse King of France, a man so powerful in means,
and so popular in State, that nothing could make him unhappy, but the excess
of his happiness: This Duke, I say, being the first Prince of the blood, was
so transported with such an aspiring pride, and unlimitted desire of Rule, that
he could not digest a small expectation. His desire of Sovereignty carried him
so beyond the bounds of all respects, that neither Wisdom could inform his
mind, nor Honor sway his actions. Nature nor Duty could prescribe him any
law, though he were a Subject, subject to the law. How to gain the Crown was
all his care: His glorious consideration thereof, made a continual examination
of all his thoughts, how he should be possessed thereof, Ambition (the Nurse of
disloyal plots and practices) said, The King must dye; and Resolution (the
performer of all deeds) answered, He shall dye. But how, or by whom, he knew
not. Young men (he said) are not ripe enough for such an action, and Old men
are too timorous for so great an enterprise. The rashness of the one, and the
fear of the other, are the ruin of such business. To trust others then, is
to deceive my self; For hope of reward (for the preservation of a King) will,
I fear, betray my trust; And then I must conclude, that though a desire to
steal, make not a Thief; yet my intent for treason, will make me a Traitor;
and in the punishment thereof, I shall find no distinction of persons. What
rests then but force and Arms? my sword must plead for possession, Rome
could not resist Caesar, when he came to the gates, in the strength of his
forces. I will therefore first fortify my self with potent friends, dissemble
for the time, my intent, and take counsel of three sorts of men: of the
Lawyer, that speaks not as he thinks; of the Physician, that does not as he
says; and of the Divine, which oftentimes teaches better then himself
leads, and always better then the people follow. I know the least wind of
the peoples favor will fill my sails full; Their eyes are fixed upon my
greatness, and they observe me already for my interest; The King has no
issue, and therefore of less regard; his time is but short, and Respect only
waytes on posterity, that promises continuance of reign. No sooner (says
some) is a Collateral heir known, but the Kings Testament is made; why then
should he live to command me, that am borne to rule? He may live to bury me,
where then is my Crown? I must and will reign. Upon these moveable sands
(like a foolish Merchant, that adventures all his substance in a broken
vessel) did this fond Duke build both his resolve, and his hope; And to give
success to his trust, he sent presently to the Daulphin of Viennois (whose
principality was in manner equal with a Kingly Royalty) to require his
daughter, the fair Vienna, in marriage for his son. The haughty Daulphins
mind, did well simpathize the Dukes nature; both their prides, and desires,
were reciprocal: only the Daulphin was more reserved, and ever better
advised; but this motion did so attatch him with joy, to think that his
daughter should in time be a Queen, that he covetously embraced the Dukes
request, and wished that Commissioners on either side, might be nominated, and
appointed, to confer and conclude thereof.

This consent of the Daulphin did so elevate and animate the Duke, that he
thought himself already an invested King. The incorporating of Daulpheny to
his Dukedom, would (he knew) make him undoubtedly, redoubted great; and the
uniting of both their powers with their adheres, would well enable him to
affront the King, who now was fitter for a Cloister (as he thought) then for a
Crown. Thus we see, that where men has least reason, there they are aptest to
believe anything, that but flatters their desires. Men that fall into Treachery
or misery, not known nor foreseen, are worthy of some compassion; but they
that wilfully run into rebellion, or calamity, deserve no pity, but shame
and death. In all our attempts, justice, and discretion, should be the
plotters; and Honor, and Moderation, the Actors. A violent humor overthrowes
the Master. Kings we know are made only by God, either in Justice to execute
his wrath upon a sinful Nation; or in mercy, as well to preserve and set
forth his worship and glory, as to maintain his people in righteousness and
peace. For neither Royal birth, succession, election, usurpation, conquest,
nor right, can so establish, or perpetuate a Royalty; but that God when he
pleases, can, and will translate it to others. But now the disloyal and
deceitful Duke (being as far from procrastination, as the Daulphin was
greedy of dispatch) sent his Commissioners for the recapitulation, and
perfecting of such Articles, as should be proposed on either side. In brief,
they agreed on all points, and assigned a day for the young Prince of Vandoume
to come to the Daulphins Court. This being divulged and made known to Sir
Paris, did so excutiate all his thoughts, and so inflame his perplexed heart,
that he was ready to expose himself to all dangers and hazards. In this
distraction, Lanova found him, and knowing the cause of his distemper (for
Rumor had possessed all men with it) he grieving, thus sadly said unto him. Let
patience my Paris conduct thee out of this stormy Sea, into a more quiet Port,
Fortune should have no power over fortitude and courage. What thou never had,
that thou do not loose. Thy inability, and imparity, could never promise thee
any hope; and thy long nourished despair shall now find a period, that in the
end, would have brought thee to thy end. Let necessity then make the now suffer
constantly; and custom will make thy sufferance easy. Sir Paris who did
hear, but not hearken to what his friend had so discreetly delivered, regarded
him no more then a greedy Lawyer does his impoverished Clyent, but still
deeply excogitating how he might intercept, or pervert the intended match, at
length he all sighing said: This Gordian knot must be cut asunder, though I
want an Alexanders sword. Industry, and Policy, often effects unlikely things;
and we should not judge that which is possible, nor that which seems
unpossible: as it is credible, or incredible to our capacities. The eternal
wisdom has (I know) a reserved power, and a secret intention, to bring
things to pass, which the wisdom of man cannot conceive, nor see, till it
happen, and be done. What though Vandoume be mighty? A small Rock may ruinate
a great Ship. I will not so loose Vienna, but where I want force to play the
Lion, there will I assay to gain by fraud. La-nova he said welcome, thou
come in a useful time, thou must secretly fit me with a gray beard, a pair
of Beads, a Friars Gown, and Hood. I must turn Friar, and Prophet all at
once. It must be so, the plot is laid, and we must be Actors both in the play.

La-nova, knowing that his undaunted courage could never brook a Corrivall,
though he were never so great, did much fear that he intended some stratagem,
and therefore he told him, that unless he might know his purpose, he would
make no such provision. Why said Sir Paris, my thoughts dwell in thy breast,
and in thy heart, does my love (next to Vienna) live. How then can thou be a
stranger to my purposes, that art the Treasurer of my secrets? Thou know
La-nova how jealous the Daulphin is of his safety; His rigorous (I might say
cruel) Nature has taught him to fear many, whom many does still fear. Thou
know also that Kings are ever suspicious of their Successors: Experience
makes them to fear, least they should loose that, which they, and many others
seek, with greatest dangers to obtain. My project is, to make the King and
the Daulphin my instruments to break the marriage; give me Pen, Ink, and
Paper, and thou shall see what a fearful fire, I will kindle, to burn up all
their matrimonial hopes and agreements. But to give more life hereunto, thou
must play thy part. Thy Uncle is Steward to the Duke of Vandoume, and thou thy
self art gracious in his presence. To him must thou poast, in show of love to
see him, and in all duty to tender thy service; And when opportunity shall fit
thy purpose, thou must take occasion to wonder, that so great a Prince has his
Armoury so ill stored, and by way of persuasion, thou must tell him, that no
man's title is so right and just, but that it may find work upon their best
advantages, and therefore it is a provident policy for his Highness to be
presently furnished for all contingents. This La-nova, will so feed, and sway
his ambition, that he will make overhasty and unadvised provision. The
knowledge whereof, will so prepare and fortify the Kings jealousy, that it
will crown my device with belief and success. La-nona glad to see him so
well resolved, promised his best endeavors, and in the performance thereof had
his wished success. But before he went, he brought Pen, Ink, and Paper,
whereupon Paris (more Prophetically then he thought) writ as follows.

When Vandoumes first borne, shall Vienna wed,
The Daulphins Land, shall doom the Daulphin dead:
Pride scorns that time should check Vandoumes French Fate,
Thy death must help to Crown his Royal pate.
La-noua divining that this procreated conceit, would bring forth some good
issue, could not but laugh thereat; and in that joy, he went immediately to make
provision both for himself, and his friend.

Now each Wednesday, in every week, the Daulphin (more for applause, then to
do good) received himself (as he went to hear Mass) all the Suitors
Petitions; and in the afternoon viewed, and considered of them. Upon this day,
Paris having lapt up his fraudulent Libell, like a plain Petition, went to the
Court well furnished for the purpose, where he did so well personate a holy
Friar, that Linxes eyes could not discover him. There did he unsuspected
deliver it, and returned without perseverance. Afterward the Daulphin upon the
perusing of them, found and read (amongst the rest) Paris his threatening and
suffocating Prophecy, which did so poison and swell him with suspicious
thoughts, and most fearful surmises, that in his irefull indignation, he
cried out with the King of Moab, How shall we avoid the deep dissembling of
Ehud? Plain dealing I see is dead without issue; and all Honor, and due
respects are buried, in the insatiable desire of Rule. Surely this is no
enigmaticall, nor promiscuous Oracle; but a plain prediction sent by God, or
some good man in zeal and favor of Princes, and in tenderness of our
safeties. O most treacherous and perfideous Duke, that in the bonds of Aliance,
would cut off the small remainder of our days; to work thy further bloody
ends.

My daughter shall not so be Queen by our death; Nor shall our Subjects be so
slain in his unnatural and rebellious War. I will not suffer the true Vine
to be so displanted, nor shall my connivence traduce me for his impunity. For
though wisdom permits not, that I detect him openly, for fear of making him
my implacable enemy; yet will we send a private, and an unknown Messenger
secretly to his King, who shall (upon his Royal word for the concealment of
our intelligence) discover, and lay open, Vandoumes most impious and pernicious
intended Treason; and after shall he cast (by our instructions) such store of
oil up. on that jealous flame, that it shall (at least) burn up all Vandoumes
hopes of further proceeding with us. Thus, did such hate proceed from fear,
that after a small respiration, he sent accordingly to the King, who was no
sooner possessed thereof, but that his divided thoughts made such intestiue war
within his breast, that he knew not what to say, or do. His fraternall love
made him weep, to see Nature so monstrous and unkind; and fearful
jealousies (a disease incident to Kings) called upon justice, and said, that
corrected Treason was the life of a Prince.

Distrust now still dreamed upon Murder, and unquiet fear could not be
secured, but with execution: Then Affection told him, that then we come
nearest unto God, when we judge with pity, and pardon in mercy.

In this doubtful Combat of the mind, he sent for the Duke, who no sooner
came, but that taking him alone into his private Chamber, he with a mild
severity, thus breathed out his grief, and his just and loving rebuke.

It is our pleasure Vandoume (for so thy Sovereign calls thee) that thou
neither interrupt us while we speak, nor at our conclusion, make any answer
or excuse; Then know, that if we were as ready to punish, as thou art ready to
rebel; Thou should now find a sharp censure in steed of a kind brother;
and we should be freed from an incompatible Traitor, in lieu of a loyal
Subject. God that protecteth Kings, has now made thy implicit Treason
transparent. Thy proclivity to rule; thy thirsting after popularity; thy
subtle taxing of our Government: thy needless provision sor Arms in a well
settled Peace: and thy disguised desire to match with the Daulphin, is not
unknown to us; And thou that in pride, could not brook a Superior, art now
by divine Justice, brought beneath the fortune of thy equals. It is now in our
power to humble thee, but not to make thee humble; Such is thy aspiring
Ambition, that nothing but a Crown can limit thy unbounded desires. For
neither the terror of Law, the instinct of Nature, my binding duty, nor the
awe of thy due duty, could keep, or confine thee, within the circumference and
compass of thy Allegiance. Know thou not that the jealousy of a King is
death? and that a Prince is neither a kin, nor allied to a Traitor. Admit
that thou had prevailed in thy most nefarious rebellion. What had been thy
Conquest? but terror of conscience, daily doubt of Treason, nightly fear of
murder, the shame of thy self, the hate of men, and the vengeance of God. O
what bitter fruits should thou so untimely have purchased. The usurpation of
my Crown (which a few days would peaceably give thee) could not Patronize thy
fratricide, nor dispense with the murder of thy Sovereign. How fondly,
inhumane, malign, and degenerate have thou then showed thy self? Many are the
probabilities that thou soughts my life, and more then many are the inducements
why I should secure my self by thy death. And what mercy can thou expect
there, when thou did intend no pity. I grieve and blush to see such an
Antipathy betwixt us. But it shall suffice, that to my glory, and thy shame, I
give the now pledge of the virtue of my love, that thou may hereafter the
better love me for my virtue: For here I do not only fteely pardon thee, but
do entertain the a new to dwell ever in my dearest affection. A brothers
frown should set with the Sun; and here shall be the period of my wrathful
indignation. Then let this new birth beget in thee a new life; and let this
make such a stable connection of our loves, that we both may hereafter contend,
whether we with a better heart have given thee thy life; or that thou can
more affectionately retaliate our kindness. Only thou shall abjure the match
with the Daulphin, and instantly write to him, that we oppose and prohibit
the same, And therefore shall thou pray his patience, and the continuance of
his love; and allege, that neither Subjects in matters of state, nor Princes
of the blood in marriages, can dispose of their wills, nor of themselves,
without the permission of their King. This was no sooner said, but that
Vandoume (kissing his Sovereigns hands, with full falling tears (expressing
both his grief and shame) most willingly performed the same.

O most prudent Paris, with what prescience, caution, and facility, did thou
infatuate and delude these wise and great Princes; and how subtly have thou
made them thy deceived Agents, to work upon each other, all only to preserve
thy weaka hopes of fair Vienna, But though Paris now had thus disperc'd these
terrifying clouds that threatened shipwreck to his high desires, yet durst he
not dream after better fortunes, though he held the success of his late
fraudulent fiction very auspitious; But pleasing himself with what he had
done, and affecting still his own affections, he walked into the chamber of
presence, where Vienna, Jzabella, and other Ladies, were playing at Cards;
Thither he went (under color of attendance) to feast his eyes, and to
Paradise his heart with the beloved sight of his all-admired and affected Lady.
O with what wonder, did he now observe her matchless beauty, her graceful
Majesty, her pleasing words, and her sweet delivery. And what a conflict was
now grown betwixt his desire and despair: All his thoughts were extravagant,
and at war with each other. For as desire did find content, with joy, to be
in her presence; so Despair denied him all hope, with distrust of any comfort.
His heart now began to rebuke his eyes for soaring so near the Sun, and for
gazing after impossibilities. But his eyes told his heart, that no disdain
could dwell in so rare a perfection. In this perturbation of mind did he
stand, until Vienna being dry, called to him for a cup of wine, which he in
the pride of that employment hastily brought, but delivered it with great
astonishment and stupidity (as being over-surprized both with joy, and fear)
he all-shaking, flasht some of the wine over the cup, and so wet both their
hands; which one of the Ladies perceiving, scornefully said; Sir Knight, you
are over-bountifull, I am sure, my Ladies hand called for no wine. There is no
offense (answered Vienna) at all; He knew my hand was dry. So Madame, said
Izabella, is your foot. My foot, she replied, is further off from the burning
Sun, and receives moisture enough from the humide earth. But neither, said
Izabella, did need any wine. We called, said Vienna, for it, being dry; And
how could our body receive it, unless our hand had first taken it? A dry cup
and a clean hand, said another Lady, had been more serviceable. Why said
Vienna, clean hands are often washed, and dry cups quenches no thirst; Then
must dryness have moisture, and he has freely given it us: but no more, we
have lost our game in his defense. Paris, whose ecstasy had given way to these
passages, recollecting himself, humbly said, What (most gracious Princes) you
have lost in the game, that have you won by patience in your meekness; but
how shall I worthily magnify your great worth, that (notwithstanding these
tart Ladies bitter provocations (has showed the fullness of all virtue in your
goodness. Let your Highness but pardon my unstayed hand, and you shall ever
find me more ready to shed my dearest blood in your service, then I have been
either to wet your fair hand, or to spill your wine. Thanks good knight, said
Vienna, we desire no such satisfaction; your taken pains shall be all your
punishment. Paris being proud of this conceited favor, (though Vienna in her
mild nature pleaded in his defense, only to cross the other Ladies derision,
and to approve her own accutenesse) withdrew himself to the next window,
where with his Diamond he thus writ.

Jn spite of scorn, true virtue did me grace,
In scorn of spite, Jle laugh in Envies face.
But more considerately weighing his own case, he entertained better
thoughts, and therefore writ in the next stage of the window.

Jf Rivers great, from smallest Brooks do flow,
Poor hopes in time, far better haps may know.
But now Fortune that waited (though yet a far off) on Paris unknown merit,
gave him a befitting occasion to do Vienna (though still covertly) more
pleasing and more glorious service. For there had lately fallen out in the
French Court a great contention, betwixt the native Barons, and some several
noble Forraigners, that then for their pleasures, followed that Court in honor
of the King. The controversy was, whether was most fairer or the more virtuous
of these three Ladies; Valentia the great Duke of Burbons daughter; Vienna, the
Daulphins sole heir of Viennoys; or the Lady Margaret, sister to the King of
England. Great was their debate, and many there were that maintained each
several Ladies beauty. In so much, as they fell from arguing to anger, from
anger to blows, and from blows to wounds. The French King offended with their
offending uproare, and great neglect of their due respect to place and person,
commanded peace upon their Alleageances: And after being pacified, and fully
possessed with the cause; he held the occasion well worthy dispute, but their
faulty courages, and our furious proceedings, punishable in the place: Yet
fearing the further ill that might in many particulars well ensue thereof; out
of his deep insight, he pardoned their great over-sights, and calling them all
before him (after some few reprehending words) he thus with a mild majesty,
briefly and wisely appeased them all.

First, he commanded that a solemn and royal Iusts (in honor of the three
Ladies) should be proclaimed throughout all his Kingdom to be holden in Paris,
at Pentecost following, free for all comers, and that she whose Knight should
honor her, with the honor of the day, should be ever had, and held, for the
fairest of the three; and that his Queen should crown her with a Crown of
white Lillyes, beset with precious stones, as Sovereign Queen of most perfect
beauty: This mild and pleasing shower, so kindly distilling from the King, so
well allayed their stormy furies, that calming their over-enraged wills, in the
shame of their amiss; they humbly on bowed knees, craved pardon for their
offenses, and thanked the King for the grace and honor that he did them. Then
sent the King his Ambassador to acquaint the English King, and specially
Messengers to the Daulphin, and Duke; entreating the King, and willing both the
other to honor him, and his Court, with their persons, his sister, and their
two daughters at the assigned day, and that each of them would be pleased, to
prepare, and bring some beseeming prize of value, befitting both themselves,
the cause, and the worth of the Victor. All which they promised in the word of
a Prince, holding themselves no little honored in so honorable a contention.
Before the day (the day drawing near) there came so many noble and well
appointed Knights, that the French Kings (...) seemed an Alexanders Camp.
Great was their F^^^ti^g, and full Royal was all their entertainements. But
the d^y of trial being come. Aurora no sooner showed her ^^^^ings blush, but
that the French King ashamed of (...), rose, and rid to see the three high
Artificial Mounts, which he had caused to be erected, and made for the three
Ladies to sit on; who no sooner were come and placed, but that the Duke of
Burbon came marching in with a rich Garland, made all of orient Pearl, hanging
on a Blew Banner, with his coat of Arms on the other side, and placed it on
the Mount belonging to Valentia, on her left aside.

Then followed the Daulphin of Viennois with a rich Collar of Esses, beset all
over with Rubies, hanging on a white Banner, with his arms displayed on the
other side, and placed it on Viennas Mount, on the right hand of his Daughter.
Then came Englands royal King, with an imperial Crown of burnisht gold, set
with Indian Diamonds and blew Saphirs, supported betwixt two regal Lions,
hanging on a red Banner, and placed it on the middle mount before his Sister
the Lady Margaret: In the face of each several Mount (some four degrees under
the Ladies) sat each several Ladies Father, in a strange devised Seat, so
curiously made, and so gloriously decked, that each one seemed to be Apollo
sitting in the Chariot of the Sun. The Knights (whose rare Devises discovered
their secret and several fancies) as they were affected; so they betook
themselves to the Mount, whose honor they were to maintain. The French King
sitting in his rich Pavillion powdered with Flower-deluces, opposite to the
Mounts, caused Proclamation to be made on pain of death, that none but the
Knights Encounterers should stay, or enter into the Listes, and that no Knight
unhorsed should Just again, nor any make offer of Combat: This being done,
the King of Arms stood up, and after a third sound, bade them go too, and do
their best devoyres like valiant Knights: And no sooner had he ended his words,
but that there came from Valentias Mount a Knight well mounted on a speedy Bay,
his Armor, Bases, and all other his Furniture Azure, full of fiery flames, and
on his shield he bare a Phoenix, enclosed within a bright shining Sun, and
under it, a hand reaching toward it, with this underwritten Motto, O vtinam:
Toward him came from the Lady Margarets Mount, a green Knight, full of eyes
and bleeding Hearts, mounted on a fierce Black, bearing on his Shield an Armed
Knight prostrated undera Ladies mercy, his Lance lying unbroken by him, with
his Motto, All-ready conquered: These two Knights encountered each other so
furiously and forceably, that their Staves shivered in the air, and witnessed
their courages in their fall, but in the counterbuffe, the knight of the
Phoenix was borne to the ground, so that the green Knight rode on,
overthrowing twenty other Knights that came from both the other Mounts; the
last of whom, bare in his Shield the Picture of Vienna most richly pourtracted
with a veil of lawne all over her, and from the dexter part of the Shield
there was a Hand and an Arm coming forth of a Cloud; holding a fair Labell,
whereon was written, Such an one, as such is none. Great was now the glory of
the Lady Margaret, and all malecontented sat the other two Ladies, especially
Vienna, who now seeing her shadowed self lying in the dust, mist, and wished
for her White and unknown Knight; And as her wandering eye romed up and down,
still looking whether she could epsy him, she suddenly both heard and saw a
well proportioned Black Knight, rudely rushing from her Mount, who so fiercely
saluted the Green Knight, that he made him pay tribute for his former honor,
in the overthrow of his fortune: Threescore other assayling Knights he
dismounted before Vienna, who now joying, wondered, and wondering, prayed that
he might be her desired knight, that won her Crystal Shield and Chaplet at
her Fathers Court; and well she prayed, that had so well her prayer, for it
was Sir Paris indeed, who knowing that Emulation has many eyes, and that
Observation might easily discover him, fearing to be known by his white
Armor, had thus sadly armed himself suitable to his sable fortune; and
therefore he bare nothing in his Shield but Blackness, for his Devise was
still to be without Devise; only his sad Armor was covered all over with
mourning Clouds. Many Knights there were overthrown by La-nova, but more then
many did Sir Paris foil. For then, if ever; and if ever, then: did he show the
virtue of his valor, in the strength of his courage. Now grew the hurly-burly
great, and many, and great were the encounters made on each side, In so much,
that there rested but unoverthrowne, one Valentia on the Lady Margarets part,
on either side three; and all only on Viennas, but one; which was the black
clouded Knight, who now was deemed hardly bestead, both in regard of his former
travailes, and the present advantage of the six fresh assailants, who bent all
their forces first against him. Valentias hope was now a little revived, and
the Lady Margarets proud expectation fully answered Valentias hope. Only
doubtful Vienna, near dyed for fear, least that her beauty should now be
eclipsed in the loss of her gotten fame, and that her fame should be buried in
the dying renown of her best esteemed beauty. For as she wondered he had so
long resisted, so she held it unpossible he should longer resist. But Sir
Paris (only weary, in that there were no more to be wearied by him) casting
his eye (the messenger of his heart) on Vienna, and seeing the shining lights
of her transparent beauty, over-shadowed with sorrow and dismay. Desire so blew
the fire of his new conceived rage, that like an unmercifull, and
hunger-starved Lion, (that runs raging for his prey) so he violently run
amongst them, that with one staff he overthrew the first three he met, and
turning his House, before Vienna could turn her despair, he charged the
fourth so forceably, that he sent both Horse and Man to the ground: At the
sight whereof, the people gave such applauding shoutes, that Vienna lifting up
her sad eye (as waking from a careful slumber) she saw her Knight returning in
the glory of their overthrowes. So that hoping now for better hap, a better hap
did befall her then she did, or could expect. For no sooner made he his last
return, but he returned again from overturning of the other two. Who
triumphed then but Vienna? Who now more sad then Valentia, or who more grieved
then the Lady Margaret? the Just thus ended, the French Queen came with a
troop of attending Ladies, carrying before her the Crown of Artificial
Lillies, richly stoned, and setting it on Viennas head, she Crowned her for
sole, and Sovereign Queen, of absolute, and matchless beauty.

Then came the King, and took Sir Paris by the hand, and lead him (all the
other Knights and Barrons following them) with tryumphing honor, and sound of
Trumpets, to the three Mounts, where with his own hand he gave him the three
Banners, with the three prizes on them, which Sir Paris reverently taking,
re-delivered over to his friend La-nova, secretly to convay them away, while
he stayed the ending of all other the ceremonies. All which being
accomplished: The King, the Daulphin, and Vienna (rendering Sir Paris thanks
for his worthy and affectionate endeavors, and most renowned and fortunate
achievements) requested him, in the name of Vienna, to discover himself, and
tell unto whom they were all so much bounden. But Sir Paris humbling himselefe
in all duty, made reverent show of his unwillingnesse therein; which the King
noting, would not further importune him, nor could the Daulphin in any wise
over-treat him, nor durst Vienna overmuch press him: So that he kissing her
hand, held it long and after drawing his sword, laid it at her feet, and
taking it up again kissed it likewise; and then holding it up, seemed to
threaten the world in her behalf, which added this Article to Viennas belief,
that he undoubtedly was her white Knight, and the same, and non but the same,
that first so melodiously sang under her Chamber window; and theeefore her
desires having now no end, she ever after though each hour an age, till she
knew him. But Sir Paris withdrawing himself to the rest of the Knights,
retired with them, still giving back, till he was the last of the troop, and
then taking a crosse-way, separated and convayed himself from them, and
suddenly disarming himself, he speedied to find out the Bishop of St.
Lawrence, with whom (of purpose to prevent all surmises) he had a little
before familiarized himself, and no sooner had he espied him, but that he
hasted to greet him, and still kept in his company, as if St. Mark had robbed
god Mars of a Martialist. Such was his holy show of devout Religion, as that he
made all men admire him, and his father to be inwardly grieved at him.

But Vienna, who now had greater cause to love him, then means to know him,
wondering at his valor, not to be valued; and valuing his virtues, by clowding
the glory and value of his prowis, held now his love an honor to her
affection, and vowed her affection a guerdon for his love. But when she heard
of his secret departure, and that no one knew what he was, from whence he came;
nor to what place he had retired himself; Then impatient desire made her the
child of passion, and fear to loose that she never had, made her feel what
before, she neither knew, nor feared. And so much the more she held her self
miserable, in that she knew not for whom she was so miserable, nor how to seek
an end, to end her misery.

As Viennas, sad conceit, thus overshaded the glory of her beautiful
Conquest, so was Sir Jaques flattering hope made black with foul despair;
For missing his son Sir Paris out of two so Royal and honorable Assemblies,
where renown eternized each deserving Knight, with never dying fame; and
seeing him still associating the Bishop; he feared least his business of over
superstitious Zeal, had abandoned all desire and regard of Knightly Chivalry.
And therefore hot in his repining conceit, he hastened to find La-nova, unto
whom in grief, he manifested the cause of his grief; Requesting and conjuring
him by the sacred laws, and name of friendship, and by the honor he owed to
Arms, to persuade his son to a more befitting respect of his unregarded
honor. La-nova hearing Sir Jaques worthy complaint, and seeing his frosted
beard all bedewed with the tears of his sorrow, pittyed his lament, but durst
not disclose the mystery of the truth; but commending his honorable care, he
comforted him with promise of assured and present remedy, and so left him
better satisfied, then truly certified. And no sooner were they parted, but
La-nova departed, to impart to Sir Paris, what his noble Father had so
sorrowfully said to him: which so moved his feeling consideration in a Sons
regard, that partly to satisfy his Father from living so supposedly idle, and
partly to forget (if so he could forget) the tormenting thoughts, that still
troubled his enthralled mind.

He determined to go (only with La-nova) to the wars of Florence. And
craving, he obtained, willing leave of his glad Father; but before his
departure, he called his Mother aside, and delivering her the key of his
Chamber, and Oratory, wherein were placed all his purchased Prizes, well covered
over with Hangings of sky-colored silk, en broydered with stars of gold,
and shaded all over with black Cipris, that the dimmest eye might perceive the
glory of the heavens, through the blackness of the cloud. Her he devoutly
requested, and humbly conjured (as she tendered his contentment, and following
welfare) not to suffer any to enter therein, nor so much as look therein her
self. This was his request, and this did she protest religiously to perform:
This done, he craved and received their blessing, and so set forwards toward
Florence, where in brief, he achieved so great honor in the Dukes Wars, as
the bruit of his spreading fame, both famed, and inworthied him in the
Daulphins Court, which much joyed the Daulphin, and more rejoiced Sir Jaques.

Vienna all this while grew more pensive, and passionate then before, and still
(as Pharaoh longed to know his dream) so desired she to know, and see him whom
she loved more then her self. Her vestall virtue was now no Dianas proof, to
withstand Venus force; nor could her chaste conceit, dispense with affectious
thoughts. But the more she sought to quench desire, the more she burnt
herself within her own fire. Many Princes became Petitioners and Prisoners to
her beauty, and greatest Barons did homage to her virtues; But neither Prince
nor Baron could find favor in Beauty, nor love in virtue. So strangely, was
her strange affection, estranged to all but to him that was so mere a stranger
to her so strange a passion. To him, and for him, had she consecrated, and
reserved her devoted heart; and to him and none but him, would she yield the
conquest of her Maidens mind. And although disturbed reason affoorded her no
hope, nor possibility of finding or enjoying him; Yet did the gracious aspect
of her favorable stars, yield her this means to know him. For Sir Jacques
being greatly visited with sickness, was so generally bewailed of all, and so
particularly bemoaned of the Daulphin (in regard of his thrice noble service in
the wars, and his wise directions in Counsel) that he sent the Daulphinis his
Lady to visit him; who taking Vienna and Jzabella with her went attended with
four other Ladies, to see, and comfort his enfeebled estate. But finding him
pretily amended (after some fashionable, and cheerful chat:) The Daulphinis
(led thereto, I know not by what desteny) was desirous to see how well the
house was contrived, how beautified, and how furnished; which the good old Lady
in all humbleness yielded unto, conducting them into every place, until they
returning, came again by Sir Paris his Chamber door, which his Mother both
going and coming back, purposely past by. But being demanded of the
Daulphinis what Chamber, or Place that was; she durst not but tell, and
telling, would have past away, which the Daulphinis noting, merrily said; Nay
Madame, I will not leave the Chamber of so worthy a Knight unseene. The good
old Lady not knowing how to avoid this counterbuffe, fearfully with a
trembling hand, opened the door, wherein they were no sooner entered, but that
they saw all manner of Armours, and befitting furnitures for approoved good
Knights, which made them commend the owner no little; and to hold him far
worthier of a better Armoury. As thus they viewed his several Armours; Vienna
happily fixed her eye on a white Armor not far unlike unto that, which Sir
Paris had on him, when first he won her Chaplet, and Crystal Shield. Tha
sight whereof, made Hope (the Harbinger of happiness) to breath in her this
pleasing comfort; that as that Armor was none but the same: So Sir Paris (that
renowned owner) must of necessity be that secret Knight, that not daring to be
known to love her, was (by her sacred vows) to be beloved of her. Thus Hope
presumed the best, and invited joy to gratulate her good success. But doubt
(curbing rashness with deliberation) persuaded her to further trial. For as
her hope was ready to embrace the first show of comfort, so was her desire most
greedy of more perfect assurance. And the better to effect, what she affected,
she feigned (and feign she was to feign) her self suddenly sick, and after
some show of some extremity, she desired her Mother (the better to make better
search) to leave her alone, all only with Izabella, to rest her for a time on
the bed, which they holding convenient, consented to it. And no sooner were
they gone, but that Vienna bolting the door, began to make a wary search. At
last, at the end of the Chamber she found a privy pertition, so well shadowed
with the Hangings of the Chamber, that hardly could any perceive the same;
within, and behind this, was the place wherein Sir Paris daily sacrificed his
prayers unto his God, wherein they were no sooner entered, but that withdrawing
a glorious clouding Curtain, they discovered the three famous rich Prizes of
Sir Paris victorious prowis, stately erected upon the wall, and below them
hanged the Crystal Shield, and golden Chaplet, he first won at her Fathers
Court. Opposite to which, on the other side, stood his white and black clouded
Armours, so fully, and lively set up, as they seemed as ready to defend the
place, as their Master was willing to maintain her beauty. Long looked Vienna
on every several Prize, but longer looked she on both the Armours; now
blushing and sighing; then smiling and wondering at the stately and pleasing
proportion of them. In this contentment, and admiration of her thoughts, she
would have dwelled still, but that casting her nimble eye aside, to see what
Izabella did, she perceived these following verses to lie written on the Table.

Time Fortune, Love, and hot Desire, enioynes,
Such Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, as Death procures:
Time doubts, Love fears, Fortune hard hap assigns,
Desire unrest; unrest Desire endures.
So that Time, Fortune, Love, and hot Desire,
My Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, does now conspire.
Time threatens Love; Love Life; Life Love attends,
Love doubts Disdain; Disdain, Desire nere slayes:
Fortune my foe, my fancy still offends,
Desire, Love covets; Love desire gaine-sayes.
Thus Time, Love, Fortune, old Desires and new,
My Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, does often renew.
My Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, so often renewes,
As Love (no Love) a Lover so does leave;
Fortune most fell, my love, thy Godhead rues,
Desire dye, no hope of health conceive.
Since Time, Love, Fortune, and distressed Desire,
My Woe, Loss, Care, and Death, does all conspire.
But if that Time, in time, fell Fortune daunt,
If Love, in love, but move my Love, to love:
If Fortune smile, in Loves sweet yielding grant,
And my desires enjoy, what Lovers prove.
Then shall my Woe, Loss, Care, and Death retire.
And I laud Time, Love, Fortune, and Desire.
These Verses well pleased Vienna, and all contentment now waited on her first
liking conceit: But after she had more consideratively weyed, how poor Sir
Paris was that mean Man whom she wished so much to see, and to whom she had
devoted the honor of her love; her blushing bashfulnesse then rebuk't her
misliked kindness, and his muddy clouded affection, ecclipsed the sunshine of
her far more glorious worth. In this dislike, she silent sat her down, and
rising straight again, said; That promise is nefarious, that is to be
accomplished by an ignoble deed; and it is more tolerable to violate an
unworthy vow foolishly made; then by keeping the same, to draw on my disgrace,
and give just cause of offense to others: My faith falls out a treason to my
self, and the love I bear him, is the field wherein I seek to overthrow my
renown: But why should my rash judgment set a ranckling tooth in his virtuous
side? Or why should I care for more honors then to content my self; Or for
more riches, then to enjoy my self? we are all borne to love; and we only
live, and love to be beloved: Then not to love, and think to be beloved, is
like that foolish Virgin, that sought to light her Lamp at another Torch that
was quite extinct. With that she began to recount the shining Glory of his
spreading renown, the full perfection of his many approoved and admired
virtues; the commendable regard of his secret and imprisoned love, with the
dangerous and honorable approbation of the same; and how she was bound in honor
to honor and love him, that had above the pride of all honor, so honored her.
Then, then began she to be more sorry she could love him no better, then
before she was ashamed she loved him so well: And therefore taking Jzabella by
the hand, she vowed and swore, that she would live to love none but Sir Paris,
nor love to live longer then she might be beloved of her Paris; For Fortune
said she has decreed it so; Love will have it so, and Vienna swears it shall
be so.

Jzabella first uttering her mislike, in her complaining tears, and then
drowning her tears in the grief of her complaint, thus all sighing, she
sadly said: Ah Vienna, no more now Vienna, since Vienna has lost her self;
what is become of your Princely regard, befitting your state? where is your
wonted wisdom, so admired of all? Your virtue giving light to others, and
your modesty eternizing your beauty: Shall base conceit (ever attended on with
repenting follies) eclipse now the honor and wonder of your Name? Are fervile
thoughts beseeming companions for your noble mind? or ignoble subjects fit
objects for Princes eyes? If Vienna be so predominate over you, that Diana is
quite forgotten of you; yet let me call you before the judgment of your own
virtue, and then tell me whether the unworthy worthiness of his Degree,
equalize the great greatness of your Dignity? Admit his deserts be many, and
promise much, yet are his possibilities of advancement, no possessions of
enrichment; nor are his noble deeds the deeds of a Noble man. Will you then
lose an honor for an humor? Nay, rather perform a Regal office in a
Princelike nature; that being a Princess in your self, become also Princelike
in your deeds. What will your Father say, nay all France, nay all the World?
when they shall here that Vienna, late scorning the Royal love of greatest
Princes, is now subjected to the will of a mean Knight: Far be it from my
Lady so to do, far from any to think so, and far from Izabella ever to see
it so.

Vienna, (whose settled affection) held her persuasive inuertions odious, and
whose resolved determination, thought her reprehension loathsome, with unusual
eyes, arguing her discontent, she all angry, thus sharply replied; Were I
(unkind, ungrateful, and unjust Jzabella) as far from affection, as thou art
from reason and pity; Yet would not the common care that Ladies of esteem
ought to have toward Knights of good regard, suffer me to hear due deserts so
disgraced by injurious tongues, nor true renown so reproacht by malignant
mouths. Then know (and knowing grieve, that so thou know) that thy
unseasonable words has wounded my desire, and my desire abandons thee in thy
words: Think thou that desire dreams once on Dignities? or that Cupid cares
for Crowns, that never saw Gold: See not thou these Trophies erected in his
honor, and his honor shining in these Trophies? If I be great, his great deeds
answers my great estate, and my estate shall be made greater by his great
deeds: For if ever any Knight merited renown for renowned Chivalry, it is my
Paris; or if ever Knight followed his Lady with true love, loved her with
honor, or honored her with regard and remarkable services, it is my Paris:
Then if ever well-deserving Knight triumphed in the faithful love of his Lady,
it shall be my Paris: For here I swear by the eternal justice of the Highest,
that none shall have Vienna but Paris, nor none love Paris so well as Vienna,
Then leave to grieve me, and load not my grief with further displeasure, in
gainsaying what I say again, I will never gainesay: For in vain it is to
water the plant, the root being perished, or to seek to persuade me, that am
so resolvedly persuaded.

Izabella seeing her so resolute in her passion, and so passionate in her
resolution, thought it was in vain to urge her further; and fearing her
threatening displeasure, she thought it good thus to balm the wound she before
had given. Let not my honorable Lady (she said) return an imagined wrong,
with an effectual injury, but pardon the well wishing fault of your faultlesse
friend, who (if offending) offended in tender care of desiring your good, and
not of purpose to contract you, or with will to discontent you, whom before all
others I wish to content; for proof whereof, I here vow repay to the debt of
my error, with the interest of all my furthering endeavors, to advantage you
in your Love. No sooner had she spoken the last word Love, but that Vienna in
love, for love, kissed, and embrast her, joying in her promise and availing aid;
and protesting, that most grateful guerdons should make full satisfaction for
her offered kindness. In the mean time, she required secrecy, and fearing
least their long stay might procure, either some fear, or suspicion, in her
Mother, she thought good to depart as one well recovered of a sudden hatch;
but before they went, she caused Izabella to take, and secretly to convey
away: the Crystal Shield, and Chaplet; the first and rich records, both of
her beauty, and his prowis; and this she did of purpose, not so much for any
desire she had to have them, as to give him occasion to come to enquire after
them.

In this process of time, the Wars of Florence, were ended, and Sir Paris
being intelligenced of his Fathers sickness (whose infeebled age he much
feared) and being desirous to see Vienna, though despair of success, the
hearce of his supposed idle hopes; yet Desire (the nurse of perseverance) gave
him wings to make the more speed; so that La-nova, and he, posting homewards,
happily came, and found Sir Jaques well amended, whose good recovery was no
less joyful to Sir Paris, then his return was comfortable to his Father.
After they had long discoursed of the occurrants of these Wars, and of his
many adventures and fortunes. Sir Paris, longing to give his eye contentment,
by gazing on his Idolatrous Prizes, he took his Mother by the hand, and
walking toward his Chamber (like the Lapwing that flies far from her nest)
he enquired of Court affairs, but she being not able to satisfy the drift of
his reach, he pressed her no further; but being entered into his Chamber, he made
a step into his Oratory, were suddenly missing the first pride of his happy
achievements, the chief glory of his study, and the true testimony of Viennas
beauty, and bounty; being therewith much appaled, and moved at their remove,
he all angerly came forth, and asked who had been there, and there had taken
away such things as he most esteemed. His Mother abashed at the question, but
more grieved that there was any thing wanting, not knowing how, or by whom they
should be taken away; answered, that since his departure no one had been
there, but the Daulphinis, and her daughter the Lady Vienna, accompanied with
other Ladies that came to visit his Father in his sickness, and that she
desired amongst other Chambers to see that, which she (after some denying
excuses) durst not longer gainsay, and how that she her self was with them
so long as they stayed. Saving that the Lady Vienna being suddenly surprised
with sickness, requested for her better ease, to stay only alone with
Jzabella, to rest her a while on your bed. Paris flattering himself with his
own favorable construction, deemed (and truly deemed) that the cause of her
alteration, grew by the unexpected sight of the Prizes, and the view of his
verses, that he had left on his Table; and that she had taken them away either
in her angry disdain, or to see what account he made of them, or whether he
would re-demand them. And therefore pleased, to adventure his fortune upon the
rock of this hazard, he showed no further mislike that he mist them. But
afterward, shadowing his desire to see Vienna, under the borrowed veil of
duty, to see, and to attend the Daulphin: he went to the Court, where the
Daulphin, glorying in the luster of his Subjects renown, because it gave a
splendor to his Greatness; he kindly received him, with more familiar
embracements, and loving respects, then his austere nature, did usually afford:
by this his unwonted courtesy and grace, he made Sir Paris thoughts (more
obligatory) to his favors; and fashioned his favors (more complementory) to
Sir Paris fortunes. for courtesy, they say, in Majesty, binds ever affection
in duty. As Sir Paris stood before the Daulphin (relating the honor, and issue
of the Florentine Wars) he glaunc'd, and fearfully glaunc'd many times on
Vienna, but checking his eyes, that still rebuked him; he left to look, on
whom not daring to look, he could not but look. But Vienna, whose late
kindled love, was now grown into a flame, having tediously before expected
him, could not now seeing him, feast her ravished eyes at full, but gazing still
on his ample perfections (for now he seemed more then exquisite) and taking
pleasure in the sweet harmony of his well-tuned words; she no sooner rejoiced,
joying in her own desires; but that straight she desired the enjoying. And
turning toward Izabella, she all-blushing smiled, and smiling blushed again,
because she smiled, and then asked her, whether she saw not bashful fear, and
doubtful coffeehouse, sit on the face of his troubled countenance, for the
loss of his Prizes, and the discovery of his affection; and whether she were
not happy in her Choice, and more then happy in his love. All which,
Gnathonizing Jzabella prodigally confirmed, and demanded, how she would do,
to enfeoffe him with her affection, that durst not be known of his own love.
Which Vienna well ruminating in her mind, at length (woman-like) found out this
device.

She feigned her self, for some three days, very sick; and in the distemper
of her wounding offenses, fearful of her sins; but after when she was
better enabled both in body, and mind; she desired leave of her Mother, to
go the next day (for the more quieting and confirming of her conscience, and
to give God praise for her recovery) to the Bishop of St. Lawrence, to confess
herself, and to receive the Sacrament within the sacred Temple of God; which
her Mother liking, yielded unto, rejoicing no little to see her so well
amended, and so devoutly and piously devoted. In the interim, Vienna caused
Jzabella to send to Sir Paris in the Bishops name, to come and speak with him
in the Cathedral Church, at nine of the clock the next morning; which Sir
Paris promising, performed accordingly. For at the appointed hour he came, and
being come, saw (and wondered that so he saw) the Princess Vienna conferring
with the Bishop, whose leisure, he willingly attended, and walked a little
aside, wearying his fancy with wishes; and punishing his conceit with
fearful imaginations. Long he had not walked, but that Vienna espying him,
applauded her fortune; and armed with her own desires, she gave her self
countenance, under the pretext of employment; and called to Sir Paris, telling
the Bishop that she had matters of employment in foreign affairs, to impart
unto him from her Mother; And therefore she requested the Bishop (if he had
any occasion with him) to walk a while a fide, till she had performed her
Mothers command, and then she would leave them both to their pleasures. The
Bishop being glad to see the Princess so sanctified, commended her zeal, and
left her to the discharge of her duty, blindly supposing that the Daulphinis
would send Sir Paris in message to some of her foreign friends. But Vienna
finding her self alone with him, in whom she joyed alone; she pleasantly
demanded what he made there, or whether he had any suit to her, or to any
other, wherein she might accommodate him; If it be so (so it be convenient)
Sir Paris shall find a friend, if Sir Paris be found a friend. This pleasing
and preludious demand, and Enigmaticall conclusion, made Sir Paris, somewhat
fearful how to answer. But Hope the comfortable Counsailour of Love shaped in
him this bold and short reply. My business (thrice worthy Lady) is the Bishops
will; my suit, your service; your service my chief desire, and my desire your
favorable countenance; And longer may not Paris live, then he rests humbly
thankful to Vienna; and if not offenssiue, a faithful servant to my Lady.
Thanks (said Vienna) good Sir Paris, your suit shall not be nonsuit, if you
shoot at Honors aim. But tell me, and truly tell me, whether your suit (and
your coffeehouse, which I see harbors in your eyes) be not for your Prizes
which I took away, when attending my Mother, I was at your Fathers house: If
so it be, (be it so, or not so) you shall have them again, if again you will
return with me. Paris proud of her presence, held himself more deified, then
dignified, by her favors, and humbling himself; he vowed, that they,
himself, and all in all, were at her Honors command. Then must I (Vienna
said) command, and conjure you to tell me, whether it were your self, that so
sweetly sung under my Chamber window; and so friendly gave me Music; that did
wound, and beat my Fathers Guard; that won, and bare away my Crystal
Shield, and Chaplet, in the Tournament at my Fathers Court; and that carried
away the Honor and the three Banners, with their Prizes, from all the Barons
and Knights at Paris.

Paris astonished at her demand, durst neither confess, for fear of disdain;
nor yet dissemble, for offending her, whom in no wise he would offend; which
perceived by Vienna, she familiarly pressed him to acknowledge the truth, which
manifested; she with a pleasing and pleasant countenance merrily said, why
then does Sir Paris affectionately love us? Sir Paris whose entising fault had
erst controlled but now condemned, his over-clyming thoughts, was so amated in
himself, and so transported from himself, that silence, in bashful signs,
blushed out a dumb reply. But Vienna (ballancing his cold conceit, by the
alteration of his countenance) allowed the weight, and animated in her own
affection, she commanded him boldly to aver, what she her self inferred,
by such his troubled silence. Paris seeing the cloud of his care dispierced,
gloried the more in the brightness of his Sun; the beams whereof he found
so comfortable, that he proudly confessed his love, and that he had long done
secret, and humble homage, to Venus under her so rare a beauty. Vienna
surfeitting in the pride of her full content, kindly entertained his so
affectionate a conceit, with as friendly a receite, and briefly, assuredly
assured him; that none but Paris should enjoy Vienna; if none but Vienna should
joy in Paris.

This cordial conclusion, being Sealed with protestation of perseverance, and
by confirmation of oaths; they knit two hearts in one, and parted one will in
two, and so departed. During these Haltion days, commanding Love, wrought
ensuing cares: For Vienna sitting but in the shadow of love, thought the
fruits of affection overlong in ripening; and therefore presuming (in her
erring aim) that her Father in her favor, would tie his consent to her
choice, and her love to his liking; She importuned Sir Paris to request his
Father to acquaint the Daulphin with her affection, and humbly pray his consent
in favor of his Daughter: Which Sir Jaques advisedly at the first denied, as
unwilling to waken a sleeping Lion, or to seek for Fish in a dry Poole. But
Paternall love (the allination of reason) and flattering hope (the nurse of
deceit) so transported himself, from himself, that most unlike himself, he
(vainly dreaming after possibility) yielded to sail in a Ship without a
Stearne, and to gather honey out of Stones. But the Daulphin (whose repugnant
humor scorned so servile a motion, and whose abused kindness, now begat in
him most spiteful rage) so irefully boiled in his disdainefull surquedry, that
bitterly checking Sir Jacques, he fearfully thundered out his threatening
indignation, in exiling poor Sir Paris.

Paris though checked, yet not mated; showed now the virtue of his courage in
the eclipse of his fortune. For being persuaded by La-noua, to make presently
away; He notwithstanding the danger of tyranicall authority, resolved to see
his Lady before he lost his Country: And therefore as one desperate in
despair, he hastily (yet secretly) went to participate his engrieued state
with hapless Vienna; who hearing thereof, was so confounded in herself, as
she was full of sorrow for being unable to relieve him, as she was void of all
means to help herself. Their lamentations paid now large tribute to their
griefs; and their desires that before had no end, did now, by despair, end
endless things in their first motion: But after that the flood of their tears
was grown to an ebb, (admitting the necessity of time) they concluded, ever
to live to none, but to each other; though they never saw again one an other.
And so Sir Paris fainting in his farewell, was deprived of his welfare: Which
(all loving and impatient) Vienna not brooking, so to be deposed from him, in
whom she wholly reposed her self, recalled him again, and enfolding him
within her fainting arms, she vowed to partake with him in all his fortunes;
ever remembering him, that the chaste root of her true affection was Virtue,
clad in constant loves desire: She therefore advised him secretly to conceal
himself, and to provide for shipping, and at the hour of twelve, the third
night following, she would disguised (with stored Gold and Jewels) meet him in
the portch of Saint Anthonies Church, and so depart with him whithersoever: Sir
Paris kissing her often, (for in vain kissing is some pleasure) found now his
purgatory, to be his paradise; Joy triumphed in his eyes, and comfort lodged in
his heart; and in this haven of happiness he would have swimmed still, but
that danger of delay told him, that growing Trees have their falls, as well as
their springs, and that apprehension would dissolve all their harmony: He
therefore (being borne away with the hasty tide of smallest leisure) road
presently into Provence, where happily meeting with Monsieur de la Mott, a
Ship Master of his acquaintance, he privately told him, that he had slain a
Man of account, and that he must for a time leave his Country, and therefore
prayed him (for his gold) speedily and secretly to Ship him and his two Friends
away into some other Coast; which Monsieur la Mott promising, sent one away
incontinent to Saint Victor, where his ship lay, to make all things in
readiness and returned himself with Sir Paris, to assist and direct him in all
his needful dispatches.

Now Vienna and Jzabella, at the time and place appointed met with Sir Paris
(according to their agreement) in men's apparel, dispencing with needless
salutations, addressed themselves to speedy journeyes: And so long they poasting,
rid out of all Highways, that being benighted, they were glad to crave
harbor of a Prelate, who lodging them, placed Vienna and Jzabella in one
Chamber, and Sir Paris and Monsieur de la Mott in another. In the morning,
their early desires so hastened their speedy departures, that being timely up,
and quickly horsed, Sir Paris and La Mott, rode apase before, to view the
River, whose overflowed banks were so over run, by the pride of a late
swelling flood, that the Foard was not pastable: which made Sir Paris so
impatient, so to be frustrated of his attending Ship (the assurance of his
safety) that Monsieur de la Mott over venturous to venture over the passage, was
in searching the Foard, most unfortunately drowned in the merciless Flood. Sir
Paris daunted at that so fatal a sight, sighed, and sighing, grew to a
prodigious prognosticator of his own ensuing harms. But fearing least the
knowledge thereof might appale his fair Friend, he suddenly returned to their
religious Host, where he had left the two Ladies, when he went to find the
Foard, and to try the passage; and shadowing now his tormenting grief with a
forced smile, he demanded of Vienna, how she fared, who answered, as my Love
fares, so fares thy Love; happy in my self, because happy in thee. And long
may (said Paris) my Love live to love, that loves to live only for my love.
Scarce had Sir Paris pronounced his last word, when one came running to tell
the Priest, that there were many Knights in the next Town; that came in quest,
and searched for Vienna and Sir Paris: Which Vienna understanding, was so
surprised with grief and fear, that being altogether disheartened in her hope,
she held her self more then undone in her disturbed expectation: But after she
had bathed the beauty of her eyes, in the sorrow of her tears, fearing most in
this present peril, least death should arrest her beloved Friend: She with a
much more resolved mind, and an assured countenance, then befitted either the
time, or was incident to her sex, thus exhillerated her astonished Friend.

My Paris, (she said) Time admittes not there many words, where danger still
knockes at the door: In extremities, the winning of time, is the purchase both
of life and love: Let not violent passions (that never remooves any ill, but
betrays our secret imperfections) now sway the virtue of thy thoughts, nor the
fortitude of thy heart; but carry thou in thy Lions look, a Lions mind; and
like the Sun show thy fairest face, in thy lowest fall. Load not my sorrows
with thy grief, nor kill thou thy self, for fear of death; But in the wonted
courage of thy never-daunted Spirit, get thee to some other more safer shore;
where let Virtue be thy Governor; my remembrance thy Love; thy love my
comfort, and my comfort thy sole contentment. Thou have conquered men in love,
and Love in me, and both in worth and wisdom; and never shall I deem my
self happy, but when I shall see thee happy, for whom I now am so unhappy: As
thou leauest me, so shall thou find me; be but thou as constant a Friend to my
Mind, as thou shall be a true Possessor of my Heart; and I shall have as much
cause of joy, as thou no cause of doubt. If thou continue loyal, success
(thou shall see) will bless thee well, and all good fortune will wait on thy
just merits. This Diamond which here I give thee, shall be a true remaining
record of my sincere love to thee: Only, let me hear of thy abode; and so I
leave thee to the guide of Virtue, and service of Fortune. Sir Paris thus
discomforted, comforted; weighing the danger of delay, by his immient peril,
and forced to set up his sails in this so insupportable and threating a
tempest; and there sealing up the vow of his faith, in the silent grief of a
departing kiss, he posted to the River side again; where Despair made Fear
so valiant, that ere he found cause of fear, he was past all fear: For
having past he knew not how the River, he was got before he wist into the Ship:
wherein being Cabined, he told of La Mot his fatal accident, and forced them
to put to sea, sailing himself with as many contrary thoughts, as Eolus sent
out winds upon the Trojan Fleet. At length he arrived at Genua, where he
rested his restless self, and where he lived, wanting but little, because not
desiring much. But such was his disconsolate solitary life, that the Citizens
(though strangers) affecting the man in his manners, pitied much his
distress, in the show of his coffeehouse. In the mean while, the Daulphin
wasting himself, in his own implacable, and unlimited wrath, violently, and
suddenly seized, and consiscated, all Sir Jaques Lands and Goods into his
hands; imprisoning both him, and his Lady, as Fauters, Abetters, Confederates,
and Adjuters thereunto. Thus ets Outrage, ever the sharpest edge upon the first
advantage; And in this distemper of his ill disposed mind, he commanded that
naught but bread and water should be given them. For, said he, where the
offense is greater then the service, there Justice changes the bond of
recompense into due punishment. During this their faultlesse imprisonment, the
questing Knights returned with Vienna, and the Hospitalious Parson, her Host;
who being brought before the angry Daulphin (her enraged Father) she saw the
cloud a far off, before the storm fell, and therefore prostrating her self
at his Feet, she required pardon for her offense, and prayed that he would
not make her sin deadly, which was but venial; pleading ignorance for the
Prelate, and irresistable love for her self; swearing and assuring him, by
sacrament of solemn oath, and the testimony of her Host, that she was as
honest in her flight, as she was in her birth, and that her un potted thoughts
were never stained, with any unchaste deed or desire. The noble followers of
the obdurate Daulphin, seeing the Princess washing her repentance in her own
tears, humbly besought him to forget, and to forgive her amiss, since the
frailty of her offense, was rather a sore, then a sin; and wounds were to be
healed and not hurt. This submission, strengthened by such general entreaties,
somewhat quenched the burning heat of his enflamed ire: And though his severe
Justice told him, that not to punish an evil, was to allow of an evil; yet
mercy he knew pardons them often, that deserves it not, and judgment in nature,
should be next a kin to favor. Upon this calm construction (after many sharp
rebukes, and protested threats, he vowed that determinate, and inevitable
condemnation (...) punish her next offense) and so he pardoned her upon promise
of more regardfull duty.

Now Sir Paris had not long sojourned in Genua, but that mindful of his
charge, he writ to Vienna, and enclosed it in another writ to La-noua, wherein
he excused his unkind departure without his priuity, and conjured him by the
sacred laws of true amity; to attend and follow his Lady, in all service and
fast friendship. La-noua glad of such glad tidings, went in the height of his
joy to Vienna, and (after some complementall salutes) asked her, what she
would give to hear of her Paris. Vienna great with child with the expectation
of her friends welfare, longed to be delivered with the notice of his health;
and said, that the whole world afforded not sufficient worth to answer her
liberal heart therein. La-nova ioying in the constancy of her love, showed her
the letter, which she hastily snatching, as hastily read, re-read, and many
times, more then many times over-read, the pleasing contents as follows.

SWeet (sweet Vienna) I see is the hope that springs in the bud, but most
sorrow full I find is the hap that decays in the blossom. The hoped harvest
that over-credulous love assured me. Time (injurious time) keeps now (you
know) from the sith, what Fortune before sought to destroy in the grass. What
rests then? but to curse Time; as enemy to our desires, and to bewail our
desires as intercepted by Time. Yet should I live many years, or had I as many
lives, as Nestor had years; Those lives, those years, and all, in all; should
(I protest) be only spent in recording your worthiness, and in arming my
whole endeavors, to do you some agreeable service. Only in absence, my
grief grows, in finding my present estate, so weak in Fortune, and my
deserts so slender in Nature; that not knowing with Anthony how to requite his
Cleopatra, I only rest with Anthony to dye for my Cleopatra. I cannot use many
words, where every word wounds me with a new careful conceit, and every
conceit kills me with a fearful doubt. Let it then only suffice, that as I
live to love none but Vienna; so I wish, and wishing desire, to be ever, and
only remembered of Vienna. I am now in Genua, where my stay shall be little.
For my desire flattering me, with hope of honor, calls me (being debarred
from attending you) to foraigne services. I am therefore earnestly to entreat
your favorable consent therein, and that you would but grace my disgraced
fortune with your colors, that under protection thereof, I may for my better
security march, as shadowed under Achilles shield. In lieu whereof, I vow that
all my happiest endeauours, and atchieuements, shall be done under the honor
and favor of your name. This is all, and of this would you but daigne me the
comfort of your answer; I should think me unhappy, happy; and live to hope,
to be more happy. Thus wishing my deserts still suitable to my desires; and my
desires ever pleasing to your deserts; I rest, ever, for ever, your true and
loyal servant.

Paris.


Vienna well certified, but not fully satisfied, commanded La-noua to return a
speedy answer, with chaage that Paris should not depart Genua, but that he
should there sojourne, till better times afforded better turns: And that he
should bear himself, as himself, and her favorite. To maintain which, she
delivered to La-noua ten thousand Crowns, which he sent immediately: Sir
Paris receiving now so pleasing a pledge of her perseuered constancy,
triumphed no little in her so agreeable affection. And as she required, so
sat he up the main sail of his obscured glory in the wind of her will, by
taking a great house, and by maintaining so great a Port, that his majesticall
magnanimity well manifested, that his former sinister fortune was nothing
suitable to his birth and education.

Whiles Sir Paris thus Courted it out in some content, Vienna was solicited by
many great Lords. But the seed which they sowed in the sands, was washed away
with the first flood of the Tide; so that all their hoped Haruists, was naught
but crops of growing cares. The Daulphin (whose climing thoughts looked ever
upon greatest stars) kept the beam of his balance straight, without
gaine-saying this Suitor, or disgracing that. But to prevent all distaste that
might come by denial, he speedily sent special Messengers to his fast
friend, the Earl of Flanders, requesting his best labors and endeauours, to
move, and make (if so he might a marriage, betwixt his daughter Vienna, and the
Duke of Burbon his son. Such was his covetous desire, in lieu of the Burbons
possessions, not to be valued; and sueh his conceit of his sons valor, not
then (as he thought) to be equalled; so as his pride, could, nor would, admit
of any other son in law, but this great and matchless Prince. The Earl of
Flanders glad that occasion offered it self, that he might both gratify the
Daulphin his friend, and interest himself in the love and greatness of the
Burbon Duke, which he had love desired; was now as willing as the Physician,
that is ever ready to pleasure another, to profit himself. And knowing, that
he that sleeps, catches no Fish; he went instantly to the Duke, who no
sooner herd of the motion, but glorying in the hope of such unexpected
advancement, he entertained the Earl with all the state, that either
greatness could perform, or desire require. In conclusion, the Burbon Duke
sent his son, in the greatest pride of proudest state, to the Daulphins
Court, where he did proportion his carriage answerable to the eminency of his
place; his merits being such, and so many, that (setting only aside his pride
of heart) Envy her self, could not detract from his worth. But before he came
to the City, the Daulphin hearing of his near approach, went to his daughter,
and told her what tender care he had of her good, how he had labored to make
the Burbon Prince, her glorious Groom. and how happy she might think her
self, to be bestowed on so great and famous a Lord. One, whom the world
admires for his heroical fortitude; fears for his greatness; and loves for
his deserts. A Prince incomparable by title and birth: A person beautified by
Nature; And a man inricht with wisdom, wealth, and worthiness. Then let my
Choice be thy content, and in thy full consent see that thou entertain him
with all virtuous favors. This said, he commanded to horse, not staying her
answer, and so rid forth royally attended, and appointed, to receive the young
Prince. And far he had not rid, but that he met, and encountered with his long
desired, and now expected guest. The young Prince first alighting from his
Horse, gave the Daulphin occasion to dismount himself, who being on foot,
stayed till the Prince came unto him; where they greeted, re-greeted, and
embraced each other, and then remounting themselves, they rid Marshalled in
right good equipage to the Palace, where all the Ladies (saving Vienna) gave a
second salute, to the greater content of the Burbon Prince. But the Daulphin
missing Vienna, misliked much her absence, yet seemed to take no notice of it,
but smoothing the angry furrows of his coffeehouse, he (with an enforced
cheerefulnes) brought the Prince to his lodging, and there leaving him to his
private repose; he hastily went to Viennas Chamber, where all sad, and
solitary, he found her sitting in the seat of sorrow, or rather in the shade
of death, for fear of her fathers provoked ire; whose violent, and peremptory
disposition, would (she knew) transport him beyond all the bounds of Natures
tenderness. Of her, he demanded, why contrary to his command, she had
absented her self in the requisite entertainment of so great a Lord, and so
worthy a friend.

Vienna rising from her sorrowful seat, but not from her sorrow, with
fearful erected hands, and pity pleading eyes, humbled her self at his
feet, and told him, that for shame of her first flying fault, she had vowed
her chastity to Diana; and sworn her self, a Vestall, to Vesta. And therefore
had she so separated her self a side, because she would not give fire to his
fancy, nor wrong his better deserts with forlorn desires. In consideration
whereof, she humbly prayed, that none but her self might enjoy her self,
since none but her self could, or should content her self. The Daulphin
perceiving light through a small crevis, began in mild policy, by gentle
entreaties, and rich persuasions, to weane her from her will; telling her, that
unlawful vows were to be violated; since the first cause ceasing and a new
succeeding, both might be altered; neither had she any such power in her self,
that was not to be disposed of by a Father; And to honor, and obey Parents, is
the first Commandment that has any reward promised on earth. Besides, it is
an envious wrong to Nature, to suffer her fairest work (like a sweet fragrant
odoriferous Rose) to dye upon the stock; that being plucked in the bloome,
might yield both pleasure, and profit to others: therefore renounce this
belief, if thou meanest to be saved, or to have any favor. For by course of
kind all things were made to increase; and by increase to benefit another;
and she is a Devil amongst men, that profits no man. This did the Daulphin
think by his smooth words, to build a Castle in the air, that had no hope of
foundation on the earth. For Viennas unremovable resolution, being bent to
shoot at her first mark, could not be won to level at another aim; which
made the Daulphin, (failing (like a Fox) to deceive with kindness) to play
now the Lion by compulsion; And therefore gnashing his teeth together for anger
(like the Sea that waxes mad, when the winds do rage) he commanded both her
and Jzabella to close prison.

The young Prince meruailing beyond all measure, that he could not see amiable
Vienna, the eye of France, the miracle of her sex, the wonder of time, and the
pride of Nature; demanded of her Father, what ominous cloud shadowed the
brightness of France his second Sun, that she appeared not in her
all-admired glory. The Daulphin fearing least he should distaste the Prince, by
understanding the matter; framed, and feigned this excuse. That sickness had
attached her, and made her a prisoner to her bed, and therefore prayed his
patience awhile, till be hoped recovery might better please his fancy. The
young Prince holding his words for Oracles, held himself contented, and
thought to wear and weary out the weariness of time, with otehr Courtly, and
more Knightly sports; wherein he was so fortunate, that Fame was the Herauid
of his Heroical deeds. This did so inflame the love of the Daulphin toward
him, that no eye-water could ever after quench the same; Desert did now double
his desire; and his desire had no end, in gayning his daughters consent, which
he again now vainly labored: Sometimes laying before her the Riches, Glory,
and Dignities of Juno: sometimes painting forth the Honor, Respect, and
Happiness, she should receive by such another Hector; and then pleading the
sweet content, that grows by enjoying so pleasing and complete a Prince. But
when he found his wasted words dye in their own sound, and all his hopes
utterly shipwrackt: his better consideration was then forfeited further to
hate, and rancour; then either nature, or pity, could redeem it. Then began
he to thunder out fearful threats, cruel chastments, and most insupportable
miseries. Commanding the Keeper (in his ouer-awfull justice) that sad
solitariness should only attend her imprisonment, and that eager hunger
should daily wait on her Table, and so he departed, hopeless of reclayming
her, and therefore resolved to chasten her obstinacy, with all severity. But

No force, can Fancy force; nor crosses Love expel,
For Rivers stopped, above their banks, will higher swell.
The young Prince having now spent many days, and not seen her, whom only he
came to visit; importuned the Daulphin, that he might but visit her both to
comfort her in her malady, and somewhat to satisfy his starued eyes, in their
more then greedy desires. But the doubling Daulphin pleaded her mislike so to
be seen; assuring him, that she daily requested, that he (whom she only upon
sole report entirely affected (should not in any case see her so sore impaired.
So great (said be) is her care to seem pleasing unto you, such her
shamefastness at first so to be seen of you. And therefore let me entreat
your further patience, for ^our willing return, until her better health, may
better counteruaile your taken pains; which once recovered, you shall be
speedily informed. In the mean time salute in my name, your thrice noble
royal Father, and tell him, that I hold my self so much honored, in his
desired affinity, that my self, and what is the Daulphins, rests wholly at
his pleasure: and further, pray him that the lawful cause of this unwilling
stay, may stand for satisfaction till better payment. The young Prince thus
smoothed up with words of fairest dye, held himself well appeased, though not
thoroughly pleased; and holding the Daulphins words for written verity, he
implored the firm continuance of his found favors, and protested kindnesses;
and so commending himself to the good grace of his adored Lady; he humbly and
friendly took his leave, and returned to Burbon. The Prince departed: The
Daulphin, who had no more remorce then the cruel Judge has mercy; gave in
charge, that no one should visit, or repair to his Daughter, but only
Monsieur Maux, a right Saturnist by nature, and an unrelenting Tyrant in life,
him he commanded (under pain of death) to give her nothing but bread, and the
worst wine, twice a day; which this enemy of virtue, and stain of all
mankind, so barbarously performed, that his cruel usage too soon impared
poor Vienna, and distressed Izabella who had unkindly, and untimely pined, and
perished in that loathsome solitary prison, had not La-nova found out a means
(as hereafter shall be shown) to succor, and relieve them.

But now the Daulphinis, who had many times washed her aged face, in the tears
of her consuming grief for her afflicted Child, having neither knowledge of
any means to relieve her, nor hope of her delivery; knowing the Daulphin, to
be as resolute in his rigor, as he was absolute in opinion: Advised with her
nearest friends, and obliged dependants, what was to be done in so desperate
and grievous a case. Whereby the concurrance of advises, it was concluded, that
she should send unto the Delphian Oracle, there to learn, what should be done,
and become of her enthralled daughter. This Counsel being embraced, and the
journey undertaken, the winds gave speed, and the Messenger arrived at
Delphos, where after all ceremonies were religiously performed, hereceived a
scrowle to carry unto the Daulphinis, with charge not to look therein. The
Daulphinis, whose fear made her think all good to be too good for her;
thought yet each hour an age, till his return: misfortune so blinds those,
we will overthrow, as that she gives their desires wings to draw on, and hasten
their own decays. At last he came, and humbly delivered the scrowle,
importing this much.

Viennois heir, to thraldom still belongs,
until her Fathers bonds, shall set her free:
Who captived is; in place, confused with tongues,
by Ismaels brood, detayn'd shall be.
Both shall live, in doubt, in care, and we,
until the banished Son, of forlorn Troy;
Shall succor give, unto his greatest foe,
and bring him home, with hope, with love, with joy.
Then shall Vienna wed a sable Moore,
And happy live in peace; and not before.
The Daulphinis, whose over sad surcharged heart was unable to digest such
heavy and bitter Cates; found this sauce too sharp for her diet. For it was
no sooner read, but that finding (as she thought) all the gates of comfort
shut up with intricate threats and impossibilities, (being too weak a
vessel, to bear so sharp a liquor) she shrunk under the weight of her sad
burden, and fell suddenly dead; and so left the Daulphin a cruel Father, and
a careless Widdower.

This mournful accident rather exasperated his irefull displeasure toward his
daughter (in making her disobedience the original cause of her death) then in
any wise extenuated his execrable resolution, against her determined endurance.
But he had not lived many days in dolor, but that burying the remembrance of
his dearest spouse, in the hope of future happiness; his obdurate heart became
as unsenceable of her loss, as of his Daughters misery. Love found love, and
the madness of age made him such a slave unto his slave, that before one
years period, he married one of his Wives meanest Attendants; One (who knowing
her own unworthiness,) having neither Virtue to strengthen her fortune, nor
good nature to incite her to pity or goodness, nor any merit to win
applause, was notwithstanding so potent over him, that she guided the stearne
of his flinty and unpennitrable heart: And though she feared the scorn of
abject baseness, yet to maintain the stolen pride of her enhansed heart, she
cunningly gave fuel to her Husbands enraged will, and covertly blew still the
coals of his displeasure. For fear she did, least that her Daughters liberty
should (in the aspect of true honor) cloud both her swelling conceited glory,
and detract from her proud insulting greatness: To frustrate which, she
cautely one day, leaning on his breast, and stroking his frosted beard, thus
sadly said.

When (my dearest Lord) I look upon the breach of the Princess, your
Daughters obligation; I find the penalty you take, to be most just (though
severe;) Since the just Iudger of all, did for the sole disobedience of only
one, cast both him, and all his Posterity out of Paradise: How like unto him
you show your self herein, your unpartiall Justice well demonstrates, who
rightfully punishes the sin of disobedience in your own members, as God did
in his own creatures. Justice is the badge of virtue, the state of peace, and
maintenance of honor; and the will of a Father should be a religious law unto
the Child: And they that prefer their own Iustes before their Parents
pleasures, loses the benefit both of natures right, and a Fathers regard: For
reason would not we should respect those that forsake us: The Husbandman cuttes
and loppes off all unkindly Branches from the good Vine; Jove held his Children
part of his substance, of whom he did and might dispose; and the noble Romans
deprived their Sons of life, that infringed but their commands. I allege
not this (most worthy Lord) to aggravate your Daughters foul offense, whose
other deserts I honor, whose welfare I affect, and whose merited punishment I
condole; Nor yet to detract from the worth of your thrice worthy chasticement,
which all men commend, and justice allows. But fear (of I know what) and the
love of your safety enforces me in love and duty, to manifest what I fear,
and to prevent what I doubt. Vienna (you know) my endeered Lady, is the
immediate apparent Heir to this Principality, and the unjust desires that
wait upon a Crown, begets often most inhumane, unnatural, and unlawful Acts:
Nature in that expectation, loses her sight. Virtue her strength, Duty her
obedience, and Love her respect: Nothing can outballance ambitious desire,
either in the reach of dignity, or revenge; Nor is there any limitation in the
adventurers. Her restraint is (I fear) like fire raked up in embers, that
covertly will kindle, and openly burst forth into a flame; For the harder she
deemes her self handled, the more will she seek after her release, if not
after revenge; Nor can she want instigators thereunto: Since all men like and
prefer the rising of the Moon before the setting of the Sun: And to win
advancement in that hope, they will contrive, practice, and execute whatsoever,
and howsoever: Such occasions gives fire to corrupt Humorists; and such grounds
sets repugnant Malcontents a work. I would my death might free you from such
dangerous intendments, or that my life could acquit you from such heavy
accidents. And therewithal (her heart having taught her eyes to weep) she
threw her self into his bosom, the more to endeere her self unto him, and
without any sorrow, she sighing, said, Ah what shall become of me, when I shall
loose my loving Lord?

Craft gave her tears, Deceit showed grief.
Fraud a forced a fear to win belief.
Thus to nourish debate, after she had fed on slander, and instil'd in his
ears a fearful jealousy, which over-credulous minds easily apprehends, and
covetously entertaines. The better to acquit her self from all suppose of
malice or detraction: She weeping, told him, That the night before, her Mothers
Ghost appeared unto her, all in white, her unsmoothed hair displayed about her
shoulders, her ruefull fallen face pale, her eyes hollow, and in either hand a
Taper burning dim; which so affrighted her, that had she not comfortably
spoken to me, when I had no power to call to you; I had awaked you, and cried
for help: But suddenly, with a feeble voice, she mildly said; Fear not my
Daughter, to look upon thy Mothers harmless Ghost, who in tender care of
thee, and thy espoused Lord, have left my bed of rest, to come to premonish
thee of your ensuing ill. Treason does threaten the Daulphin; Subjects
mislikes, works upon Viennas discontentments: Her liberty will be his death,
and in his destruction shall thou find thy grave: Now thou know it, look
to it, and so farewell. With that she gave a wimpe, darkness possessed the
place, and I lay wounded and affrighted with remembrance, both of her sight and
of her words. This Apparision, the happy Angel of our God, (for visions are
clear revelations, where dreams are but delusions) has moved me, out of an
affectionate fear of you, to deliver what I saw, heard, and have said; which
otherwise in my love to your Princely Daughter, I would willingly have
concealed. And therewithal she wept again, and kissing him said, O hardest
of happes, but most unhappy only I, that she, to whom I owe all love, and from
whom I cannot withdraw my devoted affections should by my means be the more
afflicted. But in my Lords love and welfare, do I only live, and will bury
all other affects and considerations. The guilled Daulphin, whose undisgested
displeasure, and over-iealous preiudicating heart, gave way to every suspicious
thought, so procreated ^y false conceit, and so confirmed by her mellefluous
and deceitful tongue; began now to conceive much more, then he did see or
perceive. Fear and dislike so shipwrackt his judgment upon his Wives clouded
rocks, that what before seemed to him by conjecture but probable; that he
holds now as an Oracle. And therefore embracing her, he kissed her often, and often
did wipe her forced bedewed eyes, and then did kiss again, and thanked her
for her provident care; and preserving love; assuring her that thus warned, he
would be ever armed, and that in his daughters wedded miseries, they would
build up both their securities. And thereupon commanded that a strickt Watch
should ever guard the prison door, that no one (but Monsieur Maux) should
come, or send unto her.

Thus Beasts corrupt, do lightly poison take:
Thus envy weeps, that tears may michiefe make.
But La-nova understanding of the Daulphins Decree, and finding the venomous
drift, and impoysoned mind, of this Serpentine mother; having Land adjoining
to the Castle, did erect (after a great, and strickt show of holiness) a
Chapel in honor of our Lady, wherein he made a close partition; In the one
part to hear public Mass, and in the other (which adjoined to his Castle)
to prostrate himself before his God, and to power forth his more private
prayers for his secret sins. In this part, he dug in the night so long,
and many nights so long; that at length he made a secret way, that ascended up
to the place of their aboade, and pausing there a while, to rest his
over-wearied self, he heard Vienna and Izabella, carefully, and
interchangeably, sing this contentions Ditty.

Vienna. Who lives to love, does live to care,
Who cares much, much grief shall find:
Who finds grief, tormented are,
In endless woe, of woeful mind,
Why then should love poffesse our hearts,
That yields naught else, but secret smarts?

Izabella. Who loves to live, should live to love,
Who loves much, much joy shall find:
Who finds joy, such joys shall prove,
As proves no joy, to Lovers mind.
Why should we then, sweet Love dispraise,
By whom our minds, such joys assayes?

Vienna. The heart oppressed, in fancy dies,
Affection sails, in Times arrest:
Jove's royal bird, preyes not on Flies,
Loves greatest joy, is hopes behest.
Why love we then? Why joy we so?
Since hope is vain; and Love breeds woe.

Izabella. The Paulme suppressed, does higher grow,
The lowest sail, Time sets aloft:
The highest Sun, does shine below,
And poorest hope, finds hap full often.
Then live, and love: then hope and have;
Heavens made love: Love heavens gave.

Vienna. But Towns besieged, distressed yields;

Izabella. But forts maintained, great glory gains:

Vienna. Onforlorne Hope, Love never builds:

Izabella. In Fortunes change; Hope, hap obtaynes.

Vienna. Then will I love. Izabel. Then constant prove.

Vienna. Sweet Paris live. Izabel. Viennas love.

No sooner had they made an end of their Song, but Lanova, found an end of his
work, and going forth of his dark passage, he softly, yet cheerfully entered,
and saluted Vienna, who though amazed, yet animated at his sight, run, and
fell upon his breast, and in the fall of her many tears, asked him, What news
of her Paris, and whether he lived, and living, lived to his first Enone; or
struggling, had found, and made a second choice. Say, La-nova, say, has any
Hellen won my Trojan from his betrothed Nymph, or has Adenis forgotten his
Venus, and become amorous of another Lady. If so, say so, and tell me, how
thou came hither. For I wonder at thy presence, and fear thy hazard. Your
Knight (most constantly (virtuous, and renowned Lady) said La-noua) lives I
hope, and no doubt wholly yours: But never since the receite of this Letter,
heard I any tidings of him. Only my care of your good (the sum of Sir Paris
charge) has plotted, and effected, this poor shift, to relieve and comfort
your grace. And so he told her how, and showed her the way, the top whereof he
advised her to cover well, least it should be discryed, he undone and she
unsuccoured. Vienna re-embracing him for his kind and tender regard to her,
and for his true, and fast love to them both; gave him many thanks, and
earnestly entreated him, to make privy enquiry of the Genua Merchants, whether
they knew, or had heard of Sir Paris, and how he spent his days, and so
fearing the detested Keepers coming. La-noua left her, to make provision for
her.

Now the Daulphin, whose diseased mind could not be cured, but by the match
of the Burbon Prince; thought himself still endangered, so long as she lived
unmarried, and imprisoned: His wicked wily wife, had cast such an erroneous
mist over his bewitched eyes, and so drowned his heart in fearful doubts,
that he durst not trust his own safety; unless his harmless daughter were
either made away at home, or married away far from home. To give peace unto
these his disturbed thoughts, he went unto the Castle to see whether that
weakening diet, and tedious thraldom, had well reduced her seduced mind; and
made her of a disobedient child, the daughter of his will. In trial whereof,
he demanded, whether in the high, and sacred pre-eminence of a Father, he
should find yet the obliged duty of a child; the which if she would in
repentance acknowledge, and in performance willingly accomplish his will. She
should be restored to her former estate, his wonted favor, and her preeminent
dignities. Vienna on humble knees, falling at his feet, required his blessing,
and said, that continued sorrows had so mortified all thoughts of affection,
that only grief was grown to be pleasing to miserable creatures; and that
custom had made her content to lie in her bed of woe, and to water her couch
with tears: only she prayed, that the just God might appease his ire against
unjust men. But how (said she) shall my self, persuade my self, that you
mean me any good, that not only have so hardly entreated me, and so
unnaturally imprisoned your sole child; but most unjustly and cruelly have put
in prison poor Sir Jacques, that has spent all his happiest days in your
unrewarded service. It is the true property of a Prince, to resemble Cod, in
virtue, bounty, and mercy: and not the Lion in force, rigor, and cruelty.
Mercy pardons those that deserve it not; and the interpretation of the
strictest law, should rather tend to mercy, then cruelty; since rigorous laws
were first made, more to terrify all, then to torment any. The doubtful
Daulphin finding his amiss, but not his remedy; somewhat to persuade his
daughter of his repenting rigor, and intended good; commanded that Sir Jaques
should be set at liberty and restored to his Pristen estate; which greatly
contented Vienna for her Paris sake, and no little joyed good La-nova, that
secretly had succored him. But these shows of favor, and promises of
preferment, nothing advantaged the Daulphin: For Vienna (strengthened in the
expectation of sorrow) not obstinately, but constantly told her father, that
the Barbons love, was like a Spiders web, fit to be swept away; and that her
Virgins vow, should eternize her chastity after death. This resolve, raised
again the storm of his allayed fury; in the rage whereof, he left her,
discovering by his threats and malicious words, the ill of his heart, as
Viennas sorrowful sighs showed the hurt of her heart.

La-nova wigehing the Tyranny of the time, and finding no hope of better hap,
presently writ to Sir Paris the truth of all such accidents as had befalne, his
Father, Vienna, and himself; since the receipt of his Letter, which gave so
fresh and so sharp an assault, to his already over-surcharged heart, that
virtue was no Armor of proof against such affliction, but raging in the
tempest of coffeehouse, rather like an unkennelled Cerberus, then any
distracted Ajax, he blasphemously belched and breathed out cruel oaths,
vengeance, daring threats, and most fearful words against Time, Love, Gods,
and Men.

O Time, said he, Traitor unto Love: O Love abused by Time: O Gods unjust to
men: O Men too subject to the Gods. O that your Deities were essential,
visible, and mortal, that I might hew vengeance out of your wrongs, and write
Tragedies on your lives. O heavens I challenge your Throanes, and deny your
powers. Your swift motions I will stay with my hand, and your revolutions I
will drown in the Sea: I will unloose the bonds of Orion, and stop the course
of each constellation. The straying Stars I will pluck from their Spheres,
and with their influences will I kill all the Tyrants on the earth. Time I will
consume with my breath, and burn up Love with the Sun. The world I will cut
a sunder with my Sword, and make a new Land in the air. The Waters I will
swallow up, and bury the winds in the Moon. Jxion I will remove from his
moving and tormenting seat, and set the Daulphin on his turning wheel, where
hunger-starved Vipours shall gnaw on his hateful heart, and pyning Tantalus
give him all his food. Vienna shall be sole Queen of heaven, and only rule
the glorious Globe; And I will reign in Jupiters stead, and throw down fire
and lightning on the cursed Castle that enthralls my love: I will beat that
cruel Daulphin to powder with thunder, that I may be revenged on Time, Love,
Gods, Men, the World, the Daulphin, and all for the Daulphin. Thus distract in
his madding mood he all enraged, raged he knew not how, and said he knew not
what, pulling the Letter in pieces with his teeth, renting his Hangings,
tearing his Clothes, and breaking his Bed, Board, and Stools, with such
violence, that his amazed servants durst not come near him.

At this unwonted passion, their hearts were possessed with wonder, and their
eyes floodded with tears; his bounty causing the one, and his wisdom the
other. But ignorance is the mother of admiration: They knew not where his shoe
did pinch him, nor could they tell how to help him. At last (as one
breathless in his wasted fury) he fell upon his bed; which they seeing,
hastily stepped to him, and uniting their strengthes, kept him down, making
silence their preparative, to quit his tempestious thoughts; Then darkning the
Chamber, one of them took a deep base silver stringed Bandora, whereupon he
played so sweetly, and so dolefully, that Sir Paris hearing of it, lent a
listening to it, which brought him into such a sad melancholy Muse, that he
began to slumber, and after fell into a heavy sleep, which so well appeased
the storm of his disturbed senses, that after three hours enjoying reposed
rest; he waked, and walked, perfected in his mind, and ashamed that he had so
defaced the Image of virtue, and abused his own knowledge. Consideration made
him now hold himself the sole spite of Fortune, and the very scorn of time,
and men. Detraction threatened his disgrace, Derision proclaimed his folly, and
the guilt of his own ill, made him privately, and secretly, to leave Genua,
and to wander whether his shame should not follow him, nor any hear of his
being. But before he departed, he both rewarded, and discharged all his
servants, and paying all duties whatsoever; he lastly writ to La-nova and to
his Father as follows.

IF silly Sheep (my ever fast found friend) all only for their bare food (as
hating ingratitude) yield their fair Fleeces as due guerdons to their Keepers.
How then shall J now countervaile thy so many merits, that enjoy naught my
self, but mere misfortunes, and insufferable miseries. Alas my La-nova, the
Times are changed, and we are changed in the times: Thou writest now of naught
but woes, and my grief is already such, as to live is a grief. O unhappy,
happy J, whose extremest ill, flows from my greatest good; and whose blisfull
heaven, is become my tormenting hell. Ah Vienna, J would either my death might
extinguish thy affection, or thy affection had been settled on a more happier
and worthier person. Then should J dye more contented, and thou live better
esteemed. But since my love has wrought thy fall; Thy fall shall be recovered
in my loss. For presently J will depart to unknown parts, and try the force
of my further destenie, in seeking the worst of my fortune, And therefore have
I written to my Father, to adopt thee in my place for his heir; which J pray
thee deliver, and demean thee as his Son, For never will J return, and
therefore write not; For never shall thou hear of me. Only recommend my love,
to my Ladies good grace, and tell her, that J fly not from her favor; but
with my ill fortune, from my more threatening pervert fortune: And though I dye
in her sorrow, yet will I ever live in her remembrance. And so farewill. Genua,
the last of my abode, and the first of my Pilgrimage.

Only unhappy in his happiness. Paris.


La-nova, having read his own sorrow, in his Friends grief, could not
refrain from shedding most bitter tears; and having long bewailed the
untimely loss of his so worthy a Friend, he speedied himself to acquaint Sir
Jacques, unto whom he delivered his Sons Letter, importing thus much.

IF Plato (right dear, dear Father, seeing an unthankefull Man prosper,)
said, that the Gods were unjust, in that they had laden a Thistle with fruit.
O let not then (I humbly beseech you) the many good turns, that many times,
La-nova (my second self) has with venture often adventured, and done for us,
be now forgotten in your best consideration: Least his deserts dye in your
shame, and your shame mask without any vizard of excuse, And since my perverse
fortune, has exiled me from my native home, and the cruel aspect of my
sinister Stars, has quite lately slain all hope of future return. My last
request is, that I being the last of my Tribe, and the first of our declyning
Family, you would comfort your age, with the better hope of my Friends more
worthier worthiness, and that you will repute and take him for your Son: And
when Nature shall pay the duty you owe unto the Earth, that then you will
inherit him in all such Lands and Goods, as Fortune in your fortune, and
ability, shall then leave behind you: So shall you yield desert his due, honor
me, and eternize your own fame. The Lord give you patience, enrich me with
your blessing, comfort your gray hayres, and redouble, with treble happiness,
your aged days.

Your hapless Son, only happy in being your Son, but most unhappy in
being himself, Paris,


Sir Inques having read the sad contents of his Sons resolved last
farewell, fainted under the burden of his so unsupportable grief, but revived
and comforted by La-nova, that was himself to be comforted, he betook
himself unto his careful bed; where though his attached tongue could pay no
tribute to his dumb sorrow, yet did his silent woes, show his speaking
grief. Such was his woe, that it was a woe, to see his woe: In so much, that
La-nova, swollen with his own grief, was ready to burst; to see his sorrow;
And therefore, having neither temperance to cover the one, nor a heart to look
upon the other; he returned to his erected Chapel, where he pierst the very
Heavens, for the preservation of his Friend, and powered forth his Prayers for
his return. This done, he held himself undone, in so inestimable a loss: And
after a long and sad meditating with himself, he fearfully went to acquaint
Vienna, that all their sorrows might be complete at once: Her he found all
pensive and heavy, as one presaging her further mishap; and no sooner she saw
him, but that drawing forth the true portracture of sorrow, out of his careful
countenance, she hastily, yet fearfully, demanded, what news? The Heavens
Madam (said La-nova) grant you patience, and more comfortable news. Vienna
aghast, ghastly asked, if Paris then were dead? Not dead he said, and yet
departed. Departed, ah said Vienna, how, whether, or to whom? from life to
death, or from me to a causeless change? If dead, why live I then? If alive,
why then dead to me? Say, say La-nova, where lives, or lies my Paris? Paris
(said La-nova) lives in his sorrow, and dies in your grief: But where, alas
I know not; for mad in your affliction, he is gone in his fury, to dye
elsewhere for his fancy. Vienna, whose eyes overflowed with tears, and whose
heart was wounded with his words, stood like a second Niobe; and then falling
suddenly into a deadly trance, she no sooner came to her self again, but
that again she lost her self. But after her full recovery, her remembrance
then recording, how all her nourished woes had begot many crosses, that
miserably fell upon her like haile-stones, that strives to overtake one
another; she could not refrain, but thus bewailed her self.

What fault of mine, cruel and unkind, has caused thus thy causeless flight?
Is this, ah this, and woe is me in this, the hoped harvest of devoted Love?
Deserves my endured miseries, this ungrateful guerdon? O Paris, Paris, thy
love comforted me in my cares, but thy loss has confounded me in my love. O
that I had never seen thee, whom yet I wish to see; or seeing thee, had never
affected thee, whom ever I most affect: My hap is hard, that can neither have,
nor hope; and the fault I find in my self, follows me still, whiles death
does follow me. Ah La-nova, what now availes thy doubtful diligence to thy
Friend? under the zealous show of thy simulate sanctitude? To what end now
intends my pyning imprisonment the due chastisement of my neglected duty? Am I
now become the only Daughter of sorrow, and the cashiered Child of disgrace?
O happy Portia, thy dead sad woes are all buried in my long lived griefs; and
Heccubaes tears are all drowned in the sea of my sorrow. Why then do I live
longer in dolor, since my preordinate life is predestinate to a dolent death?
I will cruciate my effamished Body? and satiate the angry Fates, with my
mortal and tragical end: The end of my woe, shall be the woeful end of my
life; and the life of my laments, shall be the wounds of my death: And
therefore leave me La-nova, leave me; that at last, I may honor the
Carthagenian Queen by breathing out my last.

These last words, so sore appaled La-nova, that jealous of her weakness (her
enfeebled estate, being unable to support her oppressing and confounding
sorrows) he much feared (least overcome with grief and passion) she should
yield to mischief her misery: To prevent which, he buried, for the time, all
his own grief, in the heedfull care of her safety; and closely wiping his
bedewed eyes, he began, Pastor-like, to Preach patience, Faith, Hope, and
Comfort, to her sad dismayed Soul. Let not (said he, I beseech your
Excellence) any sinister cross, chance, or mundaine affairs, overthrow, or
oppress, the lively force of your requisite Faith: Nor let any pusalimity
weaken the wonted courage of your prudent mind; but build your Faith and hope
on him, who as Roy, royal, rules and overrules all chances and accidents,
that befalles humane Creatures: Then embrace not a mischief, to prevent an
ill; since God sends good for evil, as he made light out of darkness, Joseph
was in prison, before he could be Governor of Egypt; and the Jsraelites were in
bondage, before they could come into Canaan,: You see your soar, but not your
salve: Though with Job you lie now in ashes, yet when with Job, you be tried,
there shall be no more sorrows left to afflict you, then there were sores left
to torment him: For as the power of God is above our capacities; So does his
succors and comforts, come quite contrary to our hopes: To him therefore
refer all things, and in him only repose your self; and be you assured,
that in the assurance of your better trust, you shall find comfort unexpected,
and hope well rewarded. Crosses (your Grace knows) are but-touch stones, to
try our patience; and patience is both a virtue and the true Physician of
distress: And in managing of affection and affliction, is the true proof of
discretion: To overcome an other, is the gift of Fortune; but to vanquish our
own wills, is the true proof of wife courage, and a glory proper to our
selves.

I confess (said Vienna,) that Patience is a Virtue, but a poor one; and that
Hope is a heavenly thing, but long hopes consume patience, and water a far
off, does never quench fire at hand: And when two Winters come together, Death
may fall before Summer. Yet time (said Lanova) heales griefs, by killing of
cares. Nay, Time (she replied) is rather a devourer of our expectations, then
a Chyrurgion to heal or soars: For all men takes pleasure to come to their
journyes end before they be weary; and our teeming hopes, would ever be
delivered of a gracious Birth. Yet be you Madame (he reanswered) as you should
be, if not as you would be, since it will be as it is; and with some sweet
deceit, exile these sower conceits. Alas, (said Vienna) how can sour
conceits, entertain sweet deceites? since present deceites, are still my
sowrest conceits: Your Physic La-nova, is good, but my disease is desperate:
For patience without comfort, brings peril of consumption; and they are
always unpatient Martyrs, that are punished uniustly: my grief was at the
highest before, and now like swelling Nilus, it disdaineth bounds. Deceive not
your self, said La-nova, his endeered Love, not brooking your misery; and not
his fraud, never known to any, with his killing despair (the bloody butcher
of all hopes contentments) has forced thus his further flight: And for
probation thereof, read here his Letter, which he sent me; and doubt you not
Madame, but when aftertimes shall make him find the error of his amiss, and
that his wounded hope shall be healed with better thoughts; that then (finding
with the sick man, that the shifting of his Bed, alters not his disease,) he
will then, I say, return in his repentance, and make inquisition after your
welfare. Vienna taking and perusing the Letter, and swallowing up the contents,
with contentment, was overcome as much, with kind, and affectionate grief, as
before she was surprised with cold care and distaste, of his supposed flying
fancy: Insomuch, that washing a new her face, in the balmy drops of her
love-distilling tears, she laid her hands on his shoulder, and sighing said;
O pardon, La-nova, my offensive offense, Sweet Paris, where so ere thou art,
pardon my amiss: I was, I am, and will be, still the same, and ever thine.
Thus having surfeited in her own sorrow, she purged heriealous conceit, and
in the comfort of his constant love, she laid her down on her weeping bed,
where La-nova left her, to rest her restless thoughts.

By this time, the Moon seven times had shown her fullest face, and as many
times lost the splendour of he light. When the Prince of Burbon, desirous to see
the Emperious Mistress of his enthralled heart, taking humble leave of his
Father, secretly poasted to Vienna, where the Daulphin enknowledged of his
coming, went to receive him at his outermost gate. The young Prince, greeted,
entertained, and feasted, of some, of many, of all; amongst them all, mist the
fairest of them all, the fair Vienna, the admired Princess of all pulcretude,
of whose wished welfare, he asked her Father: Who like a subtle Mercurist
(cunning in Cautels) soberly said; that as yet she had not recovered her
health. The young Prince, discomforted in so lingering a sickness, importuned
the Daulphin, that he might visit her, and so somewhat satisfy his hungry
mind, almost famished with desire. The Daulphin (whose senses held now a
Synod) was driven to such an exigent, that not knowing how to avoyde the
Cheque without a Mate, he was pe^force forced to confess the truth. So that
taking him aside; he swore by Sacrament of solemn Oath, that his whose drift,
and desire was, to bestow his Daughter on none but him; and that he had
banished ambitious and audatious Sir Paris, for his over-proud and presumptious
love. But such (said he) has been, and is still, her permanent frowardness,
and most obstinate disobedience therein, that in injustice, I have justly
imprisoned her, not so much for her degenerate breach of duty, (though not to
restrain an ill, is to maintain an ill) as to bring her to yield to your
fancy: But overhardened in her wilful conceit, she rests no less careless
of her endurance. then resolved in her wilfulness; for which, I also have
deprived her of her glory, and comfort; sworn her continual thraldom, and
pray the continuance of your good opinion, and amity.

The young Prince astonished at the strangeness of the case, wondered greatly
at the cause: Yet flattering himself, with selfe-conceite of his more worthy
worthiness; He earnestly entreated the Daulphin, that he might make some
trial, what himself could do for himself. The Daulphin granting his
request, he presently clothed himself, in the richest Ornaments of Pride and
State; and Princely attended, went with more speed, then success to the
Prison; the Door whereof had but only a small hole cut forth, to take air
in, and to receive such lean and slender Sustenance, as was most sparingly
allowed her.

Vienna foretold of his coming, had before, gotten by La-nova's means, a
Capon, whose dismembered Legs, she closely had tied under the holes of her
naked Arms, that there, with heat putrefying, they might the sooner corrupt,
and unsavery, smell the stronger. The young Prince coming to the door,
knocked, and demanded for Vienna: Who coming, and seeing him so richly cladde,
and in so glorious an estate, blushed out such beauty, that her very Eyes seemed
a fair Temple, wherein Love and Beauty seated themselves: Yet dissembling her
knowledge of him, she asked what he was, and would. Viennas Friend, (he said)
and Viennas Love I would. My Friend, (said she) oh Friendlesse, name I Friend?
that live exempt from Friends: My Love, why name I Love? that only love to
live here unbeloved.

The young Prince (whose listening ears, were well pleased with the sweet
harmony of her well tuned words; and whose liking Eyes, were ravished with the
sight of her perfections,) was so perplexed betwixt new conceived desires, and
disdain to be disdained; that not knowing what to say, he stood like one that
had lost himself; not real in sense, but as a fair Flower, nipt with the
morning frost, hanging down his head, as most sorry, for his declyning glory:
In this despair, the remembrance of his own greatness, and the conceit of
his own merits, gave such quickening life to his mortified thoughts, and such
freedom to his imprisoned tongue, that boldly, and plainly, he told her, who
he was, why, and for what he came. Vienna pleading ignorance for the error of
her careless regard, humbled her self, with thankful acknowledgement of his
more worthy worthiness: But such (said she) is the obligation of my decreed
chastity, that naught but death shall break the bond. Why Madame (replied the
Prince) in so doing, you wrong Nature, in clouding the brightness of her
Sun, deprive the world of more glorious light, neglect your duty, in
disassenting from your Fathers will, wound my desires with forlorn hopes, and
rob your self, both of propagating pleasure, sweetest content, and greatest
glory: Then leave these injurious walls, and change your Prison (unfitting
your Person) for a Palace prepared for a Princess; In assurance whereof,
accept most renowned Lady, this Pledge of my Faith, wherein is charactered,
the Life of my Love, and the Love of my Soul; and therewith,

Of Ruby rich, a wounded heart he gave.
That pirec'd by Dart, did bleed; and mercy crave.
This was so Artificially made, and cut; that the falling drops did seem to
mourn, and plead for pity, and underneath them, was engraven; Viennas
help. This he gave, and this she gave again; saying, that by gifts, we make
our selves Lords; but by taking, slaves: I will not make a Prince servile, nor
can you make a prisoner proud: Affection is a mere stranger to affection; and
Jewels of price do not befit a miserable thrall. Then let your own gift
(replied the Prince) make you a Queen, and me your slave. My fortunes (said
Vienna) admits of no such Soveraignety; and your Greatness is too potent for a
Vassal. I am too poor to give; and it stands not with a Lord to beg; then
be you still a King in your own thoughts, and I will rest content with my
Fate. Why, Kings (answered the Prince) have no privilege in Love: and the Gods
themselves were subject to beauty. Vienna constant in her chaste pretense,
seeing his earnest prosecution, and being wearied with resistance, because
loathing such conference, held it good policy to prevent his further
importunity, And therefore she briefly and plainly told him, that she was not
for his honor, nor his honor for her humor. For know (she weeping said) that
the long cold and grievous imprisonment, which indurable, I have yet endured,
has so corrupted and putrified my impared body; that the very stench thereof
offends, and endangereth the small (yet tedious) remainder of my loathed
life. For proof whereof, she bearing her breasts, bad him feel, what
infectious sent her ulcerated and dying flesh yielded; which he no sooner did,
but that he was near stifled with the smell. The enflamed Prince, thus cooled
in his hot pursuites, found his thoughts now freer from affection, then he
deemed his body sound from infection. Such was the choking savor, that so
offended his queasie stomach, that comforting her for fashion sake, he made a
brief conclusion, and there left both her, and his love, that erst would have
dyed for love. Vienna well appayed in acquitting her self of so troublesome,
and hurtful a suitor, returned to Jzabella; and sighing out a smile, told
her, how she had deceived the Prince; whereat she ioyed no little, and
concluded thereby, that women's pregnant wits, in all cases of sudden
extremities, pre-excelled men's most sapient heads. The Prince thus satisfied,
acquainted the Daulphin with the circumstance of the matter; which nothing
moved his Tygars heart; which the Prince condemning, held it no security to
stay with a Tyrant: and therefore striking sail, in so threatening a tempest,
he took his thankful farewell of him, and all his Knights, and so returned
to Burbon.

Now Sir Paris had by this time, recovered the bounds of Turkey, where fearing
the innate, and inveterated malice of those barbarous Infidels against
Christians. To dispierce that threatening cloud, that might shower down
mischief on his harmless head; He made policy his guide, and craft his
Counselor; And being a great Artist, and well learned in the secrets of
Nature; He cast an Artificial blackness all over him, and transnominated his
name by turning his name backward, he Christened himself Sirap, an Ethiopian
borne.

For who in foreign place, will safely live, and credit win,
Must work with wiles, and not oppose; nor hold their doings sin
Thus with indefatigable pains he travailed, unregarded of all, and not
suspected of any, unto Constantinople; where having knowledge of the Greek
tongue, he coversed with the meanest of estate, the better to preserve his
own estate. And it happened, (and happily happened) that Fortune, Fortune-like
of his foe, became his friend. For walking one day into the fields, accompanied
with none, but with his own troubled thoughts, he encountered by adventure
with the Sultans chief Faulkner, who returning from Hawking, bare on his hand
a goodly fair Faulcon, so dangerously hurt, that there rested no hope of
help. Sirap (for so now must we call him) seeing the Hawke hang her bruised
wings, and all blooded on her fluttered breast, being Artificially cunning, and
naturally affecting the game; pitied the chance, and boldly stepping to him,
asked in Greek, how it happened. The Faulkner near dead, to see his Hawke
almost dead; sadly told him, that flying at the River, his Hawke lying at
height of highest pitch, made so forceable a stouping on the rising Foul, that
in her stonelike fall, she nere gorged her self on a broken bough, that grew
amongst other branches, upon the Grovie bank. Such said Sirap, is the fortune
of the field; but what will you give, if I recover your Hawke; any thing (said
the Faulkner) for that Solimon, the great Sultan, does prize her for her high
flying, before any City in Greece: Then Sirap undertaking it, gathered certain
powerful herbs, of inward, and unknown virtue, and bought other Apothecarie
materials; and so carefully applied his expert skill, that in short time he
healed, and perfected the so endangered Hawke. The Faulkner admiring at his
skill (for ignorance is the mother of admiration) in the joy of his thoughts,
went, and brought his recovered Hawke unto Solimon, and recounted unto him, how
that a stranger, an Ethiopian borne, that called himself Sirap, had effected
that cunning Cure; and that he was a man so exquisite in all proportion, and of
so goodly, and majesticall a presence, that he seemed not only to be of an
Heroical heart, but also promised more then was usually in a man. The Sultan
joyous of his Hawke, and well pleased with his description, held his requisite
cunning in great regard; and his service more necessary then others: And
therefore he instantly sent for him; who no sooner came, but that liking his
person, he graced him with his good countenance, and demanded what he was, and
what occasion brought him into that Region. Sirap, whose Courtly demeanor,
might well warrant his behavior, and in whose face, was stamped the true
Character of honor, with humble boldness told him, that he was of no great
lineage, nor livelihood, yet gentle borne; but so subject to the destinies
displeasure, that not brooking his fatal infelicity, he secretly had left the
utmost South of Aethiopia, adjoining to the Deserts of Libia, his Native soil,
to seek content elsewhere in foreign Nations, And after, said Sirap, I had
long with tedious travail past the hot, and whole Clymate of Affricke, having
no other companinion then my mind, nor no other servant then my tongue: I was
at length by the guide of Fortune, conducted into this part of Greece, where my
thoughts winged with desire, to see the most great, and mightiest Monarch on
the earth, brought me to this your imperial seat. The Sultan pleased, with
his pleasing, and well couched words (grew desirous of his service) and
therefore according to the nature of his pride (appropriating to himself
authority over all) he Imperiously commanded him to attend his person: To
which, though Sirap knew, that denials to such absolute Potentates, were held
for capital offenses: yet he thus reverently and boldly answered. If, said he,
any poor endeavors of mine (most high and mighty Emperor) may be but
pleasing to your Greatness, I shall then think my self most happy, when I
shall find my self able to do you any agreeable service. But if in any wise
your unmatchable Majesty, seek so to tie me to your will, that of necessity I
must follow your fancy: Then must I (not offending your magnificence) deem
both your highest Highness, unjust; and hold your Law, no Law, because
grounded on necessity. The Saltan wondering at his bold and discreet answer,
and liking his noble and generous spirit, highly estimated him, according to
the virtue of his courage; that could; and durst, with such prudent boldness,
and circumspect fear, except against his never controled pleasure: And
therefore allowing his reasons for reason; he freely granted him more then
the full pre-eminence of a free privileged Travailer; and setting greatness
and the law of his will aside; he gently entreated him, but to make some stay
in his Court, and he would mount his fortunes, by his extended favors.

Thus works our Stars; by means, most small.
That things fore-doom'd, by Fate, may fall.
For Sirap, being thus rarely, and royally entreated, and entertained with the
Sultans unknown, and unusual favors and requests; wholly humbled himself at
his command; and said, that albeit, he had vowed continual Pilgrimage to
sundry Regions; yet would he in some sort, yield obedience to his will, and
dispense for a time with his conscience, because he would not oppose, nor
resist the pleasure of his will, nor the command of his potent power. The
Sultan glad of his grant, gave one of his Basshas in charge, that he should be
provided for at his dispences; who presently placed him next to the house,
where the Tartarian Ambassador, but newly arrived, was lodged.

Now amongst the Ambassadors followers, there was one that far exceeded all
the rest, in huge height, incomparable strength, and great proportion, insomuch
that the Turks did with wonder admire his stature, and deemed his Sampson-like
force, beyond the power of men. This grim and insatiating Tartar (who served no
other God, but his will; nor observed no other law, but his lust) being one day
left behind, to manage some affairs in the house, when the rest were gone to
the Court; suddenly, and most rudely seized upon a young Damsel, that as
unfortunately as unadvisedly, was come to see the provision, and manner of
these Strangers. Her (without any show of good entreaty, or kind usage) with a
facile force he carried into a Chamber, and disverginated her; notwithstanding
her shrill cries, that called in many (but too late) to her aid. This vnt^med
beast, or rather infernal devil, finding himself oppressed with multitudes,
grew so enraged, that his wrath had no mean, neither did his interrupted
fury, admit of any consideration, but dreadlesse both of Law and danger, place,
and people: he threw all to the earth, that came near to him, endeavoring
still to retain his prey, which made the outcries of all so great; That Sirap
being in his Chamber, at the noise thereof, rushed in with his peaceable sword,
and finding him carrying the bemoaning Maid, in an unmannerly manner from
them, toward another Chamber, he so powerfully smote him on the face with his
displeased hand, that force, perforce, he was forced to leave his hold, and
betake him to his angry Semitar, with which he furiously assaulted him. But
Sirap (who held it a great fault, not to do a good thing well) readily
returned him unwelcome interest, for his so willing leave. Long did they work
on each other, like tempests on a Ship, and the blood of both, did well show,
that neither of them were well pleased: None durst come near them, till that
Killer Aaga, Captain of the Janissaries, hearing of this tumultuous and
debatefull strife, came in, and stayed the fight.

The Damsels Father, and friends, (standing upon their strength of testimony)
pursued the outrage, by way of complaint against the Tartar, and required of
Solimon the benefit of Law. The Tarter (countenancing himself under the
protection of Potency and Ambassagie) pleaded the privilege of his place, and
said, That he was liable to their ordinances; nor subject to any but to his
own Lord, the Emperor: who in Majesty, might, and merit, far surmounted all
other Potentates of the world, and thereupon offered in open Court Combat,
thundering out defiance against all, that but durst aver the contrary.

Solimon much distasting his ungoverned pride, and worse disiesting his
barbarous outrage, and offensive contempt: did inwardly fret that no one durst
attempt to quench, nor allay the prodigal heat of his foolish fire; and not
knowing how otherwise to correct his insolence, since Kings should ever show
themselves rather just, then great: and the law of Nations (which is the state
of peace, and maintenance of honor) did warrant his trial by Combat; he at
last thus deliberately concluded: That the 20. day following, he should be
ready Armed at all assayes, and mounted like a Knight, to make that good with
his sword, which he so arrogantly, and over-audatiously had delivered with his
tongue. And if there came not any one then to chastise his folly, and correct
him for his brutish, and injurious attempts, that then he should be free from
touch, both of law and life. This being rumoured abroad, came to Siraps ears,
who grieving to loose opportunity, as one that thirsted after occasion, both to
show his courage in honorable revenge, and to do Solimon some commendable
service; though his resolution was a sufficient Armor for the encounter, yet
knowing that naked valor, could promise no success where Armed force did
assail: his greatest fear was, least for want of Armor, and furniture,
others would cut the grass from under his feet, and so deprive him both of
favor and fortune. But this courageous fear, was acquitted by the timorous
fear of all others, that feelingly feared such desperate and deadly attempts,
as promised neither hap, nor hope of good success. At length the day being
come, and all things in order, came Solimon with his Sultannesse, attended with
his Vice-royes, Beglerbegs, and Basshaes in great Royalty, and 2000. Armed men
for his Guard, and in the place of trial assigned, he seated himself and his
Sultanesse upon a glorious Throane within his Imperial Pavillion; great was
the press, and many the people, that waited on the issue hereof: when
suddenly the sound of Trumpet showed the near approach of the Tartar: who (in
honor of his earthly God, the son of the light, the terror of men, and for
the repute of his Country) came with his sword drawn, accompanied with the
Ambassador and all his followers, most richly furnished. The Appellant himself
being mounted on a courageous Horse, his Caparisons, and other his furniture,
all of purple Satin, embroydered with gold all over, with dismembered heads,
arms, and severed legs of slaughtered men, be prinkled all with blood. And
in his Shield he over-gloriously bare his own picture, naked; holding a
Combating Lion, stifled by the throat with his hand, and underneath was
written, WHAT NOT: In this terrifying equipage, he stayed at the Barriers of
the Lysts, until the Officers appointed for that service, demanded what he
was, and wherefore he came; who answered, that he was Turbulent the fierce, the
invincible Tartar, that came to prove by his sword, that he being only
subject to the greatest Monarch on earth (who had no equal) ought not to
undergo the censure of any other inferior power, and thereupon demanded
entrance; which being permitted, he put up his sword, and was conducted to the
upper end of the Lysts, where lighting, he was seated in a rich Chair,
suitable to his Basses, to repose himself in: Near unto which, was pitched a
most stately Tent for the Ambassador, and his Train. Then the Herald was
commanded to summon the Defendant by sound of Trumpet, but no one appeared,
which made Solimon fearful of disgrace. Then he sounded the second time, but
no one presented himself: which made the proud Tartar (in arrogancy of his
redoubted puissance) to stand up, and drawing his terrified sword, he
brandished it over his head, in such tryumphing and daring manner, that the
great Sultan seeing his insulting pride, could scarce contain himself within
himself. Then as the Herald founded his last summons, a lowly Hermit, clad
all in gray, leaning on a staff of Ebony, stayed him with his other hand, and
required, that he might speak with Solimon the Emperor; who being brought
before him, bowed himself thrice before him, and then prayed in zeal of
justice, and for the honor of the Turkish Empire, he might have Horse, and
Armor, to tame that uncivil and vntutored Tartar, whose pride, he said, was
not so high, but that Vengeance did sit above it.

The Sultan glad that any one durst, and would in his honor undertake, so
great and fearful a hazard; commanded that presently he should be withdrawn,
and brought to his Armoury, and there at his choice be Armed, and mounted as
his proper Champion; which was no sooner said, but that the Hermit being
attended on thither, took (upon the view of all) one of the largest, and one
that fitted his own conceit best: wherewith being Armed, and mounted, he
showed himself at the Barriers end of the List, in a bright Azure Armor, like
unto the sky, with a half Moon in the midst, both before, and behind: His
Basses, Caparizons, and other furniture waved like a Sea, full of silver
Fishes, that seemed as he rid, to stir; and play under so bright a Planet. On
his Shield he had a Ship, stayed (in the midst of a Sea) by a little Fish,
called Remora; and his impresse was, Virtue, not force. As thus he stood
looking for entrance, The appointed Officers, demanded what he was, and
wherefore he came, who answered, that he was a Man of peace, a devout Hermit,
and one of the least of the most humblest Servants of Great Soliman; Who for
the love of Honor, and to honor his Lord, came to approove that the Sultan of
Turkey, was a greater and a more Imperial, and a more magnificent Monarch,
then the Tartarian Emperor, and much more renowned in his person; And that
Turbulents shameful, and criminal offense, was punishable (by all National
laws) where the fault was committed; and this he would make good on his body,
and desired to enter the Lysts. Upon this, all the Turks gave a great showt,
and cried God, and Mahomet for the Hermit: And so putting up his Sword, he was
conducted by one of the Basshaes to the other end of the Lysts, where
dismounting himself, he was seated in a rich Chair of State, curiously
wrought with half Moons in silver, and set with precious Stones. During their
small repose, the elected Officers viewed their Arms, and their Armours, to
see whether they were of equal length, and that there were no wrong done to
Chivalry: and then the chief Herald proclaimed, that no one under pain of
death should enter the Lysts, but the Officers appointed to the service, and
that no one should cast any thing into the Lysts, nor use any words, nor sign
to discourage, or encourage either party.

This done, he bade the Combatants to rise, and mount themselves, and at the
sound of Trumpet to begin the assault. At the setting forth it could not be
discerned who was first. The Tartar, bearing his Mast-like Staff over high,
carried away part of the Hermites Plume; But the Hermit (unto whom Judgment
and custom, gave an advantage) bare himself so evenly in his winged Course,
that he hit the Tartar so forceable on the breast, that though the goodness of
his Armor denied entrance, yet did it make him do homage to the strength of
the blow: For Turbulent keeping his seat, was notwithstanding, by the breaking
of all his Girthes, set on the ground, with his Saddle betwixt his legs. This
not only moved great laughter, but stroke all men with such a wonder, that
where before they could not harbor the least hope, now they began to look
after good hap. The Tartar swelling with irefull disdain (like unto the
disturbed Ocean) breathed out direful revenge; and furiously drawing forth
his dreadful Sword, called for him, (who needed no summons at all) threatening
death and destruction, not only to him, but to all others. But the Hermit,
whose undismayed courage, could not be shaken with any boisterous winds; upon
his stopage, turned his Horse, and seeing him on foot, (scorning the
advantage) alighted, and unsheathing his correcting Semitar, advisedly came
toward the Tartar, who rudely saluted him, with so mighty a blow, that
notwithstanding his full ward, with his Shield) he was forced to stagger a
little; whereby he knew the unresistable strength of his Foe, and more warily
stood after, rather upon motion, then warding: Yet did his superlative valor,
equal the others incomparable strength: But the Hermit, in guerdon of
Turbulents cold courtesy, returned him such powerful thanks, as made his
dazeled eyes ready to start out of his disturbed head. This interchange of
puissant strokes (ecchoing like the Ciclopes blows upon their fiery Anviles)
begot such spightfull disdain, and malicious rage in both, that the
tempestuous fury of their stormy blows came like thunder, to the amazement of
the beholders: The great stature, and unresistable strength of the one, showing
both might and courage; and the unmatchable valor, and practive skill of the
other, showing great prowis and judgment. Turbulent, mad with hateful and
angry contempt, that any one should, or could, so stand against him (trusting
to his never failing strength) laid on such load on the magnanimious Hermit,
as all men wondered how he could keep his standing, or standing, durst once
stand to withstand him: But the bold haughty Hermit, whose watchful care,
and used skill, had made him expert in such threatening tempests, gave some way
unto that stormy shower, avoiding the danger, sometimes by motion of his
Body, and sometimes by strong and wary wards; never loosing any advantage to
offend, nor giving ground in his defense.

In the end, finding the Tartars wasting fury to consume it self; In the
abatement thereof, he so redoubled his renewed blows, which like hayle-stones,
strove to overtake each other before they fell, that Turbulent knew not how to
avoid the greatness of the storm. Now was there several Armours broken,
bruised, and mangled in many places, and the blood that issued from them both,
made the dyed Earth a witness of their implacable rage. But the Tartar, that
had lost most blood, finding his strength to abate, united all his forces
together, and smote the Hermit so forcibly on his Burgonet, that
notwithstanding his Shield, which then he cloue asunder, he brought him on his
knees maugre both his ward and his might; but such was his quick delivery,
and invincible courage, that he was no sooner down, then he was up again; and
seeing himself deprived of the best part of his defense, he was so overcome
with scornful anger, that he had been brought so low; that he began to
renew the Fight, more furiously, and with much more puissant and insupportable
blows, then before; and finding (by his euerwatching eye) that the Vambrasse
was broken, and fallen from the Tartars Curatt, and that he was within his
advantage; taking his threatening and wrathful Sword in both his hands, he hit
him so full and so strongly on his disarmed Arm, that he severed it from his
cursed Body, so that Arm, and harmefull sword, fell both to the ground. The
Sultan, and all the rest, beyond all wonder, wondering at the greatness of the
blow, and the continuance of so terrible cumbate, admired who that valiant
Hermit should be, that with such unwearied force, and such approved skill, had
showed such prowess, as the like was never seen.

The loss of the Tartars arm made him curse heaven, and earth, and frothing
at his mouth, like a wild chaffed Bull, he bellowing out wrath, and vengeance,
in such a madding manner, that (being as ignorant of his Fate, as he was
impudently mad in the maintenance of his ignominious wrong) he desperately
run headlong on the Hermit, thinking so to bear him over. But advised
experience, and wary circumspection, which had ever armed the Hermit for all
accidents, and assaults, made him unwilling of such unkind embracement: And
therefore made stopage by a most fortunate thrust, which finding entrance under
his bruised Tases, run upwards, and made quick inquisition after his death.
Thus was the pride of Goliath turned to confusion, and thus fell the redoubted
Tartar, like a great Town upon the earth, to the amazed grief of the
Ambassador, and all his Train; and to the admiring joys of the Sultan and
his Turks. But the Hermit, who ever held, that to destroy mercifully, was to
save; stepped to him, and pulling off his headpiece, with his sword he smit off
his fearful head, and holding it up on high, Cried, God save Solimon, the
invincible Sultan, the mightiest Emperor, and greatest Potentate on earth.

This being done, the Trumpets tryumphantly sounded forth the joy of most
pleasing Victory, and all the people made such rejoicing Cries, that their
applauding shouts pierst the lower region, to witness their glory on the
earth. But silence being made, the heroical victorious Hermit (armed with
glorious conquest) was betwixt two Beglerbegges (the chiefest of the Turkish
Nobility) brought with sounding Trumpets unto the Sultan, who commending his
great strength, his surmounting prowess, and most invincible courage,
commanded him to put off his Helmet, that he might know who had so much
honored him, that according to his great merit, he might deservedly advance
him. To which the humble Hermit answered, that all his Actions did aim at
Honor, not at advancement; and that the favors he had already found and
received of so great a Prince, was all-sufficient in it self, to enable a
weaker arm to perform a greater work; besides, his desire (he said) did
carry him beyond all means, and ability, to do him a more pleasing service;
And therewithal taking of his Helmet, in all humility he bowed his body
(according to the Turkish manner) thrice unto him. But when Solimon saw that he
was Sirap, his new affected and entertained friend, laying aside all state and
regard of greatness, he ran to him, and embracing him, said: How shall the
Turkish Sultan requite the honorable love of so praiseworthy a friend, that
in therenowned hazard of his inualuable life, has both preserved, and
dignified my name, and the fame of my Empire. But more befitting times, shall
show us respectively grateful, and affectionately mindful, of so virtuous a
friend, so famous a Champion, and so glorious an act. In the interim, he
commanded that three of his chief Bashaes should ride before Sirap, and that
the first should carry the Tartars louped arm and sword: the second his
unweldy spear, and massy shield; and the third, his grim and terrible severed
head; and that after should follow the monstrous and headless trunk of that
huge boasting Goliath; after whom should march the disgraced Ambassador, and
all his discontented train: And that Sirap mounted on his Courser, all alone,
with his naked bloudied sword in his hand, like a Conqueror should follow; and
after him, he himself, his Sultanesse, and all his royal Attendants would
ride, and so pass through the City, to his Palace. This he did to honor his
friend; And out of this honor, did Eugenia the Sultanesse more affectionately
look upon the Merit of Sirap. His carriage seemed now more maiesticall; his
color though black, she deemed lovely; and the nobleness of his spirit,
deserved (she thought) the favor of the greatest Empress. This liking begot
longing, and she desired now to enjoy, what she was enjoined not to affect. The
remembrance of her place, and the terror of their law, qualified, but not
quenched her fired fancy; which she seeking to smother in the embers, burst
out after into a greater, and more shameful flame.

But Sirap, during his repose, for the healing of his wounds, entering into
consideration of his cross fortunes, seeing his admired victories applauded
with open joys, honor, and tryumphes; and his dejected and enthralled heart,
still clad in black woe, and accompanied only with secret grief, and
tormenting passions. To feed his distaste of rejoicing, with some sad
conceits. He suitably composed these few following reverst, and returning
verses; which being read either forward or backward, are still the same in
sense both ways; and either way, end in meeter.

Joy, Mirth, Tryumphes; I do defy,
Destroy me Death; feign would I die:
Forlorn am I; Love is exilde,
Scorn smiles thereat; Hope is beguilde:
Men banished bliss, in Woe must dwell,
Then Joy, Mirth, Tryumphes, all farewell.
Thus did he show himself to be ever one, as constant in his woes as he was
unremoveable in his love; And thus ever in his hours of leisure, did either
his tongue complain, or his pen manifest his sorrow. But when loathed time
had healed his honored wounds. The grand Sultan to give his solitariness some
sollace, sent unto him, that the next day he should be in befitting readiness
to attend him to the chase of the wild Boar, in the near adjoining forest;
And commanded one of his Basshaes to see that Sirap should be well mounted, and
furnished accordingly. For still it bare him in mind (seeing the map of
Majesty in his eyes, and finding the virtue of true nobility in his thoughts)
that he was extract from Royal blood; And by this means, he thought he should
(by his observance) make a further trial thereof. The next morning Phoebus had
no sooner rent the sable Clouds, and washed his face with the dew of the
earth, but that the winding of base and bugle horns, summoned the Sultan to
his Silvan sports, and Sirap to his attendance.

And long it was not, but that each one was in full readiness, and being
horsed, rid to the Forest, where separating themselves, they took diverse
ways, the sooner to find their game, but still Sirap attended the Sultan,
whose fortune was to epsy the Boar, whetting of his angry Tushes in the mouth
of his den, as though he had foreseen his pretended pursuit, and meant to
wound his pursuing foes. The Sultan proud of such success, gave spurs to his
flying Horse, and with careless eagerness unlodging the beast, pursued his so
swiftly, that none but Sirap could come near unto him. The Boar seeing
himself pursued, fled by decreed desteny toward the midst of the Desert;
where the Tu^ke fast following, was suddenly seized on by a great, fell, and
hideous Dragon.

Sirap seeing the Sultan so embraced within the murdering arms of death,
(knowing no fear to make a pawse) set spurs to his Horse, and so furiously
run at him with his Boar spear, that he happily wounded him under the left
wing. The fierce Dragon feeling the smart of his hurt, left his unkind hold,
and smote with his wings so violently at Sirap, that he brake his spear all to
pieces. Then drew Sirap his Semitar, which the Sultan had that morning given
him, and freshly assaulted that dreadful Beast with such advised heedfulnesse,
that hardly could that enraged Monster fasten on him; so quick in agility, so
ready in dexterity, and so watchful he was at all times. But in the end he
smote Sirap so forceable with his Serpentine tail, that maugre all his might
and strength, he was constrained to fall on the ground: when the wrathful
Dragon advancing his threatening wings, and opening his infernal mouth, made
offer as she would devour him at once. But Sirap seeing the danger, carried so
vigilant an eye, and so ready a hand, that the Dragon no sooner stooped to
seize on him, but that, as he lay upright on the ground, he so strongly
thrust his well steeled Semitar into his almost unpenitrable breast, that
piercing his heart, he suddenly prevented death by death. Now the frighted
Sultan, who only was but pinched a little with his claws; was no sooner free
from that murdering Beast, but that creeping amazedly into a thick bushy
Grove, he fearfully hid himself there, scarce daring to lend his eyes, to
behold that uncouth and perilous Combat. But when he saw Sirap on his feet,
striking off that ghastly and monstrous head; and eliuating it on the point of
his Semitar, and turning himself, called for his Lord. Then, then, came he
forth in the admiration of his thoughts; and kneeling down, first gave thanks
to Mahomet, and then to him, for his so redeemed and preserved life. But Sirap
yielding the heavens only thanks, bad him ascribe the only glory thereof to
God, and not to him a sinful man, or to any other surmized power; since none
but God had armed his humble heart with undaunted courage; and none but God
could have given his weak hand such a happy Conquest. As this they sacrificed
their thanks. One of the Basshaes, that had lost himself in the persuit, came
straying in by chance, unto whom the Sultan recounted all the accident: with
such admiring wonder of Siraps worthy valor, that both the Sultan, and his
Bassha, esteemed him as another Mahomet. In this height of Solimons joy for his
secured life; he commanded the Bassha himself to carry the Dragons head
before Sirap into the City, and that his man should poast before to publish
that thrice renowned deed, that the Citizens might triumph in their Lords
escape, and honor Sirap for his purchased life. And no sooner it was revealed,
but that the Citizens first amazed with wonder, and after ravished with joy,
wholly went to meet their earthly God; whom once reverenced, they guarded to
the City gate; where the Caliphe (the Primate of their superstition) to
celebrate the happiness of Solimons preservation, accompanied with all the
order of their ceremonious Priests, received him, and brought him after their
Heretical, or rather Heathenish manner to his Palace. The next day he caused
the Dragons head to be set on his Palace gate, that all men beholding it,
might know their Lords danger, and Siraps valor. Then he assembled all his
Basshaes, and in their presence would have created him one of his Visiers;
which with all thankful humility he reverently refused, as not capable yet
of that dignity, and therefore humbly requested his greatness, that he would
for a time pardon his denial, until the infancy of his weak merit, were
grown stronger in better deserts, which well pleased Solimon, because Solimon
would not displease Sirap. Then began fie to feast, and to make tryumphes in
his Court. Where Sirap honored knighthood in those Iusts, and graced those
Iusts in honor of the Sultan. Such was his Knightly carriage, such his
unresistable courage; so well could he manage his furious Steed, and so
redoubted was he in all his encounters, that all men rather deemed him the God
of Arms, then a man in Arms. For there was neither Turk, nor Sarazen, that
could withstand his puissant force: nor was there any dismounted, that held
himself dishonored. So highly did they estimate his unequalled valor, that
they held his power rather divine then humane. As for the vulgar sort they
flocked about to see him, with such applauding showtes, as though Mars had left
his heavenly Sphere, and descended amongst them, to sport himself on earth.

These Heroical deeds of famous Chivalry, begot admiration in all, but
brought forth such unresistable affectio nin the faultfull Sultanesse, that
what before she held deadly, now she deemed it not to be venial: Lascivious
love dissolved the bonds of all respects, and her mind being set on desire,
nothing could limit her adventures. For though Just carry ruin behind her,
yet must the Queen of love enjoy the God of War: yea, though Vulcan frame
and lay his subtle nets for their discovery. How to make Argoes sleep was all
her unquiet care; the eyes of the Eunuchs must be made blind, either with
gold or guile; which she put in practice, by calling these watching
Attendants, or rather jealous sailors unto her; unto whom she told, that the
day following, Hirena an other of the Sultans Wives, had secretly appointed a
Gretian Hero to come to solace with her; for as that day, the Sultan himself,
his Visiers, Basshaes, and Martial Commanders, would sit in the Divano, there
to consult and conclude, for the invading of Christendom; And if they would
stand as faithful Sentinels in such a place as she would covertly appoint them
to, and carefully make their prying eyes full witnesses of her sportfull
abuses, that then she would guild their labors over with Gold, enrich their
estates, and make them more pleasing in the Sultans eyes, for that regardfull
service, The Eunuchs, whose offices stood upon such employments, embraced the
offer, and promised their best endeavors.

The Sultanesse proudly glad, that she should by this deceitful means, be
freed from these preventing and interrupting Spirits, made now no question of
opportunity, and therefore no doubt of the fruition of her desire; To hasten
which, she called unto her Mentiga, one of her attendants, whom she before had
fashioned to her purpose, and gave her in secret charge, that she should that
evening following, disguise her self in Man's apparel, and go to the
victorious Ethiopian, and warily deliver him that Letter, and crave his
answer. Glad was Mentiga of this employment, it fitted her nature well, and
hope of reward gave speed to her desires, to do her Mistress some pleasing
service. The evening being come, this mindful Mentiga (sins packhorse) that
had tired many a Man, now attired her self like a Man; and going, found Sirap
alone in his Chamber; unto whom, humbling her self, she delivered her carnal
Letter, which thus pleaded in her Mistrisses behalf.

EVgenia, the Greatest of Women, well greeteth Sirap, the Worthiest of Men:
That I write to thee may be thy glory; and that I love thee, let it be thy
happiness: If thou have wit to know Love, J have beauty to moove Love; and if
thou have merit to win Love, J have a body to reward Love: We both were bred in
the intrailes of the flesh, and therefore subject to the desires of the flesh.
Let Nature then excuse my blushing show of immodestie herein, who has not left
our affections within our own powers, but has framed our inherent and
iuevitable fancies, as facile to be seduced by love, as she has made us by
kind, too kind to resistt Love. The Sultan grows old, and Love deckes not
her self with fading flowers, nor can the withered Tree shade beauty from the
burning Sun. Love without fruit is a Picture without a Face; and Venus is
best pleased when she is feelingly enfolded within Mars his arms. If then thou will live like the King of Bees, seek honey at my Hive, and thou shall suck
the breasts of full delight, and gage the vessel, when this Earthly God shall
drink the Lee. It shall suffice Soliman, that the Sea is sufficient for more
Fishes then one; and it may proudly content thee, that opportunity waits on
thy best fortunes, for to morrowwill the Sultan sit in the Divano, and I have
taken order for my Attendants: Then cloth thy self in some Religious habit
(for they may ever do the most wrong, of whom least is looked for,) and come
where Pleasure attends thee, and where Treasure shall enrich thee, and so
farewell.

EVGENIA.


Sirap having read this with amazement, stood abashed, not that overpowerfull
Love had given her such bold countenance; but that licentious lust, had armed
her with such impudency. He now found that the dry Earth, the Grave, and a
wicked Woman, were three unsatiable things: But her alluring follies could not
win him, nor her atractive offers waine him from the constant resolve of his
virtuous dispose; For though Fortunes gates were set wide open for him to
enter, yet he well knew, that as much would hurt the ill that he should find, as
the good that he should loose: Though Laurel (he said) be of high esteem, yet
who so tastes it shall find it bitter, Vices may vanish, but their effects
can not perish; and therefore he chose rather with the Be, to extract Honey
from every weed, then with the Spider to gather poison of the fairest flower.
Viennas love was a rich rock of defense against all Siren songs, nor would the
binding benefits he had received of the Sultan suffer him to blast his
benefactors Vine, nor make him mud the fountain that gave him drink:
Aperpetuall repenting sorrow, he could not buy, for so golden and glorious
seeming a solace: For what profits it to touch, nay have the Crown? and
after to be smitten down with the Scepter. Dignities agravate the offense
against him, that is bound not to offend; and such pleasures ever contaminate
those that embrace them. False disloyalty could not corrupt him nor could
poverty infect him. As these considerations made him resolute in the refusal
so doubtful, fear made him careful, least his denial should beget disdain,
and disdain bring forth direful revenge; for unjust Women, do never apease
their wrathful ires against just Men. To sail betwixt these threatening
Gulphes, was dangerous, yet like a wise Pilate, he turned himself to the
stearne of his best providencie; and taking Pen and Ink, he no less subtilely
then suddenly, writ her such an answer, as (being left of purpose unpointed)
might sensibly be read, either to suit her desire, or to excuse his denial.
This Letter he sealed, and delivered it to the Protean Messenger, with excuse
of the necessity of his Religious observation, to celebrate his Nativity the
next day, and that he would couetously attend, and joyfully embrace the benefit
of the next Tide. By this coulorable delay, he freed himself from all hazard,
and by winning of time, he hoped to avoyde all dangers. But Eugenia receiving
the Letter, read it as follows.

THe awe of Majesty, and bond of oblieging honesty J regard, not the
consideration of so glorious Love, shall make me yours; the greatness of your
merit J acknowledge, and will affect as I ought; respectively I honor the
estimate of your Place, and Greatness; your Love J will affectionately embrace
never; Eugenia for me, shall fail of her desire, and Sirap will ever live
freely; yours in all service,

Sirap.


Disdain of contempt, and rancorous despite for refused favors, would scarce
let her read out the last word, but that throwing it away in a most distasteful
rage, she vowed that his life should answer the disgrace: which Mentiga
hearing, grieved that her labors had brought forth no better fruit, and
finding her Paradiz'd hopes cast down, she in a most scornful manner took
up the Letter, and happily read it the other contrary way, and therewithal
humbling her self, besought her Majesty to take a better view thereof, and not
to contemn him, that gave her such ample and pleasing content. Content, nay
contempt said Engneia, thou would say. Think thou that I cannot see,
read, nor understand what he has done? what madness moves thee to persuade
me to unpossibilities. Thy idle words cannot make my constant eye, a Traitor
to my perfect judgment. See here witless woman, that have either lost thy
sight, or thy senses. Read, read, and let every word win thy assistance to
my just, and cruel revenge. It shall (most potent Empress) answered Mentigae,
so that in your own milder nature, and more temperate dispose, you will but
vouchsafe to see with patience, what I shall most truly and directly read. I
will, said Eugenia on that condition, and thereupon Mentiga read the same
again, and as she read it, she poynted it with her finger, as follows now
poynted.

THe awe of Majesty, and bond of oblieging honesty J regard not, the
consideration of so glorious love shall make me yours; the greatness of your
merit J acknowledge, and will affect as I ought respectively; J honor the
estimate of your place, and greatness; Your love J will affectionately
embrace; never Eugenia, for me, shall fail of her desire; and Sirap will ever
live freely yours, in all service.

SIRAP.


Now most meritorious Lady (said Mentiga) and worthiest of Princes, what
mislike can you gather from so full a consent of Love? Or what could you expect
more from him, then to be wholly yours? with adventure of life he offers
love, and not regarding danger, he devotes himself to your pleasure. O happy
Lady, Sovereign Queen of Fortune, and sole commander of contentment; that out
of your own fancy can triumph over others affections, and at your own
pleasure enjoy your desires with wished delights. Eugenia amazed, and
confounded with wonder, knew not what to say, or think of herself: Sure she
was that she read it directly otherwise, and as assuredly she found it now to
be otherwise. In this silent confused study, she punished all her thoughts
with variety of thinking, and stood like a fair liuelesse Picture, made to
life; but wanting life; until fatal Mentiga awaked her wandering spirits, and
thus merrily cheered her. Nay, most mighty Empress (she said) confess your
error, and your pardon shall be granted: here is nothing metamorphozed;
only you may see, that there is nothing well done, that is ill construed. Your
fear to loose what you wished to have, made you to think as you doubted;
believe what you feared; and read as you deemed. But that Cloud being
dispierced, look now with comfort upon the glory of the Sun, and with joy
receive the benefit of his sweet influence; and therewithal she read, and
re-reade it, with such plain and direct pointing of it, that the Sultanesse
(being easily made apt to embrace what she desired) acknowledged her
oversight, and never after sought to read it, in any other manner, or to any
other sense. To ratify which, Mentiga told her, that he sorrowfully craved
pardon for his next days attendance. For that, it being his Birth day, he was
tied both by his Countries custom, and by his obliged observance, religiously
to celebrate it, in a sacred sort, according to their wonted and hallowed
manner. This was somewhat cordial unto her wounded heart, though not so
comfortable as she desired. And yet it did (because it must) satisfy for the
time: which time, was all, surprised Sirap sought to gain: For in the delay of
days, he hoped to prevent that threatening evil, which so dangerously (like a
prodigious, though bright Commet) proclaimed, and prognosticated his
destruction. In the mean time, he left the pleasing and entising sports of the
Court (for pleasures are no pastimes for malecontented and disconsolated men)
and purposely walked all alone into the fields (the freer to enjoy his own
thoughts;) where sudenly making a stand, in his melancholy pause, he writ in
the sand with the point of his sword, as follows.

My foes J foil; my woes do conquer me,
Fancy I fly; yet love, and loved would be:
Thus Sirap joys, and thus does Paris mourn,
Jn Greece; graced, and admired; in France forlorn.
No sooner had he writ the last Letter, but with his discontented foot, he
buried them all in their own Sepulchers, and smoothing the place again,
stamped out this new inscription.

No eye shall see, what sands would tell,
No winds shall blab, where I do dwell.
But then calling to remembrance his enthralled Lady, lying hopeless,
hapless, and heartlesse; in his loss, in her love, and in her self. And
finding himself exiled from Prince, Parents, and possessions, wandering like a
fugitive, from foreign places, to places still unknown. Then, then, drowning
the late flowing stream of his gotten glory, in the full Sea of his preter
hard haps; he began thus to ease his oppressing grief, by pleading, and
publishing to the winds his case, and cause of grievous care.

O false Fortune (said he) constant only in inconstancy, how have thou made me
a mirror of thy many mutabilities.

First, thou flatteredst my clyming thoughts with imperial conceits, and
promised success to my aspiring hopes; and then, even then, thou punishest my
desires with distrusting favors. After thou did erect rich and glorious
Trophies, for my renowned victories; and in thy greatest grace, disgraced my
fortunes, and ecclipsed my honor, with most obscure and clouded Conquests.
Then in thy fraudulent smiles, thou winged my hope with beauties consent, and
made me fly in the heaven of my blisfull contentment. But after (like a
cruel Tyrant) thou thrust my heart out of Paradise, and like a Thief, robbed
my desires of his purchased prey. And now rather to show thy staylesse state,
then to salve any wound thou gave; thou guirdest me with pleasing glory, and
unaffected favors in Greece, and feedest my mated mind with unseasonable
joys; when alas my excruciated thoughts cannot but live, as strangers in
foreign delights. O sweet Vienna, in thee only have I lost the beauty of the
World, the pride of all joys, the sweetest fruit of best content, and the
highest mark of true loves ambition: And for thee only, all these
remonstrances of love, joy, mirth, solace, and tryumphes; seem unto me, but as
the rich spoils of a vanquished Kingdom, in the eye of a Captive Prince;
which as they are, but as vnbreadings of his loss; so are these, but as sharp
whetstones to my continuated sorrows.

O how these Barbarian, and Turkish tunes of comfort, sound in my ears, like
che Israelites bemoaning Music, upon the Babylonian banks: And how the
Sultan, and his Empresses affording graces, seem unto me, but as the
glistering sparks of a broken Diamond, and the pictures of dead and decayed
beauties; fair signs, not salves, of my lost felicity; and true memorials,
not medicines, of my purchased calamity. O Vienna, Vienna, as thou art the food
of my thoughts, the relief of my wishes, and the only life, and repasse of
all my desires, so is thy love to me a continual hunger; and thy absence an
extreme famine. Then pardon my enforced flight in my stormy fury, driven
thereunto by my angry Fates; and let my faith live still in thy fancy, which is
not to be controlled by any fortune. But alas, thou live thy self, a Captive
Princess to thy will; and a most desolate prisoner to thy abused constancy. O
cruel Daulphin, Tigar-hearted Father, and most unnatural, and unrelenting
Parent; the smallest drops will soften the hardest stones, but Natures greatest
tears, cannot supple thy stony heart: Thy Justice without pity, is as
cruel; as Pity without Justice is foolish. If wrath were not by mercy to be
appeased, no flesh should be saved. O would, and thus as he would have floated
further in the Sea of his sorrow, he was interrupted, and driven out of his
Saturnall humor, by a certain Messenger of worth, that the Turk had sent to
seek him, with whom he returned shadowing his grief, with the borrowed vale
of seeming pleasant; and arming his patience, with noble resolution, to give
way to all occurrents, and to withstand all sinister accidents. No sooner was
he come into the Sultans sight, but that he cheerfully called him, and briefly
told him, that he meant to invade Christendom: And that for his approoved
prowis, and for the love he bare him, he meant to grace him with the conducting
of his Army, and make him General over all his forces. This said he, is our
will, and this your charge: Then see that your performance answer our
expectation, and that our love be guerdoned with your victories. Sirap wounded
with these words, knew not how to lay a plaster on this sore, yet resolved in
his Countries good, he humbly prostrating himself, yielded all reverend
thanks, for such his great esteem and graceful respect. But such (said he,
pardon me, most victorious and most mightiest, of most mightiest Princes) is my
unpractived knowledge, in Marshalling of Troops, and ranging of Battles, that
I should rather eclipse the feared honor of your name, by my overthrow; then
eternize your gotten fame by my Conquests. Besides know most great Commander,
that though I be a mortal enemy to the Cross of Christ, and an inherent foe
to all Christians; yet for some private causes (best known to my self) I
vowed long since never to tread on Christian ground, nor come where any worship
that Messiah for their God. Then let (I humbly entreat your Imperial Majesty)
some other in worth, more worthier; supply my defects in their better deserts,
and bury not your living renown, in my so probable ignorance, and
unexperienced discipline.

The Sultan weying the danger of an unpractised General, allowed the rather
his devout objections; and considering the religiousnesse of his vows, (though
he held it superstitious in it self) yet would he not violate his consecrated
promise; but yielding to his request, he made Mustapha, Bassha, his General;
and the preparation for him was so great, that the bruit thereof piercing the
Western Clyme, came to the knowledge of the French King: who as the greatest
Christian Prince, assembled his wisest Councillors, and noble Peers, praying
also in aid of all his Allies, and Princely Confederates about him, to
confer, and conclude somewhat, for the honor and preservation of
Christendom: Amongst whom, the Daulphin of Viennois was there, as the sole
Solon, and only wisest (though too severe a Cato) of his Country. But such was
his over-wayning conceit, such the elevation of his high stirring spirit, and
such his proud estimation of his allowed wisdom; that halled on (I know not
by what destiny) he voluntary offered, secretly, and Pilgrime-like to go to
Constantinople, there to espy, and learn, the strength, intention, course and
preparation then intended, meant, and made for Christendom. This being
applauded by the whole assembly, so tickled the flattering humor of his vain
glory (the eclipse of his mature wisdom) that poisoned with their praises;
he failed to look into the true consideration of so doubtful, and threatening
an enterprise. Pride made him forget both his place, and his years; and Glory
would not permit him, neither to take counsel of Time; nor make a provident
delay; which well shows, that they that are transported with their own
desires, have no true scope of judgment left them, to look with perfect eyes
into their designs; otherwise actions so uncertain, had been better not
undertaken, then unfortunately hazarded: But he ever hastes to repent, that
rashly enterpriseth: He was most resolute in his determination, nothing could
dismay him, nor no Man could dissuade him; doubt he held to be the bane of all
hopeful endeavors, and if his fate were certain, he said, it would profit
him little to take heed; and if uncertain, it would be more then mere
foolishness, to fear what he was ignorant of would happen.

In this resolute resolve, he called for the Lord Vran Esperance, (a Man, whose
care and providence, was the life of that State,) unto his wisdom and trust,
did he leave the whole government of his Principality, till his return;
commanding him upon his allegiance, to marshall, and manage the whole State, as
best should stand with Justice, Law, and equity; and that he would neither in
pity, duty, nor favor (such was his perseverant rigor) release, comfort,
nor give countenance to the Princess Vienna, otherwise then was by him already
censured, allowed, and accustomed: That her obstinate and degenerate
disobedience (she being a Traitor to true Generation) might eternize his
unpartiall Justice, make her miserable, in being an example to others, and that
his Title and right, might in his absence be the better secured by her
imprisonment. And so taking his leave, he privately departed, accompanied with
none but with Mal Fiance, his affected and learned Servant.

After their Land travel, they Shipped themselves, and lanched into the Ocean;
where after some days sailing, they were by force of wrathful and sinister
winds (by the command of Neptune) driven into the Egyptian Sea, and so cast on
the Bay of Alexandria, where he had not rested full three days, but that a
subtle Mercurian, a Merchant of Babylon, that then lay in Traffic there,
observing more heedfully, the eminent Majesty, and uncontrolled countenance of
the Daulphin, supposed thereby, that he was of no mean Estate. His Complexion
and attire made him a Christian; and his commanding Eyes (the true image of the
mind) showed him to be of an high Spirit.

This Linx, this Blood-hound to mischief, hunted after opportunity, to resolve
this doubt, and by fortune, encountered with Mal Fiance in the Marketplace,
whither the Daulphin his Lord had sent him to buy some Necessaries; Unto whom
in Latin (as the most general Tongue, best known to all) the politic
Merchant gave many kind salutes, offering him secretly, for the love he bare
to Christ, and Christians, all the best offices he might perform, wishing
withal, (to gain the more credit) not to make himself known in so dangerous
and impious a Place. Mal Fiance (being better Learned then Traveled) finding
himself so kindly entreated by a Stranger, returned thanks, and joyfully
embrast his courtesy. The Merchant glad that he understood him, requested his
acceptance of a cup of their Country Wine, which Mal Fiance (as one proud of
such unexpected friendship in so strange a place, and that he had met with one
of knowledge to confer withal,) willingly assented unto.

The Merchant, having waded thus far into the depth of his awaked intention,
thought good to sound the Foord at full by undermining their proiects: And
therefore in the courtesy of their Bachonizing Cups, he gave him some few
pieces of Gold, wishing him to make his wants known, with the distress of his
Companion, that he might privately relieve them, and secretly give them comfort
and directions for their more security. This false fire (the seeming show of
good regard) burnt up all Mal Fiances fear of distrust; the strength of hot
Wines, consumed all due consideration, and the joy he took in finding so good
a Christian amongst unbeleeving Infidels, made him unadvisedly tell the
Merchant who he was, whom he served, and where his Lord the Prince was This
Machivelian Merchant, being now fully informed of what he desired, the better
to mature his ill design, spoke to the Master of the House in the Slavonian
Tongue, (a Language much used amongst the Turks) that he should stay that
Stranger, until his return from the Sanzake, the Turks Governor of
Alexandria, which he did, to no less admiration, then dismay of confounded
Mal Fiance: For now too late he found, that Crystal is like a
pretious-stone, till it come to hamering; that his betraying tongue was guilty
of his own evil, and that in the least danger, is ever some eminent peril.
But this seducing Merchant (the Son of Deceit, borne of Hate, fed with
mischief, and maintained with others losses) being now armed with all the
apparances of Truth, that might fit and further his purpose, went instantly to
the dreadlesse Daulphin, and in his corrupt Latin (suitable to his ulcerated
heart) he thus greeted him.

THE Savior of the Faithful, the comfortable Son of the most Righteous,
all-Seeing, and Everliving GOD, make your Excellency most happy in all your
intendments, and guard your Person from the knowledge and malice of cruel
Miscreants. To testify my Faith by my Works, and to preserve the living
Plants of Christ's Vineyard, from the bloody hands of the Destroyer. I am come,
most noble Prince, to save thy thrice worthy Christian life, from the tyranny
of murdering Infidels: In assurance whereof, let this suffice, that your
Attendant Mal Fiance is apprehended, and that for fear, he has confessed that
you are a French Prince, and Daulphin of Viennois; and that as a wily Ulysses,
you are selected, and come to pry into the Turkish State, and to discover their
Projects; which being made known to the Sanzake, your Highness shall be sent
a Prisoner to Constantinople, where that cursed sinful Sultan will make you
dye a most cruel death. To prevent which, I have posted unto you, and will for
our Savior sake, convey you from his slavish and barbarous cruelty. For know,
most gracious Prince, that in heart I am a real Christian, though in show a
Mahometitian, and have given addition of life to many, by private intelligence,
secret relief, speedy prevention, and by close protection, and unknown
transporting them to their native homes: And this, and all this, I do in some
satisfaction for my Sins, and to save my Soul, for which the Lord of Life
lost his dearest Life. This loathed Habit of mine, gives me safety, and
warrants my vowed endeavors for Christian supports: Unto which saving service,
I have dedicated both the length of my days, and the fullness of my means.
Nor do I leave Goshen to dwell in the Tents of Kedar; Nor desire I with Lot to
stay in Sodom, nor would I for my Possessions here, establish my inheritance
(with the Children of Ruben) in the Land of Giliad; But I live in Alexandria,
for performance of my Sacred Vows, and to preserve the Flock of Christ, from
these Band-dogges of Satan, that otherwise would be devoured by them. And
therefore if you love this your life, go with me, and pass over the Foord now
the waters are low, least by your dangerous delay, you be destroyed in the
Flood: And to prevent the instant search, I will bring you out of the Lions
den, and free you from the snare of the Hunter. Fraud you know, goes beyond
Force, and prevention helps, what repentance can not redress. I will not use
many words, (Protestation is the Mother of Jealousy,) but when time shall
promise better security, I will at my own charge convey you to France. In the
mean time, you shall want nothing, that my Money can procure, or my Labors
obtain.

Thus did this subtle Sinon (who had the voice of Jacob, but the hands of
Esau) guild over his poisoned Pills, and weave the Web of the Daulphins woe;
who finding cause of fear, in that he was so apparently known, did willingly
feed on Poison, and rashly commend his welfare, to his betraying trust;
praising God, that he had sent him such a Shield of defense, and had so
preserved him from the terror of shameful death: But this comfort in danger,
was but like the Honey that Sampson found in the Lions Jaws, or like Lightning
in a foggie night: Time would not permit neither of better consideration, nor
of further complement. The perfideous Merchants fear (for still he seemed
fearfully to fear) haled him away to his Chamber, where he closely kept him
with respect, until the next day; against which time he had provided two
swift Dromidaries well furnished, to carry them to Babylon, there to make
present of so Great and strange a Prince, unto the Sultan his King, promising
himself, either a great Share in his Ransom, or no small Reward for his so
worthy a Prize. The long travail of the Daulphin, made him give way to all
suspicious thoughts: His journies were greater then stood with ease or liking;
Yet what he could not avoid, he learned to bear; necessity enforced him a
constant patience. But being come to Babylon, he was presented unto the Sultan,
and like a Captive (in triumph) he was led through the City to Prison. The
dejected Daulphin (whose French Fortunes, was but erst the Ministers of his
will) was now so controled, and deprived of all Dignity, that hopeless of his
life, he had no other comfort, then to be void of all comfort: Sometimes he
would envey against the detestable treachery of his deceitful Servant, and
condemn his own credulity, in believing an Unbeliever. Then would he curse
his over-glorious desire of Popularity, (the ground of his grief) in seeking
applause with danger, and hazarding his Person, to give liking to others. But
after, when humble misery had appeased his discontented thoughts, he then cast
off his Adders-skinne; and soft Pity did enter in at an Iron gate; and finding
then his own cruel tyranny, in another long digested misery, he let fall
some relenting tears, and passionately he thus bewailed his Daughters
endurance, in his own thraldom.

Ah poor Vienna, too poor for Vienna: Rich art thou in Feature, but more then
poor by thy Father. Nature has honored thee in thy Birth, Beauty has
eternized thee in thy Person, and Virtue has renowned thee in thy Life. Only
I, yea I only, thy hapless Sire, have made thee unfortunate, to be the more
unfortunate my self: The rigor of my Injustice, is in true Justice, now
punished in my self with rigor; and the remembrance of thy long injurious
endured miseries, is as a living hell to my dying soul. O that thy sorrows
(my thoughts tormentors) might end with my life: or that thy life (my lives
honor) might be preserved by my death; so should I dye more contented, and
thou live better regarded and comforted. But alas thou untimely dies, to live
in thy renown; and I shamefully live, to dye in my reproach. O cruel Father,
unhappy Daulphin: O forlorn Vienna, but most distressed Daughter. The Heathens
makes my death their Heaven, and my nearest friends accounts my life their
hell. The earth now disdaines to bear me, and yet the heavens deny to receive
me. Men scorns me in my fall, and the Gods refuse me in my sin: So shall I
dye, disdayned of most, bewailed of none, and unregarded of all. Thus did
misery, and sorrow (the kind sisters of mercy, and true wakers of
compassion) extract tears, and sighs from stony cruelty; as strokes do
force fire out of hardest flints.

But leaving him to his more deserved dolours; Let us return to the great
Sultan of Turkey, who hearing of the Daulphins apprehension, and that he was a
prisoner in Babylon; wrote instantly to the Sultan, that in no wise he should
release him: In the interim, he ioying wondered, and wondering enjoined, that
Boonfires, Feasts, and Tryumphes, should be made throughout the City. In such
high account, and fearful regard, did they hold him for his judicious
discipline, practive policies, turbulent spirit, Martial provocation,
approoved directions, and rare stratagems, that now taken, they held (in this
presage) the Conquest certain. But Sirap understanding the cause of these
rejoycings, was astonished at the news. Report could not make him believe,
what reason showed was false. His greatness he thought denied all private
exploytes, and his years gainsaid such tedious travail. The places were too
far remote; and there was no combination of Christian Princes, to undertake a
general War. Traffic stood not with his dignity, and pleasure could not
draw his age to peril. His command at home, would not suffer him to go from
home: Nor durst he trust the faith of a Subject, nor the strength of his foes:
He had no son, and therefore more subject to his neighbor invasions. He was
wise, and more feared then beloved; And therefore he had cause to fear many,
whom many did fear. These, and other reasons persuaded him to the falsity
thereof.

But the Sultan discoursing of the truth, and the manner thereof, wounded him
with wonder, and made belief subscribe to his relation. Now grief arrested
his loyal heart, and made his dutiful regard, a prisoner to his pensive
thoughts. His forsaken Country, was now forsaken, and made a prey for the
avaritious forraigner. His distressed Lady destitute of his help, when she had
most need of his aid. This was his greatest grief, and this commanded his
return: But judgment told him, that her right failed, while the Daulphin
lived, that the Nature of Justice was to render to every one his own, and that
he was bound for Viennas sake, and as a subject, to industriate himself, for
his delivery: And though his exile awaked Revenge, yet Charity, he knew,
required forgetfulness of evil deeds. His Countries hazard, he deemed less
then his Lords loss. The miscarying of the one, might be helped by the
recoverie of the other: but the destruction of the Prince would beget both
foreign and intestive broils. In this persuasion he secretly vowed his best
endeavors for his infranchisement; and secretly smothered his sorrow, never
taking notice of the accident, nor making enquiry after further occurrants. In
the expiration of few days, being in the Court he found the Sultan alone, in
the mildness of his unusual mood, both pleasing and pleasant: In that happy
hour, he took opportunity by the forepart, and (imprisoning his worthy
resolution within the Closet of his secret thoughts) he in all subjected
humbleness, requested his favorable consent, for the accomplishment of his
obliging vow, that tied his engaged soul, amongst other Cities of famous
name, to see Babylon, both for the antiquity and worthiness of the same: And
that he would be pleased to grant him his Imperial warrant under his Silver
Seal, for his better security in travail; and further grace him, with his
commendatory Letter to the Sultan; that he might find favor in his sight, and
respect with his Highness. The Sultan unwilling to leave him; in that he both
loved him affectionately, and intended to make a profitable use of his great,
and unequalled valor, persuaded him to stay still with him, and he should
command in Turkey, dwell in his grace, and live in height of honor. But Sirap
pleading necessity to go promised speedy return; and that in lieu of his
favors, he would bestow all his remaining days in his service. This pleased
the Turk so well, that he yielded to his request, and to his encouragement for
his back repair: He gave him Princely Robes (as ornaments of honor) to
countenance him; rich Jewels to show his dignity; and great treasure to defray
his answerable dispense. He furnished him with Attendants, especially with one
of knowledge in the Chaldean tongue, to be his Interpreter. He also writ unto
the Sultan, to receive him, as one most complete in all worth, worthy all
honor, honored by Solimon the great, his especial favorite, and the God of
Wars chiefest Champion; and therefore he entreated him to receive him with
all Royal regard, and to give him what contentment he might; and the rather,
in that he purposely came to see his magnificency, and the state both of his
Court, and City. This no little availed Sirap, in his intendments, and these
Princely favors, and furthering means, made him no less joyful for his
proud hopes; then most humbly thankful for the Sultans so gracious a respect.
And so taking a submissive leave for that time; He would needs for his pleasure
go to Pera, a City distant but a mile from Constantinople: And as he crossed
Thracius Bosphorus, (a water that only devideth the two Cities:) he fortunately
espied amongst the Gally-slaves that rowed him a Frenchman, no otherwise known
to him, then the cloth to the List: For though seven years slavish Captivity
had made him a Grecian in his tongue; and dyed his sunne-burnt skin more
blacker, then his Native hue; yet did his making, and manner of his speech,
proclaim him a French man. Of him in Greek he demanded, what was his name,
and Nation: who answered; France is my Country; Bonfoy my name, which pleased
him well. Then (without discovering himself, or taking further knowledge of
him) he asked, Whether he would for his liberty, truly, and faithfully
serve, and follow him, and his fortunes: and he would after sometime, send him
into his own Country, wheresoever it was. Bonfoy to gain that happy freedom,
and to be freed from that miserable and base slavery; swore by the son of
God, who was made man, that men might be made the sons of God; that he would
truly, and faithfully (during his pleasure) tie himself, and all his
endeavors, to his command. Whereupon Sirap begged him on the Captain, that
durst not deny him any thing, and ever after most kindly used him, and loved
him, because he would be, not only served, but beloved of him: That forth of
that love, he might the better trust him, and be the better interest in him.
For where love has supremacy, there all affections attend on it, and all other
passions are overswayed by it.

But now the sensual Sultanesse hearing of Siraps hasty provision for his
sudden departure to Babylon, grew more then impatient in her discontented
fears; and beyond all consideration of her state, deplored the hardness of
her hap. Her lustful hopes were now wounded in the expectation of her
lascivious desires, and unbounded love so oppressed her unchaste thoughts, that
finding her infected affection frustrated of conceived joys, she fainted under
the burden of her unexpected woes. In this sad alteration she threw her self
on the humble floare, where her dumb sorrows uttered naught but bemoaning
tears, and complaining sighs: Which Mentiga ruefully beholding, and well
waying that this unwelcome event would deprive her of enriching favors, and of
promised preferments, she summoned her wits together, and set them all on the
rack of Invention, to find out means of some redress. At last, after a sad
and serious pause, she said; Take comfort most mighty Empress, and my most
gracious Sovereign, let this sudden lightning dye in his abortive birth, and
listen to your most submissive Handmayd, who desires no longer life, then she
may do your Highness acceptable service. Your Knight is no doubt, enforced
(by the Sultans employment) to this unliked journey, and your remembrance will
not only be a plea for his dispatch; but his controling affection will also
give speed to his return. In the mean time, I will undertake to bring him
this night to your bed, where you may make your desired delights, do homage to
your wills, pay tribute to your sufferance, and bind him over to accomplish
your further pleasure. Then raise your better thoughts, this base floare (but
your footestoole) is no bed for Majesty: Nor stands it with the resplendant
Queen of Asia, to prostrate her self so low, as to lie in the dust of the
earth. Eugenia thus rowzed, rose (with an erected heart) from her seat of
sorrow, and carefully looking on her, said; Ah Mentiga, Mentiga, can it be that
Physic has any Cordial receipt for so desperate a disease: Is there any
mollifying salve can cure my tormenting sore; or can thou give a healing
plaster, to my wounded mind. Speak thou hapless, or most happy woman: When,
where, or how, can thou effect so great, and sweet a work; and please thy
Lady without perceivance? The glorious Sun (thou know) is ever remarkable,
when mean Stars are seldom gazed on. Pale Jealousy is a subtle spy; and
invincible Envy has murdering eyes. Danger waytes on dignities, and Beauty
is ever guarded with observance, The light (I fear) is a blab, and darkness
but a Traitor: These walls have ears, then be silent Mentiga, least the air
whisper, and betray thy intention, and enterprise.

Thus had Eugenia (when it came to it) many eyes, to see into many evils, but
they were all blind to prevent any. Misfortune so blinds those, she will
overthrow, that nothing can clear their understandings, nor limit their
adventures; which made Mentiga answer, that she had a Charm to close up
Argoes eyes, and that Deceit should lull Danger asleep, when Beauty should
feast with Love. And this, she said it is, and must be. The Sultan, you know,
(either to refresh himself with ease, or to make his pleasures more complete
by change) does the two last nights of every Week, abstain both from your bed
and Chamber: And this ensuing night, being the first of the two, when your
Eunuchs be at supper, we will in my Chamber secretly change our attyres, and
to give life to our device, you must as Mentiga, bring me as Emperesse to your
bed, where leaving me, you shall depart into my Chamber next adjoining, where
fastening the door, you must attend the hour of midnight, and then putting on
my Night-gowne, you must as silently as may be, go down the stayres into the
Garden, and there opening the posterne gate, (The key whereof shall be
pre-provided for you) you shall receive your disguised Knight, and bringing him
up the stayres to my Chamber, you both may safely entertayne your stolen
delights, and give both your desires, all fullness of content. But how (said
Eugenia) shall he return vndiscovered. Early in the morning replied Mentiga,
before the day shall discry your dalliances, will I rise and come unattired
unto you to my Chamber, when you shall leave my blessed and beautyfied bed, and
return to your own Chamber, in such manner as I came. And then will I cloathe
your Knight in the Religious habit of the Hozes, the same I used, when I went
to him. And so he may depart, when the Sun (the eyeof the world) shall not
discover him. For clouded Rocks deceive Mariners: A justifiable cloak ever
hides a treacherous fraud; and they ever may do the most wrong, of whom least
is looked for. And because we will not procrastinate our designs, lest our
proiects be communicated. I will presently put on my Protean shape, and like a
holy Father, goeto Sirap, unto whom I will unfolde all that we have
determined, and both enjoyne and entreat him in your name, and for your love,
that he will not fail his hour, at that place, but come to take Loves
farewell, and leave a settled possession of his purchased favors. This enticing
plot, promised more to Eugenia then a possibility. Her lawless love saw no
exception, nor could her wantonizing thoughts dream of any interception: Her
transported desires were so drowned in her over-amorous passion, that she
entertained the least conceit, that might but help her foolish fancy. Her
flattering hopes held good correspondencie with all likelihoods; and in the
confidence of her supposed assurance, she bad her go, and after called her
back again. Her presaging heart did fail her, and she began to fear she
knew not what. A sudden trembling possessed her in every part, and what
before she but carelessly dread, now she did more then fearing doubt. In this
distraction, and fear of misadventure, she said; It is better to be in love
most miserable, then through love to be guilty of our own mainfest confusion.
Why should we then Mentiga for loving follies, weave the web of our own woes?
Violent streams being once run out, the mudde will appear in the bottom.
The indignation of a Prince is death; and the love of a Stranger as inconstant,
as a Travailers mind is wandering. He is but mean, and puddles are not for
Princes to drink at: Let him be as he is, that I may be as I am. O Eugenia!
had thou been as provident to shun the cause of thy fall; as thou was
foolishly wise to apprehend thy fall:

Thou might have longer lived in thy renown,
But now thy sins are ripe; Fate throws thee down.
For she being drawn by a wilful folly, unto that whereunto she was
destinate, no sooner had uttered what she misliked, but straight she misliked
what she had uttered. Shall idle doubt (she said) the hearce of our desires,
deprive me of my wished delights? Is base fear (the badge and terror of
Pesants) a befitting Counselor for a commanding Empress? or is Love tied to
equality, honor, or majesty, that knows no difference of persons. Must
greatest Queens want their wills, and the dross of Damsels enjoy their
pleasures? Where then is our dignities, our pretogatives, and our privileges?
To command others and be slaves to our selves, is worse then subjection. I will
be my self, my affections shall bow to my will, and my fancy shall command my
pleasures. Necessity has no law, and where there is no law, there is no
breach. Here Mentiga take this purse, and happily get thee gone, and
fortunately return. This concluding command gave her speed, and being come
before him, she thus in his private Chamber all alone salutes him.

Eugenia, the great Imperial Sultanesse, Sovereign Queen of Queens, and
only Mirror of Beauty and Bounty, by me her trusty Hand-mayd, greetes thee
well, and wishes thee (O thou happiest of Men, and blessed Son of Fortune) all
the Joys that thy heart can wish, or her affection can afford. She grieves
that thou art bound for Babylon; and she entreates thee, that diguised this
night, at the hour of twelve, when darkness has put on her blackest roabe,
thou will come to the Posterne-gate of the Gardon wall, where she will in
person receive thee, and safely bring thee, where thou may bath thy self in
Beauties most delightful Fountain, and feast thy best Fortunes, with all the
pleasures that true Love, or proud State can yield. Nor may thou doubt of
hazard herein, since thy security is thus carefully and certainly assured. And
therewithal, she related to him the whole plot of their devise; which she said
was only intended, that by your incorporated farewels, you both might seal
such an infringeable Deed of your covenanted Loves, that naught but Death
should break the same.

Sirap being thus surprised, when least he looked for such an assault, wished
himself in Babylon. His virtuous dispose, did contemn such shameful
treachery: Nor would he violated his plighted Faith to Vienna, for all the
proud Fortunes and Favors of Asia, and Affricke: Yet fearing, least his
refusal should cross his departure, he smoothly set a scarlet dye, on his
rough and course conceyt, and like Jove himself, when he entered Danaes
Tower, he seemed both pleasant and pleasing to Mentiga; which made her more apt
to believe what he never meant.

Return (said he) unto the brightest Star, and greatest Glory of Turkey,
and present in all humble humbleness, my true service unto her, and say; That
in the intercourse of Affection, my Love surmounts hers, and that neither
Danger nor Death shall alter, or hinder, the wished fruition of my Fancy, so
fortified by a Princes Favor. To take my farewell, is my thirsting desire, and
to seal the deed of my purchased Favor, is the Gordian knot, that I most wish
to unloose, Be true to thy Queen, wise to thy self, give thy Thoughts no
tongue, nor my Name no record. Thus did he in another meaning, satisfy
blinded Mentiga; who proud of her surmised success, was so ravished with joy,
that taking a compendious farewell, she posted (in the conceit of her happy
endeavors) to feast Eugenia with her glad tidings.

And no sooner was she gone, but that Sirap falling on his knees, besought God
to guard his innocence, from all Barbarian perils, and to free his chaste
tboughts from those tempting Sirens, those ruinating Follies, and those
lascivious and nefarious Assaults; and that he would so direct him in his
wisdom, and defend him by his power, that he might safely (without
interuption) go to Babylon, and for the good of his Sanctuary, remoove that
Pillar of his Church out of the House of Dagon, and bring him home to be a
Glory to his Temple. This Sacrifice was his safeguard; His virtuous
determination, and constant resolution, merited well; but his firm affiance in
his God, and dependancy on Divine perfection, shielded him, no doubt, from
pertaking of that adherent mischief that fell fatally upon the Sultanesse, and
Mentiga: Yet in seeking to avoid Sylla, he feared to fall into Charibdes: His
nonappearance, would make his fraud apparent; and his delusion, might draw on
his secret destruction.

But Mentiga coming to her Sovereign Lady (who long had expected her before
she came, though she came long before reason could expect her,) chearefully
recounted unto her, what Sirap (in truth, but not truly) had protestingly
delivered unto her; how pleasing her Message was to him, how joyfully he
entertained the Name of Love, how feelingly he entered into comparison for his
affection, and how comfortably he embraced the remembrance of his desired
Farewell. These, and other demonstrances of Passion, she so fully and
pleasantly related, that Eugenia drowning all thoughts of danger in the
conceit of her approaching happiness, she dreamed of naught but Loves
Embracements, Venus Delights, and wantonizing Sports; building a Palace of
Pleasure in her mind, wherein she meant to feast all her Amorous desires, and
crown her thoughts with sweet Content. To this end, she gave Mentiga in
charge, that nothing should be wanting, that should be requisite to further
their designs; Whilst interrupted Sirap (being thus Chequ'd by a Queen) lay
studying how he might drive it to a Stall, and not receive the Mate, but give
speed to his departure. Resolved he was, not to touch the forbidden Fruit, nor
to drink on Cirses Cup; he would not with the Spider suck poison out of a
fair Flower, nor spotte his True-love with the dregs of Majesty. Proud
bewitching Pleasure could not entice him to Folly, nor rich alluring Treasures
corrupt his constant integrity: He scorned to sell his Loyalty for Lucre, or
Love for Sylver: True wisdom made his virtuous mind to bend, rather to that
which was good in it self, then to that, which by evil minds might be judged
good. In brief, his conclusion was, to excuse his not coming, by express
Command from the Sultan, that as that night, he should consult with his
Visiers, concerning his negotiation in Babylon. But this false color need no
allowance; Displeased Justice took away all exception, and sealed him pardon
before any accusation; For the dismal night being come, Vengeance attended her
fatal hour; which approaching, she accordingly, changed her attire with
Mentiga, and brought her as her Hand-mayde to her Royal Bed, and after, went
to Mentiga's Chamber, where she waking, waited for the appointed hour; which
come, she casting on Mentigaes Night-gowne, with a bold heart (beyond the
resolve of her weak Sex) she paced down the stayres that led into the
Garden; Into which she no sooner entered, but that she saw the angry Heavens
(then cladde all in black) throwing down with violence, a fiery threatening
Star over-crosse the Garden, forbidding her farther passage, notwithstanding
the sable Skies lent not then an other Light: This prodigious Sign, and
fearful premonition, might well have appaled, and backed a more redoubted
heart, but that the voluptuousness of her thoughts, extinguished the light of
her mind: Love gave her boldness, and unlimited Lust directed her (according
to her sinister and destinated Fate) unto the Posterne gate, which she with
nimble facility opened, and there made her fearelesse stand. O imperious and
impious Love; thou deluding Traitor, how rightly did the Poets, and Painters,
paint thee blind, and naked? Since thou have no eyes to see into how many
dangers thou leadest thy servants; and like thy self, makes them both blind
and naked, disroabing them of all their virtuous abilliments, that their naked
shame may appear in their found pursuites. Who seeks thee, finds deceit;
and whosoever follows thee, seeks reproach, and obtains repentance. Care,
is thy Court; Tyranny, thy reign; Slaves, thy Subjects; Folly, thy attendance;
Lust, thy Law; Sin, thy service, and Repentance thy wages. But this mighty
Sultanesse, whose wretched folly, was clothed in danger, had not long waited
for her own woe, but that there came a base Sarazen toward her, who of
purpose did straggle that way, to ceaze upon some prey; the fall of whose
steps, gave the found Sultanesse such hope of Siraps then coming, that over
rashly running upon him; holding for certain that it was he; she said, Come,
come my best beloved; and go with me, where I will lodge thy love in pleasures
lap, and guerdonthy labor with fullness of gold; And therewithal she kissed
him, more then often deeming that his rough habit had been but the cloak of his
craft. For the Prince, and the Peasant, differs but in the fleece, not in the
flesh. But the subtle Sarazen being capable of his own good, apprehended the
error, and in hope of gain, adventured the success. Thus did the mounting
Kite, seize on a homely prey, and in her blindness, prefer a greasy Lamp,
before a bright and mighty Star; and throwing her Mentle upon him, led him
toward her last prepared bed: where he fearing to be discovered, disvested
himself of his homely habit and rough shirt.

And did (redid, and often did) full well,
The thing my modest Muse does blush to tell,
For with a lusty courage (stoutly borne)
He did (in Siraps stead) the Sultan horn.
And in this furfeit of pleasure did they cloy themselves, till themselves had
wholly spent themselves. When wearied with delights, they both were summoned by
leadden Morpheus to banquet with blood and death. For the Sultan (by divine
decree) dreaming that night, that the roof of Eugenias Chamber did renting
part it self in two, and was open; and that he saw descending down from a
black Cloud; a grim swarty man, clothed in a short illfavoured garment, all
to be rent, holding a broad rusty sword, dyed with Vermillion red in his
besmeared hand. Who falling on the tapestred floare, stood not long; but that
Eugenia came smiling all in white, besprinkled thick with blood, and put on
him a scarlet roabe, set her Diadem on his shaggie head; kissed, and embraced
him often, and then taking him by the soyled hand, led him toward her royal
bed; which the Sultan seeming to see, cried out, and said; Stay villain, stay:
The Eagle made not her nest, for the Owl to lie in; The Batte has no eyes to
look upon the Sun, nor may the Kestrell make her perch within her beams.
And therewithal grasping for his Semitar, he amazedly awaked, and finding it
but a dream, smiled, yet was wounded with no little wonder at the strangeness
of the same. His thoughts still were troubled, and his heart (led thereunto by
the force of Fate) gave him such a present desire to go offer incense to
Venus, in Eugenias shrine, that suddenly taking his night roabe, his Semitary,
and his key, (which purposely he had made for his sole, and private passage at
all times into her Chamber) he went to perform his wanton Sacrifice; and
being entered, finding by the dawne of day (for the night began to cast off her
black Mantle) that all things as he thought were well, he ioyed at the
illusion of his fantastical dream, and in the contentment thereof,
withdrawing a little the curtain, he carelessly laid him down by Mentigaes
side: who upon his entrance awaked, and finding her self entangled in her own
device, grew fearful of the issue, and kept her self as close as might be.
The Sultans kind entreaties, found no resistance, nor yet any pleasing
entertainment. The fear of her death, took away all delight of dalliance; and
those pleasures which before she made her Paradise, she now deemed them a
mortal punishment. Feign would she have killed herself, for fear of death,
but death gave her no means of death. In this deadly terror, she lay so
distacted, that every member began so to tremble and shake, that the Sultan in
tenderness of her health, (fearing sickness sudden attachment) hastily
took her in his arms, and kissing her many times, asked how she fared, but
receiving no answer (for sudden surprised Treason has no tongue) he bare
her toward the light, to give her better air, when seeing who she was, and
one whom he had spent his enforced pleasures; missing Eugenia, and remembering
his provoking dream; all enraged, he cast her to the floare, and treading on
her throat, he took his Semitar, and thrust it quite through her heart, and
then violently running at the door, that opened into Mentigaes Chamber, he
burst it open: The noise whereof awaked the sturdy slave, that he might see his
own death; who seeing one enter with his drawn Sword, not knowing who he
was, nor where himself was, leaped out of his banefull bed, and snatching a
bed-staffe in his hand, fiercely rushed upon his unknown Lord, got within him,
and being the stronger, had him down, and so liberally belabored him, that
the blood running down his face, well witnessed, that the slave alone, now
less respected, and feared him; then many Nations, mightiest Armies, and
greatest Princes, that only had trembled at his sight. Which made the Sultan
in his dismay, cry; Treason, treason; at the hearing whereof, came running in,
two Ianizaries that were of his Guard, whose allotment was that day amongst
many others to attend. They seeing this strange accident, pulled the rascal
off the Sultan, and hewed him all to pieces. But the Sultanesse thus surprised
with shame, with fear, and with amazement, was more confounded at the base
sight of her reproachful deceit, then at the bloody summons of pale Death; and
because she would not see her own shame, nor look murder in the face, she
crept over the head into the bed, crying fearfully, No Moore, no Moore;
because she saw, she had not layne with the Moore. Which made Solimon suppose,
that she cried that he should stay his hand, and do no more; which
distasteful conceit, exasperated his anger, and added more fuel to his
enflamed fire, and in the heat of his irefull indignation, he stepped to her
adulterous bed, and like a tempestuous storm, he fell upon her, giving her
stab upon stab, saying often withal; Nay, thus much more, and more: And the more
he said so, the more he thrust his Semitar (not yet dried with the blood of
the Sarazen) into her body. This speedy and sudden execution, was Siraps
preservation. For it took away all further knowledge of the cause. The Court
was now all in combustion, and the City hearing that the Sultan was slain,
instantly did rise, and confusedly did run to the Palace, bearing all down
before them, in such a distract sort, that the Turks Guard was glad to shut
the gates against them, and to entreat the Sultan to show himself out of the
Casement unto them, which so well appeased them, that they quietly returned to
their houses. Then was inquisition made after the knowledge of the Sarazens
apparel, which was so base, that all men wondered not only that he was there,
but how he came there. His mangled body kept him unknown, and his mean habit
made him no appertenant to the Court. When no notice could be had neither of
the one, nor of the other, the appeased Sultan sent for the Eunuckes that
attended his Emperesse, and caused two Mutes to strangle them in his sight.
After, he caused all the dead bodies, with the two beds, and all their
apparel, to be carried forth of the City, and to be burned all together; and
further, gave in charge, that the two Chambers should be converted into houses
of base use, and that no one under pain of death should after speak thereof.

Now Sirap, who during these tempestuous storms, lay at anchor in his own
private harbor: as one that knew well, that great men ever envying the glory,
and fortune of strangers, would in this tumults be ready, to stab at the bosom
of merit; and that mischief (the cursed Captain always of the unruly
Commons) might in a disturbed uproar endanger his safety; hearing now that the
sight of the Sultan had allayed the windy Allarum of his rumoured death, and
that the present murder of the Sultanesse, with her Maid, and unknown
Paramour, was the occasion of such disorder rising; He grew jealous of the
cause, suspicious of the error, and timorous of his welfare. For, though
guarded with innocence, yet was he fearful, lest Mentiga had cast some
scandalizing aspersion upon his unspotted honesty. In this fearful doubt, he
kept himself within himself, until report had further manifested not only
the manner of all their deaths, but the ignorance of the cause. This
dispierced all clouds of care, and made him a perfect Judge both of the
error, and the event. Then lifting up his erected heart, he said: O Vienna,
thy love I see now, has given me a second life, and my constant loyalty, has
kept me from the grave. Justice has preserved the guiltless, and
righteousness has found mercy in judgment. Now praised be my God, my strong
defense; For he has covered me under the wings of his protection, and kept
me from the death of the wicked. He has cast down lightning, and burnt up
the daughters of Babell, that I might be safe in their sudden destruction.
The storm is past, and these cloudy occurrants threaten another tempest. The
Sea cannot be so calm in Summer, but that it may swell again with the rage of
wrathful Winter; There is more wisdom in preventing, then in redressing a
mischief; Security lives not in tyranny. For though the Tygar hide his claws,
yet in the end, will he show his Rapine. Revenge has now smoothed the Sultans
angry browe, and Time has given some peace to his displeasure. The Tide serves
me, and my profane abode with the heathen, is displeasing to the heavens. My
Captived Lord calls me away, and Vienna says, I am too slow; my mark is set,
and I level straight, I will commend my aim; and therewithal casting off all
further deliberation, he went to the Court to take his leave of Solimon, Who
seeing him stand upon his departure, after some private conference, and
protestations, that he would crown his return with highest honors
advancement, he vouchsafed graciously to embrace him, and so bad him farewell.
The next morning Sirap having before caused all things to be in readiness, the
winds summoning him to Sea, he took shipping, and sailing by the Islands,
situate in part of the Mediteranian Sea, he landed at Sidon, a Port Town in
Syria, and there taking Horse, he poasted through the Country, and part of the
Deserts of Arabia, and so came to Babylon. Where we will leave him to look
into France, and see how Vienna brooks her continued thraldom, which was not
so grievous unto her, as the tormenting suppose of Sir Paris loss. Great was
her sorrow in fear of him, and many her bemoanings for not hearing from him.
In so much, that La-nova seeing the increase of her growing cares, thus sadly
spoke unto her.

Madame, these ruthlesse walls neither melt with your tears, nor yet shake,
nor shrink with your sighs. Comfort dwells not in restraint, nor lives Remedy
in Lamentations. Though your Father be absent, yet has he left a jealous
Keeper: You may ever weep and bewail your estate, and lie still in the bed of
sorrow: If you never seek after redress, you shall ever find your self a
Prisoner: You know the secret way I made to relieve you; If so you please, I
will convey you through the same, to some private place, where Metamorphosed,
we will either hunt in quest after Sir Paris, or you shall rest unknown in
some foreign Nation, till either my travail shall gain knowledge of his
aboade, or that the death of the Daulphin shall leave (you for your right) to
the trial of your Friends. Then cast off these mortifying dumpes, and leave
now your sorrow to the Governors, as a pawn for your return, and let us
stand upon our Fortunes: Hope lives in Industry. and my Adventures shall ever
wait on your pleasure.

This kind offer did moove her much, but could not remoove her at all: Liberty
she said was sweet to that life, that might take the pleasures of this life;
But to a dejected heart whose banished content could promise no wished delight;
there a Close-prison was better then a glorious Palace. To travail (she said)
to my Paris; would be more pleasing then painful to Vienna; but not knowing
where he is, I might perhaps extravagantly go further from him then Iam, that
am already further off then I would be: Here for his Love was I made a
Prisoner, and here will I still rest a Prisoner for his Love. If he be living
and loving, here shall I soonest hear from him; and if he be neither in Love
nor in Life, here will I end both my Love and Life: Only take thanks for thy
loving care, and kind respect, and be still a true Friend to Paris, that
Vienna may ever take comfort in La-nova.

Upon this conclusion he parted, and Isabella strewed the Rushes over the
private way that gave him entrance: But no sooner was it done, but that one of
the Keepers Gentlemen (that seemed ever most serviceable unto her) came in,
whom the devilish Daulphinis had before fashioned to her purpose, for she
wrought upon his want, as knowing well, that Poverty betrayeth Virtue, and
that Wealth bewitcheth Wit; Corruption having made him her Creature, she had
instructed him how to train Vienna to her destruction; for naught but Death
could satisfy her disdainefull fear: Her malicious and unbounded pride,
locked into the danger of her Lords return: If the Daulphin fell, then must
Vienna (though now a Prisoner) be Sovereign. This made her heart-burning hate
to prosecute her overthrow: And though she had no cause to fear her, (for
occasion never yet made her her enemy) yet could she not endure to think that
she should be Subject to another, that now was most eminent in her self. To
have the Regent, was all her ambitious desire, and nothing did let but Viennas
right; To frustrate which, she with fullness of Gold, and promises of
preferment, had as aforesaid, seduced this mettle-minded Servant, to deceive,
and to destroy her by such subtle and obscure means, as both gave least show
of mistrust, and most likelihood of execution: And this it was.

Don Poltron (for so was he rightly named) bringing Viennas mornings repast to
her, with a bemoaning tongue, and a sighing heart, complained much against
Nature, and enveyed more against Fortune, that had made beauty so miserable,
and Virtue so unhappie, as to entombe the glory of the one, and the effecacie
of the other, in so unprofitable, and so uncomfortable a place. My eyes (said
he) cannot endure to see Dignity so disgraced; nor can my Ears entertain the
killing sound of your laments: I must, and will leave my wounding Service, that
at longth I may be a Stranger to sorrow, least my grief for your grief, make
my revived woes as great as your grief.

Vienna liking his generous nature, judged by his discreet and relenting
discourse, that he was well bred, and pleasing witty; and therefore required
him to tell what was his Name, and where he was borne: Who answered, Don
Poltron am I called, and in Spain was my birth; my education was better then
my fortune, and this my servile Place bears now record of my sinister fate.
Why said Vienna, if thou be unfortunate, keep still thy station, here is a
place of woe, and thou have a Princess to associate thee in thy sorrows: Have
thou cause to bewail thy mishaps? Let us know thy crosses, and we will ease
thee with our grief; For it is a comfort to find a Companion in misery. Then
say Poltron, (for thy Nature agrees better with us then thy Name) and story to
us the life of thy Fortune, that we may also recreate our mind, by listening
to thy griefs.

Poltron having pleased her with this sugered Bayte, cast out his hidden Hook,
and told her that he was a rith Merchants Son in Spain, left so well
Treasured, that he swayed the world at will, until emperious Love made him of
a free Lord, a Bond-slave to Melleflora: Unto her (said he) I sued long for
obtained grace; which had, I held my self more fortunately happy, then Paris
did in the fruition of his Love. Paris, said Vienna, what Paris? Paris said he
of Troy, that enjoyed the Beauty of Greece, and made his Pleasure a Plague to
his Country. But in the height of my joys and hope of highest happiness,
Death deprived me of my Paradised Bliss, and not only made my broken heart
the sad habitation of woe, but also turned my mind (which before was a Kingdom
to me) into a Hell of tormenting thoughts. The place of my Birth grew (by her
loss) so hateful to me, that I was necessitated to forgo the ground that
yielded me no other harvest but grief. In brief, for better portage, I turned
all my Substance into Jewels of estimate, and traveled to Naples where I spent
more of my Wealth then I did of my woes. Then Repentance made me leave that
wastfull Nation, and so I came unfortunately into France. Thus he drew on her
attention with a feigned tale, that he might without all suspicion, and with
better gain of belief, give more fuel to her desire, for his further
betraying discourse. And to blind all jealous thoughts, he purposely seemed by
his abrupt end, to be unwilling to proceed further. But Vienna whose crossed
affection delighted to hear of semblable fortunes, would needs know what other
mishaps waited on his lost love. Alas Madame, said Poltron, the small remainder
of my broken state I brought with me into France, to maintain the length of my
days; but in my passage, I was set on by four Thieves, that stripped me of all
I had, and wounded me sore, and would no doubt have taken my life, but that by
chance there came by a poor Hermit, who seeing their violence, without all
dread of their number, or fear of his own feeblenes, cast off his peaceful
Gown, and drawing out a hidden sword out of his staff, he so fiercely
assaulted them, that in the end he slew three of them, whilst the fourth run
away with the prey, the danger of my wounds made him then as far to surmount
himself in pity, as he had excelled the other in valor: And in the
tenderness of his relenting mind, he brought me to his Cell, where on a bed
of moss he laid me; and binding up my wounds, with a piece of his shirt (for
other linnens he had none) he afterward applied the joyce of herbs so often
unto them, that they healed, and I began to grow strong. With him had I
continued still, but that during the stay of my recovery, I could not endure to
see this good Chyrurgion, and noble minded Hermit that had so well preserved
and cherished me, sit so often sighing, and many times exclaiming against unjust
rigor, and unnatural injustice; that half distraught, he would often
confusedly say; Does the Sea nourish a more cruel fish then the Dolphin? is
not Vienna the fairest City of the world? And lived there ever a more
unfortunate man then Paris. Then would he bewail destroyed Troy, and blame
Love that fired Jllion; and by and by curse that wretched Knight, that
overthrew so fair a creature, and so glorious a City. Then would he sit in a
doleful dumpe, and after suddenly start up as one affrighted, and accuse his
offending tongue of Treachery, for wronging the divine name of love, since he
was so highly beloved, as his mean fortune merited not the glory thereof. But
leaving him (with my prayers) both to his Cave, and to his Cell; after many
thanks, I left that woeful and worthy Hermit, and came to Viennois, where
necessity compelled me to seek this service. And this most virtuous
Princess, is the Map of my misery; and so he seemed to end, before he had
begun; that the Fish might bite the more eagerly, when the bayte was pulled
away: But oh, said Vienna (for now she had swallowed the hidden, and hurtful
hook) did thou not perceive the cause of his so secret, and so great a
grief? Yes Noble Lady, said Poltron. Time and Occasion gave me means to know
the same; Then good Poltron, let me entreat thee she said, to relate the full
discourse thereof. For such Subjects of woe, best fitteth woeful minds, and
causes of dolor and calamity, are ever most pleasing to perplexed persons.
Poltron thus halled on, to set the trap, that should ensnare her life, thus
cunningly gave fire to her tinder.

Though, said he, I am unwilling to ingrieve my thoughts with the sad
remembrance of my friends over-grieuous sorrows; yet since it is your
pleasure, your will commands my obedience. Then know, most fairest of fair
Ladies, that after I had many times observed the frenzy of his passions: and
wondering, had noted his broken and disconsonant complaints; he being at other
times most advisedly wise, and most humbly (though sadly) patient: As we were
sitting at the mouth of his Cave, chatting on the miseries of this life, and
the crosses of this uncertain world, I requested him in favor of my desire,
to recount unto me, the cause of his so often passionate laments. In answer
whereof, he said.

Though my grief be already such, as there can be no addition to so great an
extreme; and though my wounds cannot be healed, because they may not be
searched; yet to give thee some content, know that not far from Tolledo in
Spain, I served not long since a great and mighty Lord, called Don
Daulphinatus; who had one only daughter named Paris-enna, whose beauty was
far fairer then the evening star, and whose virtue was more powerful then
the greatest constellation. By her sweet influence did I only live, and
breathe; and though my mean fortune durst not gaze on so bright a Planet, yet
did her gracious aspect both so ennoble, and enable my towering thoughts, that
unknown I atchiued in honor of her name, many admired exployts. After some
season, both my acts, and my love, were accidentally made known to her, who in
time made me (though most unworthy) the Master of her desires, that was, and
still am, a servant to her will. Our mutual minds thus combined, was like the
Garden of Eden, wherein grew more delights, then either Nature now affords, or
Art can express. Our hearts fed on pleasures, our eyes beheld the bliss of
each other, and in the full comfort of all content, did we sleep in love; and
wake, and walk, in all fullness of joy. From this Paradise, were we driven by
felonious Fortune, who envying our happiness, would not suffer that we should
make this earth our heaven, that was before cursed for our sins. My Lord, her
Father, had knowledge thereof, who finding my indignity not worthy of such
sovereignty, was so carried away with disdainful scorn, and irefull
displeasure, that he doomed me to death, if ever I were found within the
precinct of his command. This separation (for now I was put to my flight) was
such a corasive to both our confounded souls, that she stayed to endure a
greater misery the deprivation of life; and I wandered in unknown paths, to
seek after a wished death. Long was my travail, and manifold my fortunes: But
neither distance of place, continuance of travail, happiness of fortune, nor
tract of time, could free my fancy, nor weary me from my constant affection.
At last, being both wearied and nighted, I came to this harmless Cell; where
in love of Solitariness, and in contempt of the world, I vowed to spend the
unspent sorrows of my Life, and keep my self from the knowledge of Men; and
thereupon, he devoutly swore me, that I should not make his private abode
known to any Man. Whereat the wounded Princess, in her apprehension, sighed,
and watered the floare with her baulmy Tears, as knowing by the amplyfied, and
conjoined Names, and by the concurrence and circumstance of the Matter, that
he was most assuredly her beloved Paris; and thereupon, she demanded what was
his Name? Sans Lieure (replied Poltron) did he call himself. Sans Lieure, said
she? Oh how rightly did the Destinies Christen him; and how truly does his
Name express his Fate; For Grief has but a dead heart, and hapless Love
none at all: But where is that Place of playnt, that so confines Sorrow in it
self, and makes Woe a habitation for so miserable a Man? Tell me, O tell me,
that I may send some Sanctified person to comfort him, and weyne him from so
wretched a life.

My Oath (answered Poltron,) will not admit, that any Man be my means should
know thereof. Then would I were (she said) with him my self, for by his Name
(I now remember) he is that Divining Man that has revealed Wonders, and can
tell what shall befall every one; Often have I heard of him, and strange things
by him foretold has come to pass. Thus did they both disguise their minds,
and with untempered Mortar, daube up their several concealed meanings, and
hidden intentions, that they might both the better work out their Advantages.
But Poltron seeing his venomous Plot had (without all suspect) thus poisoned
her belief; boldly told her, That as she was no Man, she was not within the
Condition of his Bond, and therefore (if so she pleased) he would not only give
her full liberty, but also bring her unknown to that hapless Hermit, whom
she desired much to see, provided that she should give him Gold, to bring him
after to his native Home, and also be directed by him, both for the means and
the manner of their escape, and travail. To this, she answered, that Prisons
were no Treasure-houses, and that she had no Minte to answer her mind; only
some reserved Jewels she had, which she would give him. It shall (said he)
suffice; Pity pleades in your behalf, your merit claymes redress, and my
feeling grief, to see a Princess so distressed, commandes the hazard of my
Life. Be you but silent and secret, and you shall see, that I will deceive the
waking eyes of encharged wisdom, and overthrow the heedfull care of reposed
trust: And thus it must be: By the Print of the Keys (which I will make in
Wax) will I make other like Keys, by which all the doors shall congee to
your Will, and give passage to your pleasure. Then will I have you, for our
better security, homely attired with a Box under your arm, and Bone-lace
hanging out of it, a pair of Shieres tied to your Girdle, and a Yeard in your
hand, that you may seem to be, not what you are, but what in appearance I
would have you show to be. And I will with a Pedlers pack on my back, well
suited thereunto, travel along with you as your Husband: So shall we both
better escape, and avoid suspicion.

But how, said Vienna, shall Izabella bestow her self? She, said Poltron, must
stay behind in Prison, to take away the knowledge of our flight; For after our
departure, she must lock the door again, keep your Bed with the Curtains
drawn, and lay your Clothes by, most in sight; and when any comes into her,
she must carefully say, that you are not well, and that you are laid down to
sleep: So shall we gain time to prevent our hasty pursuites, and she may
after, at her will, repair to some private Friend, in such disguise as I will
provide for her. That (said Vienna) may not be; for I will never leave her,
that has never forsaken me; Nor will I without her, venture upon any such
adventure.

Poltron seeing it would not otherwise be, yielded, though unwilling thereunto,
and like Sins Solicitor, moved, that Izabella would play the Peddler, and he
would become a Tinker, with his Budget on his back, a leatheren colored Apron
before him, a Hammer under his Girdle, and a Brazen Ladle in one of his hands;
And thus with his Face besmeared, would he go a pretty way before them, as
none of their company, and yet guide them in the way. So gallant a
Bonelace-seller, so proud a Peddler, and so stout a Tinker, all France will not
pattern; But thus it must be, if you Madam will have your desire: Nor may you
scorn that means, that promises assurance of Liberty, and hope of better
Hap. The Gods to have their wills, disdained not to undertake the shape of
Beasts; and we must with the cunning Fowler, cloth our selves in Feathers,
if we will deceive wily Birds. It is a Soar, no sin, to betray Tyranny;
but a shift, no shame; to get Liberty.

These guilefull enticing words of his, and the betraying instructions of the
deep deceitefull Daulphinis, were (without any semblance of other reach) so
smoothly, and passionately delivered, by this damnable and perfideous Villain,
that all his wily words were held as Oracles; and the further he seemed to be
from her, the nearer still he touched her to the quick: In so much, that
Vienna being blindly led in her over-affectionate desire, beyond the lymit of
all due consideration, yielded to refer her self to his Trust, and to
fashion themselves according to his Direction.

Alas Vienna, where disloyal Treason threatens thy shipwreck, and where
remorcelesse Murder is thy Plot, there assured danger must be thy Harbor, and
reproachful destruction thy Host: Implacable malice pursues thee, invisible
fraud betrays thee, and too late repentance, will I fear, learn thee, that
they are most miserable that make themselves wretched examples to others. But
how should Love (the Child of Folly) look into a plot of policy, when
unseduced wit can not see it, nor untainted wisdom find it. The appearance of
Truth, and the show of Pity, and simplicity, has in all deceitful
Practices, subverted Cities, deposed Kings, defrauded Subjects of their
Rightes, and taken away the guitlesse lives of Innocents. How then poor
Princess, could thou avoid thy running upon the Sands, though Armies of
objections did rise against thy doubtful hazard; yet cannot thy good, though
free intention, make thee faulty, though thy over-credulity in entertayning of
conjectures made thee err. Thy chaste thoughts shines still, I see, in thy
virtue; and thy virtue (by divine providence) must shield thee both from
abusive shame, and from unexpected slaughter. But now Poltron had provided at
Viennas cost all materials; and the Ladies disroabing themselves, hid their
attyres, and to cast a mist before the eyes of ignorance, they clothed them to
the purpose, and at supper time, the night being dark, upon Poltrons
watchword, who then stood sentinel, they came forth, pulling the door after
them: For lock it, Vienna would not, because it should appear which way they
came forth, least upon further search, they might find out La-Nouas private
way, and so bring him into trouble, who at the time was in Flanders enquiring
after his lost friend. The next morning their escape was discovered, the City
was searched, Poltron mist, and every way was full of inquisitors. But that
nights travel, and their unsuspected disguise (being the usual habit of such
wandering professors) brought them safe unto a great wood, that stood at the
foot of a high hill in Languedoc, where he persuaded them the Hermit had his
Cell. At the entrance whereof, Vienna stumbled, the dull earth forbidding
thereby her further passage; and Jzabellas eyes were suddenly, for the time,
stricken blind; as though, the feet of the one, were unwilling to bring their
Mistress into peril: and the eyes of the other were ashamed to see such
intended villainy. But no presage can forstall desire, Love looks altogether
after their own fancies, and consters all things according to her affections.
This helhound, (the Devils agent,) seeing Vienna ready to fall, stepped to her,
and taking her by the arm, in show to support her, led her into the thickest
of the wood, where suddenly as one transformed, this seeming dove showed
himself a vulture; and like Cruelty her self, with imbosted mouth and staring
eyes, he drew his short sword that hanged by his lustful side, and gashly swore,
that if either of them made any noise, he would forthwith kill them both:
whereat the weak and wearied Ladies, were so amazed, that all their senses
were senseless, their tongues were bound to the peace by Justice fear; they
could not speak, nor durst not cry. Now Lust, the (execrable parent of murder)
seeing her abashed beauty shine like the Sun through a Cloud, had so fiered his
fancy, that where before it was but kindled by her looks, now having her
within his power, it did violently burn by the touch. Death must now forbear,
and attend his pleasure for his pleasure; and nothing could satisfy this
Covetous Fox, but after the stealing of the grapes, he meant to forridge the
vine. To effect which, he turned Jzabellas face to a tree, and bound her arms
round about the same, and notwithstanding, flatteringly promised them both
their lives, if Vienna would but consent to his wanton will; If not, he then
prodigally swore, that in dispight of all power, he would gather the fruit,
now it was ripe, and after leave their flaine bodies a prey unto the beasts of
the field. Vienna, having recovered some spirit, and seeing the present danger,
with elivated eyes, erected hands, and bowed knees, she besought him not to
sport in her misery, nor to spot his soul with the repenting pleasure of
uncleanness. Remember said she, that I am a Princess, save but my honor, as
thou art my mothers Son, and I will freely forgive thee my death as I am my
fathers daughter. I seek not life, but the honor of my life; for my long
lived grief, makes me hate life, and despise death, But in the loss of my
chiefest cherished care, my curses shall poison thy salvation; and the wildfire
of thy lust, shall burn up all thy worldly welfare, and make thee a speedy
prey to speedy destruction. O let then my Chaste tears quench the flame of thy
sinful Concupiscence; blast not the beauty of the Lilly in the bud; deprive
not the Rose of the fairnes of the blome; nor brand not thy self with the
cursed name of a hateful villain. The fiercest Lion has no cruelty to hurt a
Royal Virgin; Man was made to help, not to hurt a silly Maid; and the Lord
of hosts, has countlesse plagues to punish such offenders. Thy carnal regard
is but momentary, but thy shame will be everlasting, and thy punishment
eternal; For repentance follows fruition; and the reward of sin is death.
Thus did she pray, plead and entreat, and thus would she have dissuaded him
from doing evil, that never yet knew good. But his unruly passion, and thirst
of blood, could brook neither intercession, nor interruption. His hot untamed
desires prayed in aid of force, which made her shricke, and call full loud on
Gods Justice for helpful revenge; when suddenly the angry heavens began to make
war against him, and to threaten him with a terrible voice, sending forth
such fearful thunder, lightning, and powerful storms, that force perforce,
he was enforced to desist for the time. But as the woeful Ladies continued
still their shouting cries; It fortuned that two Peasants that had Pomage in
the wood, had been seeking of their swine who by violence of the disturbed
Skies, and wrathful Elements, had taken shelter under a Tree. As thus they
silent stood, praying for preservation, they heard their dismal cries, and
hasting (for so their good Angels would) toward the place of playnt, they
found the obdurate Traitor attempting a fresh assault; which made, the swifter
Man coming in with his Batte, to make him loose his lascivious hold.

This happy accident revived the dying heart of Vienna, and the guilty dread of
Poltron, fearing to be taken, made him so desperate, that he both wounded and
grounded the gentle Peasant; and as he endeavored to take away his life, the
other coming in, knocked out his brains. This speedy dispatch gave the Devil
his due, and freed the Daulphinis of all suspect, who otherwise had by Drugge
taken order for his perpetual concealements. The Ladies thus succored, freed,
and comforted, praised God for their deliverance, and thanked the poor Men for
their assistance; And in guerdon of their so happy service, not knowing
otherwise how to requite so great a good, they wished (concealing themselves)
that they would bring them to the Governor of Viennois, who they knew would
bountifully reward them. The incapable Peasants, smyling thereat, told them,
that they would not for Jasons Labor, seek after Coridons Hyre: For Persons
(said they) so vnremarkable, can neither pleasure nor profit greatness of
State. To which, the Princess answered, that by her means, they should
deliver into his hands, the two Ladies that were committed to his charge, and
that lately had conveyed themselves out of Prison. This golden hope did win
their consents, and not only refreshed them in their Travail, but also gave
speed to their Journey: Only it contented Vienna, that she should by this
means requite her Preseruers, though thereby she made her self a thrall to
time and tyranny. Liberty could give her no comfort, nor could she tell how
hetter to dispose of her loathed Life, then to make her self a Prisoner to
Love and Fortune: The care she had of Isabella, made her the more sensetiue of
her wrongs; And therefore turning toward her, she softly said; Though the
Fruit of the Olyfe-tree come late, yet is the Liquor both good and wholesome.
The tide now serves, my dear Isabella, take thou the benefit thereof, and at
last free thy self from participating of my further woes: Fortune has bound
my life prentise to her frowns, and I am resolved to serve out my time; then
leave me to my fate, and get thee to some more happy place, where my Prayers,
and thy more fortunate Friends, may purchase thee more content.

Jsabellas impearled tears did publish her mislike, and in her grief she
said, that Love never thought that time too long, that did hang on desert; and
that sorrows grown to a custom, were pleasing to miserable Creatures: Then
what should separate my attendance from your Grace, since without you I cannot
live, and with you I mean to dye. Vienna thanking her, joyed no little in her
constant Fellowship: For Friendship is ever most sweetest, when Fortune is most
sowrest.

Thus as they chatted, they came to Viennois, where she advised their two good
Conductors, to wayt for the Governors going to the Church, and then boldly to
step to him, and secretly to proffer him the delivery of the Princess, and her
Companion; which done, you shall privately bring us to him, unto whom we will
present what we have promised. The Peasants promise (having done according to
instruction) made the Governor to rejoice so at the news, that he returned
back to his house, and sent one of them for the Princess, who yet was not
known to be the Princess. Upon their return, Vienna with show of Majesty,
thus greeted the Governor.

Let not my Lord Vray Esperance wonder at our disguise, nor question the Cause:
It may suffice, you have your Prisoners, and we are content with our
alotments: Reward well these honest Persons, that with hazard of then Lives,
have not only preserved our Honors and Lives but also freed you from many
Cares, and saved you perhaps from dangerous troubles. This is all our desires,
we know your charge, and willingly yield to your dispose. The Governor baring
(in due reverence) his aged head, with more tears of pity then of joy,
respectively saluted them, and giving the Peasants store of Crowns, humbly and
courteously he brought the Ladies to their careful Chamber, where we well
leave them to learn of Sirap, what success waited on his Babilonian
endeavors.

Now had time, and travel, brought Sirap (whom we left in his Journey) unto
Babylon; where the Sultan (to gratify the Turk, and to show his love to
Virtue, and his estimation of Merit) entertained him with all Magnificence, and
variety of Kingly Delights. But after they had feasted, and spent some days in
Courtly sports: Sirap being mindful of his Lord, desired to see the City, with
such Monuments and Antiquities, as were therein; which so well pleased the
Sultan, that to honor him the more, he accompanied him in person, still
showing him by his Interpreter, all such places of note and worth, as then were
there remaining: At length they past by, (for so their passage lay) the Castle
wherein the Daulphin was imprisoned. Which Sir Sirap long viewing, commended,
and in his praise thereof, demanded by his Interpreter, what Castle or Palace
that was, that was so well situated, so stately built, and of such strength.
And they told him, that it was called Mount Semerian, built of old by
Semiramis, Queen unto the first great King of the Assyrian Monarchy, And that
as then, there lay as prisoner one of the greatest Princes of France in the
Western Clime; known by the name of the Daulphin of Viennois, Sirap seemed
much to wonder both at the name and Country, as unheard of before, and
therefore was desirous to see the stature, favor, carriage and manner of those
men; and to learn, if he could, the nature, law, religion, custom, and State
of the Country; which stood so well with the Soldans liking, that both in one
desire, went to the Castle to see, and to confer with the Daulphin.

Now Sirap building on Boufoyes fidelity, as having somewhat possessed him with
his purpose, and wrought him to his will; did use him as an Interpretour
betwixt him and the Daulphin: For he would not altogether, yet discover
himself to Boufoy, and therefore speaking to him in Greek, he commanded that
he should Salute the Daulphin in his name, and tell him, that as a Stranger he
was come to see him, and of mere humanity to visit him; which the Daulphin
kindly accepting, as kindly regreeted, and entertained him with all the
gracious remonstrances he could. Sirap bad him then ask what his Country was,
how great; by what laws they were governed, under what title they were
subjected, what Religion they observed, and what God they chiefly adored; unto
which the Daulphin thus briefly answered.

France he said is my native nest, both most populous and spacious, as having
in it 27. thousand Parish Churches; It is most fertile, and abounds in all
plentifulnesse of fruits, wines, salt, corn, fish, and wild-fowle; There are
many Universities famous therein (the nursing mothers of all virtue) out of
whose breasts, youth draws out the knowledge of all Arts; It has many large
Provinces; and diverse abordering Principalities owe homage thereunto: The
Cities are great, and many; rich in Treasure: and fair, and uniforme in
building; the chief whereof is Paris, famous for beauty and bigness: the
usual residence of the King, and great trastique of all kind of Merchandise.
Our laws are termed the civil Laws, wherein Justice is tempered, and
qualified by equity and conscience; and equity and conscience are guarded and
maintained with Justice. Our Monarch is entitled a King, the most Christian
King of France, under whose protection his people live secure, inioying their
own; and under whose Greatness, his Subjects rest fearelesse of foreign
foes. Our Religion is built upon Gods sacred Word: Truth is the root thereof,
Charity the branch, and good Works the fruit. Our Pastors are our Teachers,
who like Lamps consume themselves, to enlighten others; their Doctrine is
examined by the twelve Apostles: Our prayers by Christ taught six Petitions:
Our Faith by the general Creed; and our Lives by Gods ten Commandments. And
where the tongue of Aaron cannot persuade, there the Rod of Moses does correct,
and compel. We serve and worship one only GOD, in persons Three: not
confused, nor divided; but distinct: of one and the same divine Essence,
eternity, power, and quality. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost. The Father being the first, chief, and original cause of all things:
The Son his Word and eternal wisdom: and the Holy Ghost his power, virtue,
and efficacy. This is that God, that by his Word made the glorious Globe his
seat, and the massy Earth his footstool; that fed his servants (the
unprovided Israelites) with food from Heaven, forty years in the Wilderness;
that divided the Waters, and brought them dry-foote through the Red Sea, and
drencht proud Pharaoh therein, that pursued them with murdering hearts. To him
we offer no burnt offerings, nor sacrifice of blood; but the sweet intercession
of devout prayers. For those ceremonies ceased at the coming of Christ, by
whom we are called Christians; and we are received into his Church by
Baptism, and continued and fed therein by the other Sacrament of his last
Supper. And such is our Country, these our Laws, such our King; this our
Religion, and this the God we only serve, love, fear, and adore. Sirap
thanked him for his good description, and seemed to take pleasure in the
knowledge thereof. Then he demanded how he brookt his Captivity, and he
answered like a Prince, and therefore like himself; as one subject to chance,
and resolved in the change. Then he bad him ask whether he had any children,
and he all sighing said, but one only daughter. Then Sirap caused him to ask
why he then so sighed; and he replying said, that his sole souls grief
consisted in her memorry, and so made manifest his hard, cruel, and unnatural
dealing toward her; and how he had left her a prisoner to his tyranny, and
therefore by divine Justice made himself a prisoner to Tyranny. Sirap being
thus certified, was well pleased that Vienna yet living, lived his permanent
friend; and though he grieved much for her endurance, yet did he smother up
his conceived sorrow, in the recordation of her love. The thought of his exile,
and Viennaes thraldom, awaked Hatred and Anger (the ready Offices of Revenge)
to hasten his death: but in the eye of his milder consideration, knowing him to
be his Lord, and Viennaes Father; his relenting heart checkd his repining
humor, and blew the coals of his hotter desire, to seek, and to effect his
speedy deliverance. To compass which, he seeming (seemed of purpose) to take
pleasure in him, and understanding of his Countries customs, commodities, and
government. And therefore he requested the Sultan for the continuance of his
contentment, and for his further knowledge of foreign affairs, to admit, and
tolerate his thither repair, that he might hereafter (if cause so required)
reduce his learing to practice; which the Sultan granting, gave in charge for
his free access, and so they departed; the one glad in that he had, or could
gratisie so worthy a friend: the other proud, in that he had said a
foundation whereon to build. The two next days, Sirap spent in covertly
revealings, wherein his expertnesle, and carriage, did both win respect, and
gave delight. The third following day, he with his Interpretour went to parley
with the Daulphin, who dispairing of life, they found expecting death. But
after they had greeted, and regreeted each other, with kind salutes, Sirap
told him by his Interpreter, that as a man he bewailed his fortune; and as he
was a Prince, he lamented his fall. Yet dismay not noble Lord, said he, since
all corporal damages, that happen to mortail men, are either by means
remedied, by reason suffered, by time cured, or by death ended. Malicious and
violent storms may for the time cleave the bark from the tree, and rent the
branches of his body; yet for all the furious blasts of wrathful winds, it
cannot be plucked up by the Root. If there be a power above the capacity of
men, then may there come comfort, contrary to the conceit of men. Expectation
in a weak mind, makes an evil greater, and a good less: but the resolved
mind disgests an evil being come, and makes a future good present, before it
come; Then expect the best, since you know the worst at the worst, will have an
end.

The Daulphin conceiting the civil demeanor, the Philosophical discourse,
and the pious mind of the supposed impious and barbarous Moore, honored his
mild inclination, wondered at his regular admonitions, and thanked him for his
humane comforts and tender regard. My mind, mindful (said Sirap) of Fortunes
fickleness, affects (I know not how, nor wherefore) your deliverance: what
then will the Daulphin give, if I affect the same? The Daulphin, whose smallest
sails of hope, the least winds did blow, offered the third part of his
Principality, when he should come to Viennois. Promises said Sirap of
advancement, are no assurances of enrichment, and he has a wit too short of
discretion that will loose certain favors, for uncertain fortunes.
Notwithstanding, if you will but swear unto me by that same God, which you
serve and adore, to grant me one request that I shall make when I come to
Viennois, I will endanger my life to free your life from danger; and leave, and
loose my honors in Babylon, and Greece, to seal and feate my self with you
in France: more you cannot desire, less (my Country Gods ayding me) I will not
accomplish. The Daulphin whose flattering hope, suddenly gave him a present
assay of future happiness, though at the first he was very credulous in
entertaining such favorable conjectures, yet hardly could he ground any firm
belief; since knowing him to be but a Stranger, he thought that such deep
wounds could not be searched with such shallow Instruments. But at the last,
referring all things to God, and to the will and wisdom of the supposed Moore;
he wholly embraced his kind offer, and anchored all his hope, in his
provident industry: unto whom, preferring life before livelihood, he devoutly
swear by his Fathers God, the only one true God, and God of all Gods, in whom
he chiefly, and only trusted; that whatsoever he would demand, should be
freely, absolutely, and willingly given him, In further consideration whereof,
he gave him a rich Diamond, and his Interpretour a hundred French crowns,
which for his use, if need required, he had closly hid betwixt the lyning of
the collar of his doublet. Sirap holding himself satisfied, said, it sufficed.
Only he required his continual prayers for his better success, and so left
him, to feast his hopeful heart with the expectation of desired success. The
next day Sirap taking occasion to walk to Euphrates, that famous River that
runs by Babylon, there to view the variety of strange and several small
ships, he casually met, and secretly compounded with an avarous Pilot, whose
corruption being gilded over with gold, he was to bring him down the River
through the Persian gulf to the next Port Town upon the Affricke shore. The
fifth following night he appointed to come a board, attended only with two
men, and therefore gave him in charge, not only to be most secret therein,
but also that he should make full provision of all requisites. This done, he
presently gave forth, that he would shortly depart, and return to
Constantinople; and the better to accomplish his desire without misdeeme; he
determined (under color of preparation, and fitly furnishing himself) to lie
some few days in the City, before he would embarque himself. All which he
presently imparted to the Sultan, and humbly with prodigal thanks took his
leave, saying, that his period of time, pleaded now his promised return, which
in no wise he would violate with the high commander of his thoughts, the great
and Imperial Turk, unto whom he owed all obliged love, and most reverent
respect. And therefore, if so it pleased his Majesty to command his ready
service in ought, he would willingly attend his pleasure, and by his Graces
employments, hold himself more then graced. The Sultan seeing he would depart,
presented him with many rich gifts of Royal estimate, holding himself no
little bounden to his Gods, in that they had interested him in so noble and
meritorious a friend: so blinded was he with Siraps civil demeanor, and so
dusked with Solimans powerful commends, that he could not with Palimed pry now
into the profundity of Ulysses. And therefore requesting him to take in worth,
those small remembrances of his fast sealed love, he friendly bad him farewell,
and so left him.

Sirap whose thoughts travailed now in quest after the Daulphins deliverance,
got himself into the City, where he chambered himself in a Merchants house
of great and good regard, where being once left, and seated; he began to call
his wits to account, how best he might best deceive the Daulphins Keeper. For
providence preventeth misfortunes, and gives life to our future actions: And
therefore he was neither carelessly, nor over-timorously suspicious of that,
which might sinisterly, and suddenly succeed: but jealous, and headfull in the
hazard, lest any oversight might cross his endeavors, and so leave his Lord
helpless, and himself hapless. But after he had stretched and tentred his
wit, and set all possibilities on the rack of his invention; at length his
desire carrying him beyond all doubt of danger; he armed his determination
with steeled resolution, and setting his chance on the Dice, he thus attempted,
and assayed his fortune.

The day before his departure, he went unto the Castle where gently greeting
the Keeper, he told him that he was to return to Constantinople, and therefore
finding himself engaged to him for his willing pains, and already ready
showed kindnesses, he was come of purpose in person to invite him, and all his
followers, (unto whom he had been troublesome) to sup with him that night, that
he thereby might acknowledge his thankfulness, and they have cause to
remember his love, and his person: And because (he said) my Chamber is no
receite, and that I am unwilling to be troublesome, or offensive to the Master
of the house, let me entreat the use of the Castle, and so make you, my Host,
and Guest at once. The Keeper blinded with his former bounty, secured by the
Sultan, and now drawn on, by the pleasing show of kind courtesy; knowing him
(whom yet he never knew) to be of a virtuous dispose, of great estimate, and
highly favored of the King; did freely, and gratefully offer himself, his
service, and the Castle, at his command. The great unknown distance, betwixt
the Daulphins, and the Moors Country Clymes, with their admiration of each
other, and the difference of their tongues could not make the gulled keeper
suspicious, nor can cause him once to dream of deceitful guile. This illusion
gave Sirap hope of happy success, and therefore manifesting his thankfulness
with a rich Jewel, that he (giving) required that he would wear it for his
sake, he left him, and prodigally povided, what either his purse could procure,
or the time would afford: He gave also further charge to his Attendants, that
the Table should be still and ever fully furnished, with many repleat Cups of
Greekish Wine. For (said he) the cost is ill spared, that is spared for cost;
and the beauty of the banquet is there eclipsed, where Jupiter raines not down
full showers of Nectar. As himself, he had carefully and secretly before
provided sleeping Poppy, heavy Darnell, and the mortifying juice of
life-bereaving Mandrake; with other powerful powders, a small quantity whereof
taken in drink, would make the Receiver fall into a most sudden and deadly
sleep. This did he so secretly, and so frankely bestow amongst all the flaggon
Pots, but one (which Bonfoy had in trusty charge reserved by mark for himself
and his Lord) that every one had in full measure, his dormative full weight.
These poisoned Pots he closely kept for the middle of the banquet; and Supper
being served in, Sirap seated every one in their due places, to the contentment
of each one; and then he began to feast, and cheer his gladsome guests, and
like a pleasant Idolist, merrily cheared his feasted friends. But in the end
(they having no end in drinking) he seeing them so devoutly sacrificing to
Bacchus, he to honor their Religion, added then more fatal fuel to their
drunken fire. Their over-drawne Cups were still replenished with the powdered
Wines, and ever he plied them with Cups, till their Cups had over-plyed them:
That drunk in their drowsy devotion, they falling into a leaden slumber,
began to sleep out all living consideration. Now Sirap seeing his hope,
honored with some perfection, thought it fit to do homage to opportunity; for
in deferring of time, many times, it is both the loss of life, and occasion:
And therefore adding execution to time, he instantly went to make all such as
were in the Castle sure; which done, he came back, and taking the keys from
the Keeper, (who with the rest of both their Servants, we will leave where they
silent lay) he hastily went down to the Daulphins lodging, where they found
him prostrate on the ground, moystning the earth with his repenting tears, and
piercing the heavens with his prayers, for the supposed Moors good success;
but before he could make an end of his prayers, Sirap came to end his prayers,
and Purgatory at once; and releasing him from his oppressing Irons, brought him
up to view Morpheus Comedy, which that dull God (with his aid) had made, and
prepared for his pleasure.

Thus when our sins are ripe, and God to Justice bent,
He turns our greatest pleasure, to our just punishment.
Now Time struck his lock before, and it fitted not to argue what was done;
or what was to be done, least they themselves might be undone; but giving
praise to God in their several showed kinds, they presently buckled up their
spirits, with their legs, like Bees, that having sucked the juice of foreign
Gardens, make wing to their own hives, that they may make merry with the
fraught of their adventures. So did they have to the back gate of the Castle,
which they prizing open, went to the Rivers side, where the hired Pilot
courteously attended their coming: In a small vessel they imbarqued
themselves, and sailed to the Persian Gulf, and so a long to the Affricke Sea:
Upon the entry whereof, there crossed them a great Pirat of Arabia, whose
uncheckt fortunes, and uncontrolled strength still crowned his hardest attempts
with victory. But his Pride was now like a vapor, that ascending high, soon
turns into smoke. For he no sooner saw their small Frigot, but counting it
his purchase, he hastily made toward them, and looking for no resistance, he
grapled with them, and commanded them to yield. But Sirap being unwilling to
loose the rich benefit of his high adventure, having no acquaintence with
fear, and being ever accustomed to conquer, drew forth his sleeping Semitar,
which his enraged fury whetted so sharp, that he clove the first opposer
down to the back, and sent the head of the next, as an Ambassador, to plead
for peace amongst the monsters of the Sea. The Daulphin seeing such great chips
cut out of such rough timber, wondered at his force, and admired his valor;
Death seemed now to hold a Sessions in the Ship, and Sirap still gave the
summons for their appearance. For fearing least their entry into his Ship
should endanger the Daulphin; he to prevent that, hazarded himself the more,
by leaping in among his enemies, where his magnanimious mind, armed with the
arm of puissance, so disheartened his foes, that the Captain fearing least any
more should come to assist him, caused the ships to be ungrapled: And no sooner
were they separated, but that the timorous Pilot wherein the Daulphin was,
seeing himself severed from peril, began to turn the stern of his Ship, and
with a side wind to sail back; which Boufoy espying, thought it better to
dye in adventure of his liberty, then to become a Captive again to misery.

Despair therefore made him valiant, and necessity did add to his courage,
which made him to exceed himself in might, and to go beyond all hope in
success: For suddenly running the Pilot through with his sword, he wounded the
next to him so sore, that he could not offend. The Daulphin seeing the success
of his bold attempt, raised his fallen courage to the height of noble
resolution; and unsheathing his quiet sword that Sirap had given him, he gave
him such assistance, as his weak ability could afford. In the end, fear made
them valiant, and their valor freed them from fear. The assaulted Sailors
(being weaponlesse) fell in their blood; and in their overthrowes, did the
survivours submit themselves to the mercy of their swords Force now overawed
them, and they were compelled by Boufoy to make toward the other Ship, wherein
Sirap was making an end of an unequal battle. For having at the first slain
their redoubted Captain, he wrested his approved broad shield from him,
under which shelter, his increasing valor made such slaughter, as of sixteen
persons, he left but three alive, which as Boufoy came in, were prostrate on
their knees for pardon. But when Sirap saw them, and understood of their
interaccident, he was more glad of their safeties, then he was of his own
victory. The Daulphin stood amazed when he saw the Shipped embost with
scattered heads, divided arms, and dismembered legs; And in his admiration
said, If he be but a man, how this? If more then a man, why this? Such
forceable blows, shows a power beyond all humane power; and yet I see he is
but a man, though he has done much more then many men. This estimate of his
valor and worth, made him ever after respect him more for his incomparable
prowess, then he did before for his deliverance. Boufoy now thought himself
happy in such a Master, and Sirap grew proud of such a servant. Love (the joy
of nature) now sat in triumph for their securities; and the wrathful God of
War, being wearied with destruction, laid him down in the bed of peace:
With these two Ships, they securely sailed, with winds suitable to their wills
all along the coasts of Magadoxa in Aethiopia, and so by Guine, where meeting
with a Portugal Merchant, they hired the Pilot to bring them to Marselles.

Thus did the inscrutable providence of God, from injurious and bad causes,
produce good effects; making the banishment of the one, to save the life of the
other; and the love of liberty, to give liberty to love. The change that change
of fortune wrought in them all, made their minds more then pleasing Paradises
of unspeakable pleasures. The Daulphin dreamed of naught but Majesty and
Dignities; Boufoy of freedom and preferment: and Sirap his rich hopes promised
him now golden fortunes: yet durst he not unmaske himself, lest he should
deprive Conceit of his new Christendom, and betray Policy of his chiefest
pretense; but still holding the borrowed habit and artificial color of a
black Moore, he still spoke unto the Daulphin by Boufoy his Interpreter, by
whom he discoursed of many things: and again, and again, and still again,
enquired of such affairs, as most nearest did concern him: wherein he took
double delight, in not only gaining knowledge of the assurance of Viennaes
life and love: but in deceiving the Daulphin, that the Daulphin might thereby
be the more deceived. In this clouded communication, we will leave them a
while, to see what befell Mal Fiance, whom we left detained in the Tavern,
ignorant of his Lords surprise, though not innocent of the cause.

Ten days did the Vintner keep him close, still expecting that either the
Merchant should return, or that the Sanzake should send for his restrained
guest. But when he could neither hear of the one, nor the other; he began to
grow jealous of the matter, and premeditating thereon at last, fastened on this
belief; That the Merchant (like a subtle Mercurian) had cheated the stranger,
and after left him, not only to pay for the wine, but also made him a stale to
convey himself away under the face of honesty. For otherwise he thought, that
if there had been cause of taxation, complaint, or examination; there would no
doubt have been hasty inquisition made after him.

In this persuasion he set Mal Fiance at liberty, who now found his repenting
error, in the loss of his Lord; Shame rebuk't his tongue, Grief attached his
heart, and Fear afflicted all his thoughts. At this dear rate he purchased
wit; which taught him to labor more advisedly in the fearful search of the
Daulphin; His enquiring eyes did still pry into every corner of all his
careful and wandering ways; and in all assemblies, he sought whom he could
not find. But when neither weary time, nor wary search, could give him any
knowledge of him. Then happily meeting with a Flemming, that was ready bound
for Zeland, he went a shipbord with him, hoping that either he should find
his Lord returned to Viennois, or give them cause to follow him in better
quest. After many days sailing they happily arrived at Middleburge, where in
an old decayed Burgamasters house, they lodged Mal Fiance; who finding the
aged jealousy of his aged Host, cunningly carried himself in a strict show of
purity; that under that deceit, he might the better deceive. This suspicious
Sire, having not only a beautiful daughter, but a young fair wife, whom
lately he had espoused, was so fearfully jealous of them both, that he
confined them within the limit of his house; and if either of them were but out
of his sight, he straight supposed she was in action; A service which none can
digest, that may not themselves perform. But to take away all means that did
help (not heal) his misdeemes; he caused his daughter to lie in a lowbed
within his Chamber, and made the door to be locked each night.

Now it fell out, that there was a great and secret love betwixt his daughter,
and one Haunce, the son of a rich Tanner, that dwelt not far from him, who
by appointment came presently after supper time to her Chamber window that
looked into the Garden, where he so passionately pleaded for the Harvest of his
amorous desires, that she (being made of flesh not flint) granted that he
should reap the full fruition of his love, if he would but adventure the
venture of it. For so (said she) it is, that over and besides my Fathers
watchful fear, and ever waking jealousy, I do lie near unto him, within
his Chamber, where though I may easily give you entrance, yet to entertain you
without his perceiuance, stands not with my belief. That matters not said
Haunce, I will not leave the venture, for any adventure; leave the managing
thereof to me, who will for thy sake attempt the height of the hazard. Love
fears no danger; and pleasure without show of peril, loses the vigor of
her sweetness: I will with fear so deceive his fear; that I will take from
him all apprehension of such fear. Only be not thou afraid at any thing that
thou shall hear, or see, and so farewell, and expect my coming.

All this wanton discourse did Mal Fiance listening hear, as by chance he
leaned in his chamber window, which was but the breadth of a post from her
window; who like a true Venerian (knowing their carnal conclusion) resolved to
take the benefit of the match, though she were more then his match, and to put
into the Mediterranean Sea, when the wind should serve, in that pleasant
Pinnace, wherein enhaunced Haunce hoped solely to sail withioy through the
Magellan straights. To affect which, he sat in counsel with all his
thoughts, how he might best deceive, not only hopeful Haunce, but also her
jealous Father, and over-amorous Mother; who being sick of old ages tedious,
and overlong enduring debilities, had many times by her alluring eyes, stolen
glaunces, and other enticing demeanours, looked for Physic at his hands. At
last, device advised him, that there was no way to bind jealousy to the
peace, and to keep himself from interruption, but only by horror of fear,
to make him loose himself, and senseless of all other fear: In proof
whereof, that night, at the dead hour of heavy and leaden sleep, he took
one of his bed sheets, and tying a knot on the top, threw it over him, and
like a troubled ghost, with doubtful paces, went into the Burgamasters
Chamber; who being kept waking by his decrepit griefs, heard the fall of his
steps, and being so dark, that he could not see, he ghastly asked who was there:
None but I, said his watching sensual daughter, supposing it had been Haunce.
Is the door locked said he: yes, quoth she, you heard me lock it your self,
and so she did, but without the staple. Mal-Fiance being thus
plannet-strucken, cursed old Saturn for being now so opposite to Venus, and in
his pawse of doubtful stay, he light on this subtle shift; presently he
crept stealingly, under his bed, where finding a pair of bellows, that
carelessly had bin thrown, and left there; he took them up, and softly rising
by the beds head, he blewe many sudden and short blasts upon him, and then
falling down again, he set his back to the middle of the bed cords; where
with all his force, he lifted the bed up as high as he could, and then would
let it softly fall, and then raising it up again, would after let it fall
suddenly; and then would he blast them with the bellows again, which so
amazed and frighted the poor Burgamaster, that he could not speak, but
fearfully crept over the head into the bed, and laid such fast (though
shaking) hands, on his wife, that he awaked her: who being held over-hard,
demanded what so appaled him: who answered in a low voice, that there was some
tormenting spirit in the Chamber. Alas sweet (said she) thinking it to be but
the disease of his jealousy, you do but dream: there is no such thing, give
me leave to sleep, since you cannot keep me waking.

The Daughter, whose lustful attendance, waked after veneriall copulation,
hearing this, and knowing the fallacy; could not but laugh at her Fathers
deceiving, and betraying fear, and in the pride of her naked strength, she
prepared her self (being then most ready, when she was most unready) both to
assay, and allay that troublesome spirit.

Mal-Fiance having thus secured their stirring, by deluding their hearing, went
boldly to the daughters bed, (the wished port, where he desired to arrive)
where finding no opposition, she still deeming him to be Haunce, he cast
anchor, that his barque might ride at full Sea: At which time Mars and Venus
being in conjunction, produced such strange effects, that the bed wherein they
say, did both shake and rock; which her mother-in-law hearing, began to be
half afraid, having heard nothing before: yet out of wonted boldness (which
was great in bodily adventures) she called to her daughter, and asked her how
she did: I do (quoth she) well, and as well as any woman can do. It is the
better for you replied the mother, but do you not hear, nor feel any thing,
I hear nothing (said she) that is ill, and most assured I am, I feel no
hurt. Well daughter said the Mother, bless you, and cross you well from all
evil spirits. Nay mother (quoth she) my faith herein has ever been so
great, and so good, that I neither fear the devil, nor think any man is
present that endangers me. All this while the poor Burgamaster lay over the
head, in the sweat of his false fea^e, which did so tyrannize over his
weakness, that he durst lie no longer, but hastily calling up his man, he bad
him light a candle: For he would rise, and go fetch his ghostly Father, Friar
Frederick, to come to bless his Chamber, and to sprinkle it all over with
holy water. His wife could not divert him from it; and his daughter, and her
unknown Paramour were ready to betray themselves with laughter; yet was
Mal-Fiance glad to hide himself in the bed, whilst to prevent suspicion, the
daughter rose, and took upon her to unlock the unlocked doors, by which time,
the man came with a light, and getting his Master up, he help to array him,
and after went with a Lantern with him to seek the Friar. And no sooner were
they gone, but in comes lascivious Haunce in the heat of his desire, like the
Prince of darkness, clothed in a Bulls hide, with the horns on his head: (for
it much behooved him to have horns, that must leave horns behind him) who
finding the doors open, made no stay till he came to the daughters bed, where
hearing two breath, he softly shrunk back, supposing it was the Fathers bed,
and stumbling after by hap on the other bed, where the wife lay all alone, he
holding down his head, softly said: fear not my Love, it is I, and so
dismantling himself, laid him down by her, who conceiting that it was
Mal-Fiance that had taken the benefit of her husbands going forth, resisted
not, but entertained him with all the full favors, that wanton love could
afford: (Thus do women's light thoughts, many times make their husbands to
have heavy heads:) But in this amorous combat, the very bed did proclaim
their forceable encounters, and the fall of bedstaves well witnessed their
fresh assaults; which the daughter hearing, deemed that her restless mother
was tormented with some terror of fear; and therefore calling to her, she
wished her to have a good heart, and not to yield to idle conceits, which but
troubled the mind with deceiving imaginations. The mother perceiving that some
thing was perceived, and that they were heard; took upon her to be affrighted,
and said; Alas daughter, some thing, I know, has been upon me, and if spirits
have any substances, it is surely one; Cover your self well, said the
daughter: By this enterchange of chatte. Haunce knew that he had travailed in
a by-path, which so distasted him, that his teeth gnashed together for anger,
and Mal-Fiance lay laughing at the knowledge thereof, who remembering now, that
Haunce would come in some fearful shape, to make way for his pleasure, he
thought to work further on him, and to beat him with his own weapon; And to
give life to his device, he stole up, and creeping along the beds side wherein
enchaffed Houace did lie, he sought by feeling, and by feeling found, the
hayry hide, which by handling thereof, he knew well was a garment of his
Fathers, and as he threw it over him, with intent to frighten Haunce, he heard
his Host and the Friar coming into the house; who came sooner then they were
expected: Then was he forced to run behind the door, thinking by his hell
like habit, to terrify them all; and so get unknown to his Chamber. Now
Haunce perceiving light through the door (for as yet the Friar durst not come
in, till he had said diverse Pater nosters, and besprinkled the door with his
holywater sprinkle) leapd hastily out of his disliked bed, and failing to find
his devils coat, he pulled the higher sheet out of the bed, and shrewding
himself therein, went like a Ghost to the other side or the door, thinking
likewise thereby, so suddenly to fright them, that undiscovered he might
escape. But the tardy-taken-women, that now were more afraid of shame, then
they were before of sin, were driven to such an exigent, that they knew not
how to avoid, neither rebuke, nor reproach; Their scarlet blushes accused them,
and the holy Church was at the door ready to condemn them. In this hell they
lay, fearing to be seen, until the light which most they feared, freed them
from those they most feared. For the new transformed devil, and the late
metamorphosed ghost, suddenly seeing each other by the light of the Candle,
upon the opening of the door, were so aghast at the fearful sight of either
others terrifying, and unknown shapes, that they verily thought, that the
devil, or some other ill spirit, were purposel come from hell to carry them
away, for their sinful assuming their damned forms, to such wicked and
forbidden ends. In this fear and fearful thought, they made such have to
run away the one from the other, that they both rusht at once so forceably
through the door, that they bear the old Burgamaster down, and turned the
poor Friar over and over; in which fall he pitifully brake his face on the
housecill, and half drowned the Burgamaster with the Holy Water that he
brought, and shed upon him. The careful women though they were thus cleared of
disgrace, yet were they so daunted at the sight of these incarnall devils, that
they woefully cried, and shrieked out; the servant with the Lantern, as one
distract, run out of doors; Mal-Fiance as fearfully fled to his Chamber;
and heartlesse Haunce most amazedly run into the street after the servant;
who looking for fear behind him, saw this spirit P. running (as he thought)
after him; which made him cry out Help, help, a spirit, a ghost; a ghost, a
spirit.

The Watchmen coming by, and hearing him, thought the man was stark mad; but
looking a side, they saw this affrighted, frightning ghost coming toward
them, which put them all into such amazed fear, that they threw down their
weapons, and run away. The coast being thus cleared, unhappy Haunce got into
his Father house. But now the next neighbors that had heard the wretched
woman's shrieking cries, were risen, and having gotten lights, speedily came to
see, and know the cause of their outcries, And finding the Master of the
house, and the Friar (whom fear had entranced) half dead on the floor, and
the Friar all bloudied by his fall, they supposing, that they were slain,
instantly cried out Murder, murder: The dismayed women (that all this while
lay over their heads, in the bath of their sweating fear, doing penance for
their stolen pleasures) having their fear both renewed, and redoubled by these
their cries; cried out as fast, the devil, the devil; at the hearing whereof,
all the neighbors run out of the house again, and Mal-Fiance grew upon this
dreadful allarum, so fearfully timorous, that he durst not moove, though he
were more then moved. In this agony of terror, did they all lie till break
of day, when light (the comfort of dark dismay) emboldned the chief Officer
(who of purpose was sent for) to enter into this house of horror, where raising
them from that place of Purgatory; they found upon examination, that the devil
had bin there, and was the cause of all their disturbances. But Mal-Fiance who
now had made peace with his distracted thoughts; not only found his own
error, but easily apprehended the shift and enforced subtilty of the other. For
remembering that he had disfurnished Haunce of his black Mantle, and so
prevented him of his infernal shape; he conceited, that he had no other
means to free himself, then by taking one of the sheets, and so by appearing
like a ghost to make way for himself. In the belief of this conceit, he vowed
that Haunce should well pay both for terrifying him, and for his planting in
another Vineyard. And to this end, he seeking found him, and told him, that he
had a very good Bull hide to sell him. Haunce knowing well where he lay, was
much astonished thereat, and thanking him, said, He had no need of any. Then
(quoth Mal-Fiance) shall my Host have it, to make him a night-gowne; but you
shall pay for the horns, though you were so liberal as freely to give them.
For in brief Mr. Tanner, the abuse that you have offered mine Host, and the
scandal that you have raised on his house, is so injuriously great, and so
shamefully injurious, that unless you will give me ten pounds, I will uncase
the Devil, and both reveal his adulterous dealing, and tell of your ghostly
escape. Haunce seeing he was discovered, bought his concealment with his coin;
which made Mal-Fiance so wanton, that being so well silver-shod for travail,
he discharged all his debts, and in the innocence of his thoughts, not dreaming
after any danger, he made more have, then good speed to Viennois. And no
sooner was he come, and known to be in Vienna, but that the Lord Vray
Esperance sent for him, and demanded where his Sovereign Lord the Daulphin
was; who being unable to answer thereunto, was presently deemed, either to have
murdered him, or to have betrayed him to his enemies: For it is a rule by
observation true; that they that fear not to be thought faulty, will neither
be afraid to commit the fault, nor ashamed to be seen after the fact. His
leaving (howsoever) of his Liege Lord, was held worthy ofdeath. And therefore
was he sent bound hand and foot to prison, till rigor of justice should by
speedy sentence award him condign punishment.

But the brute hereof, begat such tumultuous vproares, and brought forth such
mischievous factions, both in Court and City, that hardly could the tempest be
allayed without the utter subversion of the state. For how should the low
shurbs stands in rebellion, when the high Cedar was thought to be blown down
by treason? In this combustion, some stood for the indubitate heir the
Princess Vienna, whose liberty they proudly required, amongst whom, Sir
Jacques; and La-Noua were most forward. Some for the malicious and proud
Dalphinis, whose Regencie many affected, But all malcontents, rupugnant
humorists, disordered men, decayed persons, and servile pesants (that thrive
best in mutation of States, and live by others falling, as Swine do by the
dropping of Acornes) flocked about Monsieur Malign, the reputed bastard of the
Daulphin, who ambitiously would needs (according to the wicked disposition of
illegitimates) deprive others by ruin and rapine of their rights, and
appropriate to himself the Crown. The fired fashions began to break forth
into flaming seditious; and masked Rebellion waited but on time and advantage,
to use open force against each other: The Commonweal did well to see her
destruction in this triumuirie; Amongst these briers and brambles, that sought
to ouer-top the stately Oak; awful Justice had no powerful place: Law was no
force, and authority lost all command. For where alteration threatens war,
there the sword makes all things lawful.

But when the Lord Vray Esperance, who was an Anthony in clemency, a Traian in
bounty, and another Augustus in wisdom, beloved of most, and respected of
all; saw this tripertite, and diflentious division growing to such monstrous
heads: and hearing that many of the giddy headed multitude were already
assembled together in the Market place, in a most confused manner, according to
the mutinous natures of the mutable Commons, fearing their aptnest to
innovation, and the sad effects of civil broils, or some sudden ouerture;
leaving (because wanting) all time of further consideration, even in the
assurance of his virtue, and strength of his zeal to his Country, he suddenly
went to the Market place, where all men (notwithstanding their distemperarures)
gave way to his merit, and in love followed after him; so powerful was he in
popular affection, which he perceiving, stayed; and turning himself toward
them, with tears in his eyes, and his Hat in his hands, more like an humble
Suppliant, then a regal Ruler, he made a sign for audience; which granted,
he mildly after some few sighs, said.

What moves my fast friends, loving favorites, and more then dear Countrymen,
to this threatening mutiny? What disturbes your quiet peace, or what seek you
by the hurtful Arms? Do you want a Prince? Why the Daulphin, your liege Lord
(for ought that any knows) lives; and the Princess his apparent heir is not
dead. Does any usurp your rights, or oppress you with wrongs? Why justice
shall give to every one his own, and I am here ready to shed my blood in your
behalfes. Or does the bare suppose of your Sovereigns death, thus untimely
move you to create, and inuest a new, because Mal-Fiance is returned without
his Lord? A project trust me, that will being forth some notable deceitful
design. If needs he must be dead, because none can hear tell that he is
alive; Why then should he not be as well living, because here no one knows
that he is dead? But admit that our sins have (which God forbid) deprived us
of him, does it follow, that the ambitious Daulphinis, or that degenerate
Bastard Malign, should succeed him? What though Vienna be a prisoner to her
Fathers will, and my faith must keep her still a thrall to his severity? yet
the Father dying, the daughters bonds are broken, I discharged, and you tied,
to enthronize her for your lawful Princess.

Why then should there be any such disparity of minds, or diversity of
affections amongst you, since you are all sudiects born to one end, and
Viennonians sworn to one right? What shall become of this Principality, when
those that should unite themselves to maintain the Weale-publique; do thus
divide themselves, to overthrow the public weal? Know you not, that by thus
banding your selves, you do altogether abandon your selves?

Will not your insulting, and enchroaching neighbors (the proud Savonians) our
inveterate and irreconciliable enemies, take advantage of your weakening of your
own strengths, enter forceably upon your rights, dispossess you of your
habitations, and make you aliens to your inheritances? Yes, yes, be you
assured, that hatred amongst friends, gives ever succor to Strangers: and that
civil wars within you, will bring foreign wars upon you. Look on the
Daulphinis, of whom I am loath to speak ill, yet in this, I know not how to
speak well. Does not her unwasted corruption and pride show, that she loves a
Palace better then her Paradise? that thinks by shameful rebellion, to make
her self a sinful Queen?

Know you not, that they that are so greedy, so unlawfully to get; will be ever
as ready to do wrong? What color of claim can she have, that is neither
royalized by propagation, nor extract from Princely or Noble blood? She had no
authority given her in his highness rule; nor has she any left her at his
departure. It is, I see, only her pride, that can suffer no equal, and
Malignes ambition, that can brook no Superior: two firebrarnds, that burnt up
Romes most glorious Monarchy. O let them both then fall in their pride, that
seek so uniustly to fly before they have wings; and wash not your eyes, and
hands, like Envy, in one another fall. In persisting to maintain evil,
Malign does condemn himself; otherwise he would not seek to obtain that
with blood and shame; which he can neither get, nor keep, without sin and
death, In all the Scriptures there was but one sole Bastard (only Iephiha) that
did come to any good; and yet he had the mark of the curse: for his all only
daughter was most sorrowfully sacrificed for her great Fathers offense; And
this was but to show, that there is no perpetuity, nor long prosperity, in
hateful and condemned bastardy. And will you then make the corrupt and cursed
seed, and excrement of sin, your unlawful Prince? that by all divine,
nature, and national laws, has no inheritance on earth; and whom the Jews
counted as no part of their congregation.

If the Father be an Adulterer, and the Mother a Fornicator, the Son must in
reason be a bad liver, and a wicked governor. For he that is borne in double
sin, must of likely hood in nature, be both subject to many faults, and
guilty of many offenses. And how can polluted hands make foul vessels clean?
or how can he that is but the son of the people, be the son of the
Daulphin? The Mothers acknowledgement, and protestation, is no proof; that
ever fathers them on those that can best maintain them. She cannot be true to
one, that is untrue to her self: Corruption will still break out there, where
it is once festered, How then can you affect the son of shame, or without
shame, yield your selves subject to the Son of a strumpet? If his desire be
beyond his merit and reach, let him fall besides his hopes, and receive just
guerdon for his deserts. As for the virtuous Princess, whose right I reverence
and whose worth I admire. Let her yet remain (though with better respect)
where she is. For it is not good over-suddainely to open a wound, that has
long been closed up. The greatest right, may do the most wrong, and the
omission of a good action, is no sin; when it cannot be done without
committing of sin. I have sworn to her Father, and would be found faithful
to my Lord; I affect not government: For in this, I am but like the Sun that
carries his Lantern for others, and not for himself. It is better to be
doubtful then over-credulous; and the uncertainty of his death, is no warrant
for my discharge, nor your disobedience. There is time for all things, and the
Moon that is not yet risen, may rise, and shine in full glory, though now she
be eclipsed. What more would you have, or what further (O you fond Viennonians)
do you endeavor to affect? Will you turn Traitors to your Lord, rip up your
own bowels, make your wives widows, and your children fatherless, and
helpless? Will you put fire to your own houses, possess your foes with your
wives, and wealths: see your daughters deflowred, and make an utter
devastation of your Country?

Alas, I see your wilfulness betrays your wits, and draws on your
overthrowes into your enemies tryumphes; and grief makes me to shed tears of
blood for your own purchased destructions. Let me at last, O let me in love,
and tender care of your welfares, dehort you from wounding of your selves, and
leave these ill presaging jarres amongst you; and like birds of one flock,
fly together; Maintain your sacred oaths, for the preservation of your
Sovereigns right, till better assurance acquit you from your obliged faithes.
To hasten the knowledge whereof, I will wing many Messengers with speed, to
enquire, and learn what is become of our Sovereign Lord, with that the tears
did trickle down his face, which struck such a compassionate regard in all
their hearts, that being before made sensitive of their errors, and now fully
satisfied, and reclaimed by his tongue of persuasion; they joyfully threw up
their Hattes, and some lifting him up, cried, God save the Daulphin, and the
Lord Vray Esperance, under whose government we will only live. Thus did his
pleasing words, powerful authority, mild behavior, refined and probable
seasons, and subtilized distinction, allay the force of the approaching storm,
and gave such contentment to all, that every one departing in love, brought
home peace to their neighbors.

Thus did this noble Governor (like a good and a skillful Musicioner) put all
this iarring discord, in a good, and true time; which so crossed the hateful
hopes of malicious Malign, that failing of native strength, and rebellious
forces, to dignifie his indignities; he suddenly fled unto the Savoy Duke, to
require foreign aid, to royallize his proud baseness. Such was his aspiring
wrath, that it had no mean, and such his Treason, that it had no end. Fear
made him now doubt the rigor of law, that before would have been subject to
no law: and therefore did he in such unstable waters, and threatening winds,
seek for more powerful ears; which the subtle Duke well perceiving, thought
to feed on him, as Pharaohs lean Kine did on the fat:

But before he went, he advised thereof with his politic and sworn
considerate friend, Monsieur Meschant, whose false semblable minds, ever made
such a full connection of wills betwixt them, as what the one pernitiously
contrived, the other most traitorously put in practice. And therefore Meschant
seeing him already over the shoes in danger, persuaded him to wade up to the
chinne: For, said he, There can never be any peril in the adventure, where
the Foord promises so good a passage. Danger now only dwells at home, and the
Savoy Duke may both fortify your hope, and raise your fortunes. Offer him but
interest in the Daulphin, and you shall find that his avarice and pride will in
that hope, greedily work on our broken and disturbed state. So then happily
with speed, and most powerfully and successively; may you return; and as
prevailent may your success be, as your going is most pertinent. And
therewithal, he took a sheet of clean paper, and laying both sides straight
together, he cut diverse rows through them both; and after cutting them a
sunder, he kept the one half himself, and gave the other, saying:

By this, and through this, shall you (without either danger to me, or
perceivance of any other) still know what is here done, and what I would have
you further to do. For though I writ my Letters directly, and most
distastfully against your Apostacy, and combination with the publipue foe, and
advise you to betray that noble Duke, (which for my safety I must still do,
lest in the portage, or otherwise, my Letters should miscarry) yet shall you
easily at all times unmaske my intended intelligence, and find out both my
fallacy, and true instructions: if you but take this your cut pattern, and
lay it one my Letter, where you shall plainly, and formally, read through the
same, no more, then what I purposely in truth do write unto you, and would
willingly enfeoffe you with. In like manner (as I will teach you) may you
safely by the same illusion, certify me, of all your proiects and designs.

Malign thanked him, prayed his remembrance thereof, and so bad him farewell.
For fear sent him post away, and hope gave him such speed, as in short time
he came to the Dukes Court, where after he had most respectively saluted him,
he related, how that the Daulphin his father was dead, and that the Lord Vray
Esperance affecting government, most ambitiously sought to retain his usurped
rule. That the Princess Vienna was in prison unregarded of all; and that he
had himself, many strong and assured favorites, that would stand for his
fortune. In furtherance whereof, he was come to pray his assistance, and for
guerdon thereof, he would interrest him in that half of Daulphine, that lay
next unto him.

Thus did he seek his own ruin with great labor, and buy repentance with
bloody cost. Thus did he make himself a Bridge for the encroaching Duke to
enter upon his Country: And this gap did he open, that the Sauonian forces
might like an inundation submerge, and ouerwhelme both himself, and the whole
body of the State. For the Duke who ever waited on opportunity, and still
watched how the Market went, finding now the Mine discovered; he thought good
to make profit thereof, and to take the benefit of the Tide, while the flood
served. And therefore he embraced the person, for the occasion; and promising
him help (but with Judas subtilty to make himself rich) he leavyed Forty
thousand men well appointed, with whom, with all affected expedition, he
instantly in person, went to fish in Viennois troubled water, without making
any Conscience of thrusting his Sickle into another Harvest. The opinion of
possibility so redoubled his unbounded desires, that he thought that time too
long, that he spent in going: But it had been better for him, with the
Tortoise, to have kept his head within his own shell, then by seeking so
abroad, to raise his fortunes out of another ruins.

For that careful Shepherd (the ever watchful Governor) being now summoned
by wastfull War, to defend both his Flock, and his Fold, stood not now like
a doubtful Chyrurgion, to consult of the ripeness of the sore; but like an
expert Captain (that at the first, would prevent fury by force) he suddenly
raised 30000. men, whom in pride of his aged age, he himself led into
Daulphine, to encounter with the injurious and intruding Duke.

Now Mescant hearing that the Duke and Malign, were entered into Daulphine, and
seeing the present preparation, and hasty march, that the governor now made
against them; He instantly writ unto Malign thereof, and thus deceitfully
disguised his subtle intelligences.

MY Lord, your speed to ruin J applaud, and J joy in your approaching fall;
which I wish, if you seek to waste your Native, and distressed Country with
Foreign strength. The terror of war, you, nor your Savonians forces has
yet known. But be you assured, that GOD will confound those, that strive to
dispossess others of their rights. War never yet appald the hearts of the
true and valiant Viennonians: Our Governor is wise, powerful, and practive in
Martial discipline; His Allies great, his Adheares many, and his followers
nothing fearful of the event; and though his Army cannot make 30000. strong,
yet has he leavied many more Troops, which now are marching on a pace to his
aid. Betray that hateful Duke, and you shall find many that yet are your
harmless enemies, and some that will in that merit procure your pardon. Trust
not a Foreign Conqueror; For he will be absolute, and remove you, and your
assured friends. Loose no occasion, nor time in giving battle, wherein you
may best work their overthrow, and redeem your lost Honor. Be secret in
your intended Stratagems, least you find more hazard, and resistance, by
greater and more dangerous opposition. If you will thus repair your fortunes,
send me the like notice thereof, and you shall be secured by our supplies.
Bend your forces chiefly against the General. For dead men bite not. It
matters not how, so it be well done, Take but away the Chiefetaine, and the
Army will scatter. For in his fall, the field is lost, and the honor yours,
Farewell.

MESCHANT.


Thus in a fair Cup of gold did this pestiferous Meschant utter his hidden
poison; And under the apparent show of honest loyalty, did he give both
treacherous intelligence, and dangerous instructions to the hostile Enemy. For
Malign upon the receite of this Letter, laid his pattern thereon, and so read
his subtle and cloked advertisements through the same, as by laying down, and
covering this his Letter, with this exampled pattern, you may plainly
perceive.

By this time had the Daulphin, and Sir Sirap (after tedious travail)
recovered Marcelles in Province, through which they past unknown into
Daulphin; where the Daulphin finding his Country, in his declining days,
covered over with Camps, Carriages, barbed Horses, and armed Soldiers; he
amazedly asked, and asking learned, the unexpected cause thereof; which made
him bewail his sinister fortunes, and envy no little against that impious
abject, his accursed supposed son. Grief now made him weep at his Countries
calamity, and fear made him doubt his own deprivation. The Harvest of his
sins, yielded him now more increase of woes; then the lusts of his youth
afforded him pleasures. But how should (said the sorrowful Daulphin) he that
is begotten in my full sin, and borne in his own shame; live without doing
villainy, or dye without making mischief? If his being be from me, why then
should he seek to take from me my being? And if he be none of mine, what then
has he to do with it, which is mine? but he is not mine, but the son of
iniquity, and scorn of nature; and therefore knows neither his shameless
self, nor his sinful father. I nourished him (as a Snake) in the bosom of my
love, and now he would sting me to death, in the poison of his hate. O how
just are the judgments of God, that pays our amiss, in the amiss of our
offenses, and makes our wicked pleasures our just punishments.

In this bemoaning fury, did he call for vengeance to be powered down on
Malign; which Sirap seeing, could not but grieve at his sad lamentations,
though otherwise he rejoiced, that occasion presented unto him both a means to
show there his prowess; and a way to make his Country indebted to his valor.
For as a stranger he knew he should win honor, and after gain (being made
known) more respect. The wrath of War he did not fear, nor made he any
doubt of his Countries safety. And therefore he chearefully commanded Boufoy
to comfort the distressed Daulphin, and to assure him, that the God of the
Viennonians had brought him thither, in justice, both to punish the treachery
of his degenerate son; and also to correct the insulting pride of the
intruding Duke; in both whose ambitious bloods, he vowed to bath his
revengefull Sword, and by force of the Viennonian forces, to overthrow all the
Savonians. Only entreat him to take up the heat of his indignation in the
embers, and to keep himself unknown that thereby he might both receive a
true trial of his Subjects forces, and fidelities; and the easier escape, and
support himself, after, with foreign supplies, if the Viennonians should
unhappily be vanquished. As for himself, he would (when they were hottest in
battle) suddenly thrust himself amongst them, where he would write such
Tragedies in his enemies blood, that weeping repentance should teach them, what
it is, to invade another right, and to displant the true Vine. His Highness
and Boufoy, I would have them, like two peaceable Pilgrims, to stand safely
aloof, and to view the hazard of the game, till the last chance be cast, and
then secretly to convey themselves to some cave in the near adjoining Wood,
whether in the dark of night I will undiscryed repair, and further consult
what after is to be done. To this the animated Daulphin subscribed. For in his
virtuous valor, and practive knowledge, did he build his new raised hope; and
on his unresistable force, and most fortunate achievements, did his comfort
depend.

Now Sirap having ever about him his never failing Semitar, wherewith he
vanquished Turbulent the fierce, and being furnished with the Shield, and
Armor, that he forceably took from the Captain of the Pirates in the Affricke
Seas; he made all things in readiness, and instantly sent Bonfoy to the next
Town with his Shield, to cause a Painter to draw omit a disturbed waved Sea
and in the midst thereof a crowned Daulphin, driving other Fishes before him,
and striking many under the waves with his tail, with this Impresse under.
Crowned to Conquer.

Thus did the Daulphins unknown Knight, in honor of the Daulphin, make
himself the Knight of the Daulphin. But by this time the two Armies marching
both on, affronted each other in sight, which made the Sauoy Duke, to make a
stand, and to set his men in good array of Battle, which he divided in two
parts. The first were his troops of Horse, which he assigned to be conducted
by the Bastard Malign. The other, consisting of Foot, he led himself. In
this equipage he soberly marched, till he came to a spacious Plain, near to
Andre, where he preparedly stayed the coming on of the Viennonians, who being
well Marshalled in one mean Battle, Cressat-wise, with two wings of Horse on
either side, came on apace, by the Command of their good General, the L. Vray
Esperance; unto whom, honor gave spurs; his place, faithfulness; and the
love of his Country courage.

Malign heartned on the Duke with the false assurance of the Viennoians
revolt, and the hope to incorporate that Principality to his own, haled him on
the more to that bloody bargain. For the charge being given, Desire, and
Revenge, encountered each other with such fury, that the Battle was long in
suspense. Victory enclining to neither side, till at last, the Troop of the
Sauonian Horses disranked both the Wings of the Viennoians, and brake in upon
the squadron of the Foot, with such violence, that they began to stagger, and
give back. When the all-valarous, and invincible Sirap, the Knight of the
Daulphin, came fortunatly in, who finding where danger dwelled most, there he
opposed himself, and like to a sudden Tempest, bare down all before him.
His desire to approve himself in his Countries defense, and his implaceable
wrath against those, that sought to defeat Vienna of her right, and to defraud
him of the comfort of his hope, made his blows fall like thunder, and his
sword to cut like the Executioners Axe. None could stand before him, nor durst
there any come near him; which so encouraged the disheartened remainder of the
Viennonian Caualirie, that they ranked themselves again, and came up to second
him. This fresh, and new assault, disordered, and dismayed the Sauonian
Troops, who now fought fearfully, and confusedly; which Malign perceiving,
purposely, and fatally brought up all his Forces, and begirt him round,
thinking so to end the Battle, by making an end of him, that both had ended
so many of their lives, and only maintained the Battle. In this danger, did
the undaunted Knight of the Daulphin fight so long, that his Horse was slain
under him, which he with great agility well and quickly avoided, and being on
foot, perceived his other self, his entire dear friend La-nova (whom he
knew by his coat Armor) to lie in the dust. This sight was such an Alarm to
waken Revenge, that he grew now more furiously wrathful, and more irefully
impatient then before; and being desirous to recover his body, he desperately
strid over him, and like valiant Hector amidst the begirting Myrmidons, he
stood to withstand all assaylers. Lanova being thus freed from the smothering
feet of his Enemies, having had time of breathing, came to himself (for he was
not mortally wounded) and began to stir, which being found, and perceived by
the Knight of the Daulphin, (maugre all the force of his swarming and pressing
foes) he took him up, and bare him to the Lord Vray Esperance, unto whom,
kissing him often, in manifestation of his love, he delivered him, with many
speaking signs, that he should be sent safely away. The General who had
seen with the eyes of admiration, the incomprehensible force, and unvaluable
valor of this unknown Knight, respectively received him, and accordingly sent
him to the next Town, and then having already brought up his strength of
Foot, of purpose to succor the Daulphin Knight, he followed him in his bloody
passage, with intent to horse him again, lest he should miscary in that
peril: In this desire, he came on so furiously fast, that the Savoy Duke
seeing the rage of this tempestuous flood, to over-beare Malignes Forces,
advanced his maine Battle and like a terrible storm, fell upon the
Viennonians. But this lightning lasted not long, for the Knight of the Daulphin
perceiving that now the dice was cast, and that they both were to abide their
last chance, summoned all his strength together, and in the vigor of his
displeased courage, meeting with Malign, he smote him so on his Burganet, that
he felled him, sore wounded to the earth, where being no respight for rescue,
he was smothered, and trodden to death.

Thus dyed the spawne of sin, in sinful shame,
Ill was he got, lewd his life, bad his name.
Now notwithstanding, the withstanding Savonians, the Knight of the Daulphin
took Malignes Horse, and in despite of all interruption, he lightly mounted
on him, and with his confounding sword, he made such a slaughter, that he found
little resistance. This remarkable act, gave not only fresh hope, but new life
to Esperance, who wondered not so much, at who he was, as at what he did; and
yet he thought he must be more then a man, that did more then a man could do.
But the doubtful Daulphin standing all this while aloof, joyfully beholding
the heroical deeds, of his second Savior, said unto Boufoy, that Siraps
valor was beyond all apprehension, his courage above conceit, his puissance
more then humane, and his deeds surmounting all opinion.

By him, said he, I have my second being; and by him I see, I shall still be a
Prince; O would, and as he would have proceeded further, he made a stay to
behold the distempered Duke, who seeing his men discomforted and slain, most
by this alone Knight, came in with a troop of reserve; whom he had commanded,
to unite all their forces together, and bend themselves wholly for the taking,
or killing of this unknown Hercules, the most redoubted Knight of the Daulphin;
but costly experience made them loath to come so near him, as to hurt him,
least breaking the rule of pity, they should be guilty of their own deaths.
Yet in some presumption, both of their number, and Armor; they faintly
assaulted him to their repenting detrements. In this fresh conflict, the Knight
of the Daulphins Beaver was broken; and fell down, which much more advantaged
then endammaged, or endangered him. For the Enemies seeing his black hew, and
his wrathful eyes (being then kindled a new with anger) shining like fire,
were suddenly appald with such dread, and fearful amazement, that (holding
him rather an infernal spirit, then a mortal man) they began to recoyle, and
to fly from him like a great Covie of frighted Partridges, from the first
pursuit of a fierce Faulcon; whereupon he flourished his Conquering sword, and
cried out in Greek, Victory, Victory, and then followed them with such raging
fury, that he hewed out his way in blood, till he encountered that proud
innading Duke, whom he knew by his rich Armor, and thinking now to make an
end of both him and the Battle at once, he lifted up his controuling and
quelling arm, and so enragedly smote him on the side of his helmet, that
neither the steel, nor the temper, could secure him from that fatal and
inevitable blow; but as all men fall that seeks to build up their fortunes
upon others ruins; so fell he now (in the height of his hope) breathless to
the ground. Then began the Savonians to fly on all hands, and light
unharnessed legs were better then well approved arms. Most of them were
slain, few escaped, the rest were taken prisoners.

Night drawing on, the General, the Lord Vray Esperance commanded to sound the
Retrait. But the Knight of the Daulphin purposely pursued the Chase, that in
the darkness of night he might the better convay himself away, and
undiscovered go (as he did) to the Wood, where the glad Daulphin joyfully
attended him: And no sooner did he see him, but that with tears of joy, that
in triumph, trickled down his cheeks, he hasted to embrace him, and impalling
him within the circuit of his arms, he held him fast, his tongue failing to
be messenger of his thankful heart. For in this passion,

Love clipped him fast, true Comfort held him long;
Joy could not speak, for Wonder had no tongue.
But after his full heart had a little enjoyed it self, and somewhat digested
his surfeit of joy. Then, then, his tongue was enabled to applaud his victory;
and he both crowned his prowess with loud resounding praises, and gave him
more then many thanks for his most glorious and happy labors; And now with
more regard, did he not only industriate himself, to do him all the kind
offices of love, but also humbly offered to unarme him, which in no wise Sirap
would permit, but wearied with that days travail, he betook himself to his
rest; where his restless thoughts began a new War betwixt his desire, and
determination: feign would he have seen her, whom he loved more then his
life, and yet to deliberate well on things profitable, he held to be a most
provident delay, At last he resolved to keep himself, and them unknown for
some few days, that the Country might be settled in peace, and he see what
course would be held both for Vienna, and for the government. In the interim
he might the better conclude with himself, for his own affairs. O noble,
noble Paris, more noble then those, that are enobled with flattering and fading
titles. How loving art thou true? How truly wise, and virtuous; that not only
can without pride conquer thy foes; but also without folly (beyond nature)
command to own and dearest affections. If that wanton Trojan had had the like
sympathy of mind, and the same stable sincerity of heart, as he had the
likeness, and unity of thy name; Troy had been unconquered, and he had lived
longer and in greater glory. But let us return to the Lord Vray Esperance, who
after the overthrow and ejectment of the Savomans, had posting news brought
him, that the masicious and imperious Daulphinis, upon notice of the victory,
fell suddenly dead. She could live no longer, that had no hope to rule any
longer: He pride and desire of Soveraignety, could neither brook subjection,
nor endure controlment; Besides the guilt of her own evil, proclaimed her
death; and the fear of loosing her life, was the loss of her life. Such is
the nature of greatness, that but crossed in their ambitious courses, they
shrink under the weight of their own burthenous pride. But her remove, moved
not so much the good Governor, as the miss of their glorious preserver, that
invincible and all admirable Knight of the Daulphin, that to their amazement,
had so often relieved their weakened forces, rescued their fainting endangered
friends, repulsed their oppressing Enemies, slain most of their best
Commanders, daunted the whole Army, and at two blows, overthrown and killed
the malignant Malign, and the proud ambitious Duke, that potent General: Then
he caused inquisition to be made throughout all his territories after him, and
rich rewards promised to him that could, or should give knowledge of him: but
no one could show what he was, nor where he was: only some declared, that his
Beaver being broken in Battle, they saw his face as black as darkness, and
his eyes as bright as fire; which made the Governor doubtful, whether he were
a man, that did more then many men; or no man that could not be subdued by an
host of men; or that the all-mercifull God in favor of their distressed right,
had sent some of his correcting Ministers, to chasten, and power vengeance on
the hateful heads of their unjust foes. But the War being thus ended, Peace
called a counsel for the further establishing of tranquillity; And the
consideration of these bloody iarres, condemned poor Mal-Fiance to dye; not
only for leaving his Lord, and being unable to give account of his Sovereigns
life; but also for being the first cause of perturbation in the State, and
after of foreign invasion. The loss of so many of their lives, made them all
thirst after his death; To hasten which, they brought him the next day to the
place of execution, where happily the Daulphin, and Sirap, with his man Boufoy,
came by all in Pilgrims gowns, as they were (by agreement) going to the City;
who seeing and understanding the cause of that Assembly, withdrew themselves,
and upon short consultation, they sent Boufoy to the Governor (who needs
would be there to hear his latest Confession) that he might learn somewhat
concerning his beloved Lord.) Of him did Boufoy, knowing now the cause) in the
name of his Master, the Knight of the Daulphin, require that Mal-Fiance should
be delivered unto him; which granted, he would undertake to bring them to the
Daulphin. In assurance whereof, he (unfolding his Gown) tendered the honor of
his Masters shield, as a pledge for his performance; which when the Lord Vray
Esperance saw, he knew it by the devise thereon, to be the same, that the
Knight of the Daulphin carried in Battle, and therefore he joyfully took it,
and kissing it reverently, said; That that remarkable badge of his
all-vertuous, and most glorious worth, (besides the glad tidings he delivered
of their gracious Lord) was more then sufficient, to redeem a world of lives;
And therefore presenting Mal-Fiance unto him, he prayed that they might both
see the Daulphin, and the Daulphin Knight, whom next to the Daulphin; both he,
and all the Viennonians, did, and would ever honor, as their sole and only
preserving Patron; And then taking his Chain from about his neck, he gave it
him, saying: Let this be a witness of my gratefulness, and truly tell thee,
with that true joy I entertain thy welcome tidings. Boufoy humbly thanked his
honor, and requested him, that he would be pleased to see how he bestowed
Mal-Fiance, whom he brought unto the other two Pilgrims, that were walking a
little aside from them. But when the Daulphin had discovered himself unto him,
Mal-Fiance fell down at his feet for mercy, and rising, threw up his Hat into
the air, and cried aloud, the Daulphin, the Daulphin, God save my Lord the
DAVLPHIN.

This unexpected, and most fortunate accident, made all the company at the
hearing thereof, to showt for joy: And the good Vray Esperance hastily lighting
from his Horse, fell upon his knee, and kissing his hand, said; Long may my
Liege Lord the Daulphin live. Whereat the Daulphin raising him, embraced him,
and told him, that as his loyalty was crowned with renown, so would he add
honor, and reward to his virtues. But forget not, said he, my Lord, to
welcome this noble and heroical Moore, the thrice worthy Knight of the
Daulphin, that both has preserved me from death and thraldom, and delivered
you, and my Country from our oppressing foes. O with what joy, and
astonishment, did then this loyal rejoicing Lord hasten to kneel unto him:
For though he held him less then a God, yet he thought he could not be, but
more then a man: But Sirap staying him, greeted him with all the demonstrations
of love, and reverent respect. This done, they mounted both the Daulphin, and
this magnificent Moore, who needs would both ride barefaced in their Pilgrim
Gowns through the City; Mal-Fiance waited on the Daulphins stirope and Boufoy
manly carried his Masters Shield before him, and after went the Lord Vray
Esperance, with all the rest of their retinue.

Now their approach was no sooner known in Vienna, but that they knew their
welcomes by their rejoicing bells stately boone-fires, and triumphing hearts.

Hardly could they pass for press of people, still they came running to see
them, especially the Knight of the Daulphin, whom they admired for his fame,
honored for his great achievements, and loved for their protection. Sirap
seemed much to admire the French, whom the French themselves did more then
admire. But in viewing the whole Troop, his observing eye, light by chance on
his fast friend La-nova, at which sight, he sighed, yet thought himself happy
in the sight. Thus rode they on triumphant in themselves, and honored of all.
At length they came to the Palace gate, where dismounting themselves, the
Daulphin now happy in being the Daulphin, could not but shed swelling tears,
in tender remembrance of his too well beloved Wife.

But as the General of an Army, buries all the remembrance of his lost
friend, in the pride and triumph of his Conquest: so did the Daulphins freedom
from many perils, and the artainement to his near lost principality,
extinguish all sorrow and memory of the dead Daulphinis. So that wiping his
eyes, he turned himself toward Sirap, and embracing him, said; Most worthy
Knight, and my dearest friend, welcome to my Court to my self, and all that is
mine: This Palace, my Country, and I, are all at your dispose; For so in my
particular obligation, and by your merritorious and pleading deserts, am I
bound unto you: And longer may not I enjoy what I now possess, then you shall
find my promises full laden with rich performance. And be further assured,
that as I only live through your love, and reign altogether by your valor,
so will I ever owe you fealty for my life, and still do you homage for my
Crown. Sirap understanding thus much by Boufoy, returned him humble thanks
for his so grateful and high esteem, both of himself, and his poor
endeavors; with protestation that he neither wished, nor expected so great,
and undeseruing guerdons; but still held himself most indebted unto his own
desires, to do him all further possible service.

This interchange of kindnesses, gave contentment to them both, and was most
pleasing to the Daulphin, who yet fed so on his fresh feeling happiness, that
he gave in charge that all his Subjects should honor Sirap, as himself, and
hold his will, as the will of their Lord; For so (he said) is your Lords will,
that next to the Lord of hoasts, holds his life, and living of him. Then told
he them, how and with what hazard of his life, he had redeemed him, from most
base bondage, and cruel death; How he had left many heathen honors, to honor
him, then greatly dishonored; and how he had protected him at Sea from danger
of Pirates: and lastly, established him in his regalty, in despite of his foes.
And therefore many, and sundry were the Triumphs that now were ordained for
him; but more then many, were the several thoughts that afflicted his
doubtful mind: Vienna he thought had cause to condemn him since affection
ever thinks all times of stay too long, that hangs on desert: La-nova he knew
would rebuke him for violating the sacred laws of friendship in his
concealment: And his reverend Father might well question his breach of love
and duty, that so refused to show himself a son. One while was he ready to
embrace La-nova; another time to run to Vienna; and by and by he was ready
pressed to fall on his knees to Sir Jaques. Now did he pity distressed Vienna
(who in all these alterations, was neither moved nor removed) Then did he fear
her liberty, since her Father had no feeling of her calamity. Thus dubiously
perplexed in mind he sadly sat, unregarding regarding, the continuing and
maintained Iustes; until the Daulphin judging of his stormy thoughts, by his
clowded countenance, thus awaked him by his Interpreter.

What think, said he, my best worthy friend of our French Knights? and how
stands our Court sports with your liking? Sirap, whose Martial mind, was now
mollified with milder, and calmer thoughts by his man, thus answered, As
Knights of good regard, I regard your Knights; and as noble befitting sports, I
commend your heroical pastimes. All does well, and well does it stand with
your Highness, that has Knights, that can do so well. But the Iustes being
ended, the Daulphin that had read his coffeehouse in the deep characters of
his face (for the countenance often shows the affects and passions of the heart)
took him by the hand, and privately led him into a fair tapistred gallery,
hanged with most artificial pictures of greatest Monarchs, where he thus
again assaved to find the cause of his disturbance. Let not (said he) any
doubt dismay mylives preserver, nor let any remembrance of your last, and lost
honors, work in you any repenting humor; since Viennaes Daulphin is both
willing, and ready, both to accomplish your demand, and to honor you with all
dignities. What pleases Sirap, pleases the Daulphin, and nothing shall
content the Daulphin, but what shall well like Sirap. Then ask my Lord, and
be Lord of your asking. Sirap thus kindly entreated, and encouraged, lowly
humbled himself, and by Boufoy, thus replied.

Know most renowned, and thrice worthy Prince, that doubtful suspicion
harbors not in noble hearts; Nor think I once of honors change. Your
covenanted promise exiles that doubt, and the effect of my request, is the
honor that best will please my mind. Then let me show, and showing crave,
both what troubles your servant, and what he now (in all humility) demands for
his conditioned gift. Not affecting honors, the worlds fading glory; nor
coveting riches, man's pleasing evil; but seeking contentment in loves
felicity. I ask, claim, and require, your daughter my Lord, for my wife, and
a wife for my reward. The renown of her attractive virtues, and the virtue of
her moving perfections, has by report so captivated my freest thoughts since
my coming to Viennois, that wondering at her Fame, I am wounded with Fancy; and
my desire is to see and applaude her excellencies. Then let it not seem
strange unto you, that unseene perfections have thus wrought unknown passions,
since the ear is as well subject to conceit, as the eye is pliant to
affection. The Daulphin, whose unnatural and impenitrable heart felt no longer
remorce of her endured misery, then whilst he was himself in misery; and who
was no sooner free, but that he freed his remorced thoughts, from all thought
of remorce; In so much, that looking neither after her imprisonment, nor his
own posterity, he in his ever over awfulnesse showed himselse now rather an
unrelenting Tyrant, then a chastising Father. But now thus utged by Sirap
(whose warranted demand, and high deserts, might well challenge an absolute
grant) he herein (still discontented) thus contented Sirap.

Nothing I see (right noble, valiant, and most merritorious Moore) seems
worse to love, then to prefer^e any thing before it self; For cloth Desire in
plates of burnished gold, and Desire will shiver all for cold; and fill
affections purse with treasure, and fancy wanting contentment will starve for
hunger: so that nothing can satisfy Love, but love. Your deserts might well
have challenged my Principality for your due, my dignities for your right and
all my treasure for your own. But all these I see suffice not, because they
satisfy not; And to ask you why, is to ask one half pyned, why he is
hungry. You love my Lord, you love but whom? my daughter; yea that is my
grief; Not that you love her, unworthy your love; but that I cannot give you
her, more then worthy her. For such I swear (by the eternal, and my
all-preseruing God) has been, and yet is, the undutiful, and most obstinate
will of my too disobedient and degenerate daughter, that never yet nor yet ever
could I, or shall I (I fear) persuade, entreat, or enforce her to consent to
any, in royal rank, worth, or majesty suitable to her self. For many times
many powerful Princes, that sued for her favor, she has both carelessly
disrespected, and scornefully refused; And as many times, many times, has she
therein my will disobeyed, and contemned. Not regarding her renown shining in
their glory; Nor respecting my contentment, nor progeny, eclipsed both in her
neglect of me, and in her affoorded favor to her far inferiors; which
caused me in justice to punish her hateful disobedience with imprisonment, and
yet in nature to bewail her imprisonment, though enforced by Justice, Where I
left her, there (so you please) may you find her, a prisoner to her will, that
will not yet submit her self to my will; and therefore by my will, worthily
chastised without offense to Nature. For where Nature. offends law, there law
may justly be executed on Nature Assay her (most worthy of all worth) and put
in balance your fortune with your fancy, and if your hap may drown her
favor, you shall redouble the small remainder of my aged days, and well
satisfy the justice of my displeasure, with the honor of your desired
affinity. All my right is yours; your demand, my consent; and my consent a full
Fathers grant. Sirap acknowledging this his so great bounty, gave him more
thanks then if he had presently entitled and invested him in the Principality
of Viennois; Yet said he, it seems not ouer-strange to me, nor should it be
so offensive to your Highness, that one so enriched by Nature, so admired for
Virtue, and so endowed by Fortune, should herein against all nature, so resist
the law of nature; since Fancy is altogether guided by Destiny; and Love is
neither subject to duty nor reason. Then seeing that Love yields neither
reason of choice, nor change; I will leave to reason further of it, and
adventure once to carry up a dish to Venus table, that never yet served in her
Court.

The Daulphin glad that his demand, was of no greater consequence, secretly
smiled at his simplicity, that neglecting Honors highest advancements, only
contented himself with the naked hope of most impossible favors. But Sir
Sirap being more assured, then the Daulphin did assure himself, rested
thankfully contented with the same; And the next morning in the pride of his
secret joy, he went unto the Castle, where (having the Daulphins signet for
his warrant) he called for Vienna, who fearing some sudden stratagem, (for
all her hope of welfare was dead) fearfully came to the door, to know the end
of her punishment. But when Sirap saw the alteration, that virtuous Constancy
had wrought in her imprisonment, grief so attached him, that he was more
mortified at the sight, then he was Moorefied in sight; yet after some secret
digested sighs, he cheared up his ingreeved spirit, with the joy he had to
see her, and thus by his interpreter he saluted her.

Our Gods of all happiness, make fair Vienna happy in her desires, and more
fortunate in her life. The same Vienna (Vienna said) yields you hearty thanks,
and prays that the like content may countervaile your well wishing. Then shall
(said he) my love be made immortal in your liberty, and your liberty be
purchased by my love. Vienna abashed at his reply, replied again; that grief
had no harbor for love, nor love any acquaintance with distressed Vienna. A
noble cause, said Sirap, may yet help to heal a grievous case. Then leave
these for lorne walls, and let not your will make you a prisoner, that may live
in my love a Princess. For know (Madam) that your father being a prisoner in
Babylon, and allotted there to most base and cruel death; I though by kind,
an unpassionate Moore, yet (much more then any Moore) pitying the wiseries of
others, had such compassion on your Fathers distress, that growing careless
of my estate (being there then entertained with greatest state) I adventured
with great adventure, to acquit him from shameful bondage, and more cruel
death; Conditionally; that upon my arrival with him in this Country, he
should grant me, without all exception, one gift, that then I should require;
which he then ratified by oath in sight of his God, and now has confirmed it,
hy will in the presence of his people.

Now Madame, hearing the well worthy renown of your renowned beauty, though
being by Nature fierce, yet subject to affection, I could not but in that
frailty, yield to humane condition. And therefore prizing my content before a
Crown, I required your Ladyship for my Wife, which your Father by oath has
granted, which you in duty should yield unto, and which I in love (if love can
merit such happiness) do deserve, and yet most humbly do request. Vienna
thus moved, remooved thus his flattering and aspiting hope. If, said she, my
Father enjoy a second life by your conditional adventure, you may Press him
to the performance, so far, as it it is in his power to accomplish; more you
cannot ask, less he will not perform.

But know Sir Knight, that love knows no such paternall law, that yet was
never subject to any law. The Father has but a consent, not the choice, in the
daughters affections; his free thoughts have no feeling of her conceit; and his
mettle mind, and corrupted humors, are often unpleasing to his childs fancy;
Neither stands it with any reason, that he that cannot govern his own
passions, should command others affections. Then must you of necessity, excuse
his impossibility, and admit only of his willingness; that can give naught
but consent for his larges.

Yet Madame, by your favor (said Sirap) stands the daughter bound for her
Fathers good, and the guerdon is but ungrateful, that is required in contempt.
True said Vienna, but every good must not be rewarded with the best; lest the
best want fit requital for due desert. Let it then suffice, that with thanks
I acknowledge your great good, and in any other thing will be ready to pleasure
you. Only in this, pardon me my Lord, for in loves infirmities I have no
affinity, A troubled soul only in tears, her comfort seeks. It is a heavy
comfort, said Sirap, that in mourning stands, yet, said she, does the custom
of sorrow lessen the grief, and it is some comfort to be void of all
comfort. Despair, said Sirap, is mother to death, and death no fit compannion
for beauty. My beauty said she (poor as it is) has already been my bane,
and made me most unfortunate in my most fortunatnesse.

Why Madame, quoth he, has your Grace been deceived? So said she, say they
that told me so. But truth he replied, stands not on the tongues of men; True
she said, and that is the cause why we are deceived by men: you mistake me
much, said Sirap: Nay, said she, not mistaken, but overtaken you in the truth,
and so she bad him farewell, leaving him tormented in mind, in that he gest
by her last words, that some one to advantage himself, or in malice to him,
had wronged him in words; Yet could he not but smile, to think how his
conceit was her deceit. But leaving her, whom he meant not so to leave, but to
reassay her again, he returned to the Daulphin, and told him of his hapless
success. Who smothering his inward joy, made such show of coffeehouse,
that the angry ocean swelled not as he seemed to storm. But Sirap neither
waying his anger, nor her answer, all smiling said, that once more he would
with Ixion, assay to embrace Juno, and see whether in shuffling again of the
Cards, Fortune would deal him a better game. For he would owe her himself,
and try whether in his own language he could weane, and win her to his will,
which moved great laughter, and ministered further occasion of pleasant talk.
Thus they passed for the rest of the day, until supper, which ended, Sirap
giving them the good night, went to his Chamber, where calling to mind Viennas
words, which in his suppose, argued to report of his disloyalty, which grieved
him much that her grief would be redoubled by his never intended falsity, and
that he should be so wronged by unwronged, and unknown men. But after he had
a little fed his sad humor with his deceiving conceit, he determined darkly,
that dark night, to show his conceit thereon, and to remove that veil of
misdeeme, that so shadowed the assurance of his faithfulness. And therefore
furnishing himself with a well tuned Lute, in the dead of night, he went
alone to the Castle, where close shrowding himself under her window, he
sweetly sounding, thus chaunted out this irefull song.

Sleep not Revenge, Revenge awake,
awake you irefull spirits all:
All are too few, too few you are,
to plague those tongues, that swim in gall:
Then wake Revenge, Revenge awake.
And blast those tongues, that discord make.
Sleep not Revenge, Revenge awake,
Envy my Love, from Love exhorts:
Report has wronged true Troylus name.
and false furmise, in slander sports.
Then wake Revenge, Revenge awake,
And cut those tongues for Plutoes sake.
Sleep not Revenge, Revenge awake,
Virtue has lost her constant mind:
Love lies sick in her deceit,
Fancy is subject to the wind.
And all through hare, of spightfull tongues,
Then wake Revenge, revenge these wrongs.
Awake Revenge, for shame awake,
Suspect has robbed content of joy:
Malice has slain deserved trust,
and light belief, has bred annoy.
Then wake J say, Revenge awake,
And now, O now, revengement take.
Revengement take, take this Revenge,
Let banefull blasters rot their tongue:
Poison their breath, and make them dumb,
and let them live, in dying long:
So shall Revenge a God be known,
When thus Revenge, revenge has shown.
Vienna hearing this iarring City, wondered what he should be, or what he
should mean by this his wrathful song. At last she supposed it was La-nova,
that in Paris behalf thus excused his long silence, and absence, so condemned
by her; but neither discrying him, nor receiving any answer from him, we then
imagined that he was some other, that carried away with grief and wrong had
amongst other doleful places, there eased himself of his woeful burden, by
breathing out his secret and oppressing sorrows. For it is some comfort to the
grieved, to find either a companion in grief, or a sad befitting wretched
place, to lament and manifest his grief. But greatly disallowing his
uncharitable mind, she all sighing said:

Cease grieved soul, my soul grieves at like wrongs,
Yet leave revenge, to him, revenge belongs.
Sirap perceiving that his Song rather renewed, then relinquished her of her
causeless grief, and persuading himself, that her stepmother both in envy
of her glory, and in disdain of him, had at the first so hardened the heart of
her Father, that he now altogether forgot (in continuing his rigor) that he
was a Father; He thought good to warble out a more pleasing note, and to lull
her a sleep with more comfortable Music, And therefore turning his voice, he
chearefully recorded this liking Ditty.

Sleep, sleep, O sleep, sweet Lady sleep,
cloud not your beauty with black care:
Cares do consume, grief has no grace,
your Graces grief, wears beauty bare.
Then sleep, O sleep, sweet Lady sleep,
Let me, ah me; your sorrows keep.
Sigh not at all, all is in vain,
In vain are sighs; fighes do confound:
Times have their turns, turn then your tears,
your woe, with woe, my heart does wound.
Then sleep, O sleep, sweet Lady sleep,
Your Slave alone, for you will weep.
O cruel Dame, Loves second choice,
O choice the change of Natures love:
O Love forlorn, slave unto time,
O Time corrupt, Virtues remove,
Why trouble you her quiet sleep,
Since J for her, do daily weep.
Sleep, sleep, O sleep, fair Lady sleep,
your sorrows have all sorrows spent:
Hope doubt has slain, dead is despair,
and Love will crown you with content.
Then sleep, O sleep, sweet Lady sleep,
No cause there is why you should weep.
Why you should weep,
Why you should weep,
No cause there is, why you should weep.
Vienna pleased with the tune, amazed at the voice, but more then ravished with
the words, hastily put her head out of the window, and said; What so ever thou
art, take thanks of a distressed Lady, and Heaven comfort thee, as thou have,
J know not how, recomforted me. And so turning her self to Jzabella, she asked
whether she had ever heard that voice before, who replying, said, That if her
memory failed her not, it was the same, or much like; if not the same that they
heard in first in Court, under her Chamber window. Ah Izabella said Vienna,
thou harpest too well, to be so well. Yet if my mind divine aright (God grant
it may devine) I shall hear some tidings of my Paris, so persuades my heart,
so grant our God. But say Izabella, say, what shall poor Vienna say to this
moralized Moore, whose civil condition, maiesticall presence, and sugared
tongue, differs so much from his rude, and barbarous Nation. Is not his black
hue full of sweet favor, and his favor sufficient to command beauties
proudest favor. Now trust me Izabella the gentle Moore, more and more would
gain interest in my affection, but the more I think he is a Moore, the more
(for my Paris sake) I scorn to love the Moore. And therefore resolved to live
to none but Paris, (though Paris has forgotten Vienna) how shall I non-sute
his importunity, whose proud hope promises love, and whose love is warranted
by my Fathers oath. Jzabella most carefully to acquit her of that care (though
it was the least care of her care) told her, that her old putrified policy,
would easily prevent that mischief. and therefore having a ready Capon in the
Castle, they presently dismembring the body, took the two legs, and binding
them under her arm holes, where the heat of her body might soonest corrupt
them, she preparedly expected his coming the next day. When Sirap clad in his
richest array, strangely fashioned, came accompanied with many, that of purpose
(being made acquainted with his intention) came to recreate themselves with his
so supposed unusual courting. For he being as they thought, not to be
understood by his tongue, nor to be satisfied by his ear; They vainly
imagined, that he either would woe her with gifts, or with his countenance, or
with variety of gestures. But he no sooner came to the Castle (but frustrating
their expectation) he requested them by Bousoy, to stay, and stand a while
aside. When winged with the hope of Loves assurance, he instantly boldly, and
all only, entered, saluted, and in French thus courteously assaulted his fair
and friendly foe. How fares, said he, the imperious Mistress of my inthralled
heart? As a prisoner, not like a Princess, she said, fares the Mistress of a
thralled, and woeful heart. But how came you Sir Knight so Frenchified, that
erst was so strangefied? Love, sweet love, he said, has made my tongue your
Countryman, and my heart your servant. Then has love (she replied) wrought a
wonder in you and an admiration in me. Such said Sirap, is the divine power of
Loves Deity, such the virtuous force of your heavenly beauty, and such the
happy issue of our decreed destiny. Therefore, yield Vienna, Vienna yield, to
that, which the Gods have decreed, Love commands, thy beauty requires, our
Fortune allots, thy Father wills, and I thy friend request. Vienna thus
charged, could not tell how to discharge her self of him, but by having a
recourse to her wonted and hidden policy; And therefore uncloathing her Ivory
breasts, she all sighing said, Alas Sir Knight, thy commendable demeanor, and
Princely worth, well merits favor; and thy enticing tongue is sufficient to
entrap a well advised mind, and a far more stayeder conceit. But know most
noble, and most Magnificent Moore, that I am far worse then I seem, and much
better then I would be. For behold (she bared her breasts that he might
behold) the untimely corruption of my blasted beauty, look on the loathsome
fruit of my long, and grievous imprisonment, and but feel; O feel not the
filthy sent of my ulcered and rotting body; and then tell me whether I am not
rather to be loathed, then loved; fled from, then followed. Sirap astonished at
her words, but beyond all amazement, danted with the smell, near fainted
thereat; such was his insufferable sorrow for her, that he cursed himself for
her; And yet such was the constancy of his never dying love, that encouraging
himself, the better to cheer her up, he with a joyful countenance said; Be
it Madame so, or worse then so, or what so you will; it shall not matter, I
rest wholly yours, if for yours, you will accept of me, that am none but
yours. For know most constant, and my endeered Lady, that Paris (if Paris be
not forgotten) pleads now in person for himself, and here offers his life,
and service for your love. In confirmation whereof, see here the happy seal of
your love, and the sole comfort of my absence, the loyal, and unvaluable Ring,
your Highness gave me, when first being pursued by your Fathers Knights, I
departed from you, like a hungry Infant pulled from his Nources breast, or a
thirsty Heart chased from a sweet Fountain. Then, then in the pride of your
perfections, you paradiz'd me in the heaven of your love; and now in the decay
of your glory will I wed my ever-living constancy, to your never dying loyalty.

Look, nay look not on me so strangely; my black hue is but an Artificial
vizour, and my borrowed countenance but the assurance of my safety. Vienna not
able on the sudden to entertain so great a joy, shrunk down, deprived of
her vital spirits, but chafed, reuived, and enabled by Jzabella, she with
tears of joy distilling down her cheeks, sadly said. Ah Paris, Paris, thy
love made me a contented prisoner, but thy long absence has made my prison a
tormenting hell. But now, O happy now; thy thrice happy return makes my prison
seem a Paradise, and my hell a most glorious heaven; with that falling on his
breast, and enclosing him within her fainting arms, she often redoubled, her
double doubled kisses. Paris being likewise surprised with fullness of joy,
lost himself in her arms, but being acquitted of that ecstasy, he paid her
large interrest for her kindness, pleaded sorrow for her martyrdom, and mere
necessity for his absence. Cease Paris, she said, my Paris surcease these
needless excuses of faultlesse injury, since to over-fortifie innocence, is
to breed suspicion. There is none but I, that have (if offended) offended. As
first in being cause of thy exile, then of thy dangerous travailes, and now in
rejecting thy love; but impute the first two, to my Fathers severity, not to my
love; and the last of my ignorance, not to my inconstancy. For proof whereof
see here, (here showed she the Capons legs (the trial of my truth, which
but in policy I used in all extremities, to withstand importunate Suitors, and
all only to love none but thee, erst the sole hope of my life; but now the
only life of my soul.

Thus pleaded she to please him, and thus it pleased him to praise her, and
both of them still ioying, in that they enjoyed each other. Then turning to
Jzabella, he kissed her many times, and vowed that out of his best fortunes, he
would be thankful to her, for her love to him, but especially for her
comforts to Vienna.

And taking them both by the hands, he told them how, and by what means, the
Daulphin her Father had freely, and absolutely given her to him. And therefore
he requested them to conceal their knowledge of him, and to go along with him,
for that he meant to have her Father to deliver her to him; all which they both
so willingly, and cheerfully did, that the Gent. attending his leisure, no
little marveiled to see him lead them so familiarly by the hands, and so
pleasantly talking with Vienna in a private manner. But when they were come
before the Daulphin, Paris (for now is Sirap turned again to returned Paris)
holding her still by the hand, humbly requested him, in the presence of his
daughter, and Barons, to ratify his vowed guist. Which the Daulphin both
misliking, and admiring: demanded of her, whether her liking, and consent,
stood to that black irreligious Moore, that had so often refused so many
potent Lords, and most accomplished Princes. To which she (in all reverence,
praying pardon) said. That the black smeared Smith was most pleasing to the
Queen of beauty; That tha constant color unfadible in it self, well argued
constancy in the person. That his barbarous nature, was both reclaimed, and
refined by his more civil education; and that his religion would easily be
conformable to their profession. But howsoever, it suffices, that I love him
and love yields no reason of choice, nor has any respect of persons. His
blind deity, blindes our fancies; and fancy lives not in desert, but in
desire. We love altogether by liking not for honors; and our wills cannot
command our affections, that are not in our powers:

Then vouchsafe my Sovereign Lord and most gracious Father, of my destinied
desire and admit of his wel-merited demand, and let me with your free consent
enjoy him for my Husband, that has so well purchased me for his Wife; so shall
you honor your self, in doing him right; reward his services, enworthy your
posterity, and repair my decayed glory. The Daulphin seeing that it was but in
vain, to resist celestial influence, preordinate be providence divine, and
that he could neither in honor, nor conscience infringe his obliging oath, nor
reject his pleading and glorious worth; showed a virtue in necessity, and
freely gave, and delivered her unto him.

Now Paris being thus possessed of his desire, cast off his artificial mask,
and lowly on his knees, showed and presented himself, the humble and thankful
servant of his Lord. The Daulphin finding himself thus deceived by him, that
happily deceived the Sultan, and his Keepers for him; could not but commend his
loyal love, and love him for his saving service. His superlative valor, and
unvaluable virtue, showed that his great fortunes were but Ministers to his
will. And therefore he cheerfully said. In France was I honored by Paris, In
Babylon unthralled by Sirap, And at home both I, my Country, and people, were
protected by the Knight of the Daulphin. To Paris therefore I return my love,
To Sirap I give my daughter, And to the Knight of the Daulphin I yield my
Principality. Then my beloved and renowned son, give me thy hand, and let me
embrace thee with thy valor. And here I swear by the all-ever-living-God,
that if I were sole Monarch of the whole Universe, thou only should rule for
me, and after me: More I cannot give thee for thy Asian lost honors, less thou
shall not have then my whole Europian dignities. To confirm which, he
presently caused him to be proclaimed his son in law, and the next lawful
and immediate heir to all his Royal Territories. Great was now the wonder of
all men, great the preparation to solemnize their Nuptials, and more then
great, the joy, and tryumphes made, and ordained for them. But amongst them
all, there was none (Vienna excepted) that rejoiced more then old Sir Jaques,
whose silver beard, was all embossed with pearls of swelling tears, for the
joy of his so famous found son. As for his endeared friend La-nova, his glad
heart showed the triumphs of joy, and all his thoughts were ravished with
delights and contentments. To him (after many embraces) did Paris give infinite
thanks for his comfortable friendship, and careful regard of Vienna, and his
Father. Thus lived they long happy in each other, until the Daulphin summoned
by death, paid Nature his due: and old Sir Jacques wasted by age, yielded to
death. Then was Sir Paris created Daulphin of Vienna, who enjoined La-nova to
marry Jzabella, unto whom he gave all his Fathers Lands, and Boufoy he made
his Steward. And so they fortunatly reigned, and lived together many years,
with great comfort, and full contentment, in Princely state, and height of
terrestiall dignity.

The Jmage of God; the wrath of Mars; and pledge of Nuptial rite;
Records his name, that for his friend, this trivial toy did write.
FINIS.

