Orders Appointed to be executed in the City of London, for setting roges and
idle persons to work, and for relief of the poor.

Proverbs, 16. He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord: and
look what he lays out, it shall be paid him again.

Psalm. 61. Blessed is the man that provides for the sick and needy: the
Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble.

At London

Printed by Hugh Singleton, dwelling in Smithfielde, at the sign of the
golden Tun.

FOr relief of the poor, and for setting to work of vagaraunt people, there
are to be set up in Bridwell certain arts, occupations, works and labors.

2 There are to be provided stock and tools for those works. There is to be
provided bedding, apparel, and diet for those poor to be set to work.

3 When order shall be taken and sufficient provision had for the furniture of
the works, Proclamation shall be made throughout the City, that all
vagarants which are come out of other places, where by the law they ought to be
provided for, shall depart the City and the lyberties thereof, to the places
of their birth or last abode according to the Law, upon the pains thereof due.

4 Within convenient time after the day limited by such Proclamation a
general search shall be made, and likewise new general searches from time to
time as shall be requisite, thoughout the City and the liberties thereof at one
instant, and all the vagarants that shall be there found shall be brought to
Bridewell to be examined.

5 Such of them as be not diseased, and the City not to be charged with the^
by law, shall be dealt with according to the law.

6 Such of the said vagarants as shall be found diseased and to be curable, to
yt number that the Hospitals shall be able to receive, shall be sent to the
Hospitalles to be cured: and being cured shall be sent to Bridewell again there
to be examined and used as is aforesaid.

7 In this respect order is to be taken with the Hospitalles of S. Bartholmew
and S. Thomas, that such as shall be sent to them from Bridewell by warrant of
four governors at the least under their hands to be subscribed at a Court
or assembly of them together, may be received at all times of the week and not
deferred until their Court days. And that they spare the taking in of other,
for the time, if need so require.

8 Those whom the City by law is charged to provide for and are able to work,
shall be received into Bridewell, and there kept with thin diet, only sufficing
to sustain them in health, and shall be set to work in such of ye works labors
and occupations as they shall be found fittest for.

9 If any such shall loyter and will not do such labor as in reason they ought
and as is done by other of like capacity and strength, they shall be punished
in Bridewell as is used by the discretion of the Governors.

10 If any of them shall run away or escape from Bridewell, and be taken again
vagarant within the liberties of this City, he shall be committed to the jail
as a Roge in the first degree, and nevertheless after execution done upon him
by boaring his ear, he shall again be sent to Bridewell to work as before,
if none other will at the Sessions receive him according to Law.

11 Likewise escaping and being eftsoons taken again vagarant, he shall be used
as a felon according to Law.

12 If any such vagarants shall be found skillful in any occupation whereby any
Citizen or other using such occupation will be contented to receive them into
service, or yt any Citizen or any other will be content to take any of the^
Apprentise or to service either in London or in the country, the governors of
Bridewell shall do their endeavor so to bestow them. Provided always that if
after such bestowing, any of them shall be found vagarant, he shall be used as one
escaping out of Bridewell as is aforesaid.

13 Such of them as belonging by law to the charge of the City have young
children upon their hands, and upon examination none shall be found which by law
ought to find them, the same children shall be sent to Christ's Hospital by
such order and manner as has been accustomed so far as the house shall be able
to maintain the^. And the rest to be maintained at the charge of ye parish
according to law.

14 Such of them as are aged lame and impotent and not to be cured nor able to
labor, shall be provided for in the Parishes where they dwell by some good order
there to be taken.

15 If any being so provided for shall be found begging in the streets they
shall be punished in Bridwell by order of the governors for the first time. And
for ye second time, and the third time they shall be used as Roges in the first
and second degrees according to the Law.

16 Such Parishes as have more poor then they are able to relieve shall have
aid of the money to be levied for this cause.

17 If any Carier or other shall by land or water bring to this City or
near to ye same any children or other and leave them vnplaced or not
sufficiently provided for: such Carrier or bringer shall be punished by
imprisonment, or otherwise as sharply as law will permit, and also shall be
bound to convey such back again to the places whence they came or where they
ought to be provided for according to law. Warning to be given by Proclamation
of the contents of this and the next Article.

18 Every Inkeeper or such other person in this City or near to the same,
which shall wittingly receive or keep any such child or other so brought and
not sufficiently provided for, shall be charged to keep and provide for such
child or other so brought, or else be bound to discharge the City of them, or
to convey them back again from whence they came. And if he refuse so to do,
then he shall be punished as is abouesayd of the Carier or bringer.

19 That Proclamation be made that every Citizen shall have charge on pain of
iii. s. iiii. d. and every other person shall be required, to bring or cause to
be brought to the Constable or his Deputy or to the Bedle of the Ward or
other Bedle every such vagarant as shall beg of them in the Parish where such
citizens or other do dwell: that such vagarant may by such Constable or his
deputy or by the Bedle be sent to Bridewell to be examined and used as is
above said.

20 The Constables, Surueyors of Parishes, Bedles of Wards and other Bedles
shall have charge to apprehende all such vagarantes as they shall find, and to
bring or send them to Bridewell as is aforesaid, on pain of vi. s. viii. d. to
be paid by every such Constable or his deputy, and iii. s. iii. d. by every
such Surueyor or Bedle in whom the fault shall be found, and the same to be
levied by distress, and to be employed to the use of the poor in Bridewell.

21 And also that the Constables, Deputies, and bedles, on like pain, shall
convey to Bridewell, such as shall be brought to them as is before said.

22 The Constable in every watch shall be charged upon like pain of vi. s.
viii. d. to apprehend all such vagarants and Rogish persons as they shall find
by night, and shall send or convey them to the Counter or Cage, and so to
Bridewell the next day. And the Porter or Officers of Bridewell shall presently
receive them without any further attendaunce of such as shall bring them.

23 The governors of Bridewell shall appoint some meet persons to follow the
causes at every Sessions against such as shall be committed to prison as is
aforesaid.

24 For avoiding the return of idle vagarants, and for better reformation of
the idle youth and unthrifty poor in this City and for further execution of
the premises, every Alderman or his Deputy in his ward assisted with a
sufficient steward shall keep his Court of Wardmote once in every month for
the first year now ensuing, and in other years once in every three months,
on pain to every Alderman for his default or of his sufficient Deputy for him
in not keeping the said Court xl. s. to ye like use of the poor. And all ye
inhabitants shall there appear or be amerced for their defaultes, and out of
the said amercements and profits of Court the steward shall be rewarded with
reasonable fee by the discretion of ye Alderman, and the rest shall be to the
said use of the poor.

25 By the Inquest shall be there enquired, if idle persons, roges, vagabunds,
and other suspect persons which live disorderly or suspiciously or spend their
times at Bowling allies, plays, and other places unthriftily: and whether the
mean officers do their duties, and all other matters, as in the charge of
leetes: and that speedy process be used according to the law for the
reformation without delay.

26 Order to be there taken for the Wards to have cages and stocks, according
to the Laws of this City, and for the renewing of searches for vagarants and
such other persons from time to time as shall be requisite.

27 In every Parrish by the Person or the Curate and Churchwardens with the
Constable and the Collectors for the poor, and six other of the chief of the
inhabitaunts at the least, a vestry to be holden in the week before the
assemble of every such wardmote, to enquire and understand of all idle persons,
vagaboundes, roges, disordered masters of houses, disordered Children of the
poor, dysordered Alehouses, and such like, absences from Church, and other
misdemeaners in their Parrish: and that such as they find, be presented at the
next wardmote.

28 In every parrish a general survey to be made, by the Constable,
Churchwardens, Collectors for the poor, and vi. other of the Parishners of all
their poor and needye neighbors of the Parish vz. of every house particularly,
the names of the dwellers, the children and servants, the sex and age of
every one, and which be able to labor and whereupon, and who be utterly
impotent to any labor.

29 No pension nor other relief to be given to any which are idle, being able
to labor. And such as will labor and have not nor can provide to set
themselves to work, making their moan to the Churchwardens or Collectors for
the poor, may by a bill to be signed with the hands of the said Churchwardens
or Collectors, or any two of them and three other parishoners, have work
appointed or delivered them at Bridewell, or else where.

30 None of the poor, or their children be suffered to beg or wander in the
streets, but be exercised upon meet labor toward the getting of their living
in honest sort.

31 In every parrish all the poor houses shall be at convenient times visited,
daily if it may be, by some one or more to be appointed at the vestry to see how
they apply their work, and the defaults to be certified every sunday to the
Churchwardens, and by the^ to be noted in a book against the next vestry.

32 Such youth, and other as are able to labor and may have work and shall be
found idle shall have some manner of correction by the parents, or otherwise as
shall be thought good in the parish. And if they will not amend they shall be sent
to Bridewell to be reasonably corrected there.

33 Such as be impotent and relieved by pensions and can do somewhat, shall be
occupied in so much as they can do: and the sick shall be visited and relieved
of the common box for the poor in their Parrish during only their sickness,
and afterward shall apply their labor again.

34 Humble suit to be made to the Lord Mayor and his brethren that upon
presentiments in the court of Wardmote due execution and reformation be had.

35 For better execution and redress to be had of things to be presented by
the Inquest of Wardmote, the presentiments shall be deliuerd to the Alderma^ of
the ward, and by him or his deputy shall be speedely redressed and executed such
things so represented as be within his power by law and the orders of this
City to execute.

36 Such things as be not in the power of the Alderman or his deputy, but in
the power of the house of Bridewel by virtue of their charter shall be delivered
to to the governors of Bridewel to be by them executed and reformed so far as
they may according to the law.

37 Such things as be not in the power of the Alderma^ or his deputy, nor in
the power of the house of Bridewell, but do require the authority of the Lord
Mayor or of the court of Alderme^ or of any Justices of peace, shall be
delivered over to the Lord Mayor or to such justices as shall be requisite, that
the same may be lawfully and duly redressed.

38 To every art, science, or labor in Bridewell be appointed two of the
governors of Bridewell to ouersee the same, who shall have care to the doing
thereof as they may answer that charge in credit and conscience.

39 Four gouerners of that house shall atte^d two hours at the least in every
day for examination and direction of such as shall be brought thither after the
first search and for expedition of other things requisite.

40 The tresorer with some of the governors of Bridwell shall be appointed for
the providing of corn, bread, victual apparel and necessaries for the poor,
and to ouersee their lodgings and such other things as be needful.

41 Of such companies of this City as well the worshipful as the inferior as
the governors of Bridewel shall find to be requisite according to the quality
of the arts or labors that are to be ouerseene, there shall be appointed persons
to attend, so as there may be every day two attending at Bridewell to ouersee
the works, and to give knowledge of the defaults which they shall find, to the
governors, on pain of xx. shillings to be paid by the wardens if they
appoint not, being thereunto required by the space of a week before, and on
pains of vi. shillings viii. pence to be paid by every of the parties
appointed, if he atte^d not being warned three days before at the least, the
said pains to be to the use of the poor in Bridewell and to be levied by
distress.

42 Where in the Sauoy are lodged nightly great numbers of idle wicked persons,
cutpurses, cousiners, and such other thieves, and there in the night are hidden
from officers and in the day do use their rogish life, so that ye same place
honorably ordained is by such abuse made a noursery of roges thieves idle and
dronken persons: for remedy thereof, request to be made to the master of that
house, ye special persons be appointed to examine such as shall come to lodge
in the Sauoy that such be lodged there as be of honest fame, poor men coming
up for their suits or causes, or such as are known and can give account of
their labor in the day time, and no other: and if any such lewd roges be
found there, the officers of the Sauoy or the Justices to whom it may
appertain may send them to such place as they ought to be sent by law.

43 Like order shall be had for reformation of the like abuse in S. Thomas
hospital. And for better execution thereof two or more of the governors of
Bridewell may from time to time as often as shall be thought needful go into
S. Thomas hospital with assistaunce or consent of some of ye governors there,
to search what people shall be there lodged, and such as they shall there find
vagarants and able to labor shall be committed to Bridewell to be examined as is
aforesaid.

44 For reformation of excessive number and disorder of alehouses, tippling
houses, cellers, and such like which be the maintainers and receivers of
wicked persons and be the occasion of much theft pilfering and incontinent
life and ye increase of harlots and consequently of Bastards and diseases to
the great charge of the City: a view be had of all alehouses, cooks houses,
tippling houses, cellers, and such like in every parish by such as have thereof
authority, and that the numbers of them be abridged to a reasonable proportion
for the Ward or Parish, and in places convenient, as shall be thought meet, and
certified by the Alderman of the Ward, and no other to be allowed.

45 That al be put down and disalowed, but only such as be of good fame, and
known enemies to wicked life and so certified by the Alderman of the Ward, and
that such as be once detected and found faulty of evil rule, shall never be
allowed again.

46 No lodging, gaming, or vitling be suffered in any celler.

47 Bonds shall be taken with suerties for observing ye said orders by vitalers,
and the bonds and forfaytures thereof shall be made and employed to the use of
the poor in bridewell.

48 Where many Landlords and farmers of Allies, or of great houses converted
into small habitatio^s, do keep victaling houses, and houses, shoppes, or
cellers for uttering of drink vittaile and other chaffer to the inhabitants
of those allies or small habitations, all such shall be utterly dissalowed and
forbidden to be used of such Landlords or farms or by any other by their
means or within such Allies or houses.

49 Such as are above limited to be punished by whipping, shall be so punished by
the discretion of ye governors of bridewel, whereof at least there shall be such
numbers of Justices as in such case is required by the statutes without tarying
for any delay of sessions at the Guildhal, which to the Governors should be
troublesome and to the house very chargeable, and consequently hurtful to the
release of the poor.

Arts, Occupations, Labors, and Works, to be set up in Bridewell.
The work in the Milles, The work in the Lighter and vnlading of Sand The
carrying of sand. Making of shoes. Thicking of Cappes by hand and foot. Making
of woll Cards. Making of Nails. Making of gloves. Making of Combs. Making of
Inkle and tape. Making of silk Lace, Making of Aparrell for the house. Spining
of woollen yrane. Knitting of hose. Spinning of Linen yarne. Spinning of
Candell week. Making of Pack thread Drawing of wier. Making of Pinnes. Making
of Points. Making of Knives. Making of Tennise balls. Making of Bays. Making
of Feltes. Picking of woll for Felts Or any other that may fall in practice
50 IT is to be ordered, to ye intent that the house of Bridewel be not
ouerpestred, but may be able to receive such as shall need, and that such as
shall be brought thither be brought for their reformation and not for perpetual
servitude, that the governors shall do their endeavors to bestow as many of
the youth as shall be put to labor there, in service either as apprentises or
otherwise with citizens or any other that will be content to receive the^. And
specially that owners and Masters of ships be entreated to receive such
into their service.

51 To avoid the peril that the setting a work of vagrants in the said Arts
at Bridewell might be to the overthrow of the work and to the undoing of poor
citizens householders, and their families that live by working in the same arts
for other, or by retaling of things wrought: Therefore the governors of
Bridwell shall consult with the Wardens and discrete men of those companies
that use ye working or selling of such things as shall be wrought in Bridewel, as
shoomakers and other, that the said companies and their householders shall
deliver their work to such number in Bridwel as they may with the benefit of
their company, and shall pay for the same at reasonable rates to their profit.

52 Also a note shall be kept in Bridewell of places and persons where and of
whom work may be had, that poor in parishes sent thither to require work
may be the better releued.

53 A view to be had of the cordwainers and other artificers what forrens are
set on work contrary to ye laws of this City, and how many of them by their
birth or by their continuance the space of three years do belong to the burden
and charg of this city, that order may be taken for them and for avoiding the
increase of them hereafter but in case of necessity, and also with bonds of
such as shall retain them that they shall never be burdenous to the City as
vgarants or persons unprovided for.

54 For the better relief of the poor, the leather that shall be found faulty
in this City and seized as forfayted, shall never for any price come to the
use of the searchers, or sealers of leather, but shall wholly be to Christ's
hospital, and Bridewel, to be there made into shoes for the poor, by the
poor that shall work there: and the searchers shall have their portion in
money according to the praisement.

55 Prousion is to be made for apparel, bedding, and meat for the said poor,
for tools, and for stock and stuff for the occupations, for making of
Milles, and buying of Lighters, for fees and wages of Bedelles and other
necessary poor attendauntes: and therefore a competent and sufficient portion
of money is to be had, which by an estimate for one year accompting for ii, C.
persons amounts about ii, M, l.

56 That the act of common Counsel for Lime and for spending of sand and
gravel to be taken out of Thamise be severely put in execution, which the body
of the City do humbly pray the Lord Mayor and his brethren earnestly to do,
and to bind, and punish with all straightnes the offenders to the contrary, and
especially such workmen as in deceiving of builders do slander the said sand,
which by good trial in the buildings of noble men, and of sundry good
Citizens, and other, and specially by a trial late made in the presence of the
wardens of the said workmen, is found and confessed as good for the work and
as profitable to the builder as any other sand.

57 For the provision of the said stock to the accomplishing of the said good
works, there may be granted by the body of this City too fiftenes to be
assessed and levied in usual manner, whereof the one to be paid as speedyly as
may be, the other at the end of vi. months.

58 Hereunto be added the taxations of al forens inhabiting within ye liberties
of this City to be assisted according to the statute lately made for erecting
of houses, for setting the poor on work, or else to be contributary in the
said fiftenes by the rate of their houses.

59 Where the other Hospitalles both for the poor children, and for the
diseased are likely at the first to have here by some increase of charge, and
where also some parishes are to be charged with their impotent poor, which are
not able nor fit to work in Bridewell: Therefore the Lord Mayor and such as
be thereunto authorized by the statutes will sit again and peruse the books of
taxations for the poor, that by the assessing of such as become in place since
the last assessement and were not assessed before and by auauncing such as God
has further blessed with hability, and with reasonable consideration of such
as be less able, the book may be renewed and made as beneficial, as
reasonably may be for the poor.

60 That a consideration be had of the pensionaries out of the hospital in
every Parish, that none be allowed without need, nor to such as have pensions
otherwise, whereby such as truly have need may be the better relieved.

61 For help of the hospitals and Parishes in this charge all churchwarde^s
and collectors for the poor be strayghtly charged to execute the law against
such as come not to church, against al persons without exception, and specially
against such as while they ought to be at divine service, do spend their time
and their money lewdly in haunting of plays, and other idle and wicked
pastimes and exercises.

62 For as much as the playing of Enterludes, and the resort to the same are
very dangerous for ye infection of the plague, whereby infinite burdens and
losses to the City may increase, and are very hurtful in corruption of youth
with incontinence and lewdnes, and also great wasting both of the time and
thrift of many poor people and great provoking of ye wrath of God the ground
of all plagues, great withdrawing of the people from public prayer and from
the service of God, and daily cried out against by ye grave and earnest
admonitions of the preachers of the word of God: Therefore be it ordered that
all such Enterludes in public places, and the resort to the same shall wholly
be prohibited as ungodly, and humble suit be made to the Lords that like
prohibition be in places near unto the City.

63 The forfaitures of al such as be bound not to place in their allies and
small habitations any such as shall be burdenous to the City, be severally
levied and employed to the relief of the poor in the said Hospitals and
parishes, and that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen will not remit any part thereof
nor stay any suit or execution upon any of the said bonds without consent of
the common counsel.

64 New bonds be taken to like effect and for avoiding of Inmates of all such
as be not yet bound or whose bonds shall cease by the execution of them.

65 The Lord mayor and aldermen by the request of ye governors of Bridewell
appoint some special officers or persons to enquire of goods foren bought and
sold whereby Citizens should otherwise lose ye benefit of their trades and
become unable to relieve the poor, and part of the forfeitures so to be found
may be to the relief of ye poor.

66 That the preachers be moved at the sermons at the Cross and other
convenient times specially in the term time, and that other good notorious
means be used, to require both Citizens, Artificers, and other, and also all
farmers and other for husbandry, and gentlemen and other for their kitchins and
other services, to take servants and children both out of Bridewell and Christ's
Hospital at their pleasures, with declaration what a charitable deed it shall be
not only for ye relief of those whom they shall so take into service but also
of multitudes of other that shall from time to time be taken into the hospitals
in their places, and so be preserved from perishing, with offer also that they
shall have them conveniently apparelled and bound with them for any competent
number of years, with further declaration that many of them be of toward
quallities in readyng, writing, Grammar, and Music.


