A SERMON PREACHED AT CERN, IN THE COUNTY of Dorset, the 18. day of September
1623. at the Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of
BRISTOLL.

BY ROBERT LOVGHER Pastor of Mapowder.

HAGGAI. 1.4. Is it time for your selves to dwell in your sieled houses, and
this house lie wast? LONDON, Printed by JOHN LEGATT, for FRANCIS CONSTABLE, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the White Lion, in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1624.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, ROBERT (by Divine providence) Bishop of
BRISTOLL; R. L. wishes all health and happiness both Temporal and Eternal.
RIght Reverend,
Your Lordships request at Cern, was to me, as a command upon my Canonical
obedience; so that I durst not neglect the Apostles precept (Obedite
praepositis) as having likewise learned, that obedience is better then
sacrifice. Having hereupon summed up my weak Meditations, I have now made
bold to send you a Copy of my poor Labors in your Visitation, according to
your Lordships pleasure, and my promise. Whatsoever it was (if any thing) in
the speaking; I fear me, it will be no thing, or no thing like, in the
reading; as wanting that life, which is the first, second, and third thing, as
in a Rhetorical, so in a Theological Orator: Only this is my comfort, that
your Lordship will be pleased to give it both life, and grace, by your reading
it, together with a kind of Episcopal confirmation, by imposing your sacred
hands upon it. Whatsoever it is, it is wholly yours, preached by your
appointment, and in your Lordships Visitation, transcribed according to your
pleasure, and now with all humility it comes to kiss your Lordships hands, in
hope of a gracious, and favorable acceptance. Princes and people did bring to
King David, Brass, Silver, Gold, and precious Stones in great abundance,
toward the building of a Temple, a material House, for the Lord of Hosts.
Silver I have none, and Gold I have none, nor any precious and curious stuff
fit for this purpose; but such as I have, give I unto you toward the building
of Gods spiritual House: And where there is a willing and a ready mind, God
accepts according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.
Toll, and Lege. And the Lord give a blessing to it, and vouchsafe to bless
your Lordship for deigning thus to bless and to grace it: And so I cease to
trouble you, but never to honor you, resting

Ever devoted to your Lordships service ROBERT LOVGHER.

Haggai cap. 1. verse. 14. And the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the
son of Shealtiel a Prince of Judah, and the spirit of Iehoshua the son of
Iehozadak the hie Priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people, and
they came and did the work in the house of the Lord of Hosts their God.
THE Lord commanded Moses to make two silver trumpets, which were to be
sounded by the Priests the sons of Aaron. Numb. 10.1. etc.
At the first sound of the trumpet the Rulers were to stir; the sounding
again of the trumpets was for the people, so we read in the tenth chapter of
the book of Numbers. Men, brethren, and fathers, right reverend, and the rest
beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: It has pleased God at this time,
to send me one of the meanest and weakest of the sons of Aaron, to sound out
the silver trumpet of his sacred word, to incite and stir up both Rulers, and
people, to a conscionable performance of their duties in their several places.
And the rather to animate and encourage me in this his Message, he commands
me, (as he does all his Ambassadors in the like case) To cry aloud, to lift up
my voice like a trumpet, to show his people their transgression, and the house
of Jacob their sins, Esaias 58 1.
as it is in the 58. chapt. of the prophecy of Esaias.

You know how famous Jerusalem sometimes was, the City of God, and the Temple
builded there by King Solomon, ^. Chro. 22.5.
accounted the mirror, and glory of the world. Yet for the sins of Princes,
Priests, and people, both City and Temple were brought unto destruction by
Nebuchadnezzar, and the Babylonians. Who after two years siege, rased the
City and burnt the Temple down to the ground, carrying away both Princes and
people as slaves to Babylon; when after 70. years captivity, Cyrus king of
Perfia (subduing the Chaldeans) gave them leave to return to Indea their own
country, with commandment, and authority to reedifie, and build up the
Temple destroyed by the Babylonians, restoring also the vessels of the house of
God, which were of silver, and gold carried away by Nebuchadonosor, all which
(to a great number) were delivered to Zerubbabel Prince of the people, 50400.
E^ra 1.11.
which returned with him to Jerusalem.

This people two years after their return; began to lay the foundation of the
Temple where it stood before. And this was done with great rejoicing; with
trumpets, and cymbals, with singing of the Levites, and shouting of the people.
But they had no sooner begun, but presently there arose up adversaries, who
openly and secretly hindered this work, until the second year of king
Darius, who (moved by the Spirit of God) did further this building as king
Cyrus did before him. But now behold, Prince, Priest, and people were so
carried away, some with matter of pleasure this way, and some with matter of
profit that way, that they little regarded the building of Gods sanctuary,
running every man to his own house, and letting Gods house lie waste as it is
in the ninth verse.

Whereupon the Lord raised up this his Prophet Haggai, to rouse them out of
their sleep of security and carelessness, and to spur them forward in the
work of the Lords house, which here you see did take effect. And the Lord
stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the Prince, etc.

In which words are four things remarkable, and of us at this time to be
considered. First, what is meant by the word spirit. Secondly, who stirred up
the spirit: And that was God. The Lord stirred up the spirit. Thirdly, the
persons whose spirit the Lord stirred up: And they were Prince, Priest, and
People. The Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the Prince, and the spirit
of Iehoshua the hie Priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people.
Fourthly, the end wherefore the Lord stirred up the spirit of Prince, Priest,
and people; and that was to the repairing and building of his Temple, they came
and did the work in the house of the Lord of hosts their God. Of these points
while I shall speak briefly, and plainly, as it shall please the Spirit of
God to afford me his blessed assistance, lend me I beseech you a little your
wonted patience and attention.

And the Lord stirred up the spirit.

This word ((...)) spirit, has in the Scriptures diverse significations.
Sometimes it is taken for the nature of the Godhead, or for God generally, as
in the 4. Ioh. 4.24.
of John, God is a Spirit. Sometimes for the third person in the Godhead
specially; so in the 1. Ioh. 5. There are three which bear record in heaven,
1. Ioh. 5.7.
the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit. Sometimes the good Angels are
called spirits: as in the first of the Hebrews, He made the spirits his
Messengers. Sometimes the evil angels are called spirits, Heb. 1.7.
as in the 10. of Luke: Luke 10.20.
In this rejoice not, that the spirits, that is, that the devils are subdued
unto you, but rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven.
Sometimes again it is taken for the wind: So in the 3. of Ioh. Spiritus vbi
vult spirat, The wind blows where it lists. Ioh. 3.8.
Sometime it is taken for a vehement zeal, and violent motion of the mind
either to good or evil. Luke 9.55.
So in the 9. of Luke, Nescitis cuius spiritus estis, You know not of what
spirit you are. Sometime it may be taken for breath, as the sign of the soul
or life; as in the 2. of James the last verse, As the body without the spirit
is dead, Iam. 2.26.
so faith without works is dead also: Where by spirit, I do not think to be
properly understood the soul, as the Rhemists would have it in their
annotations on that chapter, for then works must animate and give life to
faith, as the soul does to the body: whereas S. Austin teaches, that Opera
sunt ex fide, non ex operibus fides, That works are of faith, and not faith of
works. So then as breath is not the life of the body, but a sign of the
soul, which is the life of the body: so charity is not the form of faith,
good works are not the life of faith, but they are a sign of that confidence
and trust in God, which is form, and which is the life of faith. As therefore
that body, which is without spirit, that is, without breath, is known to be but
a dead body: So that faith which is without good works, is known to be but a
dead faith. Sometime indeed it is taken for the soul of man, as in the
seventh of the Acts. Domine suscipe spiritum meum, Act. 7.59.
So Saint Steven, Lord receive my spirit, that is, my soul; And so our Savior
Christ in the 23. of Luke Pater in manus tuas commendo spiritum meum, Father
into thy hands I commend my spirit, that is my soul. Luke 23.46.
Contrary to that error of Apollinaris, who held that Christ had a true body,
but had no soul, but in steed of the soul, stood the divinity, which is
plainly confuted by that of our Savior in another place, where he says: Mark.
14.34.
My soul is very heavy even unto the death. And again, Christ was made man,
like unto us in all things (sin only excepted) and therefore needs must have
a soul, which is the chief and principal part of man.

Sometimes again it is taken for the mind of man, Pro animo, quo sapimus, pro
mente, qua diuina contemplamur. And this is said to be the noblest part of the
soul. Whereof the Apostle in the first of the These. 5. I pray God that your
spirit and soul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and body may be kept blameless, and in the 1. Cor. 2. What man knows the
things of man, save the spirit of man, 1. Cor. 2.^^
that is, the mind of man, which is in him.

Finally, it may be taken sometime for the will of man, or rather for a mixed
power in the mind and will of man; and so (under the leave of better
judgment) I take it to be used here in my text.

Now let us see in the next place, who stirred up this spirit, this Mixtam
potestatem in mente and voluntate humana. And that was God: The Lord stirred up
the spirit. Here must I of necessity pass by a a maine point of controversy
touching man's will, for I have far to go, and but a little time to spend,
and I would not willingly forget that saying of S. Hierome. Quam auditoris
animus plus quam valet tenditur, mentis corda rumpitur. When the ears of
auditors are once strained beyond their accustomed compass, the strings of
their attention are ready to burst asunder.

Briefly, then to the purpose, and no more.

The Lord stirred up the spirit.

Here the Prophet sets down God to be the author of the godly motions of
their minds, and of the good inclination of their wills, that they might not
attribute any thing to their own strength, or powerfulness. And as the
Prophet preached not of his own head, and by his own authority, but by the
instinct of Gods holy Spirit, as the Lord his God had sent him: So the Spirit
of the same Lord stirred up the minds and wills of Prince, Priest, and people;
first, to here Gods messenger: secondly, to learn his will: thirdly, to fear
him, and fourthly, to do what he required at their hands. The Prophet
faithfully delivered the word of the Lord, as you may see in the 12. verse. But
to show that Paul May plant, and Apollos may water, and that neither he that
planteth is any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase:
It is here said, That the Lord stirred up the spirit. Whence we learn, so often
as we do any thing that good is, not to attribute that arrogantly to our
selves, which properly belongs to God; seeing no man is fit for Gods work, but
whom God stirs up, transforming his mind, informing his understanding,
reforming his will, conforming his affections, and forming, or rather creating
in him a clean heart, and renewing a right spirit within him. And thus is man
changed into the image of God from from glory to glory by the spirit of the
Lord whose workmanship he is, 2. Cor. 3.18.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
which God has ordained that he should walk in them.

The Apostle teaches in the 2. of the Cor. and the 3. that of selves, as of
our selves we are not able to think a good thought, 2. Cor. 3.5.
much less says S. Aug. are we able to desire, to will and do a good work;
but all our sufficiency (says the apostle) is of God, who works in us Et
velle, and operari, Phil. 2.13.
both the will and the deed even of his good pleasure. So that without Gods
operation, first to make us willing, and cooperation afterward when we are
willing, we are neither able, nor willing to do any thing that good is. No,
every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, Iam. 1.17.
and comes down from the Father of lights, who as at the first with his
preventing grace does work this in us to be willing: so afterward with his
subsequent grace he does accompany us, cooperate and work with us, that we
will not in vain, according to S. Austin.

In short then. As the echo answers not, unless first there be a voice, or
a sound (as it were) infused into it. So Zerubabel the Prince, Iehoshua the hie
Priest, and the remnant of the people could not answer in the language of true
obedience unto God, until first the voice of the Lord did sound in their
ears, and his holy Spirit was infused into their hearts, whereby they might
say (Paratum est cor nostrum, Deus paratum est cor nostrum) Our hearts are
ready o God, our hearts are ready, and so are our hands for the building of thy
house.

And the Lord stirred up (excitauit.) The word in the original signifies to
awake out of sleep, according to S. Hierom; And so he translates it thus ( and
suscitauit Dominus spiritum, And the Lord awaked the spirit. Which me thinks
is a notable metaphor or borrowed phrase of speech, setting forth the nature of
sin unto us. For sin is indeed a sleep of the soul, having no fear, nor
feeling of God, so long as a man lies secure and careless in it. And this is a
phrase much used by the Apostle Saint Paul, as you may see throughout his
Epistles. As in the 13. of the Romans It is now time to awake from sleep; Romans
13.11.
and in the 1. of the These. 5. Let us not sleep as other do, 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.
but let us watch and be sober. And in the 1. Cor. 15. Awake to live
righteously and sin not, 1. Cor. 15.34.
and in the 5. of the Ephesians. Awake thou that sleep and stand up from the
dead, Ephesians. 5.14.
and Christ shall give thee light, etc. Thou have a name that thou live
(says the Lord to the Church of Sardis in the 3. of the Revel. 1. verse: but
indeed thou art dead. Now as if this death in sin were a sleep, he says in
the 2. verse be awaked, and if thou will not awake, I will come on thee as a
thief, etc.

God in his holy word, by corporal things uses to declare unto us, the nature
of things spiritual both good and bad. As we when our bodies lie sleeping in
our beds (which is the very image of our grave) can neither see, here, feel,
taste, smell, move out of the place, nor take any pleasure in any one creature
of God until we be awaked. So when we lie sleeping in sin, we can neither
see the Majesty of God with the eye of our faith, nor feel his mercies
offered unto us in his Son Christ, nor can taste at all how sweet our Lord
and Savior is, our ears are stopped from hearing good counsel, we perceive
nothing at all of Gods goodness toward us, his word is unsavory unto us;
neither be once stirred up to any one good work of piety toward God, nor to
any one good work of charity toward men. So that as the Shunamite son lay
dead, stark dead until the Prophet Elisha came, and stretched himself upon
him, laying his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, 2. King. 4.34.
and his hands upon his hands, until his flesh waxed warm, and he opened his
eyes and saw, says the text: In like manner, albeit we have a name that we
live, yet are we dead, stark dead in trespasses and sins, until God by his
Prophet, until God by the preaching of his sacred word, together and
especially by the powerful op^ration of the H. Ghost, do touch (as it were)
our eyes, and our ears, and our mouths, and our hands, and our hearts, and
that the spiritual warmth of a new life be wrought in us, being baptized with
the holy Ghost, and with fire, burning up all carnal affections, and kindling
our hearts with faith, hope, charity, and such like spiritual graces. As that
Lacedemonian then, when he could not set a dead man to stand upright upon his
feet; said, Oportet aliquid intus esse: there must be somewhat within, meaning
a life, or a soul to quicken him: So we can not be set to stand upright before
God as true conuerts, as penitent and repentant persons, unless there be
aliquid intus, somewhat within, even the spirit of truth, working together with
the word of truth, to quicken and support us.

The means to awake men out of this sleep of sin, are many and diverse; but
the ordinary and special means which God uses, is the preaching of his
word, which he will have to be sounded, as a trumpet in the ears of his
people; according to that in the 58. of Esaias, Cry aloud, as you use to a man
that lies in a dead sleep, Cry aloud, spare not, life up thy voice like a
trumpet, Esaias. 581.
show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins.

David was a good king, and said to be a man after Gods own heart, yet he was
apt to fall into the sleep and slumber of sin; adultery and murder, and
therein lay securely sleeping for the space of a year, until the Prophet
Nathan came, and sounded the trumpet of Gods word in his ears, then he awaked,
and cried out peccaui, Against thee oh Lord have I sinned, 2. Sam. 12.13
etc. as it is in the 51. Psalm, which he composed upon the same occasion.

Ezekiah was a good and a religious king, yet was he apt to fall into the
sleep of sin, even pride and vainglory, and therein lay securely sleeping
until the Prophet Esaias came and sounded the trumpet of Gods word in his ear,
then he began to awake, and he had no sooner cast down his eyes upon his black
feet, but presently he began to let fall his proud peacocke plumes, 2. King.
20, 15, 16. etc.
as you may read in the 2. Kings 20. chapt.

Ioas was a good king, so long as his uncle Iehoida the hie Priest ^iued, and
sounded the trumpet of Gods word in his ears, but as soon as Iehoida dyed and
the trumpet of Gods word lay still, Ioas began to slumber, nap, yea and fell
fast asleep. 2. Chron. 24.17. aufinem cap.
He fell into a gross sin of foul idolatry, and therein was murdered by
his own servants, as you may read in the 2. of Chron. the 24. chapt.

Now to come home unto my text. The Jews here after their return from
Babylon, fell into a deep and a heavy sleep of security and carelesnes
forgetting God, and his house where he would be worshipped. But the Prophet
Haggai had no sooner sounded the trumpet of Gods word in their ears, but they
awaked, and presently came, and did the work, in the house of the Lord of
hosts their God. Here if you mark it, not only the meaner sort, the remnant of
the people fell asleep, but Zerubbabel the Prince, and Iehoshua the hie Priest
were heavy headed too, and had need to be awaked as well as the rest.

Whence we may observe, that there is not the wisest man, nor the greatest
learned man that lives upon the face of the earth, but needs the instruction
and admonition of an other man, though far inferior to himself, in learning
and knowledge. For as a skillful Physician, when he is thoroughly sick indeed,
can not cure himself, nor has his senses and judgment so sound and perfect,
but is feign to seek counsel and help at an other Physicians hands, it may
be far inferior to himself, in knowledge and judgment: so the greatest
learned man, and the wisest man that lives, so long as he carries sinful
flesh about with him, shall have such sinful and froward lusts and affections
dwelling in him, which will so dim his understanding, so obscure and darken
the eye of his soul; that he shall not so well perceive his own sins,
infirmities, and imperfections, as when he is put in mind of them by an other
man, especially such a man, whom God had ordained and consecrated for that
purpose; whom Job calls a messenger, Job 33.23.
an interpreter, one of a thousand to declare unto man his righteousness: as
it is in the 33. of Job 23. verse.

The parable of the wise, and the foolish virgins does teach us plainly that
not only the foolish, Math. 25.5.
but the wise virgins too, did slumber, nap, yea and fall fast asleep. Wherein
is set before our eyes the nature of us all; that whether we be wise, or
whether we be foolish, whether we be learned, or whether we be ignorant, we are
apt to fall into the sleep and slumber of sin, forgetting God and our
duties. And therefore there is not the best of us all, but had need to be put
in mind of our duties; yea, and of those things which we know most perfectly.
Philip king of Macedonia knew that he should die, and he knew as well how apt
he was to forget the same, being carried away with the pomp and glory of a
kingdom; and therefore he would have a remembrancer every day to knock at his
door with a memento; Remember Philip, thou art but a mortal man. David (no
question) knew, that to sin as he did, and to continue in his sins was
evil; yet the Prophet Nathan was saine to come and reprove him before he left
it. King Ezekias, (no doubt) knew vainglory to be a foul sin: yet the
Prophet Esaiah was feign to come and rebuke him before he forsook it. And what
made Saint Paul to write so earnestly unto Timothy and Titus, two such worthy
Evangelists, and men of such rare and excellent gifts; but to show that the
best had need to be put in mind of their duties, yea and of those things
which they know as perfectly, as they do their names. And therefore the
Apostle Saint Peter tells them to whom he writes, 2 Pet. 1.12.13
that he would put them in mind of their duties, so long as he lived, albeit
they knew it well enough, as you may see in his second Epistle and the first
chapter. You have heard what is meant by the word (spirit) and you have heard
who stirred up, or who awaked the spirit, and that was the Lord.

Come we now to the third point, to wit, the persons whose spirit the Lord
stirred up, and they were Zerubbabel the Prince, Iehoshua the high Priest, and
the remnant of the people; in all, to the number of 42360. as we read in the
2. of Ezra. Ezra 2.64.
The Israelites were first ruled by Moses; secondly, by Joshua; thirdly, by
Judges; fourthly, by Kings; and fifthly, by Dukes or Princes, the first whereof
was this Zerubbabel, and so is he here called a Prince of Judah.

When God gathered his Church in the 4. of Exodus he appointed two chief
Rulers of the People, the one in civil matters, the other in Religion. And to
those two places he chose two Brethren, to wit, Moses, and Aaron, to teach all
posterity that the Magistrate and the Minister should love and join together
as brethren. And so here you see are joined together Zerubbabel the Prince, and
Iehoshua the high Priest, that the one with the Word, the other with the Sword,
should jointly and zealously set forward the building of Gods house. Whose
example the remnant of the people was ready to follow, Nam facile transitur ad
maiores, Men are apt to imitate great authorities. And where those that be in
authority are men of understanding, there the City prospers (says Solomon)
and all goes well. Prou. 10.11.
Here (if you mark it) Zerubbabel the Prince is always first named before
Iehosua the high Priest, and has still the precedence, as you may see from the
beginning of this Prophecy to the end thereof.

Whence we may observe the pre-eminence of the chief civil Magistrate, by
what name, or title so ever he be called. And from hence we may learn chief
power in all Commonweals, to be joined with the temporal Sword: And that
every man must be subject to the chief civil Governor within his Realms and
Dominions, Every soul (says S. Paul in the 13. of the Romans) yea, though an
Apostle, Romans 13.1.
though an Evangelist, though a Prophet. So Saint Chrysostom does expound it,
Chrysostom hom. 23 in Epist. ad Romans
writing upon that Epistle.

All which notwithstanding, the Pope and Bishop of Rome is so far from
yielding obedience and subjection to King, or Kaesar: that all Emperors, Kings,
and Princes, throughout the world (according to Bozius) that all Christian
Emperors, Kings, and Princes (according to Bellarmine) are inferior to his
Holiness, yea, and so far inferior too, as the Moon is lesser then the
Sun, and that is 57. times according unto Bellarmines Astronomy.

But S. Peter (whose successor the Pope would feign be) was not only obedient
to civil Rulers, and those profane men and Infidels in obeying them in all
things not contrary to Gods worship, and Religion: for then that rule of the
same Apostle is in force, It is better to obey God, then men. Acts 4.19. 1 Pet.
2.13.
Saint Peter (I say) himself was not only obedient to civil Rulers, but left
it written to all posterity, that we should obey the King as chief, and
highest above all other.

And even so wrote Tertullian in his time, Tertul. ad Seapu. Lam.
Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem, We
reverence the Emperor, the King, the chief civil Magistrate, as second unto
God, and inferior only unto God. That may be true (says the Papist) in
matters concerning man, but not in matters concerning God. But you must know
(beloved) that a Christian Prince is custos vtriusque tabulae, Has the charge
of both the Tables committed unto him, to give him to understand, that not
only civil and temporal matters, but also religious and Ecclesiastical do
appertain unto his Office; that is, he is put in trust as well with the
first, as the second Table of the law of God, not only to observe and keep
the Contents of both the Tables in his own person, but to see that all his
Subjects (as well Clergy men, as Lay men) each man in his vocation do observe
and keep them duly. And therefore S. Augustine says to Bonifacius, Aug.
Epist. 50. ad Bonis.
In hoc seruiunt Domino Reges, herein Kings are said to serve the Lord, as they
are Kings, when within their own Realms and Dominions they do those things
which none can do but only Kings.

Hebrews, at the 1. verse, will tell us, that not Zerubbabel the Prince, but
Iehosua the high Priest, is ordained for men in things that appertain to God;
and so we say too, that he is ordained to do them, as it follows in the
next word of the same Scripture, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins,
which we acknowledge to be the peculiar Office of Iehosua the Priest; which,
if Zerubbabel the Prince take upon him to meddle with, as sometime King Vzziah
did, then transgresses he the bounds of his Office, and provoke the wrath
and vengeance of the Lord against him as King Vzziah did. 2 Chro. 26.19


Zerubbabels charge, this is the Kings charge. And so is he ordained of God
within his Realms and Dominions, next and immediately under Christ a supreme
Governor over all persons, and that in all causes, not only civil and
temporal, but also religious and Ecclesiastical, so far forth as belongs
to the outward preservation, but not to the personal administration of them:
wherefore the supremacy which we give unto our Zerubbabel in causes
Ecclesiastical, is to deal therein, not as King Vzziah, but as good King
Ezekiah did; that is, not to offer Incense, not to preach the Word, not to
administer the Sacraments, not to celebrate public prayers, not to practice
the discipline of the Church, and such like: But to see that these things be
done as they ought to be done, by such as are lawfully called thereunto, this
is Zerubbabels charge; And in giving this to Caesar, we give no more then is
Caesar's.

The greater then is their fault, who reprove the Oath of the Kings supremacy,
as wicked and ungodly. For to be sworn to this of his Majesty, is no more, but
to acknowledge him to be the lawful Sovereign. And why may not our Parliament
take an oath of Englishmen for James our King, against the Pope usurping his
right, as well as Iehoida took an oath of the men of Judah for Ioash their
King, 2. King. 11.4
against Athaliah, that usurped his State, as you may read in the 2. Kings 11.

This point then let me close up with that of Saint Augustine, In hoc seruiunt
Domino Reges, etc. Herein are Kings said to serve the Lord, as they are Kings,
when within their own Realms and Dominions they do command good things, Aug
contra Cres^^b 3. cap. 13.
and forbid the contrary, not only concerning the civil state of men, but
concerning the religion of God also, so S. Augustine writing against Cresconius.

And now let us descend to the last point to be handled, to wit the end,
wherefore the Lord stirred up the spirit of Prince, Priest, and people. And
that was to the building and repairing of his Temple. They came and did the
work in the house of the Lord of hosts their God.

To show that they were awaked from sleep, they came, and set themselves to
work. A good argument that a man lies not still sleeping. Many (you know) will
answer in their sleep; speak, and talk in their sleep, and say they will
do this, and that, and yet all the while lie sleeping still. But when you see
a man once set himself handsomely to work, then you may be assured that he is
awaked indeed.

As when the chief poise of a clock lies down upon the ground, all the
wheels stand still; but as soon as the weights are wound up from the ground,
presently all the wheels are set a work, and are every one in its proper
motion, and so by the Horologe and the bell, you may see, and here how the day
passes. In like manner, so long as the heart, of Prince, Priest, and people
lay groueling on the earth, and earthly things; running every man to his own
house, letting Gods house lie waste: so long their was no stirring, no motion
in them toward the building of Gods Temple. But as soon as the Spirit of the
Lord drew up the poise of their heart, from the earth toward heaven and
heavenly things; presently as so many wheels, all the powers and faculties of
their souls, and all the parts and members of their bodies were set a work in
building the house of the Lord of hosts their God, Some commanding, some
directing, some aduising, some devising, some working in brass, some in gold,
and silver, some in purple, some carrying, some sawing, some squaring timber,
some hewing stones, some building the walls, and some bearing mortar; And so
courageously and cheerfully did they follow this business; that whereas
before Gods house lay waste, in the dust, and in the rubbish for the space of
forty years after their return from Babylon: Now they had finished the work
in four years space, as we read in the sixth of Ezra. They began the second
year, and made an end in the sixth year of King Darius. Ezra 6.15.
As you may see by comparing this prophecy with that of Ezra.

And now to come unto our selves. Application.
Let this teach us (beloved) as carefully, and as cheerfully to set forward
the building of Gods spiritual Temple. And what is that: the Apostle will tell
you. Know you not, that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost? 1. Cor. 6.19.
and that the Spirit of God dwells in you. O let us then repair the ruins,
1. Cor. 3.16.
and breaches of this temple made by sin and Satan, and let us adorn and
beautify it with meekness, temperance, sobriety, chastity, faith, hope,
charity, and such like spiritual graces: that the Spirit of God may take a
delight to dwell in our heart, as in the Sanctum Sanctorum of this Temple. From
whence as from between the Cherubines of verity and mercy it may utter the
oracles of God, to the everlasting consolation, and comfort of our souls. And
let us remember what the same Apostle says. 1. Cor. 3.1.
If any man destroy the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. And therefore let
us glorify God in our body, and in our spirit, for they are Gods, 1. Cor. 6.2.
They are the temple of the holy Ghost.

Again, let this instruct, and teach us, as cheerfully, and with as great
alacrity to set forward the building of Gods spiritual house; which the
Apostle calls the Church of the living God, the pillar and the ground of
truth; built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, 1. Tim. 3.15.
Christ Jesus himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the building
coupled together, Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. And this is that spiritual Temple,
whereof this material temple was a type, and a figure, here spoken of in my
text. And the building of this spiritual house, we are then said to promote as
good Christians generally; when we endeavor to live soberly, justly,
uprightly, and in the fear of God: Abstaining from all appearance of evil,
and keeping our selves unspotted of the world; when we do follow peace with
all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord; when we all of
us endeavor to live, every man in his vocation, painefully and honestly, and
that with a clear conscience both toward God, and toward all men.

More particularly. Then is Zerubbabel and the Magistrate, said to further this
work of the Lord, when they do execute judgment and justice uprightly, for
the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well; when they
do execute judgment, recte sententiando, and when they do execute justice
debite exequendo. When according to Illyricus, Illyricus.
they do execute iudicium iustitia, iustitiam iudicij, and semper iustitiam in
iudicie. Et sit verbum sapienti sat.

And then are Iehoshua and Gods Ministers, said to set forward the building of
Gods house, which is the Church of Christ, when (wearing Vrim and Thummim upon
their heart) they do preach the word of God instantly, when they do improoue
and rebuke, and exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine. When they are
ready (according to the Scriptures, to teach the ignorant, to confute the
repugnant, to reprove the evil mannered, and to instruct and frame the well
disposed.

Among the rest, special workmen are ye, the Sworne-men, Churchwardens and
Sidemen; on whose shoulders, a weighty burden of this building, a weighty
burden of this business lies. Peruse then seriously your books of Articles,
weigh well the dreadful oath you take, Read it over again and again, as it
is set down unto you in the forefront of your books. Consider the Majesty of
that great God, whom you invoke as a witness of your integrity and
uprightness. And if you would be, as indeed you should be, then must I tell
you, that you should in some sort be like unto Melchisedech; Heb. 7.3.
who in the 7. of the Heb. is said to be (...), etc. without father, without
mother, without kindred: that so ye may say (as Cassidore notes) non nouimus
Patrem, We know not father, we know not mother, we know not sister, we know not
brother, we know not friend, we know not foe, we know not rich, we know not
poor; veritatem nonimus, We know the truth, and the truth we will present; all
malice, all fear, favor and affection laid aside, and that according to the
tenor of our oath.

If thus (beloved) you will truly inform things deformed in the house of God;
I doubt not but those in authority will carefully see all things reformed,
conformed, and performed to the glory of God, and to the amendment of what is
amiss in the Church of Christ. Ezekiel. 9.4, 5.
In the 9. of Ezekiel, you shall read of an Angel, whom the Lord sent to
Jerusalem in the similitude of a man; and what was his message? Go through the
City, and cry against all the abominations that are done in the midst
thereof. Other then there were, which followed him, and what was their charge?
Go after him through the City, and smite, and let your eye spare none,
neither have you pity. Here both Jurors and Judges may see grafically
described a picture of their duties. The Roman Senate (as Liuy writes in his
Decads) upon some weighty occasion, Tit. Liu. li. 24. deca.
sent a Messenger unto a certain people, with whom they were in league called
Aequi, sometimes he calls them Aequitani. But they regarding neither the
message, nor the Messenger, willed him to deliver his errant unto that tree,
pointing unto an Oak that grew thereby. Whereupon the Ambassador turning him
to the tree, said, Tum haec sacrata quercus audict, quod faedus violatur, Why
then (said he) this sacred Oak shall here, and bear witness, that the league
is broken. And hereupon followed the ruin, and destruction of that people.
Well, you have heard your duties. Churchwardens, and Sidemen going before, to
take and to give notice of abominations, faults, defaults, innormities. You
that are Ecclesiastical Judges, following after to reform, and amend what is
amiss, to smite, to execute judgment, and justice without all respect of
persons. Now herein do you all take heed that you be not remiss, you be not
partial, you be not negligent, lest the timber, the walls, the windows, and
the pillars of this sacred house do testify, and bear witness against you.

How God plagued these Jews for their negligence in the building of his Temple
(Gods material house in Jerusalem) you may see in this Prophecy. Is it time
for your selves to dwell in your sieled houses, and this house lie wast? There
is their sin recorded in the 4. verse of the 1. Chapter. Will you know what
were the plagues and judgments inflicted upon them for this sin? Then look
into the 6. verse, You have sown much, and bring in little; you eat, but you
have not enough; you drink, but ye are not filled; ye cloth you, but ye be not
warm; and he that earneth wages, puts the wages into a broken bag. And in
the 9. verse, Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little; And when ye
brought it home, I did blow upon it. And why says the Lord of hoasts? Because
of mine house that is wast, and ye run every man unto his own house. Therefore
the Heaven over you stayed it self from deaw, and the earth stayed her fruit.
And I called for a drought upon the Land, and upon the Mountains, and upon the
Corn, and upon the Wine, and upon the Oil, upon all that the ground brings
forth, both upon Men, and upon Cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands.
And in the 16. and 17. verses of the 2. Chapter, before they set themselves
about the building of Gods Temple, When one came to an heap of twenty
measures, there were but ten; and when one came to the wine press, for to draw
out fifty vessels out of the press, there were but twenty. I smote you with
blasting, and with meldew, and with hail in all the labors of your hands, yet
ye turned not to me says the Lord.

And has not the Lord of late years plagued us after the same fashion, for
our negligence in the building of his spiritual house, just after the same
manner making our fruitful Land barren for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein?

And how can we tell but we may be thus plagued, partly for our negligence and
want of zeal in the repairing, and in the seemly adorning of our Churches
which are likewise domus Dei, and domus orationis, Gods houses consecrated and
dedicared to his worship, and service, as was the Temple in Jerusalem? And may
not I say to you touching these, as the Prophet did here unto these Jews
touching the Temple? Is it time for your selves to dwell in your sieled houses,
and this house lie wast? So, is it time for your selves to dwell in your
sieled, curious, and costly houses, and let your Churches (which are Gods
houses of prayer) lie waste, or indecently, rude, and neglected, as in too many
places they do throughout the Country Villages, and some better Towns. What
an eye-soare is it to a Christian that loves even the outward beauty of Gods
house? What an unwelcome abatement to his devotion, to behold in the place of
the best account in this world the worst outside, moldy green walls,
ill-fauoured pillars, ragged floores, unseemly seats, battered windows,
homely Carpets, and Linen for Gods Table, where his holy Sacrament is
administered; poor and base Ornaments, or none at all for the Pulpits, whence
Gods Oracles are delivered, and such like. And is not all this true in many of
your Churches throughout this Country? And yet who sees any thing amiss? as
if there were nothing to be presented but Omnia been, All is well.

Tertullian will tell you, that Pietas est, pro pietate sumptus facere, That it
is godliness to be at cost with God. And I am persuaded that our Churches
(being Gods sanctuaries, and dedicated to his service, if they had their due
habit, and hability would serve) ought to be more decent and beautiful then
the houses of the rich or Nobles in this world; nay, they cannot be too
beautiful, Math. 10.16.
all superstition and idolatry set aside. Christians should be as Doves
without all gall of bitterness; and Doves (you know) love to resort to a sweet
and a dainty house. Aspicis vt veniunt ad candida tecta Columbae. Oh, how far
short come we of that zeal of the Israelites in the building and beautifying
of Gods Tabernacle, when the workmen were feign to cry out to hold the peoples
hands, Plus affert populus quam necessarium est, Exodus 36.5.
The people bring too much, and more then enough for the use of the work?
Whereas we may cry out as fast on the other side, The people bring too little,
nay they will hardly offer any thing, I say, not to the adorning and
beautifying of Gods house ( quorsum perditio haec? That were wast and
superfluity indeed) but to the ordinary reparation and maintenance thereof,
were it not for fear of presentment and danger of the law. Brethren these
things ought not so to be. Again, look into the 20. verse of the 2. Chapter
of this Prophecy, Hag. 220.
and you shall see how God promised to bless these Jews, upon their diligence
and zeal in building and beautifying his Temple, Gods material house in
Jerusalem. Is the seed yet in the Barn, as yet the Vine, and the Fig Tree, and
the Pomegranat, and the Olive tree has not brought forth; from this day I will
bless you.

And will not the Lord (think you) be as ready to bless us upon our diligence
and zeal in repairing and adorning our Churches, Gods material houses among
us, but especially in building his spiritual house, reuerencing his sanctuary,
sanctifying his Sabbaths, hearing his Word, receiving his Sacraments, fearing
the Lord, and walking in his ways. If thus we shall do touching Gods
spiritual and material houses, as becomes good Christians to do; then (no
doubt) the Lord will hear the cry of the Heavens, Hos. 2.21.22.
and the Heavens shall hear the cry of the earth, and the earth shall hear
the cry of the Corn, the Wine, and the Oil, and the fruits of the earth
shall hear the cry of the people, and he will bless us with plenty and
abundance. If thus we shall do with zeal and piety; then (no doubt) the Lord
will say to us as he did unto this people; From this day will I bless you,
lo, from this day forward will I bless you.

One short observation more, and so an end. Though time has wings, yet houe I
not much transgrest my bounds: And therefore listen yet a little I beseech you,
and I will not overmuch strain the strings of your attention. Here it is said,
that Prince, Priest, and People came, and did the work, in the House of the
Lord of Hosts their God. Ezra 4.3.
And in the 4 of Ezra we read (that rejecting the adversaries of Gods true
Religion) they went about this work themselves, and they went about it
together; so linckt in concord and unity, as if they had been but one man. So
that they came to this work, as the Tribes came to David, with a single heart,
with a willing heart, with one heart. And so the Lord of Hosts (who is the God
of unity) blessed and prospered the labors of their hands.

In like manner, If we would be blessed, and prosper in the building of Gods
house, which is the Church of the living God; If we would have impiety
defaced, piety practiced, true religion embraced, and the Gospel to flourish;
we must not betake our selves to this business like those two Tribes of
Israel, Manasses ready to eat up Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses. We must not
go about this work like Sampsons Foxes, back to back, one drawing one way,
and another an other way, one building up, and another pulling down (as Jesus
Syrach speaks) but rather like the Cherubins on the Mercy seat, Exodus 37.9.
turning face to face; or like those Angels in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 1.9.
joining wing to wing: so we joining hand to hand, and heart to heart, as if
that blessing of God, Ezekiel. 37.19.
in the 37 of Ezekiel had fallen upon us. The wood of Judah, and the wood of
Joseph shall be joined in one tree; and then shall we prosper in the building
of Gods house, when we our selves are composed, and joined together like
Jerusalem, Psalm. 122, 3.
which was builded as a City that was at unity in it self.

We must not then go about this building, like the builders of Babel in the
confusion of tongues; One speaking in the Language of Atheism, another in the
Language of Papisme, another in the Language of Brownisme, another in the
Language of Anabaptisme: one speaking in the Language of this Sectary, another
in the Language of that (divided into companies like Labans Sheep.) O no, If
we would have this Spiritual building to go on currantly, we must all
endeavor to speak one Language, even that, which the Prophet Esaias terms
the Language of Canaan: Esaias 19.18.
by which may be meant the true profession of the one and only true God, and
his sincere and true Religion. O Lord, let never the abomination of desolation
defile thy Temple. O Lord, let never the Arc and the Idol Dagon be set to
stand upon one Altar among us. 2 Cor. 6.14. etc.
For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion
has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial? and what
agreement can there be between the Temple of God and Idols?

The same Apostle will tell us in another place, that There is but one Body,
Ephesians. 4.4. etc.
and one Spirit, and one Baptism, and one Lord, and one God, and one Faith;
and so but one true Religion, and all in unity. Et non habet Dei charitatem,
qui Ecclesiae non diligit vnitatem. So S. Austin, He has not the love of God,
that loves not the unity of his Church. Phithagoras (as Plutarch writes in
his Morals) attributing much to numbers, Plut. in Moral.
constituted two chief principles: the one he called vnitatem, unity; the
other binarium numerum, the number of two. Vinitatis natura si acri insit etc.
If the nature of unity (says he) be in the air, it makes a good
temperament; if in the mind, it works virtue; if in the body, it procures
health; if in families, cities, kingdoms, it causes peace and concord. But if
(says he again) it be not in the air, there is a tempest; if not in the
mind, there is vice; if not in the body, there is sickness; if not in
families, cities, kingdoms; and let me add, if not in the House of God, if
not in the Church of Christ, there is nothing but discord and dissension. Et
Deus non est discordiae, sed pacis Deus, says the Apostle, God is not the God
of discord, the God of confusion. O no, he is the God of unity, 1 Cor. 14.33.
he is the God of amity, he is the God of peace, as we see in all the Churches
of the Saints.

Marcus Agrippa (as Seneca writes) was wont to say, that he owed much to
Salust for one little short sentence, which was this. Senec. epist. 94.
(Concordia parua res crescunt, discordia magnae dilabuntur,) By concord small
matters grow to be great, by discord great and mighty matters come to just
nothing; he did acknowledge, that he owed much to Salust for this short
sentence; because by it, he was optimus frater, and optimus amicus; because, by
it he was made a good brother, and a good friend.

Surely (beloved) if we could but well remember that little short piece of a
sentence in the 34. Psalm. (secke peace, Psalm. 34.14.
and ensue it) we might acknowledge our selves deeply indebted to the Prophet
David for the same: which being well pondered, and well considered of us, would
make us to become good brethren, and good friends, and good husbands, and good
wives, and good neighbors, and good subjects, and finally good Christians,
endeavoring to keep (vnitatem spiritus in vniculo pacis) the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 43.


I remember once I saw an emblematicall picture, wherein was graphically
described a Christian Commonwealth, divided into three States: The Regal,
Ecclesiastical, and popular estate. And every one of these drawn in a
chariot, after the manner of Caelius Secundus triumphs. The first was the
Regal estate, and in this chariot sat the king. But give me leave to speak
in the language of my text. In this chariot sat Zerubbabel the Prince,
accompanied with sapientia, wisdom. And she (me thought) was aduising him, as
if she said unto him, as it is written in the second Psalm, Psalm. 2.10.
Be wise ye kings, and be learned ye that are Judges of the earth. This
Chariot was drawn with two horses; The one white, trapt with crowns, and
laurel garlands, and his name was (praemium bonorum) the reward of the godly:
The other horse was black, trapt with whips, swords, halters and such like,
and his name was (Paena malorum) the punishment of the wicked. The Chariotor
that guided this chariot, was called Iustitia, Justice, with a pair of
balance in the one hand, and a sword in the other hand: teaching Zerubbabel,
teaching Kings, Princes, Judges and Magistrates, how they ought to execute
justice uprightly, to the punishment of evil doers, 1. Pet. 2.14.
and for the praise of them that do well.

In the second place followed the Ecclesiastical estate. And in this chariot
sat Iehoshua the hie Priest, accompanied with (verity) the truth; and she (me
thought) was counselling him, as if she said unto him, as sometime it was said
to Archippus in the 4. of the Coloss. Col. 4.17.
Take heed unto the Ministry which thou have recciued in the Lord, that thou
fulfill it. This chariot was drawn with a dove, and a serpent alluding to that
of our Savior Christ, Be wise as Serpents, and simple as doves. Math. 10.16.
The Coachman that guided this caroach was called fides, faith.

In the third place followed the popular estate, and in this chariot sat the
remnant of the people, accompanied with obedientia, obedience. And she (me
thought) was reading a Lecture to them, as if she drew her text from the 13. of
the Romans, Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God, and the powers that be are ordained of God, etc. This chariot was drawn
with an Ox, and an Ass, the Ox was called Labor, the Ass was called
pacientia patience; Teaching subjects how they ought to live (every man in his
vocation) laboriously and industriously, and how they ought patiently to bear
those burdens, which by authority are imposed on them, remembering how it is
written in the 13. of the Romans Give to every one his due, tribute to whom
tribute, custom to whom custom, Romans 13.^.
and so forth. The Coachman, that guided this Coach was called (fidelitas,)
allegiance.

Now after all these followed a fourth chariot, and this is it whereunto my
speech aymeth: And this was called (currus charitatis) the Chariot of charity.
In this Chariot sat Zerubbabel the Prince, and Iehoshua the hie Priest, and
the remnant of the people altogether; Signifying (as I take it) that whatsoever
odds, whatsoever difference there is in this world between State and State,
and between man and man (quoad externa) in regard of birth, riches, dignities,
and promotions, honors and such like; And howsoever every estate, and every
person, has his precedence according to his degree and place (in giving honor
going one before another: Romans 12.10.
yet ought every estate, and every person to be joined together, to ride
together, and to be drawn together in the chariot of charity. And they were
all compassed round about with a golden chain, which was called catena
vnitatis, The chain of unity, alluding to that in the 133. Psalm. 133.1.
Psalm. Behold how good and how joyful a thing it is (in the sight of God, in
the sight of Angels, and in the sight of men) for brethren (whether brethren by
nature, or brethren by nation, or brethren by religion and profession,) Behold,
how good and how joyful; behold how good and how comely a thing it is, for
brethren to dwell together in unity. It is like the precious ointment that was
powered upon the head of Aaron; which stayed not there, but ran down to his
beard, and yet yet stayed not there, but trickled down even to the skirts of
his clothing; signifying how unity, and amity should pass throughout all
the members of the mystical body of Christ. From top to toe: from the head to
the foot; from Zerubbabel the Prince, that sits upon the throne, unto the
basest of the remnant of the people, that stands digging upon the dunghill.

This Chariot of charity was drawn with the other two Theological virtues,
Fides and Spes, Faith and Hope. And they were drawing this Chariot to heaven;
whither when they have brought it: Faith and Hope are vnyoked, and vanish away;
leaving charity there to remain perpetually, in loving God, in loving the
Saints, in loving one another world without end, for ever and ever. Et bonum
est esse hic, And it is good being here, where among the many mansions in our
heavenly Fathers house, there are three tabernacles made and provided. One for
Zerubbabel, an other for Iehoshua, and an other for the remnant of the people;
if they shall zealously, and religiously promote the building of Gods house, as
becomes such as are ordained unto salvation and everlasting life; where are
such unspeakable joys treasured up for them which faithfully labor in this
work, as no eye has seen, no care has heard, neither can the heart of man
conceive them. I can not leave your meditations in a better place. And
therefore no further to trouble your patience, here give me leave to set a
period to my speech.

Often have I spoken in this place, and the like elsewhere, upon the like
occasion: And indeed, never thought I thus to have spoken more. But behold the
power and goodness of Almighty God, who kills, and makes alive, brings
down to the grave, and raises up again; his name be blessed and praised for
ever. The first visitation Sermon that ever I preached, was in this place,
almost thirty years since. And now God in his providence has brought me
hither once more, to preach my last in this kind: Long have I been vale
tudinarius, weak and sickely as you know: And now would I willingly take my
leave, and give my vltimum vale to this place, and the like, in the like
assemblies and upon the like occasion; leaving it to others every way more fit
and able, and the Lord God still increase the number of them.

And in this, my vale-diction, let me say to every one of you (my brethren) as
Saint Paul does to Timothy. Take heed unto thy self, 1. Tim. 4.16.
and unto learning. Take heed to thy life, and to thy doctrine, continue
therein; for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear
thee. And you (beloved) that are of the remnant of the people: Remember how it
is written in the 13. of the Hebrews: Heb 13.^7.
Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves: for they
watch for your souls, as they that must give account, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
that they may do it with joy, and not with grief. And again in the 1 Thessalonians. 5. Now we beseech you, brethren, acknowledge them which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; that you have them in a
singular love; not in an ordinary affection, but in a singular love for their
works sake; If for nothing else, yet for their works sake, and their work is
no less, then mediately the salvation of your souls.

And so let me conclude with the Apostle S. Paul. Finally (brethren) fare ye
well; 1. Cor. 13.11
be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of
love and peace shall be with you. This God of peace, and that peace of God
which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge
and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord: and the blessing of
God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be among you, and
remain with you, in body and soul, both now and evermore.

Amen.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be ascribed all praise and
glory.
FINIS.

