THE MAP OF MORTALITY.
shield of the Trinity The father god is, made of none,
created nor begot
The son of father is alone,
not made create but got.
The holy ghost procedes from both
not made create nor ^^^^t.
trinity in unity.
the father is God the son is God the holy ghost is God God is the father
God is the son God is the the holy ghost the father is not the son the
son is not the father the father is not the holy ghost the holy ghost is
not the father the son is not the holy ghost the holy ghost is not the
son




depiction of Christ the good shepherd As by first Adam all do die
So in me all are made alive.
Death's swallowed up in victory,
And I aeternall life do give.


star of David In god dwells he,
that in love does dwell.
and god in him does dwell,
that loves well.
True love it is,
the everlasting bliss.
Where god alone, in all his glory is.
That brothers live in unity
and neighbors dwell in amity.
and man and wife do well agree
both god and man rejoice to see.
A threfold knot, thus wisely tide,
against all assalts fast will abide
for god is love and true love guide
and ever is on true loves side
depiction of sundial each hour prepare:
Death stikes unware:
i ^ ii ^ iii ^ iiij ^ V ^ Vi ^ Vij ^ viiij ^ iX ^ X ^ Xi ^ Xi ^





depiction of rooster Awake from sin,
that sleep therein.


skull and crossbones Prepare for death but fear not death

REMEMBER THINE END

Earth goes to EARTH as moulde to moulde.
Earth treades on EARTH glittering in goulde,
Earth as to EARTH return nere should.
Earth shall to EARTH go ere he would
Earth upon EARTH Consider may,
Earth goes to EARTH naked away
Earth though on EARTH be stout and gay,
Earth shall from EARTH pass poor away.


depiction of swan A Conscience pure,
singes to last hour.


depiction of book All flesh as grass
away does pass
and come to naught
Gods word most pure
aye does endure
not changed in ought


depiction of corpse in a shroud A SHROVDE TO GRAVE
MEN ONLY HAVE


Proud earth behold, as thou art we shall be.
Against the grave, can no defense be made.
Dust will to dust, as thou art once were we:
Worlds vaineglorie does thus to nothing fade.
Man does consume as water spilt on sand.
Like lightnings flash, his life is seen and gone:
Our part is plaide, your part is now in hand,
Death strikes unawares, and striking spares none.
Life is a debt to death, all men must die:
But when, where, how, the Lord alone does know.
As death leaves thee, even so undoubtedly
Judgment shall find thee when last trump shall blow.
Consider this o man whilst it is day,
Thine own Christ's death, for thee (if thou be his)
Vile worlds deceites, helles torments, heavens joy.
Provide to day: in night no comfort is,
In season calm, with Noah build an arc:
With Joseph lay up store in plenties time:
How to be saved, let be thy chiefest cark,
Return to God, repent thee of thy crime:
That come death late, early, or when he list,
It be birth day of thine eternity.
Of righteous men live thou the life in Christ:
Then sure the death of righteous shall thou die.
Die to the world, the pompes thereof forsake,
That Christ may come and live with thee in love:
So in the world, when thou shall farewell take
Thou may go dwell with Christ in heaven above.
Youth well to live, age well to die should care:
In life, for death: in death for life prepare.
Sith Adams fall did fill the world with sin,
Whereby man's days (few) days of sorrow bin,
His life, no life, rather calamity,
And worlds best pleasures, but mere vanity:
Since beauty, strength and wit, flowers fading be,
Man made of dust, to dust must turn again:
Since all must die, by gods most just decree,
And death no torment is, but rest from pain:
Why should frail flesh fear death, that ends all woes,
That salues all sores, and takes man from his foes?
His shape though ougly'tis, he brings peace,
Stints strife, ends cares, gives life, and wisht-for ease.
Men dying, sleep: sleeping, from travel rest,
To live in joy for ever with the blessed.
Rather embrace, then fear so good a friend:
Yet wish not for him; that in sin does end:
But greater sin, to fear him sure it is,
That troubles ends, and brings eternal bliss.
To faithful soul, death's full of comfortes sweet,
That longs with his Christ in Clouds to meet.
In earth naught sweeter is to wisdoms sense,
Then to prepare for peace-full passage hence.
For, wise man all his life should meditate
On death: that come he sudden, soon, or late,
He is prepared to entertain him so,
As Captives do, redeeming friends from woe.
Live well thou may: but can not live long. Even
So live, that death may leave thee fit for heaven:
And fear not death; pale, ouglie though he be.
Thou art in thrall, he comes to set thee free.
Imprinted at London by R. B. for William Lugger, and are to be sold at his
shop in Holborne, over against S. Andrews Church.


