Your five Gallants.

As it has been often in Action at the Blackfriars.

Written by T. Middleton.



Imprinted at London for Richard Boulan, dwelling at the sign of the
Spred-Eagle, right ouer-against the great North door of Saint Paul's Church.

Your five Gallants.
Presenter or prologue, passing over the Stage, the Bawde-gallant, with three
wenches gallantly attirde, meets him the whore-Gallant, the pocket-Gallant,
the cheating-Gallant, kiss these three wenches and depart in a little whisper
and wanton action: now for the other the Broker-Gallant, be sits at home yet I
warrant you, at this time of day, summing up his pawnes, hactenus quasi
inductio, a little gli^pse giving. Enter a fellow. 1. IS your pawn good and
sound sir?


2. I Will pawn my life for that sir;


1 Place your self there then, I will seek to prefer it presently: my
Master is very jealous of the pestilence; marry the po^ sits at meat and
meal with him.


starts back. Frip. Lent the fifth day of September to mistress Onset upon her
gown, Taffatie petticote with three broad silver Laces, three pound fifteen
shillings.

Lent to Justice Cropshin upon both his Velvet Iackets, five pound ten
shillings.

Lent privately to my Lady New-cut, upon her gilt Castingbottle, and her silver
Lye-pot, fifty five shillings.


1. Sir.


Frip. Lent to Sir Oliver Needy upon his Taffatie cloak, Beuer hat, and
perfumd lether-Ierkin, 6. pound 5. shillings.


1. May it please your worship --


Frip. Lent to master Andrew Lucifer, upon his flame-colourd doublet, and blew
Taffity-hose -- top the candle firrah, me thinks the light burns blew-when
came that suite in.


1. Tas lain above the year now?


Frip Fire and brimstone, cut it out into matches, the white linings will serve
for tinder.


1. And with little help sir, they are almost black enough already? -- Sir
here is an other come with a pawn;


Frip. Keep him aside awhile* and reach me hither the Bill of the last week;


1. T^^^^ere at hand sir?


Frip. Now sir what is your pawn?


3. The second part of a Gentlewomans gown sir, the lower half I mean;


Frip. I apprehend you easily, the breeches of the gown!


3. Very proper, for she wears the doublet at home, a ghuest that lies in my
house sir; she looks every hour: for her cousine out at'h country.


Frip. Oh her cousine lies here a may mistake in that? my firend of what parish
is your pawn?


^. Parish why? Saint Clements sir, -I Will come to you presently,


Frip. What parish is your pawn my friend. Saint Brides 5. Saint Dunst^^^s
none; Saint Clements 3. 3. at Clements, away with your pawn sir, your parish
is infected, I will neither purchase the plague for six pence in the pound, and
a groat Bill money, nor venture my small stock into contagious parishes: you
have your answer fare-you-well, as fast as you can sir.


3, The pox arrest you sir at the suite of the Suburbs.


Frip. I welcome, welcome.


3. For I think plague scorns your company.


Exit. Frip. I rank with chief Gallants, I love to smell safely: lent in the
vacation to master Proctor upon his Spiritual gown, 5. angels; and upon his
Corporal doublet, 15. shillings. sum 3. pound 5. shillings.


1. Sir.


Frip. Now sir.


Enter his man bringing a trunk. 2. Here Is one come in with a trunk of
apparel.


Frip. Whence comes it?


1. From Saint Martins in the field.


Frip* Saint Martins in the field, -- Saint Mary Maudlin 2. Saint Martins none,
here is an Honest fellow, let him appear sir.


1. You may come near sir,


Frip. Oh welcome, welcome what is your pawn sir?


4. Faith a Gentlewomans whole suite sir.


Fry. Whole suite? it is well.


4. A poor kind soul, troubled with a bad husband; one that puts her to her
shifts here.


Frip. He puts her from her shifts me thinks when she is feign to pawn her
clothes?


4 Look you sir, a fair Satin gown; new Taffaty petticote.


Frip. Stay, this petticoate has been turned?


4. Often turned up and down and you will, but never turned sir.


Frip. Cry you mercy indeed:


4. A fine white Beuer, pearle-band; 3. falls, Iha known her have more in her
days.


Frip. Alas and she be but a Gentlewoman of any count or charge, 3. faules
are nothing, in these daies-Know that; tut the worlds changed, gentlewomans
faules stand upright now, no sin but has a Bolster, that it may lie at ease:
Well what do you borrow of these sir?


4. Twelve pound and you will sir.


Frip. How?


4. They were not hers for twenty.


Frip. Why so: our pawn is ever thrice the value of our money unless in plate
and Jewels, how should the months be restored and the use else? we must cast
it for the twelve month, so many pounds, so many months, so many eighteen
pences, then the use of these eighteen pences, then the want of the return of
those pounds, all these must be laid together, which well considered, the
valuation of the pawn had need to sound treble: Can six pound pleasure the
Gentlewoman.


4. It may please her, but like a man of threescore in the Limbrest degree.


Frip. I have but one word more to say in it, twenty nobles is all and the
utmost that I will haxard vppon't.


4. she must be content with it, the less borrowed the better paid, come.


Frip. Arthur?


1. At hand sir.


Frip Tell out twenty nobles, and take her name in a Bill?


4. Im e satisfied sir?


Frip. Welcome: good Saint Martins in the field, welcome, welcome, I know no
other name?


Enter Bawde-Gallant, Primero? Prim. What so hard at your prayers?


Fri. A little sir, summing up my pawnes here: what Master Primero? is it you
sir Gallant; and how does all the pretty sweet Ladies, those plumpe, kind,
delicate blisses; ha? whom I kiss in my very thoughts: how do they Gallant?


Pri. Why Gallant? if they should not do well in my house, where should it be
done boy, have I not a glorious Sc^tuation?


Fri. Oh a Gallant Receipt, Violet air, curious garden, quaint walks,
fantastical Arbors, three back-doores and a Coachgate, nay tha'rt admirably
seated, little furniture will serve thee, tha'rt never without moueables.


Pri. I praise my Stars; ah the goodly virginities that have been cut up in
my house, and the goodly patrimonies that have lain like sops in the grauie,
and when those sops were eaten, yet the meat was kept whole for another, and
another, and another, for as in one pie twenty may dip their sippits, so upon
one woman forty may consume their patrimonies.


Fri. Excellent, master Primero?


Pri. Well, i will pray for women while I live, the're the profitablest fools, i will
say that for em, a man can keep about his house the pretiest kind foul, so
tame, so gentle e en to strangers, hands, So soon familiar, suffer to be
touched, Of those they nere saw twice: the Doves not like em.


Fri. Most certain, for that's honest; but I have a suite to you?


Pri. And so have I to you.


Fri. That happens well,
Grant mine and i will grant yours?

^ri. A match.


Fri. Make me perfect in that trick that got you so much at Primero.


Pri. Oh for the thread tied at your partners leg: the twich?


Fri. I that twich and you calt so.


Pri. That secret twich got me five hundred pound,
Ere it was first known and since I ha sold it well
Five hundred pound laid down shall not yet buy,
The f;ee simple of my twitch I would be here with it,
It Was a blessed invention, I had been a beggar many alowsie year
But for my twitch. It was the prettiest twitch?
Many ouer-cheated gulls, have fatted
Me with the bottom of their patrimonies
Even to the last Soap, gapte while I fed em;
who now live by that Art that first undid them.
But I must swear you to be secret, close,

Frip. As a maid, at Ten.


Pri. Had you sworn but two years higher I would here h'a believed you.


Frip. Nay I let twelve alone,
For after twelve has struck, mades look for one.

Pri. I look for one too and a maid I think.


Frip. What, to come hither?


Pri. Sure she follows me? a pretty fat eyde wench, with a Venus in her
cheek, did but Raiment smile upon her, she were Nectar for great Dons, boy and
that's my suite to thee.


Fri. And that's granted already: of what volume is this book, that I may fit a
cover to it?


Pri. Faith neither in folio, nor in Decimo sexto, but in Octauo between both,
a pretty middle fizde trug.


Fri. Then I have fitted her already: in my eye in faith: here came a pawn in
even now will make shift to serve her as fit, look you sir Gallants, Satin,
Taffety, Beuer, fall and all.


Pri. Is it new.


Fri. New? you see it bears her youth as freshly, --


Pri. A pretty suite of clothes in faith; -- but put case the party should come
to redeem em of a sudden?


Fri. Puh then your wits sickly, have not I the policy think you to seem
^^treame bufie and defer em til the morrow, against which time that pawn shall
be secretly fetched home, and another carried out to supply the place.


Pri. I like thy craft well there.


Fri. A general course, oh Frippery is an unknown benefit sir Gallant!


Pri. And what must I give you for the hire now in faith.


Fri. Of the whole suite, for the month?


Pri. I for the month.


Fri. Go to, you shall give me but twelve pence a day, Master Primero your a
friend, and I Will use you so, it is got up at your house in an afternoon in faith,
the hire of the whole month: yea must think I can distinguish spirits and put
a difference between you and others: you pay no more in faith.


Pri. I could have offered you no less, my self.


Fri Tut, a man must use a friend, as a friend may use him; your house has
been a sweet house to me, both for pleasure and profit: i will give you your
due, omne tulit punctum, you have always kept fine puncks in your house, that's
for pleasure, qui miscuit vtile dulci, and I have had sweet pawnes from em,
that's for profit now?


Pri. You flatter, you flatter sir Gallant? but whist, here she enters; I
prithee question her? oh you are welcome.


Fri. Is this you new scholar Master Primero?


Pri. Marry is she sir.


Fri. I Will commend your judgment in a wench while I live, that face will get
money in faith, twill be a get penny I warrant you? got to? your fortune was
choice pretty Bliss to fall into the regard of so kind a Gentleman.


Nouice. I hope so sir.


Fri. See, what his care has provided already for you, you will be simply set out
to the world: if you will have that care now to deserve his pains oh that will be
acceptable: and these be the Rudiments you must chiefly point at: to counterfit
cunningly, to wind in gentlemen with pourefull attraction, to keep his house
in name and custom, to dissemble with your own brother, never to betray your
fellowed imperfections, nor lay open the state of their bodies to strangers, to
believe those that give you, to gul those that believe you, to laugh at all
under Taffety, and these be your rudiments.


Pri. There Is even al i faith, we will trouble you with no more, nay you shall live
at ease enough: for nimming away jewels and favors from Gentlemen (which are
your chief vailes) hope that will come naturally enough to you, I need not
instruct you, you will have that with, I trust to make the most of your pleasure.


Nou. I hope ones mother-wit will serve for that sir.


Pri Oh proprest of all wench: it must be a she wit that does those things,
and thy mother was quick enough at it in her days.


Frip. Give me leave sister to examine you upon 2. or 3. particulers: and you
make you ready be no ashamed, hers none but friends -- are you a maid.


Nou. Yes, in the last quarter sir.


Frip. Very proper, that even going out, a maid in the last quarter, that's a
whore in the first; -- let me see, new moon on Thursday, she will be chande by
that time too; are you willing to pleasure gentlemen?


Nou. We are all borne to pleasure our country forsooth.


Frip. Excellent, can you carry your self cunningly, and seem often holy.


Nou. Oh fear not that sir, my friends were all puritanes.


Frip. I Will nere try her further.


Pri She Is done well in faith, I fear not now to turn her loose to any
gentleman in Europe.


Frip. You need not sir of her own accord, I think she will be loose enough
without turning -- Arthur.


Art. Here sir.


Frip. Go make have, shift her into that suite presently.


1. It shall be done.


Pri. Arthur do it neately Arthur?


1. Fear't not sir.


Pri. Follow him wench.


Nou. With all my heart sir --.


Ar. But master
In what are we forgetful all this while?

Frip. In what?


Pri. The wooing business man.


Fri. Heart that's true.


Pri. The Gallants will prevent us.


Fri. Are you certain.


Pri. I can avouch it there is a general meeting,
at the deceasde knights house this afternoon
there is riualship enough.

Fri. No doubt in that?
Would either thou or I might bear her from em.

Pri. My hopes are not yet faint.

Fri. Nor mine.

Pri. Tut man?
nothing in women's hearts sooner win place,
than a brave out side and an impudent face?

Fri. And for both those we will fit it.


Pri. I if the devil be not int, make halt:


Exit Prime. Fri. I follow straight, vanish thou Fog, and Sinck beneath our
brightness,
Abashed at the splendar of such beams:
We scorn thee, basse eclipser of our glories,
That would have hid our shine from nortalls eyes,
Now Gallants, I am for you, I and perhaps before you*
You can appearce but glorious from your selves,
And have your beams but drawn from your own light,
But mine from many, many make me bright.
Here Is a dimond that sometimes gracst the finger of a countess, here sits a
Ruby that near lines blushing for the Party that pawnde it: here a Sapphire, O
providence and fortune! my beginning was so poor, I would feign forget it, and
I take the only course, for I scorn to think ont. Sl^ue to a trencher:
obseruer of a saltseller, privy to nothing, but a close-stoole, or such
unsavory secret: but as I strive to forget the da^es of my serving, so I shall
once remember the first step of my raising, for having hardly rakte five mark
together, I reioyst so in that small stock, which most prouidently I venturde
by water to Blackwall, among fishwiues, and in small time, what by weekly
return, and gainefull restitution it rize to a great body, beside a dish of
fish for a present, that stately preserude me a seauen-night: nor ceast it
there but drew on greater profit, for I was held religious by those that do
profess like abstinence, and was full often secretly supplied, by charitable
Catholics, Who censurd me sincerely abstinate, when merely I for hunger nor
^or zeal, eat up the fish, and put their alms to vselha, ha ha; but those
times are run out, and for my sake, zealous dissemblance has since fared the
worse; -- let me see now, whose cloak shall I wear to day to continue change,

Oh -- Arthur.


1. Here sir.


Frip B^ing down sir Oliver Needies Taffety cloak. and Beuer hat, I am sure
he is fast enough? and Andrew ^^cifers Rapier and dagger, in the knights ^ard,
with the emb^st gitdle and hangers, for he is in his third sweat by this time,
sipping of the docto^s bottle, or picking the ninth part of a Rack of mutton
dry roasted, with a leash of night-caps on his head like the popes triple
crown, and as many pillowes c^usht to his back, with oh the needles, for he
got the pox of a Se^ster, and it pricked so much more naturally, -- quick Arthur
quick, now,

To the deceast knights daughter
Whom many Gallants sue to, I among many: for
Since impudence gains more respect then virtue,
And come them blood which few can now deny,
who are your chief Gallants, then but such as I.

Exit. Enter Misters Katherine with Fitsgraue a Gentleman. Fits. You do your
Beauties injury, sweet virgin,
To loose the time they must rejoice in youth:
There Is no perfection in a woman placed
But wastes it self tho it be never wasted,
Then judge your wrongs your self.

Kath. Good Master Fitsgraue?
Through sorrow ^or the knight my fathers death,
(Whose being was the perfections of myioye:
And crown of my desires,) I cannot yet,
But forcedly, on marriage fi^e my heart,
Yet heaven forbid I should deiect your hopes
Conceive not ofn eso uncharitably,
I should belie my soul if I should say,
You are the man I never should affect:
I understand you thus far, you are a Gentleman
Whom your estate and virtues may command
To a far worthier breast, then this of mine,

Fitsg. O cease, I dare not hear such blasphemy,
What is without you worthy, I neglect,
In you is placst the worth that I respect:
Vouchsase vnequalld Virgin whereon I justly kept,
Accept this worthless favor from your servants arm, the hallowed beads,
The true and perfect number of my fighs.

Kat. Mine cannot equal yours, yet in exchange, accept and wear it for my
sake.


Fitsg. Even as my i will ra^e it?


Goldst. Heart? Fitsgraue in such bosom single-loues?


Enter five Gallants at the farther door. Pursn. So close, and private with her?


Taylb. Observe hem, he grows proud and bold?


Frip. Why was not this a general meeting?


Prim. By her own consent, Death how I could taste his blood?


Kath. See, the gentlemen, at my request do all present themselves?


Goldst. Manifold blisses wait on her desire,
whose beauty and whose mind so many honor?

Kath. I take your wishes thankfully? -- kind gentlemen!
all here assembled, over whose long suites,
I near insulted,
Not like that common sickness of our sex,
Grew proud in the abundance of my suitors,
Or number of the days they su'd unto me.
Dutiful sorrow for my fathers death,
Not wilful coyness has my hours detaind
So long in silence:
Im'e left to mine own ehoyce, so much the more
My care calls on me If I err through love,
It Is I must chide my self, I cannot shift
The fault unto my parents, they are at rest,
And I shall sooner err through love, then wealth.

Goldst. Good.


Pursn. Excellent.


Taylb. That likes me well?


Prim. Hope still.


Kath. And my affections do pronounce you all*
Worthy their pure and most entire deserts,
Yet they can choose but one,
Nor do I diswade any of his hopes,
(Because my heart is not yet thoroughly fixed,
On marriage, or the man,)
But crave the quiet respite of one month,
The month unto this night, against which tim^,
I do inuit you all to that election,
Which on my unstained faith, and Virgin promise,
Shall light amongst no strangers, but your selves:
May this content you?

All. Glad, and content.


Kath It Is a good time to leave,
Till then, commend us to your gentlest thoughts.

Exit. They look scur^ily upon Fitsgraue, and he upon them. The boy in a
corner, with his master pocket-Gailant. All. Enough.


Fits. Ough.


Boy Hist, master Hist.


Pursn. Boy? how now?


Boy. Look you sir.


Pursn. Her Chain of Pearl.


Boy. I s^eckt it away fi^ely.


Pursn. Active boy, thy masters best reuenew, his life and soul
Thou keepst 'em both together? whip, away,
Fall back, fall belly, I must be maintaind,
Hope is no purchase, nor care I if I miss her, why I rank
In this desiegne with gallants, there is fu'l cause
Policy enuites me to it, it is not for love, or for her sake alone:
It keeps my state suspect^e^le and unknown.

Exit. Fitsg. Their looks run through, and through me, and the st^^gs
Of their Snake-hissing whispers pierst my hearing:
They Are mad she gracd me with one private minute,
Above their fortunes, I have obserud em often,
Most spightfully aspected toward my happiness,
Beyond all others: but the ^ use I know not,
A quiet month the Virgin has enclosde
Unto her self: suitors stand without till then,
In which space cunningly lle wind my self,
Into their Bosoms. I have be-thought the shape,
Some credulous Scholar, easily infected
With fashion* time, and humor. unto such
Their deepest thoughts, will like to wanton fishe^,
Play above water, and be all parts seen:
F^r since* ^^me their envy pi^es i will see
Whether their lives from touch of blame sit free.

Exit. ACTVS. 2.
Enter Primero, the Bawde-Gallant, meeting Mistress New-cut a Merchants wife.
Pri. Mistress New-cut, welcome, here will be choice of Gallants for you anon.


New. Is all clear, may I venture? am I not seen of the wicked?


Pri. Strange absurdity, that you should come into my house and ask if you be
not seen of the wicked, push, I takt unkindly in faith, what think you of my
house, it is no such common receptacle.


New. Forgive me sweet master Primero, I can be content to have my pleasure
as much as another, but I must have a care of my credit, I would not be seen;
any thing else; my husbands at Sea, and a woman shall have an ill report in
this world let her carry her self never so secretly: you know it master
Primero: and what choice of Gallants be they? will they be proper Gentlemen
think you?


Pri. Nay sure they are as proper as they will be already.


New. I must have choice you know, I come for no gain, but for sheere pleasure
and affection.


Pri. You see your old spy-hole yonder, take you stand, please your own eye,
I Will work it so, the Gallants shall present themselves before you and in the
most conspicuous fashion.


New. That Is all I can desire -- till better come? look you.


Pri. What mean you Lady?


New. A trifle sir, to buy you silver Spurs: good sir accept it.


Pri. Silver Spurs, a pretty emblem, mark it, all her gifts are about riding
still; the other day she sent me Boote-hose wrought in silk and gold, now
silver spurs; well, go the ways, you are as profitable a spirit as ere
lighted into my house; come Ladies come, it is late, to Music, when?


Curt. You Are best command us: sir, our pimp's grown proud.


Pri. To fools, and strangers these are Gentlewomen
of sort, and worship: Knights heirs, great in portions,
Boorded here for their Music,
And often time 'tas been so cunningly carried,
That I have had two stolen away at once,
And married at Sauoy and proved honest shopkeepers;
And I may safely swear they practiced Music:
Their natural at prick-song, a small mist
Will dazzle a fools eye, and that's the world,
So I can thump my hand upon the table,
With an Austere grace and cry 1 2 and 3,
Fret, stamp and curse, foh twill pass well for me?
How now sirrah?

Boy. They Are coming in sir, and strangers in their company,


Pri. Tune apace Ladies, be ready for the Song sirrah?


Goldst. Nay I beseech you gallants be more inward with this,


Enter, All Pursn. Gentleman his parts deserve it,
Whence come he sir?

Goldst. Piping hot from the University, he smells of buttered loaves yet,
an excellent scholar, but the arrantest Ass, for this our Soliciter, he is a
rare fellow five and forty mile hence, believe that: his friends are of the
old fashion, all in their graves, and now has he the leisure to follow all
fashions, plye the Brothels, Practice salutes and Cringes.


Pursn. Oh!


Goldst. Now dear acquaintance,
I Will bring you to see fashions.

Firs. What house is this sir?


Goldst. Oh of great name here music is professed,
Here sometimes Ladies practice, and the meanest,
Daughters to men of worship,
Whom Gentlemen, such as our selves may visit,
Court, clip and exercise our wits upon,
It is a professed courtesy.

Fitsg. A pretty recreation in faith.

Goldst. I seldom saw so few here, you shall haue'em sometimes in every corner
of the house, with their Violls betwixt their legs, and play the sweetest
strokes twould even filch your soul almost out of your bosom.


Fitsg. Pax on it: we spoil our selves for want of these things at University?


Goldst. You have no such natural happiness, let us draw near,


Pri. Gentlemen you are all most respectively welcome:


Goldst. We are bold and insatiate Suitors sir to the breath of your music,
and the dear sight of those Ladies.


Pri. And what our poor skill can inuit you to,
You are kindly welcome: you must pardon 'em Gentlemen,
Virgins and bashful, besides new beginners,
It Is not a whole month since they were first entered.

Goldst. Seven year in my knowledge*


Pri. They blush at their very lessons, they will not endure,
To hear of a Stop, a Prick, or a Semy-quauer,

1. Curti. O out upon you:


Pri* La I tell you, you will bear me witness Gentlemen,
If their complaints come to their parents ears,
Their words of Art, I teach 'em naught but Art.

Goldst. Why it is most certain.


Bung. For all Scholars know, that Musica est Ars.


All. O beastly word?


Pri. Look to the Ladies, Gentlemen;


Goldst. Kiss again?


Pursn. Come an other?


Taylb. this a good Interim?


Pri. what have you done sir?


Bung. why? what have I done,


Pri. Saw you their stomachs queasie, and come with such gross meat!


Bung. Why is it not lattin sir,


Pri. Lattin? ^hy then let the next to it be lattin too:


Pursn. So enough?


Goldst* Nay I can assure you thus far, I that never knew the language have
heard so much that Ars, is lattin for Art, and it' may well be too, ^or there is
more art int now a days the^ ever was:


Pri. is it possible? I am sorry then I have followed it so far.


1. Curti. A Scholar call you him,


Pri. Music must not jar; the offense is satisfied, come to the Song, beg^n
sir.


The Song, and he keeps time, shows several humors and moods: the boy in
his pocket nims away Fitsgraues Jewel here, and exit. Bung. Not a whole month
since you were entered Ladies?


Fitsg. None that shall see their cunning will believe it,


Pri. It is no affliction Gentlemen?


Bung. I care not much in faith, if I write down to my father presently, to send
up my sister in all haste, that I may place her here at this Music school.


Ne^^. Slid it is the fool my cousin, I would not for the value of three
recreations he had seen me here?


Pri. How like you your new prize;


Prip. Pray give me leave, I have not yet sufficiently admir*d her


Pri. My wits must not stand idle, Slife he is in a sick trance?


Goldst. A cheat or two among these mistresses,
Would not be ill bestowed, I affect none,
But for my pray such are their affections,
I know it, how could drabs and cheaters live else,
Then since the world rowles on dissimulation,
I Will be the first dissembler.

1. Cur. Prethy love, comfort, choice, my only wish in thee
I am confinde, deny me any thing a slight chain of pearl,

Pursn. Nay an't be but slight --


Cur. Being denied,
I prize it slight; but given me by my love,
Light shall not be so dear unto my eye;
Mine eye unto the body as the gift,

Pursn. How have I power to deny this to you,
That commandall my fortunes are thy servants,
And thou the Mistress both of them and me.

1 Curt. The truest that ere breathd.


Goldst. To a Gentleman,
That thus so long and has so sincerely lou'de you,
As I my self, nere was less pity shown.

2. Curt. Why I never was held cruel.


Goldst. But to me.


2. Curt. Nor to you.


Goldst. Go too, 'tas scarde you much,


2. Curt. I Am sorry your conce^t is so unkind,
To think me so.

Goldst. When had I other argument,
I Have often tendered you my love and service,
And that in no mean fashion:
Yet were you nere that requ^tefull Mistress,
That grac*st me with one favor,
Slight, not so much as such a pretty ring, pax on it,
T'as almost broke my heart.

2. Curt. Has took it off, Sfoot master Bouser,


Goldst. Nay where a man loves most, there to be scanted.


2. Curt, My Ring, come, come.


Goldst. What reckon I a Satin gown or two,
If she were wise.

2, Curt. Life my Ring sir, come.


Goldst. Have you the face in faith.


2. Curt. Give me my Ring.


Goldst. Prithee hence, by this light you get none on it.


2. Curt. How?


Goldst. I hold your favors of more pure esteem,
Then to part from 'em, ^aith I do,
How ere you think of me.

2. Curt. Push, pray sir,


Gold. Hark you, go too, you have lost much by unkindness, go your ways.


2. Curt. Sfoot.


Gold. But yet there is no time past, you may redeem it.


2. Curt. Come, I cannot miss it in faith; beside the Gentleman that bestowde it
on me* swore to me it cost him twenty nobles.


Goldst. Twenty nobles* pox of twenty nobles,
But you must cost me more, you pretty villain,
Ah you little rogue.

2. Curt. Come come, I know you are but in jest,


Gold. In jest no you shall see.


2. Curt. No way will get it.
As good give it him now, and hope for somewhat.

Gold. I ru^ love made jest.


2. Curt. I did but try thy faith, how fast thou would hold it,
Now I see a woman may venture worthy favors to thy trust,
and have 'em truly kept, and I protest, had I drawn't from thee,
I should nere ha lou'de thee, I know that.

Gold. Sfoote I was nere so wronged in my life,
Think you I am in jest with you, what with my love?
I could find ^^ghter subjects you shall see,
And time will show, how much you iniure me.

2. Curt. The Ring were thrice worth I freely give,
For I know you will requite it.

Gold. Will I live.


2. Curt. Enough.


Gold. Why this was well come off now,
Where Is my old Seruingman? not yet returnde,
Oh here he peepes: now sirrah?

1. May it please your worship -- they are done artificiallyyfaith boy.


Gold. Both the great Beakers.


1 Both Lad.


Gold. Just the same size.


1. I and the marks as just.


Gold. So fall off respectively now.


1. My Lord desires your worship of all love.


Gold. His Lordship must hold me excusd till morning,
I Will not break company to night,
Where sup w^e Gallants?

Pursn. At Ma^-maide.


Gold. S^p there who list, I have forsworn the house.


1. Serving. For the truth is this plot must take effect ^t Miter.


Goold. Faith I Am indifferent.


Bung. So are we Gentlemen.


Pursu. Name the place master Goldstone.


Goldst. Why the Miter in my mind,
For neat attendance, diligent boys and, push, excels it fair.

All. Agreed, the Miter then: Boy, some goodness toward, the Boys whipped away.


Fitsg. The Jewel, heart the Jewel.


Goldst. How now sir? what mou'de you?


Fitsg. Nothing sir, a spice of poetry, a kind a fury,
A disease runs among Scholars.

Goldst. Mass it made you stamp.


Fitsg. Whoo, till make some stamp and stare, make a strange noise,
Curse swear, beat Tire-men, and kick players boys,
The effects are very fearful.

Pursn. Bless me from't.


Fitsg. Oh you need not fear it sir -- hell of this luck.


Goldst. Hark, he is at it again.


Pur. Some pageant plot, or some device for the Tilt-yeard:
Disturb him not.

Fitsg. How can I gain her love, when I have lost her favor.


Goldst. What money have about thee?


Purs. Look you sir, I must be feign to pawn a fair Stone here, for ordinary
expenses: a pox of my tennants, I give 'em twenty days after the quarter, and
they cut out forty.


Frip. Why you might take the forfeiture of their leases then.


Gold I know I might, but what is their course? the roagues comes me up all
together, with Geese and Capons, and petitions in pigs shoutes, which would
move any man in faith, were his stomach nere so great, and to see how pitifully
the pullen will look, it makes me after relent, and turn my anger into a
quick fire to roast 'em -- nay touched and spare it not.


Frip. It Is right, well, what does your worship borrow of this sir?


Goldst. The Stone's twenty nobles.


Frip. Nay hardly.


Gold. As I am a right Gentleman.


Frip. It comes near it indeed: well here is five pound in gold upon it.


Gold. Twill serve, and the Ring safe and secret,


Frip. As a Virgins.


Gold. I wish no hyer: what Gallants* are you constant,
Does the place hold?

All. The Miter.


Goldst. Sir, in regard of our continued boldness, and trouble, (which love to
your Music has made us guilty of) shall we entreat your worships company,
with these sweet Ladies, your professed Scholars, to take part of a poor
Supper with my self and these Gentlemen at the Miter.


Frip. Pray master Primere.


Pursn. I beseech you sir let it be so.


Pri. Oh pardon me sweet Gentlemen, the worlds apt to censure, I have the
charge of them, they are left in trust, they are Virgins, and I dare not hazard
their fames, the least touch mars 'em, and what would their right worshipful
parents think, if the report should fly to them, that they were seen with
Gentlemen in a Tavern.


Gold All this may be prevented, what serves your coach for,
They may come coacht and maskt.

Pri. You put me to it sir,
Yet I must say again, I fear the Drawers,
And Vintners boys will be familier with them,
And think 'em Mistresses.

Pursn. There are those places where respect seems slighter,
More censure is belonging to the Miter, you know that sir?

Pri. Gentlemen you prevail.


Gol. Weel all expect you there.


Pri. And we will not fail.


Frip. The diuil will nere dissemble with them so, as you for the^.


Gold. Come sir.


Frip. What else, lets go,


Exeunt. Enter whore-Gallant. Pri. How cheer you sir?


Taylb. Faith like the Moon, more bright,
Decreast in body* but re-made in light,
Here thou shall share some of my brightness with me.

Pri. By my faith they are comfortable beams sir.


1. Cur. Come, where have you spent the time now from my sight,
I Am iealious of thy action.

Taylb. Push I did but walk, a turn or two in the garden.


1. Curt. What made you there?


Taylb. Nothing but cropped a flower.


1. Cur. Some woman's honor I believe.


Taylb. Foh, is this a woman's honor.


1. Curt. Much about one?
When both are plucked their sweetness is soon gone.

Taylb. Prithee be true to me.


1. Cur. When did I fail.


Taylb. Yet I am ever doubtful, that your sin.


1. Cur. I do account the world but as my spoil, to adorn thee,
My love is artificial to all others,
But purity to thee, -- do thou want gold?
Here take this chain of pearl, supply thy self,
Be thou but constant, firm and just to me,
Rich heirs shall want, ere want come near to thee.

Taylb. Upon thy lip I seal sincerity.


Exit* 2. Cur. Was this your vow to me?


Taylb. Pox, what is a kiss to be quite rid of her, she is sued so long I was
ashamde of her, it was but her cheek I kissed neither, to save her longing.


2. Cur. It Is not a kiss I weigh.


Taylb Had you weighed this,
T'ad lackt above five ounces of a true one:
No kiss that ere weighed lighter.

2. Cur. It Is thy love that I suspect.


Taylb. My love, why by this, -- what shall I swear by?


2. Cur. Swear by this jewel, keep thy oath, keep that*


Tail. By this jewel then, no creature can be perfect in my love, but thy*
dear self.


2. Cur. I rest.


Tail. Ha, ha, ha, lets laugh at em sweet soul.


Nou. I, they may laugh at me, I was a nouice, and beleiude your oths,


Taylb. Why what do you think of me, make I no difference,
Turn seven years prostitution, and seven days,
Why you're but in the waine of a maid yet:
You wrong my health in thinking I love them,
Do not I know their populous imperfections.
Why they cannot live till Easter, let em show
The fairest side to the world like hundreds more, whose clothes
Even stand upright in silver, when their body,
Are ready to drop through em, such there be,
They may deceive the world, they nere shall me.

Nou Forgive my doubts, and for some satisfaction were this ^ing,
From which I vow de nere, but to the, to part.

Tail. With which thou ever bindst me to thy heart.


Exeunt. Enter Fitsgraue. Fitsg. My pocket picked, this was no bro^he^-house,
A music school; damnation has fine shapes,
I paid inoug for'th song, I have lost a jewel
To me more precious then their souls to them,
That gave consent to filch it, i will hunt hard:
Wast time and money, trace and wheel about,
But I will find these secret mischiefs out-how now, what is he:
Oh a servant to my love, being thus disguizde,
I Will learn some news, now sir; you belong to me.

1. I Do sir, but I cannot stay to say, so, nay good sir detain me not I am
going in all have to enquire or lay wait for a chain of pearl nimd out of her
pocket the fifth of November, a dismal day.


Fitsg. Ha a chain of pearl say thou.


1. A chain of pearl sir, which one Master Fitsgraue a gentleman and a
suitor fastened upon her as a pleadge of his love.


Fitsg. Ha?


1. Urge me no more I have no more to say,
Your friend Ieroni^o Bedlam.

Exit. Fitsg. Thou 'rt a mad fellow indeed, some comfort yet,
That's hers is missing too, I feel my soul at much more ease: both stolen.
When griefs have partners they are better borne.
Exit.
Taylb. Oh the parting of us twain, Enter Wbore Gal.
Has causde me mickle pain, and I shall nere be married,
Until I see my muggle again.

New. Hist?


Pri. Ha.


New. The nimble gentleman, in the clestiall stockins.


Pri. Has the best smock fortune, to be beloved of women?
Valle loo lo lille lo lilo, vallee loo lee lo lillo.

Taylb. Vallee loo lo lillee lilo, Vallee loo le lo lil'o.


New. Ah sweet gentleman, he keeps it up stately.


Pri. Well held in faith sir -- mass and now I remember too, I think you nere
saw my little banquiting, box above, since I alterd it.


Taylb. Why have you alterd that?


Pri. Oh divinely sir: the pictuers are all new run over again.


Taylb. Fie.


Pri. For what had the painter done think you, drew me, Venus naked, which is
the grace of a man's Room you know, and when he had done, drew a number of
Oken-leaues before her, had not lawne been a hundred times softer, made a
better show, and been more gentlewoman like?


Taylb. More ladie-like, a great dea'e.


Pri. Come, you shall see how it is alterd now? I do not think but you will like
her.


Exit. Pri. Where be your liueries?


Enter all at once. 1. They attend without.


Pri. Go, call the Coach! Gentlemen, you have excelled in kindness as we in
boldness.


Taylb. So you think amiss sir?


Go. Kind Ladies we commit you to sweet dreams,
Our selves unto the fortune of the dice, dice ho?

1. Cur. You rest firm mine.


Taylb. Even al my soul to thee.


2. Cur. You keep your vows.


Tail. Why do I breathe, or see?


Nou. Is your love constant.


Tail. I to none but these now gone, I, now I love nor them nor thee, slife, I
should be cloide, should I love one in three.


Purs. Oh here is master Bowser now.


Fitsg. Save you sweet Gentlemen.


Taylb. Sweet master Bowser? welcome?


Pursu. When come these dice.


( Within Anon, anon fir) Pursu. Yet anon, anon sir.


Go. Have thou shown art in em.


1. You shall be judge sir, here be the Tavern Beakers, And here peep out the
fine Alchimy knaves, looking like, well sir, most of our Gallants, that seem
what they are not.


Go. Peace villain, am not I in presence.


1. Why that puts me in mind of the jest sir.


Goldst. Again, you quarter her.


1. Nay, compare 'em, and spare 'em not.


Gold. The bigness of the bore, just the same size, The marks, no difference:
away, put money in thy pocket, and offer to draw in upon the least occasion.


1. I am no babe sir.


Gold. Hist.


1. What Is the matter now?


Gold Give me a pair of false Dice, ere you go.


1. Pax on it, you're so troublesome too, you cannot remember a thing before, if
I stay a little longer, I shall be staid anon.


Vint. Here be Dice for your worships.


Pursn. Oh come, come.


Gold. The Vintner himself,
Ilo shift away these beakets by a slight.

Vint. Master Goldstone?


Gold. How now you coniuring rascal?


Vint. Bless your good worship, you're in humors me thinks.


Gold. Humors: say that again.


Vint. I said no such wond sir, -- would I had my beakers out on's fingers.


Gold. What Is thy name Vintner?


Vint. Jack and please your worship.


Gol. Turn Knight like thy companions, scoundrell, live upon usury, wear thy
gilt spurs at thy girdle for fear of slubbering.


Vint. O no, I hope I shall have more grace then so sir:
Pray let me help your worship.

Gold. Cannot I push 'em together without your help?


Vint. O I beseech your worship, they are the two standards of my house.


Gold. Standards, there lie your Standards.


Vint. Good your worship; I am glad they are out of his fingers, my wife shall
lock 'em up presently, they shall see no sun this twelue-months day for this
trick.


Gold. Let me come to the sight of your Standards again.


Vint. Your worship shall pardon me, now you shall not see em in have I
warrant ye.


Gold. I do not desire't; ha, ha.


Bow. Why master Goldstone?


Gold. I am for you Gallants -- Master Boxeer cry you mercy sir, why supt you
from us?


Bou. Faith sir, I met with a couple of my fellow pupils at University, and so
we renewed our acquaintance and supt together.


Gold. Fie, that's none of the newest fashion, I must tell you that master
Bouser, you must never take acquaintance of any ath' University, when you are
at London, nor any of London when you're at University you must be more
forgetful in faith, every place ministers his acquaintance abundantly.


Bun. He tells you true sir.


Gold. I warrant you here is a Gentleman will nere commit such an absurdity.


Bun. Who I, no, it is well known, if I be disposde, I Will forget any man in a
seauen-night, and yet look him in the face: nay let him ride but ten mile from
me, and come home again, it shall be at my choice whether I Will remember him or
no, I have tried that.


Gold. This is strange sir.


Bun. It Is as a man gives his mind too 't sir: and now you bring me in; I
remember 'twas once my fortune to be coozned of all my clothes, and with my
clothes my money; a poor Shepherd pitting me, took me in, and relieu de me.


Gold. 'Twas kindly done of him in faith,


Bun. Nay you shall see now, 'twas his fortune likewise not long after, to come
to me in much distress in faith, and with weeping eyes, and do you think I
remembered him.


Gold. You could not choose.


Bun. By my troth not ^, I sorgot him quite, and never remembered him to this
hour.


Gold. And yet knew who he was.


Bun. As well as I know you in faith --
It Is a gift given to some above others.

Gold. To fools and knaves they never miss on it.


Bu. Does any make such a wonder at this; why alas it is nothing to forget
others; what say you to those that forget themselves?


Gold. Nay then to Dice: come set me Gallants, set.


Frip I, fall too 't Gentlemen. I shall here some news from some of you anon:
I have thou art to know which loose and nere look on; I Will be ready with all the
worst money I can find about me, Arthur!


Art. Here sir.


Fri. Stand ready.


Ar. Fear not me sir.


Gold. These are mine sir.


Frip. Here Is a washed Angel, it shall away: Here Is Mistress Rose-noble has
lost her maidenhead, cracked in the Ring, shoe's good enough for gaimsters, and
to pass from man to man: for gold presents at Dice your harlot, in one hour
wone and lost thrice, every man has a fling at her.


^ay. Again pax of these dice


Bu. It Is ill to curse the dead sir.


Purs* Mew, where should I wish the pox, but among bones.


Fitsg. He tells you right sir.


Tail. I nere have any luck at these odd hands,
None here to make us fix -- why Master Frip.

Frip. I am very well here I thank you sir, I had rather be telling my money
my self, then have others count it for me; it is the scuruiest music in the
world me thinks, to hear my money gingle in other men's pockets, I never had
any mind toot in faith.


Tay. Slud play six or play four, I Will play no more.


Gold. Sfoot you see, there is none here to draw in.


1. Rather then you should be destitute gentlemen, i will play my ten pound, if my
masters worship will give me leave.


Purs. Come.


Tay. He shall, he shall.


Gold. Pray excuse me Gentlemen: ^soot how now goodma^ Rascal, what? because
you served my Grandfather when he went Ambassador, and got some ten pound
by the hand, has that put such spirit in you, to offer to draw in among
Gentlemen of worship, knave.


Tay. Pray sir, lets entreat so much for once.


Purs. It Is a usual grace in faith sir,
Yo'ue many gentlemen will play with their men.

Bung. I and with their Maids to in faith.


Purs. Good sir give him leave.


Gold. Yes, come, and you be weary on it, I pray draw nere sir.


1. Not so sir.


Tail. Come fool, fear nothing, I warrant toe, h'as given thee leave, stand
here by me, come now, set round Gentlemen, set,


Pur. How the poor fellow shakes: throw lustily man.


5. At all gentlemen.


Tail. Well said in faith.


Pursn. The're all mine.


Taylb. By my troth I am glad the fellow has such luck, ^t will encourage him
well.


1. At my masters worship alone.


Go. Now sit slave?


1. At my masters worship alone.


Go. So, saucy rascal.


1. At my masters worship alone.


Go. You're a rogue and will be ever be one?


1. By my troth Gentlemen at all again for once.


Taylb. Take em to the^ boy, take em to thee, you are worthy of em in faith.


Go. Gentlemen faith I am angry with you, go and suborne my knave again me
here; to make him proud and peremptory.


Taylb. Troth that's but your conceit sir, the fellows an honest fellow and
knows his duty, I dare swear for him.


Pursn. Heart, I am sick already.


Go. Whether goes Master --


Pursn. Play on, i will take my turn si^? -- boy?


Boy. Master.


Pursn. Pist? -- a supply, cary't closely my little fooker, -- how much --


Boy. Three pound sir.


Pursn. Good boy, -- take out another lesson? how now gentlemen?


Taylb. Devils int did you ere see such a hand?


Pursn. I set you these three angels.


Boy. My master may set hie? -- for all his stakes are drawn out of other
men's pockets.


1. As I said gentlemen?


Pursn. Dues Ace.


1. At all your right worshipful worships.


All. Death and vengance!


Go. Hell, darkness,


Taylb. Hold sir.


Pursn. Master Goldstone.


Gold. Hinder me not sweet gentlemen -- you rascal -- I banish thee the board.


Tail. In Faith but you shall not sir?


Go. Touch a Die and thou dare, come you in with your lowzie ten pound, you
slave among gentlemen of worship, and win thirty at a hand.


Taylb. Why will you kick again luck sir?


Bung. As long as the poor fellow ventures the loss of his own money, who
can be offended at his fortunes.


1. I have a Master here? many a Gentleman would be glad to see his man come
forward aha.


Pursn. Prey be persuaded sir:


Go. 'Slife, here is none cuts my throat in play but he I have obserude it, an
vnluckly slave it is.


Bung. Me thinks his lucks good enough sir.


Go. Upon condition Gentlemen that I may ever bar him from the board hereafter
I am content to winck at him.


Pursn. Faith, use your own pleasure hereafter, has won our money now! come
to the table sir your master's friends with you.


1. Pray Gentlemen.


Taylb. The fiends int I think, I left a fair chain of pearl at my lodging
too, like an ass and nere remembered it; that would ha bin a good pawn now,
speak what do you lend upon these Master Frip? I care not much if you take my
Beuer hat too, for I perceive it is dark enough already, and it dos but troble
me here.


Frip. Very well sir why now I can lend you 3. pound sir --


Taylb. Prithee do it quickly then?*


Fri. There it is in six angels.


Tail. Very compendiously.


Frip. Here Arthur, run away with these presently, i will enter em into'th
shop-booke to morrow. Item one gilt hatched rapier and dagger, with a fair
imbrodered girdle, and hangers, with which came also a Beuer hat, with a
correspondent band.


Tail. Push, in faith sir your to blame, you have snibd the poor fellow too
much, he can scarce speak, he cleaues his words with sobbing.


1. Haff haff, haff, haff at al Gentlemen.


Go. Ah rogue, i will make you know your self.


1. At the fairest.


Pursn. Out in faith -- two Aces.


Go. I am glad of that, come pay me al these good man cloakebag:


Pursn. Why are you the fairest sir?


Go. You need not doubt of that sir -- five. angels you Scoundrell.

Fie ath these Dice, not one hand to night, -- there they go Gentlemen at al
in faith.


Purs. Pay all with 2. treas and a quater.


Taylb. Al curses follow em, pay your selves withal, i will pawn my self to it,
but i will see a hand to night, not once hold in? here Master Frip, lend me your
hand, quick, quick, So.


Frip. What do you borrow of this doublet now?


Taylb. Nere saw the world three days.


Frip. Go too, in regard your a continual customer, i will use you well, and
pleasure you with five angels upon it.


Tail. Let me not stand too long ith cold for them:


Bung. Had ever country gentleman such fortune?
All swoopt away i would, need repair to the Brokers,

Taylb. If you be in that mind sir there sits a Gentleman will furnish you
upon any pawn, as well as the publickst broker of em all:


Bung. Say you so sir, there is comfort in that in faith.


Frip. Item, upon his oringe tawny satin doublet, five angels,


Bung. But by your leave sir? next comes the breeches, --.


Frip. Oh I have tongue fit for any thing --


Bung. Saving your tail sir? it is given me to understand that you are a
Gentleman ith hundred, and deal in the premises aforesaid.


Frip. Master Bungler, Master Bungler, you are mightily mistook, I am content
to do a gentleman a pleasure for once, so his pawn be neat and sufficient.


Bung. Why what say you to my Grandfathers seal ring here


Frip. I marry sir, this is somewhat like.


Bung. Nay view it well, an ancient arms, I can tell you.


Frip. What Is this sir?


Bung. The great codpeice with nothing int.


Frip. How?


Bung. The word about it, partur iunt montes.


Frip. What Is that I pray sir?


Bun. You promise to mount us.


Frip. And belike he was not so good as his word.


Bun. So it should seem by the Story, for so our names came to be Bunglers*


Frip. A lamentable hearing that so great a house should shrink and fall to
ruin.


Pursn. Two quaters and yet loose it heart, boy? *in faith? what is it?


Boy. Five pound sir.


Pursn. By my troth this boy goes forward well, ye shall ^ee him come to his
preferment in the end!


Go. Why how now, whose that gentlemen, a barge-man?


Tail. I never have any luck Gallants, till my doublets off, I Am not half
nimble enough, at this old finquanter driuelbeard:


Purs. Your worship must pay me al these sir?


Taylb. There, and feast the devil with em.


Pursn. Hell gnawe these dice.


Gol. What do you give over Gallants.


Full. Is It not time.


Tail. I protest, I have but one angel left to guide me home to my lodging.


Gol. How much think?


Fulk. Some fourscore angels, sir.


Go. Peace, we will join powers anon, and see how strong w^ are in the whole
number, mass, yon guilt Goblet stands so full in mine eye, the whoreson tempts
me, it comes like cheese after a great feast, to digest the rest, he will
hardly escape me in faith I see that by him already; back for a parting blow
now,*boy?


Vint. Anon anon sir:


Go. Fetch a penneworth of soft wax to seal letters.


Vint. I will sir?


Tail. Nay had not I strange casting, thrice together, 2. quaters and a dews.


Pursn. Why was not I as often haunted with two treas, and a quater:


Vin. There Is wax for your worship -- anon, anon, sir.


Go. Screene me a little you whoreson old cross biter.


Fu. Why what is the business? fill chiton h^b Goblet.


Pursn. And what has master Bowser lost?


Bou. Faith not very deeply sir, enough for a scholar, some half a score
royals.


Pursn. Sfoot I have lost as many with spurs at their heels.


Gol. Come Gallants shall we stumble:


Tail. What Is a clock.


Draw. Here Is none ont Dick, the Goblets carried down.


Go. Nay it is upon the point of three, boy, Drawer, what is to be done sirs?


Uint. All Is paid, and your worships are welcome, Only there is a Goblet
missing Gentlemen, and cannot be found about house.


Gold How a Goblet:


Pursn. What manner a one*


Uint. A guilt Goblet sir, of an indifferent size.


Gold. Sfoote I saw such a one lately.


Uint. It cannot be found now sir.


Gold. Came there no strangers here?


Vint. No sir.


Gold. This a marvelous matter, that a Goblet should be gone, and none but we
in the room, the loss is mere all, here as we are; keep the door Vintner.


Vint. No I beseech your worship.


Gol. By my troth Vintner we will have a privy search for this; What? we are not
all one woman's children.


Vint. I beseech ye Gentlemen, have not that conceit of me, that I suspect
your worships.


Gold. Tut, you are an Ass; do you know every man's nature: There Is a Broker
in the company.


Purs. Slife you have not stole the Goblet, boy, have you?


Boy. Not I sir.


Purs. I was afraid, -- it is a good cause in faith, let each man search his
fellow, we will begin with you.


Tail. I shall save some body a labor Gentlemen, for I Am half searched already.


Purs. I thought the Goblet had hung here in faith -- none here, nor here.


Gold. Seek about flower, -- What was the Goblet worth Vintne.


Vint. Three pound ten sh^lings sir no more.


Gold. Pox on it Gentlemen, it is but Angels a piece, it shall be a brace of mine,
rather then I would have our reputations breathed upon by all comers, for you
must think they will talk ont in all companies; such a night, in such a company,
such a Goblet, Sfoote it may grow to a gangrene in our credits and be
incurable.


Tail. Faith I am content.


Frip, So am I.


Purs. There Is my Angel too.


Gol* So, and mine, I Will tell thee what, the missing of this goblet has dismaide
the Gentlemen much.


Vint. I am sorry for that sir.


Gold. Yet they send thee this comfort by me, if they see thee but rest
satisfied, and depart away contented, which will appear in thy countenance;
not three times thrice the worth of the Goblet shall hang between them and
thee, both in their continual custom, and all their acquaintances.


Vint. I thank their worships all*I am satisfied.


Gold. Say it again: do you hear Gentlemen?


Vint. I thank your worships all I am satisfied.


Gold. Why la, was not this better then hazarding our reputations upon trifles,
and in such public as a Tavern, such a questionable place.


Tail. True.


Pur. Faith it was well thought on. Nay keep your way Gentlemen: I have sworn
master Bowcer, I will be last in faith* Rascal the goblet.


Fulk. Where sir?


Gold. Peep yon sir under.


Fulk. Here sir.


Finis Actus 3.
ACTVS. 4.
Enter Taylbee reading a letter. Tail. reads. My husband is rode from home,
make us delay', I know if your will be as free as your horse, you will see
'^ee yet ^re dinner: From Kingston this eleventh of Nouvember* Ha? these women
are such creatures such importunate sweet souls: they will sca^se give a man
leave to be ready, that is their only fault in faith, if they be once set upon a
thing, why there is no remoouing of em, till their pretty wills be fulfild -- O
pity thy poor oppressed client here sweet Cupid, that has scarce six hours
vacation in a month, his causes hang in so many Courts, yet never suffer my
French adversary, nor his big swollen confederates to overthrow me,*Who without
mercy would my blood carouse, And lay me in prison in a Doctors house:

Thy clemency great Cupid: peace, who comes here?


Pursn. Sir Gallant, well encountered.


Talb. I both salute, and take my leave together.


Purs. Why whether so fast sir*


Tail. Excuse me pray, lme in a little have,
My horse waits for me.

Purs. What some journey toward?


Tail. A light one in faith sir.


Purs. I am sorry that my business so commands me,
I cannot ride with you; but I make no question,
You have company enough.

Tail. Alas not any -- nor do I desire it,
Why it is but to Kingston yonder.

Purs. O cry you mercy sir,


Tail. Escape but one reach, there is little danger thither.


Purs. True a little of Come-parke.


Tail. You'ue namde the place sir, that is all I fear in faith,


Purs. Farewell sweere master Taylebee,
This fell out happily; I Will call this purchase mine, before I greet him,
Even where his fear lies most, there will I meet him: Boy.

Boy. Sir.


Purs. Walk my horse behind yon thicket, give a word, if you discrie.


Boy. I have all perfect sir.


Purs. So, he cannot now belong: What with my boys dexterity at Ordinaries,
and my Geldings celerity over hedge and ditch, but we make pretty shift to rub
out, a Gallant, for I have learnt these principles.

Stoop thou toth' world, 'twill on thy bosom tread,
It stoopes to thee, if thou advance thy head:
The mind being far more excellent then fate,
It Is fit our mind then be above our state;
Why should I write my catremitics in my brow,
To make them loath me, that respect me now,
If every man were in his courses known;
Legs that now honor him, might spurn him down.
To conclude, nothing seems as it is but honesty, and that makes it so little
regarded amongst us.

Boy. Eela, ha, ho.


Pusn. The Boy: he is hard at hand, I Will cross him suddenly: and here he
comes; stand.


Taylb. Ha!


Purs. Deliver your purse sir.


Tay. I feared none but this place in faith, nay when my mind gives me a thing
once.


Pursn. Quick, quick sir, quick.
I must dispatch three robberies yet ere night.

Tail. I Am glad you have such good doings by my troth sir.


Purs. You Will fare never a whit the better for your flattery I warrant you sir.


Tail. I speak sincearly, it is pity such a proper-parted gentleman should
want; nor shall you, as long as I haue't about me, nay search and spare not:
there is a purse in my left pocket as I take it, with fifteen pound in gold
in it, and there is a fair chain of pearl in the other: nay I'e deal truly
with you; it greeues me in faith when I see such goodly men in distress, I Will
rather want it my self then they should go without it.


Purs. And that shows a good nature sir.


Tail. Nay tho I say it, I have been always accounted a man of a good nature,
I might have hanged my self ere this time else* Pray use me like a gentleman,
take all, but injury not my body.


Purs. You must pardon me sir, I must a little play the Usurer, and bind you,
for mine own security.


Tail. Alas there is no conscience in that sir, shall I enter into bond, and
pay money too.


Purs. Tut, I must not be betrayed.


Tail. Here me but what I say sir, I do protest I would not be he that should
betray a man, to be Prince of the world.


Purs. Mass that is the diuill, I thank you heartily, for he is called prince
ath' world.


Tail. You take me still at worst.


Purs. Swear on this sword then, to set spurs to your horse, not to look
back, to give no marks to any passenger.


Tail. Marks, why I think you have left me nere a penny sir.


Purs. I mean no marks of any.


Tail. I understand you sir.


Purs. Swear then.


Tail. In Faith I do sir:


Purs. Away.


Tail. I Am gone sir, by my troth of a fierce thief he seems to be a very
honest Gentleman.


Exit. Purs. Why this was well adventured, trim a Gallant:
Now with a courteous and long thusting eye,
Let me behold my purchase, and try the soundues of my bones with laughter,
how? is not this the chain o^ pearl I gave to that periurde ha^lat, it is,
Sfoot it is, the very chain, oh damned mistress, ha; and this the purse, which
not five days before I seen* her filled with fair spur-royalls -- heart; the
very gold? -- slife is this no robbery, how many oaths flew toward heaven,

Which nere came half way thither; but like fire drakes,
Mounted a little, gave a crack, and fell;
Fainde oaths bound up to sink more deep to hell.
What folded papers this? death -- it is her hand.
Master Taylbee, you know with what affection I love you, You do:

I count the world but as my pray to maintain you, The more dissembling queen
you I must tell you,

I have sent you an embroderd purse here with fifty fair spurroyalls int -- A
pox on you for your labor wench: And I desire you of all loves to keep that
chain of pearl from Master Pursnets sight --

He cannot strumpet, I behold it now, unto thy secret torture:

So fare thee well, but be constant and want nothing.

As long as I have it ifayth? me thinks it should have gone so, -- well; what a
horrible age do we live in, that a man cannot have a queen to himself let him
but turn his back the best of her is chipt away like a Court loaf, that when
a man comes himself, has nothing but bumbast; and these are 2. simple chippings
here, does my boy pick, and I steal, to enrich my self, to keep her, to
maintain him: why this is right the sequence of the world, -- A. L. maintains
her, she maintains a Knight, he maintains a Whore, she maintains a
captain. So in like manner, the pocket keeps my boy, he keeps me, I keep
her, she keeps him, it runs like quicksilver, from one to another; Sfoote I
perceive I have been the chief vpholder of this Gallant all this while; it
appears true, we that pay dearest for our pasture are ever likely worse-usde,
Sfoot he has a Nag can run for nothing, has his choice, nay and gets by the
running of him; -- oh fine world strange devils, and pretty damnable affections.


Boy. Lela ha, ho?


Pursn. There boy, again, what news there?


Boy. Master, pist, master?


Pursn. How now boy.


Boy. I have discride a prize.


Pursn. Another lad?


Boy. The gull, the scholar?


Pursn. Master Bowser:


Boy. I, comes a long this way:


Pursn. Without company.


Boy. As sure, as he is your own.


Pursn. Back to thy place boy,
I have the luck to day, to rob in safety:
Two precious cowards, whist: I hear him -- stand

Fits. You lie, I came forth to go.


Pursn. Deliver your purse.


Fits. It Is better in my pocket.


Pursn. How now, at disputations, signior fool.


Fits. I Have so much logic to con^ute a knave, a thief, a rogue-


Pursn. Hold, hold, sir, and you be a gentleman hold, let me rise.


Fit. Heart it is the curtizy of his scarf vn^askt him to me,
Above the lip by chance, i will counterfit,
Light, because I am a scholar, you think belike that scholars have no
metal in em, but you shall find, -- I have not don with you cousin.

Pursn. As you're a Gentleman:


Fits. As you're a rogue?


Pursn. Keep on upon your way sir:


Fits. You bad me stand?


Pursn. I have been once down for that:


Fits. And then deliver?


Pursn. Deliver me from you sir -- oh pax on it, has wounded me Eela, ha, ho my
horse, my horse boy:


Fits. Have you your boy so ready: oh thou world,
How art thou muffled in deceitful fonnes:
There Is such a mist of these, and still has been,
The brightness of true Gentry is scarce seen:
This journey was most happily assignde,
I have found him dross both in his means and mind: what
papers this he dropped? i will look on it as I go.

Pursn. A gull call you him, let me always set upon wisemen, they will be afread
of their lives, they have a feeling of their inniquities, and knows what it is
to die with fighting* sfoote this gull lays on without fear, or wit, how
deepe's it say thou boy?


Boy. By my faith three inches sir.


Pursn. La, this was long of you, you rogue:


Boy. Of me sir.


Pursn. Forgive me dear boy, my wound akte, and I grew angry, there is hope of
life boy, is there not?


Boy. Puh, my life for yours.


Purs. A comfortable boy in man's extremes! I was nere so afread in my life
but the fool would have seen my face, he had me at such advantage, he
might have commanded my Sca^f^, Iscapt well there tad choakt me; my reputation
had been past recovery, yet live I unsuspected, and still fit for Gallants
choice societies -- but here I vow, if ere I see this Bowser when he cannot
see me, either in by-lane, privilege place, Court, Alley, or come bekinde him
when he is standing, or take him when heereeles from a Tavern late, pissing
again a Cundit, Wall, or Gate, when he is in such a plight and clear from me,
i will do that I am ashamde to speak till then.


Enter two Gentlemen. 1. Nay read forward, I have found 3. of your Gallants,
like your bewitching shame merely sophistical, there is your Bawde-Gallant,
your pocket-Gallant, and your Whore-Gallant.


2. Master Taylbee.


1. That's he


2. I count the world but as my prey, to maintain you?


1. That's just the phraze and still of em all, to him: they meet altogether in
one effect, and it may well hold too, for they all iumpe upon one cause,
subands lechery.


2. What shapes can flattery take, let me entreat you,
Both in the virgins right, and our good hopes
Since your hours are so fortunate, to proceed.

1. Why he is base that faires, until he crown his deed.


Exit. Enter Pursnet and his 1. Curt. Pursn. See that dissembling devil, that
periurde strumpet.


Curt. Welcome my souls best wish, -- oh out alasle* thy arm bound in a
scarf, I shall sown instantly,


Pursn. Heart and i will fetch you again in the same tune,
O my unmatched love, if any spark of life remain,
Look up, my comfort, my delight, my --

1. Cur. O good, o good?


Pursn. The organ of her voice is tunde again,
There Is hope in women, when their speech returns*
See like the Moon after a black eclipse,
She by degrees recouers her pure light:
How cheeres my love?

1. Curt. As one new wah't out of a deadly trance,
The fit scarce quiet.

Pursn. It Was terrible for the time, I Would much ado to fetch you.


1. Curt. Shrew your fingers,
How came my comfort wounded, speak?

Pursn. Faith in a fray last night.


1. Curt. In a fray? will you loose your blood so vainly,
Many a poor creature lacks it, tell me how?
What was the quarrel?

Pursn. Loath to tell you that.


1. Curt. Loath to tell me.


Pursn. Yet it was my cause of coming.


1. Cur. Why then, must not I know it:


Pursn. Since you urge it, you shall,
You Are a strumpet.

1. Curt. O news abroad sir?


Pursn. Say you so.


1 Curt. Why you knew that the first night you lay with me.


Pursn. Nay not to me, only but to the world.


1. Curt. Speak within compass man.


Pursn. Faith you know none, you sail without.


1. Cur. I have the better skill then.


Pursn. At my first step into a Tauerne-roome, to spy that chain of pearl
wound on a strangers arm you begd of me.


1. Cur. How, you mislooke it sure.


Pursn. By heaven the very self same chain*


1. Curt. O cry you mercy, it is true, i would forgot it, it is S. Georges day to
morrow, I lent it to my couzin only to grace his arm before his m^s^is.


Pursn. Notable cunning.


1. Curt. And is this all now in faith.


Purs. Not, I durst go further.


1. Curt. Why, let me never possess your love, if you see not that again a
Thursday morning, I take it unkindly in faith you should fall out with me for such
atrifle.


Purs. Better and better.


1. Curt. Come, a kiss and friends.


Purs. Away.


1. Curt. By this hand I Will spoil your atme and you will not.


Purs. More for this then the Devil.


Gold. Ye, at your book so hard.


Purs. Against my will, are you there Signior Logic,
A pox of you sir.

Gold. Why how now, what has fate sent us here, in the name of Venus goddess
of Cypress.


Purs. A Free-booters pinck sir, three or four inches deep.


Gold. No more, that's conscionable in faith.


Taylb. Troth I Am sorry for it, pray how came ir sir?


Purs. Faith by a paltry fray, in Colman-streete.


Fitsg. Coome-parke he would say.


Purs. No less then three at once sir, made a Triangle with their Swords and
Daggers, and all opposing me.


Fits. And amongst those three, only one hurt you sir.


Purs. Ex for ex.


Tail. Troth and I Will tell you what luck I had too, since I parted from you last.


Purs. What I pray?


Tail. The day you offered to ride with me, I wish now I Would had your company,
Sfoote I was set upon in Coome-parke by three too.


Purs. Bah.


Tail. Robbed by this light of as much gold and Jewels, as I valued at forty
pound,


Purs. Sure Saturn is in the fifth house.


Tail. I know not that, he may be in the sixth and he will for me, I am sure
they were in my pocket wheresoever they were: but I Will nere refuse a Gentleman's
company again when it is offered me, I warrant you.


Gold. I must remember you, it is Miter-night Ladies.


2. Curt. Mass it is indeed, Friday to day, I Would quite forgot, when a woman's
busy, how the time runs away.


1. Curt. Oh you have betrayed us both.


Taylb. I understand you not.


1. Curt. You Have let him see, the chain of Pearl I gave you.


Tail. Who him: will you believe me,
By this hand he never saw it.

1. Curt. Upon a strangers arm he swore to me,


Tail. Mass that may be, for the truh is in faith,
I was robbed on it `at Coome-parke.

1. Curt. It Was that betrayed it,


Tail. I would had staide him,
He was no stranger, he was a thief in faith,
For thieves will be no strangers.

1. Curt. How shall I excuse it?


Bung. Nay I have you fast enough boy, you rogue.


Boy. Good sir, I beseech you sir, let me go.

he thumps
Bung* A pick-pocket, nay you shall to Newgate luck you: is this your Boy sir.


Purs. How now boy? a monster? thy arm linde fast in an others pocket, where
learnt you that manners; what company have you kept alate, that you are so
transformd into a roage, that shape I know not, believe me sir I much wonder at
the alteration of this boy, where he should get this nature: as good a child
to see to, and as virtuous, he has his Creed by heart, reads me his chapter
duly every night; he will not miss you one tittle in the nine commandments.


Bungl. There Is ten of em.


Purs. I fear he skips ore one; thou shall not steal.


Bung. Mass like enough.


Purs. Else grace and memory, would quite abash the boy. Thou graceless impe,
ah thou prodigious child, begot at some ec ipse, degenerate rogue. Shame to thy
friends, and to thy master eke: how far digressing from the noble mind of thy
brave Ancesters that lie in Marble, with their coat a^^ors ore em.


Bung. Had he such friends?


Pursn. The boy is well descended, though he be a rogue and has no feeling ont,
yet for my sake, and for my reputations seek not the blood of the boy, his
near allied to many men of worship now yet living, a fine old man to his
father, it would kill his heart in faith, heed away like a Crysom.


Bun. Alas good gentleman?


Pursn. Ah shameless villain, complainst thou? do thou want?


Boy. No, no, no, no.


Purs. Art not well clad, thy hunger well resisted.


Boy. Yes, yes, yes, yes,


Pursn. But thou shall straight to Bridewell.


Boy. Sweet master.


Pursn. Live upon bread and water, and chap choke.


Boy. I beseech your worship.


Bun. Come I Will be his suerty for once:


Pursn. You shall excuse me indeed sir?


Bun. He will mend, a may prove an honest man for all this, I know gallant
Gentlemen now, that have done as much as this comes too in their youth.


Pursn. Say you so sir?


Bun. And as for Bridewell, that will but make him worse, a will learn more
knavery there in one week, then will furnish him and his heirs for a hundredth
year.


Pursn. Deliver the boy.


Bun. Nay I tell you true Sir, there is none goes in there a queen, but she
comes out an arrant whore I warrant you.


Pursn. The boy comes not there for a million.


Bun. No you had better forgive him by ten parts.


Pursn. True, but a must not know it comes from me, down a your knees you
rogue, and thank this gentleman has got your pardon.


Boy. O I thank your worship:


Pursn. A pox on you for a rogue, you put me to my set speech onee a quarter:


Gold. Nay gentlemen you quite forget your hour, ^ead master Bowser

Exeunt all but Gold; and Curtisan.
2. Cur. Let me go you are a dissembler


Gold How.


2. Cur. Did not you promise me a new gown?


Gold. Did I not? yes faith did I, and thou shall have it, go firrah run for
a Tailor presently.

Let me see for the color now; Orange tawny, Peach color, what say to a
Watchet Satin?


2. Curt. O it is the only color I affect.


Tailor. A very orient color, ant please your worships, I made a gown ont for
a Gentlewoman the other day, and it does passing well upon her.


Gold. A Watchet Satin gown.


Tailor. There your worship left sir.


Gold. Laid about Tailor.


Tailor. Very good Sir.


Gold. With four fair Laces.


Tailor. That will be costly sir.


Gold. How you rogue costly, out ath'house, you slip-shood, shamlegd,
browne-thred, penny-skeand rascal.


2. Curt. Nay my sweet love.


Gold. Hang him rogue, he is but a Botcher neither, come I Will send thee a fellow
worth a hundred of this, if the slave were clean enough.


Exeunt. In the midst of the music enter one bringing in a sui^e of Satin,
knocks at Taylbees door, enter his man. 1. Who knocks.


2. A Christian: pray is not this master Taylbees lodging, I was directed het
her.


1. Yes, this is my masters lodging.


2. Cry you mercy sir. Is he yet stirring.


1. He Is awake, but not yet stirring, for he plaide away half his clothes
last night


2. My mistress commends her secrets unto him, and presents him by me with a
new Satin suite here.


1. Mass that comes happily.


2. And she hopes the fashion will content him.


1 There Is no doubt to be had of that sir -- your mistress name I pray? you are
much pretiously welcome.


2. I thank you vncommonly sir.


1. The suite shall be accepted I warrant you sir.


2. That's all my Mistress desires sir.


1. Fare you well sir.


2. Fare you well sir.


1. This will make my master leap out of the bed for joy, and dance Wigmois
galliard in his shift about the chamber?


The Music plays on a while, then enter; Taylb^e his man after trussing him.
Taylb. Came this suit from mistress Cle^ueland?


Jack. She sent it secretly sir.


Taylb A pretty requitefull squall, I like that woman, that can remember a good
turn 3 months a'er the date, it shows both a good memory, and a very feeling
spirit.


Ia. This came fortunately sir, after all your ill luck last night.


Taylb. I Would beastly casting Jack.


Ia. Oh abom nable sir, you had the scuruiest hand -- the old Seruingman swoopt
up all;


Taylb. I am glad the fortune lighted upon the poor fellow by my troth, tmade
his master and?


Ia. Did you mark that sir, ^ warrant he has the doggedst master of any
poor fellow under the dog-signe, I Would rather serve your worship, I Will say that
behind vour back ^ir, for nothing, as indeed I have no standing wages at all,
your worship knows.


Taylb. Oh but your vailes Jack your vailes considered, when you run too and
fro between me and mistresses.


Ia I must confess my vailes are able to keep an honest man go I where I lift.


Taylb. go to then Jack.


Ia. But those vailes stand with the state of your body sir as long as you hold
up your head, if that droop once, farewell you, farewell I, farewell all, and
droop it will, though all the caudles in Europe should put to their helping
hands toot; it is even as uncertain as playing now vu now down, for if the Bill
rise to above thirty, here is no place for players, so if your years rise to
above (...)ty, there is no room for old lechers.


Tabl. and that's the rea on all rooms are taken up for young Temp'ers?


Ia. you are in the right sir?


Tal^. pize ont I pawnd a good beuer hat to master Frip last night Jack,

I feel the want of it now, -- hark whose that knockes;


1. I^ master Taylbee stirring?


Ia. What Is your pleasure with him, he walks hereith hall.


1. Give ^our worship good morrow,


Taylb. Welcome honest lad;


1. A letter from my mistr^sse.


Taylb. Whose the mistress?


1. Mistress (...) block.


Taylb. Mistress new-blocke my sincere love how does she?


1. Faith only ^^n the wait of your sight.


Taylb. A^asse ^eere sweet, Iu'e had such buisines, I protest I nere stood
still since I saw her.


1. She has sent your worship a Beuer hat here, with a band best in fashion.


Taylb. How shall I requite this dear soul?


1. Tit not a thing fit for me to tell you sir, for I have three years to
serve yet: your worship knows how I warrant you;


Tal^. I know the drift of her letter, and for the Beuer, say, I accept it
highly.


1 O^ she will be a proud woman of that sir.


Tail. And hark thee tell thy mistress as lm'e a Gentleman, I Will dispatch her
out of hand, the first thing I do a my credit, can thou remember these words
now?


1. Yes siras you are a Gentleman you will dispatch her out of hand the first
thing you do


Tail. Ia my credit.


1. Oh of your credit, I thought not of that fir.


Taylb. Remember that good boy?


1 Fear it not now fir.


Tail I dreamt to nighe Jack, I should have a secret supply out a'th City


Ia. Your dream craules out partly well sir, -- what news there now?


Enter another. 1. I have an arrant no master Taylbee --


Jack. Yonder walks my maist^r;


2. Mistres Tiffany commends her to your worship and h'as sent you your ten
pound in gold back gain, and says she cannot furnish you of the same Lawne
you desire, till after all hollantide --


Tail. Thank her she would let me understand so much? ha, ha, -- this wench
will live, why this was sent like a work woman now, the rest are borchers to
her, faith I commend her cunning, she is a fool, that makes her servant fellow
to her heart, it robs her of respect, dams up all duty, keeps her in awe even
of the slave she keeps.

This takes a wise course I commend her more,
Sends back the gold, I never saw before:
Well women are my best friends in faith,
Takes lands give me good legs:
Firm back white hand black eye, brown hair,
And ad but to these five a comely stature,
Let others live by art and I by nature.

Exit. Enter Goldstone calling Mrister Bowser. Go. Master Bowser Maistr
Bowser, ha, ha, ho, master Bowser.


Fusg Holla:


Gol. What not out of thy kennel, Master Bowser.


Fitsg. Master Goldstone, your an early Gallant sir?


Gol. A fair cloak yonder in faith, -- by my troth a bed Master Bowser, you
remember your promise well ore night.


Fitsg. Why what is a clock sir?


Go. Do you ask that now, why the chimes are spent at Saint Brides.


Fitsg. It Is a Gentleman's hour, says Master Goldstone i will be ready in a
trice.


Gol. Away there is no trust to you:


Fits. Faith i will come instantly?


Gold. Nay choose whether you will or no, by my troth your cloak shall go
before you --


Fits. Nay Master Goldstore I ha sworke -- do you hear sir:


Gol. Away, away, faith I Am angry with you, pox, a bed now I Am ashamde of it.


Fits. Foot my cloak, my cloak Master Goldstone, slife what meant you by
this sir you will bring it back again, I hope, no not yet, by my troth I care very
little for such kind of jesting, me thinks this familiarity now extends a
little too far, unless it be a new fashion come forth this morning* secreetly
yesterday twould have shown unmannerly, and sawcily; I scarce know yet what to
think on it, well there is no great profit in standing in my shirt, i will on with
my clothes, has bound me to follow the suite, my cloakes a stranger he was
made but yesterday, and I do not love to trust him alone in company.


Exit. Enter Frip. Frip. What may I conjecture of this Goldstone? he has not
only pawnde to me this cloak, but the very Diamond and Sapphire, which I
bestowde upon my new love at Master Primeroes house; the cloakes new and comes
fitly, to do me great grace at a wedding this morning, to which I was solemnly
enuited. I can continue change more the^ the proudest Gallant of em all; yet
never bestow penny of my self, my pawnes do so kindly furnish me: but the
sight of these jewels is able to cloy me, di^ I nor preserve my stomach the
better for the wedding dinner, a gift could never have come in a more patient
h^ure, nor to be better disgested; is she proved false, -- but i will not fiet to
day no* chafe my blood.


Enter Pursnet. Pursu. Ha, yonder goes Bowser, the place is fit: -- boy stand
with my horse at Corner, I owe you for a Pinck 3. inches deep sir?


Frip. On -- o -- o;


Pursn. Take that in part of payment; for Coome-parke:


Frip. On -- o -- o?


Exit. Enter Fitsgraue. Fitsg. How now, whose this? sfoote one of our Gallants,
knocked down like a Calfe, is there such a plauge of em here at London, they
begun to knock em ath head already:


Frip. Oh Master Bowser, prayrend me your hand sir; I am slain:


Fits. Slain and alive? oh cruel execution?
What man so sauage-spirited durst presume,
To strike down ^attin on two taffeties cut:
O^ li^e his hand against a Beuer hat.

Frip Some rogue that owes me money, and had no other means
To a wedding dinner: I must be dressed myself me thinks.

Fit'g. How why this my cloak, life how came my cloak hither?


Frip. Is it yours sir,? Master Goldstone pawnde it to me this morning fresh
and ^a^^ing* and borrowed five pound upon it.


Fits. How, pawnde i^? pray let me near out this story, come, and i will lend you
to the next barbers-surgeons; -- pawnde my cloak?


Enter Goldst^and Gall. Bung. How now Mar^aduke what is the wager;


Marm. Nay my care is at end sir, now I am come to the sight of you? my mistress
your couzin entreates you to take part of a dinner with her at home at her
house, and bring what Gentleman you please to accompany you.


Bun. Thank my sweet couze, i will munch with her say.


Mar. I Will tell her so.


Bun. Marmaduke --


Mar. Sir?


Bun. Will there be any stock fish think thou?


Mar. How sir?


Bun. Tell my couze I Have a great appetite to stock fish in faith -- Master
Goldstone i will entreat you to be the gentleman that shall accompany me.


Gold. No^? me sir?


Bung. You sir.


Bung By my troth concluded, what state bears thy couze ^irrah?


Bung. Oh a fine Merchants wife, --


Go. Or rather a Merchants fine wife --


Bung. Trust me and that's the ^roperer phraze here at London, and it is as absurd
too, to call him ^ine Merchant, for being at sea, a man knows not what pickle
he is in.


Go. Why true --


Bung. Yet my couze will be serude in plate I can tell you, she has her silver
lug^ and her guilt Tankards.


Go. Fie.


Bun. Nay you shall see a house dressed v^ in faith, you must not think ^o tread
ath ground when you come there. --


Go. No, how ther^?


Bun. Why upon paths made of fig-frailes, and white blankets cut out in steakes.


Go Away -- I have thought of a device, where shall we meet an hour hence.


Bung. In Powles.


Exit Bung. Go. Agreed.


Enter Fitsgraue. Fitsg. The Broker-Gallant, and the Cheating-Gallant,
Now I have found 'em all, I so rejoice,
That the redeeming of my cloak I wey not:
I have spyed him.

Gold. Pax here is Boucer.


Fits Master Goldstone, my cloak, come where is my cloak sir?


Gold. Oh you are a sure Gentleman; especially if a man stand in need of you, he
may be slain in a morning to breakfast, ere you vouchsafe to peep out of
your lodging.


Fits. How?


Gold. No less then four Gallants, as I Am a gentleman, drew all upon me at
once, and opposde me so spightfully, that I not only lost your cloak in the
fray.


Fitsg. C^mes it in there?


Gold. But my tic^e Hangers, sirrah, I think thou have seen e^^.


Fitsg. Never i^a^h sir.


Gold Those with the two Unicorns, all wrought in Pearl and gold pex on it it
frets me ten times more then the loss of the platty cloak; prithee and thou
love me speak no more on^t, it brings the Unicorns into my mind, and thou
would not think how the conceit greeues me: I will not do thee that disgrace
in faith, to offer thee any satisfaction, for in my soul I think thou scornst
it thou bearst that mind in my conscience* I have always said so of thee;
fare thee well, when shall I see thee at my chamber, when?


Fitsg. Every day shortly.


Gold. I have ^ine toys to show thee.


Exit. Goldst. Fits. You win my heart then:

The Diuill scarce knew what a portion he gave his children, when he allowde
'em large impudence to live upon, and so turned em into the world, surely he gave
away the third part of the riches of his kingdom, revenues are but fools
to it; the filed tongue and the undaunted forehead,

Are mighty patrimonies, wealthier then those
The City- Sire, or the Court-father leaves,
In these behold it, riches often like flaues
Revolt, they bear their foreheads to their graves,
What soonest grasps advancement, me ^ great suites
Trips down rich widows, gains repute and name,
Makes way where ere it comes, bewitches all
Thou impudence, the minion of our days
On whose pale cheeks favor and fortune plays!
Call you these your five Gallants, trust me they are rare fellows
They live on nothing; many cannot live on something,
Here they may take example; -- Suspectlesse virgin!
How easy had thy Goodness been beguilde
Now only rests, that as to me they are known,
So to the world their base Arts may be shown.

Exit. Ente Pursnet and his boy. Pursn. Art sure thou saw him receiu't boy?


Boy. Forty pound in gold as Im'e a gentleman borne,


Pursn. Thy father gave the Rams-head boy?


Boy. No you are deceived my mother gave that sir.


Pursn. what is thy mothers, is thy fathers;

Enter Piamont.
Boy. Im'e sorry it holds in the Rams-head, see here he walks, I was sure he
came into Powles, the gold had been yours master long ere this, but that he
wears both his hands in his pockets:


Pursn. How unfortunately is my purpose seated, what the devil should come in
his mind to keep in his hands so long, the biting but of a paultry louse
would do me great kindness now, I knew not how to requite ^t, will no rascal
creature assist me, stay, what i^ I did impudently salute 'em out, good, boy
be ready boy.


Boy. upon the least advantage sir?


Pursn. You Are most devoutly met in Powles sir?


Pia. So are you, but I scarce remember you sir.


Pursn. Oh I cry you mercy sir, I pray pardon me I fear I have tendered an
offense sir, troth I took you at the first for one master Dumplin a Norfolk
gentleman.


Pia. There Is no harm done yet sir?


Pursn. I hope he is there by this time, how now boy, have it?


Boy. No by troth have I not, this labors lost, it is in the right pocket, and
he kept that hand in sure enough.


Purs. Vnpractizd Gallant, salute me but with one hand, like a counterfeit
soldier, O times and manners? are we grown beasts, do we salute by halfes,
are not our limbs at leisure, where is comely nurture, the Italian kiss, or the
French cringe, with the Polonian waste: are all forgot, then misery follows --
Surely fate forbad it, had he imploide but his right hand, I Would had it: -- It
must be an everlasting devise I think, that procures both his hands out at
once: do you walk sir.


Bung. No I stay a little for a Gentleman's coming too.


Piam. Farewell then sir, I have forty pound in gold about me, which I must
presently send down into the country.


Bung. Fare you well sir: I wonder Master Goldstone spares my company so long,
it is now about the nauill of the day, upon the belly of noone.


Enter Goldst. and his man disguisde both. Gold. See where he walks, be sure
you let off at a twinkling now.


Full. When did I miss you, -- your worship has forgot, you promised Mistress
Newcut your cozen, to dine with her this day.


Gold. Mass that was well remembered.


Bung. I am bold to salute you sir.


Gold. Sir.


Bung. Is Mistress New-cut your coozen sir.


Gold. Yes, she is a coozen of mine sir.


Bung. Then I am a coozen of yours, by the Sisters side.


Gold Let me salute you then, I shall be glad of your farther acquaintance.


Bung. I am a bidden guest here too.


Gold. Indeed sir?


Bung. Faith invited this morning.


Gold. Your good company, s^all be kindly embraced sir.


Bung. I walk a turn or two here for a Gentleman, but I think heel either
ouer-take me, or be before me.


Gold. It Is very likely sir; there sirrah, go to dinner, and about two wait for
me?


Bung. Nay let him come between two and three coozen, for we love to sit long
at dinner in the City.


Gold. Come sweet coozen.


Bung. Nay coozen, keep your way coozen,
Good coozen I will not in faith coozen.

Exit. Enter Mistress New-cut and Marmaduke. New, Why how now sirtah, upon
twelve of the clock, and not the cloth laid yet -- must we needs keep
Exchange time still.


Mar. I am about it forsooth.


New. You Are about it forsooth; you are still about many things, but you nere do
one well, I am an Ass to keep thee inth' house now my husbands at sea, thou
have no audacity with thee, a foolish dreaming lad, fitter to be in the garret,
the^ in any place else, no grace, nor manly behavior; when did thou ever
come to me, but with thy head hanging down, oh decheerefull prentize,
uncomfortable servant: pray heaven the Gull my coozen has so much wit left, as
to bring master Taylbee along with him; my comfort, my delight, for that was
the chiefest cause I did inuit him, I bad him bring what Gentlemen he pleazd
to accompany him, as far as I durst go, why may he not then make choice of
master Taylbee, had he my wit or feeling he would do it.


Enter Bungler and Goldst disguized. Bun. Where Is my sweet coozen here, dos she
lack any guess?


New. Ever such guess as you, you are welcome coozen.


Gold. I am rude Lady.


New. You Are most welcome sir.


Bung. There will be a gallant here anon cooze,
He promised faithfully.

New. Who is it master Taylbee?


Bung. Master Taylbee, no master Goldstone.


New. May. Goldstone; I could think well of that Goldstone, were not for one
vilde trick he has.


Gol. What Is that Lady?


New. In jest, he will pawn his punc es for suppers.


Gold. That's a vilde part in him in faith, and he were my brother.


New Pray gentlemen sit a while, your dinner shall come presently.


Gold. Ye mistress New-cut, at first give me a trip,
A close bite always asks a secret nip.

Bun. My coozen here is a very kind natured soul in faith, in her humor.


Gol. Puh you know her not so well as I cooze, I have observed her in all her
humors you nere saw her a little waspish I think.


Bung. I have In Faith.


Go. Puh, then yea nere saw pretty humor in your life, I ca^ bring her into it
when I list.


Bun. Would you could in faith.


Go. Would I could? by my troth and I were sure thou could keep thy
countenance couze, what a pretty jest have I thought upon already to entertain
time before dinner.


Bun. Preche couze what is it, I love a jest a life in faith.


Go. Ah but I am iealious you will not keep your countenance in faith.


Bun. Why yea shall see a pretty story of a humor.


Go. Faith i will try you for once, you know my couzin will wonder when she comes
in to see the cloth laid and nere a salt upon the board.


Bu. That's true in faith.


Go. Now will I stand a while out of sight with it, and give her humor play a
little.


Bung. Couze do thou love me, and thou will ever do any thing for me, do it.


Go. Marry I build upon you countenance.


Bung. Why do thou think I Am an ass couze?


Go. I would be loath to undertake it else, for if you should burst out
presently, couze the jest would be spoild.


Bung. Why do not I know that, away, stand close, so, so mum cousen? a merry
companion in faith, here will be good sport anon, -- whist she comes?


New. I make you stray long for a bad dinner, here cousen, if Master Goldstone
were come, the meats even ready.


Bu. Some great business detaines him couzin, but heel not be long now?


New. Why how now, cuds my life, --


Bun. Why?


New. Was ever mistress so plaugd with a shetle-headed servant -- why Marmaduke.


Mar. I come forsooth:


New. Able to shame me from generation to generation.


Mar. Did you call forsooth?


New. Come hither forsooth -- did you lay this cloth?


Mar. Yes forsooth:


New. Do you use to lay a cloth without a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt,
a salt.


Man. How many salts would you have, I Am sure I set the best ith house upon the
boore.


Bu. How? cousen: -- sings -- cousen, cousen, did call couze.


New. Did you see a salt upon the board when you came in.


Bung. Puh.


New. Come, come, I thought as much, beshrew your singers, where is it now?


Bun. Your cousen yonder.


New. Why the man's mad.


Bun. Cousen, hist cousen.


New. What say you.


Bun. Puh, I call not you, I call my cousen, come forth with the salt cousen:
ha, how, nobody: why wa^ not he that came in even now your cousen?


New. My cousen: O my bell salt, O my great bell salt.


Enter Goldstone. Bung. The tenor bell salt; oh here comes Master Goldstone
now cousen, he may tell us some news on him. Did you not meet a fellow about
door, with a great silver salt under his arm.


Gold. No sure, I met none such.


New. Pardon me sir, I forgot all this while to bid you welcome. I shall loath
this room for ever. Take hence the cloth you unlucky maple-fac'd rascal, come
you shall dine in my chamber sir.


Gol. No better place lady.


Exeunt. Enter Pyamont. Pya. No less then forty pound in fair gold at one
lift, the next shall sown, and sown again till the diuill fetch him ere I set
hand to him, heart, nothing vexes me so much* but that I paid the Goldsmith
for the change too not an hour before, had I let it alone in the chain of
silver as it was at first, it might have given me some notice at his
departure, sfoote I could fight with a win-mill now, sure it was some unlucky
villain, why should he come and salute me wrongfully too mistake me at noone
day, now I think ont in cold blood? it could not be but an induction to some
villainous purpose, well, I shall meet him --


Enter Pursnet. Pursn. This forty pound came fortunately to redeem my chain
of pearl from morgage, I would not care how often I sowned to have such a good
cawdle to comfort me, gold and pearl is very restoratiue. --


Pyam. See yonder is the rogue I suspect for foul play, i will walk muffled by
him, offer some offense or cause of a quarrel, only to try his temper, if he be
a coward, he is the likelier to be a rogue, an infallible note.


Purs. What a pox aile you sir, would I had been aware of you.


Pyam. Sir, speak you to me?


Pursn. Not I sir, pray keep on your way I have nothing to say to you.


Pyam. You Are a rascal.


Pursn. You may, say your pleasure sir, -- but I hope I go not like a rascal.


Pyam. Are you* feign to fly to your clothes, because ya^e Gallant, why
there is no rascal, like your Calla^t rascal believe that.


Pursn. You have took me at such an hour, faith you may call me even what
you please, nothing will move me.


Pyam. No, i will make somewhat n ooue you? draw? I suspected you were a rogue,
and you have purst it up well with a coward?


Purs. Who my Patron.


Pyam. Keep out you rascal.


Purs. The gest that did me the kindness in Powles,
Hold as you are a gentleman, you will give me breath sir.

Pyam. Are you there with me, a vengeance stop you, you have found breath
enough to run away from me I will never meet this slave hereafter in a
morning but I will breath my self upon him, since I can have no other
satisfaction, he shail save me that forty pound in fence-schoole.


Exit. Gold. When things are clenly carried, sign of judgment,
I was the welcomst Gallant to her alive,
After the salt was stolen; then a good dinner,
A fine provoking meal which drew on apace,
The pleasure of a day-bed, and I had it:
This here one ring can witness, when I parted,
Who but seewte Master Goldstone, I left her in that trance.
What cannot wit so it be impudent
Devise and compass? I would feign know that fellow now,
That would suspect me but for what I am.
He lives not,; It Is all in the conueyance, what? Thou lookst not like a
beggar, what makst thou on the ground, I have a hand to help thee up, a fair
chain of pearl, surely a merchants wife gives lucky bandsell; they that find
pearl may wear't at a cheap rate, mary my Lady dropped it from her arm for a
device to toale me to her bed, Iu'e seen as great a matter -- who be these?
I Will be to crafty for you, oh mounsier Primero, Signior Fr^, is it you gallants.


whisper. Frip Sweet master Goldstone?


Enter Taylbee. Tail. every bawd exceeds me in fortune: master Primero was
robbed of a Carkanet upon monday last* laid the goldsmiths and found it. I h'a
laid goldsmits Ieweller, Burnisher Broker, and the devil and all I think, yet
could never so much as here of that chain of pearl, he was a notable thief,
he works close; peace, who be these, ha^let me see, by this light there it
it is back least they see thee; a happy minute, Goldstone what an age do we
breath in, who, that saw him now would think he were maintaind by purses: so,
who, that meets me, would th^nke I were maintaind by wenches, as far as I can
see it is all one case, and holds both in one Court, we are both maintaind by
the common road way? Keep thou thine own heart, thou live unsuspected, I
leese you again now.


Gold. But I pray you tell me,
met you no Gentlewomen by the way you came?

Frip. Not any what should they be?


Gold. Nay I do but ask,
Because a Gentlewomans glove was found,
Near to the place I met you?

Primero. Faith we saw none sir.


Taylb. good officers, upon suspicion of felony.


Cunst. Very good sir


I. What call you the theefs name you do suspect?


Tail. Master Justinian Goldstone.


I. Remember, master Justice Goldstone, a terrible world the whilst, my
Masters.


Tail. Look you that is he; upon him officers.


I. I see him not yet, which is he sir.


Tail. Why that.


I. He a thief sir, who that Gentleman in the Satt in?


Tail. Even he.


I. Farewell sir, you are a merry Gentleman.


Tail. As you will answer it officers, I Will bear you out, I Will be your warrant.


I. Nay and you say so, what is his name then.


Tail. Justinian Goldstone.


I. Master Justinian Goldstone, we apprehend you sir upon suspicion of
fellonie.


Gold. Me.


Tail. You sir.


Cun. I charge you in the Kings name gentlemen to assist us.


Gold. Master Taylbee?


Tail. The same man sir.


Gold. Life what is the news?


Tail. Ha you forgot Come-parke?


Gold. Come-parke? no, it is in Kingstone way.


Tail. I believe you will find it so.


Gold. I not deny it.


I. Bear witness has confessed.


Gol. What have I confessed, pair of cockscombes indubitable?


Tay. I was robbed finely of this chain of Pearl there,
And forty fair Spur-Royals.

Gold. Did I rob you?


Tail. There where I find my goods I may suspect sir.


Frip. I dreamt this would be his end.


Gold. See how I am wronged Gentlemen:
As I have a soul, I found this chain of pearl,
Not three yeards from this place, just when I met you.

Tail. Ha, ha!


Frip. Yet the law's such, if he but swear it is you, you are gone.


Gold. Pox ont, that ere I saw't.


Frip. Can you but swear it is he, do but that, and you tickle him in faith?


Taylb. Nay and it come once to swearing let me alone:


Frip Say and hold, he called my Jewels counterfeit, and so cheated the poor
wench of 'em:


I. Come bring him away, come?


Gold. T will call my state in question!


Purs. I think what is got by theft does never prosper, Now lost my chain of
pearl -- come master Goldstone, lets go this mine in faith,


Gold. The chain of pearl?


Pur. By my trothit's mine;


Gold By my troth much good do it you sir?


Frip. Im'e glad in my soul sie -- Gnawes,


Cunst. Deliver your weapons,


Pursn. How?


Cunst. You're apprehended upon supition of felony?


Pursn. Felony? what is that'


Taylb. Was it you in faith, sir all this while, that did me that kindness to ease
both my pockets at Coom-parke:


Pursn. I si^? pray gentlemen draw near, lets talk among our selves, stand a
part Scoundrell; -- must every gentleman be up braided in public that flies
out now and then upon necessity, to be Theames for pedlers and weauers? this
should not be, it was never seen among the Romans; nor read we of it in the
time of Brute* are we more Brutish now? did I list to blab, do not I know your
course of lise master Taylbee to be as base as the basest, maintaind by me,
by him by all of us, and a second hand from mistresses, Iu'e their letters
here to show?

Why should you be so violent to strip naked

Another Reputation, to the world knowing your own so leprous, Beside this
^nai^ie of pearl and those spur-royals came to you fa se y for she broke her
faith, and made her soul a strumpet with her body, when she sent those; they
were ever justly mine? Pray what moves you sir, why should yo^ shake your head,
you are clear, sure I should know you sir, pray are not you sometimes a pandar,
and oftener a bawd sir, have I never Sinned in your ban-quetting boxes, your
bowers and towers? you slave, that keeps fornication upon the tops of trees,
the very Birds cannot in gender in quiet for you, why rogue, that goes in good
clothes made out of wenches cast gowns.


Pri. Nothing goes so near my heart as that?


Purs. Do you shake your slaves nodle?


Tail. And here is a rascal looked asway too, (saving the pre, seace of master
Goldstone;) a filthy-slymy-lousie-nitticall broker, pricked up in pawnes from
the hat-band to the shoostringa necessary hook to hang gentlemen's suites ont
in the Air, least they should grow musty with long lying? which his pawnes
seldom are guilty off, a fellow of several sents and Seeamea; French, Duch,
Italian, English, and therefore his lice must needs be mungrells. why Bill money?


Gold. I am sorry to here this among you, you have all deceived me, truly I took
you for other Spirits, you must pardon me hence-forward, I have a reputation
to look to, I must be no more seen in your companies;


Frip. Nay, nay, nay, nay, master Golstone, you must not escape so in faith, one
word before you go sir,


Gold. Pray dispatch then, I would not for half my revenues in faith now, that
any gallants should pass by in the mean time, and find me in your companies,
nay as quick as you can sir.


Frip. You did not take away master Bowcers cloak ^other morning, pawnd it to
me and borrowed five pound vppon't;


Gold Ha?


Frip. 'Twas not you neither that finely cheated my little Nouice at master
Primeroes house, of a Diamond and Sapphire, and swore they were counterfeit, both
glass, mere glass as you were a right gentleman;


Gold. Slife, why were we strangers all this while? s^oot I perceicue we are
all natural Brothers? a pox on^s all are we found in faith?


Frip. A cheater?


Gold. A these, a lecher, a bawd and a Broker?


Cunst. What mean they to be so merry, Im'e afraid they laugh at us and make
fools on's.


Gold. Push, leave it to me -- how now: who would you speak withal?


Cunst. Speak withal? have we waited all this while, for a suspected theefe^


Gold. How? your'r scarce awake yet I think, look well, does any appear like
a thief in this company* away you slaves, you stand loytring, when you should
look to the common wealth? you catch knaves apace now, do you not? they may
walk by your nose, your as kalls?


All. Sweet Master Goldstone.


Gold. You lackt spirit in your company, till I came among you* here ^ee ^iue
on's, lets but glue together, why now the world shall not come between us.


Purs. If we be true among our selves.


Gold. Why true; we cannot lack to be rich; for we cannot lack riches, nor can
our wenches want, nor we want wenches.


Prl. Let me alone to furnish you with them.


Tail. And me.


Gold. There Is one care past: and as for the Knights daughter,
Our chiefest business, and least thought upon.

Purs. That's true in faith.


Tail. How shall we agree for her.


Gold. With as much ease as for the rest: to morrow brings the night, lets all
appear in the best shape we may; troth is, we have need on it, and when amongst
us five she makes election, as one she shall choose.


Purs. True, she cannot choose.


Gold. That one so fortunate amongst us five,
Shall bear himself more portly, live regarded,
Keep house, and be a countenance to the rest.

All. Admiral.


Gol. For instance, put case your self after some robbery done
Were pursu'de hardly; why there were your shelter,
You know your Sanctuary: nay say you were taken,
His letter to the Justice will strik't dead,
It Is policy to receive one for the head.

All. Lets hug thee Goldstone.


Gold. What have I begot?


Purs. What Sir?


Gold. I must plot for you all, it likes me rarely.


Tail. Prithee what is it sir?


Gold. 'Twould strike Fitsgraue pale,
And make the other Suitors appear blanckes.

Frip. For our united mysteries.


Gold. What if we fiu: presented our full shapes
In a Strange-gallant, and conceited mask?

Pursn. In a mask, your thoughts and mine w^te^ wins.


Tail. So the device were subtle nothing like it.


Frip. Some Post must (...)*


Go. Poet? you will take the direct l^ne to have us sta'gde? why what lacks
Bowser, are you too well, too safe, an absolute scholar, easy to be wrought,
^o danger in the operation.


Purs. But have you so much interest*


Go. What in Bowser? why my least woo^ com^^^ ^^ him:


Tail. Then no man fitte^.


Purs. And there is Master Frip too, (...)sh us of ma^king s^i^e(...) ^^ow.


Frip. Upon sufficient pawn I think I can sir^


Purs. Pawn? I^we, here take my ^^aine^pa w^es among brothers? we shall
thrive? but we must still expect one ^ongue in five, and think us happy too.


Go. Last man we spoke on, Master Bowser.


All. Little master Bowser, sweet master Bowser welcome in faith?


Fits. Are your fathers dead* gentlemen, you are so m^rry.


Go. By my troth a good jest, did not I co^^^nd his wit to you gentlemen, hark
^^rm Rafe Bowser, co^^^ Bowser in faith? there is a kind of portion in town, a
girl of 15 hundred, whom we al powrefully affect, and determine to present our
parts to her in a Mask.


Fits. In a Mask!


Go. Right sir, now a little of thy brain for a device to present us firm,
which we shall never be able to do our selves thou know that; and with a
kind of speech wherein thou may express what gallants are* bravely;


Fits. Puh, how can I express em otherwise but bravely: now for a Mercury and
al were fitted.


Purs. Could not a boy supply it?


Fits. Why none better.


Purs. I have a boy shall put down all the Mercuries ith town,
A will play a Mercury naturally, at his fingers end in faith.

Fits. Why then we are suited; for torch-bearers and sheeldboies, these are
always the writers properties; you are not troubled with them.


Go. Come my little Bowser; do it finely now, to the life.


Fits. I warrant you gentlemen.


Frip. Hist; give me a little touch above the (...) and you can possible, for I
mean to present this chain of pearl to her.


Fits. Now I know that let me a^o^e to fit you.


Exeunt. ACT. 5.
Enter Curti^^^^^ I. Cur. Come forth you ^^ry private -- why spring strumpet
have we found your closse. haunts, your private watchtowers, and your (...)till
means.


New. How then?


2. Curt* You can steal secretly hither, you mystical queen you, at
twylight, (...) you have a privilege from your hat forsooth, to walk without
a man, and no suspicion, But (...) gentlewomen that go in Ti^es Have no such
liberty we cannot do thus* Custom grants that to you that's shame in us.


New. Have you done yet?


^. Cur. You broke the back of one husband already and nowth' others dead with
grief at sea, with your secret expenses, close ^^elths cunning filches, and
continued banquets in corners; then forsooth you must have your milke-baths to
white you, your ^ose-leaues to sweeten you, your beane-floure bags, to sleeke
you, and make you soft, smoothe, and delicate, for lascivious entertainment.


New. So, and you think all this while you dance like a these in a ^^st you are
safe, no body can find you; pray were not you a P^lmo^gers daughter at first,
that run away with a new Courtiar for the love of Gentlewomens clothes, and
bought the fashion at a dear rate, with the loss of your name and credit, why
what are all of you, but rusticall insides, and city flesh, the blood of
yeom^n, and the b^m of gentlewomen --


Enter Fitsgraue. 2. Curt. What shall we suffer a changeable forepart to
outtongue us, take that.


New. Murder, murder --


Fits. How now? why Ladies, a retreat, come, you have shown your spirits
sufficiently, y are all land captains, and so they shall find that come in
your quarters, but have you the law free now to fight and scrath among your
selves and let your Gallants run away with us.


1. Curti. How?


2. Cur. Good.


1. Cur. Sweet master Bowser.


New. Another?


Fits. Why then I perceive you know nothing: why they are in the way of
marriage:

A knights daughter here in town makes her election among em this night.


1. Cur. This night?


Fitsg. This very night, and they all present themselves in a mask before her,
know you not this?


2. Curt. O traitor Master Goldstone.


3. Cur. Periurde Master Tayl^eer


New. Without soul?


1. Curt. She will chase him.


Fits. You have more cause to join, and play the grounds of friendship among
your selves, then rashly run diuisional could tell you a means to pleasure you:


1. Good master Bowser.


Fit. But that you are women and are hardly secret.


2. We vow it seriously?


Fits. You should be all there in presence*
See all, hear all, and yet not they percieue you.

3. So that --


New Sweet master Bowser, -- I


Fits. I can stand you in stead,
For I frame the device, --

All. If ever --


Fits. Will you do it -- hark you --


1. Content.


2. And i will make one.


3. And I another,
We Will mar the match,
When that good news came of my husbands death,
Goldstone promised me marriage.
and Swear to me.

2. I Will bring his oths in question*


3. So will^:


Fits. Agree among your selves, for shame.


1. Are we resolude?


2. In this who would not feign,


3. Friends all for my part,


4. Here Is my lip for thine*


3. Round let it go,


2. All wrath thus quenched,


1. And I conclude it so.


Exeunt. Prip. How all events strike even with my wishes, Their own invention
damnes them, -- now Gentlemen? stands your assistance firm?


1. Gal. Why it is our own case,
I Am sorry you should doubt.

2. Gal. We Will furnish you?


3. Are these our Gallants?


Fits. Are our Gallants these?


Pay^^. Here be five shields sir?


Fits. Finished already, that's well? I Will see thy master shortly*


P^i^. I Am satisfied.


Exit. Pia. Prithee lets see master Fitsgraue,


Fits. I have blazed them,


1. What Is this;
Fooh, you should be a gallant too, for you are no university Scholar?

Fits. Look this is Pursuit:, the device, a purse wide open, and the mouth
downward. The wood, Alienis ^ee^ ^r^^^^nis.


1. What Is that?


Fits. One that lives out of other men's pockets,


Pya That's right?


Fits. Here Is Goldstones three silver dice,


1. They run hye, two sincks and a quater?


Fits. They Are hye men fit for his purposes -- The word,


Fratremque Patremque? 2. Gal. Nay he will cheat his own brother, nay his own
father in faith?


Fits. So much the word imports -- Master Primero,


3. Pox what says he now?


Fits. The device, an vnuallued pearl, hid in a cave. The word, Occulos vendit
honores,


1. What Is that*


Fits. One that sells maidenheads by wholesale;


2. Excellently proper?


Fits. Master Frip?


2. That pythagoricall rascal, in a gentleman's suite to day, in a knights to
morrow:


Fits. The devise for him; a Cuckoo sitting on a tree? The word, Enauis ex
a^ib^s; one bird made of many; for you know as the Sparrow hatches the Cuckoo,
so the Gentleman feathers the Broker?


1. Let me admire thee, master Fitsgraue?


Fits. They will scorn gentlemen: and to assist them the better, Pursnets boy
that little precious pick-pocket, has a compend ous speech in lattin, and like
a Mercury presents their their dispositions more liberally:


1. Never were poor gallants so abused?


Fits. Hang 'em, their counterfets, no honest spirit will pity 'em*
This is my Crown,
So good men smile I dread no raskalls frown.
Away, bestow your selves secretly, ore'head, this is the place appointed for
the rehearsal, to practice their behauiours.


1. We are vanished.


Gold. Master Bowcer,


Pursn. Welsaid in faith, off with your cloakes gallants, let us fall roundly to
our business:


Tail. Is the boy perfect?


Fits. That Is my credit sir, I warrant you?


Frip. If our little Mercury should be out, we should scarce be known what
we are*


Fits. I have took a course for that, fear it not sir; look you first here
be your Sheilds:


Gold. I Where be our Sheilds?


Pursn. which is mine?


Tail. Which is mine master Bowcer? this?


Fits. I pray be contained a little gentlemen, they will come all time enough to
you, I warrant:


Pursn. This Frip is grown so violent;


Fits. Yours to begin withal sir?


Pur. welsaid master Bowcer, first the Device, a fair purse wide open, the
mouth downward, the word Alli^nis ecce crumenis?


Pursn. What Is that prithee?


Fits. Your bounty powers it self forth to all men.


Purs. And so it does in faith? that is all my fault, bountiful?


Fits. Master Goldstone heers yours sir, 3. silver Dice, the word, Fratremque
Patremque?


Gol. And what is that?


Fits. Fortune of my side?


Gol. Welsaid little Bowcer in faith?


Tail. What say you to me sir?


Fits. For the device A Candle in a corner; the word, Consumptio, Victus:


Tail. The meaning of that sir?


Fits. My light is yet in darkness, till ^in^oy her, right sir?


Pri Now mine sir?


Fits. The Device an vnuallued pearl hid in a Cave.


Pri. Ah ha sirs?


Fits. The word, Occultes vendit honores;


Pri. Very-good I warrant,


Fits. A black man's a pearl in a fair Ladies eye,


Pri. I said it was some such thing;


Frip. My turn must needs come now; am I fitted Master Bowcer?


Fits. Trust to me, your device here is a Cuckoo sitting on a tree,


Frip. The Welsh Lidger, good.


Fits. The word, En Anis ex A^ib^s.


Frip. I marry sir.


Fits. Why do you know what it is sir.


Frip. No by my troth not yet sir*


Fits. Oh, I keep one tune, I ^ecant not.


Fri. I me like the Cuckoo in that indeed, where I love I hold.


Fits. Did I not promise you I would fit you.


Gold. They re all very well done in faith, and very Schollerlike, tho I say it
before thy face little Bowcer, but I would not have thee proud ont now: come if
this be performde well.


Pur. Who the Boy, he has performd deeper matters then this.


Pyam. I a pox on him, I think was in my pocket now, and truth were known.


Bungl. I caught him once in mine.


Fits. Suppose the shields are presented, then you begin boy.


Boy. I representing Mercury, am a Pick-pocket, and have his part at my fingers
ends, Page I am to that great and secret thief, magno illo et Secret^ Latroni.


Bungl. There you make your honor sir*


Boy. At Latroni.


Purs. You have it sir.


Boy. Latroni, that's mine.


Fits. He confesles the Theefe's his.


Purs. Remember boy, you point Latroni to me.


Boy. To you Master, proceed*


Ftis. These four are his companions, the one a notable cheater, that will
coosen his own father.


Bou. Master Goldstone.


Gold. Let me alone master Boucer, I can take mine own turn.


Bou. Why.


Gold. Peace.


Fits. The second an notorious letcher maintained by harlots cuius virtus
consumptio corpus.


Tail. That's I master Bowcer.


Bou. There you remember your honor sir.


Boy. Ille leno pretiosissi^^s, Virgineos ob lucrum vendens honores.


Purs. It sounds very well in faith.


Boy. Postremus ill^, quamuis apparatusplendidus, is no otherwise but a Broker,
these feathers are not his own, sed anis ex Auibus; all which to be nothing
but truth, will appear by the event.


Fits. In Faith here is all now Gentlemen.


Gold. Short and pithy.


Tail. A good boy in faith and a pregnant.


Purs. I dare put trust in the Boy sir; forget not firrah at any *hand to point
that same Latroni to me.


Boy. I warrant you master.


Gold. Come Gentlemen the time beckons us away.


Fits. I, furnish Gentlemen, furnish.


Purs. Hark one word master Boucer, what is the same Latroni, I have a good
mind to that word in faith.


Fits. Latroni? why Sheerfe of the Sheere.


Purs. In Faith? and I have sh^^uen some sheeres in my days.


Fits. Now gentlemen are you satsfied and pleased?


Exit. 1. Neue: more amply*


Fits. Amongst us now falls that desired lot,
For we shall blast five riualls with one plot.

Enter the Virgin between two ancient gentlemen. Kathe. Grave gentlemen, in
whose approved bosoms,
My deceast father did repose much faith
Your dearly welcome: pray sit, command music,
See nothing want to beautify this night,
That holds my election in her peaceful arms,
Feasts, Music, Hymns, those sweet celestial swarms.

1. May you be blessed in this election.


2. That content, may meet perfection.


Himne.
Sound Lute. Band^ra, Gitterne,
Uioll, Virginalls and Sithron!
Uoices spring and lift alowde,
Her name that makes the Music proud:
this night perfection,
makes her election:
Follow, follow follow, follow round,
Look you to that, nay you to that, nay you to that:
Anon, you will be found, anon you will be found, anon you will be found.
Cornets. Enter the mask, thus ordered. A torchbearer, a sheeld-boy, then a
masker, so throughout, then the sheeld*boyes fall at one end, the torchbearers
at the other; the maskers ith middle, the torchbearers are the five gentlemen:
the sheeld-boies the wh^res in boys apparel: the maskers the five Gallants,
they bow to her she rises and shows the like, they dance but first deliver the
sheeldes up; she reads. The speech: their action* Kath. Alienis ecce crumenis.


Pursn. Bows to her.


Kath. Fratremque, Patremque.


Gold. Bows to her.


Kath. Consumptio victus.


Taylbe Bows to her.


Kath Occultos vendit honores.


Prim. Bows to her.


Kath. A Cuckoo: en anis ex a^ibus.


Frip. Bows to her.


Kath. Are you all as the speech and shields display you?


Gold. We shall prove so.


They going to dance, each vnhaspes his weapon from his sid^, and gives em to
the torch-bearers. Katherine seems distrustful, but then Fisgraue whispers to
her and falls back. At the end of which all making an honor, Frip presents her
with that chain of Pearl. Kath. The very chain of Pearl was filcht from me.


Fits. Hold stop the boy there.


Pursnet stamps. Kath. Will none lay hands on him.


All lay hands on him. Gold. How now.


Frip. Alas I Am but a broker, 'twas pawnd to me in my shop.


Tail. Ha, Fitsgraue?


Purs. Peamo^t and the rest.


Gold. Where Is Boucer?


Fits. Here.


Gold. We are all betraide.


Fits Betrayde* ^ ^^e new forth to betrayde, you have not so much worth: nay
struggle not with the net, you are caught for this world.


1 Curt. Would we were out.


Fits. 'Twas I framed your devise: do you see 'twas I;
The whole assembly has took notice of it,
That you are a gallant cheator,
So much the pawning of my cloak contains*
You a base thief, think of Coome-parke and tell me that your a hired
Smokster, here is her letter. In which we are certified that you are a Bawd.


1. The broker has confessed it.


2. So has the boy.


Taylb. That boy will be hanged, he stole the chain at first and has thus long
maintainde his masters Gallantry.


Fits. All which we here present like captive slaves,
Waiting that doom which their presumption craves.

Kath. How easily may our suspectlesse sex,
With fair appeering shadows be deluded:
Dear sir, you have the work so well begun,
That took from you small glory would be won.

Fits. Since it is your pleasure to refer to me,
The doom of these; I have provided so:
They shall not altogether loose their cost;
See I have brought wives for em.

Gold. Heart, the strumpets -- out, out*


Taylb. Having assumed out of their impudence,
The shape of sheeld-boyes.

Frip. To heapefull confusion.


1. Cur. Rather confine us to strikt chastity*
A mere impossible task then to wed these:
Whom we loath worse then the f^ul'st desease.

Gol. O grant em their requests.


Fits. The doom is past,
So since your aim was marriage:
Either embrace it in these Curtizans,
Or have your base acts, and fello^^ous liue^
Proclaimd to the indignation of the law,
Which will provide a public punishment:
As for the boy, and that infectious Bawd,
We put forth those to whipping.

Pri. Whipping? you find not that in the statute to whip satin.


Fits. Away with him.


Gol. Since all our shifts are discovered, as far as I can see it is our best
course to marry em: we will make them get our livings.


Purs He says true.


New. You see how we are threatened, by my troth wenches be ruled by me, lets
many em and it be but to plauge em; for when we have husbands we are under
couert-baron, and may lie with whom we list; I have tried that in my the other
husbands days.


All Curt. A match.


Fits. I Will be no more de^erd* come, when do you join:


Gol. These forced marriages do never come to good.


Fits. How can they, when the come to such as you?


Purs. The often prove the ruin of great houses,
Nor Virgin do I in this seek to entice:
All glory to my self; these Gentlemen,
To whom I am bound to love for kind assistance,
Had great affinity in the plot with me.

Kath. To them I give my thanks: my self to thee,
Thrice worthy Fitsgraue.

Fits. I ha^ ^ll my wishes.


Kath. And I presume there is none but those can frown,
Whose ^nu^s like the rushes we tread down.

FINIS.

