APPELLO CAESAREM. A JUST APPEAL FROM TWO UNJUST INFORMERS.

BY RICHARD MOUNTAGU.

LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Matthew Lownes. M. DC. XXV.

TO HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
MOST GRACIOUS AND DREAD SOVEREIGN,
BY a Missive, from a Papist I am sure, and J suppose from a Priest, I was not
long since forced upon the Controversies of these times, between the
Protestant and Romish Confessionists. And because it has bin ever truly
counted a readier way for the advancement of Piety, rather to lessen and abate,
than to multiply the number of many needless contentions in the Church:
therefore when I first undertook to answer that very worthless Author, The
GAGGER of all Protestants mouths for ever, I did it with a firmed purpose to
leave all Private Opinions, and Particular Positions or Oppositions whatsoever,
unto their own Authors or Abbettors, either to stand or fall of themselves;
and not to suffer the Church of England to be charged with the maintenance of
any Doctrine which was none of Her own, publickely and universally resolved on.
For we are at a great disadvantage with our Adversaries, to have those Tenants
put and pressed evermore upon us, for the General Doctrine established in our
Church, which are but either the Problematic all Opinions of Private Doctors,
to be held or not held either way; or else the Fancies many of them of Factious
men, disclaimed and censured by the Church, not to be held any way, Such
disadvantages has This Church too long endured: and out of just indignation
against this Gagger and his Fellows, I could not but so much the more labor
to vindicate Her Freedom ex professo, and to assert Her (as far as I was able)
unto Her own proper, true, and ancient Tenants, such as be without any doubt
or question, legitimate and genuine, such as She will both acknowledge and
maintain for her own. My direct dealing herein, MOST DREAD SOVEREIGN, so
reasonable, so necessary (as I supposed) has very much and highly discontented
some Private Divines, who desire to have those Opinions, which are controverted
among ourselves, to be taken and defended for the common and public Doctrine
of the Church: but more especially has it incensed those Classical Puritans,
who were wont to pass all their Strange Determinations, Sabbatarian Paradoxes,
and Apocalypticall Frensies, under the Name and Covert of The True Professors
of Protestant Doctrine; supposing, as it should seem, that in this case we
were all liable to the Statute, that is, bound to keep and foster their
Conceits as our own Doctrines, because they have cast them upon Us and upon
Our Church, like Bastards upon the Parish where they were borne, or Vagabonds
on the Town where they last dwelt, or were suffered to pass without due
correction. Such Irchins it was necessary to disband, and send them away to
shift for themselves, that our Mother the Church might no more be troubled with
them. And yet for this cause have some Informers Articled against me, and
traduced me to the World for a Papist and an Arminian; though the world and
themselves know, I flatly defied and opposed the One; and GOD in Heaven knows
that I never so much as yet read word in the other. It was my happiness, MOST
GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN, that so mean a Vassal as my poor self was sufficiently
known to be nor So nor So, unto Him, who, if ever any of the Royal rank, was
indeed sicut Angelus Domini to discern, my late MOST SACRED LORD and MASTER of
ever Blessed memory, unto whom that Information should have been represented;
by whom, in his most able and impartial judgment, I had my Quietus est, and
Discharge. But in regard their Clamours were so impetuous, and Accusations so
divulged, it pleased HIS MAJESTY, out of that Goodness which was ever eminent
in his most blessed disposition, not only to grant me leave humbly to Appeal
from my Defamers unto His most sacred Cognizance in public, and to represent
my just Defense against their Slanders and false Surmises unto the world; but
also to give express order unto Doct. WHITE the Reverend Deane of Carlisle,
for the authorizing and publishing thereof, after it had been duly read over
and approved by him, to contain nothing in it, but what was agreeable to the
Doctrine and Discipline established in the Church of England, whereof HIS
MAJESTY was most tender. It was read, approved, and sent to the Press
accordingly. Since which time, it has pleased the King of Kings to call Him
unto Himself, and to Crown Him with Glory and Immortality in Heaven, before I
could return the Book into His Royal hands. But blessed for ever be the LORD
GOD of Heaven, that has preserved YOUR MAJESTY, and set YOU upon His Throne as
King in stead of HIM, to go in and out before his People in his Place, and to
execute Judgment in YOUR FATHER's room. What was then intended unto HIM,
according to his Own most Gracious and Royal direct appointment, I humbly
crave leave upon my bended knees, to present unto YOUR MOST EXCELLENT and
SACRED SELF; And in all lowly wise I cast both It and my Self, and the best
Service I shall be able to do in GODS Church, at YOUR MAJESTY'S feet, desiring
no longer to live than I shall be and continue a most conformable and true
member of this Church, and

YOUR MAJESTY'S most loyal and faithful Subject and Servant, RICHARD MOUNTAGU.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS.
THE FIRST PART Touching ARMINIANISME.
CHAP. I. OF the Inscription which the Informers made to their several
Articles. CHAP. II. Of S. PETER'S FALL. CHAP. III. Of the loss of Faith and
Justification. CHAP. IV. Of FALLING FROM GRACE. The Tenet of Antiquity therein.
The doctrine of the Church of England in the 16th Article, the Conference at
Hampton Court, the Book of Homilies, and the public Liturgy. CHAP. V.
Touching PREDESTINATION. Of Arminians, Lutherans, Calvinists, foreign Divines.
Of the Church of England: Submission thereunto. The question between them and
us. CHAP. VI. Dangerous consequents brought by Others, upon the irrespective
Decree. CHAP. VII. Lutherans averse from the doctrine of Calvinists. The
moderation of the Church of England in these great and unsearcheable mysteries.
The Author's submission thereunto. The doctrine of Predestination. Man the
Author of his own destruction, and not GOD. The doctrine of Antiquity
contemned by Novellers. The Synod of Dort no obligation to us. The Saying of
DEODATE. The Articles of Lambeth forbidden by Authority. Foreign Doctrine
maintained, to bring-in Foreign Discipline. The Church of England no
Patroness of novell opinions. CHAP. VIII. Touching Free Will, the III. point
of Arminianisme. CHAP. IX. Controversies unnecessarily multiplied: the AUTHOR
no Favourer of them. Questions of obscurity and speculation, not fit for
Pulpits and popular ears. Free Will made no such controversy among moderate
men, either of the Pontifician or Protestant Side, as people are borne in hand
withal. CHAP. X. The Council of Trent not wholly to be condemned. Man's Will
not merely passive, but active and free in the proper acts thereof. The
memorable Saying of SCOTUS. The power of the Will in things divine. CHAP. XI.
The fourth and last point of ARMINIANISME touching the Synod of DORT. The Synod
of Dort not our Rule. Private opinions no Rule. The Informers imputations
nothing at all.
THE SECOND PART touching POPERY.
CHAP. I. THe Author uncharitably traduced. His profession for the doctrine and
discipline received and commanded in the Church of England. Conformable
Puritans. Furious zeal. The Church of Rome not a sound, yet a true Church.
Private opinions disclaimed. The Church of England asserted to her own public
and proper Tenants. The cause of all these Imputations. CHAP. II. The Church
Representative, and Points Fundamental, what they are. All that Papists say,
is not Popery. Particular Churches, have and may err. The Catholic
Universal Church has not, cannot err. Of General Councels. The Author far
from the Jesuits fancy. The XXI Article of the Church of England explaned.
CHAP. III. Strange accusations. Antiquity reverenced, not deified. Fathers
accused of some error by Jesuits. The occasion of their enlarged speeches
concerning Free Will. The Author acquitted of Popery. CHAP. IV. Private and
public doctrine differenced. In what sense the Church is said to be always
visible. The Author acquitted from Popery again by others, learned Divines. Of
the Church of Rome. CHAP. V. Touching ANTICHRIST. The Pope and Prelacie of
Rome, Antichristian. That he is Magnus ille Antichristus, is neither determined
by the public doctrine of the Church, nor proved by any good argument of
private men. Difference among Divines, who The Man of sin should be. The
marks of the great Antichrist fit the Turkish Tyranny every way, as well as
the Papacy. The peace of the Church not to be disquieted through variety of
opinions. No final resolution to be yet had in this point. CHAP. VI. Touching
JUSTIFICATION. The state of a mere natural man; who, to please GOD, must
become a new creature. That newnes cannot be wrought without a real change of
a sinner in his qualities. In what sense it may be said, that there is an
Access of Justification, both by daily receiving remission of new sins, and by
increase of grace, injoyning virtuous and good deeds unto faith. CHAP. VII. A
change made in a justified man. The Author agrees in part with the Council of
Trent, and therefore maintains Popery, no necessary illation. The doctrine
of the Church of England, and of other reformed Churches, in this point of
Justification. CHAP. VIII. Strange Popery. GOD only and properly justifies.
CHAP. IX. Holiness of life added unto Justification and Remission of sins.
GOD justifies originally, and Faith instrumentally. CHAP. X. An Access
declaratory made to the act of Justification by the works of a lively faith. S.
PAUL and S. JAMES reconciled. The old Prophets and ancient Fathers made new
Papists by the Informers. CHAP. XI. The doctrine of MERIT ex condigno rejected
as false and presumptuous. Difference between the old and the new signification
of Mereri. CHAP. XII. The quality and conditions of a good work, required by
the Roman Writers, to make it rewardable (as far as they are positive) no
Protestant disalloweth of. To those conditions may others be added. CHAP. XIII.
GOD surely rewards good works according to his promise, of his free bounty
and grace. CHAP. XIV. The Church of England holds no such absolute certainty
of salvation in just persons, as they have of other objects of Faith expressly
and directly revealed by GOD. CHAP. XV. Touching Evangelicall Counsels.
Evangelicall Counsels admitted according to the doctrine of the old Fathers,
and many learned Divines of our Church. Popish doctrine concerning works of
Supererogation rejected. CHAP. XVI. S. GREG. NAZIANZ. defended from the touch
of uncircumcised lips. CHAP. XVII. The exposition of the saying of our SAVIOR.
If thou will be perfect, etc. S. CHRYSOSTOM. S. AUG. S. HIER. S. AMBR. make it no
imperious precept. If it be, the Informers are the least observers of it, and
sin against their own consciences. CHAP. XVIII.

Touching LIMBUS PATRUM. The dreams of Papists about Limbus Patrum, related
and rejected. The state of men's souls after death. The place proportioned to
their state. The souls of the blessed Fathers before CHRIST'S ascension, in
heavenly Palaces, yet not in the third and highest heavens, nor in that
fullness of joy which they have now, and more of which they shall have
hereafter. The opinion of old and new Writers. Our Canons not to be
transgressed. The doctrine and faith of the Church of England concerning the
Article of CHRIST'S descent into Hell. The disadvantage we are at with our
Adversaries. Every Novellers Fancy printed, and thrust upon us for the
general Tenet of our Church. The plain and easy Articles of our CREED
disturbed and obscured by the wild dreams of little less than blasphemous
men; by new Models of Divinity; by Dry-fatts of several Catechismes. The
Belief of Antiquity. The Author and It far from POPERY. CHAP. XIX. The seventh
point of Popery touching IMAGES. The Historical use of Images makes nothing
for the adoring of them. Popish extravagancies. CHAP. XX. S. GREG. doctrine
concerning Images, far from Popery. CHAP. XXI. No religious honor or worship
to be given unto Images. They may affect the minds of religious men, by
representing unto them the actions of CHRIST and his Saints. In which regard,
all reverence simply cannot be abstracted from them. CHAP. XXII. Popish
doctrine and practice both, about adoration of Images, rejected. CHAP. XXIII.
The Church of England condemns not the historical use of Images. The Book
of Homilies contains a general godly doctrine; yet is it not in every point
the public, dogmaticall, resolved doctrine of the Church. The Homily that
seems to condemn all making of Images, is to be understood with a
restriction of making them to an unlawful end. Many passages therein were
fitted to the present times, and to the conditions of the people that then
were. The final resolution of this controversy. CHAP. XXIV. Touching signing
with the Sign of the CROSS. To sign with the sign of the Cross out of
Baptism, or upon the breast, etc. no more superstition than to sign in
Baptism, or upon the forehead. The practice of the ancient Church. The reasons
that moved them, that might move us to use often signing. They lived with
Pagans, and we with Puritans; both deriders of the sign of CHRIST'S Cross.
CHAP. XXV. The practice of the primitive Church approved. Unadvised Informers.
Novellers rejected. CHAP. XXVI. The testimony of S. ATHANASIUS vilified by the
Informers. The testimonies of other Fathers concerning the efficacy and power
of the sign of the Cross. CHAP. XXVII. Popery is not the signing with, but
the adoring of the Cross. Strange effects which GOD has wrought of old
adhibito signo CRUCIS; and may do still by virtue of CHRIST'S Death and
Passion, which that Sign does represent. CHAP. XXVIII. The Informers
presumption against the current of Antiquity. CHAP. XXIX. Touching the
SACRAMENT of the ALTAR. The Informers drawn low, when they leave matter, and
take offense at words. The antiquity of Altars. A Sacrifice representative and
spiritual, acknowledged by all. The Author herein farther from Popery, than
the Informers from Puritanisme. CHAP. XXX. A real presence maintained by us.
The difference betwixt us and Popish Writers is only about the modus, the manner
of CHRIST'S presence in the blessed sacrament. Agreement likely to be made, but
for the factious and unquiet spirits on both sides. Beati pacifici. CHAP. XXXI.
The Author's acknowledgement of his error. Consecration of the elements causes
a change; yet inferrs no Popish Transubstantiation. The Informers out of their
element. Antiquity maintained. Figurists and Novellers condemned. CHAP. XXXII.
Touching CONFESSION. Information against the express direction and practice of
the Church of England. No new Popish custom, but the ancient and pious manner
of Confession for the help and furtherance of men's true repentance, and for
the continuing of them in amendment of life, is, may be, and ought to be urged.
How Confession of sins to a Priest, is required by the Church before the
Receiving of the LORDS Supper. CHAP. XXXIII. Touching the Sacrament of ORDERS.
The new religion full of exceptions, though but against words only. Ordination
acknowledged to be a Sacrament by M. CALVIN himself. A Sacrament in lato
sensu. What our Church means in saying there are but TWO SACRAMENTS.

CHAP. XXXIV. Information against the Church-Book of Ordination; which
acknowledges the giving and receiving of the HOLY GHOST in sacred Orders: so
that Priests have that interior grace and power conferred upon them for the
dispensation of divine mysteries, which others have not. CHAP. XXXV. Touching
power of Priesthood to forgive Sins. Priests have power to forgive sins,
not originally, but ministerially. The doctrine of the Ordination and
Communion-Booke for public and private Absolution. The Informers to lose the
profits of their livings, and to be imprisoned without bail, for declaring
against it. CHAP. XXXVI. Priests only and none other have commission from
CHRIST to forgive sins. The Extravagancies of Puritans and Papists both in this
point. CHAP. XXXVII. THE CONCLUSION. The issue of YATES and his
FELLOW-Informers fond Accusations. Other flying reports and defamations
neglected: The Authors humble submission unto the Church of England and to HIS
most sacred MAJESTY.


FINIS.
The Approbation.
I FRANCIS WHITE, Doctor of Divinity, and Dean of Carlisle, by the special
direction and commandment of His most excellent Majesty, have diligently
perused and read over this BOOK, entitled, APPELLO CAESAREM, A just Appeal
from TWO unjust Informers; by RICHARD MOUNTAGU: and finding nothing therein,
but what is agreeable to the Public Faith, Doctrine and Discipline established
in the Church of England, I do approove it as fit to be printed, Dat. 15.
Febr. 1624.

FRANCIS WHITE.

APPELLO CAESAREM. AN APPEAL FROM THE BRETHREN.
CHAP. I.
Of the Inscription which the Informers made to their several Articles.

INFORMERS.
ERRORS delivered by M. RICHARD MOUNTAGU in his Book entitled A new Gagg,
etc. and published by Authority this present year, 1624.

MOUNTAGU.
THese Informers, in this Frontispice before their several suggestions,
impliedly undertake to make good Three Assertions. First, that whatsoever They
have challenged and articled against in their accusation, has been in terminis
so Delivered by M. R. MOUNTAGU in his book, as they have tendered it, and no
otherwise. Secondly, that all particulars so designed by Them, and said to have
been delivered by Him, were Published by warrant of Authority. Thirdly, that
all things so Published, and so Delivered, and by Themselves, the Informers,
insisted on, and complained against, are Errors actual in themselves; and so
stand resolved and accounted of in the Doctrine of the Church.

The first of these three, that is to say, Whether, or not, whatsoever is so
insisted on, as Error, has been so Delivered and Published as is suggested,
must hereafter be examined in convenient Time and Place. For happily all has
not been so by Him Delivered, as They have surmised and informed: at least,
not in that sense as is conceived. They may mistake his meaning: why not? For
have they assistance of Infallibility annexed unto their conceits; especially
in a pressed and short style by him ensued, and inclining to Scholasticall
Character? Or they may wilfully mistake his meaning, to their own advantage:
for Faction and Affection are too frequently interessed in Oppositions. Or
lastly, they may well enough be guilty of misreporting his words: I dare not
trust their consciences in that point too far. I know their Charitic is not
too transcendent.

But for Publication by Authority, it may touch them nearer than they are
aware of. It is not unknown not Authority, that Puriritanicall Self-conceit,
and Presumption, will square Law and Gospel too according unto that untoward
Lesbian rule of their own Private Spirit, and special opinion: and dare
challenge any Authority, old or new, for Errors; preaching, publishing,
maintaining Errors; viz. whatsoever does not consort or run with the Tide of
their Private Spirits motion. And it has been found by experience practiced
of such malcontent maligners at States in being, Civil as well as
Ecclesiastical, that they seldom or never talk of any misbeing,
misordering, misdemeaning, in any point or case, but that ever and anon,
directly or upon the By, they can lend a lash unto, or pinch upon the credit
of Authority, though most Sacred, that great Cordolium and Moate-in-the-eye
unto popular irregularitie, and puritanicall paritie, the Idol of our Godly
Brethren. It is more than probable, these Informers are of this stamp and
making. I have bin told, and am assured, they are two Grandees of the faction;
as great and turbulent, as most be in the Diocese of Norwich (which is not
improbably thought to have of that Sect mo than enough.) They hold Authority
interessed (as far at least as connivency goes) both for points of Popery
and Arminianisme, if they could be proved his against whom they are objected.

If it had not been their purpose thus to have grated upon and galled
Authority; with little ado, by the addition of but one poor word, they might
have amended and cleared all. Had the Information been carried and conceived
thus: and SAID to be published by Authority; the Errors of Popery and
Arminianisme, if any were, must have laid all and every one hard upon M.
MOUNTAGU, interessed alone: no reflection could have resulted, as now
intentionally, upon Authority. For Publication, that gave life and living to
these dangerous Errors, is said to be precisely the Act of Authority; which
is more than countenancing them, in my understanding; and I doubt not,
according to their interpretation. Had this been done, M. MOUNTAGU must have
borne all alone: and, what had it been that He erred? He who may err, (For in
many things we err all) but will be no Heretic, especially against the
Church of England; to the doctrine whereof established, He has more than once
subscribed: and therefore disclaimeth all aspersion of Popery, and is farther
from it than any Puritan in the kingdom. He is indeed well acquainted with
such Imputations, as Papist and Arminian, and I know not what, the ordinary
language of of our precise Professors, against any man that is not, as
themselves, MORE FURIOSO Calvinista. And having had this measure often meted
unto him from their very great Zeal, and very no-Charitie, he could have
been contented to have contemned their malice (the rather, because a Scold
cannot any better way be charmed than by contempt): but because Authority was
drawn in, to lie at the stake for conniving in points so dangerous (but God
knows how); he could not possess his soul in patience, but thought himself
in duty and in conscience bound to clear those points from Error which he
delivered, lest Sacred Authority might come in for Maintenance and Champetry,
as they would have it. To come then to the Inscription.

Errors delivered, must be his Tenants and avowed Propositions, one way of
these twain; either by Affirmation or Negation. For Errare (says S. AUGUST. if
yet our Informers and the Side regard what S. AUG. says) est verum putare quod
falsum est, falsumque quod verum est, vel Enchirid. c. 17.
certum habere pro incerto; incertum pro certo, sive falsum sit, sive verum.
Howsoever, there passes omni modo a resolution for the thing erred in, by
Affirmation or Negation: So or not so. And therefore we cannot justly say, He
erreth, or at all tax him for Erring, that neither denies, nor affirms that
which is imputed unto him; but only reports what he finds. This is the case
of M. MOUNTAGU in all, at least in the major part of these imputed Errors. He
is but a Narrator of other men's opinions, suspending his own judgment,
sometime peradventure when he should not have so done, out of a due respect
unto Peace and Quietness in the Church, sufficiently already disturbed; and
not the least by these Brethren. and also because he would not stir the
Hornets neasts of men affected otherways.

Secondly, Error is (...), respectively against something which is right; as
being an aberration from a Rule. Now I demand of these so forward Informers,
those delivered Errors by M. MOUNTAGU, and published Errors by Authority,
against what common Tenent do they offend? From what Rule are they an
aberration? I do not find it expressed by the Informers, Contrivers, or
Subscribers, why, in what, against whose conclusions they are erroneous.
Against some Rule of Faith they must be, if Errors in Doctrine. I know none: I
am told of none; but the private opinions of the Informers, or some Classical
resolutions of the Brethren. Through all the several XXI Articles, or what you
will call them, of Popery and Arminianisme, I find no other proof, but Ipse
dixit: my words are related only, and you must take them, upon M. YATES and M.
WARD'S bare words, to be Popery and Arminianisme: for other proof you cannot
find, nor must expect. So Magisteriall are our Purer Brethren, those great
Rabbines and Doctors in Israel; having annexed unto their Penns and Pulpits
infallibility of judgment, (it seems) as well as the Pope of Rome unto his
chair. Popular Spirits have evermore great opinion of their own singular
Illumination. And you shall ever observe, that each simple Ignorante, a
classical Dictator amongst the Covent, tendereth his own dreams and
conceits, Simulachra modis volitantia miris, no otherwise but as Oracles upon
their own bare words. And such prevailing power have they upon their
Proselites (none living but Jesuits so great as they) that their Sayings are
held uncontroleable. And hence it is, that they vouchsafe us no proof in their
so many false Imputations. Better Popery, I will abide by it, than any one
proposition in M. MOUNTAGU. For what difference betwixt their Dictates and
Papal Decisions? an abortive Embryo of the much groned-for Monarchy of our
Puritanicall Parochial, would-be Popes over Kings and Kaesars, and All that
are called Gods.

Error then is ever against a rule. In points of Faith Error is, or should be,
against the rule of Faith. Scripture is, they will not deny, the rule of Faith,
as proceeding from Revelation divine, the true Constat and Canon of Faith and
Manners. It is granted, aberration from Scripture is Error. The farther
aberration, the greater Error. Bring me in any one point, or all points, to
this Rule: Tie me to it: Try me there. Submitto fasceis, I fall down and
adore it: I would not, I will not swerve from it. But put the case, in
application of any Question unto that Rule, there be dissents; that I say one
thing, the Informers another, the Collectors a third: and in conclusion there
be quot homines tot sententiae; how many men, so many minds. For the true and
exact decision thereof, what shall we do? First, in equity no man is to be his
own carver: and, Opinionibus vulgi in errorem rapimur. Popular positions are
not ever passable. Nay, rather most commonly it is true, that Populus dicit,
and ideo errat. Now Private Spirits are of much weaker assurance: therefore all
that are not unlearnedly mad, or insolently wedded unto their own wills,
grant, that as the Church is Custos regulae; so does it of right apply
Examinanda unto that Rule. The Church universal in general causes; each
particular and private Church, for special and particular and territoriall
questions and querees. These Informers against M. MOUNTAGU'S Errors, unto what
Rule will they stand? or whither do they appeal? I disclaim, as incompetent,
Popular Cantonings of dismembered Scripture, and Private Interpretations of
enforced Scripture. I will not be put over unto Classical decisions, nor that
Idol of some men's Reformation, unto any Prophetical determinations in private
Conventicles after Lectures. For when departed The Spirit of God from me, or
any other conformable Minister of the Church of England, to speak unto them?
But because the doubts hang in the Church of England, unto the Public
Doctrine of the Church of England do I appeal, contained in those two
authorized and by All-subscribed Books of the Articles and Divine Services of
the Church. Let that which is against them, on Gods name, be branded with
Error, and as Error be ignominiously spunged out: let the Author be censured,
as he well deserves, by Authority; if there be any thing in that much maligned
book of M. MOUNTAGU, either against the Rule immediate, the Word of God, or
against the Rule applied or expounded in the Dictates of the Catholic Church
in general, or the Tendries of our English Church in particular. If I so be
taken with the fact, or evidence be clear against me, or I be convicted per
testes idoneos, to have erred thus, I will recall and recant whatsoever is so
exorbitant; and further, will deal so with my own writings as they did with
their curious books, Act. 19. 19. Qui primas non habui sapientiae, modestiae
and poenitentiae habebo secundas.

But to come at length up to, and join issue with this Information. Upon the
Endictment, I plead, Not guilty of both Accusations, of Arminianisme and
Popery, and call therein for trial for it by God and my Country; the
Scriptures, as the Rule of Faith; the Church, interpreting and applying that
Rule from time to time, against all Novellers: and signanter unto this English
Church, against Forreyners. Dare any of the Brethren join issue with me upon
this? Absque hoc. They dare not. But to close with them first in General, then
in Particular; for Arminianisme at large, and Arminianism in the several parts.

I disavow the name and Title of ARMINIAN. I am no more Arminian than they
Gomarians; not so much in all probability. They delight, it seems, to be
called after men's names. for anon they stick not to call themselves
CALVINISTS: which Title, though more honorable than Gomarian or Arminian, I am
not so fond of, or doting upon, but I can be content to leave it unto those
that affect it, and hold it reputation to be so instiled. I am not nor would
be accounted willingly ARMINIAN, CALVINIST, or LUTHERAN, (names of Division)
but a CHRISTIAN. For my Faith was never taught by the doctrine of men. I was
not baptized into the Belief, or assumed by grace into the Family of any of
these, or of the Pope. I will not pin my Belief unto any man's sleeve, carry he
his head never so high; not unto S. AUGUSTINE, or any ancient Father, nedum
unto men of lower rank. A CHRISTIAN I am, and so glory to be; only denominated
of CHRIST JESUS my Lord and Master: by whom I never was as yet so wronged, that
I could relinquish willingly that royal Title, and exchange it for any of his
meniall servants. And further yet I do profess, that I see no reason why any
member of the Church of England, a Church every way so transcendent unto that
of Leyden and Geneva, should lowt so low as to denominate himself of any the
most eminent amongst them. But as those two Towns and States, next unto God,
have stood by supportance of the Crown of England, for esse and been esse in
Temporalibus; so likewise if CHRIST JESUS must needs be divided, both One and
Other, even the most eminent in one and other, ought to take name rather and
denomination of Us or some of Ours, than we be nicknamed ARMINIANS or
CALVINISTS of some of them. Indignor, I avow for my own part, to do it; and
will not do my mother that wrong to admit it, nedum to seek it.

Again, for ARMINIANISME, I must and do protest before God and his Angels,
idque in verbo Sacerdotis, the time is yet to come that I ever read word in
ARMINIUS. The course of my studies was never addressed to modern Epitomizers;
but from my first entrance to the study of Divinity, I balked the ordinary
and accustomed by paths of BASTINGIUS'S Catechism, FENNERS Divinity, BUCANUS
Common places, TRELCATIUS, POLANUS, and such like; and betook my self to
Scripture the Rule of Faith, interpreted by Antiquity, the best Expositor of
Faith, and applyer of that Rule: holding it a point of discretion, to draw
water, as near as I could, to the Wellhead, and to spare labor in vain, in
running farther off to Cisternes and Lakes. I went to enquire, when doubt was,
of the days of old, as God himself directed me; and hitherto I have not
repented me of it. I have not found any Canon, Order, Act, Direction in the
Church of England against it; for it I have found many. I never held it
wisdom to tire my self with haling and tugging up against the stream, when
with ease enough I might, and with better discretion should, secundo flumine
navigare. We know, the further the current is, the more muddy, troubled, and at
length brackish the water is. (...), Him. 2.
CALLIMACHUS said well,

Assyrius magnam Euphrates vim volvit aquarum:
At multa illuvie, foedaque it turbidus ulva.
If ARMINIUS in Tenants agrees unto Scripture plain and express: if he has
agreeing unto his opinions the practice, tradition, and consent of the ancient
Church, I embrace his opinions; let his person or private ends, if he had any,
alone: I nor have nor will have confarreation therewith. If CALVIN, so far in
account and estimation before ARMINIUS, dissenteth from Antiquity and the
universal ancient Church, I follow him not. No private man, or peculiar spirit
ever did, or ever shall tyrannize upon my Belief. I yield only unto God and
the Church. Nor do I wrong CALVIN, or any other in this, more than they have
wronged the ANCIENT FATHERS. So much in general for ARMINIANISME: now to
particulars imputed by the Informers.

CHAP. II.
Of S. PETER'S FALL.

INFORMERS.
TOuching the Doctrine of Final Perseverance, these are his words: As S. PETER
was a private man, Christ did pray for Him, that though his Faith fell totally
for a Time, yet it might not fall eternally. CHAP. 8. FOL. 64.

MOUNTAGU.
TOuching the doctrine of Final Perseverance, I took not upon me to Touch it,
much less to Determine it all. I do not there mention it, or meddle with it.
I grant, these words remembered by the Informers, are found in my Book in the
quoted place of fol. and chapt. and mo words than these, to make up a perfect
period; which they have dismembered to their own behoof. My words indeed are
these. Your Masters (and my address is unto the Gagger touching his Romish
Teachers only) consider S. PETER two ways, even in this Prayer made for him
by our SAVIOR. as a Private man, as a Public person; or, as they love to
speak, as Head of the Church. As a private person, CHRIST did pray for him,
that though his Faith fell totally for a time, yet it might not fall eternally
and for ever, as JUDAS failed and fell: and he was heard in that he prayed
for. These are my words in public Record. But can you say they are mine in due
consideration, that is, ex animi sententia delivered? For all have reference,
by as good Logic as ever PETER RAMUS taught you in Cambridge, unto those
words, Your Masters, etc. and so, (...), as Artists speak, must all and every
passage be conceived. Not any man but Partiaries would have taken them spoken
Dogmatice, in course of determined resolution: but Diegetice, by way of
Narration only; reporting the proposals of some Roman Disputers, not my
determination for and in the point. But let them be mine absolutely every way.
Yet secondly, any ingenuous Reader might conceive, that they are not Assertive,
thus, His Faith did fall: but only Suppositive, Though his Faith did fall. In
effect thus: To put the case that S. PETER fell away totally for a Time, from
GOD and CHRIST, in denying CHRIST; yet he fell not finally and for ever: for
he recovered footing and fastness again, and held it out constantly unto the
last, Why this, admitted an Error, should be reputed an Error of mine, I
cannot see. For though it be Published, it is not Delivered; only supposed,
related, and no more. It may be a custom amongst the Informers, and others of
that Tribe, to dictate to their Popular Auditories out of their Pulpits,
tanquam de tripode, though it be quicquid in buccam, and the same to be
received upon their bare words, as divine Oracles. whereupon they need not make
any suppositions, put no cases to be demurred on, seeing they are ubique and
in omnibus peremptory, resolved, and conclusive. But with us it is not so; we
are not so happy to have our bare words pass: we must prove what we speak,
and well is it if so, and then, we find credence. They and the Jesuits are
rare men, to lead men's Faith and Belief so in a string. In this passage
against me (it being ad oppositum, and they like enough to be demanded Proofs
for what they say) all their accusations of Arminianisme and of Popery, though
they be false and slanderous, yet are they Magisteriall. You cannot find so
much as any one proof annexed unto any of the imputed Errors, or brought in to
manifest, Ideo this or that is an Error. Their Style runs, These are his
words: or, Thus he writes, etc. supposing all men will, at least should, take
it upon their words, That what he so writes, is an Error. Such Illuminates
are our Classical Brethren. May they be entreated a little to descend from
this their Chair of Infallibility, and yield somewhat, according unto reason,
by producing that Rule against which touching Final Perseverance, the words
produced, if so be they are mine every way, to all intents and purposes, do
offend, and for which they may justly be styled Errors. The Rule produced;
upon trial and application, M. MOUNTAGU must either stand or fall. Till then,
he appealeth to all indifferent censures, for suspension of their judgments
concerning Errors thus by him Delivered and Published by Authority.

In the Interim, to come somewhat nearer unto the Error here informed against.
Does ARMINIUS maintain touching final Perseverance, (you must tell me, my
good Informers, for I have not read him) that sometime the Called and Elect of
God, the Chosen ones and Justified by Faith, such as S. PETER was, though they
do fall totally for a Time, shall yet recover necessarily again, and not fall
away finally, or for ever? If this be Arminianisme, and so his conclusion, then
therein He holds with ARMINIUS. But I have bin assured, that ARMINIUS did
hold as the Lutherans in Germany do, not only Intercision for a Time, but also
Abscission and Abjection too, for ever. That a man Called and Justified freely
through the grace of GOD in CHRIST, might fall away again from Grace Totally,
finally, and become a castaway, as JUDAS was, for ever. For S. PETER (upon
admission of this Passage, as your selves have related it in your calumniatory
Information) by M. MOUNTAGU'S conclusion, did not, could not fall finally; for
CHRIST prayed for him, that he might not fall; and CHRIST was ever heard in
that he prayed for. So that out of your own mouths M. MOUNTAGU is acquitted
of Arminianisme: for if He say any thing to the point, it is, that S. PETER
could not fall finally from Faith, nor lose it for ever irrecoverably. For, say
you, These are his words, Though S. PETER fell totally, he fell not eternally,
that is, he recovered and persevered unto the end. and so touching final
Perseverance, at least, He teaches, in your own confession, no otherwise than
your selves do. Thus Pure malice and indiscreet zeal make men many times lose
their wits they know not where.

I add, if M. MOUNTAGU be an Arminian, you are rather Papists: for I demand,
In denying and forswearing CHRIST, did S. PETER fall, or did he not fall? If
abnegation, and abjuration, and execration will enforce a fall, he did. Now if
he fell, he needs must fall totally or finally: for Cedo tertium, a man falls
not, who is not off or down from the Place (...) Grace. Multi dantur ad gratiam
recessus: he that falls to day, may rise again to morrow, hold out unto the
end, receive the reward of Righteousness, in final Perseverance be crowned
with glory and immortality. I say no more than you have subscribed if you look
unto it: Artic. 16.
After we have received the HOLY GHOST, we may DEPART FROM GRACE given, and
FALL into Sin, and by the grace of GOD we may arise again, and amend our
lives, Artic. XVI. Nec beatum dixeris quenquam ante mortem; quamdiu enim
vivimus, in certamine sumus: quamdiu sumus in certamine, nulla est certa
victoria, was Catholic Doctrine of old.

But here also, as in the former passage, these Informers mistake me for their
own advantage: for I speak but only representatively, according to the opinion
and Tenent of the Roman Schools. I appeal unto their Honesty, at least wise
Knowledge; are not my words laid down directly thus? For in YOUR opinion,
Justifying faith may diminish, and may be abolished and lost. Now Justification
being in an instant, etc. If in their opinion it may be lost, namely faith
which justifies; then Justification, which is an Effect of faith, may also be
lost; and may be recovered after such loss. For things transitory are in a
like habitude unto being, and not being; may cease to be, and be again. After
such loss of Faith and Love, transitory in their opinion, they again may
revert and find a being, but yet still in their opinion. So all here
Delivered, Errors or not Errors, so or so, is still in their opinion, not the
judgment specified of M. MOUNTAGU. My goodly Brethren, this is no fair play,
to fasten that on me, as my Assertion, which precisely I relate from another
mouth; which I remember not but as the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; and upon
that their Doctrine by Them maintained, by Him related, do infer against a
Papist, a plain Non sequitur from his own Tenants, unto an inconsequent
Argument by Them inferred and opposed against the true and Catholic doctrine
of the Church of England, touching Justification by Faith alone.

CHAP. IV.
Of FALLING FROM GRACE: The Tenet of Antiquity therein. The doctrine of the
Church of England in the 16th Article, the Conference at Hampton Court, the
Book of Homilies, and the public Liturgy.

INFORMERS.
ANd again: Some hold that Faith may be lost totally and finally, which is
indeed the Assertion of Antiquity. The Learned in the Church of ENGLAND
assent unto Antiquity in that Tenet: which the Protestants in GERMANY
maintain at this day, having assented unto the Church of ROME.

MOUNTAGU.
A Ntiquum obtinent: These men are still the same; Calumniators, and run
still along with all one indirect dealing. Their Information in direct terms
stands thus: To make report, and no more but to make report of Arminianisme
(if yet it be Arminianisme which is reported) is, in point of opinion, to be
an ARMINIAN; in point of Arianisme, with these men, to be an ARIAN: for M.
MOUNTAGU in this case has done no more. The very suggestion, as it is by
themselves here rendered, howsoever patched up of shreds cut out from several
parts, and laid together again for most advantage to their calumniation, will
yet speak no further, but only to this purpose. For themselves set it down, in
style not of Position but of bare Narration, with these terms of Some hold;
It is the assertion; The learned assent unto, etc. So that admit the points
related were pure-pute Arminianisme, yet so long as the Relator passes no
consent upon them (I appeal unto your own, though never so much Cheverellized
consciences, my good Calumniators) can there be inferred a just accusation? If
so, upon as good ground, in these terms, I can inform against the most
precisest Puritan in the Kingdom, for as good Popery as any BELLARMINE has;
any, for as perfect blasphemy with the Tongue, as ever The fool said or
conceived in his heart. I demand, can you find any assent of mine annexed?
nay, find you not rather assent denied? Have you not read in that Passage
these words, which any honest plain man would have cast into the Information,
but your selves; I DETERMINE nothing in the question POSITIVELY? If you did not
see nor read them, your eyes were not your own. If you read them, but marked
them not, your wits went on wooll-gathering at that instant. If you read and
marked them, and yet did conceal them, what became of your honesty in the
interim? You foully abused the world with false Informations. Your deserts
therefore I meddle not with: only I observe two pretty Presbyterian tricks of
Legerdemaine; First, to alter the property, by changing the state; as if it
were asserted and assented to, which is barely related, and no more. Secondly,
to conceal that which is Positive, and would discharge Mr. MOUNTAGU from your
calumniation, and leave a just taxation upon your selves. For he that
professes He does not DETERMINE, as Mr. MOUNTAGU in express and precise
words does, in my Logic, cannot be said to consent nor concur in opinion
for himself, but merely suspendeth his judgment in the case, and leaves it
indifferent, and as he found it.

But this is not all. I must yet convent your honesty somewhat further. You
have laid together into one Cento things broken and dismembered like ABSYRTUS'S
limbs; such as in my Answer unto the Gagge do not cohere nor ensue, nor follow
instantly upon each other. If the Gagger or his Copesmates had dealt thus with
me, I would have cast in their teeth forgery and false-play, and what not? But
you (my dear Brethren) are men of another stamp (and yet hard to say, whether
barrel better herring), I hope you did it out of simplicity, with a good
charitable pure intent to promote and set forward the Holy Cause; not of
Puritanicall refined malice. So I take it. And yet for my own discharge
(Charity, you know, and practice, begins at home) take it not ill, if I lay
your dealing to open view.

The Romish Gagger, whosoever he was, laid down his Proposition, as he would
have it conceived, against the approved and established Doctrine of the Church
of England; not against any either private fancy, or more public opinion of
any Faction on foot, or Sect prevailing in the Church of England: yet that he
might play fast and loose (a fashion ordinary with those of his party), he
proposes the imputation in ambiguous and involved terms. In my Answer,
because I would draw the Question unto an issue, and rightly state it, I was to
difference Opinions confounded by the Gagger, which in and touching this
Subject are not a few, concerning the loss of, and falling away from faith;
and therefore in the conclusion came home to distinguish them thus: Some
suppose that Faith cannot be lost either totally or finally: some, that
totally, but not finally: some, that both totally and finally; which is indeed
the opinion of Antiquity and of your Schools. Some, perceiving the Current of
judgments, for the loss thereof both totally and finally; and withal
considering the, at least, probability of Scriptures therefore, put-in a new
distinction of God and Man, of first and second causes of Justification. Having
reported these distinct and several opinions of elder and modern Divines,
without naming the Parties, which I could have done without enlarging upon
Particulars, no difficult thing; I demand of the Gagger, who in ambiguities
lurketh post aulaea, Which of all these ways will you have the Proposition to
be understood, that Faith may be lost, etc? and so come up unto him thus: You
mean, it may be lost both totally and finally in regard of GOD, who made no
such absolute irrespective decree; as also in respect of second causes, in man,
without man, about him, against him. All this is there, as any man may
perceive, by way of bare narration. And then, for my own opinion, I conclude
thus: I DETERMINE nothing in this Question POSITIVELY; that is, neither for
TOTALLY not FINALLY, nor TOTALLY and FINALLY; nor, nor TOTALLY nor FINALLY; not
with reference unto GOD, unto Man, unto second Causes; but leave them all as I
found them, unto their AUTHORS and ABETTORS: resolving upon this, Not to go
beyond my bounds, the consented, resolved, and subscribed ARTICLES of the
Church of England: in which, nor yet in the Book of COMMON PRAYER and other
DIVINE OFFICES, is there any Tie put upon me, to resolve in this much-disputed
Question, as these Novellers would have it: for, if there be any, it is for
possibility of total falling, as we shall hear anon. Thus stands this
Passage dismembered, mis-shaped, and abused by my Opposers to their advantage
and small reputation, for dealing in the case so insincerely and calumniously
in their Informations.

And concerning the Particulars; Wherein? whom have I mis-reported? If I can
be convicted, I will reverse it. They will not contest for the Roman Schools,
I know; as little for the Lutherans, I suppose. It is confessed on all hands,
that they hold falling from grace, and losing of faith had, and detest the
contrary opinion as heretical. For the Tenet of Antiquity I cannot be
challenged. S. AUGUSTINE, and after him S. PROSPER, affirm more than Mr.
MOUNTAGU hitherto has done. Lib. de Bon. Persev. CA. 6. Si autem regeneratus
and justificatus in malam vitam sua voluntate relabitur, iste non potest
dicere, Non accepi; quia ACCEPTAM GRATIAM DEI, suo in malum libero AMISIT
arbitrio. Ibid. CA. 13. Credendum est, quosdam de filijs perditionis, non
accepto dono persever andi usque in finem in fide, quae per dilectionem
operatur, incipere vivere, and aliquandiu JUST and FIDELITER vivere, and
POSTEA CADERE, etc. IDEM de Civ. Dei. XI. XII. Licet Sancti de suae
Perseverantiae praemio certi sint, de ipsa tamen Perseverantia sua reperiuntur
incerti. Quis enim hominum se in action profectuque justitiae perseveraturum
usque in finem sciat, nisi aliqua revelatione ab illo fiat certus, qui de hac
re justo latentique judicio, non omnes instruit, sed neminem fallit? PROSP.
Resp. 7. ad Cap. GALLORUM: Ex REGENERATIS in CHRISTO JESUS quosdam, RELICTA FIDE
and pijs moribus, APOSTATARE A DEO, and impiam vitant in sua AVERSIONE finire,
multis (quod dolendum est) probatur exemplis. But the greatest question will be
concerning the Learned in the Church of England, said to consent unto
Antiquity in this case of falling away from grace. Where first I will not deny,
but that Many in the Church of England, reputed learned, are of that opinion,
that Faith had cannot be lost. But if it shall appear, that the contrary Tenet
is the PUBLIC DOCTRINE of the CHURCH of England, then I have not wronged
private men, in making this comparison between them, and Those whom themselves
will acknowledge to be their Superiors both in learning and authority. Now, to
give them all due satisfaction, which may think themselves wronged by my
comparative speech, I argue as follows.

They were the learned in the Church of England, that drew, composed and
agreed the ARTICLES in 52. and 62. that ratified them in 71. that confirmed
them again in 604. that justified and maintained them against the Puritans at
Hampton Court; that have read and subscribed them at their Induction unto
Benefices, and Consecration unto Bishoprics; that penned the Homilies read in
Churches.

But all these have, and all such do assent unto Antiquity in this Tenent, and
subscribe it truly or in hypocrisy.

Therefore I may justly avouch it, The learned in the Church of England
assent therein to Antiquity.

The Major I suppose no man will question. The Informers themselves are
peradventure within that Pale. The Minor I make good particularly, and will
prove it accordingly obsignatis tabulis. In the forenamed XVI. ARTICLE we read
and subscribe this: After that we have received the HOLY GHOST, we may DEPART
AWAY FROM GRACE, and FALL into Sin, and by the Grace of GOD we may rise
again, and amend our lives. Now let me ask the question, Have you subscribed
this Article, or have you not? If you be Beneficed men, you have read it and
subscribed it, professed your assent and consent thereto, before GOD and his
CHURCH, or else by Act of Parliament you have forfeited your spiritual
promotions, and are deprived IPSO FACTO within two months. If so; then have
you subscribed that Arminianisme which you impute as an Error unto me. Happily
you will be of his mind, one of your Tribe, who when he was told what he had
subscribed (for, poor ignorant man, he understood it not) protested he would
tear his subscription if he could come by it; and so would have lost his
Benefice: which few of you will do, if it be a Good one, for conscience sake;
marry for a Poor one you will not stick. Happily you will quarrel the Sense of
the ARTICLES: but then you must remember, that the plain words sound to the
meaning for which I have produced them, and that until the CHURCH it self
expound otherwise, it is as free for me to take it according to the letter, as
for you to devise a figure. The ARTICLE insisteth upon men Justified, speaks
of them after Grace received; plainly avoucheth, They may fall away, depart
from that state which once they had, they may by Gods Grace rise again, and
become new men: Possible, but not Certain or Necessary. But the meaning by you
assigned cannot be good, being allied unto the stock you are: for by your
Tribe, the true meaning of the ARTICLE, and the Doctrine there Delivered and
Published by Authority, either original or derived, primary or secondary, was
upon this very point challenged as unsound, because against the current of
their Institutions. And had Arminianisme then been a nickname, the challenge
without doubt had fastened there: but challenged it was in this Sense as Unsound
at the Conference of Hampton Court, by those that were Petitioners against the
Doctrine and Discipline established in the Church of England. And being so
challenged before His sacred Majesty, was then and there Defended, maintained,
avowed, averred for True, ancient, justifiable, good and Catholic, by the
greatest Bishops, and learned Divines then living in this Church, against
that absolute, irrespective, necessitating and fatal Decree of your new
Predestination; styled by you, The Doctrine of YOUR DIVINES, commonly called
CALVINISTS: as indeed it is YOURS, being never heard of in the world but of
late; but styled then and there by the Lord Bishop of London, Dr. BANCROFT, in
public audience, with much vehemency, without any check, dislike, distaste,
dissent (for we read of none) a desperate doctrine of Predestination. At what
time also that Reverend Prelate, and most accomplished Divine (whose memory
shall ever be precious with all good and learned men) the late Bishop of
Norwich then Deane of PAUL'S, Dr. OVERALL, upon some touch, by occasion of
mentioning the ARTICLES of LAMBETH, did relate unto his most SACRED MAJESTY
those concertations which himself had sometimes had in Cambridge with some
Doctors there, about this very point of Falling from Grace; and that it was his
Tenet, and had been, That a justified man might FALL AWAY FROM GRACE, and so
ipso facto incur GODS wrath; and was IN STATE OF WRATH and DAMNATION, until
he did recover again, and was renewed after his fall. At which time, that
Doctrine of the Church of England then quarrelled, now styled Arminianisme,
accused of Noveltie, slandred as pernicious by these Informers and their
Brethren, was resolved of and avowed for True, Catholic, ancient and Orthodox,
by that Royal, Reverend, Honorable and learned SYNOD. The Book is extant
(published by warrant, and re-published by command this present year) of the
Proceedings at that Conference, which will aver all that I say for truth
against you here. See the Book.

And for explication of that Authorized and Subscribed doctrine, there is an
Homily in the Book of Homilies first composed and published in King EDWARD'S
time, approved and justified in Parliament in Queen ELIZABETH'S days, and
Authorized again of late to be read in Churches, entitled OF FALLING AWAY
FROM GOD. Which very TITLE is sufficient warrant for the Doctrine or Error in
this point imputed to M. MOUNTAGU. But that which is Delivered in the Homily,
will justify Him unto the full: for the Homily does thoroughly and wholly
insist upon the Affirmation, That FAITH once had may again be LOST. Out of the
first part of that Homily, you may take this (my good Informers) for your
edification: Whereas Page 54. of the last Edition.
GOD has showed unto all them that TRULY do BELIEVE his Gospel, his face of
mercy in CHRIST JESUS: which does so enlighten their hearts, that they be
TRANSFORMED into his Image, be made PARTAKERS of the heavenly light, and of his
HOLY SPIRIT; be fashioned unto him in all goodness requisite unto the CHILD of
GOD: So if they do afterward NEGLECT the same; if they be unthankful unto
him; if they order not their lives according to his doctrine and example, and
to the setting forth of his glory, he will TAKE FROM THEM his holy word, his
KINGDOM whereby he should reign in them, because they BRING NOT FORTH THE
FRUIT that he looked for. Can your Learning and Understanding make any other
construction of these words, than that a man may FALL away FROM GRACE; become
NO child of GOD at all? If you can, advance, and teach me that which passes
my poor apprehension. They were TRULY called, that did TRULY believe; they were
justified by faith, that were so called, as I conceive it; that beheld the face
of GOD'S mercy in CHRIST; that had their hearts so enlightened with GOD'S
SPIRIT, that they were merely transformed from Darkness unto Light, into the
Image of GOD reformed. If these be not attributes of Justified men, good Sirs
teach us some new Divinity: yet in the Doctrine of the Church of England
expounded in this Homily, these men may prove unthankful, negligent, and lose
the Interest they had in that his Kingdom of grace by his holy word. And yet
further, in the second part of this Homily we are sent unto a conclusion more
ad oppositum, not only of TOTAL Lapse for a time, but also of FINAL
Separation, and for ever. Which is also according to the doctrine expressed in
the ARTICLES: for he that says, A man may fall away, and may recover, implies
withal, that some men may fall away, and may NOT recover; which the Homily
declares thus: They shall be NO LONGER governed by GOD'S HOLY Page 57.
SPIRIT: they shall be PUT FROM the GRACE and BENEFIT which they had, and EVER
MIGHT have enjoyed in CHRIST: they shall be DEPRIVED of the heavenly light and
LIFE which they had in CHRIST while that they abode in HIM. They that thus fall
away unto the state of damnation, were TRULY justified: for it is said, They
were in CHRIST; they continued sometime in CHRIST: for they abode in him. But
yet this is not all: for it follows, They shall be GIVEN UP unto the POWER
of the DEVIL, who bears RULE in all that are CAST-AWAYES from God, as he did
in SAUL and JUDAS. I suppose this is plain and home enough.

If you be acquainted with the LITURGY and public religious SERVICE of our
Church (as to your shame few of you and your Divines are or will be, unless it
be to oppose and cavil at it), there you shall find also as much as Falling
from grace comes to. In the Form of holy Form of private Baptism.
Baptism we are taught (otherwise than your Masters teach), that every child
which is duly baptized, being before borne in original sin, and in the wrath
of God, is now by that Laver of Regeneration received into the number of the
CHILDREN of GOD, and HEIRS of EVERLASTING LIFE. For our Lord JESUS CHRIST does
not deny his GRACE and mercy unto such infants, etc. So here they be put into
the state of GRACE. And lest it should be left to men's CHARITY (as you use to
tell the world), we are there taught earnestly to BELIEVE, that CHRIST has
favorably RECEIVED these infants that are baptized, that he has EMBRACED them
with the arms of his mercy, that he has GIVEN unto them the BLESSING of
ETERNAL LIFE; and out of that BELIEF and PERSUASION, we are to give thanks
faithfully and devoutly for it, etc. To make which doctrine the more sure
against all Novelists, it is again repeated in the Catechism, to the end that
children might likewise be noursed up in it, and taught, that Catechism answ.
2.
in their Baptism they were made the MEMBERS of CHRIST, and the children of
GOD, etc; and that Rubric before the Catechism.
it is CERTAINLY TRUE by the Word of GOD, that children being baptized have
ALL things necessary for their salvation; and if they die before actual sin,
shall be UNDOUBTEDLY SAVED. According whereunto, all S. GREG. NYSSEN orat. de
baptism. S. LEO de not. Christ. sermon. 5. OPTAT. cont. PARM. l. 5. TERT. de
baptism. cap. 5. S. CYP. ep. 59. and ep. 2. COUNCIL. CARTH. apud S. AUG. ep. 90.
Quicunque negat parvulos per Baptismum Christi a perditione liberari, et
salutem percipere aeternam, ANATHEMA sit. S. AUG. epist. 157. S. CHRYSOSTOM. hom.
40. in 1. Cor. PROSP. de vocat. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 5. S. BASIL. lib. de
Baptismo. S. AMBR. de poenit. lib. 1. cap. 7. et ALII.
Antiquity has also taught us. Now let this be acknowledged to be the
doctrine of our Church, that children duly baptized are put into the STATE of
GRACE and SALVATION (which you see you cannot, you must not deny), and both
your and my experience will show, that many so baptized children, when they
come to age, by a wicked and lewd life do fall away from God, and from that
STATE of GRACE and SALVATION, wherein he had set them, to a worse STATE;
wherein they shall never be saved. If you grant not this, you must hold, that
all men that are baptized are saved; which I know you will never do.

To make an end then. In my judgment this is the doctrine of the Church of
England, not delivered according unto private opinions in ordinary Tracts and
Lectures, but delivered publicly, positively, and declaratorily in
Authentical Records. And you cannot be ignorant (for it is still extant upon
Record) that your prime Leaders have understood the Tenet of the Church of
England to be as I have reported it, and accordingly they have complained
against it (as you have against me), and objected it as one of their reasons
why they refused to subscribe. Let there then be added EXPRESS SCRIPTURE,
EZECHIEL XVIII. XXIV. and a common UNANIMOUS S. HIERON. cont. Iovin. l. 2. S.
AUO. de cor. and great. c. 8. IDEM. ep. 59. et ep. 107.

S. PROSP. ad cap. Gallor. p. 99 S. BERN. ep. 42. et alibi saepissime.

S. CYP. l. 1. de unit. Eccl. S. ATHANAS. cont. Arrian. rat. 4. S. BAS. ep. ad
Chilonem.


FATHERS expounding that and other places of Scripture (which consent our
Church does by open profession maintain in these Cap. de Concionatoribus.
Canons which she set forth to be subscribed unto, together with the XXXIX.
Articles, Anno M. D. LXXI) and I see no reason, wherefore I might not have been
as confident in maintaining falling away from grace, as you and your Divines
are upon weaker grounds in defending the contrary. But I have ever bin
solicitous to preserve peace, and to give as little occasion of disturbance
thereof unto distempered humors, as was possible. Salus Ecclesiae non vertitur
in istis: and therefore I thought it not tanti; and being not urged upon
necessity in my Answer to the Gagger to handle this question otherwise than I
did, I suspended mine own judgment, and lay off aloof in a kind of
neutrality. Neither do I now say more than I am urged to do by the PLAIN and
EXPRESS words of our ARTICLES and Doctrine publicly professed and established
in our Church; which I hope your selves will give me leave to do, the rather,
because I know you have subscribed the same with your Hands, though what
became of your Hearts in the mean time, I cannot tell.

CHAP. V.
Touching PREDESTINATION. Of Arminians, Lutherans, Calvinists, foreign
Divines. Of the Church of England: Submission thereunto. The Question between
them and us.

INFORMERS.
THe whole XXI. chapt. of his book savoreth strongly of ARMINIANISME: wherein
depraving and odiously reporting the Doctrine of OUR DIVINES commonly called
CALVINISTS, and declaring himself to consent with the LUTHERANS; in this point
he has these words: That PETER was saved, etc.

MOUNTAGU.
MAy not your Sense deceive you in the Savor? The Object we know is often
represented unto the Sense, not as it is, but as it seems. If your Sense be
out of frame, the Savor of Arminianisme may deceive you; and you may strongly
sent that which is but weak. Now who can help this? Touching this point, I
beeleeve, because Iusee the experience; such as your selves can not relish nor
savor any thing but only GOD'S secrets. For you, and men of your Company, are
never at quiet with GOD'S Arcana Imperij; can never let his eternal
Predestination alone. The most ordinary Theme of your (as I am given to
understand) and their popular Preachings, is touching that comfortable Doctrine
of Election and Reprobation. M. MOUNTAGU rubbed somewhat upon this sore, thus:
That Men in Curiosity have presumed far upon, and waded deep into the hidden
secrets of the Almighty. And you, amongst others, being galled, as guilty have
winched at it. and hence it is that He seems so strongly to SAVOR of
Arminianisme, who would not have you meddle beyond your Model, but keep and
contain your selves within the bounds of Christian sobriety and moderation,
and savor of S. PAUL'S counsel, Sapere ad sobrietatem.

He savoreth of Arminianisme: but how ARMINIUS savoureth, we shall smell it if
we can, and find it at leisure. For, having but named Him, you fall hot upon
Lutheranisme, and of M. MOUNTAGU'S consent with Them: as if Arminianisme and
Lutheranisme were two words of one signification; or in this point Lutherans
and Arminians were divided; or as if in your heat you rambled up and down,
and could not well resolve what to fasten on. Will you have the Imputation
run thus: The XXI. chap. savoreth strongly of Arminianisme, and, He declares
himself therein to consent with the Lutherans; two several acts upon
different objects? Or shall it be, that He savoreth so of Arminianisme, because
he declares himself to consent with the Lutherans? If Lutheranisme and
Arminianisme be distinct, here is an Error committed by these Informers against
Error, that I am not presented upon point of Lutheranisme in the Title, as well
as upon point of Arminianisme. If not different but the same, Lutherans were in
being and in name, when ARMINIUS was not hatched, nor in the shell. And if it
be an Error of ARMINIUS, which was the Positive Doctrine of Lutherans and
LUTHER before ARMINIUS was born, why is ARMINIUS entitled unto that which is
none of his, but M. LUTHER'S? Why is M. MOUNTAGU accused of Arminianisme, said
to savor of Arminianisme, rather than of Lutheranisme? both in this being one
and the same thing. There lies here a padd in the straw. I can guess at the
cause: a trick of your Brotherly charity. Because LUTHER'S opinions were not
Dangerous; but ARMINIUS errors are Dangerous. For we are told in their
Insinuations, that THIS Arminianisme has infested, and had brought into great
peril, the STATES of the United Provinces, if the KINGS MAJESTY, by his
gracious care and providence, had not helped to quench the fire. Scilicet, as
of old the Pagan Idolaters accused Christianity of all those calamities which
befell mankind, Postquam esse in mundo Christiana gens cepit, as ARNOBIUS
speaks. Blessed be the PEACEMAKER amongst men: the Generation of that
faithful One shall be ever blessed. And blessed be that MAN of PEACE in ISRAEL
for ever. The reward of the righteous rest upon his Royal Person and
Posterity; and the faithful promise of that GRAND-PEACEMAKER betwixt Heaven
and Earth, be sevenfold returned into his bosom, whose Princely care and
providence is not confined within the surroundry of the four Seas, but
enlarged ultra unto his neighbors, those United Provinces, primarily and
before all. But for this particular, Sirs Informers, can you speak upon
knowledge (for I must confess my ignorance and small intelligence in matters
of this kind, both for action and speculation) that there was no other Snake
lurking in covert? nothing else but the simple difference about these
School-points of Predestination, Freewill, Final Perseverance, which had so
almost endangered the state of those United Provinces? Did no crafty
Interloper (are you sure of that?) put in his Stock among those brawling
Bankers? Did no wiser men or man work upon, perhaps, exasperated minds, or
exasperate minds to work upon, as it has happened elsewhere, in points of
controverted Divinity, called into question or maintained on foot, that
Religion may serve for a stalking horse to catch fools, and be pretended to
serve turns? Surely those very points being Scholasticall speculations merely,
and as far from State-businesses, as Theorie is from Practice, are not of
themselves aptae natae to breed dangers: Those so dangerous opinions in the
Netherlands, have been as freely quarrelled and as fiercely pursued in the
Vpperlands, of as long time, without all danger but of Tonguetryall. And why
should they be so dangerous here? Those Classical projects, Consistoriall
practices, Conventuall designs, and Prophetical speculations of the Zealous
Brethren in this Land, do (...) aim at Anarchy, popular confusion; Dangerous
indeed to Prince and people. State Civil and Ecclesiastical may well come
under this Information, as being active in Front, and not only upon the Rear.
Why inform you not against the Fomenters of them? Would you not take it ill if
your selves were traduced as Dangerous indeed, who do more than upon the Bye
incline unto them? But I am loath to touch here, or to meddle beyond my slipper.
The State is not the Subject of my Profession. I pray for the prosperity of
Prince and Polity, but let their courses alone to whom they concern. I excuse
not ARMINIUS or Arminians in any misdemeanor. only let not Innocence in
different Opinions, be calumniously traduced without cause. M. MOUNTAGU, in
his own particular, is known, he gives GOD the praise therefore, to better
than your selves, or any of your Sect, be they who they will be, to foment
neither Faction in State, whereof he is incapable; nor Schism in Church,
whereto he is not inclinable: having all his Studies addressed, and Prayers
directed to one end, to make up, if it were possible, the rents in the Garment
of CHRIST JESUS, the breaches and ruins in the CHURCH: for which cause it is
apparent, They cannot endure Him, Quibus quietamoveri magna merces: and live
well, fare full and fatt by Fishing in troubled waters. There is One GOD, One
Faith, One Hope, One Baptism: not dividing, but composing Christ in his
Members and Profession.

Comparisons are odious, yet sometime necessary. Gall and Vinegar are
corrosive, but must sometime be used. There is never a Saint-seeming and
Bible-bearing hypocritical Puritan in the Pack, a better Patriot every way,
than the man that has Delivered such dangerous Errors. Your goodly glozings,
and time-serving colludings with the State, are but like Watermen upon the
Thames, looking one way, rowing another way. Your Holy cause, you see, will not
succeed by opposition, therefore you come up, and seem to cloze with the
Church of England in her Discipline, to use the Cross, and wear the Clothes:
but for her Doctrine you wave it, preach against it, teach contrary to that
which you have subscribed: that so through FOREIGN DOCTRINE, being infused
secretly, and instilled cunningly, and pretended craftily to be the Churches,
at length you may winde-in with FOREIGN DISCIPLINE also, and so fill
Christendom with Popes in every Parish for the Church, and with popular
Democraties and Democraticall Anarchies in the State. God divide you first in
JACOB, and scatter you in ISRAEL. In this present Passage, who or what directed
you, writing in, and being of the Church of England, unto this Division of OUR
DIVINES commonly called CALVINISTS, and Lutherans, as membra dividentia and ad
oppositum? YOUR Divines, forsooth. Of what Livery are you, or those YOUR
Divines? Separatists from others, Singular, a Part, a Faction, a Division; or
else, why YOUR Divines? Are not You and YOURS, Divines of the Church of
England? If not; what make You meddling, nestling, roosting here? Hy you hence
to the Brethren of AMSTERDAM, where YOUR Divines are, if there be any such. For
there they say all religions may be met with: if a man have lost his Religion,
there he may find it: there are all Divines, the Devils and all. If yea; what
make you with that Title of OUR Divines? why divide you non dividenda? Mine and
Thine, Yours and Ours, are not for Unity; are not, or should not be heard or
once named in the Church of England. The Divines here, are, or should be all of
them Divines who hold, or should hold and maintain the Doctrine established,
and commanded to be taught in the Church of England; which was never taught
nor directed by the precepts, or wills, or fancies, or factions, or forgeries
of men, and is not to be styled Lutheran or Calvinian, but by such only as
mean to set up ALTAR against ALTAR, and to foment a Schism in the Church. Such
be YOUR Divines it seems, who are cut out into Division: Into their Secret
let not my soul enter. I am none, I profess, of that Fraternity, no
Calvinist, no Lutheran; but a Christian. This I Declare, not that which you
calumniate, that I adhere, first unto them, consent unto them, All of them, and
Only to them infallibly, who have been in their several times (...), taught of
GOD; and (...), enspired by GOD: secondly, unto those that are (...), their
true Successors, and (...), their Lieutenants; and so (...), observers of the
Rules and Traditions enjoined of old according to deduction from that Prime
Rule, interpreting the HOLY SCRIPTURES, the Rule of faith, in places
controverted and obscure (which is ever in points of lower alloy), not
according to the fancy and most-what presumption of some one man, delighting
commonly to oppose and thwart the stream of Antiquity, but according to the
sense and meaning of those Times that drew water nearer unto the Well head,
that is, to the APOSTLES, and their Successors immediately.

As for consent with Lutherans, I do no where declare it. Show me the place
where I prefer them, commend them, once name them to this purpose. You never
were so privy unto any thought of mine, that you could speak what I thought of
them: concerning whom, I wish that they were men of more allayed spirits and
calmer temper than they are, or do show themselves in opposition. And yet why
may I not in some things as well, as soon, as lawfully consent unto them, as
unto YOUR DIVINES, the commonly called CALVINISTS? JOHN CALVIN came after in
time, and was but a Secondary unto MARTIN LUTHER; entering in upon his Labors
and Reversions: and why should he challenge any privilege of preferment above
MARTIN LUTHER, that I may not as well and lawfully declare my self for the one,
as for the other? In this Church and Kingdom, does any Rule, Canon, Law or
Authority, tie or command me to reverence the one above the other? to follow
the one rather than the other? I may, why not? consent with the Lutherans,
rigid or mollified, in some things against the Calvinists; and in some other
differenced opinions with the, YOUR Calvinists against them: why not? who tied
me more to the one, than the other? or to either, more than to BELLARMINE in
some things against them both? Truth has latitude and extension. No man that I
know of, has infallibility from errors assigned unto him ex ass. Truth is
truth whosoever speaks it: and S. AUGUSTINE did embrace it from TYCHONIUS a
Donatist in one particular, rather than the Tendries of Catholic Authors. What
if I went thus far, or did so much declare my self to favor the Lutherans
against YOUR Divines? Have I therein broken any Statute? transgressed any
Canon? offended against Law? opposed Order? neglected any Authority? If I have,
Declare against me: let me answer for it. If none of these take notice of
YOUR Divines, what are private men's opinions unto me, who may be as free in my
opinions, as they are in theirs? But I do not, as you inform, Declare any
such thing: for, to Declare imports a public Act, an assent upon
acknowledgement. Do I in this CHAPT. profess correspondency in the point
controverted with Lutherans? Do I any where, with them or others, beside the
Church of England, the absolutest representation of Antiquity this day extant?
What that Church believes, I believe; what it teaches, I teach; what it
rejects, I reject: what it does not tender, I am not tied unto. I was bred a
member of the Church of England, brought up a member of the Church of England;
therein, by the means and Ministry of that Church, I received that Earnest of
my salvation, when by Baptism I was inserted into CHRIST. In the Union and
Communion of that Church I have lived, not Divided with Papist, nor Separated
with Puritan. Through the assistance of the grace of GOD'S Spirit, which is
never wanting unto any that seek Him, I hope to live and dye in the Faith and
Confession of that Church; than which I know none, nor can any be named in all
points more conformable unto purest Antiquity in the best times: which I trust
to make good against any and all those Brethren in evil, Papists and Puritans,
whosoever: who looking and running two several ways, do like SAMPSON'S foxes
join together in the tail. If there be in any writing, preaching, saying, or
thought of mine, any thing Delivered or Published against the Discipline or
Doctrine of THIS Church; I am sorry for it, I revoke it, recant it, disclaim
it. Vultu laeditur pietas; if I have done so in any thing unto my Mother, in
all humility I crave pardon, and will undergo Penance. But the presumptions
of servants, are not the Lords directions. Every one that prateth, reads,
lectureth, preaches or professes, must not look to have his Theses,
Lectiones, Harangues or discourses taken as the Dictates or doctrines of our
Church. Our Mother has sufficiently made known her mind in her public,
promulgated, authorized ARTICLES and COMMUNION BOOK; with those other, to which
we have all subscribed, that are publicly interessed in the Priesthood and
Function of this Church. Hic rhodus, hic saltus. These are those Passages, at
which IEPHTHA'S soldiers are to try the lisping EPHRAMITES in their Sibboleth.
If here I be concluded with that absolute Decree of Predestination, I yield. If
no such Prescription or Tie be imposed, then (...), by your leave, ringantur
the Faction: I mind (I may so do) to continue in the opinion I am of.

YOUR DIVINES, as you style them, concerning Predestination, believe and teach,
That in the order of the causes of salvation and damnation, Almighty GOD,
primarily, and absolutely, and IRRESPECTIVELY, did from all eternity decree and
resolve; and semblably brought it so to pass in time, concerning genera
singulorum and singulos generum, to make them vessels of honor or dishonor,
to bring them unto life, or cast them off into death, to crown them with glory
and immortality, or plunge them into destruction and hellfire for ever. To
bring this his Decree and unchangeable purpose to pass, it was necessary he
should, and so he did, purpose, and so effect the creation of man and all
mankind, necessarily also, unto life or death. So that the major part of
mankind by far, perishing everlastingly from GOD, did so perish, because GOD
had decreed irreversibly and irrespectively, that they should so perish, and
indeed made them that they might so perish inevitably. For the will of GOD is
the necessity of things, say YOUR Masters out of S. AUGUSTINE mis-understood.
This is no malicious relating of the doctrine of YOUR Side, that delight to be
styled Calvinists. The first counsel, purpose, and decree of GOD was thus:
Before the works of his hands of old, merely and irrespectively to declare his
power (I cannot say his justice) and what he might and would do upon his
creatures, for his glory sake, he made the wicked AGAINST, nay FOR the day of
vengeance. The means to bring this his purpose to pass, was Creation; and the
cause of his creating man, was to effect it. Praedestinationem vocamus aeternum
DEI decretum, quo apud se constitutum habuit, quid de unoquoque CALVIN, Instit.
3. 21. 5.
homine fieri vellet. Non enim PARI condition CREANTUR homines: sed alijs vita
aeterna, alijs DAMNATIO aeterna PRAEORDINATUR. Itaque prout in alterutrum finem
quisque CONDITUS EST, ita vel ad vitam, vel ad MORTEM PRAEORDINATUM dicimus.
Hanc Deus non modo in singulis personis testatus est, sed specimen ejus edidit
in tota ABRAHAE sobole. Vnde palam fieret, in ejus arbitrio esse qualis
cujusque Gentis futura sit conditio. Thus the Founder of your fancies, in
express words. Can you find this so ruled, so taught, so prescribed in our
Church? or articulated unto our Teachers? Predestination unto life (says the
XVII Article) is that everlasting purpose of GOD, whereby, before the
foundation of the world was laid, he has constantly decreed, by his counsel
secret unto us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has chosen
in CHRIST, out of mankind, and to bring them BY CHRIST, unto everlasting
salvation, as vessels made to honor. In which, the Church speaks only unto
Election; touches not upon Rejection, Reprobation, or Desertion and
Dereliction rather: and in that also goes no further than ad Esse rei; First,
that there is a Predestination by GOD unto life. Secondly, that it was an Act
of his from everlasting. Thirdly, that he founded it, and resolved for it, in
the Man and Mediator CHRIST, both for the purpose and performance. Fourthly,
that it is and was of some special ones alone, elect, called forth, and
reserved in CHRIST; and not generally extended unto all mankind. Fifthly, the
which purpose and counsel of his is like himself, unchangeable, done
according to the counsel of his will. This is all that I can find touching
that Purpose and Decree of GOD. Then ensues concerning the putting it in
practice and execution; in their calling by grace, justification freely, and
adoption of sons; in conformity to Christ, study of good works; and then, when
these are done, to final consummation in glory. All which I constantly
profess and believe: and I add, that according unto this Doctrine, a curse is
presupposed, a state of damnation and woe intended; out of which they are
delivered, whom he electeth in CHRIST: into which how they came, how they were
plunged, the ARTICLE does not speak. YOUR Teachers declare expressly, it was
GOD'S positive, peremptory, prime, irresistible Act: they were cast into it by
GOD irrespectively, because he would do it: they were thereunto appointed by
himself, for himself, and his own pleasure; and being so appointed by his
will, were ABSOLUTELY NECESSITATED thereunto, that they could not possibly
resist his will, alter his purpose, prevent his Decree, nor avoid the effects
of his pleasure. For aditum vitae PRAECLUSIT, exitio DEVOVIT. Sect. 7. Now,
what inferences and hideous Ibid.
consequences will ensue, the Papists and Lutherans do not spare to speak, and
press to purpose: and you cannot avoid, to my poor understanding, their
conclusions. The Church of England is not heerto liable; cannot be charged
with it; must not, for YOUR sakes, be put to avow or justify it, which in wise
moderation sits down by this Temper; To have GOD'S promises in such wise
received, as they be GENERALLY set forth to us in holy Scripture, and does not
insolently press into GOD'S Secrets.

CHAP. V.
Dangerous consequences brought by Others, upon the Irrespective Decree.

INFORMERS.
IN this point he has these words: That PETER was saved because God would have
him saved Absolutely; and resolved to save him so, Necessarily; because he
would do so.

MOUNTAGU.
IT is true, in this point I have these words indeed; not as mine, but as
yours. For, relating the doctrine briefly of YOU Calvinists, as you are and
would be called, I propose it exemplified, as you use it, so. but withal I
added, which is also your Doctrine, and I go no further there, that JUDAS was
damned as necessarily, because that GOD, as absolute to decree, as omnipotent
to effect his decree, did primarily so resolve concerning him, and finally so
conclude as touching him, WITHOUT RESPECT of any thing but his own will. Is
not this the manifest, direct, plain, and express doctrine of Him, whom you
profess to follow? of whom you glory to be denominated? Nothing is by me
ascribed unto your Side and YOUR Doctors, but an absolute and irrespective
necessitating Decree concerning man in utramque partem, and concerning all the
effects of Predestination. I brought no inferences to press you withal; such
as are commonly and odiously made against you by Opposites; Papists, Lutherans,
Arminians, or if there be any else, whose virulent invectives and strange,
though too true, imputations I like not, I used not. I did not charge you with
making GOD the AUTHOR OF SIN; nor that GOD, who calls himself, as he is, the
Father of Mercies, made the greatest part of mankind, with intent and purpose,
to PERISH eternally; to DAMN them for ever into, and in Hell fire. That every
man is, as he is Predestinate, a Sinner or Believer, NECESSARILY, unavoideably.
That the Reprobate are incited on, and PROVOKED to sin by GOD. That GOD was
the Author of JUDAS treason, and the like. None of these dropped out of my pen
against you: therefore that Depravation of YOUR Doctrine, or odious relating of
it, (...)? That which I relate, is confessed by your selves, That PETER could
not perish; JUDAS could not but perish. Whether this be good Catholic
doctrine, I did not touch.

CHAP. VII.
Lutherans averse from the doctrine of Calvinists. The moderation of the Church
of England in these great and unsearchable mysteries. The Author's submission
thereunto. The doctrine of Predestination. Man the Author of his own
destruction, and not GOD. The doctrine of Antiquity contemned by Novellers.
The Synod of Dort no obligation to us. The saying of DEODATE. The Articles of
Lambeth forbidden by Authority. Foreign Doctrine maintained, to bring in
foreign Discipline. The Church of England no Patroness of Novell opinions.

INFORMERS.
BUt I make the world believe, that the Church of England does oppose the
doctrine of absolute and irrespective Election, which the SYNOD of DORT
concluded upon and determined; and that it agrees with the Lutherans in this
point.

MOUNTAGU.
DO I make men Believe it? How can you tell, that the world is so persuaded
through my words? It is probable enough that the world thought so, and Believed
so, before that my name or the Gaggers came into play among you, or were heard
of in the world. And for the Lutherans, this is all I say; The Lutherans
abhor it. It, that is, That opinion, as I then spoke indefinitely, not
imposing it on you, or YOUR Divines: as gently as I could, as tenderly as was
possible. And I pray you, for the Lutherans, is it not so? out of your
knowledge or hearsay, do not they detest it, as horribiliter in DEUM
contumeliosum, and generi humano perniciosissimum? and that so far, with such
vehemence (as their custom is, in every thing to be vehement and violent) that
they stick not to profess, they will rather come off roundly unto Popery
again, than join with YOUR Divines upon any terms, in these Questions of
Prescience, Perseverance, Election, and Reprobation. wherein they say, that by
your Tenants, Non Diabolus, sed DEUS erit AUTHOR mendacij: GOD, not the Devil,
is made AUTHOR of sin.

But concerning the Church of England's consenting with the Lutherans, your
Gloss corrupts my Text. I say no such matter. That which I say, is this. The
Gagger objecteth unto us, as held by us, that which you call the Doctrine of
YOUR Divines. My answer thereto, is Negative: Absque hoc, no such matter. For
the Lutherans in Germany do detest and abhor it: the Church of England has
not taught it. And yet this is not enough to infer, that we consent with the
Lutherans, either in their Abhorring and Detesting of it, or in those Opinions
which they hold against it; except there could be given, Nihil tertium. I add:
The Church of England does not Believe it: and why may I not say so, except you
show the contrary, or bring me forth a Creed, a Canon, a Conclusion in being,
for Believing it, in the Church of England? What our Church resolves touching
this, is (...) resolved in the XVII Article: the very words of that Article
being expressed in terms, as far as concerned that Decree. But touching the
execution of that eternal purpose, both for inchoation by Grace here, and
consummation in Glory hereafter, thus much is tendered in the self same place
and Article: Therefore they that be endowed with so excellent a Benefit from
GOD; be called according unto GOD'S purpose, by his Spirit working in due
season. They through GOD'S grace obey that calling: they be justified freely:
they be made sons of GOD by adoption: they be made like unto the Image of his
only begotten Son JESUS CHRIST: they walk religiously in good works; and at
length by GOD'S mercy attain unto everlasting felicity. In all which passage,
both containing GOD'S Decree, and execution of that Decree, is not one word,
syllable, or apex touching your absolute, necessary, determined, irresistible,
irrespective Decree of GOD, to call, save and glorify, S. PETER for instance,
infallibly, WITHOUT any CONSIDERATION had of, or REGARD unto, his FAITH,
OBEDIENCE, REPENTANCE; and to condemn JUDAS, as necessarily, without any
RESPECT had at all unto his SIN. which, say I there, and I say truly, is the
private fancy of some particular men: and, as I conjecture, you are professedly
of those SOME. And whereas you would make the World believe, that Ecclesia
Anglicana Calvinistat; as if he were the father and founder of our Faith; as if
our Belief were to be pinned upon his sleeve, and absolutely to be taught
after his Institutions: show me good warrant for it, and I yield. I may rather
say, that the Church of England has opposed this doctrine, because that many
of the Learned (your selves will not deny) in that Church, and most
conformable unto the Discipline and Doctrine of the Church, have mainly opposed
it: and the Church it self has directly and in EXPRESS words overthrown the
ground thereof, in teaching thus: that a Justified man, and therefore
Predestinate in your doctrine, may Fall away from GOD, and therefore become,
not the Child of GOD. The truth is, our Church, in these deep and high points,
has in great Wisedeme and Prudence, gone on warily and suspensely; not
presuming, (...), (as you and YOUR Divines have done and do) to conclude upon
GOD'S Secrets: not straightning and narrowing of men's consciences, by
determining, specially in those Mysteries, at which that great Apostle stood at
gaze, with (...): and, (...). and, (...); Would you and your Party be advised;
I would counsel you that, which I desire to follow in this particular my
self.

Ne curiosus quaere causas omnium
Quaecunque libris vis Prophetarum indidit
Afflata caelo plena veraci DEO.
Nec operta sacri supparo stlentij
Irrumpere aude, sed prudenter praeteri.
NESCIRE VELLE QUAE MAGISTER MAXIMUS
DOCERE NON VULT, ERUDITA EST INSCITIA.
I must confess my dissent thorough and sincere from the Faction of
novellizing PURITANS; men intractable, insociable, incompliable with those that
will not aedificare ad dissensiones; but in no one point more, than in this
their desperate doctrine of Predestination. In which as they delight to trouble
themselves and others; in nothing more: so I profess I do love to meddle
nothing less. I have not, I did not desire, nor intend to declare my own
opinion in that point (evermore with reservation of my dutiful consent with
and unto my Mother): for I needed not do it, being not forced so to do in
following of the Gagger: but because I am challenged for Dangerous Doctrine
therein by the Informers, and for Arminianisme or Popery, or I know not what;
I shall as I can briefly, and plainly without scholasticall obscurities, set
down what I conceive of this Act of GOD (setting by all execution of purpose)
or Decree of Predestination. Take it as I conceive it, and so shall profess
it, until I am informed and ascertained, that the Church of England, whereof I
am a member, believes and teaches all otherwise than I conceive of it.

First, whatsoever GOD wills, comes to pass in Heaven and in Earth. (...)
is possible with him. If it be (...) once, or (...), it is also (...), or
shall be in due time. For accordingly as he wills things should, so do they
come to pass. And as they do come to pass in due time, so he would have them
before all times so come to pass. The one is Original of the other: and the
one is Evidence of the other. GOD'S Decrees are eternal, from everlasting, as
all his purposes are, as himself is; like himself, who is Tota simul and
perfecta possessio sui. So, as in Him considered, there is nor prius nor
posterius of his decrees: but considered in effects, and quoad Nos, one thing
may be said to be first, second, or third; in nature, time, and being; before,
or after another. GOD being sibi solus, (...), from everlasting, alone
himself, and beside himself nothing, the first thing he did, or possibly and
conceiveably could do, was to determine to communicate himself, and did so
accordingly, primo, primum, communicate himself out of his Alonenesse
everlasting unto somewhat else. For Communication is an Act of Goodness, the
prime attribute of God respectively; as even the Heathen man could say, Deus
est optimus and maximus, and quidem prius optimus quam maximus. All
communication CICERO, I. de Divin.
is, and needs must be conceived to be, at least, betwixt two; being an
effluxe, emanation, issuing from, and motion betwixt terms. GOD alone could
not communicaie se, sua, or de suis, but by producing an Object communicable,
to whom or which he might impart as, and what, he pleased. Which, when nothing
was at all but himself, must and does put us upon another purpose and Act of
his, to Create; which is, framing of something out of mere nothing: nor can
possibly any other Act, or resolution and counsel, prevent this, much less
that of Predestination, yet unheard of. As is the Cause, such is the Effect;
especially, a Total, Sufficient, Immediate Cause. The Created was then, and
could not be but so, like the Creator, that is, good: and accordingly we have
that Elogium Creaturae, ALL things were exceeding good. But Good is, and must
be of a double alloy; Changeably, or else unchangeably good. Thus good, is
only GOD; without beginning, not to have end; without change or shadow of
change. Man thus made by GOD good, as otherwise than so he could not be, was
yet made by him changeably good: in as much as, that being created, otherwise
than so, he must not nor could be. Good he was, but Bad he might be:
Righteous, out of the hands of GOD; but left unto himself, in the hands of his
own counsel, unrighteous. That, changing state of Being, if happily he should
change, his alteration might be his own Act, imputable to himself, not his
Maker; his endowments must be such, as, unless himself would, none else could
hurt or annoy him. And such indeed they were, so sufficient in themselves, able
to hold out against opposition and assault, unless basely and cowardly he
would betray the Fort upon summons of a Foe. Thus he did: so he served
himself. Using his freedom of will not well as he ought, he lost his
freedom, undid himself, and his whole race then in his loins. EVE took up
sin from the devil upon lone: ADAM by Consent acknowledged the band, and
usura crevit Posteritas. For being the root and original of all mankind, he
received what he had, for himself and his; and lost what he forfeited, for
them all. Falling thus from GOD, he fell not alone: his posterity were
together with him plunged into one bottomless pit of perdition, and mass of
damnation, through their own fault. Thither they fell: not there were they
put. GOD made not man unto destruction: much less did he make him to destroy
him. As GOD'S Acts are in Production. so were they formerly in Intention. But
Creation was before Fall or Restoring: therefore so was it also in GOD'S
purpose. Thus far we have gone, and not a word of Predestination: for how
could it be in a Parity? There must needs first be a disproportion, before
there can be conceived Election or Dereliction; unto which we are now comne in
the mass of perdition, as they call it. Wherein all alike being plunged
actually, GOD passes by, looks on, considers intuitively, once, at once,
singulos generum, genera singulorum, in that very woeful plight. He had
compassion on them: so EZECH. phraseth it. XVI. When he saw them in their
blood; and out of his mercy, in his love, motu mero, not otherwise, stretched
out to them deliverance in a Mediator, the Man JESUS CHRIST, and drew them out
that took hold of mercy, leaving them there that would none of him: There
whither they had fallen of Themselves; not whereinto He had thrown them
headlong, out of his mere irrespecting will, because he would; through his
absolute power, because he could; with the irresistible necessity of an
inevitable Decree, creating them to perish everlastingly. This is enough,
absolutely to free and to acquit GOD from being AuTHOR of SIN, which he so
detesteth; or Author of death, which he made not; to which he is an enemy, as
being Life: and from being Author of destruction, which is merely of our
selves; he being Pater misericordiarum, and wholly, freely, and desiredly,
giving, occasioning, procuring, effecting our salvation day by day. If this be
Arminianisme, esto. I must profess it. (...). For unless it be so, and that,
not according to unchangeable necessity, there is not any thing in our power at
all, says JUSTIN MARTYR in his Apol. Nay, (...). If it be absolutely Page 151.
edit. ROB. STEPH.
determined, that one should be good, another bad; the one cannot be approved,
nor the other rejected. For, justitia non erit justa, says FULGENTIUS, si
puniendum reum non invenisse, Ad MONIMUM
sed fecisse dicatur DEUS. But praescivit peccaturos; non praedestinavit ad
peccatum. The reason is irrefragable, stante the Nature of our GOD: Nunquam ad
hoc hominem potuit praedestinare, quod ipse disposuerat, and praecepto
prohibere, and misericordia diluere, and justitia punire. (...). But that
inevitable necessity which we have heard of, is, that they who make choice of
the better part, have allotted them their portions according to their deserts.
and semblably those that go on to do ill, have proportioned assignements
devised unto them. Nam si omnem malignitatem, and si tantam malitiem
excogitatam, DEUS, exactor innocentiae, odit, indubitate, quaecunque condidit,
non in exitum operum constat condidisse quae damnat, licet eadem opera, per ea
quae condidit, administrentur. Quando haec sit tota ratio damnationis, perversa
administratio conditionis a conditis, in the opinion of TERTULLIAN; and not any
previous, NECESSITATING TERT. de speetac. ca. z.
Decree. So that (...), GOD cannot be blamed nor accused, in the judgment of
CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS, because (...), GOD is no causer of what is CLEM, ALEX.
Strom. 5. pa. 261
evil: which the Heathens saw and taught, as he there at large discourses
out of them. And children have read it in the Poet,

(...) They accuse GOD, but the cause is in themselves. Their own
disposednesse to evil, no necessitating Decree, makes them so liable unto
just punishment. As if he had read it in the wise man, GOD ECCLES. 7. 31.
made man right, but he sought out many inventions. (...). We were made, says
NAZIANZENE, S. GREG. NAZ. Orat. 42. pa. 696.
that we might be well and happy; and such we were, being made, estated in
Paradise, of Felicity there to enjoy pleasure in abundance: we forfeited our
seizure, upon our own Transgression. Home, and pithily as his style and phrase
is, concise and sententious, not diffused. His fellow and faithful ACHATES, in
course of life and studies, Great S. BASIL, has a Sermon to the purpose, That
GOD is not Author, or Cause S. BASIL. Hom. Quod DEus non est Author malorum.
of evil; neither poenae nor culpae, as they speak. That malum poenae is from
culpa merely originally; that culpae malum is of man himself, (...). not out
of any positive act of GOD upon him; which he instanceth in PHARAOH, whom GOD,
says he, found so, did not fashion or make so: and having in long suffering
forborne him long, ne sic quidem morti illum tradidit, donec ipsemet se
praecipitem dedit. And though we read (says he) in the Apostle of Vessels of
wrath, fitted and disposed unto Perdition, (...). Let us not so conceive it, as
if PHARAOH had been made an evil vessel: for in so saying, or opining, we
transfer the fault in Him, from Him, to HIM that made him. But reading in the
Text of the Apostle, Vessels, conceive it so, and believe it, that All we, and
every one of us, were, and was made, (...), for and to some profitable and
behoofefull use. S. PAUL says, that vessels of dishonor, if they be purged,
may become vessels of 2. TIM. 2. 20, 21.
honor. which were impossible, if GOD had made them so, and inevitably decreed
them to continue so for ever. Therefore S. BASIL might well bid us take heed
of that sense. And because ADAM was the root of all, and ADAM'S case an
exemplar of all mankind, concerning ADAM he writes thus: Erat prius ADAM in
sublimi constitutus, non loco quidem sed arbitrio, cum statim anima imbutus in
Coelum laetus suspexit, and majorem in modum ob illa visa gavisus, amore
ardenti complecteretur cum, cujus munere tanto frueretur beneficio, and vita
donandus esset immortali; ubi vocis divinae et commercij fruitus societate cum
Angelis ex aequo and Archangelis, aeternum regnaret. Qui luxurians veluti prae
satietate, corporea praetulit intellectualibus, atque ita excidit paradiso, and
depulsus est spe illa immortalitatis. And then concludes: (...). He became
evil, NOT NECESSITATED ANY WAY, but through his own misadvisednesse. (...).
Thus he fell to transgress through his wicked owne-will; and because of
transgression, was liable unto death. Nor was there any absolute decree passed
upon JUDAS to make him a Traitor, (...). Of his own proper motion he
undertook the Treason, says CHRYSOSTOM, to let us know, that of his own
accord and mind thereto S. CHRYSOSTOM. tom. 5. pa. 551.
disposed, he ran headlong upon that audacious transgression, no way moved or
caused, but only that a wicked heart within Him issued out that Treason, into
which he thrust himself. Unless from damned Heretics or stoicall
Philosophers, I never yet read in Antiquity of any prime, previous determining
Decree, by which men were IRRESPECTIVELY denied grace, excluded from glory, or
enforced to salvation; as they must be, that cannot perish if they would, nor
can be saved though most they desire. DEUS quippe, apud quem non est iniquitas,
and cujus universae viae misericordia and veritas; omnium hominum bonus
Conditor, justus est ordinator. Neminem indebite damnans, neminem debite
liberans. Nostra plectens, cum punit noxios; sua tribuens, cum facit justos.
Nam nec damnati justa quer monia, nec justificati verax est arrogantia: si vel
ille dicat, non meruisse se poenam, vel iste asserat, meruisse se gratiam:
says PROSPER and what S. AUGUSTINE taught in this point, the PROSP. de vocat.
Gent. l. 2.
world knows.

But it mattereth not now (as it should seem by these Promoters) what he or his
compeers taught; nor much what the Church of England tendreth: we must be
confined unto Forrayne opinions of some late Writers, and tied to the
Conclusions of Dort. I derogate nothing from that Synod, nor any particular
man in that Synod. For those Divines that were there of our Church, the
principal of them sometime was my worthy friend and acquaintance; since is my
Reverend and much reverenced Diocesan: the major part of them were my ancient
acquaintance likewise, and one of them brought up with me of a child so that
personal respects rather seem to affie me unto that Synod. And indeed I do
reverence the Conveners for their places, worth, and learning; but I have
nothing at all to do with their Conclusions, farther than they do consent and
agree to and with the Conclusions and Determinations of that Synod of London,
which established the Doctrine of our Church, to which I am bound, and have
subscribed. If those Conclusions go along with these, I embrace them
willingly, will stand unto them, and as I can propugne them. If they be Contra,
I will none of them: if Praeter, I may choose to receive them. For I am not
bound unto them: no Law directs me: the Church does not compel me. The
Synod was Forinsecus, and but partial. I see no reason why any of those worthy
Divines of our Church there present, should take any offense at my dissenting,
who had no authority, that I know of to conclude me; more than I do at them for
differing from me in their judgments. Quisque abundet in sensu suo. For I am
not yet acquainted with any obligatory or compulsory act for or to the
contrary, whereby the Church in general, or any man in particular, is bound or
tied to receive, abbet, maintain or believe all, or any of the Articles
concluded on in that Synod, farther than they agree with the AUTHORIZED
Doctrine of the Church of England, whose Discipline in that and in other Harm.
Synod. Belg. cap. 13. can. 8.
DUTCH Synods, is held unlawful. What Ends men had in that Synod, I know not,
nor am curious to enquire: how things were carried, I as little understand or
care. Whether any or all subscribed absolutely or with protestation, I cannot
tell. Let them look unto it, and answer for it, whom it does concern. This I
am sure; JOHN DEODATE, Minister and Professor in the Church of Geneva, and
employed unto that Synod of Dort from his Country, being lately with me at
Eaton, professed there unto me his own opinion in some points contrary to the
conclusions of Dort; as also the dissension of their Church at Geneva, from the
PRIVATE opinions (as he called them) of CALVIN and BEZA. And I am as sure, that
the Church of England never so concluded nor determined it in her Doctrime. I
am sure it has been opposed in the Church of England; otherwise taught and
professed in the Schools when I was an Auditor there. It has been prohibited
to be enjoined, and tendered, or maintained as the Authentical Doctrine of our
Church, by supreme Authority, with sharp reproof unto those that went about to
have it tendered, then, when those Conclusions or Assertions of Lambeth, as they
are called in the Conference at Hampton Court, were upon sending down to the
Universitie of Cambridge; likely enough to have been there applauded by some,
through the opinion of the great worth and learning that they had of the then
Professor, a thorough man every way upon YOUR Side, and an earnest Promoter of
the novell opinions against other learned Divines, part dead, and yet part
alive. Since which time, at the Conference of Hampton Court before HIS MAJESTY
by Doctor BANCROFT, the then Lord Bishop of London, it was styled, against the
Articles of Lambeth, then urged by the Puritans, a Desperate doctrine (as I
take it to be) without reproof or taxation of any. And can we conceive, this
should have been acted, spoken or tolerated, against a Doctrine approved by the
Church of England? Besides, in all probability, the public Doctrine of the
Church of England, is not very likely to have been, or to be upon the Party of
a Faction that has so long had a Schism on foot against it, to bring in
Genevanisme into Church and State, wholly, totally, were it possible; at least
so partially, that sensim sine sensu it might creep upon us: not as once, (...)
by opposing the DISCIPLINE ex adverso; but by complying with That, formerly
oppugned cum infortunio, to wind in with the DOCTRINE point per point: that
men, being so seasoned and infected with the ONE, may at length more readily,
willingly, and sooner incline unto the OTHER. It being so in the nature of man,
that opinion settled for the excellent worth, temper, desert and convenience of
any one invention or proposal of some one man, men may be disposed unto him in
any or all other things, though of another nature. Considering then your Side,
your Comportments, your Ends, it is not in reason probable, that you should
have the Doctrine of the Church on YOUR Side against Mr. MOUNTAGU; your
affection to the Church, setting reason of profit and interest aside, being
such as it is well known to be. Say I it is not probable? I say it is directly
otherwise. For the Church holds and teaches punctually, and that in the
Opinion, and with the dislike of the Learned of Your Side, that Faith, true,
justifying Faith, once had, may be lost, and recovered again: that a man
endued with GOD'S holy Spirit, and enlightened with the Heavenly light, may LOSE
that HOLY SPIRIT, have that Light put out, become like unto SAUL and JUDAS; may
be brought into so vile a condition, that he shall be thought meet for no
other purpose, than to be condemned into Hell. Now, to your own understanding,
my good Brethren, can the Church of England be thought to patronize YOUR
Predestination; and so far to cross and thwart YOUR Perseverance? It is your
own; GOD has appointed them to Grace and Glory; GOD according to purpose has
called and justified them: therefore it is certain, that they must and shall be
saved infallibly. But if the Once justified by a lively Faith, may, in the
opinion of our Church, lose that justification, they are not saved by an
absolute necessity, IRRESPECTIVE, without relation unto their Repentance. For
whatsoever thing may be otherwise than it is, is not necessarily to continue
one way, and ever the same. DAVID and PETER, falling as they did, unless they
had repented, as also they did, should have perished eternally; which, because
they repented, they did not. Certissime liberantur, qui liberantur. No man
takes CHRIST'S sheep out of his hand; none of GOD'S Elect do perish for ever.
which although it be true, it is so true, upon supposition of the means,
Faith, Repentance, and final Persevering in obedience: without which they are
none of GOD'S Elect, nor belonging to CHRIST; these being the appointed
isntrumental causes of all their salvation. as the proper immediate cause of
the wicked's destruction, is their impenitencie, infidelity, and disobeying
GOD: which the very Synod of Dort denies not, that define, the wrath of GOD to
remain on them that Believe not: That life eternal is for them that Believe:
which calls them Praeteritos, or non Electos, that perish a Title that cannot
accrue unto those, that, as the Doctrine of YOUR Divines was at least, were
made by GOD to perish everlastingly. Quod ante Gehennam mali pereunt, non est
DIVINI operis, sed HUMANI. Quod autem in Gehenna perituri sunt, hoc facit DEI
aequitas, cui placere nulla potest Peccantis impunitas. with FULGENTIUS so I
conclude.

CHAP. VIII.
Touching Free Will, the III. point of Arminianisme.

INFORMERS.
HE calls the Question of Freewil betwixt us and the Papists, in this point, a
Question of obscurity.

MOUNTAGU.
I CALL it so indeed: and in my poor understanding and small capacity, I ever
took it to be a Question, at least as it is entangled, of perplexed obscurity.
You, my good Brethren, as it seems, esteem it not so;

-- Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan. You can easily foord over all
the depths thereof, and clearly comprehend all the darkest mirksomnesse therein.
Admiror, stupeo: why are you enraged against me, if I cannot attain the
measure of your transcendentnesse, but confess my disability and imperfection?
But clear or obscure; light or darkness in the point of Free Will, in my
Opinion, what is it to Arminianisme in your information? Was ARMINIUS also in
the same opinion, that the Question of Free Will was obscure? Surely so; and
yet what meaned those dangers you talk of, for opposition? seeing men are not
peremptory, but upon resolution; and resolution grows not but upon
persuasion: which is ever upon evidence to the understanding. If not so; then
wherein does N. MOUNTAGU Arminianise? But esto, as you will, every way. What
Error is in it? at least, what danger consequent unto Error? I should think it
a preservative against danger rather; inasmuch as the difficulty, and obscurity
pretended, will, in all probability, keep men off from meddling in it above
their Model: and so, from any consequent trouble or danger, if any such can
be, about it. I have not heard ARMINIUS taxed for any such assertion. which if
he had held, he had been in the right. The Question of Freewill, so canvassed
and discoursed of up and down, is indeed a point, and so ever has been held,
of very great obscurity; fitting rather Schools, than popular ears or
auditories If it be not an obscure Question, what then mean those many and
manifold intricated and distracted divisions amongst men touching Freewill? the
nature, state, condition of it since ADAM'S fall? the power, efficacy, and
extent thereof in natural, moral, civil, divine, indifferent, good, bad,
determined, indetermined acts? the concurrence and cooperation thereof with
grace? the constitution and connection thereof with necessity, prescience,
providence, predestination? the decrees, purposes, and will of GOD? Protestants
and Papists together by the ears? Papists at odds amongst themselves? and
Protestants with Protestants upon no better terms? To my capacity, that is
obscure, which is so much entangled with contradictory disputations upon all
hands, and so much perplexed with oppositions. BELLARMINE, a man, no
disparagement to your worth, of as strong a brain, and piercing apprehension
as either of you, M. WARD and M. YATES, or any new upstart Master in Israel of
the pack; confesses, that the Concurrence of Grace and Free Will is Res omnino
difficilis, and fortasse in hac vita incomprehensibilis. which saying of his,
our Bishop MORTON (I hope nor Papist nor Arminian) disliketh not: and
remembers Appeal, lib. 2. ca. 1.. 11.
withal out of BENIUS this, De modo quo liberum arbitrium vel movetur vel
movet ad exercitium boni, clamant alij, rem non posse in hac vita percipi, sed
omnem ingenij humani captum superare. OCHAM, and SA, and CAIETANUS, and ALII.
This is strange Arminianisme, is it not?

CHAP. IX.
Controversies unnecessarily multiplied: the AUTHOR no Favourer of them.
Questions of obscurity and speculation not fit for Pulpits and popular ears.
Freewill made no such controversy among moderate men, either of the
Pontifician or Protestant side, as people are borne in hand withal.

INFORMERS.
BUt M. MOUNTAGU says, It might better have been omitted, and overpassed in
silence: especially the differences hanging as they do upon such niceties, and
the controverted particulars being of no great moment upon due examination.
CHAP. XVI. page CVII.

MOUNTAGU.
I Must and do confess, I am of that mind, and think so still; that the idle
fellow the Gagger had done much better, had merited more at GOD and men's hands,
to speak in his own language, and deserved better of the Church, and have
done better service to GOD Almighty: as also might the major part by much of
his Side, if they would be more sparing in multiplying controversies and
disputes; and so in disquieting the peace of the Church in points of that
nature, which do not so concern the state of man's soul, or his walking in
the ways of GOD'S commandment; or knowing of Him, the only true GOD, and
whom he has sent, JESUS CHRIST. Now was ARMINIUS also of that opinion? If he
were not, how am I or can I be an ARMINIAN for this? If he were of this
opinion, then has he been deeply wronged by you and others, that make him an
Incendiary, a Bontifeu, a Flabellum of faction and sedition, so much
undeservedly, in both Church and State; that charge him so deeply as you have
done with troubling the Netherlands, and endangering that State, by moving
Disputes about Prescience, Perseverance, Predestination, universal Grace,
Free Will, and loss of Faith. And surely M. MOUNTAGU deserved a more moderate
and less empassioned censure, than to be informed against for moving of
sedition; which touches deep, and will bear (I trow) an ACTION of the Case:
who has evermore detested that humor of Innovators, that take the disquieting
of things established, a sufficient hire to set them on work; who for fear of
offending that way, concealed both his own opinion often, and sometime the
doctrine of the Church, which happily he should not have done. Is he therefore
seditious, because he refused to dispute, discourse or talk de omni Ente? to
contest for every thing, ut pro aris and focis? to make a Case of faith or
conscience, of every speculation? or because he professes his dislike of
multiplying controversies in those kinds, which increase rather discord and
troubles in Church and in State, than serve to edification? It is strange, that
for wishing, advising, and in his own particular using and ensuing that
moderation, thereby not to engarboile the Church, and disturb the course of
piety, he should so, by you and yours, be blamed, accused, and traduced for a
PAPIST and an ARMINIAN; calumniated, almost in every Ordinary, by your means,
for a dangerous driver at Popery and Sedition; being with one breath, in the
selfsame points, blamed for being so temperate, for saying no more; for not
mooving, favoring, fomenting unnecessary quarrels and disunions, in questions
of speculation and of obscurity; advising rather to reserve them for, and
refer them to the Schools (though your honest simplicity, or PURE charity,
thought it fit to conceal this his moderate wish or advice), rather than to
thunder and lighten in your Pulpits with them, (...), by buzzing them into
popular ears and capacities, incapacious of them, unable to comprehend them. O
vertiginem! may I not well say? that men should have such whirle-gigs in their
brains, and be so far at variance with their own wits, as to imply
contradiction in adjecto? to charge M. MOUNTAGU, because he had delivered such
and such errors in Doctrine; and yet to accuse him because he misliketh the
delivering of such errors. For in such and so great variety of errors or
opinions touching free will, it may be, that not one of them all is true; but
that more than one of them should be true, it cannot be, as CICERO spoke in
another case. If, OF the CICERO de Not. Deor. 1.
defenders of Free Will, some believed not the necessity of grace; which
doctrine the JESUITS condemn of PELAGIANISME: some denied, that GOD can
absolutely determine the will; and are confuted by the most part: some
disliked, that GOD should be said by his exciting grace to work physically in
man; and are gaine-said by BENIUS, as therein Adversaries unto Fathers and
Councels: some hold, that GOD does not morally determine the will; and are
excepted against by SUAREZ: some gave to man's will, in the Act of conversion,
an equality with, yea a preeminence before grace; and are therefore
contradicted by others, as repugnant unto Scriptures and to Fathers: and
finally, some labored to satisfy all doubts concerning the concurrence of
grace and will, and yet confess they cannot assoile them; as is confessed in
these many words by the learned Bishop of Lichfield, no Papist, APPEAL, page
214.
I think, nor yet Arminian: Then (I trust) you will excuse me for concluding,
The point of FREE WILL is a question of great obscurity. And then, might not
that Gagger have spared his pains, and well passed over this point in silence?
But if your fingers did so itch to be taxing Mr. MOUNTAGU, you ought not in
common honesty to have concealed his annexed quousque and limitation of the
point. For he did not say, simply and absolutely, to be silenced; but only so
far, as from propalating of it in popular Passages and Auditories, which are
therefore unfit, thereof incapable; not apprehensive of those many niceties and
quiddities, that are so many, and almost inextricable in it: to be silenced in
Pulpits and in popular discourses; to be discussed in Schools, which peculiarly
are disposed for such purposes, and intricated questions of doubts.

But happily these things came in upon the Bye, to make up the muster, and fill
up the accusation of ARMINIANISME, ut quae non prosunt singula, multa juvent.
That which most offends, and is inexpiable, follows in the Rere; The
controverted particulars are of no such great moment, upon due examination. And
this is ARMINIANISME in the highest degree: because, forsooth, the contrary
has often passed the hedge of your teeth; you have preached the contrary from
your Pulpits, and often proclaimed in your Lectures and Sermons, that in the
point of Free Will the Church of Rome absolutely and wholly Pelagianizeth, are
enemies professed unto the Grace of CHRIST, advancing natural Indowments
above, and preferring them before Grace: that they raze the foundation, make
CHRIST none, or a partial Mediator; Man beholding to none, but to himself,
for his salvation; and that we must for ever, upon pain of Damnation (strange
Bugbeares and Terriculamenta) dissent from them, in this as in all things else,
and have no PEACE at all with them. Indeed I wrote, The controverted
particulars are of no great moment. I meant and mean, betwixt that Church and
ours, for any materiality in this point, betwixt moderate and temperate men on
either side: such as CASSANDER for the Church of Rome; ANDREAS FRICIUS, yea and
PHILIP MELANTHON for the Protestants. For it is memorable, but true, which
ANDREAS VEGA has, one of the best flowers in the garden of TRENT, Studere
debemus omnes Concordiae, and Lib. 2. cap. 18.
quacunque possimus via, omni vi and open nostra, veritati favere. And therefore
in this point he proposes a course, Si fateamur nos non habere sufficientem
libertatem ad opera spiritalia, and spectantia ad religionem, nisi Deus
adjuvet: and eos interpretemur hac ratione dixisse eos, nos non habere
libertatem respectu talium operum, quia non habemus libertatem sine gratia Dei
ad illam sufficientem: inventa erit prorsus ratio, qua illi nobiscum, and nos
cum illis in hoc Articulo conciliemur.

The which he the rather intended, because then the difference was not great:
for so he adds; Et quidem ita ego eos video per DEI gratiam a prioribus
erroribus resipuisse, ut inter nos and illos nullam, de hoc Articulo, jam esse
putem differentiam. and so goes on to exemplification, out of MELANTHON'S
Apology for the Ausperge Confession; and the Interim presented to CHARLES the
Emperor. So I thought then, and so I think now, and think I thought not then
amiss. Why I did think so; I gave my reasons by special reciting many
Concordants inter parts. For further satisfaction in that point, unto those
that are not transported with Faction, I will now enlarge, to make it appear I
spoke not then without reason, though I concealed them.

It is supposed by some, that the greatest difference betwixt the Pontificians
and us, consists in this, that they suppose the Will of man concurreth and
cooperateth with divine Grace, in the first very instant and point of
Conversion: we teach, that the Will does not cooperate in that first point
with Grace, but in progress of our Justification. So KICKERMAN in his System.
page CCLXIII. a better Logician than Divine, as once I heard him styled in the
Schools at Cambridge. For, that many Pontificians and we differ not in this
point, appears by the express Doctrine of many the best learned amongst
them, and most versed in this Controversy. Bishop MARTINEZ relates, that
ANDREAS VEGA, as Disp. 1. pa. 1. number. 4.
great a Clerk as any came to TRENT, did yield, that Gratia excitans was
motio, quam DEUS applicabat ad bonum: that excitatur homo a solo authore DEO:
that fit in homine, activum concursum non praebente, sed illum tantummodo
recipiente. which, to your understanding, what maine difference does it
contain against Protestant doctrine? And it is true, VEGA discourses thus:
That GOD can, vel se solo, vel nostrae animae potentijs, omnes actus causare,
quibus nos ad Lib. 6. cap. 8.
justificationem nostram excitat. He disclaimeth the opinion of CAIETAN and
CAMERACENSIS, concerning the ability of the Mind in such acts collaterally, as
not to be activated unless it also were active, and concludes thus:
Veruntamen pensatis omnibus, probabilius videtur, a DEO totaliter, vel per
seipsum, vel per Angelos suos, and semper sine nobis, produci vocationes,
illuminationes, inspirationes, seu bonos effectus, quibus DEUS nos per se
vocat, and excitat ad poenitentiam. and in the v. chap. ejusd. lib. thus he had
premeditated (whom STAPLETON follows (...)) Triplicia esse DEI opera circa
justificationem. Lib. 4 cap. 7. de Iustif.
Primi generis esse tempore illam Antecedentia, as post praedestinationem,
electionem, pulsare, stare ad ostium, admonere, inspirare. Quae sic DEI propria
sunt, ut NULLAM IN IIS PARTEM HABEAT LIBERTAS VOLUNTATIS NOSTRAE; non
CONSENSUM, non COOPERATIONEM: therefore in these we are merely PASSIVE. A
second sort are, Productiones qualitatum Naturam excedentium, as Faith, Hope,
Charity, etc. Quia ad producendum tam praecellentes qualitates Natura nostra
pertingere non potest, habet se homo respectu earum PASSIVE; sicut aer respectu
luminis, cum illustratur. Thirdly, sunt alia quaeda^ medij generis, as Credere,
DEUM diligere, poenitere, eidem obedire. Quae DEUS in Nobis NON exercet NISI
NOBIS CONSENTIENTIBUS. unto which purpose is applied that of S. PAUL, 1. Cor.
XV. Gratia DEI mecum. and that of S. AUGUSTINE; generally COOPERANDO S. AUG, de
great. and libero arbitrio, cap. 17.
perficit, quod OPERANDO incepit. which they learned of that grand Dictator of
their Schools, A QUINAS, in 1. 2ae. q. 3 in Corp. Artic. Gratia operante, men's
nostra est mota, non movens. DEUS autem SOLUS MOVENS. To whom accords SUAREZ,
de Praed, lib. 1. cap. 8. Auxilia praevenientia incipiunt a DEO, and quantum ad
tactum cordis, fiunt in nobis ^INE NOBIS; and MOLINA himself, cyted by
LESSIUS, Omnino dicendum, concursum DEI particularem gratiamve praevenientem,
semper vel tempore; vel Natura antecedere influxum liberi arbitrij, ad actiones
supernaturales; tanquam CAUSSA and PRINCIPIUM EFFICIENS in liberum arbitrium
immissum. Quo mediante, DEUS ulterius, una cum libero influxu ejusdem arbitrij,
in actiones supernaturales influit. So also as I have been by a most learned
friend admonished, CABRERA in 3. THO. qu. 26. Disp. 6. art. 4. dub. 3. number. 17.
CUMEI, var. disp. part. 3. page 69. MARTINEZ. in 1. 2ae. qu. 10. ar. 4. dub. 1.
and pa. 693. LORINUS in Psalm. 22. ver. 6. NAZARIUS in 1. part. THO. q. 23. art.
3. controv. 2. pa. 713. CLINGIUS in locis, p. 152. And so CAIETAN,
FERRARIENSIS, ALVARES, SALAS, CURIEL, VIGUERIUS, LEDESM. MONTESINUS, and OTHERS.

Now let us also hear the PROTESTANTS speak. WHITAKER, de peccato orig. page
149. Homo gratiam Dei LIBERE accipit. CHEMNIT. Loc. com. to. 1. pa. 508.
Voluntas mota and adjuta a Spiritu sancto, non recipit impressionem sicut
lapis, sed incipit VELLE and COOPERARI. MOLLERUS in Psalm. 65. Voluntas non
habet se ut TRUNCUS, sed mota a Spiritu sancto ACCEDIT and SEQUITUR vocantem
DEUM, etc. Quare, execrandae sunt illae voces FLACCII (and are they not YOURS
also?), Homo habet se in conversione REPUGNATIVE, HOSTILITER, ADVERSATIVE,
PERKINS, reform. Cath, in Freewill: In the FIRST conversion of a sinner, MAN'S
FREE WILL CONCURRETH with GOD'S grace, as a FELLOW or COWORKER in some sort.
Man's will is NOT PASSIVE in all and every respect, but has an ACTION in the
FIRST conversion and change of the soul, SNEGANUS and HEMINGIUS are confessed
by WILLET, to be of this mind; and if my Notes fail me not, for I have not
now the Book by me, diverse other Protestants in Mr. FOX, page 1533. In the
latter Helvet. Confession: In regeneratione intellectus illuminatur per
Spiritum sanctum, ut and mysteria and voluntatem DEI intelligat. Et voluntas
ipsa non tantum mutatur per Spiritum, sed instruitur facultatibus, ut SPONTE
velit and possit Bonum. Nisi hoc dederimus, negabimus CHRISTIANAM LIBERTATEM,
and inducemus SERVITUTEM. and in the Confession of Saxony, Voluntas statim
accepto Spiritu NON EST IAM OCIOSA. Now if the Council of TRENT intends to
say no more, where is that vast difference imagined inter parts, those of the
Romish and Protestant Confessions? These clamorous Promoters do not read so
much, it seems, as their own ordinary Protestant Writers: and therefore in
their Sermons, Lectures and Pulpits, they brawle at the shadow of their own
fancies, as dogs hark at the Moon; and in fighting the Lords battles, as they
would seem, and their silly Auditors conceive, they fight with Shaw-fowles of
their own setting up; abusing the simple credulity of the unlearned; making
themselves ridiculous to the Papists; hardening them rather in their
superstition, when they hear them talk so confidently, and traduce so
virulently, as their manner is, and yet mistake so ignorantly that which they
do not understand. The Council of TRENT resolves thus: Si quis dixerit
liberum hominis arbitrium, a DEO motum and excitatum, NIHIL COOPERARI,
assentiendo DEO excitanti atque vocanti, neque POSSE DISSENTIRE si velit; sed
veluti INANIME instrumentum NIHIL OMNINO agere, mereque PASSIVE se habere,
Anathema sit. Well, and what of this? Do not WHITAKER, CHEMNITIUS, MOLLERUS,
PERKINS, other Protestant Divines and Churches teach the very same concerning
this first branch? and does not MOLLERUS anathematise ILLYRICUS for holding so?
The Council adds, A man may RESIST the grace of God. Admit: then, first, man
has Free Will against GOD: and what said OUR SAVIOR concerning Jerusalem? HOW
often would I, and THOU WOULD NOT! But S. STEPHEN in terminis has the very
word, Acts VII. LI. (...), YOU RESIST, nay FALL CROSS with the holy Ghost, not
suffering him to work the work of grace in you. If the Council meant it de
gratia excitante, praveniente, operante, I think no man will deny it: if de
gratia adjuvante, subsequente, cooperante, there is, without question, in the
natural will of a regenerate man, so much of ADAM remaining, and carnal
concupiscence, as may make him RESIST and REBEL against the Law of the Spirit.
And if a man justified may FALL AWAY FROM GRACE, which is the doctrine of the
Church of England, then without question, your selves being Judges, he may
RESIST the grace of GOD offered.

Hitherto M. MOUNTAGU can see no such difference inter parts. If you with your
new learning (for old you have little or none) can teach me more than yet I
know, I will yield, and thank you for such instructions. But it may be
objected, that Pontificians, hold, when the will of man is once informed,
moved, incited, and helped by divine grace, that then it concurreth, it is
active, has an efficiencie in the work of godliness by the own proper
NATURAL force and condition. I answer; The moderate and discreet Pontificians
(for there are Factious and Furious amongst them as well as amongst you, that
will exceed) say no more than S. AUGUSTINE put into their mouths: Vult DEUS
omnes homines salvos fieri, and in agnitionem veritatis venire; non tamen sic,
ut ijs adimat liberum arbitrium. And therefore, vocante DEO, surgit S. AUG. de
Sp. and Lit. tom. 3. cap. 33.
de libero arbitrio, quod NATURALITER cum crearetur accepit. VOLUNTATEM LIBERAM
dedisti mihi: sed SINE TE NIHIL EST conatus ejus. IDEM in Ps. XXVI. therefore,
DEO adjuvante, conatur, ambulat. And FULGENTIUS de Incarnat. ca. XXIII. Potest
home, DEO donante, NATURALITER in DEUM credere. who intend this, That the WILL
of man; being first informed, enlightened, healed by grace, and then assisted
continually by the same concurring grace, is Pedissequa, an handmaid and a
subordinate AGENT with and under grace; and that belief, repentance, and the
like, are TRUE and REAL operations of MAN'S understanding and will; and
proceed, as actions NATURAL, out of the powers of the reasonable soul,
elevated and ACTUATED to that height and actuality by GOD'S grace. Illud si qui
dicant, sufficere homini liberum arbitrium ad Dominica praecepta implenda,
etiamsi DEI gratia, and Spiritus sancti dono, ad opera bona NON ADIUVETUR,
omnino ANATHEMATIZANDUM est, and omnibus execrationibus detestandum. Qui enim
hoc asserunt, a gratia DEI penitus alieni sunt: qui ignorantes DEI justitiam,
sicut de Iudaeis dicit APOSTOLUS, and ROMANS 13. 10.
suam volentes constituere, justitiae DEI non sunt subjecti. Plenitudo quippe
legis non est nisi charitas. Et utique charitas DEI diffusa est in cordibus
nostris; NON PER NOS IPSOS, nec VIRIBUS PROPRIAE VOLUNTATIS, sed per SPIRITUM
SANCTUM qui datus est nobis. VALET itaque LIBERUM ARBITRIUM ad opera bona, SI
DIVINITUS ADIUVETUR: quod fit humiliter patendo and faciendo. Thus S.
AUGUSTINE, and so discreet and S. AUG. tom. 2. epist. 89.
moderate Pontificians. Sine DEI gratia NULLA possunt esse liberi arbitrij bona
merita, says the Controversor. But we need a supply continually of Divine
Operation, Protection, Direction, and new Inspiration, to go on with
Free Will, which is Comes, non Dux, Pedissequa, non Praevia, as S. AUSTEN
speaks, Epist. 106. If this were not so, then faith and repentance were not
the actions of man; neither could man be said to believe or repent, but the
holy Spirit that infuseth grace. Now, Id agit gratia, ut sanata natura, quod
vitiata non potest, POSSIT per cum qui venit quaerere and salvare id quod
perierat, S. AUGUST. Retract. 1. cap. XIII. We may, says RUARD TAPPER,
consider in every R. TAPPERUS, art. 7. de lib. arb.
virtuous action of man two things: the quality of goodness, and the work it
self. The quality of goodness is WHOLLY from grace: the work it self is
wrought by the FREE WILL of man, ASSISTED by grace. Opera pietatis, Credere,
poenitere. etc. fiunt per NATURALEM virtutem liberi arbitrij, in quantum LIBERE
fiunt, and OPERA sunt: a gratia vero, ut PIETATIS opera sunt. Tamen UT SIC, a
libero arbitrio gratia informato, EFFECTIVE fiunt, non autem a SOLA gratia. He
that says thus, does not say nor think, that man can by any NATURAL power
EXCITE and prepare himself to grace, or apply himself unto GOD, to the motions
of his Spirit; as if GOD'S concurse needed not, or that man by the power of his
own will, without any special help of grace, could sorrow for sin; or by
his PURE NATURALS had power to love GOD above all, or to do works holy and
acceptable unto GOD, as some have prodigiously thought and written: nay, not
that the grace of GOD, and power of WILL, are ex aequo joint copartners to go
passibus equis; much less, that man's will can outstrip the grace of GOD. This
is denied, and cannot be inferred upon the activenesse intended, or actions
insisted on, in and of our wills prevented and enabled by grace: all that is
said, is, COOPERAMUR, -- SEQUIMURQUE PATREM, NON PASSIBUS AEQUIS; as that
child did his father in the Poet.

This is, I conceive it, the doctrine of the Protestant Schools. Vbi interim
DUO observanda esse docemus, say the Helvetians in their Confession: PRIMUM,
regeneratos in boni electione and operatione, non tantum agere PASSIVE, sed
ACTIVE. Aguntur enim a DEO, ut AGANT IPSI quod agunt. Recte enim AUGUSTINUS
adducit illud, quod DEUS dicitur noster ADIUTOR: nequit autem ADIUVARI, nisi
is, qui IPSE ALIQUID AGIT. S. PAUL, speaking of Believers, says, You have
obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine whereunto you were received, ROMANS
VI. XVII. And SOLOMON says, PRO. IV. XXIII. Keep thine heart with all
diligence: for out of it are the issues of life. OUR SAVIOR says, A good tree
brings forth good fruit. The WILL of man is a true natural faculty, given
to man in his creation. In the state of corruption, this natural faculty is a
true efficient cause of sin, and this natural faculty is punished for sin.
In the state of justification, the same natural faculty is truly and really
endued with grace, and brings forth the works of righteousness, and shall be
rewarded with glory and immortality. In both these states the WILL is a TRUE
Efficient; but differently: a PRINCIPAL Efficient in the first state; a
SUBORDINATE Efficient in the second, because the holy Ghost activateth and
enableth it. For, By the grace of GOD we are that we are: and that grace is
not in vain in us, in the Doctrine of the Church of England, ARTIC. X. working
with us when we have that good will. GOD'S preeminence in the work of our
salvation, his chief hand in the business, his GRACE preventing, inspiring,
enlightening, exciting, upholding, sustaining and concurring, does not take away
man's FREE WILL in cases where Will has any interest at all. The STOICS,
amongst others, held that Paradox of old, DEUM ire per omnes -- Terras
tractusque maris, coelumque profundum. they meant it substantially, and so
impiously. CHRISTIANS do hold and believe it too, but disposingly, etc. in his
providence, according to that Axiom of the wise, Perting it a fine, ad finem
fortiter, disponens omnia suaviter; according to the several natures and
exigences of things, to which he gave being and power to work so: not
DESPOILING them of their OWN by CONCURRING with them, nor by any access
ANNIHILATING his former grants or indowments conferred on them.

Thus having, with as great diligence as I could, examined this question inter
parts of FREE WILL, so far as was coincident unto my purpose; I do
ingenuously confess, that I cannot find any such MATERIAL difference between
the Pontificians, at least of better temper, and OUR Church. But if the
Informers can make the contrary appear, submittam fasceis, and turn over a
new leaf, even in this Article, opposing the Church of ROME as far as any of
the preciser Cut or zealous Disciples of THOMAS CARTWRIGHT'S School whosoever.
Then then, (...): I am a man reserved, abhorring to multiply controversies,
where is no cause.

CHAP. X.
The Council of Trent not wholly to be condemned. Man's Will not merely
passive, but active and free in the proper acts thereof. The memorable saying
of SCOTUS. The power of the Will in things divine.

INFORMERS.
IN the next page thrice he approves the Doctrine of the Council of Trent
touching Free Will.

MOUNTAGU.
WHolly, or in part? It would have been explaned by honest men. For say, I
beseech you, will not your own wisdoms, or charity, or common sense, or
understanding, or what you will call it, commend and approve some
Determinations of the Council of TRENT? Saepe etenim est olitor valde
opportuna loquutus. And why not they, learned men at least, resolve some thing
truly, where was no cause of Faction to be opposite? Secondly, whatsoever I
approve in that Council, is not thrice approved, as you do enlarge in your
suggestions; but twice at most nor yet twice, but by repeating the same thing,
twice remembered occasionally. That which is so approved, is this, Sess. VI.
cap. V. Si quis LIBERUM hominis ARBITRIUM post ADAE lapsum amissum and
extinctum esse dixerit, aut rem esse de SOLO TITULO, imo TITULUM SINE RE,
FIGMENTUM denique A SATANA INVECTUM in Ecclesiam, Anathema sit. And so say I:
and so I hope, if your wits be your own, will you say. Man ever since the Fall
of ADAM, is not senseless, a stock, a stone; merely PASSIVE in all things,
active and AGENT voluntarily in nothing. That which he does, at least
something that he does, he does it willingly and freely, QUUM homini non sit
per peccatum adempta neque intelligendi neque volendi facult as, sed duntaxat
RECTE intelligendi and volendi facult as, says THEOD. BEZA, opusc. tom. 2.
page 666. part. 1. quaest.
BEZA: at least he does it according to his WILL, not compellable in the
proper acts thereof; To will, though drawn to perform many acts in course of
life, as willingly it could wish them to be otherwise. Those in that Council
were Men, as well as Pontificians: learned men they were, at least the major
part, and spoke as well like men, as for a factious party in the Church. In
that place they speak of Free Will in enlarged terms, and not in reference
unto actions of grace, of piety, of repentance, or regeneration, and godliness
toward GOD. Now it is, I take it, a ruled case with all reasonable men, that in
ADAM, and through his Fall, non amisimus naturam, sed gratiam. Indowments of
grace above nature, or additaments unto nature, we lost in ADAM. Nature and
natural indowments were impaired, and not extinct and abolished in his Fall.
Nec qui a Spiritu DEI igitur, ideo se putet LIBERUM NON HABERE ARBITRIUM; quod
ne tunc quidem perdidit, says PROSPER, quando Diabolo voluntate sua PROSP. de
(...) Gent. 1. 3.
se dedit, a quo IUDICIUM VOLUNTATIS DEPRAVATUM EST, NON ABLATUM. Quod ergo NON
INTERFECTUM EST per vulnerantem, NON TOLLITUR per medentem: vulnus sanatur, non
natura removetur. In which sense and regard, I inferred then and there a second
decision of that Council; This branch of the TRID. Council, is taken out of
the second ARAUS. Council. Can. XXV.
Liberum arbitrium non quidem EXTINCTUM esse, sed viribus ATTENUATUM. The which
I might have enlarged, and commented upon, by the XVI. Canon of the Synod of
Dort, in the IIII. Decision, de conversionis modo: where the Conveners will in
these words prove either themselves Arminians, or you Ignorantees or malicious
Calumniators; will they not? Sicuti vero per lapsum homo non desiit esse homo,
intellectu and voluntate praeditus: nec peccatum, quod universum genus humanum
pervasit, naturam generis humani sustulit, sed depravavit, and spiritualiter
occidit. It a etiam haec divina regenerationis gratia non agit in hominibus,
tanquam TRUNCIS and stipitibus, nec VOLUNTATEM EIUS QUE PROPRIETATES TOLLIT,
aut INVITAM VIOLENTER COGIT. No otherwise than so says M. MOUNTAGU,
peradventure not so much as so. but you say, He concludes this his Chapter
thus: Our Conclusion and yours is all one: we cannot, we do not deny
freedom of will in man: whosoever does so, is no CATHOLIC: I add, no nor
PROTESTANT. For I did not conceive, that any Protestant, till you professed
your selves so senseless, would have denied that Conclusion, There is
FREE WILL. We eat, we drink, we sleep, we wake, we walk, we rest, we run,
we talk, we hold our peace, we consent, assent, disagree; freely wittingly,
willingly, without any constraint, out of the natural power of our Free Will.
And yet further for your sakes I add. It were well done, and worth the while,
as SCOTUS said well, to cudgel him well and thriftily, that In 1. Sent. did.
38.
should deny FREE WILL, so long, until he did confess it to be in our power
to go on, to cease, or hold our hands. And if he should commence an action of
battery, to put in this Bar; It was not I that beat him, it was FATAL
NECESSITY; and I was thereby compelled to do it. I had not any FREE WILL to
resist: it was not in my power to do, or not to do otherwise.

But concerning Freewill, the power, possibility, and activity of the will in
the things of GOD, toward GOD, in the state of grace, I have set down my
Errors, as you call them, in two propositions, tendered unto me, and unto you
also, of the Church of England. First, that Man in state of natural corruption
cannot turn nor prepare himself unto GOD, by or through his own natural and
humane power and strength. Secondly, that Prevented by grace, and by grace
assisted, he puts to his hand, to procure augmentation of that grace; as
also, continuance unto the end in that grace. No man comes unto GOD, but he
is drawn: being drawn, he runs or walks as his assistance is, and his
own agility and disposition, unto the end. No man bears fruit in CHRIST
JESUS the Vine, unless that by the Husbandman he be engraffed. To engraffe,
is opus Hortulani ALONE. When as the branch is engraffed, that it may prosper
and bear fruit, the root must supply; the slip suck and retain sap supplied
from the root. This is enough: no more need be curiously insisted on or
disputed of. The Church of England does no way contradict this: it is the
precise doctrine of our Church, ARTIC. X. The condition of man after the Fall
of ADAM, it such, that he cannot turn nor prepare himself by his own
natural strength and good works, to faith and calling upon GOD. Wherefore we
have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable unto GOD, without the
grace of GOD by CHRIST preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working
with us when we have it. Man is here in this passage, by the Church, considered
two ways: as in Nature depraved; as in Nature again by Grace restored. In
Nature depraved, Freewill is totally denied, unto man, for any works of
righteousness, acceptable or pleasing unto GOD, before conversion; or for
works of actual concurrency in the very act of first converting: but not for
works of Nature or Morality; of which works only the Proposition was to be
understood. Si per morale opus virtutes intelligas Philosophicas non neganius
posse hominem, sine speciali gratia, multa De pec. orig. 2. 3.
fortiter, and temperanter, and just agere: says D. WHITAKER. And that saying
of DAMASCEN DAMASCEN, lib. 2. de fide orth. cap. 27.
is denied of no man that has his brains in his head; (...). Man being a
creature endued with reason, does rather lead nature, than is led by nature;
and upon appetite or desire, may shake off, if he please, and acquit himself of
that desire, or close in with it, and give consent unto it. In state of Grace
repayring and restoring Nature, Free Will is not denied man; but how? Not as in
or unto natural objects; hic mota movet. It works with us, we with it
together with Grace, when we have once that good will wrought in us. And
surely if we have it working at all, it is not titulus sine re: nor is it
inane nihil, as some, it seems, thought: which the Council of TRENT
condemns very justly. This is not my singular fancy; as your opinions
most-what are private imaginations of opiniative men, ignorant of others,
wedded to their own conceits. OPERATUR ille, COOPERAMUR nos: NON enim AUFERT,
sed ADIUVAT bone voluntatis arbitrium: S. AUG.
says S. AUGUSTINE, Quaest. XV. super Deuteron. And again, Quaest. L. In
spirit ualibus conflictibus sperandum est, et petendum est adjutorium DEI. Non
ut NOS NIHIL OPEREMUR; sed ut ADIUTI COOPEREMUR. And again, Retract. I. XXIII.
Vtrumque, Credere and velle, DEI est, and NOSTRUM. utrumque est DEI: DEI est,
quiae praeparat voluntatem: NOSTRUM est, quia non fit nisi volentibus nobis.
and Epist. CVII. Quomodo dicuntur negare liberum voluntatis arbitrium, qui
confitentur omnem hominem, quisquis credit in DEUM, non nisi SUA LIBERA
VOLUNTATE credere? And PROSPER de vocatione gentium: SED etiam voluntas hominis
PROSP. de voc. Gent. lib. 2. cap. 9.
subjungitur ei (Gratiae) atque CONIUNGITUR. Quae ad hoc praedictis est
excitatae praesidijs, ut divino in se cooperetur operi, and incipiat exercere
ad meritum, quod superno semine concepit ad studium: de sua habens mutabilitate
si deficit, de gratiae opitulatione si proficit. And FULGENTIUS de Incarnat.
cap. XX. Qua gratia humanum non aufertur, sed sanatur; non adimitur, sed
corrigitur; non removetur, sed illuminatur; non evacuatur, sed adjuvatur, atque
SERVATUR ARBITRIUM: ut in quo infirmitatem homo habuit, in eo habere incipiat
sanitatem; quo errabat, eodem in viam redeat; in quo caecus fuit, in eo
accipiat lumen; and ubi fuit iniquus, serviens immunditiae and iniquitati ad
iniquitatem, ibi gratia praeventus atque adjutus, serviat justitiae in
sanctificationem. To this purpose the words are so evident in the ARTICLE,
there can be no tergiversation or eluding of them. I could name you many that
at least do write so: I content my self with one, whom I dare say you will
not reject. The learned Bishop of Lichfield is the man I mean, in his Appeal,
page XIII. Yet have they also (he speaks it of the Centuriators of
MEYDENBURG) out of the clear and sound testimony of the same Father S.
GREGORY, drawn a doctrine of Orthodoxall Truth in the doctrine of FREE WILL;
holding, that a man's will, in respect of any spiritual good, is not free in
it self, until that it be freed by grace. Then it is free in his opinion. And
this opinion, he says, is an Orthodoxall Truth: and his opinions, in your
opinion, are neither Popish nor Arminian. How can the same opinion be Popery in
M. MOUNTAGU, who goes not any farther than that Bishop has gone? and he had
warrant from Antiquity. COOPERATORES sumus gratiae DEI operantis in nobis. Non
enim DORMIENTIBUS provenit regnum coelorum, says LEO, nee OTIO S. LEO, ser. 5.
in Epiph.
DESIDIAQUE TORPENTIBUS beatitudo aeternitatis ingeritur. who yet denies not,
that without GOD we can do nothing: it is GOD that works the will and the
deed. All our works thou have wrought in us; and the like. Quaeutique sine DEO
nulla est, nec proprietatem obtinet dignitatis (the righteousness he means
of a regenerate man) nisi Spiritu sui vegetetur Authoris. Dicente enim
Discipulis suis Domino, SINE ME NIHIL POTESTIS FACERE, dubium non est, hominem
bona agentem, a DEO habere and effectum operis, and initium voluntatis, LEO
ser. 8. Epiph. The freedom of will does not exclude out GOD'S prerogative
royal, nor circumscribe it: and GOD'S preeminence in the work of our
salvation, his chief hand in the business, his grace preventing and
concurring, does not take away man's Free Will, in cases wherein Will is
interessed. Causes may be many and manifold unto several acts and particular
ends. In this (...) and concatenation of causes, there is a progress ordinary
from the first to the last, and a reflection from the last unto the first.
(...). Second causes and subordinate are reduced unto the original, prime, and
beginning cause of all; and agunt in virtute prime. If in no respect else, yet
in this regard; It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of
GOD that gives the increase.

To conclude then; That man has FREE WILL, is not by us gainsaid, says that
worthy and learned Bishop of MEAD. Freedom of will, we know, does as
essentially belong unto man, as reason it self: and he that spoileth him of
that power, does in effect make him a very BEAST. Quis nostrum, says S.
AUGUSTINE against the Pelagians, dicit, quod primi hominis peccato perierit
arbitrium de humano genere? Libertas quidem perijt per peccatum: sed ILLA quae
fuit in Paradiso, habendi PLENAM cum immortalitate justitiam. To deny Freewill
at all, is wilful folly: but to give unto it that power and sway as many do,
is little less than Blasphemy. Truth is ever in the midst betwixt two
extremes; and so is it here, most wisely tempered and qualified with
moderation in the doctrine of the Church of England; according to which I
endeavor to square my belief and opinions.

CHAP. XI. The fourth and last point of ARMINIANISME touching the Synod of DORT.
The Synod of Dort not our Rule. Private opinions no Rule. The Informers
imputations nothing at all.

INFORMERS.
He expressly makes the Church of England to cast off the defense of sundry
points which the Synod of DORT maintained and determined.

MOUNTAGU.
IN ALL my writing, to my remembrance, I name that SYNOD but once only, and no
more: That at DORT, and another National Synod at GAPP in France; and that
respectively, and in gentle, nay honorable terms, (...), with the two last in
the Church of Rome; the one at FLORENCE, the other at TRENT, and pronounce, not
I hope in any disgrace unto the Synod of DORT, that we may as well tender unto
our Adversaries, the Protestant conclusions and decisions of those TWO Synods;
as they press us with the ANATHEMATISMES of Trent or Florence. Beside this one
time and occasion, I never name DORT. And for the particular points and
passages of my Book, I protest, that to my remembrance it came not so much as
within the compass of my thoughts, (...) For what had I to do with that
Synod, not once named by the Gagger? I undertook the defense of the public
doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND, of which I am; being not curious in aliena
republica, with which I had nothing to do. That fellow had, as the use and
custom of Papists is, schismatically dividing himself from us, cast upon the
Church, as of PUBLIC allowance, many and some absurd propositions of PRIVATE
Tenants; particular fancies of some idle conceits. I pleaded not guilty unto
the Indictment, and took off the CHURCH, falsely charged, from that issue,
wherein it may be some other had joined, against right and reason. You, or any
Puritan or Papist, make it plain, that any thing by me disclaimed for being
the PUBLIC, ESTABLISHED doctrine of our Church, is yet the doctrine of the
Church, and I am ready to recant. If the Synod of DORT has determined
otherwise, let their determinations stand for me: I quarrel them not; I meddle
not with them. Those that like the Decrees of that Synod, or are bound to
maintain the Decrees of that Synod, let them maintain them if they like
them: Non equidem invideo. I have no part nor portion in them. I am not tied to
uphold them, farther than they consent unto that which I am bound to maintain,
the doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND. And if it were true, which is most
false, wherewith I am charged by these honest men, yet I might answer (and what
if I do?), Who bound the Church of England, or Me, a Priest and a Member of
the Church of England, unto defense of all the Decrees or Determinations of
that Synod? Has Prince? or Parliament? or Convocation? Edict? Statute? or
Canon? I know none: I have heard of none; nor ever shall, I hope. And till I
hear of such (quod (...)) I answer, Let them that are interessed, plead for
themselves. For my part, I nor have, nor ever will subscribe that Synod
absolutely, and in all points (for in some, it condemns upon the Bye even the
discipline of the Church of England), but so far forth only, as their
Determinations shall be found and made conformable unto the doctrine of OUR
Church: nor I think will the Ferventest amongst you subscribe it in every
point. For sure I am, YOUR Divines, as you call them, have disavowed sometimes
some things resolved of in that Synod; as for instance: Cooperation of
Free Will and Grace, Reprobation negative, rather than positive. But, as I
said, the Synod of Dort is not MY Rule, and your Magisteriall Conclusions are
NO Rule. I hope, all, not violently precise, will say, Ampliandum, upon your
bare imputations; who bring nothing to prove me an ARMINIAN, but your (...),
He says thus and thus; and we say this is ARMINIANISME. Absque hoc

And thus much for Arminianisme.

THE SECOND PART. TOUCHING POINTS OF POPERY IN GENERAL.
CHAP. I.
The Author uncharitably traduced. His profession for the doctrine and
discipline received and commanded in the Church of England. Conformable
Puritans. Furious zeal. The Church of Rome not a sound, yet a true Church.
Private opinions disclaimed. The Church of England asserted to her own public
and proper Tenants. The cause of all these Imputations.

NOw come they to POPERY in a larger extent. A strange imputation, in my
opinion, considering the subject upon which they work: which may argue in them,
with any indifferent Reader, an uncharitable, unchristian, fiery, Puritanicall
zeal, malice, and indiscretion too. For, did I prevaricate? was it a compact
between Me and the Papists to collude? If I favored them, would I so have
handled them, as few have beside me, in so exasperating a style? Sure, A
Kingdom, I know, divided cannot stand. But the truth is, As with the JESUIT
he is an Heretic, that is not furioso more a Roman Catholic: so with the
PURITAN he is a Papist, that will not run amadding with them. It is not the
first time, for this very cause, I have been talked of, esteemed of, traduced
as a Papist: which I can the better brook, because they have meted this
measure to the Church of England it self, as sympathizing with Papists in her
Liturgy, Discipline and Doctrine too. It were to be wished, that such
transported spirits were taught to be more submisse and sparing in their talk.

I call GOD and all his holy Angels to witness, I nor am, nor have been, nor
intend to be hereafter, either Papist, or ROMISH Catholic; a Papist of State,
or of Religion; but a Priest, a member, a follower of the Church, and Doctrine
of the Church of ENGLAND. The Original grounds of Popery, are, to my
understanding, against Reason, have not their warrant from revealed Truth,
stand not with the purer practice of prime Antiquity. I have been born, and
bred, and brought up in the Confession of the Church of England. I have
learned, loved, admired, and proposed unto my self to follow indeclinably, not
only the Discipline of the Church of England (whereunto the Puritans and
Schismatics themselves, at least the wiser and subtiller sort of them, come
off roundly now, for ends best known amongst themselves, remaining quod erant,
quoad doctrinam, and tantum non in EPISCOPATU Puritani) but the whole and
entire Doctrine of that Church, proposed in Synods, confirmed by Law, commanded
and established by Act of PARLIAMENT. This total, both Doctrine and
Discipline, I willingly and thoroughly embrace. In profession thereof, (...), I
have lived, and will die; and will maintain it, by GOD'S grace, to be
Ancient, Catholic, Orthodox, and Apostolical. I say it again, a never was or
will be a Papist, no not in heart; though many be arrant Puritans in heart,
that only for preferment do conform; hold with the Hare, and run with the
Hound: who so they might vivere and valere, would as willingly have up the
Presbyterian Anarchie, as would THO. CARTWRIGHT, were he living; though many,
once Puritans, turn often Papists. And no marvel: for fleeting is commonly
from one extreme unto another. Men of moving, violent, Quicksilver, Gunpowder
spirits, can never rely upon middling courses, but, dum furor in cursu est,
run on headlong into extremes. And so, I may avow, I will not be a Papist in
haste, because I never was a Puritan in earnest or in jest; having found it
true, in my small observation, that our Revolters unto Popery, were Puritans
avowed or addicted first.

And yet it must be granted; All powder does not take fire alike, nor are all
Puritan Spirits of one disposition. With some of them, more braine-sick than
the rest, all my Book against the Gagger is quickly branded with Popery or
scurrility. With others, more discreet, I do but walk upon the brinks of
Popery; wherein is some allaying of that former fervency: for, upon their
better advice, I am but (...), at the next door unto it. What they think or
speak, I cannot hinder, nor do I greatly care. I profess my self none of
those furious ones in point of difference now-a-dayes, whose profession and
resolution is, That the farther in any thing from communion with the Church of
Rome, the nearer unto GOD and Truth: that we ought to have no commerce,
society, or accordance with Papists in things divine, nor almost humane, upon
pain of eternal damnation; but must bid defiance irreconcilable unto them for
ever. I am absolutely persuaded, and shall be till I see cause to the
contrary, that the Church of Rome is a true, though not a sound Church of
CHRIST, as well since, as before the Council of Trent; a part of the
Catholic, though not the Catholic Church; which we do profess to believe
in our Creed: a Church, in which, among many tares, there remains some wheat.
In Essentials and Fundamentals they agree, holding one Faith, in one Lord, into
whom they are inserted through one Baptism. Ecclesia Papalis (says FRANCISCUS
IUNIUS, neither Papist nor Arminian) qua id habet Lib. de Eccles. cap. 17.
in se quod ad definitionem Ecclesiae pertinet, est Ecclesia. And I verily am
persuaded, that I ought not to go farther from the Church of Rome in these her
worst days, than she has gone away from her self in her best days. I hold
it to be furious zeal without discretion, issuing out of ignorance, or
malice, or both, in them who proceed so far in their extravagant assertions,
as to profess, that Turks and Turcisme is to be preferred before, and rather
embraced than Papists and Popery: with whom the Puritan-Papist, the JESUIT, is
quit. For, they teach the like concerning Turks and Heretics, as they call
us. But the truth is, haec non est illa HELENA, these opinions are not the
things which offend them so much, or moved them to impute these calumnies unto
M. MOUNTAGU: there is (...), and that is (...). For whereas the PURITANS were
wont to be shrouded under the covert of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, and to vent,
publish, and tender their many idle dreams, fancies and furies unto the world,
under pretext of the doctrine of OUR CHURCH; and our Opposites of the Romish
Side did accordingly charge OUR CHURCH with them: M. MOUNTAGU, out of just
indignation against that open wrong and injury done unto his Mother, and, as he
does assuredly hope, to the good service of HIS MAJESTY and the CHURCH, has
disbanded them from their shelter, taken them off from colluding under the
CHURCHES protection, and sent them to their own home, to shroud there if they
could, and to answer for themselves; to make good their own cause by and of
themselves: and likewise has asserted the CHURCH unto her own true Tenants,
natural and proper unto that doctrine which is publicly determined and
authorized in her authentic Records, to the high displeasure (no doubt) and
distaste of such a porent overweening faction as they are. Hinc mihi sola mali
labes. This is the ground of all the POPERY and ARMINIANISME with which I am
aspersed, The particulars whereof in the one I have wiped away aheady: the
other will as easily off too. I take them in order, as they were proposed in
the copy that came unto my hands: in which they are digested without any good
method or due order, as the (...) of angry and idle brains.

POINTS OF POPERY IN PARTICVLAR.
CHAP. II.
The Church Representative, and Points Fundamental, what they are. All that
Papists say, is not Popery. Particular Churches have and may err. The
Catholic universal Church has not, cannot err. Of General Councels. The
Author far from the Jesuits fancy. The XXI. Article of the Church of England
explaned.

INFORMERS.
HE says, that the Church Representative, true and lawful, never yet erred in
Fundamentals; and therefore that he sees no cause but to avouch, The Church
Representative cannot ERR. page XLV.

MOUNTAGU.
IN this Accusation are two Propositions distinct, though connexed and
dependent: First, The Church Representative, true and lawful, did never err
in Fundamentals. Secondly, The Church Representative, so true and lawful,
cannot err in Fundamentals. Now, whether Proposition of these two is Popery?
or are both these Propositions, jointly or severally taken, Popery? To
explicate the terms, and draw up to anatomize your confusednes: The Church
Representative is a GENERAL COUNCIL; not titularly so, as the Conventicle of
Trent; but plenarily true, general, and lawful. Points Fundamental be such
as are immediate unto faith: for instance, the ARTICLES of our CREED; which
only be those Tenants and Points of faith, that have indeed, and so must have,
Universality, Antiquity, Consent, Knowledge. No man can be saved, that
believes them not; no man can be saved, that knows them not: which must be
understood de via ordinaria, except that GOD himself have disposed otherwise,
who may dispense with his own Ordinances as he will* as in case of Infants,
Naturals, frantic persons, which through invincible disability are extra
Censure Ordinariorum. Otherwise the knowledge and believing of them is
absolutely necessary, and required necessitate medij unto salvation. To say
they are Fundamentals, to propose them for Fundamentals, that are thus
required, and must be known and acknowledged upon so great and dangerous an
exigence, is no Popery, as I conceive; no not in your opinion. The Papists
rather are ad oppositum. For they enlarge their Tenor, make their dignity and
degree too common; abusing that honor peculiarly due to them, by promiscuously
communicating it unto other points of inferior rank and reckoning; especially
those XII. new ARTICLES of the Tridentine CREED. Thus, upon explication of the
terms, we come unto the assertion.

It is, belike, Popery to say, that in them, in these Fundamental Points, A
true and lawful general Council never erred de facto, because (forsooth)
Papists say, that a general Council cannot err. If this were right and
regular, yet first, Bate me an ace. For all is not Popery that Papists say: but
what they say as Papists, as a Faction divided, as in particular by themselves,
that happily is Popery. All is not Heresy that Heretics hold: nor is all
Puritanisme that PURITANS believe or maintain. They hold many things right
with the Church of England: but what they hold as PURITANS, that is, as a
schismatic Party divided from, and opposed against the doctrine, or
discipline, or both, of the Church of England, that we may be bold to call so.
Semblably we are to judge of Papists: and so, what is said of Papists, is not
presently and indistinctly Popery; but may be said in terminis by Protestants,
and they be never a whit the more any Papists for so saying.

Again, to say that this Proposition, A true and lawful General Council
never did Err, is Popery, cannot sink into my understanding. For I demand,
Quo warranto? has any Classis, or Consistory of Lay Elders, or others,
concluded it so? It may be (...), a misreport, an error in Story, which goes
no farther than unto the thing done or not done. Historical mistakings,
mis-relatings; who made them Popery? though I profess, I neither know nor
acknowledge any mis-report or error in point of Story in so saying. Let any
Puritan living show me where, when, in what any General Council, according to
true acception, or Church representative, has so erred in the resolution and
decisions of that Council: for in the debating of doubts, questions,
propositions, the case is otherwise, and not the same. I conceive and
acknowledge but four Councels of this kind; that of Nice, of Constantinople,
of Ephesus, of Chalcedon. Show me in what Fundamental point of Faith any of
these General Counsels have erred. But it is Popery peradventure to say, It
never was; therefore in all probability it cannot be. If so, then
inconsequences and Non sequiturs in Logic, are, in your opinion, to be ranged
under Points of Popery: and so, by this your assignement, Popery will extend it
self very far indeed; farther than ever any POPE or Papist did pretend or
claim. And if you will grant the POPE this so universal and transcendent
jurisdiction, yet M. MOUNTAGU'S Popery comes not up so high as unto generality
illimited. It cannot be at all: it insisteth but upon some points only; and
that not by or with a general vouchee neither, but thus only, I see no cause.
Now there may be cause, though I see it not. It may be, though I think, and
speak, and write otherwise, or you either, yet both of us may be deceived.

But somewhat there was which these men intended, and would have said, if so
be they could have hit upon it. It is a Conclusion of the Roman Schools, The
Church cannot Err. which Proposition, I may both affirm and deny, as it is
proposed. The Church CANNOT Err. The Church CAN Err. For first it i^
ambiguous subiective; What the Church is, which cannot Err. The word is (...),
and must be distinguished. And secondly we may consider it obiective; In what
things the Church cannot Err; and Quousque, that Not erring does reach forth
Extensive: To this purpose, I differenced Churches two ways: into Topicall or
Particular Churches; into Catholic or Universal. I divided also the objects
of erring or not erring, two ways: into Fundamentalls, or superstructives. For
Particular local Churches, such as Corinth, Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatyra,
Laodicea, etc. it is in Confesso on both sides, that They may Err: for it is
evident that they have Erred, both in inferior and in higher points of Faith.
And so have Erred oftentimes, that through their Erring in Fundamentalls in
that sort, they have ceased to be Churches any more. The Catholic or
universal Church, I considered two ways; conceiving it to be Diffusive, or
Representative. and that diffusion to run out two ways: into Universality of
ALL, both Time and Place; or into Universality of Time alone. The first is so
ample, that it fetches in the APOSTLES and all; and so includes within the
Verge that part of the Catholic Church which is now regnant in heaven, and
free from all Error, as partaking of that bliss which leads infallibly,
holds inseparably in all Truth. In this sense and acceptance, the
proposition is not quarrelled: The Church so, has not, cannot Err. The second
divided part, stinted from so large an extent, is yet enlarged respectively, to
all members, to every member in particular of the Catholic Church, living any
where, at any one time. so that the whole aggregation of all Christian
professors, make and compose this Church. And as yet, I think, the Informers
do not quarrel us for Popery. Their whole stitch is against the Church
Representative in a General Council. In which, though I should resolve simply
and punctually thus, A General Council cannot Err, yet could I not be
counted a Papist. For the Tenent of the Papists, if you (my Informers) know it
not, in their Schools, is this; A General Council can no way Err in the
Decisions final thereof, which is allowed by the POPE. By which they
necessarily infer, as also they stick not to express, that unless the POPE
give ratification, any General Council whatsoever may err in any point of
Faith, of what nature soever. And therefore (such is their Doctrine since the
JESUITS have domineered in their Schools) all the validity and assurance of
not Erring, which a General Council has or can have, either in fide or
moribus, is only from that impossibility of Erring which the POPE has, as
Haeres ex ass unto S. PETER, to whom our SAVIOR behighted that impossiblity
alone. So that pretend the JESUITS as long as they will, that fair and
specious show and title of the CHURCH never so much, have they nothing in their
mouths, but, The CHURCH, the CHURCH; the POPE is that Church: and their
conclusion here is not for the Church, but for HIM. Now, does Mr. MOUNTAGU come
up unto, nay, looks he toward this Catholic Roman fancy and infallible
madness? Nothing less. He directly pitcheth upon the Church Representative in
a general Council, WITHOUT the Pope; I mean, without the Pope as Head, or
exceeding the bounds and limits of a Patriarchicall Bishop. I go not unto all
things discussed or determinable in a Council, but rest upon that which is
Fundamental. Nor do I resolve it as certum and de fide, or tender it unto
others to be believed. I say no more but, I see no cause why I may not so
resolve: and that also but upon suppositions, if the Council be truly
GENERAL indeed: and of SUCH, none yet ever erred, that ever I yet read or
observed, in Points Fundamental. And therefore I saw and see no cause but a
man may say, Such a Council shall never err in Fundamentals.

But concerning Fundamentals, if your stitch be against them, I answer with B.
MORTON in his Appeal, THE belief of some Articles is so absolutely necessary
for the constitution of a Page 443.
true Church, as a reasonable soul is for the essential being of a man. In
such as these are, show me an error. Dr. REYNOLDS himself, though maintaining
the contrary, was not able in his VI. Conclusions, out of all his reading (and
yet therein was his excellency), to afford us so much as a piece of an example
in Antiquity, for a General Council erring in FUNDAMENTALS: and I am
persuaded, no man living can instance it. Of such only do I speak, and in
such only do I conceive infallibility: and so, as I conceive it, the promise
of OUR SAVIOR may and does hold, HE shall lead you into ALL TRUTH; as also
that other to the same purpose, Where two or three are gathered together in my
Name, I AM THERE in the MIDST of them.

The Church of England may seem to have been of a contrary mind in her
determinations; and to have taught, and prescribed to be so taught, that such
General Councels, true and lawful, not only may err for possibility, but
also have erred in reality. For Artic. XXI. we read thus: GENERAL Councels
may not be gathered together without the commandment and will of Princes. And
when they be gathered together, for as much as they be an Assembly of men,
whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and word of GOD, they MAYERRE, and
sometime HAVE ERRED, even in things appertaining unto GOD. Which decision of
the Article is not home to this purpose. First, the Article avoucheth, that
GENERAL Councels have erred: which cannot be understood of my limitation,
Fundamentals; because there is no such Extat of any General Council, true and
lawful. Secondly, things appertaining unto GOD are not all Fundamentals; but
points of Piety, GOD'S Service, and Religion, which admit a very large
interpretation. For many things appertain unto GOD, that are not of necessity
unto salvation, both in practice and speculation. In these happily General
Councels have erred: in those other none can err. The Council of Nice
determined the controversy of Easter: it was not Fundamental. I put the case,
that in it they erred. It was a thing appertaining unto GOD, in his service:
this may come under the sense and censure of the Article; but this touches not
my opinion, concerning only Fundamentals. Thirdly, the Article speaks at
large concerning General Councels, both for debating and deciding. I only
spoke of the determination: wherein it may be possible they nor can, nor shall
err, that may and have erred in the discussing. In that very Council of Nice,
it was an Error in debating, though not fundamental, touching that yoke of
single life, which they had meant once to have imposed upon the Church: but in
conclusion they erred not. PAPHNUTIUS gave better advice, and they followed it.
The Article may very well have aimed at this difference in Prosecution and
Decision, in saying, ALL are not governed with the Spirit and word of GOD;
which is most true. but some are: and those some, in all probability, ever may
prevail, as ever hitherto in such Councels in those cases they have prevailed,
against the greater part formerly resolved otherwise. Again, the Article
speaks of General Councels indefinitely, without precisely determining which
are General, which not; what is a General Council, what not: and so may and
does conclude reputed or pretended GENERAL Councels, univoce GENERAL, though
not exactly and truly indeed (such as was the Council of Ariminum) whereof I
did not so much as intend to speak; my speech being limited with true and
lawful: of which sort are not many to be found. Lastly, the Article speaks
of things that are controversae fidei, and contentiosi juris. I speak of things
plainly delivered in HOLY SCRIPTURE: for such are the Fundamental points of
our Faith. And that it is so, the ensuing words of the Article do insinuate;
Things necessary unto Salvation, must be taken out of SCRIPTURE alone.
COUNCELS have no such over-awing power and authority, as to tie men to Believe,
upon pain of Damnation, without express warrant of GOD'S Word, as is rightly
resolved in the Article. They are but Interpreters of the Law; they are not
absolute to make such a Law. Interpretation is required, but in things of
doubtful issue: our Fundamentals are no such. COUNCELS are supposed not to
exceed their commission, which warranteth them to debate and determine
questions and things litigiosi status. If they do not hoc agere sincerely, if
they shall presume to make laws without warrant, and new articles of Faith
(who have no farther authority than to interpret them) laws without GOD'S
word, that shall bind the conscience, and require obedience upon life and
death; our Church will not justify their proceedings, nor do I. Non debet se
Ecclesia CHRISTO praeponere, cum ille semper veraciter judicet; Ecclesiastici
autem Iudices sicut homines, plerunque fallantur, says S. AUGUSTINE against
Lib. 2. cap. 27.
CRESCONIUS the Donatist. but he speaks not there of Fundamentals; indeed not
of the Church representative, as I explain my self. Nor does that principal
place of all make against me, which is in him contra Donatistas, concerning the
erring of General Counsels: Et ipsa Concilia, quae per singulas regiones and
provincias Lib. 2. cap. 3.
fiunt plenariorum Conciliorum authoritati, quae siunt ex universo Christiano
orb, cedunt; ipsaque plenaria saepe priora a posterioribus emendantur: cum
aliquo experimento rerum aperitur, quod clausum er at; and cognoscitur, quod
latebat. For he takes Counsels in a general acception, as it is plain by
him: and he speaks not of Fundamental points of Faith; as both the cause it
self argues, and his assigning of better information in tract of time, to
direct consequent Counsels in determining contrary to precedent. who, for any
thing he says to the contrary, might have truly determined, as things then
stood. To conclude, this Information is a mere cavil. De tali Concilio, and
saniori part, and conclusionibus in fide, probabile est. No more.

CHAP. III.
Strange accusations. Antiquity reverenced, not Deified. Fathers accused of
some error by Jesuits. The occasion of their enlarged speeches concerning
Free Will. The Author acquitted of Popery.

INFORMERS.
Again, speaking of the Fathers in general, he professes his opinion to
be, that Those worthy Lights did not any way fail; nor did darkness
possess their clear understandings. CHAP. XVI. page CXIII. The which is a
saying more Popish than learned Papists durst ever affirm.

MOUNTAGU.
NAy more sottish than any Puritan, but your selves, would ever quarrel.
Malice and Ignorance, whither will thou? As if M. MOUNTAGU had affirmed, that
no Father ever Erred in any point whatsoever. Masters Informers, you may go
range this calumny under some other head: for Popery will not admit nor
entertain it. No ignorant Papist, less learned than your selves, nedum
LEARNED Papist, either taught or thought, that no Father ever Erred And as for
M. MOUNTAGU, he utterly disclaimeth it. Though no man living carries a more
awful regard, and reverent respect unto Antiquity than he does, yet never did
he so doat upon them. It is more than ever entered into the compass of his
thoughts, so to overlavish transcendently in their commendation, as to give
them prerogative of not erring at all; and so to advance them unto their MAKERS
seat. It belongs not to these Ancients, but to the Ancient of Days, not to
Err. And so much M. MOUNTAGU had expressed in that former passage of his
pen: Take them at large, and they lavish so far sometimes, that the
greatest Patrons of the power and efficacy of Free Will, dare not join issue
with some of them. Then follows that calumniated piece, by those Pure Ones;
Not as if those worthy Lights had at any time failed, or darkness possessed
their clear understanding. Now, you Promoters, could your Christian charity be
so defective; or your common wit, sense, or understanding at so low an ebb; or
your honesty so little or none at all, as out of these premises so laid
together, to infer so misshapen a calumny, that M. MOUNTAGU Delivered and
Published this Error, that the Fathers, none of them, either did or could Err
at all? as if he had erected to himself a new frame and fabric of Popery,
never heard of in the world. Whatsoever became of their Lights and
Understandings, deep Malice possessed your malignant Passions, thus shamelesly
to slander him with indeed more than the grossest Popery. Thus it is; M.
MOUNTAGU speaks not of all the Fathers in general, nor of their opinions in
any one point, (...): but only of their opinion in and concerning Free Will,
who have meddled with, and written about Free Will. This then is the first
untruth by false suggestion fastened on him. Secondly, he professes plainly,
that in and concerning this point of Free Will, those Fathers did so far
outlavish; and speak sso inlargedly, that the very JESUITS, post mot a
certamina PELAGIANA, for fear of seeming to Pelagianise, dare not say so much
as they have said; at least wise some of them: for which I have the warrant of
Bishop MORTON in his Appeal, to be according to the confession of most
learned Papists; SIXTUS Senensis, Page cc1.
MALDONATE, TOLET, and PERERIUS. His words are, that In the root of the
doctrine of Free Will, CHRYSOSTOM, CYRILL, THEOPHYLACT, EUTHYMIUS, OECUMENIUS,
AMMONIUS, and most of others, especially in the Greek Church, did yield too
much unto the power of Nature in the Free Will of man. These terms are far
from acquitting and discharging the Fathers of all Error in that point. And
these honest well-meaning Informers, if they had imagined indeed, that I did so
acquit them, rather should have challenged me of contradiction, than of
Popery. For it seems as much Popery to accuse the Fathers of Errors, as to
excuse them of Erring, seeing those three JESUITS (than whom, scarce were ever
three more eminent in the Society) do not excuse or acquit them, but accuse
them rather for going so far in applauding of Free Will. In this point it is
plain, my meaning was, that their Understandings were not so darkened, as
their words at first apprehension may seem to import, to err so grossly in
the point as they seem to do: nor did then and in that particular, those
worthy Lights of the Church of GOD, fail in discerning of the Truth of GOD in
that particular, as (to use the words of the forenamed learned Bishop) they
inclined, contrary to Scripture, unto Pelagianisme. For things must be taken
and considered as they are spoken, and upon what occasion and ground they are
spoken. If you were not so acute to conceive this (indeed so honest to express
it) yet your dullest Readers would have observed it, had there been in you so
much ingenuity as to have added that, which ensues in M. MOUNTAGU, thus: That
they being to deal against fatal Necessity, urged by many PATNIMS,
Philosophers in those days; as also against the execrable impiety of the
MANICHEES, they extended the power of FREE WILL unto the uttermost, and set it
upon the Tenters; especially having then no cause to fear anyenemy at home,
unto the contrary, ante mota certamina PELAGIANA: There being yet no PELAGIANS
sprung up in the world, enemies to Grace, advancers of Nature and Natural
powers, beyond degree of Power, and of Possibility. In effect, M. MOUNTAGU, as
touching freewill here in this case, has said the same, and no more but the
same, that before him Bishop MORTON did in his Appeal, page CCII. THE occasion
of this difference we learn to have been a whirlwind of contrary Heresies,
wherewith, in those days, the Church of GOD was miserably afflicted. Then the
MANICHEES, and before them the STOICALL CHRISTIANS, had taught an absolute
fatal Necessity of every man's Actions, thereby taking from man the guilt of
sin: For the overthrow of which pestilent Heresy, as is confessed concerning
S. CHRYSOSTOM, some FATHERS did contrarily yield too much unto the power of
will. This was the occasion of their by-sliding, who notwithstanding did often
recover their footing, and in their more intimate meditations gave direct
acknowledgement of our Orthodoxall Defense. Just to an hair, up and down the
same Popery that M. MOUNTAGU has Delivered. That Bishop, and my poor self, say
one and the same thing; and yet will even the Informers, I dare say, acquit Him
of Popery: why not Me, as well in the self same case with him?

CHAP. IV.
Private and public doctrine differenced. In what sense the Church is said to
be always visible. The Author acquitted from Popery again by others, learned
Divines. Of the Church of Rome.

INFORMERS.
HE calls the doctrine of the INVISIBILITY of the Church, a private opinion;
no doctrinall decision, nor to be imputed unto the resolved doctrine of the
Protestants. Nusquam est, says he, quod nun quam videtur. CHAP. V. page
XLVIII. And again, page L. Moderate men on both sides do confess, that this
controversy may cease.

MOUNTAGU.
MY words were only these; It may be, some private opinions have run upon
Invisibility of the Church. But since you put me to it, if there be any such
doctrine as you speak of, it is a private opinion; and I will now say
expressly, I hold that doctrine a PRIVATE opinion: yet then and there I did
not ponere, that any had so said in terminis; or run that way, but only with
restriction, by a May-be of concession: that some men, singular from the
doctrine of the Church, in their own private opinions, had fallen upon, and
supported an Invisibilitie. Now every man, but your selves, knows that the
doctrine of a Church, Public and Authorized, is one thing; and your doctrine,
or my doctrine and private opinion, is another thing. For such doctrine as you
talk of, I know none, I acknowledge none, but that of Libertines and Brownists;
with whom if you have any commerce, intercourse, or confarreation, look unto
it: the Church of England, as it detesteth them, so is it for and of another
strain. ARTIC. XIX. touching the Church thus we read: The VISIBLE CHURCH of
CHRIST is a congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure word of GOD is
preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, etc. Where Church and Visible
are convertible terms. That doctrine then, to which you should, and would
seem to have subscribed, talks of no invisible, but a visible Church;
tendreth no Invisibility. And it is a Position drawn out from thence, and
published, that there is a Church of CHRIST, not only invisible, but also
visible. Though for invisible, it is more than that Article specifieth; yet is
it most true, that there is a Church also invisible: which was never denied, or
thought upon to be denied. Secondly, it is also concluded thence, that the
visible Church is a Catholic Church. So the Church is visible, and the Church
is invisible: both which I believe and profess, distinctly taken, and as it
ought to be understood. For these, though seeming, are not contradictory
Propositions. The Church is invisible in her more noble parts; the Saints, both
regnant in heaven, and militant in earth; such as be secreti and occulte intus;
such as be (...), the secret, hidden, the reserved Ones of GOD, Psalm. LXXXIII.
IV. as Jewels of price, of value, of account. I do also believe and profess a
visibility of the Church on earth, necessarily, toto sui, though not tota se:
in some part or other at all times; though in all parts of the world, or it
self, entire, at no one time. Nothing visible in the amplest manner that can
be, is so visible, that there is nothing in it, or of it, but is visible. It
never was, it never shall be, it is wholly impossible to be, that at some time
or other there could not be found, in any one part or corner of the world, not
any part visible of that Church Catholic. The Devil never did, nor ever
shall, so far and fully prevail against GOD and GOD'S Kingdom, as to effect
or procure such an absolute desolation. And so is it true (for of this only
restrainedly I spoke), Non est, quod nusquam videtur; not generally true, I
grant, and without limitation. There ever was, and will be ever, upon earth a
visible Church some where or other, with visible cognisances, marks and signs
to be discerned by, such as be assigned by the XIX. Article; to which men may
repair to hear GOD'S Word; where Sacraments are ministered, and may be
received unto salvation; where Priesthood and Ordination is and may be had
according to CHRIST'S mission and commission. You cannot produce any time, out
of any Records or Memorials, extant or remembered, in which and by which it may
appear, that these things were otherwise. The Churches of the East, Asia,
Greece, and Africa, were a long time visible, eminent, and glorious. The
Churches of the West have held it out longer. Since there first was a Church in
England, France, Spain, and Rome, there has not ceased to be a Church there.
And if in any of these places, or all these places, the Church should cease or
not be visible, yet would it be still visible otherwhere, though not ever
alike, nor to like purpose. Again, I do call those Some men's doctrines in this
point, Private Opinions: and so well may I do, in respect of the disinvalidity
and disproportion of them; being private men's opinions, and no public
proposals or resolutions of the Church. I call them not so in regard of paucity
of proposers: for they may be many, a strong, potent, prevailing party that
thus opine, and run a course to themselves in their own Tenants, against or
beside public, enacted and authorized doctrine. And yet even private opinions
also are against you. That worthy Divine, my dear friend while he lived, D.
RI. FIELD, lib. 111. page XIX. says, It cannot be, but they are the true
Church, must, by profession of the truth, make themselves known, in such sort,
that by their profession and practice they may be discerned from other men. But
without all question, that Church must needs be visible, the members whereof
do make open and public profession of their Faith, in such sort, that by
their practice and profession they may be known and distinguished from other
men. And therefore that learned man rightly resolves, That BELLARMINE
labors in vain to prove, that there is, Page 11.
and always has been, a VISIBLE Church; and that not consisting of some few
scattered Christians, without order, or Ministry, or use of Sacraments: for all
this we do grant, and most willingly yield unto, howsoever perhaps SOME FEW
have been of ANOTHER OPINION. Mark, my good Informers, D. FIELDS Popery to the
purpose; and with all D. HUMFREYES, another Jesuit. page 2.
Papist: SECRET abodes are no Christian Convocations, because this communion of
Saints, is an OPEN testification of Christianity. and D. WILLET, no Papist I
hope, unless your selves be, Synop. page 69.
says, that The ONLY absence of word and Sacraments do make a nullity in a
Church: therefore an existence in a Church is made by their presence. But how
can you or any man possibly conceive, that the Word should be preached, and
Sacraments administered, in a Church Invisible? The L. Bishop of LICHFIELD has
as much Popery in this point as M. MOUNTAGU has. In his Appeal thus he
writes. Now Protestants and Romanists do concarre in words, Page 661.
and almost in sense. So that the difference is not so much in the position, as
in the application of the Invisibility of the Church. And before him, long
since, that JEWEL of his time, has uttered these express words: The general
or outward Church of GOD is VISIBLE, and may Page 361.
be seen; in his Defense against HARDING. And this Doctrine is sufficiently
and to this purpose explaned by that right worthy and learned Deane, Dr. WHITE,
in his just Defense of his deceased Brother; against the cavills of a Jesuit.
And he that has read more Papists than ever you have heard of, concludes thus;
Whereunto our learned adversaries for the greater part agree. Great Ignorance
then it must be, or malice, or faction, or all, that by the Information of
these poor Divines, M. MOUNTAGU is promoted for a Papist, for saying, that
with moderate men on both sides, this Controversy might cease. or, for calling
the opinion of the INVISIBILITY of the Church, a private opinion. But as I
said, so I see it fares still now adays: as with the Jesuit and Iesuited
Papist, such as be by far the major part of that side, every man is an
Heretic, a Lutheren, a Calvinist, I know not what, that is not a desperate
Papist, to go unto the Devil with them, though it be upon a second
pouder-plot; so also with our Puritans, very Sibs unto those Fathers of the
Society, every Moderate man is bedaubed with these goodly habiliments, of
ARMINIANISME, POPERY, and what not? unless he will be frantic with them for
their Holy Cause. Yet well fare BELLARMINE, a man of a better spirit than some
of the Paternitie, who ingenuously confesses concerning this particular;
Notandum est, multos ex nostris tempus terere, dum probant, ABSOLUTE De Eccles.
3. 13
Ecclesiam non posse deficere: nam CALVINUS, and caeteri Haeretici id
concedunt. And that learned Deane of CARLISLE, of late against FISHER, says the
same; It is but lost labor, to spend time in proving against us, that there is
always in the world a true Church; for we have ever acknowledged it: and have
ever been Papists in opinion for so doing, or else these good Fellows are and
ever will be; I know what. I could have produced many more to purpose, and
amongst them diverse whom they will not cast off for Papists; as M. PERKINS, M.
CLAPHAM, D. SPARKS, etc. I will yet add a little more Popery to the former,
and so leave my friends and Informers to chew the Cud upon it, as they do after
Lectures. The Church of Rome has ever been visible. The Church of Rome is,
and ever was a true Church since it was a Church: Therefore the true Church
has been visible. I say, Remember it, lest you mistake my saying, or
maliciously mistake it; a True Church ratione essentiae, and Being of a Church,
not a Sound Church every way in their Doctrine.

CHAP. V. Touching ANTICHRIST.
The Pope and Prelacy of Rome Antichristian. That he is Magnus ille
Antichristus, is neither determined by the public doctrine of the Church, nor
proved by any good argument of private men. Difference among Divines, who The
Man of sin should be. The marks of the great Antichrist fit the Turkish
Tyranny every way, as well as the Papacy. The peace of the Church not to be
disquieted through variety of Opinions. No final Resolution to be yet had in
this point.

INFORMERS.
COncerning ANTICHRIST, thus he writes: I profess ingenuously, I am not of
opinion that the Bishop of ROME personally is THAT ANTICHRIST; nor yet that the
Bishops of ROME successively are THAT ANTICHRIST. Chap. X. page 74.

MOUNTAGU.
WHat if I am not of that opinion? what if ingenuously I profess so much, that
I am not of that opinion, as indeed I am not? I was occasioned to show my
opinion in the point by the Gagger, who charged our Church in general with the
private Fancy and opinion of some men, that the Pope of Rome was that very
Antichrist mentioned and foretold in the Scripture. I must needs avow it, or
disclaim it. That I could not do, without wronging the Church and my self:
therefore I thought it an honest man's part, ingenuously to profess what I
thought. Sure it would be more pleasing unto GOD, and commendable with men, if
your selves and such Halfers in opinions, omnium horarum homines for your
private ends, would openly avow what covertly you conceal; and publicly
profess that, in which animitus, being rotten at the Core, you are
dissentients indeed from the Church of England: than to be and call your selves
at least Conformitants for fashion sake in some few and indifferent points of
Ceremony; and to be opposites in Truth both from them and most points of
Doctrine of the Church of England. For the point in question, what if I for my
part profess so much? you may for your part profess the contrary if you
please, so be it you trouble not the Church with it, nor would pin my Faith
unto your opinion. One thing I promise you; for my part I will not lightly
talk of my opinion in Pulpits: will you say as much for your opinion? I think
not I know nay. For your opinions must be all THE LORDS HOLY TRUTH. I am not
any way offended with you for your opinion, that The Pope is Antichrist: yet
much rather might I, because you presume to determine so peremptorily of future
Contingents; which being ever uncertain quoad nos, those things cannot but
rashly be defined, or absolutely taught as true, the event whereof may hap
afterward to prove otherwise. Why should you be angry with me, in such points
of no assurance, because I do not subscribe unto you? I am not tied unto you,
more than you to me. Who concluded it, but your selves, to be flat Popery, not
to Believe or Preach that the Pope is that Antichrist? or to profess the
contrary, that he is not that Antichrist? Who can find it to be the doctrine
of the Church of England? What Synod resolved it? Convocation assented to it?
What Parliament, Law, Proclamation, or Edict did ever command it to be
professed, or have imposed penalty upon repugnants, or non-consentients unto
it? Some Protestant Divines at home and abroad, I grant, have thought so, wrote
so, disputed so; in good zeal, no doubt, against that insolent, and
insufferable, and outrageous Tyranny and Pride of the Bishops of Rome, and
their infinite enormities in the Church: and out of that affection have been
too violently forward, out of conjectures and probabilities, to pronounce, The
POPE is that MAN OF SIN, and SON OF PERDITION. The Synod of GAPP in France
made it a point of their Belief, and concluded it peremptorily to be so. And
let them and you believe it so, if you will. Their inducements do not convince
or persuade me. I never yet saw proof or argument brought, that was
persuasive; much less that was demonstrative in the case. I never yet met with
argument or reason to the point, but, at least to my own satisfaction, I was
able to answer it. If you can give better, I am like to yield. Till then, there
being no conviction nor compulsion in foro externo or interiori, I would gladly
know why it should not be as lawful for me to opine, The Pope is NOT that
Antichrist; as for others to write, to preach, to publish, to tender unto
Proceeders this Proposition, The Pope Is Antichrist. They think one way: I am
of another mind; and so are infinite others with me. Why may not I sedate and
tranquille as well deliver my Negative, as M. GABRIEL POWELL publish and print
(as if the Church of England were of his mind), out of violent and transported
passion, no doubt, thus; I am as well assured, and as thoroughly persuaded, that
the POPE is THAT ANTICHRIST, as I am resolved, JESUS CHRIST was the Son of
GOD; or to that purpose: for I have not now the book by me. Surely, this man
made it an Article of his faith; so will not I. And yet I will not deny, but
the Pope is an Antichrist. I do not deny it: I do believe it. These honest
Informers should not so have dealt with me, as by a knack of concealment to
have done me so palpable a wrong, as if my meaning were, the Pope was no
Antichrist at all. So I might have walked, not only upon the Brinks, but have
come much within the Verge of flat Popery: and not injuriously, as now, have
been slandered for, and styled a Papist. For that imputation might more than
grate upon an universal approoving of the total doctrine of the Church of
Rome; in as much as there were of old, are now, and always will be, many
Antichrists: and he that any way opposes CHRIST in his Kingdom, his Word, his
Church, is an Antichrist; which, as ingenuously as the former, I profess the
Pope and the Church of Rome does. And therefore, when out of my private opinion
only (for which I will not trouble the peace of the Church) I denied that the
Pope was THAT Antichrist, then yet and there I added withal, AN Antichrist
notwithstanding I hold him or them, carrying themselves in the Church as they
do. Which Passage and Proposition had bin sufficient, with men not partially
addicted unto a Side, and maliciously bent to calumniate an Opposite, as it is
too manifest my Informers be, to have discharged me from guilt or tincture of
Popery. For will or can any Papist living say, that the Bishop of Rome now is
an Antichrist? But so have I said, and written, and professed so, if these
honest Informers had been pleased to have reported it so. But it stood not with
their prime purpose of calumniating: directly it gave check unto their
detraction in chief, and so they passed it slightly over.

But as concerning the maine, the question on foot, Whether the Pope of Rome,
or the Popes of Rome, either are, or may be accounted, or is THAT Antichrist,
or Antichrists, my irresolution grew, as I have remembered, from the much
insufficiency of their proofs that tender it stoutly, strongly,
affectiouately, and tantum non, as a point of faith. Not any one of their
arguments is, not all their arguments together are, convincing. Secondly,
because it is in Scripture every where tendered as a Prophecy; and therefore a
Mystery sealed up, obscure, not manifested, nor to be understood, but by
evident and plain event, without divine revelation. How then (these are the
very words of Bishop MORTON in excuse of the Fathers concerning their erring in
this very case of ANTICHRIST) can ignorance of those things which cannot
possibly be understood before the time of their accomplishment in the last
days, be held prejudicial unto the wisdom of the Fathers of former times? I
may add thereunto, Or the cautelousnes of suspenders, and not forward
concluders in these times? And yet farther; because Protestants are divided in
the question. For all do not determine or resolve, that the Pope is THAT
Antichrist remembered in the Scripture: and yet none of them have hitherto at
any time been styled or reputed Papists, no not by Puritanicall Opposites. The
Scriptures, as is apparent, do in this question propose us two persons: AN
Antichrist, one with many; THE Antichrist, one eminent above all. All, and
every one that oppugneth or opposes CHRIST and his Kingdom, his Word and
Doctrine, is an Antichrist. So was SIMON MAGUS, ELYMAS, MENANDER, the
NICOLAITANS, and other Heretics abroad, and risen up in the very Apostles
times: of whom S. JOHN himself said, And now are many Antichrists. These are
all, more or less, Antichrists, as their opposition is more or less unto
CHRIST and his Kingdom, in points of higher nature or of lower Tenure. But
beside all these, more particularly and especially there is designed out in
Scripture an egregious, eminent, and transcendent ANTICHRIST, called there. THE
MAN OF SIN, THE SON OF PERDITION. Concerning him; not them, there is
diversity of judgments, discrepancie of opinion among Divines both old and
new. First, some of the ancient Fathers, and most of the Writers in the present
Church of Rome, understand the prophetical prediction of, and apply it unto
one singular individual man only, and no otherwise; and him to be an
Heretic in opinion, extremely and with all vehemence opposing the saving
truth of GOD; prodigiously impious, and beyond measure: who shall by all signs
and wonders, with maine force and opposition, set himself against CHRIST JESUS
and his Kingdom, toward the later end of the world, not long before the day
of Doom. Other Divines, as namely the major part of Protestant Writers, not
all, understand the prophecy and prediction, not of any one man or singular
person so much, as of any heretical, wicked, tyrannical State and Polity,
directly opposing the Kingdom, State and Doctrine of CHRIST JESUS. But here is
some difference among them. For there are, that by Antichrist do understand
MAOMET, or the Turkish State and Tyranny erected against CHRIST and Christians
directly; and the Pope and Papacy opposing the same indirectly and in oblique
sort; both combined in one confederacy and combination: that both these, though
opposite ad invicem in Temporalibus, may and do make one conjoined opposition
unto JESUS CHRIST, and his truth in Spiritualibus. And although that
externally, and in regard of Civil Policy, they differ, and do deadly hate
each other, and mainly one oppose against the other; yet nihil impedit but they
may, as indeed they do, conspire in opposing CHRIST and his Gospel, his
Kingdom differently. Other, more precise Protestant Divines, do not nor yet
will in any hand extend Antichristianisme beyond the Papacy; nor yet will admit
or hear of any other great Antichrist, past or to come, but only the Bishop of
Rome: which is, it seems, the opinion, or rather faith and belief, of these
Informers, together with M. POWELL, and the Synod of GAPP; as it is of most,
but not of all the Divines, whom these men think it an honor to call
CALVINISTS. I say not of all: for ZANCHIUS, ZEGEDINUS, GRYNAEUS, and FAIUS of
Geneva himself, are not so yet persuaded. For my own private opinion, I said,
and so I say still, Though I cannot, nor yet will swear unto either, being but
probable and conjecturall, yet I rather incline unto the more moderate and
temperate Tenent; and rather of the two embrace that, The Turkish and Popish
State, not several but conjoined, and opposite unto CHRIST, though several
ways, do much rather, and may so, constitute THAT Antichrist, than any one
man or private person whatsoever, than either of the two States disjoynedly:
and of the two States, rather the Turk by much, than the Pope; rather the
MAOMETAN iniquity, than the HILDEBRANDINAN impiety; at least wise as much every
way: because the Signs, and Tokens, and Marks, and Cognisances of that eminent
and great Antichrist, foretold, extant, and designed in Scripture, do all as
much accrue unto, and fit the Turk, or rather and indeed more, Him and Them,
than they do the Popes, in their State and Government ad oppositum.

First, in Apostasy they are both interessed: both are departed away; but
rather the Turk than the Pope is enteressed. For whether we take that Apostasy
to be a departing away from CHRIST, and his Kingdom, and his Doctrine, MAOMET
himself apostated, drew away his Followers and Sectaries, sometime CHRISTIANS:
and so they continue yet unto this day Reprobates, Renegadoes, Apostataes,
Deniers of that faith which sometime they did profess. The Churches of Asia,
those seven unto which S. JOHN sometime wrote; those which S. PAUL planted, and
which APOLLOS watered; where S. PETER, S. ANDREW, and the rest preached; those
many famous Churches of Africa, and others, are fallen from GOD, his Kingdom,
his CHRIST, the SPIRIT of his Grace, profession of his Name, and received the
mark and stamp of the Beast: Or whether we understand Apostasy and defection
from the Roman Empire, the Turk is enteressed as much, or more than the Pope.
both are grown great through the ruins thereof; but rather the Turk than the
Pope. Indeed, both from the Scepter of CHRIST and the Roman Empire is this
Apostasy: and so the signs, marks, and tokens hold on either side; but upon
due examination, rather upon the Turk than the Pope as yet.

Then for Deceiving signs and wonders; howsoever that cognizance holds in
the Papacy and Sea of Rome, we are assured out of Story, that MAOMET took that
course to beguile the simple, to insinuate into the fancies of his deceived
Proselites, and to make himself esteemed a (...), being a false Prophet, a
Deceiver, a teacher of lies, in regard of GOD and CHRIST. Such he pretended, he
desired to be accounted, so he was esteemed and held in his time during life,
and so is he reckoned of by his followers at this day. which hitherto secundum
literam, and (...), was never verified in Pope or Bishop of Rome personally;
nor in succession of Popes collectively.

Again, the number of the name of the Beast, does agree unto one as much or
more than unto the other: whether we take DCLXVI. for the Number of the Name
of a man, or for the Number of the Time assigned when he should rise. The time
of MAOMETS rising in the East against CHRIST and the Roman Empire, was in the
sixth Centurie. and Jerusalem was taken in by HOMAR, successor unto MAOMET,
near about the year DCLXVI. The name of MAOMET written in the Greek, that
tongue in which S. JOHN wrote, and to which he had reference, does make up that
Number unto an hair, as well as (...) so much insisted upon, thus; 40 I 70 40
5 300 10 200 m a o m e t i s in all DCLXVI.

Fourthly, as the Learned have made observation, the word TURCA, the name of
the chief Prince of Gog and Magog, does signify the same that does Apollyon
and Abaddon: which is a Name ascribed and fastened unto that man of Sin in
holy writ.

Fifthly, the Turkish MAOMETANS of these days, and so the SARASINS of old are
the grand professed enemies of CHRISTIANS, Christianity, CHRIST, qua tales; for
that Name, that Profession, that Religion, make war against hate, detest,
persecute Christians with all hostility, calling themselves interim Musulmans,
that is, the right Believers: so that religion is openly pretended for
hostility.

Furthermore, yet MAOMET personally, as a private man and a false Prophet, was
truly and indeed a man of Sin: not only for his moral parts in his loose
licentiousness, lewd carriage, abominable life, impiety, improbity, and
impuritie every way unto the highest; but in his ALCORAN, that execrable Law of
his damned Sect, he commends and tendreth unto, not only allows and
tolerateth in, his Sectaries, all filthy carnal pleasures and prostitutions.
and in reward of such a life, a semblable recompense also after death, in a
Paradise of that uaure, abounding withal beastlike brothelries.

Seventhly, he directly and (...), without more ado, thrusts himself into
the room, place, state, and office of CHRIST. He exalts himself above
CHRIST, above the Prophets, Apostles, all holy men, all holy things. and his
Successors in State, arrogate and challenge unto themselves absolute, supreme,
independent power over the Kings and Monarchs of the earth; calling themselves
in their high-swelling styles, Lords of Lords, GOD of the earth, etc. as is to
be seen in the Letters of SOLOMON, AMURATH, and others, challenging absolute,
irresistible, incontrouleable power to set up, pull down, order, alter, and
dispose the world, and all things in the world, at pleasure. That wretch
MAOMET, like ANTICHRIST indeed, commands his ALCORAN, and most abominable
Law, to be received of all as the Message of GOD, being nothing but a
TYROTARICHON and hotchpotch of errors, fables, lies, impieties, impurities,
blasphemies, derived from, and made up out of Jewish, Paganish, Manichean,
Arian, heresies, religion, and superstition. He commends it unto his
Followers, as coming down from heaven, by the ministry of his familiar and
old acquaintance, the Angel GABRIEL. He prefers it before the Law, the
Gospel, all, or any Word of GOD. He threatens torments eternal unto the
despisers of it; and unto the observers promises his carnal Paradise,
abounding with all sensual delights and carnal pleasures: and to conclude, as
in effect in despite of GOD, conculcating and trampling under foot whatsoever
is named GOD, advances his own (blasphemous reprobate and forlorn miscreant
as he is) divine power and authority forsooth, in the Devils name, above all
things whatsoever in heaven and earth. If these be not certain signs and
remonstrances of ANTICHRIST, I cannot tell what are, or may be thought to be.

Eightthly, the TURK is, and has been long possessed of Jerusalem and the Land
of promise, that pleasant Land and holy City. HOMAR, the successor of MAOMET,
took it: and since it has been a neast of unclean birds, in the hands of
those barbarous blasphemous miscreants, except for some few years under the
French. The Jews, when MAOMET first declared himself, came flocking unto him,
as unto their MESSIAH; the sooner and rather, because he was circumcised, as
be all of his Sect at this day, receiving in their flesh the mark, stamp, and
character of the Beast. They greatly advanced and propagated his impiety. They
paid him tribute, to the intent to incite him against CHRIST and Christians;
and having prevailed, and instigated him thereunto, assisted him readily in
that enterprise.

Ninthly, the TURK fitteth (...): it is verified in him, take the meaning for,
either IN the Church, or AGAINST the Church; in both which senses it is
expounded. Take Templum materially, or formally, or figuratively, any way, that
note will also fit him. At Mechae was he buried in the Church there. HOMAR his
Successor enshrined him there; appointed an Obit and Anniversary for him there;
made it meritorious to visit his Sepulcher, to undertake Pilgrimages unto his
Relics: which religion and custom continues yet unto this day. And yet
more: The same HOMAR, having after two years siege taken in Jerusalem, Templum
exquisivit, as writes THEOPHANES cited by BARONIUS, quod SOLOMON extruxerat,
ad Blasphemiae suae Oratorium constituendum. Which being done, and his Oratory
erected in place of the Jewish Temple, SOPHRONIUS, the then Patriarch of
Jerusalem, took up this saying, as having reference unto ANTICHRIST; In
veritate, ista est abominatio desolationis, quae dicta est a DANIELE Propheta,
stans in loco sancto. And yet farther: MAOMET the Great, having taken
Constantinople, and ruined the Empire of the Greeks, sat him down, and made
his Palace in the Cathedral Church of SAN SOPHIA; and in the Close and
Cloisters, the Bishops and Priests lodgings thereabout, where is his Seraglia
unto this day. Part of that large and admirablest piece of work, one of the
wonders of the world, the Church of SAN SOPHIA, namely, the Chancell of that
Church, where stood the High Altar or Communion Table, and Patriarchall Throne,
is now made, and so used as a Turkish Moschie: whither the GRAUND SIGNIOR also
himself goes often a Procession unto their Service, or blasphemous Rites and
Ceremonies of their Religion. Spiritually and figuratively he sits (...),
against or upon the living Temples of GOD, the Church of the Redeemed by the
blood of JESUS, because he has demolished, ruined, and brought unto
confusion, very many famous and renowned Christian Churches in Syria,
Palestina, Egypt, Persia, Armenia, Arabia, Africa, and Asia the Less and the
More, Graecia, Thracia, and many other Countries; Those Churches, all but one,
to which Saint PAUL wrote. Those in the Revelation he has removed, put out,
cast off, their Candle and Candlestick, bereft them of their spiritual life in
CHRIST, of the power of his Kingdom in preaching the Gospel; has set the
mark of the Beast upon them, circumcised them in their flesh, taught them to
blaspheme, and to open their mouths against the GOD of heaven. He makes and
ever has made war against the Saints, that is, against the Christians,
called, according to the calling of grace, unto a profession holy and
sanctified, eo nomine alone, because they profess the Name and Faith of
CHRIST; that they acknowledge the Only true GOD, and Him whom GOD has sent,
CHRIST JESUS, the Savior and Redeemer of all mankind; and because they detest
those execrable blasphemies of that false Prophet and man of sin against GOD,
against CHRIST, and true Religion; seeking by all means to make them, as they
speak, Musulmans, that is, to deny CHRIST JESUS, and to go to hell. And for
this cause, one amongst many, he extremely tyrannizeth upon their bodies and
temporal states: a note of ANTICHRIST to do so. but in more cruel and
wretched sort upon their souls, especially in that his barbarous and unheard
of Tribute of CHRISTIANS children every third year, or as occasion serves
oftener or seldomer, to be violently rest away from their Parents, from their
GOD, Redeemer, Religion, hope of Salvation, and everlasting life, to become the
Eunuchs in his Seraglia, worse than those in the Court of the King of Babylon;
his Ianisaries, Spahies, Beglerbegs, and Bashaes, the public means and
instruments of his Tyranny and insolences against GOD and his Church.

Tenthly, he is seated in Constantinople, that is, also in Rome. For
Constantinople is known to have been called New Rome; was so named by
CONSTANTINE himself the Founder; had in Church and Commonwealth, in both
States, (...), every way equalled privileges with the elder Rome; Senators,
and one of the yearly Consuls. The adjacent country was then called Romania;
and is so corruptly termed by the Turks at this day, Rumilio, or Rum-ili, that
is, the Roman Country. It was the Imperial City then when MAOMET that false
Prophet and Antichrist arose, as well as Rome, indeed rather then Rome, since
the time that CONSTANTINE, to the great advantage of barbarous nations, enemies
unto the Roman State, translated the state of the Empire thither. And lastly,
this great and Imperial CITY, bearing rule over the Kings of the earth, is
likewise, as well as ROME, seated upon seven hills, at or near unto the Sea:
indeed in a Foreland or Landstreight where two Seas meet; the only Seat in the
world for an Imperial See. For which cause it is called (...), by NICETAS, The
City with seven tops; Vrbs septicollis, by PAULUS DIACONUS: so acknowledged by
IANUS DOUZA a Gentleman of the Netherlands in his Iournall; and by M. RICHARD
KNOLLS in his Turkish History, with others.

Now upon these premised considerations, of the Marks of that Antichrist, so
fitting the Turkish State and Tyranny every way, it may seem probable, that
MAOMET the false Prophet, and the Turkish State, as the Beast, may at least be
assumed into association with the Pope and Papacy, in making up that Antichrist
and Antichristian Kingdom or State opposite unto the State and Kingdom of
CHRIST and Christians. which respectu finis may be accounted one in opposition
against GOD and CHRIST; though the means of effecting it be many, different
and diverse: Turcisme one way may oppose CHRIST, as it does, vi aperta, by
fiery force; and Ropery be ad oppositum another way, fraud and insidijs, as
it is. In which respect, as DANIEL may well tell us of one horn; so S. JOHN
remembers a Beast with two Horns: MAOMET in the East, the POPE in the West;
both Horns pushing fiercely against the Saints: yet so also, that it may be
probable which ZANCHIUS has, Miscellan lib. III. and LAMBERT also upon the
Apocalypse, that beside these two, after these both, it is not unlikely, out of
both these impious opposite States, one notorious, singular, mischievous
Antichrist may arise, toward the final consummation of the world; who in
fradulent, colluding, malicious craftiness, in impious, execrable and
transcendent wickedness, through heretical impostures and lying miracles,
shall go beyond all other that ever lived in the world, and be fitted with
all signs and marks of Antichrist unto the full, so as no exception can be
taken against any in any one point. Surely if the General of the Jesuits
Order should once come to be Pope, and sit in PETER'S chair, as they call it, I
would vehemently suspect him to be the party designed: for out of what nest
that accursed bird should rather come abroad, than out of that Seraphicall
Society, I cannot guess; and but guess. For in resolution, I say with that
JEWEL of England in page CCCXCIII. I will not say the POPE is ANTICHRIST. GOD
will reveal him in his time, and he shall be known: yet is it probable, he
may be of that rank. I will not say the TURK is Antichrist; though it be
probable, that Antichrist may come from thence; the Turks power being
increased and enlarged by the Popes policy, as the same B. JEWEL has observed
it well, that it may not seem strange, two opposite in State may conspire in
opposing Piety. For all these, and whatsoever is beside these in this
particular denoted, being all prophecies and predictions of things to come,
obscurely and mystically delivered, are but opinions and conjectures; not
intended, not to be received as final resolutions. For my part, I desire not
to contest with any man about them; nor would I willingly have men's minds, or
the peace of the Church disquieted with them. It is an evil disease in the
world among Divines, in things of indifferency they cannot endure dissentients.
He is not my friend, I will hold no correspondency with him, that will not per
omniae and in omnibus be of my mind. There is a Rule of faith; we acknowledge
it, commend it, and have recourse unto it. Things that are straight and direct,
and according to that Rule confessedly, need not application, are not commonly
brought to be applied to that Rule: but things of different or doubtful
standing, these need application, and are applied confessedly by the perpetual
practice and tradition of the Catholic Church in consent of Fathers. We apply
things doubtful unto Scripture, our Norma, and exact and absolute Rule of
faith and manners. We consent and agree, it is Antichristian to dissent from,
to reject that Rule; and him an Antichrist that does so, or proposes any thing
as Credendum against that Rule. The Pope does this. Let him then be an
Antichrist in S. JOHN'S acceptance: There are many Antichrists. But whether he
be THAT Antichrist or not, I dare not presume to determine, without special
warrant in such a case. If you have any special illumination, or assurance by
divine revelation, or rather strong persuasion through affection, much good may
it do you: keep it to YOUR selves: press it not on others, that in such cases
desire sapere ad sobrietatem, rather than resolve without good warrant.

CHAP. VI. Touching JUSTIFICATION.
The state of a mere natural man; who, to please GOD, must become a new
creature. That newnes cannot be wrought without a real change of a sinner in
his qualities. In what sense it may be said, that there is an Access of
justification, both by daily receiving remission of new sins, and by increase
of grace, in joining virtuous and good deeds unto Faith.

INFORMERS.
TOuching Justification, thus he writes: A sinner is then justified when he
is made just, that is, translated from the state of nature to the state of
grace, as COLOS. I. XIII. which (Act) is motion, as they speak, betwixt two
terms, and consists in forgiveness of sins primarily, and grace infused
secondarily. CHAP. XVIII. page CXLII.

MOUNTAGU.
AND this, all this, in general, in particular, is our Informers Popery.
Strange Popery. Of what religion are you, M. Informers, YATES and WARD? For in
Christian Religion a man is and may be considered two ways, as I also have
considered him, according unto a twofold state: The state of nature, to which
he was formed; and the state of grace, to which he is reformed: as he was in
ADAM, depraved and lost; as he is in CHRIST JESUS, sought out, found, and
healed of his maladies. In his Being, Subsisting, and Constitution, every man
is first a natural man: in that state standing, he pleases not GOD. He can
do nothing, says CALVIN, that can please him, or be accepted of him. His very
best works (you I hope will say so) are abomination unto GOD. Quando
naturalibus dotibus censendi sunt, a vertice capitis ad plantam usque pedis,
scintilla boni non reperitur; nisi forte velimus insimulare falsi SCRIPTURAM,
dum hisce Elogijs universes filios ADAE commendat, quod pravo sint and
praefracto cord; quod omne figmentum cordis little pravum sit a primis annis;
quod vanae sint little cogitationes, etc. breviter, quod caro sint: quo nomine
intelliguntur opera illa omnia quae enumerantur a PAULO, Gal. V. XIX. So
CALVIN, Instit. III. XIV. I. The reason then of that so great a distaste which
GOD has of the best works of mere carnal and natural men, is that great
disproportion betwixt GOD and man, that much discongruity betwixt HIM and us.
The Fountain is impure from whence these works proceed; man himself not
accepted, that is Author of them, Agent in them. And why not accepted? Because
he is unclean. GOD is of pure eyes: he sees whatsoever so is most secret in
the boughts, and turnings, and windings of the heart; so pure, that he cannot
behold vanity, nor look upon that which is defiled and unclean. And as he
cannot endure vanity: so neither will he look upon iniquity, to approve it; or
call him righteous, that is unholy and unsanctified before him. As he beholds
the forms of things as they are: so he calls every thing by the name it
has. Man by nature (as he is, and what he is) is wholly and altogether vanity.
The person with GOD must be made acceptable, then accepted, before any work of
his become approveable or approved. This is not, cannot be, he continuing
statu quo, a natural man, unclean, defiled, as he was. For, Odio est ei impius
and impietas ejus; so far, says CALVIN, that quae vel summo splendore
conspicua sunt opera, in hominibus nondum vere INST. 3. 148.
sanctificatis, tam procul absint a justitia coram DOMINO, ut peccata
censeantur. Ac proinde verissime illi, qui non, conciliari personae apud DEUM,
gratiam per opera tradiderunt: sed e converso, tum demum placere opera, ubi
persona gratiam prius in DEI conspectu invenerit. This, I hope, is not Popery.
Now, that he may be fully and thoroughly accepted with GOD; that himself
first, and then his works, may please GOD, there must (as I conceive) be a
change, an alteration in him and his: he must become a new man, a man renewed,
a man changed, a new creature, and the like, I. Cor. V. XVII. Gal. VI. XV.
Colos. III. X. Ephesians. IV. XXIII. II. Cor. IV. XVI. I. Cor. V. VII. Psalm. LI. X.
Now, in common sense and reason, as I take it, there nor is, nor can be, any
renewing of the inward man, nor any the least change of the mind, nor any new
creature, nor any translating from darkness to light, etc. without alteration;
without destruction of the first, and privation of former Being, and induction
of the second; without abolishing of the body of sin, and induction of the
Spirit of righteousness. Man cannot possible pass from one state unto
another, without ceasing to be what he was, and becoming what he was not
before. If it can be done otherwise, good Sirs let me know the manner how,
the place where, the time when, the parties in whom this alteration is made;
and I shall wonder at it. For as yet, to my conceit, this furpasseth humane
capacity and understanding, that there should be a new creature, a renewing, an
alteration, and yet no change. CALVIN has taught you otherwise, Instit. 111.
3. 9. If then there be granted a change in man, that of the child of wrath
becomes the child of GOD, renewed in the spirit of his mind (as what child
can or will deny or doubt of that?), then this alteration must needs be inter
terminos; as I think all mankind, beside your selves, will confess and
acknowledge with me, out of grounds and experiments of even natural reason. A
sick man, recovered, is changed in state and habitude of body, disease, and
disposition; ceasing to be what he was, becoming what he was not. When of a
sick man he became whole and sound, his change was from Sickness to Health:
and this his changing was Motion. the terms betwixt which, Sickness and
Health. A dead man reviving (as the widows SON of Naim, or LAZARUS
quadriduanus raised out of his grave) is changed in state, constitution, etc.
when of a dead man he becomes a living. Natural men regenerated are in like
case: In the opinion of some men, happily, sick, not dead: in your opinion and in
mine, dead unto GOD, and to good works, so long as they consist in statu quo;
are necessarily changed, when they are revived and made alive unto GOD and
Righteousness, heirs of promise, co-heyres with CHRIST. Et haec mutatio est
dexterae Excelsi. If S. PAUL had come within these Informers fingers when the
promoting humor was predominant in them, doubtless they would have informed
also against him for Error, Popery, and what not? For he telling the
CORINTHIANS what they had been, 1. Cor. VI. XI. faith, even in terminis, as I
have spoken of the regenerate man; But you are washed, but you are sanctified,
but you are justified, in the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and by the SPIRIT
of our GOD, which Text M. CALVIN Inst. 111. 14. 6. glosseth thus: Si CHRISTI
sanguine in purificationem per spiritum aspergimur, ne putemus nos alios esse,
ante hujus modi irrigationem, quam est sine CHRISTO peceator. Here is a change
admitted: from Being so and so; to Subsisting thus, and thus, betwixt terms.
Maneat ergo illud Principium nostrae salutis, esse quandam, velut a morte in
vitam, Resurrectionem. Quia propter CHRISTUM, ubi nobis datum est in eum
Credere, tunc incipimus demum transire a morte in vitam. Just the Popery that
M. MOUNTAGU in this point is informed against for; A sinner is then justified,
when he is made just, that is, when he is translated from the state of Nature
unto the state of Grace: as Coloss. 1. 13. And if this was not Actio inter
terminos, though wrought in instanti, as also mutation and change is, and needs
must be, for complement of the Act, I must confess my own dullness, I cannot
otherwise understand or comprehend it. To denic a principle of Reason, in
practice of Religion, I dare not. Surely, if Popery be a mass of absurdities,
this Taxation of the Informers is rather extreme Popery, than any thing here
avouched by M. MOUNTAGU looking toward Popery. They deny such a Principle, that
deny mutation to be betwixt two Terms; or that in the justified Sinner there
is mutation and change of former state, and alteration of his sometime Being.

But happily it is better Popery which ensues; and it is indeed the point which
with any color can be touched with this aspersion by these men, that have set
themselves to calumniate where they are ignorant of the point they undertake
against. I have in consequence these words, And consists in forgiveness of
sins primarily, and in grace infused secondarily. Which words if the
Informers could have understood, or would have construed according to my
meaning, they might have observed out of my discourse, that I made a great
difference betwixt these two parts; and by Secondly, intended only
Concomitanter: my purpose being to wipe off that odious Popish imputation, of
which I shall speak anon, in their calumniating our doctrine of Justification:
which because these Informers either could not, or would not understand, I
shall endeavor to speak somewhat more plainly and fully out unto their ears.

JUSTIFICATION, as I said, is deduced of Iustifico; which has or may have a
threefold signification: To make just and righteous, to declare just and
righteous, and to make more just and righteous; for the increase and
augmentation of Justification. Apoc. XXII. XI. Qui justus est justificetur, by
new access of GOD'S grace, and progress in course of righteousness every day
more and more. Remissio peecati facit, ut Sanctit as incheate vires acquirat
and r^^oretur; for the declaration of the Act of Justification upon man as
where S. JAMES says, ABRAHAM was justified by works that is, declared to be a
righteous man, by the lively fruits of a true faith; and for absolution, which
is the Act of the Judge, to speak according unto secular proceedings, from the
use and practice where of the word is taken, and applied unto the
proportionable Acts of GOD upon man, by whom we are justified alone. If this
be Popery, M. PERKINS is a Papist 1 In 2. ad Gal. 16
who has in effect the very same Now I professed at first, to take
Justification only in this acceptance and inferred there upon against the
Gagger, no more than was enough to confute him and his, that we teach and
believe, that when sins are pardoned by GOD, GOD does not change the mind of
the sinner ney that yet destroys in him the blot and body of sin; but that
the same remaining in the soul of man, in like manner as it did before
condonation, is only taken away by a not imputation of the guilt. For so
BECANUS, Manet ergo homo in se peccator impius immundus, and solum habetur pro
justopio, mundo; and omnia ejus opera sunt immunda, (...), inquin^ta. But we,
says that most learned and judictions D. WHITE, truly are Forre from this
absund opinion. how far? how Pa. ib. in Def.
so? for we teach says he, that together with the Action of GOD remitting
sin, concurreth another Action of divine grace, enabling man to forsake and
mortify every greater sin, which GOD has pardoned. And M. PERKINS
observes, that many among us do not hold CHRIST, or believe in him aright for
their Justification, because they hold him without change of heart and life:
for by S. PAUL'S conclusion, whom CHRIST quickneth, them he justifies; and
whom he does not quicken, he does not justify. In 3. Gal. ver. 22.
And this is directly the doctrine of the Scripture, 1. Cor. VI. XI. Heb. IX.
XIV. Rev. I. V. VI. 1. Pet. II. IX. Ezech. XXXVI. XXVI. Esaias LIII. V. Psalm.
CIII. III. Fathers also are cyted to that purpose: BERNARD says, Sins are
not only pardoned, but the gift of sanctity is conferred. and CHRYSOSTOM
says, Delivering us from sin, he engrafteth righteousness; yea, he
extinguisheth sin, and does not suffer it to be. Sin in the soul, is as a
leprosy in the body. Now, as when NAAMAN was restored by washing in Jordan,
his leprosy was removed, and his flesh restored to that natural health,
vigor, and beauty it had: so when GOD pardons sin, he removes away the
guilt thereof by free pardon, and conferreth grace, to the destroying of sin,
and healing of the foul. Mich. VI. XIX. and this is the meaning of S. AUGUST
in Psalm. VII. Cum Iustifica^u^ impius, ex impio fit justus; and ex possessione
Diaboli, migrat in templum DEI. and Ser. XVI. de verbis Apostoli, summing up
whatsoever I have said in effect, and by these Ignorantes is traduced as
Popery: Nos sumus and de iustitia nihil habemus? Habemus omnino. Grati simus ex
co quod habemus, ut addatur quod non habemus, and ne perdamus quod habemus.
Iustificati sumus, and ipsa iustitia cum proficimus crescit, and quomodo
crescit, dicam; and vobiscum, quodammodo, conferam, ut unusquisque vestrum iam
in ipsa iustificatione constitutus, accepta scilicet remissione peccatorum per
lavacrum regenerationis, accepto spiritu sancto, proficiens de die in diem,
videat ubi sit, accedat, proficiat, crescat donec consummetur: incipit homo a
fide. Quid pertinet ad fidem? Credere: sed adhuc ista fides discernatur ab
immundis spiritibus, alluding to that JAMES 2. Si tantum credis, and sine spe
vivis, vel dilectionem non habes, and Daemones credunt and contremiscunt. A new
life needs then must be conjoined with Justification. And this is the express
doctrine of D. WHITAKERS: Remissio peccatorum facit, ut Sanctitas in nobis
inchoetur. and of CALVIN himself, who will have men to be taught this
doctrine: Doceantur Lib. de reform. Ecclesiae.
homines fieri non pass, ut justi censecutur CHRISTI merito, quin renoventur
eius spiritu in sanctam vitam: frustraque grataita DEI adoptione gloriari
omnes, in quibus spiritus regenerationis non habitat. Denique nullos a DEO
ricipi in gratiam, qui non iusti quoque vere fiunt. Now, if a man at all times,
when he is truly justified, be also sanctified, what offense can there be, to
allow one common word to contain and express both these parts? But men that
understand not the true state of things, but scumme upon the surface, and take
things up in gross, without due proportions, and come with prejudicate malice,
to lay hold upon any thing for their own advantage; no marvel if they make
strange Popery, and in indiscreet zeal cast forth they cannot tell what.
CALVIN is not afraid, loco quo supra, to use the very term of INHERENT
righteousness. Nunquam reconciliamur DEO, quin simul donemur IUSTITIA
INHERENTE. which speech if that M. MOUNTAGU had used, no excuse would have put
by imputation of Popery.

To conclude, and give them satisfaction, if they will take any; if not, jacta
alea est, eatur. JUSTIFICATION is taken two ways in Scripture; Stricte magis,
and extensive Precisely, for remission of sins, by the only merits and
satisfaction of CHRIST, accepted for us, and imputed to us. and enlargedly, for
that Act of GOD, and the necessary and immediate concomitants unto, and
consequents upon that, the whole and entire state and quality and condition of
man regenerate, changed; by which a sinner guilty of death, is acquitted,
cleansed, made just in himself, reconciled unto GOD, appointed to walk, and
beginning to walk in holiness and in newness of life, Remission of sins,
and imputation of CHRIST'S Righteousness, says M. PERKINS, is Justification.
a free pardoning and cancelling of all Bands and Obligations of transgression
for CHRIST'S sake, through the only merit of his Death, Passion, and shedding
of his blood. Which Act, Psalm. XXXII. II. is called, Not imputing sin. When and
where GOD does so pardon, and not impute sin, he adds unto it, out of his
love, a seconding Act of divine mercy and grace, enabling man to abandon every
mortal sin; those sins that do hang so fast on; that are more eminent,
notorious, enormious, whose property is vastare conscientiam; to the amolishing
of the whole body of sin, that it reign not in our mortal bodies: although
that those delicta ordinariae incursionis, as TERTULLIAN names them, cannot so
easily be De pudic. c. 19.
put away. Have I unto you seemed to confound Justification with
Sanctification, if yet you know the difference between them? or have I
ascribed, in your seeming, any act of Sanctification unto Justification? You
may be pleased to remember, that I went not most punctually to work, but e re
nata to confute the Gagger, described Justification at large: never suspecting,
that any professed enemies of Popery, as you would seem to be, would so
captiously have perverted my true sense and meaning; my words, at least my
passage being warranted by YOUR own Dictators, CALVIN, PERKINS, BEZA. For
Iustificationis nomen large accipio, says BEZA; and imagine them to be my
words, ut complectitur quicquid a CHRISTO consequimur, tam per Imputationem,
quam per Spiritus in nobis Sanctificationem, Annotat in Tit. 111. ver. VII. and
in Opusc. To. 11. pa. DCLXXVII. Otherwise be it known unto your Masterships,
that I believe, Justification in strictnes of terms is neither Regeneration,
nor Renovation, nor Sanctification; but a certain Action in GOD, applied unto
us, or a certain respect or relation whereby we are pardoned and acquitted of
our sins, esteemed righteous before GOD, and accepted by him in CHRIST unto
life everlasting: which wiser men than you have so expressed, whom happily for my
sake you will hold to PERK. in Gal. 2
be Papists hereafter.

CHAP. VII.
A change made in a justified man. The Author agrees in part with the Council
of Trent, and therefore maintains Popery, no necessary illation. The doctrine
of the Church of England, and of other reformed Churches, in this point of
Justification.

INFORMERS.
ANda little after: In the state of grace a man is just, when he is changed.
Which change must have concurrence of two things: Privation of Being to that
which was, The body of sin; and secondly, a new constitution unto GOD in
another estate. In which, he that is altered in state, changed in condition,
transformed in mind, renewed in soul, regenerate and borne anew unto GOD by
grace, is just, in the state of Justification; ceasing to be what he was
becoming what he was not before. In this maine point he accords fully with
the Council of TRENT, Sess. VI. cap. XXXVII. and contradicts the Doctrine of
the Church of England in the book of Homilies, sermon. of salvation, and all
other Reformed Churches.

MOUNTAGU.
HERE now at length we have some, though very poor show of a just and formal
accusation: the rest are but mere calumniations. For here is a charge of
delivering Popery, and maintaining it; and withal an advancing of that charge,
by pretending some seeming proof, in a threefold branch: 1. of According fully
with the Council of TRENT; 11. Contradicting the Doctrine of the Church of
ENGLAND; 111. Dissenting from all other reformed Churches: which is done by
this one Assertion, A change is made in a justified man; the substance in
brief of all the former suggestion: such an one as makes me believe, that
these informations were not gathered by any Scholars or Divines, but subscribed
unto unadvisedly, and collected by some other at odds with his own little or
frantic wits: for who can conceive, that a just and unjust, a carnal and
spiritual man should be the same? that one regenerate, and reformed in the
spirit of his mind, should be the same that he was before? that a live man
should be dead? I confess I cannot conceive, LAZARUS in his grave, and
sitting at table with our SAVIOR, to have undergone no change nor alteration;
SAUL a Persecuter, and Saint PAUL an Apostle, without change; the Thief upon
the Cross, no other man, than when he robbed and killed upon the highway.
Was he called, justified, saved? then sure he was changed. Had he not been
changed from what he formerly was, he had not entered into Paradise with our
SAVIOR. He, whose Disciples YOUR Divines are assigned to be, never taught you
this Learning. Fatemur, says he, dum nos, intercedente CHRISTI justitia, sibi
reconciliat DEUS, ac gratuita peccatorum remissione donatos pro justis habet,
cum ejusmodi misericordia conjunctam simul esse hanc ejus beneficentiam, quod
per Spiritum suum sanctum in nobis habitet; cujus virtute, concupiscentiae
carnis nostrae magis ac magis indies mortificantur, Instit. III. XIV. IX. You
hear him to speak of righteousness inhabiting in our hearts, by grace diffused
from the HOLY GHOST; of a progress in a new course of life, from grace to
grace, from perfection unto perfection: which is not a fantasy, but real.
Nos enim, so he adds, sanctifitamur, hoc est, consecramur DOMINO in veram
vitae puritatem, cordibus nostris in legis obsequium formatis. And somewhat
before, as has been remembered already, he calls it a resurrection from death
to life; and no resurrection, but supposes change: when this mortal shall
have put on immortality, and this corruptible shall have put on incorruption:
which is indeed the work of the right hand of the Most High, and cannot be but
betwixt terms: that a quo; and this, ad quem: which is the strangest Popery
that ever yet I was acquainted withal. But why go I about to prove, that
there is Motion, unto those that agree not upon common Principles? or bring
proofs to ANAXAGORAS, for The snow is white, who would not suffer himself to
be persuaded so? nay, because he was otherwise by preconceit persuaded, he said
it did not so much as seem white unto him. YOUR opinions are your own: you
will opine what formerly you have thought. So do for me, and there an end.

If yet you would there make an end, and be content to enjoy your conceits unto
your selves, and make much of them at home: but we must come over and conform
our Faith unto your thoughts, or we shall hear of it on both our ears. For
instance, at present; Odiously and maliciously you advance this accusation, to
procure hate and envy unto the part and parties ad oppositum unto you. It is
the Doctrine, you say, of the Council of Trent, and M. MOUNTAGU agrees fully
with that Council. But you mistake on each hand, and know not what you say. I
do not agree fully, but only in part with the Council of Trent. And is it not
possible to accord in something with the Council of Trent, and to be no
Papist, nor maintain Popery? What say you to M. PERKINS in his Reformed
Catholic, who professes conformity in many and different points with them,
and even in this point of Justification? is HE a Papist? Even in your own
understandings, though not much, there are some Decisions and Conclusions in
that Council, which you will embrace as well as Papists do. What say you to
this? Si quis ADAE praevaricationem sibi soli, non and ejus propagini, nocuisse
asserit; acceptam a DEO sanctitatem and justitiam, quam perdidit, sibi soli,
and non nobis, eum perdidisse; aut in quantum illum per inobedientiae peccatum
mortem and poenas corporis tantum in omne genus hominum transfudisse, non autem
and peccatum, quod mors est animae; Anathema sit: and your selves will say
Amen, will you not, unto it? It is not therefore a necessary illation, M.
MOUNTAGU holds somewhat determined in the Council of Trent, he is therefore
a Papist. That Council, were it worse than it was (and yet for my part I hold
it (in some respect) pestem Reipublicae Christianae), yet resolving upon such a
Truth, as is warranted in Reason, in Divinity, with general consent of all
Ages, is not in that to be condemned. Now such is the point there concluded,
for which M. MOUNTAGU is called Papist: A man justified is changed from that
state wherein he was borne, the child of the first ADAM, unto the state of
grace and adoption of the Sons of GOD, by the second ADAM, JESUS CHRIST our
Savior; and of an unjust person, is made righteous; of an enemy, is made the
friend of GOD: that so he may become heir of eternal life. Which is good
Catholic Doctrine, non Romano, sed antiquo more; Christian and justifiable, if
S. PAUL taught Catholic and Christian Doctrine, Romans V. X. when we were
enemies, we were reconciled unto GOD by the death of his Son: and being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. And again, Heb. IX. XIV. For if
the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling them that
are unclean, sanctifies as touching the purification of the flesh; how much
rather shall the blood of CHRIST, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot unto GOD, purge your consciences from dead works, to serve
the living God! Can this be conceived without a change? GOD pardons sin in
man, for the death and passion of CHRIST his Son; in that very act and
instant imputing unto him the righteousness of CHRIST, that all-sufficient and
well-pleasing sacrifice, for his justification. and does he leave him there?
his sins belike remaining still in being, as they were? himself indeed the
very man he was before? or rather (as, perfect are the works of the mighty
GOD, not done by halves, and to no purpose) does he not also wash and cleanse
his soul and conscience from dead works? does he not wipe out his iniquities,
when he cancelleth the band, and makes him become another man? does he not
confer upon him of his grace, for the abolishing of the body of sin, and
enabling the soul against the assaults of sin? TERTULLIAN compares man in
the state of Nature depraved, unto that Leprosy described Levit. XIII. where,
as there is a change in the body made clean and whole from the leprosy, so
violent and infectious; so does he, and that justly, acknowledge the like in
the clensing and purifying of the soul: Conversum enim hominem, de pristino
carnis habitu, in candorem fidei, quae vitium and macula aestimatur in saeculo,
and totum novatum, mundum voluit intelligi, qui jam non sit varius, non sit de
pristino, and novo aspersus. Si vero post abolitionem, in vetustatem aliquid ex
ea re vixerit, rursum in Carne ejus, quod emortuum delicto habebatur, immundum
judicari. I would TERTULLIAN TERT. de pud. cap. 20.
had never written worse than so. The rest of the Fathers run the same way.
CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS in his Paedagog. page 96. and VII. Strom. pa. 319.
commenting, as it were, upon that of the APOSTLE, But you are washed, but you
are sauctified. DOMINUS qui in mentes nostras indulgentiae coelestis allapsu
clementer influxit, in animi obtestantis hospitio justa operatione tenetur:
says S. CYPRIAN, and appealeth unto DONATUS for witness. Scis, etc. Epist. 1.
quid detraxerit nobis, quidve contulerit, mors ista criminum, vita virtutum.
which generally he had a little before expressed thus: Sed postquam undae
genitalis auxilio, superioris avi labe detersa, in expiatum pectus ac purum
desuper se lumen infudit: postquam coelitus spiritu hausto, in novum me hominem
sensinativitate secunda reparatum, mirum in modum protinus confirmare se dubia,
patere clausa, lucere tenebrosa, facultatem dare, quod prius difficile
videbatur, geri posse, quod prius impossible videbatur ut esset: agnoscere
terrenum fuisse quod prius carnaliter natum, obnoxium delictis viveret; DEI
esse coepisse, quod jam spiritus animaret. Nor does the Church of England
differ heerfrom, which never did so much as dream of denying an alteration in
state, condition, life, manners, unto a man that is justified. How could our
Church do it, and make answer unto S. PAUL, Ephesians. 2. 11. 12, 13. Wherefore
remember that you being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, and called
uncircumcision of them which are called circumcision in the flesh, made with
hands; that you were, I say, at that time without CHRIST, and were aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel, and were strangers from the covenants of promise,
and had no hope, but were without GOD in the world: But now in JESUS CHRIST you
which were far off, are made near by the blood of CHRIST? So here is
variation of place and station; and an alteration also in state, ver. 19. Now
you are no more strangers and forreyners, but citizens with Saints, and of the
household of GOD. Not that only, but, Two made one. As if, says CHRYSOSTOM, two
statues were, the one of brass, the other of gold; and both being cast into
the furnace, should from thence come out gold. Such is the changed estate of
men justified; that they are also regenerate and borne anew, that are
justified. I will not justify the Council of Trent farther than needs; they
have not deserved it at the hands of any Protestants: but Truth is truth even
from the Devils mouth. And if they meant no otherwise than thus, as I conceive
they did not, I see no reason to quarrel them, or dissent from them.

But yet one peg higher is this imputation strained; namely, that I not only
agree with the Council of Trent, but disagree from the Church of England. I
deny this absolutely: prove it, and take all. If I disagree from the Church of
England, promote, inform against me: spare not. In Morboniam all the Councels
of Trent in the world, if there were ten thousand of them. I forsake them all
respectively: such regard and awful respect do I bear unto my Mother the
CHURCH of England. You quote us the Homilies: but it is at random, as if you
spoke it by Hearsay, having never read them; and no marvel: for I think you
dis-repute them, as all of your Faction do. Sermon. you say, of Salvation. There
are three several Homilies, or, as you call them, Sermons, of that argument,
with the Title of Salvation. In all of them, in any one of them, show me any
contradiction unto any thing delivered against the Gagger, or unto this Error,
as you call it, of the change made in a justified man, if you can. You cite no
words, name no place, send me to no Text, Page, nor particular by any
direction, that I may know where to find what you intend. A mere trick of
juggling companions. Marry I find some things in those Homilies, which I dare
say will not down, nor digest with you; as opposing some other dreams of your
Side: but I let them alone till opportune time. But in the second Sermon of
Repentance, I find directly in a man that is justified, a change made, faith
the Homily. The fourth part of Repentance is amendment of life, or a new life,
in bringing forth fruits worthy of Repentance. For they that do truly repent
them of their sins, must be clean abtered and CHANGED: they must become new
creatures: they must be no more the same they were before. Now look and compare
M. MOUNTAGU'S private Popery with this public Popery of the Church, and go
give your selves the check for malice and indiscretion. And afterward, having
instanced this doctrine in that memorable example of ZACHEUS'S conversion from
his evil way of covetousnes and extortion, as a common Customer, the Homily
concludes with this Epiphonema concerning him thus: Here we see, that after
his repentance he was no more the same man he had been before, but was clean
CHANGED and altered. It was so far off, that he would continue and abide
still in his unsatiable covetousness, or take ought away fraudulently from any
man, that he was most ready and willing to give away his own. Go now, and
challenge M. MOUNTAGU for his Popery upon like case, in like terms almost,
delivered. In the state of grace a man is just (and a just man I hope none is,
but he that is already justified) when he is changed. Which change of his
consists in two things: Privation of Being to that which was formerly in a
natural man, the body of sin; and A new constitution unto GOD in another
state, namely, of holiness in life and conversation. I know well enough, what
you are afraid of, what you would say, because you neither understand your
selves, nor me, that do not make this change the same with Justification in
the act; but an incident, instant, necessary consequent thereupon. Go then
and befoole your selves, for confusedly opposing common sense and reason, and
well known and confessed Divinity on all hands. No reasonable man will deny a
renewing in a justified man: where are evermore (...). Without alteteration or
any other the least change of substance, old things are made new; says ORIGIN
in his Dialogue against the Marcionites, which I have manuscript.

Nor do Reformed Churches dissent or differ, as these Calumniators falsely
suggest. The Confession of Ausberge requires novam vitam, which is obedientia
mandatis DEI, and renovatio, according to S. PAUL; and that also so
necessarily, that qui admittunt actiones contra Conscientiam, sint injusti, nec
SPIRITUM SANCTUM, nec fidem retinent. And for the manner, I find it thus: Fide
apprehenditur remissio Peccatorum; and quia per fidem accipitur SP. SANCTUS,
jam cord renovantur, and induunt novos affectus: sic AMBROSIUS. Fides bonae
voluntatis and justae actionis genitrix est. In the confession of Saxony more
direct. In declaratione vocabuli justificari, usitate dicitur, Iustificari
significat ex injusto justum fieri; quod recte intellectum, hic quoque quadrat.
And what that right understanding is, ensues (fully and wholly M. MOUNTAGU'S
Popery): Ex injusto justum, id est, absolutum a reatu propter filium DEI, id
est, apprehendentem fide ipsum CHRISTUM, qui est justitia nostra; quia EIUS
merito habemus remissionem, and DEUS justitiam ejus nobis imputat, and propter
EUM nos justos reputat, and dato SPIRITU SUO SANCTO, nos vivificat and
regenerat. a flat change. And in the Belgic Confession yet fuller: Credimus
veram hanc Fidem unicuique nostrum inditam, nos regenerare, atque veluti novos
homines efficere, ut quos ad novam vitam vivendam excitet. And in the French
likewise, Credimus nos qui Natura servi sumus peccati, hac eadem fide
intercedente, in novam vitam regenerari. Thus these Reformed Churches, and so
all the rest, acknowledge a change in justified persons, by the grace of
sanctification. I remembered before out of the Reverend and learned Deane of
Carlisle, that we are far from that absurd opinion wherewith our adversaries
charge us, that GOD in justification does not change the mind. You, it
seems, are none of those WE he speaks of: for he meant it of the public
authorized Doctrine of the Church of England, and of Conformers unto the said
Doctrine of that Church. You have a Church, or Conventicles of your own, and
Consistoriall fancies, it seems, thence derived: nor will you be freed from
that absurd opinion, nor let the Church of England willingly be freed from it.
For if a man list to believe you before that Learned Man (whose books the best
amongst you is not worthy to follow, or carry after him) in justified persons
there is no change.

CHAP. VIII.
Strange Popery. GOD only and properly justifies.

INFORMERS.
PRoperly to speak, says he, GOD only justifies, who alone imputes not, but
pardons sin.

MOUNTAGU.
DEUS, propter solum CHRISTUM passum and resuscitatum, propitius est peccatis
nostris, nec illa nobis imputat. Imputat autem CHRISTI justitiam pro nostra. It
a ut jam simus non solum mundati a peccatis, and purgati vel sancti (good
Popery, is it not? you shall have more of it) sed etiam donati justitia
CHRISTI, absoluti a peccatis, morte, condemnatione, justi denique ac haeredes
vitae aeternae. Thus much the Helvetian Confession, against your former
Information. Now follows expressly against this: Proprie ergo loquendo, DEUS
solus nos iustificat (english this, M. YATES) and duntaxat propter CHRISTUM
justificat, non imputans nobis peccata, sedimputans nobis ejus justitiam. And
yet you shall need not to english it; it is ready englished unto your hands:
for have you forgot, or rather have you read indeed, that Homily you but now
alleged against me, of Salvation? In the second Homily there I have read thus:
Justification is not the office of man, but the office of GOD. and again,
Justification is the office of GOD only; and is not a thing which we render
unto him, but which we receive of him: not which we give to him, but which we
take of him by his free mercy, and by the only merits of his most deerly
beloved Son, our Lord, our only Redeemer, Savior, and Iustifier, JESUS
CHRIST. And yet it is Popery in M. MOUNTAGU, to have said and written, Properly
to speak, GOD only justifies; who alone imputes not, but pardons sin. En
quo vaecordia caecos! For yet moreover, is it not your own Belief and
Profession (for which, if he should say otherwise, M. MOUNTAGU should be cried
down Papist) that Justification consists in Remission of sins? or, not
imputing of them unto the man justified? Ne posthac dubites, says CALVIN,
Instit. III. XI. XXII. and you subscribe it, quo modo nos DEUS justificet, cum
audis, Reconciliare illum nos sibi, non imputando delicta. and again, Nos
justificationem simpliciter interpretamur, acceptationem illam; qua nos DOMINUS
in gratiam receptos pro justis habet. Eamque in Peccatorum remissione ac
justitiae CHRISTI imputatione positam esse dicimus. Sect. 2. to whom per omnia
agrees M. PERKINS in mo places, than ten, defining Justification to be an Act
of GOD absolving, etc. And yet with you M. MOUNTAGU is a Papist for affirming,
GOD only justifies properly, when your selves confess, that Justification, at
least properly, consists in Remission of sins: and that none can forgive
sins properly but GOD. How this should hang together, I profess my
ignorance, I cannot tell. For either Justification, in your opinions, must not
consist in forgiveness of sins; or else others, beside GOD, must have power
of imputing or of not imputing sins. And here it is worth the while to
observe, how these detracters do cross their own shinnes. It will not be
long before that M. MOUNTAGU with them be accounted a Papist, for saying, A
Priest, GOD'S Minister, in GOD'S place, can forgive sins: and here he is a
Papist, for saying, GOD only justifies properly, when themselves will have
Justification to be merely forgiveness of Sins, and yet hold, that none
does or can forgive Sins but GOD. May I not say well, o vertiginem! In sober
(and not in mad Puritanicall) sadness, dare you say that some other beside
GOD, some creature over and above GOD, can forgive Sins? This is contrary to
the doctrine of the Church of England, in that Homily which you remember
indeed, but can produce no testimony thence. Because all men be sinners
(says that Homily) and offenders against GOD, and breakers of his Laws and
Commandments, therefore can no man by his own acts, works, or else deeds,
seem they never so good, be justified, and made righteous before GOD: but
every man, of necessity, is constrained to seek for another righteousness or
justification. But where shall he find it? where is it to be had? It is
expressed according unto truth, To be received at GOD'S hand. It is GOD then
that justifies in this opinion of the Homily. And again in the second Homily
of that argument, as is already remembered, Justification is the office of GOD
only: it is not the office of man Credimus SPIRITUM SANCTUM in cordibus nostris
habitantem, voram nobis fidem impertiri, ut hujus tanti mysterij cognitionem
adipiscamur; says the Belgic Confession. which is the POPERY of M. MOUNTAGU,
as pleases these Great Masters in Israel, Liars against their own knowledge,
in saying it contradicts the Doctrine of the English Church. Or if this be
not the thing they mean, what is it, That GOD imputes not sins unto the
justified? or that Justification is not in pardoning, and not imputing sins?
whereas the Papists do clamor against us for maintayning, that Justification
to be received at GODS hands, is forgivenes of sins and trespasses, in such
things as he has been offended in. I confess, I am a Papist if this be
Popery, or else that which follows after Remission of sins: against which
they inform in the next place.

CHAP. IX.
Holiness of life added unto Justification and Remission of sins. GOD
justifies originally, and Faith instrumentally.

INFORMERS.
Again; WHO only can and does translate from death unto life, renews a right
spirit, and creates a new heart within us.

MOUNTAGU.
WHo can do this, but only GOD most high? It is a work of Omnipotency to
create: they say it is a greater work to recreate. Where sin is pardoned by
GOD, and a man is become regenerate, borne anew, and in state of Grace with
GOD, there GOD by his HOLY SPIRIT works inward renovation. Where sin is
graciously and freely pardoned, there holy life and conversation does est
soones ensue. This is the divinity that I have learned in our Protestant
Schools, touching this point. And to my understanding it is observed and
tendered by DAVID in Psalm. L. X. Hide thy face from my sins, and put away all
mine iniquities; which is Remission of sins. Then follows, to make up a
complete work, Create in me a clean heart, O LORD, and renew a right spirit
within me: which to me seems an Infusion of Grace. And S. PAUL does every
where, after vocation unto, and acceptance of us with GOD, urge walking
according unto vocation, in newness and in holiness of life. But, because GOD
was moved thereunto by a true and a lively faith in him and his mercies in
CHRIST, Faith is by me said to justify instrumentally. That GOD justifies
causally, has been suspected of Popery, and challenged therefore. Now that
Faith justifies instrumentally, cannot avoid the same imputation. And yet the
maine exception of all Papists against the doctrine of our Church, is, that we
hold a man is justified by Faith: which must be originally or instrumentally.
THAT we exclude with the forenamed Homilies. That we be justified by Faith in
CHRIST only, is not, That this our own act to believe in CHRIST, or this our
faith in CHRIST, which is within us, does justify us: for that were to account
our selves to be justified by some act or virtue within our selves. For, says
S. PAUL, Romans VIII. XXXIII. It is GOD that justifies. THIS we embrace, as also
in the same Homily: Faith does directly send us to CHRIST for remission of our
sins. And by Faith given unto us of GOD, we embrace the Promise of GOD'S
mercy, and of Remission of sins: which accords with the traduced passage
of M. MOUNTAGU, because GOD was drawn unto it by our Faith; which laying hold
upon his mercy in CHRIST, obtayneth this freedom, and newness, and renewing
from Him. Faith is therefore said to justify, that is, instrumentally, or
applicatorily. And so I am content to pass for a Papist, with the CHURCH of
England.

CHAP. X.
An Access declaratory made to the act of Justification by the works of a
lively Faith. S. PAUL and S. JAMES reconciled. The old Prophets and ancient
Fathers made new Papists by the Informers.

INFORMERS.
He speaks of an Access of Justification, or of a second Justification. His
words are these: S. JAMES, Cap. 2. 24. means that a man is justus declaratus,
by his holy life and conversation; or that a man has Access of Justification,
as it is also taught by your own men. CHAP. XVIII. page 148.

MOUNTAGU.
He names indeed an Access unto Justification, but it is as out of the mouth
of Popish Writers; and not out of his own opinion. Is there no difference, in
your understanding, betwixt these two, Affirming positively, and relating
reservedly? Many Protestants give answer unto Popish objections satisfactorie,
out of Popish Tenants; who yet I think subscribe not unto those their Tenants.
B. MORTON is most frequent in this course, and yet I hope you hold him no
Papist. But I farther add: Though I said not so in that place by you recyted,
I may, and I do also avow an access of Justification, made unto it by works
of an Holy and a Lively Faith. Not as essential thereto, or ingredient
intrinsically: for Justification is properly the work of GOD, and eatenus,
without magis or minus; but as accessory and circumsistant, for destruction of
the Body of sin, by contrary actions of new Righteousness, to speak
properly, is a work of Sanctification, not of Justification, according unto S.
PAUL. But in what place do I speak by name of a second Justification? Go save
your honest credits, and name me the place: quote the very words. I
distinguish indeed betwixt the phrase of S. PAUL and S. JAMES: that HE
speaks of Justification in attaining it; S. JAMES, of Justification attained.
which cannot be separated from good works, as anon is declared, and cited out
of the twelfth Article of our Confession.

In brief, the Information is rather an inference upon the passage, than the
passage expressed as it should be. It is known unto all, that the Roman
Professors have ever in their mouths the Text of S. JAMES, What does it profit
though a man says he has Faith, and has no Works? can his Faith save him?
Unto this allegation, amongst other things, this is answered: S. PAUL speaks
of Justification in the attayning it, That only Faith does justify; and that
it is the Act of Faith in regard of man. For properly, and causally, and
originally, GOD does only Justify. But S. JAMES means of Justification had
and obtained: the which necessarily is accompanied with good works, and can
be no more separate from good works, than light from the Sun. So that
justus factus through Faith, by the grace of God, is also justus declaratus by
his holy life and conversation, that is, the tree is known by the fruit it
brings forth. Well may we bear the name of Christian men, say the Homilies,
but we lack that true faith which belongs thereto: for true faith does
evermore bring forth good works, as Saint JAMES speaks, Show me thy Faith
by thy Works. Thy deeds and works must be an open testimony of thy faith:
otherwise thy faith being without good works, is but the Devils faith, the
faith of the wicked, a fantasy Hom. 3. of Faith
of faith, and not a true Christian faith. This is the very declaration of the
Homilies, for which, and no more, my Informers have promoted me for a Papist.
For, that Access unto Justification is not by me made essential unto
Justification, but only declaratory; as I have plainly expressed in direct
words. It nor is in it self, nor is delivered by me, nor conceived of by me,
to be any part of, or ingredient into the entire Act of proper Justification.
I say proper: for as your own Divines acknowledge, the word being, as most
words are, extensive, ambiguous, and (...), does sometime extend it self unto
all the natural consequents unto, and proper Acts of Justification: and so it
may be said, there is a twofold Justification. When S. PAUL says (they are M.
PERKINS his words) No man is justified by the Law in the sight of GOD, he
makes a double Justification: One, before GOD; the Com. in 3. ad Gal. ver. 12.
other, before men. Justification before GOD, is, when GOD reputeth a man just,
and that only for the merit and obedience of CHRIST. Justification before men,
is, when such as profess faith in CHRIST, are reputed just by men. The first
is peculiarly the act of GOD. Not long before: Justification is a certain
action in GOD, applied unto us; which is wrought in instanti. Good Popery also:
yet to be found in the same man. For if Faith justifies by disposing the heart
(thus he disputes against the Papists) then there Ad Gal. cap. 2. page 209.
must be a space of time between Justification and justifying Faith. But there
is no space of time betwixt them: for so soon as a man believes, he is
presently justified. Do you hear M. PERKINS speak of Justification in
instanti, according to that old Rule, Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus sancti
grantia? which was learned, I think, from S. AUGUSTINE; which place I will
presently report: who learned it of S. CYPRIAN, who Epist. 1. speaks thus:
Accipe quod sentitur antequam discitur: nec per mor as temporum longa agnitione
colligitur, sed compendio gratiae maturantis hauritur. This he says seemed to
him at the first impossible; but in conclusion, being called and justified, he
found it true. Vt repent ac perniciter exuatur, quod vel genuinum, situ
materiae naturalis obduruit; vel vsurpatum diu, senio vetustatis inolevit. I
know Renovation, Sanctification, or the second Justification (for why contend
we about words, that agree upon the point?) is distinct from Remission of our
sins by GOD, and imputation of CHRIST'S righteousness unto us; wherein is our
Acceptance and Justification: and for them both I conclude with S. AUGUSTINE,
Sane ista renovatio Lib. 14. de Trin. cap. 17.
non momento uno fit, sicut momento fit uno illa renovatio in Baptismo,
remissione omnium peccatorum. Neque enim vel unum quantulumcunque remanet quod
non remittatur. Sed quemadmodum aliud est carere febribus; aliud, ab
infirmitate quae febribus facta est, revalescere: itemque aliud est, infixum
telum de corpore demere; aliud, vulnus quod eo factum est, secunda curatione
sanare: ita prima curatio est, causam removere languoris, quod per omnium
peccatorum indulgentiam fit. Secunda, ipsum sanare languorem, quod fit paulatim
proficiendo in renovatione hujus imaginis. Quae duo monstrantur in Psalmo; ubi
legitur, Qui propitius Psalm. 103. 2, 3.
fit omnibus iniquitatibus tuis, quod fit in Baptismo. Deinde sequitur, Qui
sanat omnes infirmitates tuas, quod fit quotidianis accessibus, cum haec imago
renovetur. De quae re Apostolus apertissime loquutus est, dicens, Et si
exterior homo noster corrumpitur, sed interior renovatur de die in diem.
Renovatur autem in agnitione DEI, hoc est, justitia and sanctitate veritatis.
And so I leave you to quarrel with S. AUGUSTINE, the Prophet DAVID, and the
blessed APOSTLE, and to inform against them at the next bought for Popery, as
you have already done against me; and pass on to the next, somewhat depending
heeron, a fourth point of my Popery, concerning Merit.

CHAP. XI.
The doctrine of MERIT ex condigno rejected as false and presumptuous.
Difference between the old and the new signification of Mereri.

INFORMERS.
He so extends Meritum ex condigno, that he would make men believe, there is
no material difference betwixt us and the Papists in this point.

MOUNTAGU.
THe Church of Rome has talked long and high, in strange terms, concerning
Merit in good works; and place much confidence in the worth of those good
works, which are done by men justified, and in the state of Grace. The Council
of Trent, in very surly manner, has denounced Anathema against such as do it
not, or deny it: Si quis dixerit justificati hominis opera bona non vere
mereri vitam aeternam, Anathema sit. Sess. VI. Ca. XVI. can. XXXII. Their
Schools have assigned to this purpose, a twofold merit of these works (for the
merit of the person, I meddle not with it) the one of Congruity, the other of
Condignity, as they speak; that is, either for the worth of the work it self,
or in respect of the promise of GOD made to reward the work. Now as touching
this, they talk not much amongst their Proselytes, or modern writings. They do
not trouble their discourses with it, nor the world with their discourses about
it. neither do they press it much: as if it were too gentle a contestation
with GOD. But that other of Condignitie is much made of, as being a piece for
the nonce of some importance: an opposite of some spirit to affront GOD, and
peremptorily to challenge, This is my due. Opera bona justorum absolute esse
bona, is their Assertion. and answerably BELLARMINE concludes, Opera bona
justorum absolute BELLAR. de Iustif. 5. 17.
esse MERITORIA vitae aeternae EX CONDIGNO, non solum ratione PACTI and
acceptationis, sed etiam ratione OPERIS. ita ut, in opere bono, ex gratia
procedente, sit quaedam proportio and aequalitas ad praemium vitae aeternae.
But VASQUEZ the Jesuit is most transcendent in advancing the worth and
validity of Works ex condigno, even against and without the grace of CHRIST,
in 1. 2ae. Qu. 114. disp. 214. cap. 5. 7. 8. for he teaches, first, Opera bona
justorum EX SEIPSIS, absque ullo pacto, and acceptatione, digna esse
remuneratione vitae aeternae, and aequalem valorem CONDIGNITATIS habere, ad
consequendam aeternam gloriam. secondly, that no Access of worth or dignity
does accrue unto the works of just men, through the Merits, or Person of
CHRIST: which the same works should not otherwise have had and be endowed
withal, if they had been wrought by the same Grace of GOD, by alonely GOD, in
liberal sort conferred, without CHRIST. And in the VIII. chap. That the
Promises of GOD are indeed an accessory addition unto the works of good men,
but yet do they no manner way appertain to the reason or being of Merit, but
rather accrue unto the works already made, not only worthy or condign, but
also meritorious. And lastly, he concludes, disput. CCXXII. cap. III. thus.
Cum opera justi condign mereantur vitam aeternam, taenquam aequalem mercedem
ac praemium: non opus est interventu alterius meriti condigni, quaele est
meritum CHRISTI, ut ijs reddatur vitae aterna. Quinimo aliquid habet peculiare
meritum cujuscunque justi, respectu ipsius hominis justi, quod non habet
meritum CHRISTI, nempe, reddere ipsum hominem justum and dignum vita aeterna,
ut eam digne consequatur. But the merit of CHRIST, says he, though it be such
as may most worthily obtain for us Glory at GOD'S hands, yet has it not this
effectual power and virtue, to make us formally just, and worthy of eternal
Life: but through virtue derived from him, men obtain this effectual power
residing in themselves. And hereupon we never ask or desire of GOD, that
through and by the merits of CHRIST, the reward and wages of eternal Life be
given to our works worthy and meritorious: but this; that Grace may be given
unto us by CHRIST, whereby we may be enabled worthily to merit this reward. To
such an enormious exorbitancie are these Schools grown since the JESUITS have
swaggered and domineered in them, contrary to the natural origination and
sense of the word, which was but to procure, to incur, to purchase: as I
observed out of CORNELIUS TACITUS, according to the phrase of those times; in
which sense the FATHERS, that lived after those times, and spoke according to
the language of those times, used it: and not as formerly the meaning of the
word was in CICERO, TERENCE, PLAUTUS, etc. so the old Translator in Genesis 3.
has it, Mayor est mea iniquitas, quam ut veniam MEREAR: Than that I may
PURCHASE or PROCURE pardon. Nay farther, it is sometime taken actively indeed;
so much from Desert, that it signifies to Do well unto. The Glossary of H.
STEPHEN renders meritum to this purpose, (...). That meaning of it, for, to
Procure or incur, was so frequent in those times, that STAPLETON confesses,
Si quis veterum STAPLETON, Prompt. Cathol. page 245.
Interpretum vocabulo PROMERENDI usus est, non aliter intellexit, quam
consecutionem de facto. and as contrary to the doctrine of the FATHERS. Neque
enim talia sunt hominum MERITA, ut propter ea vita aeterna debeatur ex IURE;
aut DEUS injuriam faceret, nisi eam donaret: says S. BERN. sermon. 1. in Annun.
Nay, Sufficit ad MERITUM, scire quod non habemus MERITA. Vnde mihi tantum
MERITI, cui indulgentia pro corona est? says S. AMBROSE, exhort. ad Virgin.
Hoc enim ipsum, quod homo just vivit, in quantum potest just vivere, non
MERITI est humani, sed divini BENEFICII. AUG. in Psalm. 109. And ORIGIN will not
be persuaded to the contrary, or very hardly at least: Vix mihimet persuadeo,
quod possit ullum opus esse, quod ex DEBITO remunerationem DEI deposcat. Cum
etiam, hoc ipsum, quod agere aliquid possimus, vel cogitare, vel proloqui, ex
ipsius dono and largitione faciamus. Contrary also to the opinion of moderate
men in the very Church of Rome: of whom we have a Catalogue in that learned
late work against FISHER, written by the Deane of Carlisle, page 172. of whose
mind M. MOUNTAGU professes himself directly to be. And yet say these
Informers (these false Informers, YATES and his brother WARD) he would make men
believe there is no material difference betwixt us and Papists in this point.
And this is proved substantially no doubt: for they say as follows.

CHAP. XII.
The quality and conditions of a good work required by the Roman Writers, to
make it rewardable (as far as they are positive) no Protestant disalloweth of.
To those conditions may others be added.

INFORMERS.
THese are his words: This is your own doctrine in the Roman Schools: and so
far the Protestants, for these conditions, do go along with you.

MOUNTAGU.
THis doctrine. And what doctrine is this? that there is merit of condignity?
that it is so far forth due unto good works, as that through and for the
work it self wrought and performed, we may deserve, and challenge upon desert
(or else GOD should wrong us), grace, goodness, heaven, happiness, at GOD'S
hands? (...). I never said it, never thought it, do detest it from my heart.
That doctrine which is to be found in the specified place, is, touching the
quality, not the validity, concerning the condition, not the imputation or
account of a good work: which conditions, specified and remembered by me, are,
1. That it be morally good, not simply evil. 2. Freely wrought, and not out of
compulsion. 3. By man, yet in this life, not after death. 4. In the state of
grace, and not by any natural man without GOD. Of these conditions (which do
not exclude other) what Protestants do not allow? I add (and may add many
more), Faith is necessarily required in the person, before that any thing he
does can please GOD. For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. These Informers,
it seems, are otherwise minded: for they traduce and calumniate me for a
Papist, who require, as necessary, these conditions unto a good work; which
were never, to my knowledge, denied until now. And these are the conditions
concerning which only I write, So far the Protestants go along with you.
Concerning which consent in these particulars, I confess I thought it was
real, and I think so still. I never could find, I never did imagine, I do
not believe, any Protestant living, setting your selves aside, so ignorant,
peevish, or profane, as to deny those conditions specified. Now it being (as I
conceived) agreed upon on all sides concerning the necessity of them, I did
make this conclusion unto the GAGGER, If your texts do contradict this, either
expressly or obliquely, look you unto it, it concerns you as much as us. And
why might I not make it, when they oppose a Position in the Protestants hands,
in which themselves are as deeply interessed as Protestants are? But the men
proceed to a specification of my consent more particularly.

CHAP. XIII.
GOD surely rewards good works according to his promise, of his free bounty
and grace.

INFORMERS.
ANd in that very page his words are, If this be your Merit, we contradict it
not. And, this is the Merit you plead for.

MOUNTAGU.
ANd so it is. For all the Gagger's Texts of Scripture plead for that Merit I
speak of, and no other. And that Merit is no more but this, Verily there is a
REWARD for the righteous, doubtless there is a GOD that judges the earth. A
point of Popery put into my mouth by the Prophet DAVID; and that totidem
verbis. And so King DAVID is become a Papist as well as I. For my words, upon
which that inference is made, are, REWARD in heaven no man denies. REVVARD
appointed for our good works, all do confess. If this be your MERIT, we
contradict it not. Do you? Dare you do it? that there is no REWARD for the
righteous? Cast the lie then into the Psalmists throat, Psalm. XIX. XI. In
keeping of them (GOD'S Commandments) there is GREAT REVVARD; and unto him that
said, GOD REVVARDETH every man according to his work: not only according to
the Quality of the work, that he that sows of the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap Corruption; and, he that sows in the spirit, shall of the spirit reap
glory, and honor, and immortality: but according to the degree and proportion
of his work. He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he that
sows liberally, shall reap liberally. Not of works, or for works: but
according unto works rather. For there is (...), and (...). Alia est merces
liberalitatis and gratiae; aliud virtutis stipendium, aliae laboris
remuneratio: says S. AMBR. specially Epist. 1. lib. 1.
in the intercourse betwixt GOD and man, where Non debendo, sed promittendo
DEUS se fecit debitorem. S. AUGUST. And from this, no Protestant, I know,
dissenteth. I am sure, a special man in your books, though I hold him of
another spirit and Sect than you (better by far) precisely sets down the
same in his Comment. upon the Epistle to the Galathians. See then, Reader, the
sincere and honest dealing of these misdeeming Informers, that accuse me of
Popery for positive Scripture (by a trick of concealment) in saying, GOD
REWARDS GOOD WORKS.

CHAP. XIV.
The Church of England holds no such absolute certainty of salvation in just
persons, as they have of other objects of Faith expressly and directly
revealed by GOD

INFORMERS.
TOuching the Doctrine of the certainty of salvation, having cited BELLARMINE'S
opinion, he has these words; This BELLARMINE assigns, and this is enough.
Faction may transport a man to wrangle for more; but when once they join
issue, the difference will not be much CHAP. XXII. page 186.

MOUNTAGU.
ET quid haec ad IPHICLI Boves? what has this to do with merit of good
works, whereto by the Informers it is consigned? Neither in my opinion, nor
yet in BELLARMINE'S judgment, does Certainty or Incertainty of salvation
depend so necessarily upon Merit or Demerit of good works. If a man continue
constant in the course of good works, he is sure and certain of salvation in
BELLARMINE'S judgment, and in my opinion also, though differently. Causally in
his, as procured by them; Consequently in mine, as following of them. But
whether he that does good works, be certain of. Salvation, that is, shall
continue to the end, faithful, constant in doing good works, and so obtain
Salvation, (the promise of GOD behighted unto those that do good) is another
Question of a different and disparate Nature. But to leave these
Extravagancies, and come to the point, unto assurance of which they speak. It
being by the Gagger fastened unto our Church, ignorantly or maliciously, very
absurdly, as almost every particular in that Pamphlet is, That every one
ought infallibly to assure himself of his Salvation, and to hold, that he is
of the number of the Elect and predestinate unto eternal life; I took him
short for such his conclusion so general: that every one ought, singuli
generum (so the words intend) to assure himself: whereas that assurance, upon
which the poor fellow grounded his imputation, resting upon the infallible
purpose and decree of GOD'S predestination of the Elect, was by the So
persuaded in the Church of England (for the Church of England it self was not
of that opinion) restrained unto some only, and not enlarged unto all; as the
man has it, Every one ought. Secondly, that concerning even those some, the
Church of England, in the public, received, authorized doctrine thereof, did
not tender nor press any such Tenet of Certain assurance, to be subscribed or
received, but left it indifferent and at large. Of this mind I was: of this
mind I profess my self to be still, and shall until I see reason and
evidence to the contrary. which if the Informers can supply me withal, I
yield; otherwise, (...), I see no cause to change. Thirdly, that if it had been
so, as they pretend, tendered unto us by the Church to be received and believed:
yet was it not a Doctrine so forlorn and uncouth, as the simple Gagger
imagined; having Papists of name, and rank, and reckoning, that proposed it,
and propugned it, both in, and also since the Council of Trent. AMBROSE
CATHARINE, and ANTONIUS MARINARIUS a Carmelite, being put unto it by
opposition, so canvased the question against SERIPAND, SOTO, and ANDREAS VEGA;
that they, and other Opposites of certitude and assurance, overcome with the
strength of those men's reasons, acknowledged, first, a conjecturall
probability; then came up unto a moral belief; and lastly, unto an
experimental faith. And VEGA, since that Council, writes thus: Mature tamen
omnibus hinc inde pensatis, probabilius profecto esse crediderim, posse aliquos
viros spirituales tantopere in exercitijs spiritualibus proficere, and in
familiaritate divina, ut absque ulla temeritate possint certo and absque ulla
haesitatione credere, se invenisse gratiam and remissionem peccatorum suorum
apud DEUM. Thus VEGA, concerning certainty of Justification. And BELLARMINE
goes not so far off; for he approves S. AUGUSTINE and his Doctrine, which
is enough against the Gagger. And this is that great Bug bear, that of which
so much ado is made, that I approve the saying of BELLARMINE; which I say is
enough, as indeed it is, against that ignorant fellow the Gagger, as any man
will discern that is not maliciously peevish and Puritanicall; though simply
it be not so, nor comes home. Amongst the Papists, many learned make Faith
not only an intellectual, but a fiduciall assent unto the Promises of GOD in
the Gospel; that Faith and Confidence are the same. And many of them confess,
that without miraculous revelation, by ordinary help and particular assistance
of Grace, a man may understand that he has Faith, Hope, and Charity: and that
a justified man may have a true and a certain Assurance of his justification,
without distrustful doubting. And they put a difference in this case betwixt
Faith and Certainty of Faith, cui non potest subesse falsum. Marry you happily,
men of other making, do know all things that belong, not only unto your present
justification, as assuredly as you know that CHRIST JESUS is in heaven: but are
as sure of your eternal Election, and of your future Glorification, as you are
of this Article of your Creed, that CHRIST was borne of the Virgin MARY. I
profess I am not of that opinion with you. And whatsoever you may resolve for
your crying ABBA FATHER, secundum praesentem justitiam, I crave pardon. I
cannot think, that you are, may or can be so persuaded secundum statum
futurum, and evermore cry so. which is an (...) of your other singularity,
that Faith once had, cannot be lost totally, or finally and for ever.

CHAP. XV. Touching Evangelicall Counsels.
Evangelicall Counsels admitted according to the doctrine of the old Fathers,
and many learned Divines of our Church. Popish doctrine concerning works of
Supererogation rejected.

INFORMERS.
TOuching Evangelicall Counsels, these are his words: I know no doctrine of
our English Church against them.

MOUNTAGU.
SO I say still, I know none. I do believe there are, and ever were,
Evangelicall Counsels; such as S. PAUL mentions in his Consilium autem do;
such as our SAVIOR pointed at and directed unto in his Qui potest capere
capiat; such as a man may do or not do, without guilt of sin, or breach of
Law: but nothing less than such as the Papists fabric up unto themselves in
their works of Supererogation. It is an error in Divinity, not to put a
difference betwixt such works, and works done upon counsel and advice. If any
man, not knowing or not considering the state of the question, has otherwise
written, or preached, or taught, what is that to me, or the Doctrine of the
Church of England? His ignorance, or fancy, or misunderstanding, or
misapplying, is not the Doctrine of Antiquity, which with universal consent
held Evangelicall Counsels; nor of our Church, in which our GAMALIEL has
told Ad Apol. TORT. pa. 196.
us; Quis nescit fieri a nobis multa libere, and quae a DEO non sunt imperata
voveri and reddi? These Promoters knew it not. B. MORTON in his Appeal says
(if he do not say true, inform against him for it) that we allow the
distinction of PRECEPTS and COUNCELS, lib. V. cap. IV. sect. 3. For his sake
excuse me from Popery, who write no more than he did before me: what in GOD'S
indulgence is a matter of Counsel; in regard of strict justice, may come under
Precept. Cap. IV. Sect. V.

CHAP. XVI.
Saint GREG. NAZIANZENE defended from the touch of uncircumcised lips.

INFORMERS.
SO he cites and approves to this purpose the saying of NAZIANZENE: We have
Laws that do bind of necessity; others that be left to our free choice, to
keep them or not: so as if we keep them, we shall be rewarded; if we keep them
not, no fear of punishment or of danger is to be undergone therefore. cap.
XV. pa. 103.

MOUNTAGU.
GRave crimen CAIE CAESAR, to cite and approve the saying of NAZIANZENE, one of
the four Doctors of the Greek Church; (...), in S. BASIL'S opinion; viri per
omniae incomparabilis, as he is styled by RUFFINUS; viri valde eloquentis, and
in Scriptur is valde versati, as S. HIER. his scholar speaks. And to acquit him
from the touch of your uncircumcised lips, S. AUGUSTINE in commending him did
not lavish at all, where he says that he was, as indeed he was, magni nominis
and fama celeberrima illustris adeo Episcopus: cujus eloquia, ingentis merito
gratiae, etiam in Latinam linguam translata, usquequaque claruerunt. This man,
(...), whose books all the Puritans in Europe are not worthy to carry, is
phillipped off slightly by these our new Masters, as if his saying were not
worth the hearing, nor the man to be made any more account of than Jack hold
my staff, by these Rabbis. Sedeat ergo cum istis sanctis patribus (from
IGNATIUS downward, not worth the looking after) etiam sanctus GREGORIUS, and
cum eis vestrae criminationis inanem patiatur invidiam, dum tamen cum eis
contra novitiam pestem medicinalem proferat ipse sententiam. So spoke S.
AUGUSTINE of old in his commendation, against JULIAN the Pelagian Heretic, who
slighted him then as much touching original sin, as you do now touching
Evangelicall Counsails. And so speak I at present in S. AUGUSTINE'S phrase. I
might have added unto that unskilful Clerk NAZIANZENE, that great Papist S.
CHRYSOSTOM in this point for company, who Hom. VIII. de Poen. says, a man
may do more than is commanded: who yet was indeed no Papist, though the poor
Capacity of these men, not apprehending what is Popery, and what is not,
misdeem, mistake, misname Popery. Qui ignorant ignoret adhuc. I will not seek
nor go about to beetle it into their brains: as in case of Counsels, so I say,
Qui potest capere, capiat: and who is he that cannot, but he that will not,
understand? This I will avow; If this be Popery, or I a Papist, all antiquity
held Popery, and were Papists. For name but one Writer of a contrary mind to
this, There are Evangelicall Counsels.

CHAP. XVII.
The exposition of the saying of our SAVIOR, If thou will be perfect, etc. S.
CHRYSOSTOM, S. AUGUSTINE, S. HIEROME, S. AMBROSE, make it no imperious
precept. If it be, the Informers are the least observers of it, and sin
against their own consciences.

INFORMERS.
ANd a little after, speaking of that place, MATH. XIX. XXI. If thou will be
perfect, go sell what thou have, etc. he has these words. A counsel it is, I
grant, no imperious form of precept: left to choice and liberty, to do or not
to do. CHRIST tieth no man, but leaves him to do or not to do. CHAP. XV. pa.
105.

MOUNTAGU.
IT is so, I have those words. It is true; I do grant it a counsel, and no
imperious precept, at least to all men. For I cannot conceive the meaning to be
otherwise, where the words are so full, complete, evident, and convincing. If
thou will; left unto choice: not, Hoc fac and vives; upon price of thy head,
pain of thy salvation, do thus: which is stilus Curiae, the style and tenor
of those imperious Laws of the Lord of Hosts, that require exact Obedience. If
it were a Law and a Commandment (says S. CHRYSOSTOM) he should S. CHRYSOSTOM. to.
5. page 322. edit. SAVIL.
not have brought it in by way of counsel and of advice. For this very cause,
he says not in plain terms, Go sell that thou have, lest he might suppose
it a binding Law: but he says, If thou will be perfect, go sell what thou
have; to let us understand, it is in our choice to do or not to do it. Thus S.
CHRYSOSTOM; not so you. Pardon me if I prefer S. CHRYSOSTOM before you, or
your betters: I mean, your Master, whose Disciples you profess your selves to
be. Quod enim praecipitur, imperatur: quod imperatur, necesse est fieri: quod
necesse est fieri, nisi fiat, poenam habet. Frustra jubetur, quod in arbitrio
ejus ponitur, etc. So S. HIEROME: S. HIER. cont. IOVIN. l. 1. c. 7
and can you give better reasons? S. GREGORY NAZIANZENE displeased you: so
will S. AUGUSTINE, I make no question; but it mattereth not. Nec enim, sicut
Non moechaberis, non occides; it a dici potest, Non nubes. Illa exiguntur: ista
offeruntur. Si fiunt ista, laudantur: nisi fiant illa, damnantur. In illis
DOMINUS debitum imperat vobis: in hoc autem siquid De S. Virg. c. 30
amplius supererogaveritis, in redeundo, reddet vobis. So will S. AMBROSE for
the same opinion, who makes a difference betwixt Precept and Counsel; and
expounds that very place of Counsel, thus: Et ut intelligas distantiam
Praecepti, atque Consilij, illum recorderis (he speaks unto you my Informers)
cui in Evangelio ante praescribitur, ne homicidium faciat, ne adulterium
admittat, ne falsum testimonium dicat. Praeceptum enim ibi est, ubi est poena
peccati: At vero cum se Praecepta Legis memorasset implesse, Consilium ei
datur, ut vendat emnia, and sequatur DOMINUM. Haec enim non Praecepto
imperantur, sed Consilio deferuntur. Duplex namque forma mandati est: Vna
praeceptiva, altera voluntaria. Vnde and DOMINUS in alia dicit, Non occides,
ubi in alia praecepit, SI vis esse perfectus, vende omnia tua. Ergo hic liber
est a Praecepto, cujus defertur arbitrio. Which Testimony of S. AMBROSE,
together with that out of S. CHRYSOSTOM, do withal insinuate in what sense
TERTULLIAN in his book de Monogamia, contrary unto the ordinary phrase, does
term it Praeceptum substantiae dividendae egenis, a Commandment to divide the
substance unto the poor. namely so, as S. AMBROSE does call it Mandatum: who
yet says it was no Imperious Precept to do so, or so: but only Counsel and
Advice; leaving it free unto his choice to do it or not to do it. For every
Counsel and Advice, is a kind of mandate; though not properly, yet with
condition. But my good Informers, if you will needs have it Popery to hold with
any Evangelicall Counsels, you will be found worse by far than Papists,
that are convicted in your consciences, to break that willingly which you hold
a Precept obligatory, and no Counsel. For do any of You all, the precisest
in the pack, obey CHRIST'S words in this his absolute command, and going,
sells all that he has, and gives it to the poor? I cannot yet name any
one so observant. I believe I never shall see any so charitable; rather
breaking that negative commandment of the highest, Thou shall not covet that
which is thy neighbors. and that other, Thou shall not steal from thy
neighbor. And yet howsoever other men are not obliged to go sell what they
have, and give it to the Poor, you are tied to do it, upon that high
Commanding form, Do this and live. It is sin to you, whatsoever it is to
other men, not to do it: for you are so persuaded it is a Precept. Precepts,
even affirmative, ligant semper, though not ad semper; require obedience and
exact performance, at some time or other, where they are tendered. But you
neither obey it, nor will suffer others to obey it that would. For you would
account and style him a Papist, that should do it. You would beg him that
should put it in use and practice. For such opinion you hold of the ancient
Monks and Ascetae, as S. ANTHONY and others, that did practice it. Until I
may perceive that you show forth your faith by your works, and manifest your
Belief by real practice, you must give me leave to think you dissemble in
the point, and would persuade men of a case of Necessity, that your selves may
feed fat upon their folly, and in vacuum veniatis. Till then, whatsoever your
opinion be, give me leave to be of S. AUGUSTINES mind: Aliud est Consilium,
says he, aliud Praeceptum. Consilium datur, ut Virginitas Sermon. LXI. de Temp.
conservetur, ut a vino and carnibus abstineatur, ut vendantur omnia, and
pauperibus erogentur. Praeceptum vero datur ut justitia custodiatur; ut omnis
homo divertat a malo, and faciat bonum. Denique de virginitate dicitur, Qui
potest capere, capiat. De justitia vero non dicitur, Qui potest facere, faciat;
sed, Omnis arbor quae non facit fructum bonum, exscindetur, and in ignem
mittetur. Consilium qui libenter audierit and fecerit, majorem habebit gloriam.
Praeceptum vero qui non impleverit, nisi subvenerit poenitentia, poenam evadere
non poterit. You cannot deny this constant resolution of Antiquity. Change
therefore your manners, or your minds. Be Papists with me, or Rebels without
me. As for me, you are like to be alone. I hold it no obligation: you do.
therefore you are tied to obey. That commandment. Matthew. v. you will not
deny: Be you perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect. Now if this be a
Precept, If thou will be perfect, go sell all thou have and give it to the
poor; it is a part of that perfection, being named in either place. But I
leave you to bethink your selves better. I conclude with S. CHRYSOSTOM: S.
CHRYSOSTOM. To. v. in illud, Salutate PRISCILLAM, etc. page 322.
(...) (...). Had this been a Law and Commandment, it should have been
tendered unto him at the first: it ought to have been digested in form of a
commandment and law, and not have been brought in, as it is, by way of
counsel and advice. For where he says, Possess nor Silver nor Gold; this
speech runs in commanding form. But when he says, If thou will be
perfect, go and sell; he speaks it as counsailing and advising only. Now, to
Counsel, and Command, are not one and the same thing: he that commands,
will have the thing commanded observed upon any hand: he that counsels and
advises, leaving it to choice and election of a man, to do or not do it;
makes him Lord and Ruler of his own actions. Thus, and much more to purpose,
S. CHRYSOSTOM in that place, if you view him. If he and his fellow -Ancients
be Papists, be it so. I am content to be so accounted. For I mean to be a
Papist with them, rather than a Noveller with you. And so I proceed.

CHAP. XVIII. Touching LIMBUS PATRUM.
The Dreams of Papists about Limbus Patrum, related and rejected. The state of
men's souls after death. The Place proportioned to their state. The souls of
the blessed Fathers before CHRIST'S ascension, in heavenly Palaces, yet not in
the third and highest heavens, nor in that fulness of joy which they have now,
and more of which they shall have hereafter. The opinion of old and new
Writers. Our Canons not to be transgressed. The Doctrine and Faith of the
Church of England concerning the Article of CHRIST'S descent into Hell. The
disadvantage we are at with our Adversaries. Every Novellers Fancy printed,
and thrust upon us for the general Tenet of our Church. The plain and easy
Articles of our CREED disturbed and obscured by the wild dreams of little
less than blasphemous men; by new Models of Divinity; by Dry-fats of several
Catechismes. The Belief of Antiquity. The Author and It far from POPERY.

INFORMERS.
HOwsoever in words he denies Limbus Patrum, yet thus he writes: The
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Fathers that lived and died before CHRIST; the
Scripture resolves, that they were not there where now they are, in the
highest heavens and glorious, there where the glorified body of CHRIST is now
residing at the right hand of GOD. CHAP. XLI. page 277.

MOUNTAGU.
THUS he writes. And what if he write so? Why then he upholdeth Limbus
Patrum. His Words and Opinion are far asunder. So said your LIMBOMASTIX
concerning the Descent into Hell. As CHRIST was buried; so also it is to be
believed, that CHRIST went into Hell, says Artic. 3.
the Church of England. Therefore he went thither, says that Ignorante,
according to this opinion, to fetch up the souls of the Fathers that were not
there. Just as you will have it, with M. MOUNTAGU in his opinion. But good
Master Informers, bethink your selves: go into your Studies again, and look
better upon your books. You understand not the state and condition of Limbus
Patrum, nor yet the Descent of CHRIST into Hell. To assure you, I am for my
opinion (dream you what you will otherwise, and what you please) absolutely of
the mind of all Antiquity, that the souls of the Blessed Dead, separated from
their bodies, and Gathered (as the Scriptures speak) unto their Fathers,
before CHRIST'S Resurrection from Death to Life, and his Ascension into Heaven;
that departed hence in the hope and assurance of GODS promises, and in the
expectation of better things to come, were not yet then in Coelo proprie dicto
summo illo and glorioso, whereas now they are, in company of all the holy
Angels, with the glorified body of our SAVIOR, far above all things in
heaven and earth. And yet for all this; I am not for him, that thereupon
ignorantly and maliciously infers, I hold with, believe, or conceit any
such Limbus Patrum, as the Church of Rome has fancied unto her self, and
tendered unto her Profelites, drawn and derived out of that negative opinion of
Antiquity, ill understood, and ill applied. As if because they were not so in
heaven, per omnia, as now they are, they must needs be so in hell as they
conceive them to be. the state whereof is imagined this.

LIMBUS Patrum is so called by the Papists a subjecto contento, which they do
imagine to be the uppermost Fringe, as the word signifies, or the Verge of
Hell. For, as if some of their Masters had been sent thither to take a survay
thereof, they do quarter out that infernal Clime into four Regions; all
agreeing in the particulars, though with some difference about the quartering
and confining. That the Regions are four, they all agree: Hell, properly so
called, of the Damned, Purgatory, Limbus puerorum, and Limbus patrum. For the
uppermost and lowermost, they all agree; but differ about the site of Purgatory
and Limbus puerorum: they cannot resolve which is the uppermost of these two.
In Hell of the Damned they imagine, and rightly, eternal loss of happiness
in exclusion from GOD, as also most insufferable eternal pain. In Purgatory,
there is some question, whether the loss be partial or not: for they are
conceited to have, at least sometimes, the intervening society of holy Angels,
who cannot but impart unto them some glimmering of heavenly consolation; and
yet the pain, though not eternal, but only temporary, is set down to be equal
unto Hell torments. Unto the Limbus Infantum, they have fastened eternal loss
and deprivation of GOD, without sensible pain: in Limbus patrum, temporary
loss, but no pain. Limbus puerorum and Hell of the Damned, in their opinions,
endure for ever. Purgatory shall cease, and be no more, at the day of
judgment: but for Limbus patrum, the date thereof is, and was long since,
expired. Now there is no such mansion or habitation of souls, they are
resolved: but what is become of it, or how employed, they are not resolved.
Some imagine it now all one with that Limbus Infantum. And peradventure there
was need to have the room enlarged, the inhabitants increasing and growing on
so fast, more than they did in the days of old; as in popular Cities the
multitude grows greater every day and greater. So that Limbus puerorum, in
their opinion, has, and out of convenience it was necessary it should swallow
up Limbus Patrum. ANTE adventum CHRISTI, says one, sancti Patres descendebant
Tractat. contra Graecos, edit. a P. STEVVARTIO, page 565.
eo. Nunc vero pueri qui absque Baptismo discedunt, sine poena sensibili
detinentur. Others do conceive of it as inane vacuum: and this is the commonly
received opinion of the Roman Schools. In effect, therefore, the Popery of
Limbus Patrum is this: That in regard of state, the Fathers who died before
CHRIST, were, quoad locum, in a part of HELL, in the uppermost Region of Hell;
and, quoad statum, without all pain; as also without all joy, without fruition
or seeing of GOD: That at CHRIST'S descent into Hell, which was locally only
into this part of Hell, but virtually and powerfully into all places and
regions of Hell, they were drawn out thence, led forth in triumph, and
translated into Heaven, in regard of place; unto seeing, enjoying, and fruition
of GOD, in respect of state. But this is not the Tenet of Antiquity. A man may
deny their being in Heaven, and yet not infer they were thus in Hell.

Now to come to the point; The question is concerning their souls only: for
their bodies, it is confessed, in ordinary dispensation, do sleep in the
dust. It is confessed on both sides, which is most material, concerning them,
That being immortal in their better Part, after dissolution and separation,
they still have a Being, and are subsisting in aliquo ubi: for though the
nature of a soul is not to be circumscriptively in place (as TERTULLIAN
fancied) as M. YATES and M. WARD are when they are in their Pulpits, yet are
they confined in their proper ubi, definitively and indistanter, as they
speak; that is, they have not, nor can have, an ubique-subsistence, but a
determined and defined. Being here, at that instant they are not there: for
omnipresence is the absolute Peculiar of the ALMIGHTY. Truly then, and indeed,
they must and do subsist in place, or rather ubi; though where, and how, who
can tell? For, the Scripture, content with their state and being, is silent
for particular touching their place. And accordingly the best learned of all
times and places, have, if not declined quaestionem loci, yet not been curious
nor resolved for it. So here is a maine difference at the first betwixt the
Papistry of Rome, and M. MOUNTAGU'S Popery. They de fide resolving the place to
have been thus: He returning Ignoramus, we are not ascertained, we cannot tell.

AGAIN, in that their Vbi wheresoever, subsisting, as they had Being and
Subsistence, so did they also perform actions of life and motion, congruous
and convenient unto their nature and kind. And though they are said to be at
rest, yet is it qualified with, In what sort; They rest from their Labors,
says the SPIRIT. where the latter word, Labors, gives species unto, and
determines the former word, Rest. For all manner rest is not predicated of
them; not such as that rest of the body in the grave. They rest not, as in a
sleep, out of mind, without motion, as not in action at all; as the frame of
Nature did in the days of JOSHUA; or as ADAM in that deep sleep, wherein EVA
was framed out of his side. Thus to rest, is contrary to their nature and
condition intellectual; though it has been the opinion of some Popes, they
say, and is of some Anabaptists at this day: such as against whom M. CALVIN
wrote his Psychopannychia. But being now separated from the body, they live,
move, exercise, perform and put in practice, acts natural and coincident unto
their proper kinds; understanding, conceiving, willing, judging, loving,
rejoicing, and such like proper acts of natural, rational, intellectual
creatures. Next, inasmuch as there are, and have been always in this life, two
sorts amongst the sons of men; Believers in CHRIST, for their profession;
Holy in course, for their life and conversation: then Misbeleevers and
faithless in regard of GOD; Wicked mis-agents in respect of living: so
proportionably there are, and have been ever, two states and conditions of the
souls of men, in their separation after death; some rewarded with happiness,
in their being for ever with GOD; some condemned unto woe and wretchedness,
for ever estranged from GOD. All men when they dye (as, sooner or later, all do
and shall) in regard of that unchangeable Law of kind, Thou shall Dye the
Death, are said in SCRIPTURE To go the way of all flesh, or of All the Earth:
for never man had a privilege of absolute or total exemption. And in regard
of their being or subsisting after their death, are said To sleep with their
Fathers, touching their bodies, (...): and to be gathered to their Fathers, or,
their People, in respective of their souls, were they good or bad. For all are
a society, a collective people; either in happy or in a miserable state. The
good go to enjoying of happiness without end, the wicked to enduring of
torments everlasting. Thus is their state diversified to their deserving. and
herein the Scripture speaks plain and evident. But now for Place, we are not
resolved so particularly. Certain it is in common course of kind, Place is
ever fitted, disposed, proportioned to state and condition of the therein
placed. And therefore, when this mortal shall have put on immortality: when
those that have won many unto righteousness, shall shine as the Sun, and be
clothed with glory and immortality, in the day of the resurrection of the just;
then we read of a fitted Place, a new heaven and a new earth. Now, fitting
unto this twofold state and condition of souls after death, I believe and
profess, that evermore there was, is, and shall be two several, different,
distinct, proportionable Places or Vbies for them, known ever commonly by that
general name of Hell and Heaven. I believe also, and profess, that the souls
of the Fathers, Kings, Prophets, Priests, Patriarchs, righteous and good men,
that lived and dyed before CHRIST came in the flesh, in eandem communem spem
nobiscum venerunt, expectantes CHRISTUM, as IGNATIUS speaks. and so when Ad
MAGNES.
they were gathered unto their people, went not into Hell locally in respect of
Place, because not to Hell interpretatively, that is, into wretchedness in
regard of state. They went to Heaven locally, as to their proper Vbi: they went
to Heaven figuratively, that is, into happiness and health, into joy in
heavenly palaces; unto GOD, into the presence of GOD, the Tabernacles of peace;
into Paradise, ABRAHAM'S bosom. Eadem est fides nostra, quae fuit illorum: Hoc
nos credimus esse factum, quod illi crediderunt faciendum. They hoped to be
saved in, through, and by him, in whom we do hope. They lived by that faith as
well as we, though not in that evidence and fullness as we. They dyed in that
CHRIST, in whom we, though not incarnate, and already come, as do we. But this
their being, their living, their dying so, will not infer that Place to have
received them then, wherein now with us they be, and where one day all GOD'S
chosen ones shall be. For the same faith has not ever the same measure, nor
proportion in all, nor the same dispensation at all times. The same hope is
more eminent in some than in others. The same persons, enlarged in their
Indowments or Achievements, are likewise enhansed and ennobled in their
Accruments, Temporal or Eternal, Personal or Original. Their bodies are not
as yet reunited unto their souls, yet shall they be raised up out of the dust,
and be made conformable in their Resurrection unto life, to the now-glorified
body of CHRIST our Savior. Their souls, then departing and at Rest, in Peace,
in Happiness, and Bliss, in the hands of GOD, yet were not in that degree of
state as now they be in; had not that fullness of joy which now they have, nor
have as yet that measure and proportion that they shall have hereafter. They
were then in Heaven, as they be now in Heaven, though not as now; nor yet
where, as now for particular place: not in Hell, or any part of Hell, as the
word and meaning is in Scripture.

This is sufficient against that dream of their Limbus Patrum in the Roman
Church: which is conceived and dreamed to have been a Part and Region of Hell,
far distant and removed from Heaven. Not then in that Heaven, where they are
now; in that Part, that Site, that Region, those Mansions of Heaven in which
now they are. For Heaven, so spacious, extended, so capacious, as we both
conceive and see, is not, nor has been so narrowed or straightened in roomth,
that there cannot be diverse Designations, Regions, Habitations, Mansions or
Quarterings there, to speak after the phrase and language of men, remote, near,
different, distinct one from or to another; fitted, applied, disposed,
proportioned and accommodated unto the several states, measures, times,
qualities, habitudes and indowments of men, that were to be carried and
translated thither before and since the coming of CHRIST; in the time of
Promise, and of accomplishment and performance of Promise; in the time of
veiles, types, shadows; and that other of Substance, Revealing, and
Consummation. They were in happiness, therefore not in any part of Hell: for
no part of Hell is capable thereof, or fitted for any, no not the least degree
or participation of joy and happiness. I absolutely subscribe unto TERTULLIAN;
Aliud Inferi, aliud sinus ABRAHAE. TERT. contra MAR. IV. 14.
and that which S. AUGUSTINE, Tom. 11. Epist. LVII. spoke somewhat doubtingly;
Non facile alicubi Scripturarum Inferorum nomen positum reperitur in bono: that
which Tom. III. de Gen ad literam, lib. XII. cap. XXXII. he is peremptory in;
Nondum inveni, and adhuc quaero, nec mihi occurrit, Inferos alicubi in bono
posuisse Scripturam duntaxat Canonicam. The Fathers then were not in the Popish
LIMBUS Patrum. For their Limbus is, though the verge and uppermost region, yet
a region and part of Hell. Whosoever either comes, or ever yet came within
the fringe and confines of Hell (except the humane soul of our SAVIOR, who
finished all sufferings and penalties upon his cross) came thither to suffer
torment and pain: whosoever came thither, except him alone, who only was liber
inter mortuos, returned not out any more from thence; but sedet, aeternumque
sedebit infelix. Between LAZARUS in ABRAHAM'S bosom, which was the Rest of the
Righteous before CHRIST, and DIVES in Hell, a place of woe and torment, was
(...), a vast, void gulf, immeasurable; and that also (...), as says the holy
Text, so seated, fixed, fastened for ever, that it was not removeable at any
time. They cannot come thence, says Father ABRAHAM: it is impossible that they
should. and he speaks it before that imagined harrowing of Hell by our SAVIOR;
intimating sufficiently, that they were not in Hell. But as they were not
there: so were not they likewise in Heaven STRICTLY taken for the THIRD Heaven;
that receptacle of the righteous now, together with the glorified body of our
SAVIOR. For that place was not then, stantibus ut tunc, fitting or accruing to
them. Such a royal habitation, the Nonesuch of GOD, did not befit their then
inferior states and conditions. But then you will ask me, If neither in
Heaven above, nor in Earth beneath, nor in Hell, where possibly could they
consist, or were they disposed? A being they had; therefore an ubi for their
subsisting. To which, first, I answer, They had both: and in general terms
the Scripture speaks, they had that subsistence in the hands of GOD, with
GOD, in his holy Hill, in the Tabernacles of Peace, in Paradise, in ABRAHAM'S
bosom with LAZARUS, with ABRAHAM, ISAAC, and JACOB, in the Kingdom of Heaven,
and of GOD. Why then they were in Heaven at least. Doubtless yes, in a more
general notion. The word is ambiguous, as I have declared against the Gagger;
put forth for condition alone, place alone, or place and condition together. In
regard of state and condition, they were in Heaven, that is, happy and
blessed, as then was convenient. In regard of ubi also, they were in Heaven, in
a more general and enlarged sense; in some part of Heaven, where GOD disposed
them. You will ask in particular, Where was that? I must and do answer
negatively, I cannot tell: I dare not define: I have no warrant for resolution.
I answer positively, You should not ask nor curiously enquire, but be content
to be ignorant of that which GOD has not revealed. And then farther, It is not
profitable to know: for GOD else would not have concealed it. So that to
enquire it pressingly, is but curiosity; to determine it resolvedly, is but
presumption at the best. Therefore M. CALVIN, and other Protestant Divines that
I could name, content themselves only with the state in special of joy and
rest; with the ubi in general to be Heaven: but presume not to descend unto
particular where, seeing GOD has not been pleased to discover it. It is enough
to know they were not in Hell as the Papists mean it: and it is more than
probable they were not in Heaven as you conceit it.

For, first, no Scripture affirms it expressly, that the Rest of those
Righteous was there where now it is. Secondly, it is not, that I could ever
read or understand, collected out of any place of Scripture, by any one
Orthodox Writer, for fifteen hundred years after CHRIST. Thirdly, no Writer
of any one confession has demonstrated it to be so intended in any Scripture.
Fourthly, no Article or Determination of our Church concludes it, or so
tendreth it to be conceived and embraced: and therefore whatsoever my private
opinion otherwise might be, I am tied not to preach or publish it, according
to the CANONS prescribed Lib. Canonum, edit anno 1571
unto Ministers in such cases; knowing it to be the resolved doctrine of
Antiquity, as I do. I am not excusable, if I transgress the CANONS. What your
ignorance may plead for you, I cannot tell: I leave it to them that must look
unto it where you live, if you offend; as you are like enough to do, if it come
in your way. But on the other side, there are Texts of Scripture that seem at
least to say, and have been ever taken, of Writers old and new, to say, that
the souls of the Fathers that died before CHRIST, were not there whereas now
they be; as, S. JOHN 111. 13. No man has ascended into Heaven. JOHN XIV. 3. I
go to prepare a place for you. PSALM. XXIV. 6. Lift up your heads, O you gates,
and be you lift up you everlasting doors and the King of glory shall come in.
Which Text of that Psalm, all Antiquity, from IUSTINE MARTYR downward, do
expound of Heaven opened at the Ascension of our SAVIOR: according unto that
which we daily profess in our English LITURGY, out of and with Saint AMBROSE;
When thou had overcome the sharpnes of death, thou did OPEN the Kingdom of
HEAVEN to all Believers. So Heb. IX. 8. 12. The WAY unto the HOLIEST OF ALL was
NOT YET MANIFEST, while as the FIRST Tabernacle was standing: and Heb. X. 20.
and Heb. XI. 39, 40

UPON these grounds, and others that I now remember not, it has been the
common received opinion of all the FATHERS, Greek and Latin, that the souls of
the Righteous before CHRIST, were not in the highest and most glorious Heavens
locally; which is also the opinion of BULLINGER, PETER MARTYR, HYPERIUS, and
others. BUCER and MUSCULUS directly write, that the Thief was the first, who
with CHRIST entered into Paradise. Upon M. CALVIN it is imposed by many, though
injuriously, that he thought no righteous soul did, does, or can go into
Heaven before the general resurrection: but indeed he declineth the question
of the place; and for the state, against the Popish LIMBUS, averreth, that in
respect of genericall happiness, they before CHRIST enjoyed the same that they
do now: but for accidental beatitude and degrees of happiness, he puts a
difference; and resolves, that even now they are in profectu until the day of
Doom: until which time, they expect in atrijs the consummation of their
beatitude. CHRISTUS, Sanctuarium Coeli ingressus, ad consummationem usque
saeculorum, solus populi eminus in atrio residentis, vota ad DEUM defert.
Instit. 111. 20. 10. If a man should press his words as they will bear, the
souls of the Righteous, and those now that dye in the LORD, nedum of the
Fathers before CHRIST, are not yet in Heaven: but I do it not. This is all; he
favors the opinion of all Antiquity, that the souls of the FATHERS before
CHRIST, were not in COELO SUMMO ET GLORIOSO: and yet I hope CALVIN did not
maintain Limbus Patrum.

ALL this grows for crossing your newly invented Puritanicall conceit, and
direct depravation of an Article of our Creed, the descent of our Savior into
Hell: and in answer unto the Gagger in this point, have I in this particular
angered the generation of your fellowbrethren. The Popish Gagger objected unto
the Church of England this TENET, that JESUS CHRIST descended not into Hell.
Unto whom the substance of my Answer was, With what face, or what forehead, can
he say that we teach so, that in our Creed repeat it openly, and ever in the
Church profess it in plain and express words; that propose it in Baptism
interrogatorily unto Godfathers and Godmothers, to be answered unto, avowed,
and publicly believed; that teach it in our Catechism unto children; that
subscribe it in our Articles thus, THAT as CHRIST died for us, and was BURIED:
so ALSO it is to be believed, that HEWENT DOWN INTO HELL, Artic. 111; that
have publicly defended it against Puritanicall opposition; and lastly, that
with us more, more really and to purpose, do believe it, than the Church of
ROME does, and those that accuse us of sacrilege for violating an Article of
our CREED? For they profess, that CHRIST only descended into the uppermost
Region of Hell, LIMBUS PATRUM, really; into the other parts and continents
virtually only, or effectually, in the power of his GODHEAD, and his Passion.
Non descendit ad INFEROS reproborum, ac in perpetuum damnatorum (says their
grand Dictator THOMAS AQUINAS), quoniam In 3. sent. d. 12.
ex co nulla est redemptio: igitur ad eum locum descendit, qui vel sinus
ABRAHAE, vel communiter LIMBUS PATRUM appellatur.

But the truth is, we are at some disadvantage with our Romish Adversaries. For
as every one (through the greediness of gain) may write and print almost what
he will, especially if it savor of the Lemannian Lake: so every private fancy,
every wilful opinion, ignorant assertion, and some blasphemous dotages, cast
forth by any man that is, or has been of our Confession, or is any way divided
in Communion from the Church of Rome, and us both, is by many men, and most an
end by our Adversaries, cast upon the general Tenent of all Protestants, and
more specially upon the Church of England: though that Church, in the general
and approved Doctrine thereof, do detest it more than the Church of Rome does.
In this very point, the manifold dreams of new refined spirits are made ours;
their little less than blasphemies, made ours; the tergiversations,
qualifications, disturbing of senses from (...), anima, Sheol, Hades, Inferi,
Infernus, and what not, made ours; the toies, trash, fables of Pagans, Poets,
Philosophers, Magicians, and who not, of what not, brought in, to trouble and
disturb our belief, by some that feign would be, and yet are loath to be
Puritans, made ours. The much urging of this Article not to be found in ancient
Creeds; not to have been taught or believed of the Eastern Churches; not of
that of Constantinople: and I know not what else, tending to make men first
waver in their faith, then to doubt of their faith, and at length flatly to
deny their faith. if in this, why not in other Articles that either are or may
be so serupulized, all made ours, laid unto our charge by our adversary, and
made the public Doctrine of OUR Church? So the blasphemy of CHRISTOPHER
CARLISLE, that made this Article an Error and a Fable, page XXVIII. and 77
against D. SMITH, is made ours. That horrible blasphemy, that CHRIST endured
the very torments of Hell, and went down to suffer there, as BANISTER and
AEPINUS taught, is made ours. That CHRIST did, being yet alive, suffer in his
humane soul INFERNI TREMENDA TORMENTA, not only (...), (as the Greek
Liturgies discrectly call them) but even desperation and the second death, as
it is in HUMES Rejoinder unto D. HILL, in DEERINGS Catechism, in your new
fangled Model of Divinity, M. YATES (was it not?) and I doubt not in others of
that stamp, are all made ours. That by Hell is meant now this, now that, as
almost in every Catechism, such Pamphlets, whereof we have abroad so good
store, as I think would freight a Dryfat to the Mart: every man making and
using, and printing a Catechism, a New Model of his own, according to his
own private motion, contrary to Order and Injunction, by which we are tied
unto One, the best of all. And lastly, if any man leaning to your Doctrine,
though not to your Discipline, say, That we know not the native and undoubted
sense of this ARTICLE; all is still cast upon the CHURCH of England. I confess
these are disadvantages for us against the Papists; as it were so many thorns
in our sides: but yet they choke us not. For the Doctrine of the Church is
plain, direct, affirmative, as it should be; without figures, allegories,
far-fetched, obscure interpretations, which never were intended to be inserted
into, must not be tolerated in Articles of our CREED, easy, plain, even and
perspicuous of themselves; and made so purposely for the use, capacity, and
instruction of the simple and ignorant, who are not capable of obscurities.

It was not impossible that the humane soul of CHRIST should have been, or
might be, or was, in triduo mortis and separationis suae, really, truly,
properly in Hell; that land of darkness, abode and habitation of the damned.
Not improbable, against Scripture, religion, piety, reason. No inconveniency,
incompetency, absurdity, much less impiety: No compulsion drew Him thither. It
was no needless thing. I have given reasons of it mo than one. He went not to
deliver, to stay, to suffer; for all was finished upon the Cross, quae
praedicta, quae praefigurata. Therefore, according to the Church of England, I
conclude in the words of Saint AUGUSTINE; DOMINUM quidem carne mortificatum,
Epist. 99.
venisse in INFERNUM satis constat. Neque enim contradici potest JOEL Prophetae
qui dixit, Quoniam non derelinques animam meam in Inferno. Quod ne aliter
quisquam sapere auderet, in Apostolorum Actibus idem PETRUS exponit, vel
ejusdem PETRI illis verbis, quibus eum asserit solvisse Inferni dolores, in
quibus impossible erat eum teneri. Quis ergo nisi INFIDELIS negaverit FUISSE
APUD INFEROS CHRISTUM? But if it be urged, he went down to free those that
were bound there, as intended by loosing the sorrows of Death, of which though
it were impossible himself should be holden, yet others were then detained
under, quibus alij tenebantur, quos ille noverat liberandos; S. AUGUSTINE will
rejoine: admit it so. Quinam tamen isti sunt, temerarium est desinire. Since
him, men are grown wiser, or more adventurous to resolve. The truth is, he
that will believe no more than he sees, nor embrace but what he has
demonstration for, or sensible apprehension; were better never meddle with the
things of GOD, where Faith is the Evidence of what is not seen. Antiquity
believed CHRIST went into Hell: they believed, when he ascended into Heaven, he
went a way nullius ante trita solo, and had the prerogative royal, as he well
deserved it, to be the first, that, removing the Cherubin at the gates of
Paradise, made a way for himself and for us into Heaven. and though (...),
when he came up from the field of Blood, thousand thousands did attend him, and
came up with him in his Royal Pass: yet they were not brought forth from
Limbus Patrum of the Papists. The Fathers of old heard no news thereof; the
Protestants detest it as much as you: and be it known unto you, so do I, as
much as any Puritan in the Kingdom. And yet I am of opinion (for it is not of
that nature or necessity, to come within my Creed) CHRIST was the first that
entered Heaven. The souls of the Righteous were not there before Him, taking
Heaven for that supreme and highest Heaven; though otherwise, in a more
general sense and acceptance, they were in Heaven, enjoied Happiness, did see
good, though not visione plena faciei. Many questions peradventure may arise
heerabout; but fitter for Schools, than popular cognizance. I conclude all as
I began: You understand not the state of Limbus Patrum, nor the depth of the
Question, but scumme upon the surface, and gibberish you cannot tell for what.

CHAP. XXXIV. The seventh point of Popery touching IMAGES.
The Historical use of Jmages makes nothing for the adoring of them. Popish
extravagancies.

INFORMERS.
TOuching Images, thus he writes: IMAGES have these uses assigned by your
Schools: stay there, go no farther, and we charge you not with Idolatry.
Institutionemrudium, Commonefactionem Historiae, and excitationem Devotionis.
You and we also give unto them these.

MOUNTAGU.
THAT for this, and no more than this, the Church of Rome is Idolatrous; you
affirm, I deny: prove your assertion if you can. Though that Church, for their
enormities, deserve no defense: yet is it, they say, a shame to belly the
Devil. I do not, I cannot, I will not deny, that Idolatry is grossly
committed in the Church of Rome. The ruder sort, at least, are not excusable,
who go to it with downright Idolatry, without any Relative adoration;
worshipping that which they behold with their eyes, the Image of the B. VIRGIN,
S. PETER, S. PAUL, the CRUCIFIXE; as if CHRIST JESUS were present. This
Idolatry is ancient in their Schools. THOMAS AQUINAS does directly vouch it,
Quod eadem reverentia exhibeatur imagini CHRISTI, and ipsi Par. 3. qu. 25. ar.
3.
CHRISTO. Cum ergo CHRISTUS adoretur adoratione latriae, consequens est, quod
ejus IMAGO sit adoratione LATRIAE adoranda. which is now an Article of Faith in
the Roman Church, and the opposite Doctrine flat Heresy: for so CABRERA upon
that place of THOMAS writes; who alleges, for his purpose and opinion, many
old and later Divines of their School. And AZORIUS the Jesuit tells us, To.
1. lib. 9. ca. 6
Constans est Theologorum sententia, Imaginem eodem honor and cultu honorari
and coli, quo colitur id cujus est Imago. and because DURAND of old opposed
such gross Idolatry in THOMAS and his Scholars, he is censured to deliver
Doctrine, dangerous, rash, relishing Heresies, nay plainly Heretical, say
they. But what has Historical use of Images to do with this so great
extravagancy? I know none, beside your selves, that censure or condemn the
Historical use of Images, for Idolatry.

CHAP. XX.
S. GREGORY'S Doctrine concerning Images, far from Popery.

INFORMERS.
ANd again: Images in GREGORY'S time were very much improved, to be books for
the simple and ignorant people. Hold you there, and we blame you not.

MOUNTAGU.
NOT for Idolaters against the First and Second Commandment: for, to be
Books for the ignorant and unlettered, will not reach home unto Idolatry. My
words concerning S. GREGORY and his times, are these, XVII. pages after the
foreremembred Imputation: S. GREGORY is of later date than S. AUGUSTINE, and
of less credit by much in controverted points of Divinity. Images in his time
were much improved; and yet not unto honor or adoration. Reverence and respect
was given unto them; to be books for the simple and ignorant people; to be
remembrances of things by representation. Hold you there, and we do not blame
you for any Idolatry. Words abused by the Informers, in leaving out that
passage, To be remembrance of Things by representation: of which that
mitigation is to be understood especially, Hold you there, and we blame you
not. This is that improvement I speak of in S. GREGORY'S time; wherein Images,
from no use in the most ancient times, were improved unto an Historical use in
S. GREGORY'S time: whose time, as himself, I under-valew unto S. AUGUSTINE.
These men seem to take improved, through ignorance of the phrase, for
approved: which is also true. Before S. GREGORY, I know no such confessed
employment for them. He was the first that gave such public approbation unto
them declaratorily, though it was true doctrine in it self, before he ever
professed it such. who yet did ever vehemently disclaim and detest the
worshipping of them: as appears in his Rescript unto SERENUS of Marseils,
about demolishing them in his Churches, upon misuse unto Idolatry. Now, had the
Church of Rome gone no farther in practice or precept, than that which S.
GREGORY recommendeth; our Church, I suppose (for so our doctrine is) would not
blame them, nor have departed from them about that point. Happily furious ones in
our Church would proceed: but (...); they are singular illuminates: let them
gang alone. Instruct me what Popery is in that historical use of them, and
then I will be of another opinion.

CHAP. XXI.
No religious honor or worship to be given unto Images. They may affect the
minds of religious men, by representing unto them the actions of CHRIST and
his Saints. In which regard, all reverence simply cannot be abstracted from
them.

INFORMERS.
ANd a little after, IMAGES are not utterly unlawful unto Christians in all
manner of religious employment. The Pictures of CHRIST, the blessed VIRGIN, and
SAINTS, may be made, and had in houses, set up in Churches. The Protestants
have them, they despite them not. Respect and honor may be given unto them
The Protestants do it, and use them for helps of piety.

MOUNTAGU.
BUt how, and how far, you have very honestly left out. For he has added,
In rememoration, and for more effectual representment of the Prototype: which
is no more but the bare historical use of them. And you, by leaving that out,
would make men believe, that he intended a religious respect and pious honor
to be due unto them; and so to draw on unto a downright worship of them. But
this was not his meaning. He is in that case as jealous of Gods honor, as any
gloyting Puritan in the Pack. In our Churches, for ought that I know, it is
not forbidden to have them: for if so, then all Tombs Monuments, Statues,
Pictures, Paintings, are to be demolished and defaced. Nor are they utterly and
absolutely unlawful for any religious employment. Our strictest Writers do not
condemn or censure S. GREGORY for putting upon them that historical use of
suggesting unto, moving or affecting the mind even in pious and religious
affections. For instance; in remembering more feelingly, and so being
empassioned more effectually with the Death, Bloodshed, and bitter Passion of
our SAVIOR, when we see that story fully and lively represented unto us in
colors or work by a skillfull hand. And I know not the man that is made of
humane mould, but when he reads on this Book his tragical endurances for
man, will reflect upon himself, and his own soul and conscience, with a
lively apprehension of man's sin, GOD'S love, CHRIST'S endeared charity in
undergoing these unknown sufferings for our sake. If this be Popery, let the B.
of Lichfield say: For we see that the Church of Rome in the days of S. GREGORY
(says he) as their learned CASSANDER witnesses, as S. GREGORY'S own writings
do show, did allow of such Pictures, as historical Monuments, whereby the
unlearned might be put in remembrance of things done, but in no case suffered
to worship them. Which how little it differs from the doctrine of
Protestants, their own learned Cardinal may witness, saying even of M.
CALVIN, that he does not simply condemn the having of Images, but admits
of them for an historical use, that is, to this end, to represent the Acts of
CHRIST and holy SAINTS, and not to worship them, lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 25. in
his Appeal.

But it has distasted some, that respect and honor should be given unto them.
Strange, it should displease any that can approve of any, be it but a civil
use of them. I cannot tell; unless men would instantly have them pulled down
in all places, demolished, stamped to powder, whosesoever, whatsoever,
wheresoever. The setting of them up, suffering them to stand, using them for
ornaments, for helps of memory, of affection, of rememoration, cannot be
abstracted, to my understanding, from reverence and honor simply, in due
kind. Can a man have the true representation of his Prince, Parents, Patrons,
etc. without awe, respect, regard, love, reverence, moved by asspect, and
wrought in him? I profess my imperfection, or what they will call it, it is so
with me. Vnco impacto in Latrinas, in Gemonias, in malam Crucem, the pictures,
statues, paintings, representations of CHRIST, the VIRGIN, APOSTLES, MARTYRS,
HOLY men and women; unless the very having and preserving of them, do in some
sort imply respect, regard, and honor done unto them, without offense justly
given, without scandal, or inclination to impiety. IUNIUS was no Papist; De
Imag. c. 11. n. 1.
not in your opinion, I hope. He, in his Animadvers. upon BELLARMINE de
Imaginibus, says, Hoc nemo NOSTRUM dicit, non esse colendas, nec ullo modo.
SUO MODO COLI PROBAMUS, velut Imagines; at non religioso cultu, qui aut
superstitiosus est, aut impius. Nec cum aliorum scandalo, sive cultus
separatus, sive conjunctus cum torum cultu intelligatur, quorum sunt Imagines.
M. MOUNTAGU scarce says so much, and yet he is a Papist.

CHAP. XXII.
Popish doctrine and practice both about adoration of Images, rejected.

INFORMERS.
BUt he concludes with the Papists thus: Let your practice and doctrine go
together, we agree.

MOUNTAGU.
NO, my good Informers, he does not so conclude. You misinform against him for
concluding with the Papists. You find it not in him, Let YOUR Practice, and
YOUR Doctrine: but, Let practice and Doctrine. Can you find no difference
betwixt these two? I can let men see a very maine difference, and the not
malignant eye will soon discern it. YOUR Practice, and YOUR Doctrine,
fetches in all, and runs out into the extravagant, Idolatrous, blasphemous
doctrine of religious adoration, either primary or secondarie, absolute or
respective; to that of THOMAS, CABRERA, VASQUEZ, the Devil and all. For with a
trick of relative worship, VASQUEZ empaleth the very Devil within the bounds
of worship, as well as that cautelous Doctrine of DURAND, that Images are to be
worshipped improperly, in as much as, They do put men in mind of the persons
by them represented; who are then adored before the Images, as if they were
then really present there. Or, as that honest conclusion of MARTIN AIALA. Nemo
in Ecclesia dicit, qui recte sentit, Sanctos deberi adorari, sed venerari,
whether in themselves or their representations. But Doctrine, without
limitation of YOUR, points you unto, and puts you back unto no other but
the precedently remembered Doctrine of Dulia and Latria. My words are, If this
you call DULIA, and no more, we admit it, we give it too. But whatsoever you
say, howsoever you qualify the the thing with gentle words (terming it DOULIA
or HYPERDOULIA) we say in your practice you far exceed, and give them that
honor which you call LATRIA, and is indeed a part of DIVINE respect and
WORSHIP: so do not we. Let practice and doctrine go together, and we agree,
that is, give them no LATRIA, formal or interpretative, and we agree.

CHAP. XXIII.
The Church of Engl. condemns not the historical use of Images. The Book of
Homilies contains a general godly doctrine; yet is not in every point the
public, dogmaticall, resolved doctrine of the Church. The Homily that seems
to condemn all making of Images, is to be understood with a restriction of
making them to an unlawful end. Many passages therein were fitted to the
present times, and to the conditions of the people that then were. The final
resolution of this controversy.

INFORMERS.
ALL directly contradicts the doctrine of the Church of England in the Book
of Homilies.

MOUNTAGU.
YOu enlarge too much for all. For, in your opinion, does the English Church
condemn the Historical or civil use of Images? which yet is a part of that
all. It does not in practice, all the world knows that; nor yet in Precept or
Doctrine, that I know. Show me that, and ponam manum meam super os. Men as
learned as any of your Side, no disparagement to (...) and self-conceit, are,
I do assure you, of a contrary mind. I have named Bishop MORTON already unto
you. And yet, were it not so, you show no great wisdom in that Limitation
which your selves put unto my contradicting the Church of England; namely, in
saying that I do it directly. For where can you find, in any writings of
mine, express words against any one point established or delivered, in the
authorized doctrine of the Church of England? and words are not direct, which
be not express. Thirdly, to come unto the issue, you name the Homilies, and
mean, I take it, the second Tome of Homilies, in the Sermon against the peril
of Idolatry. If you had vouchsafed us any proofs of your assertions, we should
have gone directly to work with your allegations: but because you take a
rounder course, to tender every thing in Magisteriall Dictates, we must shoot
at Rovers after you, and come up to you as conveniently as we may.

I answer then, first, that I willingly admit the Homilies, as containing
certain godly and wholesome exhortations to move the people to honor and
worship Almighty GOD; but not as the public dogmaticall, resolutions confirmed
of the Church of England. The XXXIII. Article gives them to contain godly and
wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for these times: which they may do, though
they have not dogmaticall positions, or doctrine to be propugned and subscribed
in all and every point; as the Books of Articles and of Common Prayer have.
They may seem, secondly, to speak somewhat too hardly, and stretch some
sayings beyond the use and practice of the Church of England, both then and
now: and yet what they speak, may receive a fair, or at least a tolerable
construction and mitigation well enough. For you have read peradventure (it is
not unlikely that you have heard by relation) how strangely some of the
ancientest Fathers do speak, and how they hyperbolize sometimes in some points
in their popular Sermons: which in dogmaticall Decisions they would not do,
nor avow the doctrine by them so delivered resolutive. as in case of Free Will,
of Invocation of Saints, and others. S. CHRYSOSTOM especially speaks
strangely of the Blessed Eucharist: as good Popery (...), as ever Papist
conceived of Transubstantiation or orall manducation. (...), To. VI. pa. 407.
Then Angels assist the Priest at the Altar: the whole troops of Heavenly
Powers cry aloud, To. VI. pa. 46. and To. V. pa. 528. Do thou imagine, that
at that time thou conversest with man? Sure it is a thought of a stony heart,
to think that thou art then upon the earth, and not rather following the
Angels in their Quires. and Tom. V. page 511. Know you not that this Table is
replenished with fire? such and so consuming, that unless GOD'S grace assisted
powerfully, men could not endure, but should be consumed with the violent heat
thereof. Tom. 6. page 16. And a little before, home to the purpose a man would
think, for Transubstantiation. (...); When thou beholdest our LORD SACRIFICED
there, and the Priest standing by the Sacrifice, and praying ever it, and every
one present BEREDDED with that most precious BLOOD, do thou suppose thou
conversest then with man, or have thy station upon earth? Which speeches cannot
all of them possibly be true in the literal sense, no not in the opinion of
the Church of Rome; and were none of them literally true, no not in the opinion
of S. CHRYSOSTOM himself. Now, after this enforcing sort may our Homilies
speak, and be so interpreted. Things are not ever, of one and the same man,
touching one and the same thing, at different times, unto distinct Auditories,
upon diverse occasion, spoken after one and the same way. In very Scripture
there are many Hyperbolicall sayings, that being literally taken, will not hold
weight at the balance of the Sanctuary. In the writings of the Fathers (as
appears by that of S. CHRYSOSTOM) there are dogmaticall conclusions for
resolution in points, and retoricall inforcements to edify affections,
disposed for and according to the Auditory. Now our Homilies are all popular
Sermons, fitted unto the capacity and conditions of the common people, to
edify them, to work upon them, ever strong in passion, but weak in
understanding. The will is more in them to be edified, than the judgment; the
consciences and hearts of men to be wrought upon for good life and
conversation, than the understanding and apprehension for any piece of
knowledge. and that also disposed accordingly, as fitted for times, for
persons, and different occasions, as they do or may happen.

As the ancient Fathers of the primitive times, had very few or no Churches at
all, at least of note, dignity, or of receipt, because they lived in times of
fierce persecution, and were seldom, or few of them, stationarie, but
compelled subinde mutare seeds; so had they very few, I grant, or no pictures
at all in public use amongst them, not so much as for ornament sake. And the
reason was, because they lived continually amongst Pagans, and were themselves,
for the most part, such as had abandoned and come over from Paganism unto
CHRIST; that were bred in, brought up in, inured to, and fast settled unto
Idolatry in Image Worship. Therefore they spoke against them with some
tartness, and inveighing sort, least happily by conversing with, or
neighboring upon Pagans, or through former use of being misled by those
Pagans (which was the case of the Israelites in Egypt, and the bordering
Nations upon Canaan) the novell and tender shoots of Christianity might receive
hurt, and learn to worship Idols, as those Pagans did. In like sort,
peradventure, OUR Predecessors and Fathers coming late out of Popery, living
near unto Papists and Popish times, conversing with them, having been nuzzled
and brought up amongst them, and knowing that Images used to be crept unto,
incensed, worshipped, and adored amongst them, might, if they were suffered to
stand as they did, put them in mind of their former practice, induce them to
do as they had sometime done, at least in heart to worship and adore them;
therefore in a godly zeal, such as moved EZECHIAS to destroy the braesen
serpent, they spoke thus vehemently, and indeed hyperbolically against them.
For the people, with whom they then dealt, were by all means to be preserved
from the taint and tincture of their superstitious practices. And for this
cause I say (it may seem) the Church Governors of those times in their popular
Sermons took that course which the ancient Fathers did, and stretched their
exhortations and enforcements, as also their dehortations, somewhat hard upon
the Tentors. For in their dogmaticall resolutions, and doctrinall positions,
they are more reserved, and go not so far. We may do well then to consider
why, wherefore, when, and to what manner men these popular Sermons were made,
and do speak; and not press every passage hand over head, for advantage. I
rest in that judgment and censure which our Church has passed upon them,
Artic. xxxv. where it is said in terminis, THEY contain a godly and wholesome
doctrine, necessary for THESE times: the times in which and for which, this
Homily against Images and the peril of Idolatry, was specially made. To
conclude, Images may be had and made, but with some limitation. The Image of
GOD Almighty is not to be made at all, and no Image is to be made for
religious worship; no not of relation, as they speak; which yet is minimae
Entitatis; but, ut ornatui sint, ut memoriae, ut Historiae: and that they may
be made for such ends, no law of GOD forbids, says our GAMALIEL. Page 203.
ad Apol. BELL.


CHAP. XXIV. Touching signing with the SIGN of the CROSS.
To sign with the sign of the Cross out of Baptism, or upon the breast, etc.
no more superstition, than to sign in Baptism, or upon the forehead. The
practice of the ancient Church. The reasons that moved them, that might moove
us to use often signing. They lived with Pagans, and we with Puritans; both
deriders of the sign of CHRIST'S Cross.

INFORMERS.
OF signing our selves, not children only in Baptism, with the sign of the
Cross, he speaks very superstitiously: We use signing with the sign of the
Cross, both in the forehead and elsewhere. Caro signatur, ut anima muniatur,
said TERTULLIAN: and so we.

MOUNTAGU.
NOT only in Baptism? Tell me then, are ye come so far home unto the Church
of England, as to allow signing with the Cross in Baptism? that Popish
Ceremony, as your Forefathers and Patriarchs of the schism were wont to
exclaim against it? There is hope you may grow in time, upon better advice, in
love and practice with some of M. MOUNTAGU'S Popery, with the sign of the
CROSS in the forehead, and elsewhere. If it be not superstitious to sign in
the forehead, why is it to sign any other part of the body? why more out of
Baptism, than in Baptism? Is one part of the body more subject and liable to
superstition, than another? the breast, or belly, or arms, than is the
forehead? Superstition is in Subjecto, or in Action. In that if you fasten
superstition, you must give us some reason why one part is more subject and
liable unto it, than another; and wherefore you put this difference betwixt the
parts. And concerning actions: religious and pious actions are more liable to
superstition to be committed in them, than common, civil, or ordinary actions
be; nay, all superstition whatsoever reflecteth upon religion. It is not but in
such acts as be of themselves, or appliedly, acts of religion and piety.
Therefore, in all probability, if it be superstitious to sign the forehead
without Baptism, it is more superstitious to do it in Baptism. Nor can the
Injunction of the Church give any privilege of immunity unto a superstitious
action of it self, to be used in point of piety without superstition: for, if
to sign with the sign of the Cross be superstitious in it self, as by your
opinion it seems to be; then cannot the Church command it to be used on the
forehead in Baptism, because no act of the Church can acquit and discharge the
action of that natural and inherent property. If it be not superstitious
absolutely, originally, and in it self, eat your words of superstition, and
elsewhere; or give us some reason why extra Baptismum it should be
superstition to use it (...), or to sign the breast, forehead, legs, head, or
any one part, or all the body, and not so in Baptism for the forehead.

The ancient Church used it in Baptism as we do. TERTULLIAN spoke of Baptism
the words remembered; Caro signatur, ut anima muniatur: which he learned not of
MARCION nor MONTANUS, as some have fabled; but of the practice of the Church
before they were born. And you shall find, if you overlook the place again,
that I remembered the words for Baptism, and not otherwise: you have chopped off
the vinculum that tied my words together, and relate them as if I cited
TERTULLIAN in general terms for any signing with the Cross, in any place, at
any time. For which action, though lawful, I do not allege him. I say,
though lawful: for where is it forbidden? What hinders, but that I may sign
my self with the sign of the Cross in any part of my body, at any time; at
night when I go to bed, in the morning when I rise, at my going out, at my
returning home? The ancient Church so used it out of Baptism ordinarily: and
so may we, for ought I know, without just scandal and superstition. The
practice of Antiquity you will not deny: you cannot, if you know any thing in
Antiquity. Therefore I will not trouble you with testimonies: you shall only
have some reasons for their practice. First, out of CYRIL against JULIAN,
remembered in the Apology against Cardinal BELLARMINE. Quod omnia Resp. ad
Apol. BELL. p. 198.
CHRISTI beneficia recordari nos faciat. YOU need not that help. Happy men,
that are ever in actu exercitato, and need no rubbing of your memory. And that
worthy Divine, D. WHITE, in his Brothers Defense, page 61. has these words:
The SIGNING of the body with the SIGN OF THE CROSS, as it was anciently used
by the prime Christians to these ends; I. To profess, that they were not
ashamed of CHRIST crucified; 2. nor of the persecution and crosses which befell
them for his sake; 3. that they hoped for redemption and salvation by CHRIST
crucified, whom Jews and Gentiles despised: our Divines acknowledge to be
lawful. What says M. MOUNTAGU more in his So do we? and then, remembering
some abuses of it in the Church of Rome, adds; In regard of these abuses, our
Church observes not so common an use of the sign of the Cross, as was in
former Ages: nevertheless we condemn not the same sign in regard of it self.
You do: I do not. And heerin you see I am not alone. IUNIUS, Animadv. c. BELL.
de Imag. ca. 29. Respectus Crucis, etiam Crucis CHRISTI, ut historicus, non
malus simpliciter, sed bonus. Malus vero efficitur, si proficiscatur ex animo
praesumente mereri ex opere operato. Nos in rebus sacris non improbaremus plane
SIGNUM CRUCIS, si abesset superstitio, etc. Rem non adeo fugeremus, si abessent
vitia indigne rem illam fermentantia. Toll errorem superstitionemque, nemo
vestrum aut illorum factum improbaturus est. M. PERKINS in his Problem, though
he feign would puritanize it, and so goes on, heawing hoof against hoof, yet
confesses, that the Fathers used to arm themselves against the Devil with
the sign of the Cross; but adds, They did not ascribe unto the outward
sign any power, or to opus operatum any efficacy. As if we imagined so, we say
with himself, that it is an idle and foolish forgery. And one day you may
read if you will what M. MOUNTAGU has written against ROSW. the Jesuit to
that very purpose. But setting this superstition aside, neither can any
moderate Protestant disallow the use of the Cross, as the Fathers used it; nor
can Master PERKINS refell it. You are of THO. CARTWRIGHT'S mind, I make no
question, that great Apostle of Puritanicall Schism; That that reason which
moved the Fathers to use, should move us not to use the sign of the Cross.
They lived with Heathens, who had the CROSS of CHRIST in contempt; we, with
such as ADORE the CROSS. Where first I answer with that incomparable HOOKER,
You err, not knowing the Fathers reasons. This was one; but this reason was
not all, because they lived with Pagans that did despite it. Secondly, we live
not so with Papists, as they did with Pagans. For the State, and Prince in
State, is for us against the Papists: so was it not for Christians against
Pagans. But thirdly, I come home to you indeed. The same reason that moved
them, may move us to use it more frequently than we are enjoined, more
ordinarily than we do. For we live with Puritans, and opposite Factionists,
that have the Cross of CHRIST in as great contempt and despite, as ever had
JULIAN or any Pagan. But as the Fathers, when the CROSS of CHRIST was in utter
contempt, did not superstitiously adore the same, but rather did declare that
they so esteemed it as was meet: In like manner, if we find the Cross to have
that honor which is due to CHRIST, is it not as lawful for us to retain it
in that estimation which it ought to have, and in that use which it had of old,
without offense; as by taking it clean away, to seem followers of their
example, who do cure wilfully by abscission, that which they might both
preserve and heal? So that worthy HOOKER, most learnedly and rightly. For your
resolution; I am enjoined to use it in Baptism: and so are you. I do so use
it: do you? I scarce believe you do it willingly. I am not enjoined to use it
in other actions, places or times. But am I inhibited to use it so? Show where,
how, by whom. I see reasons to my self peradventure, to use it so, or so; and
thus do, or may other as well as I. It is superstition you say: pardon me if I
take not your words for Gospel. Prove it superstition, and I yield. The rule
of your consciences, is not the square of mine; nor shall be, except it were
more regular, perfect, and exact, than it is. Enjoy your opinions to your self:
let me alone with mine, in things indifferent, that are not prohibited by
lawful authority any way. For, says the XXX. Canon, and I embrace it, Things
of themselves indifferent do in some sort alter their natures, when they are
either commanded or forbidden by a lawful Magistrate, and may not be omitted
at every man's pleasure, contrary to the law, when they be commanded; nor used
when they are prohibited, Till then, at least, I may use the sign of the
Cross. You say it is Popery; but you must remember, that all your words are
not Gospel, nor all Popery that displeases a Puritan.

CHAP. XXV.
The practice of the primitive Church approved. Unadvised Informers. Novellers
rejected.

INFORMERS.
HEmentioneth and approves the practice of the ANCIENTS. They signed, says
he, their foreheads, their hands, etc.

MOUNTAGU.
IT Is true, he mentions that practice of Antiquity; it is false, that he
approves it in that passage of his: for he barely relates it, and no more.
But you knew his heart peradventure by instinct. For though it then dropped not
from his pen what he thought thereof, yet seeing you put him to it to discover
himself, he has done it, and does assure you he does approve it. And it
seems strange to him, that some few Pigmies of these times should presume to
control the practice of those Ancient Heroes of former ages, and to do it so
with an high-hand: wherein unadvisedly they run upon that rock, which of all
they cannot endure to fall upon. For they confess therein, that Popery is
ancient: which, M. MOUNTAGU says, all the Papists in the world cannot prove.
For they say in direct terms, M. MOUNTAGU approves the practice of the
Ancients: and that which he approves, is by themselves censured for Popery.
Nay more, they profess themselves therein Papists, that give so much credit
unto Popery, as to confess it so directly to be ancient. Out of this ground,
e lege ^alionis, because they have now more than once informed against me for
Popery, I might as well pay them in their own coin. Howsoever, let all
Novellers know, I had rather venture to approove a supposed error with those
Ancients, the learned in the primitive Church of old, than an imaginary
truth, or not so good, with these Younglings; according to that dictate of the
Council of Niee, (...).

CHAP. XXVI.
The testimony of S. ATHANASIUS vilified by the Informers. The testimonies of
other Fathers concerning the efficacy and power of the sign of the Cross.

INFORMERS.
HE cites and approves the testimony of one of them. By the sign of the
CROSS of CHRIST, all Magic spells are disappointed, sorcery and Witchcraft
comes to nothing, all Idols are abandoned and forsaken.

MOUNTAGU.
QVam contemptim! One of them? And was not that One worth the naming? Deserved
he no respect from your Great Selves? Your uncircumcised lips might well be
sweetened with the name of that certain quidam, as you call him out of
contempt. Go to it roundly, quid haesitatis? and with those profane ones,
call him without more ado, SATHANASIUS: for ATHANASIUS was the man there named
to your hand. A man deserving better of GOD'S Church, than you and all YOUR
Divines, put them all together. If you misdoubt the Testimony to be forged,
because it was forgotten to name the place; it is in his Book de Incarnatione
verbi, page 61. and was formerly remembered by him in the Tract against the
Gentiles, pa 1. If you call the truth of the Relation into question, ATHANASIUS
Word will pass where your Bond will not go current. But you shall have mo
witnesses to speak to the same purpose. EPIPHANIUS relates of a Christian
young Gentlewoman, Haeres. 30. quae est E^ 10.
that was quitted from the wanton assaults of a young man, by signing herself
with the sign of the Cross; (...), that in it GOD might remonstrate his
wondrous power. And again the same Father says, (...). The Magicians and
Sorcerers prevailed not: (...). for the woman found help in the SIGN of
CHRIST, and through faith in him. which is gladius (...) against Puritan and
Papist: against him, for the bare sign; against you, for the sign. (...).
where the name of CHRIST was invocated, and the sign of the CROSS made, there
Sorcery and Witchcraft could do nothing. If you list to see more, and hear more
evidence to this purpose, you may look upon that which NAZIANZENE has of
JULIAN the Apostata, in his first Invective. which THEODORET has of a certain
Jew, lib. 3. cap. 3. which EPIPHANIUS of another Ho. 8. ad Romans
Jew, JOSEPHUS by name. (...), says CHRYSOSTOM, we have also spiritual
conjurations, the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, (...), and the power of the
CROSS. Nec mirum est quod haec signa valent, cum a bonis Christianis
adhibentur; quando etiam, cum usurpantur ab extraneis, qui omnino suum nomen ad
istam militiam non dederunt, propter honorem tamen excellentissimi Imperatoris,
valent; faith S. AUGUST. or whosoever wrote the LXXXIII. Quest. to DULCITIUS.
Now what say you to Qu. 79.
that Testimony of one of them? If you will not admit the Doctrine, because M.
MOUNTAGU delivers it, I can name you one will say and approove as much, whom
you dare not deny to be of credit, or style a certain one of them. The SIGN of
the CROSS, says B. JEWEL, was had in great regard among Christians; and the
more, both for the public reproach and shame that by the common judgment of
the world was conceived against it; and also for that most worthy price of our
redemption that was offered upon it. Therefore the faithful which believed in
CHRIST, in all their talk, in their whole life and conversation, used so much
the more to extol and magnify the same. Thus, as THEODORET reports, the
Christians every where, in their common resorts and open marketplaces,
published and proclaimed the victory and triumph of the CROSS. The which, as
CHRYSOSTOM says, they were not ashamed to set as a Posie to any thing that
they did, and to any thing that they possessed. Likewise GOD, that the world
might more deeply think of the death of CHRIST, wrought oftentimes strange
miracles by the same. Now is not this as good Popery as M. MOUNTAGU'S alleging
and approving ONE of them? See more, if you be so disposed, in his XIV. Article
against HARDING.

CHAP. XXVII.
Popery is not the signing with, but the adoring of the Cross. Strange effects
which GOD has wrought of old adhibito signo CRUCIS; and may do still by the
virtue of CHRIST'S -Death and Passion, which that Sign does represent.

INFORMERS.
He professes, that he knows no cause of such distraction and disaffection
betwixt us and the Papists, for the reverent use of signing with the sign of
the Cross, etc.

MOUNTAGU.
FOR this use, betwixt any, not alone, nay not at all, Us and Papists. For he
names no Papists, no more than Puritans. It is a Gloss of your own, none of
my Text: and yet I will not desire to have it expunged, though I might put it
off unto that frantic Puritan PARKER and his furious Followers, that indite
the poor Cross of felony, murder, adultery, and all the sins against both
the Tables. I know no reason why they should charge us: marry those of your
shorter Cut they may both charge and challenge, for being singular in their
own conceit, against consent of Antiquity. For, the reverent, pious and
religious use of signing, ad omnem omtum, gestum, habitum, with the sign of
the Cross, is no Popery; which is a grand abuse and a sacrilege committed by
them, in adoring the Cross, and giving unto it divine worship, and ascribing
effects unto the bare sign ex opere operato: which Antiquity never did, not
then when GOD showed greatest wonders, and magnified his power most of all at
the use of it: which you cannot disprove nor deny, though you ramble, and are
ready to grind the teeth at it. HELEN adored the KING of Deobit. THEODOSII.
heaven, and not the wooden CROSS, says S. AMBROSE. In regard of that great
and profane abuse of it in the Roman Church, we do abstain from the more
frequent, ordinary, public use of the sign; which otherwise is lawful: and
we might practice it much more than we do, were it not for scandal.

But I add in the conclusion, I could tell some experimented effects thereof.
You mean, in my own experience, by my self, or some other of my
acquaintance. What I mean, IUNIUS, Animad. c. BELL. de Imag. ca. 29. Prisci
illi Patres praesentia^, virtutem, operationem salutarem CHRISTI imploraba^t,
profitebantur, occupabant, adhibito SIGNO EXTERNO CRUCIS: cujus simplicitate,
omnia Daemonu^ Ethnicorumque Ludibria cluderent in DOMINO.
you have no authority to examine me. Whatsoever you have given out amongst
the Brethren in this point, I may by all Law, in terms of ambiguity expound my
self. Therefore prate you in corners what you please: I may intend this, that
I can out of my reading afford the Gagger (who has related none) some examples
of strange works wrought by GOD, in the times of old, at the use of the sign
of the Cross; and some I have formerly made you acquainted withal out of
EPIPHANIUS, NAZIANZENE, CHRYSOSTOM, and others: whose much, grave, and
respected authority in the Church, you, though aptly disposed thereto, dare not
trample under foot, as little account as you even now made of the Ancients. As
I told the Gagger before, that I could afford him Fathers for the use thereof,
he having recited none: so here I may be supposed to tell him (why not?) that
I could supply him with some experimented effects out of the same, or the like
Fathers; whereunto his small reading could not, I am sure has not led him.

And what if I meant some experimented effects of my own knowledge? What then?
Can you control or convince me? I am not bound to confess my self to you: but
what if upon diverse extremities I have found ease and remedy by using that
ejaculatory prayer of our Letanie, PER CRUCEM, etc. By thy CROSS (and when I
said it, what if, to testify my faith, I made the sign of the Cross?) and by
thy Passion, good LORD deliver us? I cannot tell what you will say: but you
know well, that some of your lewd Forefathers have accounted this, and a great
deal more of that heavenly Prayer, to be no better than conjuring. If you will
be rightly informed (Master-Informers), it is not by the bare sign of the
Cross that any such effect comes, but by the virtue and force of CHRIST'S
death and passion then remembered, and at that time represented by the sign of
the Cross. It is true, miracles are ceased. But what if this be none? What if
so ceased, that notwithstanding GOD can, and may, and will, and does sometimes
work even miracles in these days? CHRYSOSTOM says they were ceased in his
time, To. 5. pa. 605. yet he elsewhere relates many miracles done even in his
days. His meaning was, they were ceased from the frequent and ordinary use:
some extraordinary use of them might then, and yet may be, for ought you
know, or are able to prove the contrary. The Cross of our SAVIOR, in the
external sign thereof, being as much vilified and despised by furious
Puritans in these days, as ever it was by frantic Pagans in those; why may
not GOD, to teach men better manners, and to check this exorbitancy against the
sign of our dear REDEEMER'S death, antiquum obtinere, do now as he has done
in the days of old, and show some sign and token, to magnify the thing so
much despised? Sed (...). You have enough. Take it which way you will, all is
one to me. It comes next in the Rere, which also formerly did advance in
Front. Hear an argument of my Informers presumption against almost the current
of Antiquity, out of ignorance at least, if not folly extreme.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Informers presumption against the Current of Antiquity.
INFORMERS.
IN another place he says, IOSUAH in fight prevailed against AMALEC, through
the sign of the CROSS, rather than by the sword. Chap. VIII. page 66.

MOUNTAGU.
ISAY so indeed; and were not you either ignorant or insolent, you would not
oppose or censure my saying so for Popery. For almost which of the ancient
Fathers has not said it? To instruct your ignorance, or else to abate your
arrogance, take a particular of some of them for the purpose. JUSTIN MARTYR
against TRYPHO, page 95. and 99. edit. Graec. ROB. STEPHANI. TERTULLIAN, contr.
Iudaeos, page 102. and lib. 3. against MARCION in the same words; and in other
places. CYPRIAN, lib. 2. cap. 21. Testimon. adv. Iud. S. AMBROSE, Tom. 5. Ser.
52. in diem Parasceves. HIERON. Tom. 5. in XII. OSEE, page 71. CHRYSOSTOM. Tom.
5. page 662. and else where. NAZIANZ. Orat. 6. page 137. and those remarkable
Verses of his,

(...) which was also intended by ATHANASIUS the Great, Tom. 1. page 406. in
this close couched manner: (...). who by his people ISRAEL, working by his
secret and mystical grace and power, did vanquish AMALECH in fight. In a point
of this nature, I can be contented to be censured for a Papist, with these and
the like Worthies: in the mean time, you may blush for your ignorance and
presumption.

CHAP. XXIX. Touching the SACRAMENT of the ALTAR.
The Informers drawn low, when they leave matter, and take offense at words
and phrases. The Antiquity of Altars. A Sacrifice representative and
spiritual, acknowledged by all. The Author herein farther from Popery, than
the Informers from Puritanisme.

INFORMERS.
OF the Sacrament of the LORDS Supper he writes very Popishly.

MOUNTAGU.
I Verily does he, indeed lo. Our deer Brethren are here clean out of
Patience. Hitherto their progress has been from savouring to saying and
writing, marry it was but simple Popery. Now upon improvement, he writes VERY
Popishly. For, first, he calls the Supper of the LORD in express terms, not
as using their phrase, but his own, The Sacrament of the Altar. Very Popish,
forsooth, to use a word, no stranger in the world. And my good Brethren, have
not your selves, as holy and precise as you would seem, used the like phrase?
Have you not named the Mass, and Purgatory, and Transubstantiation, and the
like, without any adjection of, As they call it, or so? Mo times than you have
fingers and toes, I doubt not. Then sure, out of your own mouths, you speak
very Popishly; and, which must follow in your inferences against Mast.
MOUNTAGU, are very Papists, in suffering such profane words to flee over the
hedge of your teeth. And yet M. MOUNTAGU speaks by way of concession: you
have let those words slip from you absolutely. Sir Carnifex of words, and
tormentor of phrases, I could answer you as TERTULLIAN and ATHENAGORAS did the
elder Pagans; You draw low upon the lees of malice and detraction, when you
have nothing left but words and phrases to calumniate. But I rather choose to
speak in our B. MORTON'S words, apologizing for Protestants against Papists. It
may be I have taken license in use of terms; but no error in doctrine can you
find: for, to put off your imputation from farther fastening, I believe no such
Sacrifice of the Altar as the Church of Rome does. I fancy no such Altars as
they employ, though I profess a Sacrifice and an Altar. In the same reverend
Bishops words: The LORDS Table, being called improperly an Altar, can no more
conclude a Sacrifice understood properly, than when as S. PAUL calling TITUS
his son according to the Faith, which is improperly, a man may contend, S.
PAUL was his natural father according to the flesh.

So it is, The LORDS Table has been called (...) from the beginning; not, as
some falsely teach, by succeeding Fathers. S. PAUL himself may seem to have
given authority and warrant to the phrase, Heb. 13. 10. IGNATIUS, S. JOHN'S
Disciple, uses the word in the Christian use and Liturgy more than thrice. So
does CLEMENS, the APOSTLES Canons, DIONYSIUS AREOPAGITA. IRENAE us, lib. 4.
cap. 20. speaks of the Ministers of the New Testament, not the Old, that they
do DEO and ALTARI deservire. These Altars were not of Stone at first, until
the days of CONSTANTINE, that the Church came to have rest and peace; nor then
frequently and in ordinary Churches, but in Cathedral only, or in great
Cities. But of Stone they were, it is certain; and I prove it elsewhere,
before that Popery Contr. BARON. in Exerc. ined.
was heard of in the world, or in the Church of Rome it self. But the name of
Altars was given unto them when they were of Wood; as is plain out of OPTATUS
and others, as I have there collected. Now though you may stumble and break
your shinnes at the Altar, yet I hope you will not overthrowe the Sacrifice. I
have so good opinion of your understanding, though weak, that you will confess
the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, or Communion Table, whether you please, to
be a Sacrifice; not propitiatory, as they call it (I will use this word, Call
it, lest you challenge me upon Popery for using propitiatory) for the living
and dead; not an external, visible, true, and proper Sacrifice, but only
representative, rememorative, and spiritual Sacrifice. Now if you grant a
Sacrifice, why deny you an Altar? D. REYNOLDS and B. MORTON have granted, that
though we have no proper Altar, yet Altar and Sacrifice have a mutual relation
and dependence one upon the other. The name of Priests is given not only unto
all Christians in general, but also to the Ministers of the new Testament in
particular, by the confession of D. REYNOLDS out of Esaias LXVI. 21. in his
Conference, chap. VIII. Divis. 4. page 470. Indeed first to the Ministers, and
then to those that are all a royal Priesthood. They have authority, as he
confesses, to sacrifice spiritually: good Sirs, why not then an Altar, at
least of the same making, to sacrifice upon? And why then is it such Popery to
name the LORD'S Supper, The Sacrament of the ALTAR? Walk at random and at
rovers in your bypath, if you please. I have used the phrase of Altar for the
Communion Table, according to the manner of Antiquity, and am like enough
sometimes to use it still. S. PAUL calls the Pagan ALTARS (which were indeed
and truly Altars) TABLES: and why may not we name the LORD'S TABLE an Altar,
by the same warrant? You cannot communicate, he says, of the TABLE of the
LORD, and the TABLE of Devils. Nor will I abstain, notwithstanding your
oggannition, to follow the steps and practice of Antiquity, in using the words
Sacrifice and Priesthood also, and yet be farther from Popery in that
practice, than you from Puritanisme, or any Puritan is indeed from true Popery;
being two birds of one feather.

CHAP. XXX.
A real presence maintained by us. The difference betwixt us and popish
writers is only about the modus, the manner of CHRIST'S presence in the blessed
Sacrament. Agreement likely to be made, but for the factious and unquiet
spirits on both sides. Beati Pacifici.

INFORMERS.
Afterward he expresses himself more fully, and says thus unto his
adversary: But that you were bred up in a faction, otherwise you would
acknowledge there need be no difference betwixt the Papists and Us in the point
of Real Presence. page 253.

MOUNTAGU.
MORE fully (you mean, to be a Papist) than before; and that in the point of
Real presence: which Real presence, in your Divinity, is flat Popery; but
not in the Divinity of the Church of England. Concerning this point I said,
and I say so still, that if men were disposed, as they ought, unto peace, there
need be no difference. and I added a reason, which I repeat again here: The
disagreement is only in de modo praesentiae: the thing is yielded to on either
side, that there is in the holy Eucharist a Real presence. God forbid, says
Bishop BILSON, we should deny that the flesh and blood of CHRIST are TRULY
PRESENT, and truly received of the faithful at the LORDS Table. It is the
doctrine that we teach others, and comfort our selves withal. Page 779. of
True subject. And the reverend and learned Answerer unto BELLARMINES Apology,
comes home to the Faith, or Popery if you will, condemned in M. MOUNTAGU, who
learned it of him and such as he is. Nobis vobiscum de OBIECTO convenit, de
modo lis omnis est. You understand not objectum and modum here: take his own
application, to the purpose. PRAESENTIAM, inquam, credimus non minus quam vos
VERAM. De MODO PRAESENTIAE nil temere definimus. And to them agrees Bishop
MORTON, page 93. The question is not concerning a Real Presence, which
Protestants, as their own Jesuits witness, do also profess. FORTUNATUS a
Protestant, holding that CHRIST is in the Sacrament, MOST REALLY: verissime,
realissimeque are his words. CALVIN, teaching that the presence of CHRIST'S
Body, in respect of the souls of the faithful, is TRLUY in this Sacrament,
and SUBSTANTIALLY received. with whom BEZA and SADAEL do consent. If this be
the Doctrine that the Church of England teaches and professes, as it is
indeed, I leave you to those that must look unto you. Yea but it is inexpiable
that I say, We need not so dissent from Papists. As if it were a sacrilege,
not to jarre and jingle infinitely without cause. I may, I see, turn my speech
to you, and you will not refuse to take it to your selves, which I uttered
touching the Jesuit Faction: But that the Devil bred you up in a FACTION, and
sent you abroad to do him service in maintaining a FACTION, otherwise you might
right well acknowledge, there is no such cause why in this point of the
SACRAMENT we should be so distracted as WE and the PAPISTS are, seeing both
confess that which is enough, This is my body; and contend merely about the
MODUS, HOW it is my body. A point of faith undeniable, though it be
unsearchable and incomprehensible. Incomparable HOOKER, that Puritanomastix,
might well say, and you in your right wits would subscribe it, thus: Seeing
that by opening the several opinions which have been held, they are grown,
for ought I can see, on all sides at the length to a general agreement
concerning that which alone is material, namely, the real participation of
CHRIST, and of life in his body and blood by means of this Sacrament,
wherefore should the world continue still distracted (yes, to please the
humors, and serve the turns of Jesuits and Puritans) and rent with so
manifold contentions, when there remains now no controversy, saving only
about the subject, Where CHRIST is? yea, even in this point neither side
denies, but that the soul of man is the receptacle of CHRIST'S presence. It
was no blessed speech, in my opinion; but unworthy to be heard in an open
Pulpit, and Published in Print, MALEDICTI PACIFICI; those that endeavor to make
up such rents. Be you of that family, if you please. I am for peace and
reconciliation, and say still, BEATI PACIFICI; as I have good warrant from
CHRIST, and his blessed servant, King JAMES of most happy memory.

CHAP. XXXI.
The Author's acknowledgement of his error. Consecration of the elements
causes a change; yet inferres no Popish Transubstantiation. The Informers out
of their element. Antiquity maintained. Figurists and Novellers condemned.

INFORMERS.
ANd again, No man denies a change, an alteration, a transmutation, a
transelementation, as they speak.

MOUNTAGU.
NO MAN denies: you do. But pardon me, I meant it of discreet, moderate,
understanding Divines. I should have exempted you (I perceive my error) and
such as you, out of the number. Pardon me this fault, I will commit it no
more. If I have any occasion hereafter to speak of learned and moderate men, I
will ever except and exempt you and yours. I must confess my error and
simplicity: for I would have thought, that in the Sacrament every man would
have confessed a change; that the consecrated Elements had been somewhat more
than mere ordinary Bread and Wine. For I did conceive a sacramental Being of
them, and not only a natural, in their use and designment. Vbi accesserit
CONSECRATIO, de pane fit caro CHRISTI. And S. AUGUSTINES Saying is common and
well known, Accedat Verbum ad elementum, and fiet Sacramentum. And CYRIL of
Jerusalem, Catech. v. says to the same purpose: Precamur DEUM hominum amantem,
ut emittat SANCTUM suum SPIRITUM in res propositas, ut FACIAT PANEM CORPUS
CHRISTI, and VINUM SANGUINEM CHRISTI. For, quicquid contigerit SPIRITUS
SANCTUS, illud ipsum (...), it is sanctified and changed, says S. BASIL in his
Liturgy: and who is not of the same mind? Speaks he not unto the self same
purpose? You never heard, it seems, of (...) in HIM; not of (...) out of
THEOPHYLACT in MATTHEW. XXVI. not of (...) in GREGORY NYSSEN, nor of (...) in
HIM, in CHRYSOSTOM, and others. For it appears you are not much versed in
Antiquity; and ignorantly imagine, that, if these be granted, Popish
Transubstantiation must needs ensue: which if it were so, then that Popish
Minion, as Bish. MORTON calls it, were not, as it is, a Babe of yesterdayes
birth, never heard of in the world for MCC. years after CHRIST. but, a change
of the elements, that is, Transmutation and Transelementation, do not infer,
you must know, Transubstantiation. For in the other two the matter remains;
but in this the matter is destroyed: the quantity and accidents only remain.
There is a Conversion Sacramental, that is, of signification, and of operation
and use; as also in the Water of Baptism. And in Conversions that are
substantial, whether by divine power or course ordinary, there is evermore
tertium quid, novum, noviter productum, out of that which is converted. But in
their Transubstantiation the Body of CHRIST is not produced anew, nor receives
any substantial change. Many be the differences that might be insisted upon:
but I pass them over. The poor men that tendered this for Popery, were
doubtless out of their element, and meddled beyond their latchet, or else they
may go to their books afresh, study somewhat more strongly; and then perhaps
they will begin to sent it, that Change, Transmutation, Transelementation, do
not conclude, as they simply believe, Transubstantiation. Then that speech of
S. CYPRIAN will not relish of any Popery; Iste panis quem DOMINUS Discipulis
suis porrigebat, non effigy sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est
caro. Et sicut in persona CHRISTI humanitas videbatur, latebat Divinitas; ita
Sacramento visibili invisibiliter divina se infundit Substantia. Nor that
Saying of S. AMBROSE, by these puny Divines censured for Popery; as also Mast.
MOUNTAGU for approving it, and subscribing to it: Before Consecration it was
bread, common bread; but after Consecration, it becomes the FLESH OF CHRIST,
because then the Sacrament is consummate. Which did not seem Popery unto Bishop
MORTON, page 106. The Fathers, says he, do note in Baptism a certain
change. AMBROSE, speaking of the water in Baptism, says: The nature thereof
is by Benediction changed. And he is produced in the like case for proof of
Transubstantiation in the Eucharist. In the margin he sets down his words
thus: Forte dices, meus panis est usitatus: sed panis iste, ante verba
Sacramentorum, PANIS est: ubi accesserit Consecratio, de pane fit CARO CHRISTI.
The very words by me recited out of Lib. IV. cap. 4. de Sacram. Is this Popery
in M. MOUNTAGU? Is it good Catholic Doctrine in Bish. MORTON? He approves
it, and explaneth it thus; and yet S. AMBROSE (if you can light upon the right
edition) says also of the elements, Operatorius sermo est, and sunt quae
erant, and in aliud commutantur. But, esse quod erant, does utterly take away
and abolish that fiction of Transubstantiation unto another nature. They
remained what they were indeed, yet changed in use, to be Instruments by Faith
of Grace, as his own similitude does illustrate. Tu ipse eras vetus Creatura:
postquam consecratus es, nova Creatura coepisti esse. Accipe igitur quemadmodum
sermo CHRISTI omnem Creaturam mutare consuevit. It was intolerable insolence in
such Ignaroes, to challenge this for Popery which they understood not; or else
malice Puritanicall, to traduce me for Popery so publicly, which in that
learned Bishop they approve for good Divinity. In conclusion, you manifest
your selves mere Sacramentaries, or worse, that deny CHRIST'S Body and his
Blood to be in the Sacrament (I dare call it so in despite of detraction) of
the Altar. For you inform against these words as Popish. Be contented with,
That it is the Body of CHRIST, and do not seek nor define how it is so, and
we shall not contest nor contend. Which GOD forbid the Church of ENGLAND
should maintain, said Bishop BILSON. The Figurists, Significatists, Symbolists,
taught you this Doctrine, who acknowledge nothing, receive nothing, but naked
and bare signs and figures. I must subscribe unto our Church against you, and
them, and Papists; all three. Transubstantiation, or the Change of the
substance of Bread and Wine in the Supper of the LORD, cannot be proved by
holy writ: but it is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthrows
the nature of a Sacrament, and has given occasion unto many superstitions. The
BODY of CHRIST is given, taken, and eaten in the SUPPER only after an heavenly
and SPIRITUAL manner; and the means whereby the BODY of CHRIST is received and
eaten in the SUPPER, is Faith. ARTIC. XXVIII.

CHAP. XXXII. Touching CONFESSION.
Information against the express direction and practice of the Church of
England. No new Popish custom, but the ancient and pious manner of Confession
for the help and furtherance of men's true repentance, and for the continuing
of them in amendment of life, is, may be, and ought to be urged. How Confession
of sins to a Priest is required by the Church before the Receiving of the
LORDS Supper.

INFORMERS.
WE require men, says he, to make special confession of their sins unto a
Priest, if they find their consciences troubled with any weighty matter,
either when they be sick, or before receiving of the LORDS Supper.

MOUNTAGU.
BALAM at last went not to fetch divinations, as at other times; but set his
face toward the wilderness: nor these men to cast on me particular calumnies,
but per satyram congested and conjected at a mass upon the Church of England,
in pretense of me. My words are, It is confessed, that private confession unto
a Priest is of very ancient practice in the Church; of excellent use and
benefit, being discreetly handled. We refuse it to none, if men require it, if
need be to have it: we urge and persuade it in extremis: we require it in case
of perplexity, for the quieting of men disturbed, and their consciences. This
is my Popery per parts. For warrant whereof, I bring my witness and
authority, the Injunction, Direction and Practice of the Church, and of
Bishops accordingly in the Church. If I have misalledged, falsified, or else
misapplyed my Authors and Authority, why am I not taxed for that, and charged
with it? If I cite them truly and faithfully, but they have erred into Popery,
speak it out, my good Brethren, that they to whom it appertains may stand up
according, as I hope they will, as I am sure they should, to maintain,
according to their duty and places, that which their Mother, Holy Church,
has commanded in that sort and case to be observed. What that is, let Bishop
MORTON speak, and Bishop USHER deliver: no Papists I know; and I think none in
your opinion. The Bishop of LICHFIELD in his Appeal, lib. 2. cap. 14. says
thus: It is not questioned between us, whether it be convenient for a man
burdened with sin, to lay open his conscience in private unto the Minister of
GOD, and to seek at his hands both counsel of instruction, and the comforts
of GODS pardon: But whether there be, as from CHRIST'S institution, such an
absolute necessity of this private Confession, both for all sorts of men, and
for every particular sin known, and ordinary transgression, so, as that
without it there can be no remission or pardon to be hoped for from GOD. And
hereupon he reduces the Differences betwixt Papists and Protestants unto two
heads. 1. the Necessity: 2. the Possibility. The PAPISTS impose a Necessity of
Confession absolute, de jure divino, of all sins, with all circumstances:
which is a tyranny, and impossible, and a torture to the conscience. The
PROTESTANTS do acknowledge, says he, the use of private Confession, but with
a double limitation and restraint: the first is the foresaid freedom of
conscience; the second, the possibility of performance. And to this end and
purpose he recites out of BELLARMINE CALVIN'S judgment, thus. Admittit etiam
CALVINUS privatam Confessionen coram Pastore, quando quis it a angitur and
afflictatur Peccatorum sensu, ut se explicare, nisi alieno adjutorio, nequeat:
sed addit moderationem, ut libera sit; nec ab omnibus exigatur, nec necessario
de omnibus. The Council of TRENT, that Popish Cynosura, has decreed Auricular
Confession to be of absolute Necessity, from Ordinance divine. and so we must
take it, or incur their Anathema, if we care for it. The Master of Sentences
says, Without it there is no way to heaven. In IV. did. 17. INNOCENTIUS 111.
denies Christian burial unto the not confessed, when they dye. In Council.
Lateranensi. C. XXI. HUGO, de potestate Ecclesiae, is bold, he says, to
speak it. Whosoever comes to Communion unconfessed, be he never so
repentant and sorry for his sins, does, without doubt, receive to judgment.
More bold than wise in saying so, I wis: for it is oftentimes a matter of
impossibility to do it; ever impossible to do it with particular enumeration
of each sin, and special circumstance in each sin. Nor was it so rigidly
practiced of old, as appears by LYRA in XVI. XXI. of Levit. nor is there such
necessity of absolute use, nor any such original imposition. The learned
Bishop of MEAD sets down, in his Answer unto the Jesuits Challenge, the
state of Confession in the doctrine of OUR Church, thus. We tell him again,
that by the PUBLIC ORDER prescribed in our Church, before the administration
of the HOLY COMMUNION, the Minister likewise does exhort the people, that if
there be any of them, which cannot quiet his own conscience, but requires
further comfort or counsel, he should come to him, or some other discreet and
learned Minister of GOD'S Word, and open his grief, that he may receive such
ghostly counsel, advice, and comfort, as his conscience may be relieved; and
that by the ministry of GODS Word he may receive comfort, and the benefit of
ABSOLUTION, to the quieting of his conscience. Whereby it appears (says that
learned Bishop) that the exhorting of the people to CONFESS their sins unto
their GHOSTLY FATHERS, makes no such wall of separation betwixt the ANCIENT
Doctors and Us. And again, Be it therefore known unto him, that no kind of
Confession, either public or private, is disallowed by us, that is any way
requisite for the due execution of the ancient power of the Keys, which CHRIST
bestowed upon his Church. The thing which we reject, is, that new pick-lock of
Sacramental Confession, obtruded upon men's consciences as a matter necessary
to salvation. So that setting these late Romish aberrations aside, which M.
MOUNTAGU also has excepted; In HIS opinion, as well as in M. MOUNTAGU'S, we
may, as we do, advise, and urge the use thereof. And lest this phrase should
be excepted against, Urging does not ever employ constraint or imperium; it
reflecteth as often upon argument, persuasion, and inducement. Therefore, you
that are Informers against the Church and me, remember to be more temperate
hereafter, at least for some men's sakes, whom you dare not, cannot, will not
censure for Popish errors, as you do M. MOUNTAGU.

CHAP. XXXIII. Touching the Sacrament of ORDERS.
The new religion full of exceptions, though but against words only.
Ordination acknowledged to be a Sacrament by M. CALVIN himself. A Sacrament in
lato sensu. What our Church means, in saying there are but TWO Sacraments.

INFORMERS.
WHereas his Adversary charge our Church to maintain, that no interior grace
is given by imposition of hands in the Sacrament of holy Orders, and that this
our opinion is contrary to express words of our own Bibles; he takes no
exception to him for calling it, The SACRAMENT of holy Orders.

MOUNTAGU.
THis is no positive, but negative Popery; a sin, not of commission, but
omission. Not to take exception, no Peccadillo, but a capital crime with
Puritanicall quicksilver Spirits, whose service unto GOD is performed by
taking exception against all things that suit not with their fancy. Else, what
makes it so heinous an offense with them, to take no exception at a term, or
a word? We brabble not for words; our difference is for, and about things.
Contentions may be multiplied beyond all degrees of bounds, moderation or
measure, and that in things needless, and to no purpose oftentimes. You foment
this humor more than you need, or shall have thank for of the PRINCE OF PEACE,
that call us out still unto direct Contestation, and censure us for Papists,
because we are not so contentious nor brabbling as you would have us. For here
what need you quarrel the not excepting against the term Sacrament? It was
not proposed whether Ordination were a sacrament or not; but whether in that
which they call the Sacrament of holy Orders, and the Church of England, at
least, holy Orders, any interior Grace were given by imposition of hands. Just
as not long since you sought a knot in a rush for using the like phrase of
sacrament of the Altar: So, if being to say somewhat against
Transubstantiation, I do not quarrel the word, I am a Papist, though I
dispute never so earnestly against the thing. See how apt and disposed men are,
that love faction and division, to take hold and fasten upon any thing to
maintain it.

But I can otherwise excuse my self, and I believe shall not find them in the
excepting humor for it. Know then, Sirs Informers, I durst not except against
the phrase, for fear of drawing more fists about my ears than my own, viz.
of all YOUR DIVINES (and they are (...)) whom you call CALVINISTS. For have you
not read it? or do you not remember it, what BELLARMIN has said, that CALVIN
admits Ordination for a Sacrament? And BELLARMINE does not belie CALVIN; for
he does so indeed. These are his words, lib. IV. ca. 19. sect. 31. Superest
Impositio manuum: quam ut in veris legitimisque ordinationibus Sacramentum esse
concedo, ita nego locum habere in hac fabula, etc. How that is, and in what
sort, he expresses himself, lib. IV. cap. 14. sect. 20. Nam impositionem
manuum, qua Ecclesiae Ministri in suum munus initiantur, ut non invitus patior
vocari Sacramentum, ita inter ordinaria Sacramenta non numero. He admits it
a Sacrament, but not an ordinary Sacrament. No Papist living, I think, will
say or desire more. It is not for all, but for some. Which Saying of his is
semblably expressed in that short, small, but perfect Catechism in our
Communion Book: where the Question being asked, How many SACRAMENTS are there?
the Answer is made, TWO only as generally necessary unto salvation; not
excluding others from that name and designation, though from the prerogative
and degree. For, touching sacramental unction, it is observed out of M.
HOOKER, that in the Writings of the ancient Fathers, all Articles peculiar unto
Christian faith, all Duties of Religion containing that which sense or natural
reason cannot of it self discern, are commonly called Sacraments. And this is
not denied by B. MORTON. For if we should speak of improper Sacraments, Page
339.
says he, which are mentioned by the ancient Fathers, our Adversaries would
not deny, that not only seven, but seventy times seven Sacraments might be
named. Therefore, for the Church of England's sake, be good to Master MOUNTAGU
in this sin of omission; and unto the Church of England, for the ancient
Fathers sakes; unto them and unto all, for B. MORTON'S and M. CALVIN'S sake,
who is the Father of your Divines called Calvinists; who for Orders (will you
suffer them to be called Holy?) goes as far as may be, both for force, and
for form of administration: as if Ordination did, in his opinion, consist in
relation unto some such gift or grace supernatural, as only GOD can bestow;
being the powerful means of GOD, though in different degrees, unto eternal
life. It follows.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Information against the Church-Booke of Ordination; which acknowledges the
giving and receiving of the HOLY GHOST in sacred Orders: so that Priests have
that interior grace and power conferred upon them for the dispensation of
Divine mysteries, which others have not.

INFORMERS.
BUt denies our Church to hold any such opinion. These are his words: This
indeed is contrary to express words of our Bible, and therefore directly
contrary to our opinion, doctrine, and practice. CHAP. XXXVIII. fol. 269.

MOUNTAGU.
COunterfeyting at length will be dismasked, and Hypocrisy appear in the true
comportment. For here, Sorex suo se indicio. The Ape discovers himself to be
so, by cracking of nuts: so do these men, who, what, and what Side they are
of; Puritans in Faction, and engrayned in their affection that way, howsoever
pretending conformity by subscription. For what is that, trow ye, that M.
MOUNTAGU denies our Church to hold? which these Informers and their Abbetters
hold not? which they deny? which in their opinion is Popery? The Gaggers
imputation upon us and our Church, was, that in the doctrine of the Church of
England, no interior Grace is given by imposition of hands in the Sacrament of
holy Orders: In effect, that when it is formally and solemnly said, RECEIVE THE
HOLY GHOST, this is but idle, and without effect. This imputation M. MOUNTAGU
denies to be true and just, and affirms, that in the resolution and doctrine
of the Church of ENGLAND, by imposition of hands, internal Grace is conferred.
Now this these good Informers have presented to be a Popish error, namely, the
public and by Parliament established and authorized doctrine of our Church. So
said their grand Patriarchs and Fathers before them; the Puritan Undertakers,
and Complayners unto Parliament also, against the doctrine and discipline of
the CHURCH. Papisticus quidam ritus, are their own words, stulte quidem ab
illis, and sine ullo Scripturae fundamento institutus, and a disciplinae
nostrae authoribus, pace illorum dixerim, non magno primum judicio acceptus,
minore adhuc in Ecclesia nostra retinetur. Eccles. discipli. page 53. They say,
We cannot give the HOLY GHOST, and therefore we do foolishly to bid men
RECEIVE it. And yet these men, that are of the Clergy, M. YATES and M. WARD,
have subscribed, I hope, That interior Grace is given, that is, the HOLY GHOST
is given in Ordination; who present M. MOUNTAGU as a Papist for saying so. How
can these Priests answer the one Act, or the other? When they entered into
Priesthood, their profession was then amongst other things acknowledged and
subscribed, that the book of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
contains nothing contrary unto the Word of GOD: and yet now it contains.
For this is expressly contained there, which M. MOUNTAGU amongst other points
of Popery delivers, That interior Grace, that is, the HOLY GHOST, is
conferred in HOLY ORDERS; and that this is the opinion, doctrine, and practice
of the Church of England. I may and do conclude with the VIII Canon against
them; leaving the execution, which I hope will not be neglected, unto
Authority. The Canon is, Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or teach, that the
form and manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
contains any thing in it contrary to the Word of GOD, let him be
excommunicate IPSO FACTO. These men have affirmed it in most public manner: for
Popery is contrary to the Word of GOD; and they have imputed Popery to me, for
saying as I and they have subscribed. I refer it to Them unto whom it
belongs, whether they stand not therefore excommunicate; not to be restored
until they repent, and publicly revoke such their wicked rerors: the Censure
of the Canon. But I proceed from Ordination to Execution of Priesthood; from
the Original denied, unto the Ministerial part rejected also by them: and so
I shall have done with them.

CHAP. XXXV. Touching power of Priesthood to forgive Sins.
Priests have power to forgive sins, not originally, but ministerially. The
Doctrine of the Ordination and Communion Book for public and private
Absolution. The Informers to lose the profits of their livings, and to be
imprisoned without bail, for declaring against it.

INFORMERS.
THis is the Doctrine, says he, of our Communion-Booke, and the practice of
our Church accordingly, that Priests have power not only to pronounce, but to
give Remission of sins. CHAP. XI. Page 78. 79.

MOUNTAGU.
FIRST be pleased, whosoever shall view or read this Apology, to take the
true state and Tenent in the point informed against by these Promoters. It was
imposed by the Gagger, as a doctrine authorized in our Church, None but GOD can
forgive sins, or retain them. It was answered by me, that in some sense it
was true, None else can do it, viz. by authority and right original, because
all sin is properly committed against GOD; Tibi soli peccavi: and that in
some sense also it was not true. For by delegation others also might do it
ministerially. GOD does forgive them by the ministry of men. The Priest, to
do this, has power conferred upon him by GOD in as ample sort as he or any
man can receive it. And that this was indeed the doctrine of our Church, I
proved by the witness of an enemy, and therefore the stronger; producing the
verdict of a Papist, who confesses, that Protestants hold, that Priests have
power, not only to pronounce, but to give remission of sins. Which seems to
be the doctrine of the COMMUNION BOOK in the visitation of the fick. where
the PRIEST says, AND BY HIS AUTHORITY COMMITTED UNTO ME, I ABSOLVE THEE FROM
ALL THY SINS. This is my relation hitherto, of what I find. So that here is
committed crimen falsi by these Informers. I relate what one of that Side
says; I say it not my self, but only recognize the truth of his relation,
which I could not deny. For in the visitation of the sick, in the
Communion-Booke, the doctrine and practice is as he relates it. So that were
it not justifiable which is here reported, these honest, faithful Brethren
had put a trick upon me, namely, an Assertion for a bare Relation; as if I had
justified what I do but report. But it is justifiable: it is the doctrine and
practice of the Church of England. The Bishop of Mead was of that opinion,
Page 109. against a Jesuits challenge; HE has done us open wrong in charging
us to deny, that PRIESTS HAVE POWER TO FORGIVE SINS. And he gives a reason
irrefragable; Whereas the very formal words which our Church requires to be
used in the Ordination of a Minister, are these: WHOSE SINS THOU DO
FORGIVE, THEY ARE FORGIVEN; AND WHOSE SINS THOU DO RETAIN, THEY ARE
RETAINED. The execution of which authority accordingly is put in practice in
the Visitation of the sick. And no man can say more, or come more fully home
unto Popery in this point than Bishop MORTON in his Appeal, Page 270. And
indeed the POWER OF ABSOLUTION, whether it be GENERAL or PARTICULAR, whether
in PUBLIC or in PRIVATE, it is professed in OUR CHURCH; where both in our
PUBLIC SERVICE is proclaimed pardon and Absolution upon all penitents; and a
PRIVATE applying of PARTICULAR ABSOLUTION unto Penitents by the office of the
MINISTER. And greater power than this, no man has received from GOD. In as
much then as these Informers declare and speak against some part of the
Communion-Booke, in the Visitation of the sick, for Absolution in remission of
sins; and that they stand convicted thereof per evidentiam facti, by statute
of 1. of Elizab. they are to lose the profits of all their spiritual
promotions and benefices for one year, unto the KING; and without bail or
maineprise, to suffer imprisonment for half a year. If they are not
beneficed, their indurance is the longer: the punishment allotted, is, one whole
years imprisonment. which it were not amiss, that Authority would deservedly
inflict upon them, to teach them better manners hereafter, than to call that a
point of Popery, which is apparent, and confessed to be the express and avowed
doctrine and discipline of the Church, confirmed for performance by Act of
Parliament. I leave the censure of their deserts unto Authority, whom it
touches; and proceed to the next Information upon the same point, though with
some addition.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Priests only, and none other, have commission from CHRIST to forgive sins.
The extravagancies of Puritans and Papists both in this point.

INFORMERS
ANd a little after; It is consessed, that all Priests, and none but Priests,
have power to forgive Sins. CHAP. XII. Page 83.

MOUNTAGU.
ANd is it not so confessed, when by public warrant in Ordination, that power
is given unto all Priests to do so, in those solemn words of Ordination, WHOSE
SINS YOU FORGIVE, THEY ARE FORGIVEN? and unto none but Priests, because none
have else such Ordination? If this be not confessed, I will put my self to
you to school, to learn and to know what is confessed. The fact is apparent,
you cannot say nay: happily you will, nay, certainly you do question, Quo jure,
quam recte it is confessed. The truth is, you cannot deny the thing. But with
you Puritans this doctrine and practice of the Church is held to be Popery. And
here you infer necessarily, that Priests have no more power to do this, than
Laymen have. For what else can you mean by, And none but Priests, but either,
that neither one nor other have that power; or else, that one as much and as
great as other? To which you incline, I cannot say assuredly. No great
difference: for both are exact Puritanisine: you cast Confession upon both one
and other. Any Layman may hear it as well as a Priest: and therefore it is
probable, you will not be very precise for Absolution, to confer it on a
Layman, as well as on a Priest. So the power of the keys are to both alike in
equal assise. But Sirs, Absolution is a part of that Priestly power, which
could not be given by Men or Angels, but only and immediately by Almighty GOD
himself; a part of that paramount power which the GOD of glory has invested
mortal men withal. In which respect, and not otherwise, as some claim, it
has been said, The head of the EMPEROR has been subjected unto the PRIEST'S
hands. In which regard, no earthly power is of equal value and assise unto it;
as not only the ANCIENTS (you shall have a Catalogue of them if you desire
it), but Bishop MORTON confesses. None can arrogate this power and authority
unto himself: none can be invested with it, but by commission. Priests only
have this commission from CHRIST; unto whom he said, As my Father sent me, so
send I you; and, Receive you the holy Ghost: whose sins you remit, they are
remitted, etc. This commission (as they may do any) those that have it under
seal in good warrant, may abuse. And so they have done in the Church of Rome:
but that abuse does not evacuate the commission; not in the Exceeders and
Transgressers, much less in them that exceed not. They have abused it: for
says one, Sacerdos utitur ipsissima CHRISTI potestate in remittendis peccatis.
it is BULLENGER in Diatribis, Page 267. that is, Primaria, authoritativa, if it
be ipsissima; not secundaria and delegata. For our late Masters in the Church
of Rome do fasten the efficacy of forgiving sins, unto the external word
pronounced by the Priest. For, says SUAREZ, Sacraments have To. 3. d. 2. 2.
a PHYSICAL efficacity in conferring grace, as CHRIST'S humanity had in
working miracles. And therefore no marvel if they abate Contrition, by
acquiring only, as sufficient and enough, a kind of overly desire to serve
GOD anew; such as the Schoolmen call velleity: no full resolved purpose, no
matter for it; no deep sorrow or Contrition. And therefore are they so facile
in Absolution, so easy and often childish in Satisfaction.

We profess and believe, that none can forgive sins but GOD, by expiating,
wiping out, blotting away, and purging; that no man can forgive them
absolutely, authoritatively, by primer and original power; that Priests have
delegated power from GOD to reconcile unto him, by preparing of them by the
Word and Sacraments to repentance, to be capable of forgiveness; first, to
chafe and prepare the wax to receive the Seal; then, as Officers, to set to
that Seal, to pronounce them absolved in the name of CHRIST, and actually to
absolve them, so far as Ministerial Power can extend, qui non ponunt obicem
by unbelief or irrepentance. The phrase of the Ancients, and even of the elder
Roman Schools, was this, and no otherwise: Sacerdos absolvendo confitentem
pronunciat absolutum, non remittit peccatum. And again, Sacerdotes dimittunt
ostendendo and manifestando. Habent se, ad modum demonstrantis, non direct,
sed dispositive. And that because ea adhibent per quae DEUS dimittit peccata,
and dat gratiam. To conclude; the Master of their Sentences, their ancient
Ritualls, their formal words of Absolution, taught them better doctrine than
now they teach. Aliter DEUS solvit vel ligat, aliter Ecclesia. Ipse enim per se
tantum dimittit peccatum, quia animam mundat a macula interiori, and a debito
mortis aeternae solvit. Non autem hoc Sacerdotibus concessit, quibus tamen
tribuit solvendi and ligandi, id est, ostendendi homines ligatos vel solutos,
potestatem. Vnde DOMINUS leprosum sanitati prius per se restituit: deinde misit
ad Sacerdotes, quorum judicio ostenderetur solutus. Setting some rigorous
Puritans aside, that like no Religion but one of their own making, and yet in
all probability would not hold that long, I think there are few Calvinists, as
you call your Divines, that will wrench at this. So that it must unavoideably
be one of these two, The good men either know not the Tenet of their own
Doctors and Divines of the more temperate sort, and that also established in
the Church of England; or covertly mislike the one and other: but daring not
do it openly, and give the whole Church the affront so palpably with a brazen
forehead, they undertake it by traducing M. MOUNTAGU for a PAPIST, whom they
know to be no PURITAN. thus wounding their Mother through their Brothers sides.

CHAP. XXXVII. THE CONCLUSION.
The issue of YATES and his FELLOW-Jnformers fond Accusations. Other flying
reports and defamations neglected. The Author's humble submission unto the
Church of England, and to HIS most sacred MAJESTY.

THus far these Zealous Ones have uncharitably informed; and have made a
great noise and hubbub in the Church and State, of Errors, Dangerous Errors,
GOD knows how far, or wherein; Arminianisme, Popery, taught and delivered
by M. MOUNTAGU. Much suspected, nothing yet proved. Great clamors and outcries
of I know not what, or wherefore: as if ANNIBAL were ad Portas, and Popery
ready to be restated in Church and Commonwealth. So the Beacons are fired by
certain frantic fellows that are frighted with Pannick fears, and by them
the neighboring countries are disturbed without cause. A field of Thistles
seemed once a battle of Pikes, unto some Discoverers of the Duke of Burgundy.
You can apply what I exemplify. I go no farther, but leave you to your
selves; and if it be possible, unto more charitable conceits of those that
deserve no other imputation, but, THEY ARE NO PURITANS: which GOD in goodness
keep out of this Church and State, as dangerous as Popery, for any thing I am
able to discern: the only difference being, POPERY is for Tyranny,
PURITANISME for Anarchy: POPERY is original of Superstition; PURITANISME, the
highway unto Profaneness; both alike enemies unto Piety.

Other Accusations there are that walk in corners, and fly abroad by
Owle-light, as Bats or Beetles do, (...). Nor would I have regarded those idle
ARTICLERS, those that in their Informations have carried themselves so
magisterially, upon Ignorance and Malice one way, but Presumption and Opinion
of their own knowledge another way, being but (...), as TATIANUS would call
them; but that they professed themselves public Promoters, and exhibited
Informations, ut de rerum summa. It was my part and duty, not to neglect my
own innocence, but to discover and lay open their predominant frensies to
view in some part, and ignorant stupidity in common Tenants.

THEM, MY SELF; whatsoever I have said, or done, or shall hereafter do any
way; libens, merito, more Majorum, now and ever I have, I do, I will refer
and submit, and in most lowly devoted, humble sort, prostate upon bended knees,
unto this CHURCH of England, and the true DEFENDER thereof, his MOST SACRED
MAJESTY; humbly craving that Royal Protection which sometime WILLIAM OCKAM
did of JEWS of Baviere the Emperor; DOMINE IMPERATOR, DEFEND ME GLADIO, ET
EGO TE DEFENDAM CALAMO.

FINIS.

