A pleasant Dialogue, between a Lady called Listra, and a Pilgrim. Concerning
the government and common weal of the great province of Crangalor. 1579.

Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, dwelling in Barbican at the sign of
the half Egle and Keye.

To the Worshipful, Master Edward Diar, Esquier: Listra wishes prosperity.
I Judge worshipful sir, that you will wonder how I a strainger, presume to
write this little dialogue to your Worship: Nay rather you will marvel, how
also I write in the English tongue. But to make plain these causes, first I
say, although I dwell so far from your native soil, yet by trauelers I have
heard of your parentage and virtuous mind touching the public weal of your
Country, and this is the cause wherefore I offer this Pilgrims talk unto your
Worship, and where I write in your own language, you shall understand, that I
proceed out of a noble house and lineage, where my dear and loving parents,
wished: yea and also procured that I might have understanding in forreyn
languages, among the which I chiefly desired to speak and write the English
tongue. wherefore I crave of your worship, to receive this Pamphlet, and to
pardon my base style in your language, considering I am a strainger, and so
doing, my desire shall be fully satisfied, and God grant your gentle hearts
desire.

Your loving friend Listra, of Corinth.

The Dialogue.
IT fortuned, the Lady Listra, coming from her sumptuous house in the Country
and going toward Corinth, accompanied with two proper young Gentlemen her
Pages, she by chance, ouertooke a poor Pilgrim, clothed with a long vesture
of Sackcloth, and an upper garment of the same, with a large Felt Hat on his
head: this Pilgrim was a man well grown in years, as appeared, by his white
head and long beard, unto whom the Lady says as follows.

Lady. Well overtaken, father Pilgrim, and in good time.


Pilgrim. Good Madam you are most heartily welcome.


L. Father I pray you, whether do you journey this way.


P. Forsooth Madam now God willing I mean to pass to Corinth, and from thence
into Asia Mayor.


L. I perceive your Pilgrimage has bin long, but when mean you to cease and
take your rest.


P Madam when my body is laid in Grave. For truly, al mankind has but a
pilgrimage in this world: yea although they live at home in their native
Country and delectable houses, an end they must have of their pilgrimage. But
I and such other poor Pilgrims do often see by Land and Sea, the admyrable
works of the almighty. The which to tell when I come home, the foolish will
hold me for a liar: yet I do daily more and more, praise God, who is so
great, and this is my only contentacion


L. But tell me father Pilgrim go you now to visit any monument of the
Goddess Flora, here in Corinth.


P. No Madam I care not forsuch relikes. For my friend a Philosopher warned me
by ye way a^^^^ame, saying. Non licet omnibus adicere Corinthum: yea also he
wished me not to buy repentance too dear, among Dame Floras dames.


L. Well father, do you mean to abide here any long season?


P. No longer Madam then I may amend my Shoes, Hose, and also provide other
furniture for my Scrippe and Bottell.


L. I pray you good father hold me not for importunate, to demand of you a
question or two.


P. Rather Madam you seem so wise, that I receive pleasure by your
communication: therefore good Madam say on.


L. I will not require of you to signifye unto me the laws, customs, rites,
ceremonies, and strainge vsages of the Hethites, among whom you have travailed,
for I know the same to be horrible and abominable. But tell me I pray you,
have you bin among the Christians in East India.


P. Yea Madam I abode a certain time, in the famous City called Crangalor,
which stands situated near the pleasant River of Guadalquiuer. This City
is not only adorned with beauty of sumptuous Temples, Towers and costly
Howses, pleasant Orchards, and sweet Gardens: but cheefely decked with notable
government and celestial Justice.


L. Has this Country a king or a Prince for chief Lord and Ruler.


P. A Prince forsooth called Basha Haily.


L. Then I pray you tell what reverence does those subjects to their Prince.


P. O Madam truly exceeding great. But first they say yea and steadfastly
believe, that their Prince, is the only Deputy and Lutenaunt of God him self
within his dominions, to execute and maintain Justice, yea such a one, that is
not noted of any great crime, for say they God is pure and holy, even so ought
his Deputy to be in maintayninge right and Justice. So that the subjects of
this Prince, are wonderful obedient, with life and goods, and other loyal
service.


L. Then must needs follow, that the Nobilitye are virtuous and prudent.


P. Yea Madam, as members so necessary to so godly a Prince, they are decked
with humble hearts, and far from all corruption.


L. The Cleargye then should seem, to live according to the Gospel.


P. O Madam I cannot let, but highly commend ye Cleargye, for the ritchest
Bishops and Prelates are not trimmed in sylkes, but clothed in honest decet
attire. These men name themselves the Criers of God, and Steward of the poor.
For say they even as the laws of the Prince are Proclaimed, through his
dominions to the intent his subjects should know his will, even so say they,
are we the Cryers of God to proclayme, preach and set forth the laws of the
everlasting God, as well in teaching, as in our living and behaueour: for if we
do not so say they, the Prophet tells us that the blood of our flock shall be
demanded at our hands.


L. But why do they go so plain appareled, being Lords and of great calling?


P. I of my self Madam, will say no more then I have hard at their own
mouths. They say that Christ willed his holy Apostels, to leave their Nets and
other worldly goods, and follow him, who in all the time, that his sacred
Majesty abode upon earth, had never any great bodilye (...): but continuallye
like a good Shepherd went from valley to valley, from hill to hill, from
pasture to pasture, to seek his lost Sheep, and being found, brought them
home upon his blessed shoulders, to his hierd and Sheepefolde, calling always
sinners to repentance: so say they we being his disciples must every one of us
take up his own Cross and follow him.


L. Way the^ how can they dispend the great profit and revenues of their
bishoprikes and other benefices.


P. Why Madam do you marvel at that, Then harken I pray you. These good
Prelates do weekly go unto the common Iaile, where a great number of prisoners
are, some for debt, and some for other offense, and there do they preach the
word of God among them, persuading them to repentance and to forsake their
evil living, they do not only in this sort comfort the poor afflicted
prisoners, but also do according to need, cloth them which want clothing: yea
and three times in the year, at the principal feasts, all such prisoners which
lie in prison for the sum of twentye Marks or under, these good religious
men, do pay the debt, and set the poor at liberty with great admonishion, how
to flee from fallinge into danger again. This lively work of faith springs
not alone in them, but also the poor Orphants and Maidens, which want dowries
for marriage, are provided out of their house of Mercy, yea every sort of poor
people are well remembered among the^. And in this sort say they we are Steward
of the poor according to Christ his commandment.


L. Why then they deal not in Vserye, or other like Merchandise.


P. O no good Madam those wicked vices, are far from them, for truly I may
boldly say, that at the years end, all their great revenues are consumed, in
order aforesaid.


L. And is there no other sort of religious persons, within the dominion of
Crangalor?


P. Yes Madam, there is an other sort of Contemplatiues, who lives by the
labor of their hands, in the Mountains, and these are Silke-weauers, which
live only upon that occupation, and at certain times do occupye themselves
in prayer, calling upon the name of Jesus.


L. Truly father Pilgrim I do rejoice to hear of such virtuous and
religious men, who are occupied day and night in the law of God, for I would
scarcely have believed that any such had lived on earth, well good father
proceed to the Ministers of the Law.


P. I I should not seem unto you good Madam tedious: I would say some what of
their behauoour.


L. Nay rather you do me pleasure, and I give you most hartye thanks.


P. First their Judges are excellent learned men, and such as are chosen out
of the University, by the Princes Counsel, for their excellency, grauitye and
learning. These grave Judges have no kind offees, for seals or reknowledging
of writings, or such like, but are maintained with reasonable stipend at the
Princes cost.


L. Why then there are no Iuries of twelve men to try the right of any?


P. Alas no Madam would you w sh twelve simple men, without learning to decide
the doubtful and hard cases in law: no, God forbid.


L. Will not those Judges now and than take bribes?


P. No Madam, for the punishment is grievous for such an offense: yea and the
Prince to avoid that wickedness, does yearly make preuie enquiry of the
administration of Justice, to gratify the good Judges and to punish the wicked.
But yet I do remember of one Judge, that took a Goose stuffed with gold for a
bribe. But when the case was known to the Prince, he commanded the Judges
leg to be sawen off, with a wooden saw, in the open Market place. And when
the execution was done, the Prince caused the Judge to come before him, saying
unto him: sir is the stuffing of a Goose good meat, but the Judge answered
not one word. Well quoth the Prince receive your office again, and look well
what meat you eat: who ruled afterward exceeding well. The example whereof
did so terrify, that bribes were clean banished.


L. Now assuredly, this Prince may welbe called the Deputy of God, but sythens
the Judges are so upright in Justice, than what say you to the Counselors and
other ministers of the law?


P. I must needs commend them Madam, for there the good Lawyers have very
fair and large studies, and beset with many fair Chayres, so that the client
when he comes is commanded to sit him down in one of those chayres, and to
put on his bonet. Then he opens his case, if it appear a just and lawful
suit: then the said Lawyer deuiseth his Plea, and his Clarke penneth the same,
with the lines near together, for they know not what great spaces betwixt
lines after eight pence a sheet, means. Now the Plea being drawn, and
contain a large sheet of paper, written as aforesaid, the Clyent paieth to
his Lawier two shillings and three pence for the Clarke, wherewith they are
well satisfied. But if the cause apeareth not good and just, then the Lawyer
persuades the party, not to deal any further: and so always wrong is thrust
out of the doors. These Lawyers abhor covetousness, and know not what Golden
Angels mean. The Judges sit daily through the year in judgment, the Festiual
days excepted, so that there is no issue or trial upon one point or branch
of a matter, but rather by those learned Judges, a whole matter is ended at
once, which is a good and godly way. The Counselors in Law, sit on each side
of the Judges: I mean not on the same benche where the Judges sit, but rather
on each side of the judicial place, and the Judges at the upper end. So there
is no strise who shall come to the Bar: But when any ple is related. Then it is
lawful for every Lawyer to exclaim the meaning of the words on his Clyents
behalf: but with very few words.


L. But may not the party agreeued, appeal of any sentence?


P. Yes, if the cause amount above the sum of one hundred pound, the party
agreeued may appeal to the Princes Counsel: where always two synguler
Counselors attends such causes, even as a Chauncery to mittigate extremity
of Law.


L. Then how does the poor folk obtain Justice against the rich and
mighty.


P. O Madam wounderfull well. For the poor shall have rather more favor then
the rich, it is so Madam that the most famous learned man within the precynt
of the whole City, he I say is appointed for Advocate of the poor, and has
a great stipend of the Citizens for his pains. And think you Madam that he
is the basest office in a Common weal? No: for this advocate is had in
greatest honor, next unto the Princes Council, and chief Judges. And again
when the complaint of the poor comes before the Judges in the judicial Hall,
then says the Attorney of the poor, who has also his wages of the Citizens.
My Lords, it may please you to hear a poor man's cause. This voice is no
sooner heard, when the Judges staieth all matters, except it touch the estate,
and incontinent the poor man ssute is dispatched: for if it should not be so,
then many times would it happen, as once a suit depending between a poor
Poticary and a Butcher, for when their Plea is determined by the inferior
Judge: the Poticary carried privily to the Judge a little Pot of Conserua,
beseeching him to remember his matter against the butcher. The Judge took it
and said he would provide Justice. But when the Butcher heard of the
presenting of this bribe, he went and killed a good fat Hog and brought it to
the Judge, requesting his favor against the Poticary: ye Judge also received
it, and bad him depart. It so fell out, that the sentence passed on the
Butchers side. But when the poor Poticary had notice thereof, he came railing
to the Justice house, saying to the Judge: sir how chaunst you remembered not
both my right and pot of Conserua. Yes quoth the Judge, I remember them both,
but as for your Conserua, there came a Hog and threw down your pot, ye and
spilt it, so that I never found any sweetenes therein. Mary sir quoth ye
Poticary a murraine and a pestilence take such a Hog that spilt both my Justice
and Conserua. So that Madam I tell you this merry tale, to the end that you
may know how in this happy Land, it prevails not for the rich to say I have
a fat purse: for why, the good Judges, has so great a fear of God and the
Prince, that no corruption can avail. And certainly the godly Divines, are a
great cause thereof, for they will not let to tell all estates their faults,
by some honest means: by reason whereof, they do well know, that they
themselves, shall come to judgment, and be Judged, so that according to the
oppinion of S. Ierom, they have daily the sound of the Trumpet in their ears,
that shall call to Judgment. And this is the principal cause, that they do
live in the fear of God, and are blessed.


L. I do most highly praise this godly rule and order. But how are Criminal
matters decided.


P. Forsoothe Madam the Judges which have the charge of Criminal matters, do
likewise sit all the whole year in the judicial place: but as I said before,
festival days excepted. These Judges use great pollicye to search out the
troth, against any accused of crime, and the troth manifestly known, the
offense is corrected with grievous punishment: but otherwise they have great
fear of shedding innocent blood, by reason whereof every prisoner is permitted
to have an advocate, and make exceptions against his accusers. And when any
offender is condemned to suffer pains of death, he has three days respite to
repent his former life, they also have good men that never leaves persuading
them earnestly to repent, and only to stick unto the mercy of our Lord Jesus.
Truly Madam I have seen some dye, with such penitent and humble hearts, that
any good Christian would have commended their constant faith.


L. Sure, this is a charitable act.


P. I must needs confess Madam, that the people in this Country are fully
persuaded, that there are but two ways of eternitye, the one leads unto
perpetual joy and everlasting, felicity, and the other to everlasting, horrible
and unquenchable hell sier, the which both places, shall have no end, whilst
God is God, and yt is infynite.


L. The name of Jesus be praised for such a Country and people.


P. Also Madam whilst I abode in Crangalor, I saw three persons punished, the
one was a woman, and she was convicted of Sorcery and Witchcraft, but no hurt
done by her to either man or beast, approved: yet for her dealing in that
art, she was condemned. The execution was, she was set upon an Ass, her body
naked unto her Nauill, and anointed all over with Honny, the which was beset
full of small Feathers of Down, with a Miter on her head, of a yard long, and
in this sort she rode about the streets accustomed, with a Trumpet blown
before her, and a Crier manifesting her offense. An other was punished for
perjury, this man rode likewise upon an Ass, about the accustomed streets:
but not naked. And in the Market place, there was a Barbor attending for him,
with his Instruments, and there he was foreced to open his mouth, and all his
teeth being accoumpted, the Barbor drew out every fifthe toothe, in such sort
Madam, that neither money, nor friendship can redeem any punishment in that
Country. The third person that I saw punished, was a wittoll and he I say,
rode upon an Ass about the said streets, with a Hearts horn on his head full
of small Bells, and his wife rode alter whipping him, and then followed the
hangeman, whipping them both.


L. O most happy Land, where vice is so punished. But I pray you say father
the poor Prisoners that are imprisoned for det, are they put in yrons?


P. No Madam, for there they hold opinion, that none ought to were Yrons, but
such as has committed odious crimes, for otherwise say they ye Iaile is no
other thing but only a safe custody.


L. Yet they pay fees for their Yrons.


P. Alas Mada^ God forbid: for think you, that it were a just cause, that a
poor man, who has fallen into debt by sundry mishaps, should now in prison be
punished with fees of Yrons, and incur into a new debt: nay they hold such
usage for abominable extorcion, and a thing odious in the sight of God.


L. But yet I think they pay eighteen pence a day for their meat, and a
groate for their bead, or at the least twelve pence a day, and a groate for
their bead.


P. That also Madam is holden for an abominable use. But troth it is that any
Prisoner for debt, may bring his bead, his meat and drink from whence he will.
And if he be so poor that he has nothing wherewith to maintain himself.
Then the house of charity provided for such a one.


L. What fees has the Iayler then?


P. Forsooth six pence for every Prisoner, and also a yearly stipend of the
Citizens, sufficient to mainetaine an honest man.


L. I have father Pilgrim thoroughly understood all your talk. But now I pray
you how does the Notaries, Skriueners, and such like officers use themselves.


P. Madam I must also commend their usage: for why you shall understand, that
every Notary, Scriuener or such like officer, concerning either temporal or
ecclesiastical affairs have their offices from the Prince, for a certain
sum of money under the Princes Seal: the which offices each one does enjoy
for term of life, except he make resignation thereof to his son, or some
other friend, fifteen days or more before his death and for want of such
resignation the ofcie comes again to the Prince: but in effect, ever such
officer gives sufficient Sureties to the Prince, for the true and faithful
executing of his office, by mean where of all false wrytinges, and abominable
deceipts are utterly banished. More ever every such Notary or Scriuener has
his books of Records, wherein the parties obliged does set their firmes and
seals, with two or three witnesses, which testifye that they do know, that the
parties so obliged, are the very self same men, to avoid all collusion. This
done the Scriuener under his firm and sign, gives the party creaditor the
copye of the Bond, which is available, and pleadeable in Law: the cause
hereof is to avoid all subtutie, for many times poor men by some sinister
mean or casualty, has his writings stolen, enbesseled, burned, or lost: yet
were it not just, that those men should lose their right and title. In
consideration whereof the original matters remains alive in the said
Scriueners books, in order aforesaid. Every Obligation contains a sheet of
Paper, near written, for the which the Scriuener is to have six pence and no
more, and other six pence for the Copye if the party will have it. But this
must I say unto you Madam the cause of this godly government is, that once in
two or three years, the Prince sends secret visitors: who takes all these
Scriueners or Notaries Recorde's into their power, and command to Proclaim
through the Cittye, that if any person or persons, know any falsehood in the
said Officers, concerning their Offices, that then they come and manifest the
same: and the offense or offenses known, some has their hands cut off, other
some deprived from their offices, and others condemned to the Gally for slaves:
yea the Law is that if any writing chance to be enterlyned, then must the
Scriuener recite the same words at the foot of the writing, before the party
or parties seal thereto.


L. But is this order throughout all the Princes dominions, in Cities,
Viliages, and Towns?


P. Yea truly Madam, and all other writings of no effect, except some Bills
or writing made in extreme necessity, which are afterward recknowleged before
the Judge, or else remain of none effect.


L. This godly order must needs be profitable to the Prince.


P. Nay Madam much more profitable I say to the common weal, for the avoiding
of many brabling and wicked suits attempted in law.


L. Father Pilgrim, I am well satisfied in these points. But how does Majors
or other governors of great Cities behave themselves?


P. O Madam exceeding well. For each ruler of a famous City delights not in
Glottony, and Belly cheer, but rather is very vigilant and careful for the
benefyt of the City: he I say, comes not upon days appointed, to visyt the
Bakers and other Vittellers, but rather follows the order that Christ has
prescribed, which is how his coming shall be when he is not looked for: even so
does this good Ruler of Crangalor, come at such times to visyt the Citizens,
that some does rejoice, but others do tremble at his sudden coming, ye in
the night season when others sleep at quiet rest, he wandereth round about the
City, personally in all blind lanes, and solitary places, to see what watch
is kept, to harken for bibbers and dronkerds, to search out Hoores, and
Hooremongers, and to examine suspicious guestes. I am sure Madam that the
Governor of Crangalor, has expulsed a number of such vicious persons, out of
that Cittye, yea it seems now a terrenall paradise: but wot you what is the
cause of this? Forsoothe at the time of the term of expiration of the said
Governors charge, the Prince appoints a new Governor, who commands the
former Governor and al his officers, to keep their own houses as prisoners
for the space of fortye days: and then Proclaymeth throughout the Cittye, that
if any person or persons, poor or ritche, can lay any extorcion, bribes, or
other offense, against the said Governor or Officers, that then they come and
complain, and shall have present remedy and satisfaction. But when those
fortye days are expired, and no offense found: O what great Honor receives
such a Gouernoure: yea and how highly is he esteemed of his Prince?


L. Truly father Pilgrim that is a blessed Land: but what can you say of
all such officers, which has the receite and dealinges about the Princes
revenues?


P. Once in three year Madam secret enquyrye is made of their dealinges, and
their books narrowlye searched, so that the Prince cannot be deceived.


L. O father Pilgrim, the sun declyneth apace, and loath I am to leave your
godly conversation: but yet I pray you say, how does women behave themselves
in that country.


P. Very honest and virtuous they are Madam. For in that City, you shall not
see neither Wives, nor Maids with hand Baskets, or otherwise wander about the
City, because the Husbands and their men slaves do prepare all necessaries,
for their houses and Families: so that the women straye not abroad, except on
the Sabbath day, or other Festival days, when they go to the Temple, or else
when they go abroad in their Husbands company to recreate themselves: for
otherwise the Husbands fear that they should have some evil wares brought
home in those hand baskets.


L. I have yet many other things to enquire of you: but I pray you tell me, have
you bin at any time in England?


P. Never but once Madam, and then I came to the famous Cittye of London, to
take Shipping into Scithia.


L. But that Land?


P. Forsoothe Madam at that time Raygned, and I hope yet does, a virtuous
Maiden Queen, whose beautye and rare virtues, whose wisdom and synguler
learning: yea her wonderful knowledge in sundry languages: the like, I never
heard nor knew in in any part of the world where I have traueiled into: And
yet have I been in some part of Asia, in some part of America, and in some part
of Europia.


L. This is believe me the straungest thing that as yet you have told me.
God preserve her, and if I were as young as I have been, I would gladly go see
so gracious a Lady and Maiden Queen. But I perceive consydering you went that
way to take Shipping into the Land of Scithia, you had no leisure to enquire
of the commodity of that Land.


P. No truly Madam, time would not permit me: for I was no sooner come to
London, but the ships were ready to hoyse up sails and depart.


L. I fear father Pilgrim, the shutting in of Corinth Gates, because night
approaches on so fast: Wherefore good father, let us now make the more haste,
and sithe you are a strainger here, you shall abide this night with me, with
such poor cheer as I may make you.


P. God reward you good Madam, I will not refuse your gentle offer.

Now the Lady Listra, and the Pilgrim enter into Corinth, where the Pilgrim was
well entertained and lodged: yea and at his departure from thence, the Lady
gave him spending money, for his journey, with faithful promise made by the
Pilgrim at his return, to manifest unto that Lady, all strainge things, that
he should hear or see in his pretended Journey.


FINIS.
Book.
Pilgrim for thy telling troth,
Perhap thou shall be shent:
In recompense of all thy toil,
And time so godly spent.
Pilgrim.
WHat care I for recompense,
For profit or for gain:
The God that gave me fortitude,
Will well reward my pain.
FINIS.
T. N.


