AN EPISTLE OF A CATHOLIC YOUNG GENTLEMAN, (Being for his Religion
imprisoned.)

To his Father a Protestant.

Who commanded him to set down in Writing, what were the motives that induced
him to become a Catholic.

Noli exubescere testimonium Domini nostri, neque me vinctum euis.

Be not ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his Prisoner.

1. Timoth. Chap. 1. Verse. 8. DOWAY. Printed with License. 1623.

To the Reader.
I No sooner had perused this short Epistle, then I had an earnest desire it
might be Published in Print, as well for that I observed the grounds which
this young Gentleman had laid down to his Father to be both sncsinct and
Learned! as also for that I am well persuaded the promulgation thereof, would
(God assisting) give much good satisfaction to any judicious Reader, and for
that I never had any acquaintance with the Author, I moved secretly a very
Friend of mine (intimate with him) to persuade him (if possible) to put it to
the Press: which motion he not only absolutely refused, but was also
infinitely displeased with the Moouer, wherefore to prevent (what in him lay)
the printing and publishing of the said Epistle, he not only refused utterly
to give Coppies thereof, but also ecclipsed it from the view of all men. But
the Father more prodigal then the Son himself, carried the Original
continually about him, making no dainty at all to show it in St. Paul's, the
Pawn, Youngs Ordinary in Corne-hill, and in many other places at his pleasure,
he making it his common Table-discourse in Tauernes and Ordinaries: by which
means I obtained a Copy, which (though long after) I sent over Seas to a
Friend, desiring him to cause it to be Printed. Read it through with good
attention, and if thou reap any profit thereby; forget not to render due
thanks to GOD, and then in thy Prayers remember both the Author and the
Publisher.

Farewell.
TO THE WORSHIPFVLL HIS VERY LOVING Father N. N. Esquire, give these.
Good Sir:
NVmberlesse (I may truly say) have bin the attempts I have made in writing
unto you, and as many in number were the obstacles which have opposed my said
attempts: The effects of some of them are to this hour to be seen (if I list
to produce them to the quantity, And I do keep me within compass) of at the
least 24. sheets of Paper, which I intended to your good self, which by that
time they could be finished, I had motives exhortatory to call them back, and
not by any means to send them. But yet nevertheless, to exempt my self from
having any imputation of disobedience wherewith to be taxed, I have now at the
last (presuming more upon your Fatherly charity, then any other merit in my
self) been bold, to present unto you these few lines, wherein I have
delivered briefly, that which I had heretofore handled more at large; in the
passages whereof, I have here set you down most prospicuously, according to
your most important request, from whence have perceeded the motives, which
caused me to abjure the Religion in practice amongst Protestants, and to assume
the true, holy, and never erring Catholic and Orthodoxall Faith, and thereunto
to adhere: Neither do I herein go about to persuade you, but only to keep
correspondence with your desire and command, being that I find my self bound
in all Conscience, to perform such precepts, which you shall require at my
hands, supposing them to be no way derogating to Gods honor, or to the
commodity of my particular self, in making imminent peril of my souls
shipwreck, where in a case of such a nature I am not liable.

I am therefore an humble suter unto you (good Sir) in that you would be
pleased so far to favor me, as to daine with alacrity the peruse of these
few lines, and that with serious mature judgment, and then I hope you will
not be so strict in censuring me for my assumed Religion, nor yet in blaming
me for undergoing with all patience and chearfulnes, this long and austere time
of durance: but you will rather (I hope) commiserate my estate, which howsoever
to others it might appear irksome and insufferable, to me (I give God most
humble thanks) it is a greater consolation then any temporal (considering for
whose sake it is) guerdon or respect the whole world is able to afford me. And
the consideration hereof, has been of that efficacy and power with me, as
that I am at all times readily prepared, with no less willingness, to
undergo, not only Imprisonment, in the most austere manner may be imagined,
but also in the service of so noble a Master, torture, stripes, gyues, yea the
most prodigious and dolorous death the heart and capacity of man is able to
invent; For I know well enough, that whatsoever I do undergo in this behalf,
I do in it restore him but his own, and am never able to come out of debt,
albeit I had as many lives to loose, as I have in this vile and miserable
Carcass of mine, drops of blood to shed; neither shall I herein dissent from
that holy and reverend Doctor and Pillar of Gods Church Saint Bernard, who for
his sweet and delicate style, is entitled Mellifluus, who says thus; Si
totum me debeo pro me facto, quid addam iam pro me refecto: Sermo de diligendo
Deo.
nec enim faceli refectus quam factus. In primo opere me mihi dedit, in secundo
se, and vbi se dedit me mihi reddidit: Datus ergo and redditus, me pro me
debeo, and bis debeo; sed quid Domino pro se retribuam, nam et si me millies
rependere possem, quid sum ad Dominum meum? That is; If I owe my self wholly
for my first making, what can I add more for my redeeming, especially seeing I
was not so easily Redeemed as I was made. In the first work he gave me my
self, in the second himself, and when he gave me himself, he restored
unto me my self, Therefore thus given and restored, I owe my self for my
self, and I owe my self twice. But now what I am able to repay my Lord for
himself, for although I were able to repay my self a thousand times, what am
I in comparison of my Lord? which being so, what then can be the fear why I
should not give my self freely to my Creator? Sithence he has in me a double
interest, to wit, as well in respect of my Creation, as of my Redemption, the
least of which two works being invaluable.

The serious considerations hereof (good Sir) have wrought in me unutterable
effects, and such as have caused me hereby to settle so irremoueable an
affection upon the most Blessed Trinity, in regard of my Creation, and
Redemption, as enforces me with no small vehemence, to cry out with the Kingly
Prophet, saying; Quid retribuam Domino, Psalm. 115.
pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? What shall I repay our Lord for all things
which he has given unto me: certainly when I have done what I have been able,
I am, Seruus inutilis, Luke 17.
au unprofitable Servant, and Indignus vocari filius euis, unworthy to be
called his Son. The consideration whereof, was long before it came into my
mind, for that I must not deny, but that I spent much time in a most
exorbitant course of life, which I do now from my heart repent, and desire
that Gods grace may never more depart from me, so as I may for ever hereafter
live, as an obedient, and not as a rebellious Child, having so dear, loving,
and tender, and a Father, who says daily unto me: Psalm. 102.
Qui propitiatur omnibus iniquitatibus tuis, and qui sanat omnes imfirmitates
tuas, quired mi de interitu vtam tuam, qui coronat te in miserecordia, and
miserationibus, qui replet in bonis desidereum tuum, etc. That is, Who is
merciful to all thy iniquities, and who cures all thy infirmities, who
redeemed thy life from Death, who Crowns thee in mercies and compassions, who
replenisheth thy desire in good things, etc. The remembrance of these thus
skirmishing within me, have bin impregnable, and irresistible motives, which
pressed me to determine upon a more morrall worm, whereby to measure the
square of my life: and these determinations made me think upon Religion, and
Religion begat Devotion, and Devotion brought with it a firm Resolution, which
Resolution, being assisted by Almighty Gods grace, has won me to stand
against all terrors and temptations, and which have occasioned me to address
these Lines unto you, whereby I do intend to give you a taste, from what
motives and grounds I do build my Faith; which if you be able to refell, I
shall be very willing to believe, that a man may be saved in the Protestants
Church, which neither Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels, or reason was ever able to
make me understand.

1 Having therefore thus misspent my time, and Quasi seruus nequam, like to an
evil servant, S. Math. 18.
consumed my younger years, yea the prime of my days, in vanity and
irregularity, It has pleased Almighty God at the length to touch my heart with
a due consideration of my mortality, and with some care of eternity; Insomuch
as the more I seriously observed the frailty, and absurdity of the one, the
more inwardly I affected the love, and contentment of the other, that finally I
resolved to hunt after it, albeit the passages and difficulties of my life were
never so many, resting now well persuaded, That, Nil prodest homini si
vniuersum mundum lucreter, animae vero suae detrimentum patiatur. It avails
nothing to gain the whole world, if a man make shipwreck of his own Soul,
Ibidem 16.
which to save hereafter, we are taught to save here; That is, to expose it to
all afflictions and contradictions, which the world, the Devil, or our own
sensual appetite do continually stir up against us, For much better it is
for a man to enter into life everlasting lame, blind, or dismembered, then to
be plunged into the bottomless Pet of inquenchable sulphurous Hell, with all
our senses and members. Ibidem 5.


2 These therefore, and the like considerations encouraged me sincerely to
seek after Truth, swayed neither with fear nor favor, but only guided with
that vnmouing Pole, whose influence had touched my heart, like unto another
Loadstone, that howsoever these mortal waves tossed my unsteady bark, the
proof of my affections ever bent that way, I could very well have contented my
self to follow my appetite still But durum est contra stimulum calcitrare, It
is hard striving against Almighty God, and dangerous to harden our hearts
against his calls. Act. 9.
Wherefore, I yield my self, saying; Domine quid me vis facere? What O Lord is
thy pleasure I shall do? And herewith me thought, I heard this comfortable
answer, viz. Dicitur tibi quid te oporteat facere, Thou must be taught what
thou must do: and taught I must be, sithence the knowledge I sought after, was
above humane reach to comprehend and find; For these tidings came out of
Heaven, and Vnigenitus qui est in suum Patris ipse enarrabit, The only
begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he will deliver them, Ioh. 1.
and they only can have them, S. Math. 11.
Cui filius voluerit reuelare, to whom it shall please the Son to reveal it.
Nobis autem reuelauit Deus pro spiritum suum, Spiritus enim omnia scrutatur,
etiam profunda Dei. But unto us has God revealed it by his Spirit, for, the
Spirit tries all things, yea, the profundities of God 1. Cor. 2.
Showing, yt this knowledge could come from none other but only from him alone.

3 Thus then being desirous of this knowledge, and perceiving it not to be
humane, but Divine, Quemadmodum desiderat ceruus ad fontes aquarum, Look how
the heart hastes to the Fountains of water. Psalm. 41.
Even so earnestly did I thirst after some certain rule, guidance, or
direction, whereby to be led or conducted, by which means I might attain unto
what soever humane industry could not aspire, and this needs no further
proof, as being in it self manifest, and by the joint and mutual consent
as well of Catholics as of Protestants received. But of this Doctrine I
collected further, that this rule or direction we speak of, must contain two
several properties, to make it available for the end, for which it is
required: First it must be plain, easy, indifferently open or manifest to
all, and the reason good, for it must be a direction as well to the wise, as to
the simple, to the Learned, as to the ignorant, sithence all these must (before
they can be saved) be instructed in this supernatural Science, without which
can be no access to grace, Heb. 9.
entrance into Heaven, or possibility to please that Divine Majesty, according
as the holy Apostle teaches us, and therefore the Prophet foretells of this
way, saying: Esaias 35.
Et erit ibi semita and via, and via sancta vocabitur, etc. And concludes,
Haec erit vobis directa via, ita vt stulti non errent per eam. That is, And
there shall be in that place a path, and a way, that shall be your direct way,
so that fools shall not err in it. The second property of this rule is, that
it must be certain and infallible, and the reason is, for that the knowledge of
our Faith depending thereupon, must be certain, and infallible, so as it may
be no more subject to error then truth it self is to falsehood; the credit
thereof must be greater then of an Angel of Heaven. Gal. 1.
Licet nos (says St. Paul) aut Angelus de Coelo, euangelizet preterquam quod
euangelizauimus vobis, anathema sit. If our selves, or an Angel from Heaven,
shall Euangelize or Preach to you otherwise then we have Preached, accursed
let him be. For if our Faith might be subject to rrror, then did it not rely
upon the truth of God, and then it were no divine Faith. Again, if in that
Faith by which we are saved we might be seduced to falsehood, See William
Perkins, pro. de fide n. 6.
then by falsehood we might be saved, and by untruth attain to truth, which
parradoxe is both blasphemous hnd ridiculous. Authorities of holy Scriptures,
consent of venerable antiquity, and the unanimous approbation of the universal
Church, I could produce for the truth of these properties; but I hold them
needless for that in themselves they do appear most perspicuous, and by no
Protestants which I can read of, are they denied, as by all Catholics is
confessed. I having thus far waded, at the length I began to observe, where
this rule and direction is to be found, that by consent thereof, I might be
conuayed to that knowledge which so much imports me, and therefore I do here
inquire of the Protestant, and he tells me readily, that true it is, such a
rule must guide all Christians, and is to be found in their Church, contained
in their Bible, and by them termed the word of the Lord, and divine
Scriptures; this they say is easy, plain, and an infallible direction to all
who seek after Heaven, and heavenly knowledge.

5 But here I am entangled with so many difficulties, so that I am rather
pusled, clouded, and encombred, then any way freed, cleared, or ascertained of
any truth. First, how can it appear unto me that I may be assured, that this
Book is the word of God, and of that continuance and authority whereof I
speak: We see many works bear Saint Augustines name, and others of other
Fathers, which Protestants stoutly deny to be theirs; yet not so ancient as
their Book of Scripture must be, if it be true Scripture indeed; Here I
inquire so certain knowledge of the Truth, that in it self it be plain for
all men to perceive it, and so certain, that it should be impossible how it
could be otherwise, else (as I have before said) it cannot guide or warrantise
Divine and infallible Faith. But I have ever found Protestants so extremely
pusled in this point, that they know not how to extricate themselves, their
Answers were so weak, different, disjoynted, and uncertain, that at the last
they have no refuge, but to depend upon the tradition of the Roman Church, from
whence they have their Scriptures; yea, and those traditions also they must
grant to be of infallible truth and Faith, otherwise their Scriptures will not
carry credit sufficient whereupon to build an infallible Faith, and yet if
they grant this, they suffocate and choke their own cause in many
essential, and important points of difference twixt them and Catholics, so as
this Rule ought to be clear, easy, and infallible, is no sooner looked upon,
but it is presently lost in ambiguities, doubts, and uncertainties.

6 And admit that they were able in the grounds of their Doctrine to produce
any one infallible, plain, and certain rule, assuring me that the Book they
show me, is the word of God, or written by such sacred Authors as they tell of,
which they are never able to do; See John Call in Praesat. in no: test.

Zanch. lib. de Sanctis fol. 412. tom. 2.

Beza in resp. ad defen. Cast.

Ite Beza in praefat. no. test. 1556.

Car. moli. in transla. no. cest. par. 11. fol. 110.

Ite part 64. 65. 66. 74. 99.

See confe. at Hampton Court page 46.


yet are they presently encumbred with another difficulty, which makes all
uncertain, which is contained in it: For in former times of a great part of
this volume, the Greek translations were many, the Latin more, of late since
Luther began, from him, his accomplices, and Offspring, the translations have bin
diverse and so different, that one condemns another to Hell, for corrupting,
falsifying, and abusing of holy Scriptures; yea Luther himself differs in
above 30. places (as I can easily show) from himself, in several translations
of St. Mathewes Gospel, out of these into English, we have at the least 7. or
eight seuarall versions, of all which his Majesty pronounces there is never a
good, and the Geneua be the worst of all.

Here I would see how the ignorant or learned, (amid such diversity of
opinions in men of knowledge in all sacred languages) can with assurance and
certainty, select the true Translations from the false, that it be impossible
to err herein, for if in this case there can be no infallible rule, and
direction plain and easy, for all men to understand, (as I have before
delivered) it is impossible that any man can be able to settle an infallible,
and never erring Faith, upon any thing contained in it, when as he is not
certain what is the true word of God, and what by Ignorance, Error, or
wilfulnes is thrust in by human invention, and subject to falsehood.

7 Here not only the Ignorant is so entangled, with the Brackes and Toils of
uncertainty, and instability, so as he knows not which way to get out, yea
finds impossibility by his own industry ever whilst he shall live to clear
himself: But the Learned also are no less clouded with endless variety, and
difference among such as are no less (yea more) learned then themselves,
having no reason whereupon to rely their own Judgments before others, and
be so assured thereof, as that it is impossible they should be deceived, and
consequently, to frame an Article of Divine Faith upon the assurance thereof.
So as out of this head, this rule of only Scriptures, has lost not only
certainety, but perspicuity also, both which are very much behoofefull in the
direction whereof I speak.

8 And here in my understanding it cannot be answered, as in the Proeme of the
new Bible, See Calu. vbi supra.
those Translations say, to wit, that this diversity is not in matters
appertaining unto Faith, Josias Symlerus in vita Bullinger.
but in other points of less consequence. First, that is not true, as by the
inuectiues some of the Translations make against the rest does appear. Again,
in most points of Controversies betwixt them and Catholics, they translate
places concerning those points, differently from the old Latin received above
1000. years ago in Gods Church, only in favor of their own herisies and
opinions, being matters of Faith; As for example, they translate for Priests,
Elders; for Idols, Images, etc. I say yet further, that in so much as all
matters there, is the true Word of God, and I partly find that some part
thereof is mistranslated, and that is proved by the diversities of those
Translations, dissonant each to other; Therefore cannot all be true: in regard
hereof (I say) I must require a sure, certain, and infallible Rule, by the
which it may remain undoubted, that those errors or mistakings were in matters
of Faith, as well as less matters, sithence I could never hear of any
Warranty out of Heaven, assuring these translations in matters of Faith, more
than in smaller matters.

9 But admit again, that Protestants had some sure and infallible rule, or
means to ascertaine us that this which they propose, or any of these, is the
sincere translation of Gods word, yet are we as deeply incombred as ever, for
insomuch as Gods word consists not in bare characters or sillables, but in
the spirit and meaning of that writing, where (I pray) is that plain and
infallible Rule, which Protestants can assign, the conduct whereof who so
follows, cannot possibly err in the true meaning of holy Scripture. For
without this all the rest is nothing available to sustain an infallible
Faith, and an error or mistaking herein, is so pernicious and damnable, that
whosoever is possessed therewith, cannot possibly enter Heaven. Qui non St.
Ioh. 3.
credit iam iudicatus est, who believes not aright is already judged. And Heb.
11.
sine fide impossible est placere Deo, without Faith it is impossible to
please God: And our Faith is not grounded upon letters, Characters, or
sillables, but of the signification and true meaning of the holy Ghost uttered
in them.

10 Here again I find Protestants so masked, or hoodwinckt, that they know
not which way to take, or what to say, as may easily appear by the poor
shifts they are put unto, when in this matter they are by Catholics called to
account. And first it is a usual refuge of theirs to say, that the Scripture
is easy and plain of it self, to be understood of every one without
difficulty or ambiguity: But this is so apparently controwlde, with the form
and matter of Scripture, and every man's particular experience, that it plainly
discovers the weakness and insufficiency thereof. As for the form and style
it is repleate with Majesty and depth, it contains many Hebraicismes and
Grecismes, which the ignorant and unlearned do not understand, yea, and many
times the most Learned do make doubt and differ about, for that it does
contain so profound matter above ordinary capacity. As the Trinity and Unity
in God, the Incarnation, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ our most B.
Savior, together with his Priesthood, and presence in the most Blessed
Eucharist, with the like, which do inuolue great and hidden mysteries, and
profound difficulties, containing many seeming contradictions, which to
reconcile great Clerks and holy Fathers, have much travailed, writing whole
Books and large tomes thereof, against Iulia^ the Apostata, and other enemies
of Christianity. Lib. 3. conf. cap. 5.
Iustitui animam (says St. Augustine) intendere in Scripturas sacras, etc. I
intended to bend my mind to holy Scriptures to see the quality of them, and
behold, I see a thing unknown to the proud, not open to Children, but in
gate lowly, in effect lofty, and covered with mysteries, neither was I such as
I could enter into it, or bow my neck to the entrance of it, So he. Thus did
this holy Father and great Doctor find the holy Scriptures, which Protestants
make so easy and plain, and thus does every man's experience teach, not only
in the endless diversity of expositions, between Catholics and Sectaries, but
especially between Sectaries themselves, Protestants with Protestants, who have
filled the world with their ianglings, and given testimony that they speak
against their Consciences, and knowledge, when they say that the Scriptures are
easy for every one to understand, else why should they spend so much time in
making so many Expositions, and Commentaries, and in filling Books, to make
that understood, which every man with so much ease does conceive: or why should
they after all their Commentaries, leave all controversies of Scriptures more
ambiguous then before, yea in stead of clearing all doubts, beget infinite new
controversies before unheard of.

11 And from hence does appear, how poor and weak an Answer that other is
which (many brought into straights) fly unto, saying that Scriptures are made
plain by conferring one place with another; for this both Catholics and
their opposites, with all diligence do affirm; yet agree never the more by
this: neither are they convinced of one Truth: St. Paul says, Romans 1. Abacuc.
2. Gal. 3. Heb. 10. Act. 15.
Iustus ex fide viuit, The Just man lives by his Faith; and again, Fide
purificans corda hominum, God by Faith purifying the hearts of men. And St.
James says, St. Iam. 2.
Sicut corpus sine Spiritu mortuum est, ita and fides sine operibus mortua est,
like as the body without the Spirit is dead, even so also Faith without works
is dead and nothing available. Protestants explicate St. James by St. Paul:
but Catholics explain St. Paul by St. James; This diversity has well nigh
continued 100. years, tossed and discussed with all diligence, yet not to this
day agreed upon between them; and so the like in all other points of
controversies we do find.

12 Moreover I demand whether after conference of places, such as do
infallibly find Truth thereby, that it be impossible having so done to be
decciued; if you say they do, then you will be controwled by daily experience,
as well in Protestants as in Catholics, who after all differ as before; which
could not be, if by this means they did infallibly find the Truth, For Ephesians.
4.
that is but one, as God is one, and Faith one: But if you grant all that
conference of places, notwithstanding the true meaning of holy Scriptures, and
consequently cannot serve for the purpose we treat of.

13 Others confess, that conference of places cannot be sufficient in this
case, but avow that Almighty God will enlighte^ the heart of every one in
particular that seeks the knowledge of his Truth. But this seems unto me
the most absurd, desperate, and unlikely shift of all vnlikelihoods: for, (as I
have said) notwithstanding this private Spirit, we see the diversity daily
increased, rather then any way diminished, which could not be if God
particularly and infallibly guided every one that heartily desired the truth:
then must you show a mean how every one shall know or be infallibly assured
that this private exposition is true; and all contrary to it false; and then
must he show how he comes by that special gift, denied to all that differ
from him, or how we can be assured thereof, or how is this rule general to all,
which so many so earnestly travailing for truth seek after, yet attain not
unto: this therefore so repugnant to every man's reason and experience, seems
only a rendeuous which men are driven to retire unto, having no better to
succor or help themselves with; for mine own part thus much I say and know, yt
in sincere desire of truth I yield to none, I know it, the life of my soul, I
prefer before all worldly treasures, and as I rank not my self among the
Learned, so am I not the most unlearned among the ignorant and unlearned: yet
when I peruse the holy Scriptures, I do find them so deep, so profound, and so
difficill, that I can assure my self of nothing, which by mine own industry I
am able to attain unto, much less find it so easy and plain as to have
infallible assurance of what I conceive; wherefore I must of necessity seek
that assurance else where, and take direction from surer knowledge then mine
own, or any my self can gather out of holy Scriptures: otherwise I shall
fashion and molde out a very feeble and fickle Faith, and void of all
certainty. Putasne intelligis quae legis? (says St. Philip to the Eunuch) Act.
8.
Think thou that thou understand what thou read? having the old
Testament in his hands. Quomodo possum si non aliquis ostenderit mihi? How can
I (says the Eunuch) In Apoc 2.5.
unless some body shall show me? Ego (says St. Hierome) nec sa^ctior sum hoc
Eunucho, nec studiosior, etc. I am not holyer nor better studied then this
Eunuch, and concludes in these words. These things I have briefly mentioned,
to the end you may understand yt you cannot enter ye holy Scriptures without a
guide, and one who shall show thee the way.

This I finding to be most true, by all reason and experience in my self, and
diligent observation in others, I bent my labors and study to find out this
happy guide, which infallibly and without danger of erring, would instruct me
with the true meaning of holy Scriptures. Perceiving plainly therefore that the
Protestants rule of Scriptures, could not serve for this purpose, I begin to
examine what assurance Catholics had for their belief or expositions,
whereupon they relied.

14 They confess a plain, easy and infallible rule, must guide in matters of
Faith: they say moreover that cannot be any dead or dumb writing, be it never
so Sacred: for nothing can be written so plain but in many clawses or passages
it will bear several constructions; where several constructions are, there
is ambiguity and doubt, and consequently no such plainness and certainty as
our Faith requires; neither can that writing when it is wrested against true
meaning, expound it self, or determine any controversy, that about the Letter
or sense thereof shall fortune to arise.

15 This rule then must be a living rule, able to expound it self, and unfold
such doubts which in matters of Faith shall fall out. And this I easily
believed; for my own reason does dictate, that Almighty God would not under
pain of Hell, bind all men to believe aright, and with a Divine infallible
belief, and leave no rule, no mean, no ground open to every one, and in it
self infallible to establish his belief upon, and resolve the doubts thereto
appertaining.

16 This living Judge can be no private man, for warranty in such we have none;
neither is there cause to expect more in one, then in another; moreover that
must needs dye and fail, and so the rule of salvation perish, and then the
world to be left without means of access unto Almighty God.

17 A temporal or civil Commonwealth it cannot be, for no one Commonwealth
or temporal Congregation has any color of Authority out of Heaven to
challenge that privilege; Again, no one Commonwealth has continued since
Christ, but has sufferd Change in the whole form, yea Religion and all, and
there is no cause to ascribe this security more to one Commonwealth then to
another. There remains only an Ecclesiastical co^munity, to wit, the Church
of Christ whereupon Catholics do rely, and assign for this rule, wherein (as
I do confidently believe) they are not deceived; whereunto I am induced by
evident reason, by manifest and apparent authority, and continuance of
experience. For the infallible Authority left in this Community, we have the
express Promise of Almighty God in many places of holy Scripture, for of this
Church our most Blessed Savior says, St. Math. 16
Portae inferi non praeualebunt aduersus eam, The Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it. Vitia (says St. Hierome) and peccatum etc. In St. Math
16. St. Amb. lib. de bono. mortis cap. 12. Epi^h. in An.
He meant by these Gates, the vices, sins, and Doctrine of heretics, and the
same in effect say the rest of the holy Fathers. And St. Paul says, that,
Ecclesia Dei viui est columna and firmamentu^ veritatis, quod manifestum est in
Carne, iustificatum est in spiritu, apparuit Angelis, predicatu^ est gentibus,
creditum est in mundo, assumptu^ est in Gloria, 1. Tim. 3.
The Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of Truth, and manifestly
it is a great Sacrament of piety, which was manifested in Flesh, was justified
in Spirit, appeared to Angels, has bin preached to Gentiles, is believed in
the world, is assumed in Glory. Quia ab illa In 1. Ti. 3.
(says St. Ambrose) firmantur in veritate omnes credentes, For as much as from
the Church all true Believers are established in the Truth. Ego vobiscum sum
(says our Savior) S. Math. 28. vlt.
omnibus diebus vsque ad consummatione^ seculi, I am with you all days, even
to the consummation of the world. Qui In Mat. 28.
(says St. Hierome) vsque ad consummationem mundi suam praesentia pollicetur,
and illos ostendit, semper esse victuros, and se nunqua^ a credentibus esse
recessurum: Who promises his presence unto the end of the world, shows that
they shall ever live, and that himself will never depart from the faithful.
St. Ioh. 14.
And in another place he says (I mean Christ our most blessed Savior) S.
Chris. hom 74. in Ioh.
Ego rogabo Patre^, etc. I will ask the Father and he will give you another
Paraclete, the spirit of Truth, that he may remain with you for ever; which
could not be meant of the Apostles only to whom it was spoken, St. Ciprian lib.
9. in Ioh.
but of the succeeding Church whose person they bear, and was to endure to the
worlds end. Non pro eis rogo tantum (says our Savior) St. Ioh. 17.
I do not only pray for them, (meaning his Disciples) but for them also that
by their word shall believe in me, that they all may be one, as (the Father)
in me, and I in thee, that they also in us may be one, as we also are one.
And herein all holy Fathers do assent, and plainly thus understand it.

18 This promise of the holy Ghost, St. Paul does plainly testify to be
fulfilled, when he says thus; Ephesians. 4.
Christus ascendens in altum, captiua^ duxit captiuitate, dedit dona hominibus,
Christ ascending on high, he led captivity captive, he gave gifts unto men:
where after a few words he adds, Ipse dedit quosdam quidem Apostolos, etc.
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other
some Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints, unto the work of
the Ministry, unto the edifying of the body of Christ, until we meet all
into the unity of Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, etc. In these
places it is evidently promised, the assistance of the Holy Ghost, the
continuance of the Church, the infallibility of her Faith, Ephesians. 4.
the assured Doctrine of her Pastors, and Teachers, to bring her Children in
vnitatem Fidei, into the unity of Faith. We have likewise in Scriptures
express commandment given to these Pastors that they Act. 20.
carefully attend unto their Flock, and that they are to render an account of
their souls; 2. Tim. 4.
Ezech. 33.
which will be required at their hands, if through their default they perish.
We on the contrary part have the like command who are the Laity, Heb. 13.

S. Math. 18.

St. August. lib. 1. aduer. Ioui.

Idem Epist. ad Heliodox.

St. Cipri. de unit. Eccle. Number. 3.


to obey the Pastors, to take direction, Doctrine, and instruction, from them,
as appears in many places of Holy writ, and that under pain of eternal
Damnation. Wherefore that Christian who follows the direction of this Church,
and obeys her precepts, fulfilleth Gods Commandments, and so consequently
cannot err, nor the Church err in that direction.

For if the Church could err in that Direction and Doctrine, then were we
bound by Gods Commandment to embrace error, and from hence one or two
absurdities must needs arise, to wit, either that by error and falsehood we
might be saved, or else for observing Gods Commandments, we might be damned;
both which are most haereticall and apparent blasphemy.

19 When I had found that this Church had the infallible promise of Almighty
God, for the integrity and certainty of her Doctrine, for her continuance unto
the end, that to her Pastors and Teachers was committed the care of Christ his
Flock, that the said Flock was straightly commanded to obey them as their
Spiritual guides; that very affection wherewith they desired to be of this
Flock, joined me to this Church, and subjected me to this guidance, that
fear I had of mistaking the Truth, (so needful for the health of my soul,)
made me cleave to the assurance of this Direction, where the Spirit of God is
to be my direction and guide, and his lawful Officers my instructors; Now
remains only for me to learn out, where this eminent City of God St. Math.
5.
( Super montem posita, Placed or seated upon an Hill, and casting forth
splendor, St. Luke 1.
Ad dirigendos pedes in viam pacis, To direct our feet into the way of Peace,)
was to be found; and surely this Candle, which is not S. Math. 5.
Sub modio posita sed super candelabrum, Put or hidden under a Eushell, but set
upon a Candlestick, Vt iuceat eis qui in domo sient, To give light to those
that are in the House, was easy to be discerned, and so it must be if the
promises of God were true, or his providence sufficient for the saving of such
souls, learned and unlearned, for whom he shed his most precious Blood, and
dyed.

20 The Church of Rome so celebrated and known to the whole Christian world,
carries only the testimonies of this Truth. It has known continuance with
succession of Pastors from the beginning of Christianity unto this day. It has
preserved the holy Scriptures from corruption, and delivered them to posterity
from hand to hand, from age to age, to these days wherein we live. St. Vincent
Lyrinens. aduersus propha. haereses.
It has consent and unity of Doctrine throughout the whole world, and the same
preserved throughout all Ages, notwithstanding the opposition of Herisie and
infidelity, wherewith it has continually bin exercised. It has prevailed
against all Sects and Heresies whatsoever, and beat them down as they sprung
up, different each from other (like unto the prodigious heads of Hydra) at all
times. It has testimony of Miracles, Beda lib. de Eccles. hist.
whereby the better to confirm her Doctrine, recorded by most venerable
Fathers, and approved Histories, and annuals of all Ages. It has Sanctity and
Innocence of life and Doctrine, now sealed and crowned in the blood of the most
glorious Saints and Martyrs of Heaven, and such as our adversaries cannot deny
to be such. It has the consent of all general and provincial Counsels, that
have ever bin lawfully gathered, and approved in all parts of the world.

Lastly, it has Universality, true Sacraments, Sacrifice, and all what ever
marks the holy Fathers do point our the true Church of Christ: by every of
these several signs most easy to be proved, and in truth are manifest to him
who will but peruse the Ecclesiastical Histories of Times and Ages, Eusebius.
Zohomen. Dorethe. de hist. enl-
which my self by examining finding to be most true, cannot doubt of.

21 Finally if this be not it, on earth there is no true Church, St. Chris. in
Hom. quada^ ad populam Antioch.
Christ has deceived us, the Apostles deluded us, the Fathers wronged us, and
the promises of God have failed. For it is most manifest, that no Congregation,
no Society, no Sect, no Doctrine, has continued from Christ downward under
the succession of Pastors with one and the same Sacraments, under one form of
Government, but only this. And albeit some Sect has for the time seemed
powerful, as the Arrians, Pelagians, Donatists, and many others, yet were they
no sooner sprouted up, but they were severed into innumerable diversities among
themselves, and at wars, yea, deadly fewd one against the other, and it is
not unknown unto your good self, but that Regnum in se diuisum must perish,
S. Math. 12
if we may believe our most Blessed and most merciful Redeemer, and so did
they every one in their turns, insomuch that the memory of them had not
remained, if that Catholic Fathers in Confutations written against them had
not recorded their Errors, and preserved the infamous memory of the Authors.

22 And what we do find true of all former Sectaries, Luther in Epist. ad
Johan Heruag.
is notorious in Martin Luther and his complyces, for their differences and
implacable hatred, each against other, Tispogra. Argent. Zuingl. vbi s^pra. See
a Treatise written by Doctor Stapleton called a discourse upon the Doctrine of
Protest. printed at Louan. 12. of November 1564.
is at large discussed in their own Writings, to be found in almost every
Booke-sellers shop. Insomuch as since Luther among his progeny, within one
hundred years, there are recorded more several Sects, (I may truly say
Heresies) and more novel opinions, hatched and brought into the world, by
their abortiue means, then in 1400. and odd years before. And common
experience shows, that every man being his own caruer and Teacher, shapeth
unto himself a Faith out of his own Brains.

23 And thus (good Sir) I not daring to do for the reasons above mentioned,
and for the danger it imports, had none other hope to save my soul, but by
committing my self to that guidance, where so many assured promises of Gods
assistance do both inuit and warrant me, and so many infallible testimonies
of his performance. encourage me to the same.

24 Thus much (Sir) I have delivered, and these reasons I have alleged for
the better approbation of my motives, and thus much I have set down, to the
end you might understand that I have not done any thing which does savor
either of temerity or passion, but merely out of true zeal, and an earnest
desire I have to let you see how sollicitous I am to save my soul, which (how
sinful so ever it is) it has pleased Christ our loving Savior to redeem, by
the purchase he made, disbursing his own most precious Blood. Nor do I in
this stand upon mine own opinion, but upon the Judgment and Doctrine of the
whole Church of Christ; neither have I done this to any other purpose, but
merely and purely to give your importunity content.

25 These things I have (I say) delivered, and unto them will I (God willing)
adhaere, until such time as better reason shall be given me. In the interim, I
crave nothing but your Blessing and favor: if you be pleased still to cast me
off, Gods will be done.

Prouidentia Diuina haereditas mea: I must take the Divine providence to be
mine Inheritance, and then I shall have just cause to say, with that Blessed
man Saint Francis, who when his Father had cast him off for his strictness and
austerity of life, he departed from his Fathers presence, rejoicing, and
singing, Pater noster qui es in Coelis, so may I say, Pater noster qui es in
Coelis, for upon earth I have not the comfort of a Father. Wherefore that
comfortable saying of the Kingly Prophet can never depart from my remembrance,
viz. Quoviam pater meus and matter mea dear deliquerunt me, Dominus antem
assumpsit me, Because my Father and my Mother have forsaken me, but our Lord
has taken me, and the comfort hereof shall be always ready to accompany me.

26 Before I was a Catholic, my exorbitant and irregular life much afflicted
you, and now since I have amended that fault, through the grace of God, and the
help of the seven Golden Candlestickes, Ap. 1.
spoken of in the Apocalips, which are the seven Spirits of God, which the
holy Church does hold to be the seven Sacraments, all which do promise
grace Ex opere operato, which I have sucked from the charitable breasts of our
most holy: Mother this Catholic Church. You have (Sir) little reason to let
that Religion, which reclaimed me from Vice, and has been the motive to my
amendment, add matter to your greater affliction. Do you desire that I should
have Salvation? then deny me not that Faith which has more then a morrall
assurance of Heavens happiness.

27 Out of the Catholic Church, Tract. in col. cum Eremito
(says Saint Augustine) a man may have all things excepting Salvation, he
may have Orders; he may have Sacraments; he may sing Alleluia; he may
answer Amen; he may have the Evangelists; he may have and Preach in the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, but he can by no
means obtain Salvation. Thus wrote and taught Saint Augustine. And seeing I
have some of his works by me, I will allege you one or two places more to
this purpose we have in hand.

And that I may omit (says he) lib. cont. Epist. Fund. cap. 4.
this Wisdom which I deny to be in the Catholic Church, there are diverse
other things which do most Justly retain, and hold me within he^ bounds
and unity: there does hold me the consent of People, and Nations the Authority
which bad her beginning by Miracles, nourished by Hope, augmented by Charity,
confirmed by Antiquity; There does hold me the succession of Bishops (that is
of Popes) until this present Day, from the very Seat of Saint Peter, to whom
our Lord committed the feeding of his Sheep, (after his Resurrection) to the
Episcopal Dignity of this present bishop.

And lastly, this very name Catholic, holds and detaineth me in the unity
of thee Church, which Name, this Church, has always, not without cause among
so many different Sects and Heresies, in such sort obtained, that although all
Heretics do desire to be called Catholics, yet, if a Stranger (I mean a
Jew, Turk, Infidel, or one who is not a Christian) should demand where is
the Assembly of the Catholic Church, there is no Heretic, who cares to
assign his Temple or his house.

To which may very aptly be added, that worthy saying of Saint Caprian, O
beatam Ecclesiam nostram, quam sic honor diuinae dignitatis illuminat, quam
temporibus nostris gloriosus, Martyrum sanguis illustrat, erat ante, in
operibus fratrum candida, nunc facta est in Martyrum cruore purpurea, floribus
eius nec Lilia, nec Rosae desunt; That is, O happy is our Church, whom the
honor of Gods Grace does so lighten, whom in our days the Glorious blood of
Martyrs does glorify, she was in the works of our Brethren white before, but
now she is become in the blood of Martyrs of Purple color, neither are
Lillies nor Roses wanting to her Flowers.

28 Thus wrote Saint Ciprian, rreating of the Church and of the persecution
thereof in Africa: Innumerable other places of holy Fathers could I allege
for this purpose, but I hold it not needful. I will here end, for fear I
laboring to give content in Writing unto you, might discontent you more by my
perplexity, and endeavoring to avoid one mischief might happily fall into
another, according to the old Proverb, Incidit in Scytham cupiens vitare
Charibilem.

29 I therefore humbly crave your pardon to end, and withal entreating you no
further to tax me, then I shall be ready at all times, Dum spiritus hos alit
artus to continue.

From my Lodging indurance, this 15. day of August, being the 46. th Week of
my Imprisonment, 1614. Your most dutiful Son, N. N.


