IOANNES FLORIVS AVGVSTAE ANNAE ANGL: SCOT: FRANC: ET HIB: REGINAE PRAELECTOR
LING: ITALICAE
CHI SI CONTENTA GOOD
portrait of John Florio AET: 58. A.D. 1611

In virtute sua contentus, nobilis art,
Italus ore, Anglus pectore, vterque opere
Floret adhuc. et adhuc florebit: floreat vltra
FLORIVS, hac specie floridus, optat amans.
Gul: Hole sculp:
Tam foelix vtinam.



ESSAYS WRITTEN IN French By MICHAEL Lord of Montaigne, Knight of the Order of
S. Michael, Gentleman of the French Kings Chamber: DONE INTO ENGLISH, according
to the last French edition, by JOHN FLORIO Reader of the Jtalian tongue unto
the Sovereign Majesty of ANNA, Queen of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc. And one of the Gentlemen of her Royal Privy chamber.

LONDON: Printed by MELCH. BRADVVOOD for EDWARD BLOVNT and WILLIAM BARRET.

TO THE MOST ROYAL AND RENOVMED MAJESTY of the High-borne Princess ANNA of
DENMARK, by the Grace of God QVEENE of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
etc.
Imperial and Incomparable Majesty,

SEeing with me, all of me, is in your Royal possession, and whatsoever pieces
of mine have heretofore, under other stars passed the public view, come now
of right to be under the predomination of a Power, that both contain's all
their perfections, and has influences of a more sublime nature, I could not
but also take in this part (whereof time had worn-out the edition) which the
world has long since had of mine, and lay it at your Sacred feet, as a
memorial of my devoted duty, and to show that where I am, I must be all I am,
and can not stand dispersed in my observance, being wholly (and therein happy)

Your sacred MAJESTY'S most humble and loyal servant JOHN FLORIO.

ALL' AUGUSTA MAESTA DI ANNA, Seren.ma* REGINA d' Inghilterra, di Scotia, di
Francia, and d' Irlanda, etc.
C

He si puo dir di VOI, somma REGINA,
Che non sia detto delle piu lodate
Di Magnanimita, Virtu, Beltate,
Incomparabile, Sopra-diuina?
Anzi, che style tanto si raffina,
Che non sia vinto dalla Maestate,
L' Altezza, la Chiarezza, la Bontate,
Alla qual' ogni cuor di-cuor s' inchina?
La qual di tutti honori'l specchio mostra,
La qual' il pregio Sour a tutte tiene;
ANNA, l' anello della Gioia nostra.
La nostra sicurta, la nostra spene;
VIEN DALL' ECCELSO LA GRANDEZZA vostra;
Dalla GRANDEZZA vostra'l nostro been.
Il Candido

TO THE READER.
ENough, if not too much, has been said of this Translation. If the faults
found even by my self in the first impression, be now by the Printer
corrected, as he was directed, the work is much amended: If not, know, that
through mine attendance on her Majesty, I could not intend-it; and blame not
Neptune for thy second shipwreck. Let me conclude with this worthy man's
daughter of alliance: Que t'en semble donc lecteur?

Still resolute JOHN FLORIO.

To my dear brother and friend M. JOHN FLORIO, one of the Gentlemen of her
Majesty's most Royal Privy Chamber.
BOoks, like superfluous humors bred with ease,
So stuff the world, as it becomes oppressed
With taking more than it can well digest;
And now are turned to be a great disease.
For by this over charging we confound
The appetite of skill they had before:
There being no end of words, nor any bound
Set to conceit the Ocean without shore.
As if man labored with himself to be
As infinite in writing, as intents;
And draw his manifold uncertainty
In any shape that passion represents:
That these innumerable images
And figures of opinion and discourse
Draw'n out in leaves, may be the witnesses
Of our defects much rather than our force.
And this proud frame of our presumption,
This Babel of our skill, this Tower of wit,
Seems only checked with the confusion
Of our mistakings that dissolueth it.
And well may make us of our knowledge doubt,
Seeing what uncertainties we build upon,
To be as weak within book as without;
Or else that truth has other shapes then one.
But yet although we labor with this store
And with the press of writings seem oppressed,
And have to many books, yet want we more,
Feeling great dearth and scarsenesse of the bell;
Which cast in choiser shapes have bin produced,
To give the best proportions to the mind
Of our confusion, and have introduced
The likeliest images frailty can find.
And wherein most the skill-desiring soul
Takes her delight, the best of all delight,
And where her motions evenest come to roll
About this doubtful center of the right.
Which to discover this great Potentate,
This Prince Montaigne (if he be not more)
Has more aduentur'd of his own estate
Then ever man did of himself before:
And has made such bold sallies out upon
Custom, the mighty tyrant of the earth,
In whose Seraglio of subjection
We all seem bred-vp, from our tender birth;
As I admire his powers, and out of love,
Here at his gate do stand, and glad I stand
So near to him whom I do so much love,
T'applaude his happy settling in our land:
And safe transpassage by his studious care
Who both of him and us does merit much,
Having as sumptuously, as he is rare
Placed him in the best lodging of our speech.
And made him now as free, as if borne here,
And as well ours as theirs, who may be proud
That he is theirs, though he be every where
To have the franchise of his worth allowed.
It be'ing the proportion of a happy Pen,
Not to b'invassal'd to one Monarchy,
But dwell with all the better world of men
Whose spirits all are of one community,
Whom neither Ocean, Deserts, Rocks nor Sands
Can keep from th'intertraffique of the mind,
But that it vents her treasure in all lands,
And does a most secure commercement find.
Wrap Excellency up never so much,
In Hierogliphicques, Ciphers, Caracters,
And let her speak never so strange a speech,
Her Genius yet finds apt discipherers:
And never was she borne to dye obscure,
But guided by the stars of her own grace,
Makes her own fortune, and is ever sure
In man's best hold, to hold the strongest place.
And let the Critic say the worst he can,
He cannot say but that Montaigne yet,
Yeeldes most rich pieces and extracts of man;
Though in a troubled frame confusedly set.
Which yet h'is blessed that he has ever seen,
And therefore as a guest in gratefulness,
For the great good the house yields him within
Might spare to tax th'vnapt conuayances.
But this breath hurts not, for both work and frame,
Whilst England English speaks, is of that store
And that choice stuff, as that without the same
The richest library can be but poor.
And they unblessed who letters do profess
And have him not: whose own fate beats their want
With more sound blows, then Alcibiades
Did his Pedante that did Homer want.
By SAM. DANIEL one of the Gentlemen extraordinary of her Majesty's most
royal privy Chamber.
Concerning the honor of books.
SInce Honor from the Honorer proceeds.
How well do they deserve that memory
And leave in books for all posterities
The names of worthyes, and their virtuous deeds
When all their glory else, like water weeds
Without their element, presently dies,
And all their greatness quite forgotten lies:
And when, and how they florisht no man heedes
How poor remembrances, are statutes Toomes
And other monuments that men erect
To Princes, which remain in closed rooms
Where but a few behold them; in respect
Of Books, that to the universal eye
Show how they lived, the other where they lie.
A Table of the Chapters of the First Book.
1 BY diverse means men come to a like end. 1 2 Of sadness or sorrow. 3 3 Our
affections are transported beyond our selves. 5 4 How the soul discharges her
passions upon false objects, when the true fail it. 9 5 Whether the captain of
a place besieged ought to sallic forth to parlie. 10 6 That the hours of
parlies are dangerous. 12 7 That our intention judges our actions. 13 8 Of
idleness. 14 9 Of liars. 15 10 Of readi^ or slow speech. 18 11 Of
Prognostications. 19 12 Of Constancy. 21 13 Of ceremonies in the enterview of
Kings. 23 14 Men are punished by too-much opiniating theselves in a place
without reason. 23 15 Of the punishment of cowardice. 24 16 A trioke of
certain Ambassadors. 25 17 Of Fear. 27 18 That we should not judge of our
happiness, until after our death. 28 19 That to Philosophize, is to learn how
to die. 30 20 Of the force of imagination. 39 21 The profit of one man is the
damage of another. 46 22 Of Custom, and how a received Law should not easily
be changed. 46 23 Diverse events from one self same counsel. 55 24 Of
Pedantisme. 60 25 Of the institution and education of children: to the Lady
Diana of Foix. 67 26 It is folly to refer Truth or Falsehood to our
sufficiency. 87 27 Of friendship. 89 28 Nine and twenty sonnets of Steven de
Boetie, to the Lady of Grammont. 97 29 Of moderation. 97 30 Of the Cannibals.
100 31 That a man ought soberly to meddle with ^^dging of divine laws. 107 32
To avoid voluptuousnes in regard of life. 108 33 That fortune is often times
met withal in pursuit of reason. 109 34 Of a defect in our policies. 111 35 Of
the use of apparel. 111 36 Of Cato the yoonger. 113 37 How we weep and laugh
at one selfsame thing. 116 38 Of solitariness. 118 39 A consideration upon
Cicero. 124 40 That the taste of goods or evils does greatly depend on the
opinion we have of them. 127 41 That a man should not communicate his glory.
137 42 Of the inequality that is between us. 139 43 Of sumptuary laws, or
laws for moderating of expenses. 145 44 Of sleeping. 146 45 Of the battle of
Dreux. 148 46 Of names. 148 47 Of the uncertainty of our i^gement. 151 48 Of
steeds, called in French, Defiriers. 155 49 Of ancient customs. 160 50 Of
Democritus and Herachtus. 163 51 Of the vanity of words. 165 52 Of the
parcimony of our forefathers. 167 53 Of a saying of Caesar. 168 54 Of vain
subtilties, or subtle devices. 169 55 Of smells and odors. 170 56 Of prayers
and orisons. 172 57 Of age. 177
A Table of the Chapters of the Second Book.
1 OF the inconstancy of our actions. 183 2 Of Drunkenness. 187 3 A Custom of
the I Will of Cea. 193 4 Tomorrow is a new day. 200 5 Of Conscience. 202 6 Of
exercise or practice. 204 7 Of the recompenses or rewards of honor. 210 8 Of
the affection of fathers to their children. 212 9 (...) 213 10 (...) (...) 11
Of Cruelty. 233 12 An Apology of Raymond Sebond. 242 13 Of judging of others
death. 342 14 How that our spirit hinders it self. 345 15 That our desires
are increased by difficulty. 346 16 Of Glory. 349 17 Of Presumption. 357 18
Of giving the Lie. 374 19 (...) 376 20 (...) (...) 21 Against idleness, or
doing nothing. 380 22 Of running Posts, or Curriers. 382 23 Of bad means
employed to a good end. 383 24 Of the Roman greatness. 385 25 How a man should
not counterfeit to be sick. 386 26 Of Thumbs. 387 27 Cowardice the mother of
cruelty. 388 28 All things have their season. 393 29 Of Virtue. 395 30 Of
amonstrou^ child^. 399 31 Of anger and choler. 399 32 A defense of Seneca and
Plutarch. 404 33 The history of Spurina. 407 34 Observations concerning the
means to war after the manner of Julius Caesar. 411 35 Of three good women.
416 36 Of the worthiest and most excellent men. 420 37 Of the resemblance
between children and fathers. 424
A Table of the Chapters of the Third Book.
1 OF profit and honesty. 435 2 Of repenting. 451 3 Of three commerces or
societies. 558 4 Of diverting or diversion. 465 5 Upon some verser of Virgil.
471 6 Of Coaches. 504 7 Of the incommoditie of greatness. 515 8 Of the Art of
conferring. 518 9 Of Vanity. 531 10 How one ought to govern his will. 566 11
Of the Lame or Cripple. 578 12 Of Phisiognomie. 584 13 Of Experience. 599


THE AUTHOR TO THE Reader.
REader, loe-heere a well-meaning Book. It does at the first entrance
fore-warne thee, that in contriving the same, I have proposed unto my self no
other than a familiar and private end* I have no respect or consideration at
all, either to thy service, or to my glory: my forces are not capable of any
such desseigne. I have vowed the same to the particular commodity of my
kinsfolks and friends: to the end, that losing me (which they are likely to do
ere long) they may therein find some lineaments of my conditions and humors,
and by that means reserve more whole, and more lively foster the knowledge and
acquaintance they have had of me. Had my intention been to forestall and
purchase the worlds opinion and favor, I would surely have adorned my self
more quaintly, or kept a more grave and solemn march. I desire therein to be
delineated in mine own genuine, simple and ordinary fashion, without
contention, art or study, for it is my self I pourtray. My imperfections
shall therein be read to the life, and my natural form discerned, so
farre-forth as public reverence has permitted me. For if my fortune had been
to have lived among those nations, which yet are said to live under the sweet
liberty of Natures first and uncorrupted laws, I assure thee, I would most
willingly have pourtrayed my self fully and naked. Thus gentle Reader my self
am the groundwork of my book: It is then no reason thou should employ thy
time about so frivolous and vain a subject. Therefore farewell. From
Montaigne, the first of March. 1580.

THE ESSAYS OF MICHAEL Lord of Montaigne.
The first Book.
The first Chapter.
By diverse means men come unto a like end.

THE most usual way to appease those minds we have offended when revenge lies
in their hands, and that we stand at their mercy, is by submission to move
them to commiseration and pity: Nouerthelesse, courage, constancy, and
resolution (means altogether opposite) have sometimes wrought the same effect.
Edward the black Prince of Wales (who so long governed our Country of
Guienne, a man whose conditions and fortune were accompanied with many notable
parts of worth and magnanimity) having bin grievously offended by the Limosins,
though he by main forcetooke and entered their City, could by no means be
appeased, nor by the wailefull out* cries of all sorts of people (as of men,
women, and children) be moved to any pity, they prostrating themselves to the
common slaughter, crying for mercy, and humbly submitting themselves at his
feet, until such time as in triumphant manner passing through their city, he
perceived three French gentlemen, who alone, with an incredible and undaunted
boldness gainstood the enraged violence, and made head against the fury of his
victorious army. The consideration and respect of so notable a virtue, did
first abate the dint of his wrath, and from those three began to relent, and
show mercy to all the other inhabitants of the said town. Scanderbeg. Prince
of Epirus, following one of his soldiers, with purpose to kill him, who by all
means of humility, and submisse entreatie, had first assaied to pacify him,
in such an unavoidable extremity, resolved at last, resolutely to encounter him
with his sword in his hand. This resolution did immediately stay his Captains
fury, who seeing him undertake so honorable an attempt, not only forgave, but
received him into grace and favor. This example may happily, of such as have
not known the prodigious force, and matchless valor of the said Prince, admit
an other interpretation. The Emperor Courad^^* third of that name; having
besieged G^elphe, Duke of Bavaria, what vile or base satisfaction soever was
offered him, would yield to no other milder conditions, but only to suffer such
gentle women as were with the Duke in the city (their honors safe) to issue
out of the town a^oot, with such things as they could carry about them. The
(...) an unrelenting courage, advised and resolved themselves (neglecting all
other riches or jewels) to carry their husbands, their children, and the Duke
himself, on their backs: The Emperor perceiving the quaintnes of their
devise, took so great pleasure at it, that he wept for joy, and forthwith
converted that former inexorable rage, and mortal hatred he bare the Duke,
into so mild a relenting and gentle (...) there of these ways might easily
persuade me: for I am much inclined to mercy, and affected to mildness. So it
is, that in mine opinion, I should more naturally stoop unto compassion, than
bend to estimation. Yet is pity held a vicious passion among the Stoickes.
They would have us aid the afflicted, but not to faint, and cosuffer with
them. These examples seem fittest for me, for so much as these minds are seen
to be assaulted and environed by these two means, in undauntedly suffering the
one, and stooping under the other. It may peraduentvre be said, that to yield
ones heart unto commiseration, is an effect of facility, tenderness, and
meekness: whence it proceeds, that the weakest natures, as of women,
children, and the vulgar sort are more subject unto it. But (having contemned
tears and wailings) to yield unto the only reverence of the sacred Image of
virtue, is the effect of a courageous and imployable mind, holding a masculine
and constant vigor, in honor and affection. Notwithstanding amazement and
admiration may in less generous minds work the like effect. Witness the
Thebanes, who having accused and indicted their captains, as of a capital
crime, for so much as they had continued their charge, beyond the time prescribed
them, absolved and quit Pelopidas of all punishment, because he submissiuely
yielded under the burden of such objections, and to save himself, employed no
other means, but suing-requests, and demisse entreaties; where on the
contrary, Epaminondas, boldly relating the exploits achieved by him, and with
a fierce and arrogant manner, vpbraiding the people with them, had not the
heart so much as to take their lots into his hands, but went his way, and was
freely absolved: the assembly much commending the stoutnesse of his courage.
Dionysius the elder, after long-lingering and extreme difficulties, having
taken the City of Reggio, and in it the Captain Phyton (a worthy honest man)
who had so obstinately defended the same, would needs show a tragical example
of revenge. First, he told him, how the day before, he had caused his son,
and all his kinsfolks to be drowned. To whom Phy^on, stoutly out-staring him
answered nothing, but that they were more happy than himself, by the space of
one day. Afterward he caused him to be stripped, and by his executioners to be
taken and dragged through the City, most ignominiously, and cruelly whipping
him, charging him besides, with outrageous and contumel^ous speeches. All which
notwithstanding, as one no whit dismayed, he ever showed a constant and
resolute heart. And with a cheerful and bold countenance went on still,
lowdly recounting the honorable and glorious cause of his death, which was,
that he would never consent to yield his Country into the hands of a cruel
tyrant, menacing him with an imminent punishment of the Gods. Dionysius
plainly reading in his Soldiers looks, that in liew of animating them with
braving his conquered enemy, they in contempt of him, and skorne of his
triumph, seemed by the astonishment of so rare a virtue, to be moved with
compassion, and inclined to mutiny, yea, and to free Phy^on from out the hands
of his Sergean^s or Guard, caused his torture to cease, and secretly sent him
to be drowned in the Sea. Surely, man is a wonderful, vain, diverse, and
wavering subject: it is very hard to ground any directly-constant and uniform
judgment upon him. Behold Pompey who freely pardoned all the City of the
Mamertines, against which he was grievously enraged, for the love of the
magnanimity, and considederation of the exceeding virtue of Zeno, one of their
fellow-citizens, who took the public fault wholly upon himself, and desired
no other favor, but alone to bear the punishment thereof; whereas Syllaes
host having used the like virtue in the City of Perugia, obtained nothing,
neither for himself, nor for others. And directly against my first example,
the hardiest amongst men, and so gracious to the vanquished, Alexander the
great, after many strange difficulties, forcing the City of Gaza, encountered
by chance with Betis, that commanded therein, of whose valor (during the
siege) he had felt wonderful and strange exploites, being then alone,
forsaken of all his followers, his arms all-broken, all-besmeared with blood
and wounds, fighting amongst a number of Macedonians, who pell-mell laid still
upon him; provoked by so dear a victory (for among other mishappes he had
newly received two hurts in his body) said thus unto him; Betis, thou shall not
die as thou would: for make account thou must endure all the torments may
possibly be devised or inflicted upon a caitife wretch, as thou art. But he,
for all his enemies threats, without speaking one word, returned only an
assured, stern, and disdainefull countenance upon him; which silent obstinacy
Alexander noting, said thus unto himself: What? would he not bend his knee?
could he not utter one suppliant voice? I will assuredly vanquish his silence,
and if I can not wrest a word from him, I will at least make him to sobbe or
groan. And converting his anger into rage, commanded his heels to be
through-pierced, and so all alive with a cord through them, to be torn,
ma^gled, and dismembered at a carts tail. May it be, the force of his courage,
was so natural and peculiar unto him, that because he would no-whit admire
him, he respected him the less? or deemed he it so proper unto himself, that
in his height, he could not without the spite of an envious passion, endure to
see it in an other? or was the natural violence of his rage incapable of any
opposition? surely, had it received any restraint, it may be supposed, that in
the ransacking and desolation of the City of Thebes, it should have felt the
same; in seeing so many Worthies lost, and valiant men put to the sword, as
having no means of public defense; for above six thousand were slain and
massacred, of which not one was seen, either to run away, or beg for grace.
But on the contrary, some here and there seeking to affront, and endeavoring to
check their victorious enemies, urging and provoking them to force them die an
honorable death. Not one was seen to yield, and that to his last gasp did
not attempt to revenge himself, and with all weapons of despair, with the
death of some enemy, comfort and sweeten his own misery. Yet could not the
affliction of their virtue find any ruth or pity, nor might one day su^^ice to
glut or assuage his revengefull wrath. This burcherous slaughter continued unto
the last drop of any remaining blood; where none were spared but the unarmed
and naked, the aged and impotent, the women and children; that so from amongst
them, they might get thirty thousand slaves.

The second Chapter.
Of Sadness or Sorrow.

NO man is more free from this passion than I, for I neither love nor regard
it: albeit the world has undertaken, as it were upon covenant, to grace it
with a particular favor. Therewith they adorn age, virtue, and conscience. Oh
foolish and base ornament! The Italians have more properly with it is name
entitled malignitie: for, it is a quality ever hurtful, ever sottis^; and as
ever base and coward, the Stoikes inhibit their Elders and Sages to be
therewith tainted, or have any feeling of it. But the Story says; that
Psamne^icus king of Egypt, having been defeated and taken by Cambises king of
Persia, seeing his own daughter pass before him in base and vile array, being
sent to draw water from a well, his friends weeping and wailing about him (he
with his eyes fixed on the ground, could not be moved to utter one word) and
shortly after beholding his son led to execution, held still the same
undaunted countenance: but perceiving a familiar friend of his haled amongst
the captives, he began to beat his head, and burst forth into extreme sorrow.
This might well be compared to that which one of our Princes was lately seen
to do, who being at Trent, and receiving news of his elder brothers death;
but such a brother as on him lay all the burden and honor of his house; and
shortly after tidings of his younger brothers decease, who was his second hope;
and having with an unmatched countenance and exemplar constancy endured these
two affronts; it fortuned not long after, that one of his servants dying, he by
this latter accident suffered himself to be so far transported, that quitting
and forgetting his former resolution, he so abandoned himself to all manner of
sorrow and grief, that some argued, only this last mischance had touched him to
the quick: but verily the reason was, that being otherwise full, and over
plunged in sorrow, the least surcharge brake the bounds and bars of patience.
The like might (I say) be judged of our story, were it not it follows, that
Cambises inquiring of Psamneticus, why he was nothing distempered at the
misfortune of his son and daughter, he did so impatiently bear the disaster
of his friend: It is, answered he, Because this last displeasure may be
manifested by weeping, whereas the two former exceed by much, all means and
compass to be expressed by tears. The invention of that ancient Painter
might happily fit this purpose, who in the sacrifice of Iphigenia, being to
represent the grief of the bystanders, according to the quality and interest
each one bare for the death of so fair, so young and innocent a Lady, having
ransacked the utmost skill and effects of his art, when he came to the Virgins
father, as if no countenance were able to represent that degree of sorrow, he
drew him with avail over his face. And that is the reason why our Poets feign
miserable Niobe, who first having lost seven sons, and immediately as many
daughters, as one over-burthened with their losses, to have been transformed
into a stone;

Diriguisse malis: And grew as hard as stone, Ovid. M^tam. lib. 6. 303.

By misery and moan.
Thereby to express this mournful silent stupiditie, which so does pierce us,
when accidents surpassing our strength orewhelme us. Verily the violence of a
grief, being extreme, must needs astonie the mind, and hinder the liberty of
her actions. As it happens at the sudden alarm of some bad tidings, when we
shall feel ourselves surprised, benumbed, and as it were deprived of al
motion, so that the soul bursting afterward forth into tears and complaints,
seems at more ease and liberty, to loose, to clear and dilate it self.

Et via vix tandem voci laxata dolor est, And scarce at last for speech, Virg.
A^n. l. 11. 151.

By grief was made a breach.
In the wars which king Ferdinando made against the widow of John king of
Hungaria, about Buda; a man at arms was particularly noted of all men,
for so much as in a certain skirmish he had showed exceeding prowess of his
body, and though unknown, being slain, was highly commended and much
bemoaned of all: but yet of none so greatly as of a Germane Lord, called
Raisciac, as he that was amassed at so rare virtue: his body being recovered and
had off, this Lord, led by a common curiosity, drew near unto it, to see who
it might be, and having caused him to be disarmed, perceived him to be his own
son; which known, did greatly augment the compassion of all the camp: he
only without framing word, or closing his eyes, but earnestly viewing the dead
body of his son, stood still upright, till the vehemency of his sad sorrow,
having suppressed and choked his vital spirits, felled him stark dead to the
ground.

Chipuo dir com'egli arde e in pi^ci^l f^o^co, He that can say how he does
fry, Pe^. p. 1. S^n. 140.

In pettie-gentle flames does lie,
say those Lovers that would lively represent an into lerable passion.

misero quod omnes
Eripit sensus mihi; Nam simulte ^at^l. Epig. 48. 5.

Lesbia aspexi, nihil est super mi
Quod loquar amens.
Lingua sed torpet, tenuis sub art^s
Flamma dimana^, so^^^u suopte
Tinniunt aures, gemina teguntur,
Lumina ^octe.
miserably from me,
This bereaves all sense: for I can no sooner
Eye thee my sweet heart, but I wot not one word
to speak amazed.
Tongue-tide as in trance, while a sprightly thin flame
Flows in all my joints, with a selfe-resounding
Both my ears tingle, with a night redoubled
Both mine eyes are veild.
Nor is it in the liveliest, and most ardent heat of the fit, that we are able
to display our plaints and persuasions, the soul being then aggravated with
heavy thoughts, and the body suppressed and languishing for love. And thence
is sometimes engendered that casual faintnes, which so unseasonably surpriseth
passionate Lovers, and that chillness, which by the power of an extreme heat
does seize on them in the very midst of their joy and enjoying. All passions
that may be tasted and digested, are but mean and slight.

Curae leaves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. S^n Hip. act. 2. Scena 2.


Light cares can freely speak,
Great cares heart rather break.
The surprise of an unexpected pleasure astonieth us alike.

Vt me conspexit venientem, and Troia circum Virg. Aenead. lib. 3. 306.

Arma amens vidit, magnis exterrita monstris,
Diriguit visu in medio, calor ossa reliquit,
Labitur, and longo vix tandem tempore fatur.
When she beheld me come, and round about
Sensel esse saw Trojan arms, she stood afraid
Stone-still at so strange sights: life heat flew out:
She faints: at last, with long pause thus she said.
Besides the Roman Lady, that died for joy to see her son return alive
from the battle of Cannae Sophocles and Dionysius the Tyrant, who deceased
through over-gladnes: and Talua, who died in Corsica, reading the news of the
honors the Roman Senate had conferred upon him: It is reported that in our
age, Pope Leo the tenth, having received advertisement of the taking of the
City of Millane, which he had so exceedingly desired, entered into such excess
of joy, that he fell into an ague, whereof he shortly died. And for a more
authentical testimony of humane imbecillitie, it is noted by our Ancients,
that Diodorus the Logician, being surprised with an extreme passion or
apprehension of shame, fell down stark dead, because neither in his School,
nor in public, he had been able to resolve an argument propounded unto him. I
am little subject to these violent passions. I have naturally a hard
apprehension, which by discourse I daily harden more and more.

The third Chapter.
Our affections are transported beyond our selves.

THose which still accuse men for ever gaping after future things, and go about
to teach us, to take hold of present fortunes, and settle our selves upon them,
as having no hold of that which is to come; yea much less than we have of that
which is already past, touch and are ever harping upon the commonest humane
error, if they dare call that an error, to which Nature her self, for the
service of the continuation of her work, does address us, imprinting (as it
does many others) this false imagination in us, as more jealous of our actions,
than of our knowledge. We are never in our selves, but beyond. Fear, desire,
and hope, draw us ever toward that which is to come, and remove our sense and
consideration from that which is, to amuse us on that which shall be, yea when
we shall be no more. Calamitosus est animus futuri anxius. A mind in suspense
what is to come, is in a pitiful case. Sen. epi. 98.


This notable precept is often all eaged in Plato. Follow thy business and
know thy self; Each of these two members, does generally imply all our duty;
and likewise enfolds his companion. He that should do his business, might
perceive that his first lesson is, to know what he is, and what is convenient
for him. And he that knows himself, takes no more another matters for his
own, but above all other things, loves and corrects himself, rejects
superfluous occupations, idle imaginations, and unprofitable propositions. As
if you grant folly what it desires, it will no-whit be satisfied; so is
wisdom content with that which is present, and never displeased with it
self. Epicurus does dispense with his age touching the foresight and care of
what shall ensue. Amongst the laws that regard the deceased, that which ties
the actions of Princes to be examined when they are dead, seems to me very
solid. They are companions, if not masters of the laws: That which justice
could not work on their heads, it is reason it effect upon their reputation,
and goods of their successors: things we many times prefer before our lives.
It is a custom brings many singular commodities unto nations that observe it,
and to be desired of all good Princes: who have cause to complain that the
memory of the wicked is used as theirs. We owe a like obedience and
subjection to all Kings; for it respects their office: but estimation and
affection, we owe it only to their virtue. If they be unworthie, we are to
endure them patiently, to conceal their vices, and to aid their indifferent
actions with our commendations, as long as their authority has need of our
assistance, and that ought to be ascribed unto politic order. But our commerce
with them being ended, there is no reason we should refuse the unfolding of our
felt wrongs unto justice and our liberty. And specially to refuse good
subjects, the glory to have reverently and faithfully served a master, whose
imperfections were so well known unto them: exempting posterity from so
profitable an example. And such as for the respect of some private benefit or
interest do wickedly embrace the memory of an unworthy Prince, do
particular justice at the charge of public justice. Titus Liuius speaks
truly, where he says, that the speech of men brought up under a royalty is
ever full of vain ostentations, and false witnesses: every man indifferently
extolling the king, to the furthest strain of valor and Sovereign
greatness. The magnanimity of those two Soldiers, may be reproved, one of
which being demanded of Nero, why he hated him, answered him to his teeth; I
loved thee whilst thou wast worthy of love, but since thou becamest a
parricide, a fir-brand, a juglar, a player, and a Coachman, I hate thee, as
thou deservest. The other being asked, wherefore he sought to kill him;
answered, Because I find no other course to hinder thy uncessant outrages and
impious deeds. But can any man, that has his senses about him, justly
reproove the public and general testimonies, that since his death, have bin
given, and so snall be for ever, both against him and all such like reprobates,
of his tyrannical and wicked demeanors? I am sorry that in so sacred a
policy as the Lacedemonian was, so fained and fond a ceremony at the death
of their kings was ever devised and brought in use. All their confederates and
neighbors, all the slave-Heotes, men and women pell-mell, for a testimony of
their grief and sorrow did mangle and gash their foreheads; and in their
outcries, and lamentations, exclaimed, that their deceased king, howsoever he
had lived, was and had bin the best Prince that ever they had, ascribing in
order the commendations due unto desert, and to the last and latter rank, what
belongs unto the first merit. Aristotle that has an oar in every water, and
medleth with all things, makes a question, about Solons speech, who says, that
no man can truly be counted happy before his death, Whether he that lived and
died according to his wish may be named happy, Whether his renown be good or
ill, and whether his posterity be miserable or no. Whilst we stir and
remove, we transport our selves by preoccupation wheresoever we list: But no
sooner are we out of being, but we have no communication at all with that which
is. And it were better to tell Solon, that never man is happy then, since he
never is so, but when he is no more.

-- Quisquam
Vix radicitus e vita se tollit, and eijcit: Lucret. ^^^. ^^^. lib. 3. 912.

Sed facit esse suiquiddam super inscius ipse,
Nec remouet satis a proiecto corpore sese, and
Vindicat --
Scarce any rids himself of life so clear,
But leaves unwitting some part of him here:
Nor frees or quits himself sufficiently
From that his body which forlorn does lie.
Bertrand of Gelsquin died at the siege of the castle of Rancon, near unto Puy
in Auergne: the besieged yielding afterward, were forced to carry the keys of
the Castle, upon the deceased body of the Captain. Bartholomew of Alviano,
General of the Venetian forces dying in their service and wars about Brescia,
and his body being to be transported to Venice, through the territory of
Verona, which then was enemy unto them, the greatest part of the army thought
it expedient to demand a safe conduct for their passage of those of Verona, to
which Theodoro Trivulcio stoutly opposed himself, and chose rather to pass it
by maine force, and to hazard the day, saying it was not convenient, that he
who in his life time had never apprehended fear of his enemies should now
being dead, seem to fear them. Verily in like matters, by the laws of
Greece, he that required a dead body of his enemies, with intent to bury the
same, renounced the victory, and might no more erect any trophie of it: and he
who was so required, purchased the title of honor and gain. So did Nicias
loose the advantage he had clearly gained of the Corinthians; and
contrariwise, Agesilaus, assured that, he doubtfully had gotten of the
Boetians. These actions might be deemed strange, if in all ages it were not a
common-received opinion, not only to extend the care of our selves, beyond this
life, but also to believe, that heavenly favors to often accompany us unto
our grave, and continue in our posterity. Whereof there are so many examples
(leaving our modern a part) that I need not wade far into it.

Edward the first king of England, in the long wars he had with Robert King
of Scotland, having by trial found how greatly his presence advantaged the
success of his affairs, and how he was ever victorious in any enterprise he
undertook in his own person; when he died, bound his son by solemn oath,
that being dead he should cause his body to be boiled, until the flesh fell
from the bones, which he should cause to be enterred, and carefully keeping the
bones, ever carry them about him, whenever he should happen to have wars
with the Scots: As if destenie had fatally annexed the victory unto his
limbs. John Zisca; who for the defense of Wickliffs opinions so much troubled
the state of Bohemia, commanded that after his death his body should be flead,
and a drum made of his skin, to be carried and sounded in all the wars against
his enemies: deeming the sound of it would be a means to continue the
advantages, which in his former wars he had obtained of them. Certain
Indians did likewise carry the bones of one of their Captains in the
skirmishes they had with the Spaniards, in regard of the good success he had,
whilst he lived, had against them: And other nations of that newfound world,
do likewise carry the bodies of such worthy and fortunate men with them, as
have died in their battles, to serve them in stead of good fortune and
encouragement. The first examples reserve nothing else in their tombs, but the
reputation acquired by their former achievements: but these will also adjoine
unto it the power of working. The act of Captain Bayart is of better
composition, who perceiving himself deadly wounded by a shot received in his
body, being by his men persuaded to come off and retire himself from out the
throng, answered, he would not now so near his end, begin to turn his face
from his enemy: and having stowtly foughten so long as he could stand, feeling
himself to faint and stagger from his horse, commanded his steward to lay him
against a tree, but in such sort, that he might die with his face toward the
enemy; as indeed he did. I may not omit this other example, as remarkable for
this consideration, as any of the precedent. The Emperor Maximilian, great
grandfather to Phillip, now King of Spain, was a Prince highly endowed with
many notable qualities, and amongst others with a well-nigh matchless beauty
and comeliness of body; but with other customs of his, he had this one much
contrary to other Princes, who to dispatch their waightiest affairs make
often their close stool, their regale Throne or Councel-chamber, which was,
that he would not permit any groom of his chamber (were he never so near
about him) to see him in his inner-chamber, who if he had occasion but to make
water, would as nicely and as religiously withdraw himself as any maiden, and
never suffer so much as a Physician, much less any other whatsoever, to see
those privy parts that all in modesty seek to keep secret and unseen. My
self, that am so broad-mouthed and lavish in speeches, am notwithstanding
naturally touched with that bashfulnesse. And unless it be by the motion of
necessity or of voluptuousness, I never willingly imparted those actions and
parts (which custom wills to be concealed) to the view of any creature. I
endure more compulsion, then I deem befitting a man, especially of my
profession. But he grew to such superstition, that by express words in his
last will and testament, he commanded, that being dead, he should have
linnen-slops put about them. He should by codicile have anexed unto it, that he
who should put them on, might have his eyes hood-winckt. The instruction which
Cyrus gives his children, that neither they nor any other should either see or
touch his body, after the breath were once out of it; I ascribe it unto some
motive of devotion in him. For both his historian and himself, amongst many
other notable qualities they are endued with, have throughout all the course of
their life seemed to have a singular respect and awful reverence unto
religion. That story displeased me very much, which a noble man told me of a
kinsman of mine (a man very famous and well known both in peace and war)
which is, that dying very aged in his court, being much tormented with
extreme pangs of the stone, he with an earnest and unwearied care, employed
all his last hours, to dispose the honor and ceremony of his funerals, and
summoned all the nobility that came to visit him to give him assured promise
to be as assistants, and to convay him to his last resting place. To the very
same Prince, who was with him at his last gasp, he made very earnest suit, he
would command all his household to wait upon him at his interrement, enforcing
many reasons, and all eaging diverse examples, to prove that it was a thing very
convenient, and fitting a man of his quality: which assured promise when he
had obtained, and had at his pleasure marshalled the order how they should
march, he seemed quietly and contentedly to yield up the ghost. I have seldom
seen a vanity continue so long. This other curiosity mere opposite unto it
(which to prove I need not labor for home-examples) seems in my opinion
cosin-german to this that is, when one is ever ready to breathe his last,
carefully and passionately to endevor, how to reduce the convoy of his
obsequies unto some particular and unwonted parcimonie, to one servant and to
one lantern: I hear the humor and appointment of Marcus Aemilius Lepidus
commended, who expressly forbade his heirs to use those ceremonies about his
interrement, which in such cases were formerly accustomed: Is it temperance and
frugalitie, to avoid charge and voluptuousnes, the use and knowledge of which
is inperceptable unto us? Lo here an easy reformation and of small cost. Were
it requisite to appoint any, I would be of opinion, that as well in that, as in
all other actions of man's life, every man should refer the rule of it to the
quality of his fortune. And the Philosopher Lycon did wisely appoint his
friends to place his body, where they should think it fittest and for the
best: and for his obsequies, they should neither be superfluous and
over-costly, nor base and sparing. For my part, I would wholly rely on custom,
which should dispose this ceremony, and would yield my self to the discretion
of the first or next, into whose hands I might chance to fall. Totus hic locus
est contemnendus in nobis, non negligendus in nostris. All this matter should
be despised of us, but not neglected of ours. And religiously said a holy man:
Curatio funeris, Iustini. ci^ dei. l. 1. c. 12. verb. apost. ser. 32.
conditio sepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis sunt vivorum solatia, quam
subsidia mortuorum. The procuration of funerals, the manner of burial, the
pomp of obsequies, are rather comforts to the living, than helps to the dead.
Therefore Socrates answered Criton, who at the hour of his death, asked him,
how he would be buried: Even as you please, said he: were I to meddle further
with this subject, I would deem it more gallant, to imitate those who yet
living and breathing, undertake to enjoy the order and honor of their
sepulchers, and that please themselves to behold their dead countenance in
Marble. Happy they that can rejoice and gratify their senses with
insensibilitie, and live by their death! A little thing would make me conceive
an inexpiable hatred against all popular domination; although it seem most
natural and just unto me: when I call to mind that inhumane injustice of the
Athenians, who without further trial or remission, yea without suffering them
so much as to reply or answer for themselves, condemned those noble and worthy
captains, that returned victoriously from the sea-battell, which they (near
the Isles Arginusae) had gained of the Lacedaemonians; the most contested,
bloody, and greatest fight the Graecians ever obtained by sea with their own
forces: for so much as after the victory, they had rather followed those
occasions, which the law of war presented unto them, for their avail, than
to their prejudice staid to gather and bury their dead men. And the success
of Diomedon makes their ruthlesse execution more hateful, who being a man of
notable and exemplar virtue, both military and politic, and of them so
cruelly condemned; after he had heard the bloody sentence, advauncing himself
forward to speak, having fit opportunity and plausible audience; he, I say,
in stead of excusing himself, or endeavoring to justify his cause, or to
exasperate the evident iniquity of so cruel a doom, expressed but a care of
the Judges preservation, earnestly beseeching the Gods to turn that judgment
to their good, praying that for want of not satisfying the vows, which he and
his companions had vowed in acknowledgement and thanksgiving for so famous a
victory, and honorable fortune, they might not draw the wrath and revenge of
the Gods upon them, declaring what their vows were. And without more words, or
urging further reasons, courageously addressed himself to his execution. But
fortune some years after punished him alike, and made him taste of the very
same sauce. For Chabrias, Captain General of their sea-fleet, having
afterward obtained a famous victory of Pollis, Admiral of Sparta, in the I Will
of Naxos, lost absolutely the benefit of it, and only contented with the day (a
matter of great consequence for their affairs) fearing to incur the
mischief of this example, and to save a few dead carcasses of his friends,
that floated up and down the sea, gave leisure to an infinite number of his
living enemies, whom he might easily have surprised, to sail away in safety,
who afterward made them to purchase their importunate superstition, at a
deere-deere rate.

Quaeris, quo ^ac^as, post obitum, loco? S^^. Tr^as. chor. 2. 30.

Quo non nata iacent.
Where shall you lie when you are dead?
Where they lie that were never bred:
This other restores the sense of rest unto a body without a soul. Cic. Tusc.
qu. lib. 1. E^^^.


Neque sepulchrum, quo recipiat, habeat portum corporis:
Vbi, remissa humana vita, corpus requiescat a malis.
To turn in, as a hav'n, have he no grave,
Where life left, from all grief he rest may have.
Even as Nature makes us to see, that many dead things, have yet certain
secret relations unto life. Wine does alter and change in sellers, according to
the changes and alterations of the seasons of it is vineyard. And the flesh of
wild beasts and venison does change quality and taste in the
powdering-tubbes, according to the nature of living flesh, as some say that
have observed it.

The fourth Chapter.
How the soul discharges her passions upon false objects, when the true fail
it.

A Gentleman of ours exceedingly subject to the gowt, being instantly solicited
by his Physicians, to leave all manner of salt-meates, was wont to answer
pleasantly, that when the fittes or pangs of the disease took him, he would
have some body to quarrel with; and that crying and cursing, now against
Bolonie-sausege, and sometimes by railing against salt neats-tongues, and
gammons of bakon, he found some ease. But in good earinest even as the arm
being lifted up to strike, if the stroke hit not, but fall void, we feel
some pain in it, and many times strike it out of joint; and that to yield our
sight pleasant, ^ must not be lost and dispiersed in the vast air, but ought
rather to have a limited bound to sustain it by a reasonable distance.

Venius vt amittit vires, nisi robore densae Luca^. lib. 3. 362.

Occurrant siluae, spatio diffusus inani.
As winds in empty air diffused, strength lose,
Unless thick-old-growne woods of their strength oppose.
So seems it that the soul moved and tossed, if she have not some hold to
take, loses it self in it self, and must ever be stored with some object,
on which it may light and work. Plutarch says fitly of those who affectionate
themselves to Monkies and little Dogs, that the loving part which is in us,
for want of a lawful hold, rather than it will be idle, does forge a false and
frivolous hold unto it self. And we see that the soul in her passions does
rather deceive itself, by framing a false and fantastical subject unto
itself, yea against her own conceit, than not to work upon something. So
does their own rage transport beasts, to set upon the stone or weapon that
has hurt them; yea and sometimes with irefull teeth to revenge themselves
against themselves, for the hurt or smart they feel.

Pannonis haud aliter post ictum saeuior vrsa Luca^ lib 6. 2^0.

Cui iaculum parua Lybis amentauit babena,
Se rotat in vulnus, telumque irat a receptum
Impedit, and secum fugientem circuit hastam.
Even so the wound-enraged Austrian bear,
On whom a Moore has thir'ld his slinged spear,
Wheels on her wound, and raging bites the dart,
Circling that flies with her, and can not part.
What causes do we not invent, for the crosses that happen unto us? be it
right, or wrong: what take we not hold of, to have something to strive withal?
It is not the golden locks thou tearest, nor the whiteness of the breast,
which thou through vexation so cruelly do smite, that have by means of an
unlucky bullet, lost thy deere-beloved brother: on something else should
thou wreake thy self. Liuius speaking of the Roman army in Liu. di^. 3. lib.
5.
Spain, after the loss of two great Captains that were brethren. Flere omnes
repent, and offensare capita: They all wept and often beat their heads. It is
an ordinary custom: And the Philosopher Byon, was very pleasant with the
king, that for grief tore his hair, when he said, Does this man think, that
baldness will assuage his grief? who has not seen some to chew and swallow
cards, and wel-nigh choke themselves with bales of dice, only to be revenged
for the loss of some money? Xerxes whipped the Sea, and writ a cartell of
defiance to the hill Athos: And Cyrus for many days together ammused his whole
army to be revenged of the river Gyndus, for the fear he took passing over
the same: And Caligula caused a very fair house to be defaced, for the
pleasure his mother had received in the same. When I was young, my countrymen
were wont to say, That one of our neighbour-Kings, having received a blow at
Gods hand, swear to be revenged on him, and ordained, that for ten years
space no man should pray unto him, nor speak of him, not so long as he were in
authority, believe in him. By which report, they do not so much publish the
sottishness, as the ambitious glory, peculiar unto that nation of whom it was
spoken. They are vices that ever go together: But in truth such actions
incline rather unto self-conceit, than to fondnes. Augustus Caesar having been
beaten by a tempest on the sea, defied the God Neptune, and in the celebration
of the Circensian games, that so he might be avenged on him, he caused his
image to be remooved fromout the place, where it stood amongst the other Gods;
wherein he is also less excusable, than the former, and less than he was
afterward, when having lost a battle, under Quintilius Varus in Germany, all
in a rage and desperate, he went up and down beating his head against the
walls, mainly crying out: Oh! Varus, restore me my Soldiers again: For, those
exceed all folly, (for so much as impiety is joined unto it) that will wreake
themselves against God, or fortune, as if she had ears subject to our
battery: In imitation of the Thracians, who when it lightens or thunders,
begin with a Titanian revenge to shoot against heaven, thinking by shooting of
arrows to draw God to some reason. Now, as says that ancient Poet in Plutarch.

Point ne se faut corroucer aux affairs, Plutar.

Il ne leur chaut de toutes noz choleres.
We ought not angry be at what God does,
For he cares not who bears an angry tooth.
But we shall never rail enough against the disorder and unruliness of our
mind.

The fifth Chapter.
Whether the Captain of a place besieged ought to sallie forth to parlie.

LVcius Marcius Legate of the Romans, in the war against Perseus King of
Macedon, desirous to get so much time, as he wanted to prepare his army, gave
out some motives of accord, wherewith the King inveagled, yielded unto a truce
for certain days: by which means he furnished his enemy with opportunity
and leisure to arm himself: whereof proceeded the Kings last ruin and
ouer-throw. Yet is it, that the elders of the Senate, mindful of their
forefathers customs, condemned this practice as an enemy to their ancient
proceedings, which was, said they* to fight with virtue, and not with craft,
nor by surprises, or stratagems by night, nor by set-flights, and unlooked for
approches, never undertaking a war, but after it was proclaimed, yea many
times after the appointed hour and place of the battle. With this conscience
did they send back to Pirrhus his traitorous Physician, and to the Phalis^i
their disloiall schoolmasters. These were true Roman proceedings, and not
Grecian policies, nor Punike wiles, with whom to vanquish by force is less
glorious than to conquer by treachery. To deceive may serve for the instant,
but he only is judged to be overcome, that knows he was not vanquished by
craft or deceit, nor by fortune or chance, but by mere valor, between troop
and troop, in an overt and just war. It appears manifestly by the speech
of these good men, they had not yet received this sentence.

-- Dolus, an virtus, quis in host requirat? Virg Aeneid. lib. 2. 390.
Deceit, or virtue, either, in foes, it skill's not whether. The Achaians,
says Polibius, detested all manner of deceit in their wars, deeming that no
victory, where their enemies courages were not quelled. Eam vir sanctus, and
sapiens sciat esse victoriam veram, quae salua fide, and integra dignitate
parabitur. A wise and religious man will know that is victory indeed, which
shall be attained with credit vnimpeached, and dignity untainted, says
another.

Vos ne velit, an me regnare hera, quid-veferat fors, Cic Offic. lib. 1. ex
Enn. de Pyrrh.

Virtute experiamur.
If fortune will have you to reign, or me,
And what chance bring's, let virtues trial be.
In the Kingdom of Ternates, among those nations, which we so full-mouthed,
call Barbarous, the custom bears, that they never undertake a war, before
the same be denounced; thereunto adding an ample declaration of the means they
have to employ therein, what manner, and how many men, what munition, and what
Arms either offensive or defensive: which done, they also establish as a law,
that without reproach or imputation, it shall be lawful for any man, in their
wars, to use what advantage soever, may in any sort further or help them to
vanquish. The ancient Florentines were so far from desiring any advantage of
their enemies by sudden surprises, that a month before they could bring their
Army into the field, they would give them warning, by the continual sound of
their common bell, which they called Mar^^nella. As for us, who are less
superstitious, and deem him to have the honor of the war, that has the
profit of it, and according to Lisander, say, that Where the Lions-skinne will
not suffice, we must add a scantling of the Foxes; the most ordinary
occasions of surprises are drawn from this practice, and as we say, there is
no time, wherein a Captain ought to be more wary and circumspect to look
about him, than that of parlies, and treaties of accord: And therefore is it a
common rule in the mouth of all our modern men of war, that the Governor or
Commander of a besieged place, ought never to sallie forth himself to parlie.
In the time of our forefathers, the same was cast in the teeth, (as a reproach)
unto the Lord of Montmor^ and Assigni, who defended Mou^^^, against the Earl
of Nanseaw. Yet in this case it were excusable in him, that should so sallie
out, that the assurance and advantage, might still be on his side. As did the
Earl Gu^^o R^ngom in the City of Reggio (if credit may be given to Bellay:
for Guicci^^^^ affirms, that it was himself) when as the Lord of Escute,
coming to parlie made his approaches unto it; for he did so little forsake his
fort that whilst they were in parlie, a commotion being raised, the Lord of
Escute and the troops which came with him, in that tumult found himself to be
the weakest, so that Alexander Trivultio was there slain, and he deeming it
the safest way, was forced to follow the Earl, and on his word to yield
himself to the mercy and shelter of blows, into the City. Eumenes in the
City of Nora, being urged by Antigonus, that besieged him, to sallie forth to
parlie, alleging that there was reason he should come to him, since he was the
better man, and the stronger: after he had made this noble answer, I will
never think any man better than my self, so long as I can hold or rule my
sword; nor did he ever yield until Antigonus had delivered him Ptolomey, his
own nephew for a pledge, whom he required. Yet shall we see some to have
prospered well in sallying forth of their holds to parlie, upon the word and
honor of the assailant; witness Henry of Vaulx, a knight of Champaigne, who
being beleagred by the Englishmen in the Castle of Commercie, and Bartholmew
of Bones, who at that siege commanded as Chief, having caused the greatest
part of the Castle to be undermined, so that there wanted nothing but the
giving of fire, utterly to subvert the same, under the ruins of it, summoned
the said Henry to issue out, and for his own good to parlie with him, which
he did, accompanied but with three more, who manifestly seeing the evident
ruin, wherein he was undoubtedly like to fall, acknowledged himself infinitely
beholding to his enemy, unto whose discretion, after he had yielded together
with his troup, and that fire was given to the Mine, the maine props of the
Castle failing, it was utterly overthrown and carried away. I am easily
persuaded to yield to other men's words and faith, but hardly would I do it,
when I should give other men cause to imagine, that I had rather done it
through despair and want of courage, than of a free and voluntary choice, and
confidence in his honesty and well-meaning.

The sixth Chapter.
That the hour of parlies is dangerous.

NOtwithstanding I saw lately, that those of Musidan, a place not far from
me, who with others of their party, were by our forces compelled to dislodge
thence, exclaimed, they were betrayed, because during the speech of accord, and
the treaty yet continuing, they had been surprised and defeated; which thing
might happily, in other ages have had some appearance of truth; but, as I say,
our manner of proceeding in such cases, is altogether differing from these
rules, and no man ought to expect performance of promise from an enemy, except
the last seal of bond be fully annexed thereunto, wherein notwithstanding is
then much care and vigilancie required, and much ado shall be found. And it
was ever a dangerous counsel to trust the performance of word or oath given
unto a City, that yields unto gentle and favorable composition, and in that
fury to give the needy, bloodthirstie, and pray-greedy Soldier free entrance
into it, unto the free choice and license of a victorious army. Lucius
Aemilius Regillus a Roman Praetor, having lost his time in attempting by force
to take the City of the Phocens by reason of the singular prowess, which the
inhabitants showed, in stoutly defending themselves, covenanted to receive them
as friends unto the people of Rome, and to enter their City as a place
confederate, remooving all fear of hostile-action from them. But to the end
he might appear more glorious, and dreadful, having caused his army to
enter with him, do what he might, he could not bridle the rage of his
Soldiers; and with his own eyes saw most part of the City ransacked and
spoiled: the rights of covetousness and revenge supplanting those of his
authority and military discipline. ( Cleomenes was wont to say, that What
hurt soever a man might do his enemies in time of war, was beyond justice,
and not subject unto it, as well toward the Gods as toward men: who for
seven days having made truce with those of Argos, the third night, whilst
they were all asleep mistrusting no harm, he charged and overthrew them,
alleging for his excuse, that in the truce no mention had bin made of nights.)
But the Gods left not his perfidious policy vnrevenged: For during their
enter-parlie and business about taking hostages, the City of Casilinum was by
surprise taken from him: which happened in the times of the justest Captains,
and of the most perfect Roman discipline: For it is not said, that time and
place serving, we must not make use and take advantage of our enemies foolish
oversight, as we do of their cowardice. And verily war has naturally many
reasonable privileges to the prejudice of reason. And here fails the rule.
Neminem id agere, vt ex alterins praedetur inscitia. That no man should
endeavor to Cic. Offic. lib 3.
pray upon another man's ignorance. But I wonder of the scope that Xenophon
allows them, both by his discourse, and by diverse exploits of his perfect
Emperor: an Author of wonderful consequence in such things, as a great
Captain and a Philosopher, and one of Socrates chiefest Disciples, nor do I
altogether yield unto the measure of his dispensation. The Lord of Aubigny
besieging Capua, after he had given it a furious battery, the Lord Fabritius
Colonna, Captain of the town, having from under a bas^ion or skonce begun
to parlie, and his men growing negligent and careless in their offices and
guarde, our men did suddenly take the advantage offered them, entered the
town, over-ranne it, and put all to the sword. But to come to later examples,
yea in our memory, the Lord Iulio Romero at Yvoy, having committed this
oversight to issue out of his hold, to parlie with the Constable of France, at
his return found the Town taken, and himself jack-out-of-doores. But that
we may not pass vnrevenged, the Marquis of Pescara beleagering Genova, where
Duke Octavian Fregoso, commanded under our protection, and an accord between
them having so long been treated, and earnestly solicited, that it was held as
ratified, and upon the point of conclusion, the Spaniards being entered the
Town, and seeing themselves the stronger, took their opportunity, and used
it as a full and complete victory: and since at Lygny in Barroe, where the
Earl of Brienne commanded, the Emperor having besieged him in person, and
Bartholemy Lieutenant to the said Earl being come forth of his hold to
parlie, was no sooner out, whilst they were disputing, but the Town was
surprised, and he excluded, They say,

Fu il vincer sempre may laudabil cosa, Arist. cant 15. stan. 1.

Vincasi per fortuna o per ingegno.
To be victorious, evermore was glorious,
Be we by fortune or by wit victorious.
But the Philosopher Chrysippus would not have been of that opinion; nor I
neither, for he was wont to say, That those who run for the masterie may
well employ all their strength to make speed, but it is not lawful for them
to lay hands on their adversaries, to stay him, or to cross legs, to make
him trip or fall. And more generously answered Alexander the great, at what
time Polypercon persuaded him to use the benefit of the advantage which the
darkness of the night afforded him, to charge Darius; No no, said he, it
fittes not me to Curt. lib. 4.
hunt after night-stolne victories: Malo me fortunae poeniteat, quam victoriae
pudeat. I had rather repent me of my fortune, than be ashamed of my victory.

Atque idem fugientem haud est dignatus Orodem Virg. Aen. lib. 10. 732. Mezent.

Sternere, nec ^actacaecum dare cuspide vulnus:
Obuius aduersoque occurrit, seque viro vir
Contulit, haud fur to melior, sed fortibus armis.
He deigned not to strike down Orodes flying,
Or with his throwne-launce blindely-wound him running:
But man to man afront himself applying,
Met him, as more esteemed for strength then cunning.
The seventh Chapter.
That our intention judges our actions.

THE common saying is, that Death acquits us of all our bonds. I know some
that have taken it in another sense. Henry the seventh, King of England made a
composition with Philip son to Maximilian the Emperor, or to give him a more
honorable title, father to the Emperor Charles the fifth, that the said Philip
should deliver into his hands, the Duke of Suffolk, his mortal enemy, who
was fled out of England, and saved himself in the Low countries, always
provided the King should attempt nothing against the Dukes life; which promise
notwithstanding, being near his end, he expressly by will and testament
commanded his succeeding-sonne, that immediately after his decease, he should
cause him to be put to death. In the late tragedy, which the Duke of Alva
presented us withal at Brussels, on the Earls of Horn and Egmond, were many
remarkable things, and worthy to be noted: and amongst others, that the said
Count Egmond, upon whose faithful word and assurance, the Earl of Horn was
come in and yielded himself to the Duke of Alva, required very instantly to
be first put to death, to the end his death might acquit and free him of the
word and bond, which he ought and was engaged for, to the said Earl of Horn.
It seems that death has no whit discharged the former of his word given,
and that the second, without dying, was quit of it. We cannot be tied beyond
our strength, and means. The reason is, because the effects and executions,
are not any way in our power, and except our will, nothing is truly in our
power: on it only are all the rules of man's duty grounded and established by
necessity. And therefore Count Egmond, deeming his mind and will indebted to
his promise, howbeit the power to effect it, lay not in his hands, was no doubt
clearly absolved of his debt and duty, although he had survived the Count
Horn. But the King of England failing of his word by his intention, cannot be
excused, though he delaide the execution of his disloyalty until after his
death. No more then Herodotus his Mason who during his natural life, having
faithfully kept the secret of his Master the King of Aegypts treasure when he
died, discovered the same unto his children. I have in my days seen many
convicted by their own conscience, for detaining other men's goods, yet by
their last will and testament to dispose themselves, after their decease to
make satisfaction. This is nothing to the purpose. Neither to take time for a
matter so urgent, nor with so small interest or show of feeling, to go about
to establish an injury. They are indebted somewhat more. And by how much more
they pay incommodiously and chargeably, so much the more just and meritorious
is their satisfaction. Penitence ought to charge, yet do they worse, who
reserve the revealing of some heinous conceit or affection toward their
neighbor, to their last will and affection, having whilst they lived ever
kept it secret. And seem to have little regard of their own honor, by
provoking the party offended against their own memory, and less of their
conscience, since they could never for the respect of death cancel their
ill-grudging affection, and in extending life beyond theirs. Oh wicked and
ungodly judges, which refer the judgment of a cause to such time as they
have no more knowledge of causes! I will as near as I can prevent, that my
death reveal or utter any thing, my life has not first publicly spoken.

The eight Chapter.
Of Idleness.

AS we see some idle-fallow grounds, if they be fat and fertile, to bring
forth store and sundry roots of wild and unprofitable weeds, and that to
keep them in vrewe must subject and employ them with certain seeds for our
use and service. And as we see some women, though single and alone, often to
bring forth lumps of shapelesse flesh, whereas to produce a perfect and
natural generation, they must be manured with another kind of seed: So is it
of minds, which except they be busied about some subject, that may bridle and
keep them under, they will here and there wildely scatter themselves through
the vaste field of imaginations.

Sicut aquae tremulum labris vbi lumen ahenis V^g A^n. lib. 8. 22.

Sole repercussum, aut radiantis imagine L^nae,
Omnia peruolit at late loca, iamque sub auras
Erigitur, summique ferit laquearia tecti.
As trembling light reflected from the Sun,
Or radiant Moon on water-fild brass lavers,
Flies over all, in air vnpraised soon,
Strikes housetop beams, betwixt both strangely wavers.
And there is no folly, or extravagant raving, they produce not in that
agitation. Hor. art. po^t. 7.


-- veluti agrisomnia, van^ Finguntur species.

Like sick men's dreams, that faigne
Imaginations vain.
The mind that has no fixed bound, will easily loose it self: For, as we
say, To be every where, is to be no where.

Quisquis vbique habitat, Maxim, ^^squam habitat. Mars. lib. 7. ^pi. 72. 6.


Good sir, he that dwells every where,
No where can say, that he dwells there.
It is not long since I retired my self unto mine own house, with full
purpose, as much as lay in me, not to trouble my self with any business, but
solitarily, and quietly to wear out the remainder of my well-nigh-spent life;
where me thought I could do my spirit no greater favor, than to give him the
full scope of idleness, and entertain him as he best pleased, and withal, to
settle himself as he best liked: which I hoped he might now, being by time
become more settled and ripe, accomplish very easily: but I find,

Variam semper dant otia mentem. Luca. lib. 4. 704


Evermore idleness,
Does wavering minds address.
That contrariwise playing the skittish and loose-broken jade, he takes a
hundred times more cariere and liberty unto himself, than he did for others,
and begets in me so many extravagant Chimeraes, and fantastical monsters, so
orderlesse, and without any reason, one hudling upon an other, that at-leasure
to view the foolishness and monstrous strangeness of them, I have begun to
keep a register of them, hoping, if I live, one day to make him ashamed, and
blush at himself.

The ninth Chapter.
Of Liars.

THere is no man living, whom it may less beseem to speak of memory, than
myself, for to say truth, I have none at all: and am fully persuaded that
no-mans can-be so weak and forgetful as mine. All other parts are in me
common and vile, but touching memory, I think to carry the prise from
all-other, that have it weakest, nay and to gain the reputation of it, besides
the natural want I endure (for truly considering the necessity of it, Plato
has reason to name it A great and mighty Goddess) In my country, if a man
will imply that one has no sense, he will say, such a one has no memory: and
when I complain of mine, they reprove me and will not believe me, as if I
accused my-selfe to be mad and senseless. They make no difference between
memory and wit; which is an empairing of my market: But they do me wrong, for
contrariwise, it is commonly seen by experience, that excellent memories do
rather accompany weak judgments. Moreover they wrong me in this (who can do
nothing so well as to be a perfect friend) that the same words which accuse my
infirmity, represent ingratitude. From my affection they take hold of my
memory, and of a natural defect, they infer a want of judgment or
conscience. Some will say, he has forgotten this entreaty, or request, or that
promise, he is not mindful of his old friends, he never remembered to say, or
do, or conceal this or that, for my sake. Verily I may easily forget, but to
neglect the charge my friend has committed to my trust, I never do it. Let
them bear with my infirmity, and not conclude it to be a kind of malice;
which is so contrary an enemy to my humor. Yet am I somewhat comforted.
First, because it is an evil, from which I have chiefly drawn the reason to
correct a worse mischief, that would easily have grown upon me: that is to
say, ambition; which defect is intolerable in them that meddlewith wordly
negotiations. For as diverse like examples of natures progress, say, she has
happily strengthened other faculties in me, according as it has grown weaker
and weaker in me, and I should easily lay down and wire-draw my mind and
judgment, upon other men's traces, without exercising their proper forces, if
by the benefit of memory, foreign inventions and strange opinions were present
with me. That my speech is thereby shorter: For the Magazin of Memory, is
peradventure more stored with matter, than is the storehouse of Invention. Had
it held out with me, I had ere this wearied all my friends with prattling: the
subjects rouzing the mean faculty I have to manage and employ them,
strengthening and wresting my discourses. It is pity; I have assaied by the
trial of some of my private friends: according as their memory has ministered
them a whole and perfect matter, who recoile their narration so farre-backe,
and stuff-it with so many vain circumstances, that if the story be good, they
smoother the goodness of it: if bad, you must needs either curse the good
fortune of their memory, or blame the misfortune of their judgment. And it is
no easy matter, being in the midst of the cariere of a discourse, to stop
cunningly, to make a sudden period, and to cut-it-off. And there is nothing
whereby the clean strength of a horse is more known, than to make a ready
and clean stop. Among the skillful I see some, that strive, but can not stay
their race. Whilst they labor to find the point to stop their course, they
stagger and falter, as men that faint through weakness. Above all, old men
are dangerous, who have only the memory of things past left them, and have
lost the remembrance of their repetitions. I have heard some very pleasant
reports become most irksome and tedious in the mouth of a certain Lord,
for so much as all the bystanders had many times been cloyed with them.
Secondly, (as said an ancient Writer) that, I do not so much remember injuries
received. I had need have a prompter as Darius had, who not to forget the wrong
he had received of the Athenians, whenever he sat down at his table, caused
a page to sing unto him, Sir, remember the Athenians, and that the places or
books which I read-over, do ever smile upon me, with some new noveltie. It is
not without reason, mensay, that he who has not a good and ready memory,
should never meddle with telling of lies, and fear to become a liar. I am not
ignorant how the Grammarians make a difference between speaking untrue and
lying; and say that to speak untruly, is to speak that which is false, but
was reputed true; and that the definition of the Latin word, mentiri, whence
the French word, mentir, is derived, which in English is to lie, implies and
means to go against ones conscience: and by consequence it concerns only
those, who speak contrary to that which they know, of whom I speak. Now
these, either invent, seal, stamp and all, or else they disguise and change a
true ground. When they disguise or change, if they be often put to the
repetition of one thing, it is hard for them to keep still in one path, and
very strange if they lose not themselves: because the thing, as it is, having
first taken up her stand in the memory, and there by the way of knowledge and
witting, imprinted it-selfe, it were hard it should not represent itself to
the imagination, displacing and supplanting falsehood, which therein can have no
such footing, or settled fastness: and that the circumstances of the first
learning, still diving into the mind, should not cause it to disperse the
remembrance of all false or bastardizing parts gotten together. Where they
altogether invent, for so much as there is no certain impression, to front their
falsehood, they seem to have so much the lesser fear to mistake or forget
themselves, which also notwithstanding being an airie body, and without
hold-fast may easily escape the memory, except it be well assured: whereof I
have often (to my no small pleasure) seen the experience, at the cost of
those, who profess never to frame their speech, but as best shall fit the
affairs they negotiate, and as best shall please the great men they speak
unto. For the circumstances to which they will subject their credit and
conscience, being subject to many changes, their speech must likewise
diversifie and change with them, whence it follows that of one selfsame
subject they speak diversely, as now yellow, now gray, to one man thus, and thus
to another. And if peradventure these kind of men hoard-up their so contrary
instructions, what becomes of this goodly art? Who besides, often most
foolishly forget themselves, and run at randon: For, what memory shall
suffice them, to remember so many different forms they have framed to one same
subject? I have in my days seen diverse that have envied the reputation of
this worthy kind of wisdom, who perceive not, that if there be a reputation,
there can be no effect. Verily, lying is an ill and detestablevice. Nothing
makes us men, and no other means, keeps us bound one to another, but our word;
knew we but the horror and weight of it, we would with fire and sword pursue
and hate the same, and more justly than any other crime. I see all men
generally busied (and that very improperly) to punish certain innocent
errors in children, which have neither impression nor consequence, and
chastise and vex them for rash and fond actions. Only lying, and stubbornness
somewhat more, are the faults whose birth and progress I would have severely
punished and cut off; for they grow and increase with them: and if the tongue
have once gotten this ill habit, good Lord how hard, nay how impossible it is
to make her leave it? whereby it ensues, that we see many very honest men in
other matters, to be subject and enthralled to that fault. I have a good lad to
my tailour, whom I never heard speak a truth; no not when it might stand him in
stead of profit. If a lie had no more faces but one, as truth has; we should
be in far better terms then we are: For, whatsoever a li^r should say, we
would take ^^^ in a contrary sense. But the opposite of truth has many many
shapes, and an vnd^^^nite field. The Pythagoreans make good to be certain and
^^nite, and evil to be (...) and uncertain. A thousand by-waies miss the
mark, one only hits the-same. Surely I can never assure my self to come to a
good end, to warrant an extreme and evident danger, by a shameless and
solemnly.

An ancient Father says, We are better in the company of a known dog, than
in a man's society, whose speech is unknown to us. V^ externus al^ono non si^
hominis vice. A stranger to a P^^n. ^a^. hist. l 7. c. 1.
stra^g(...) not ^ake a man. And how much is a false speech less sociable than
silence? King Francis the first, vaunted himself to have by this means
brought Francis Taverna, Ambassador to Francis S^orz^, Duke of Millane to a non
plus; a man very famous for his rare eloquence, and facility in speech, who
had been dispatched to excuse his master, toward his Majesty, of a matter of
great importance, which was this. The King to keep ever some intelligence in
Italy, whence he had lately been expelled, but especially in the Dukedom of
M^^ane, thought it expedient to entertain a Gentleman of his about the Duke;
in effect as his Ambassador, but in appearance as a private man; who should make
show to reside there about his particular affairs, for so much as the Duke, who
depended much more of the Emperor (chiefly then that he was treating a
marriage with his niece, daughter of the King of Denmark, who is at this day
Dowager of Loraine) could not without great prejudice unto himself discover to
have any correspondencie and conference with us. For which commission and
purpose a Gentleman of Millane, named Merveille, then serving the King in place
of one of the Quiers of his Quierie, was deemed ^t. This man being dispached
with secret letters of credence, and instructions of an Ambassador, together
with other letters of commendation to the Duke in savor of his particular
affairs, as a mask and pretense of his proceedings, continued so long about
the Duke, that the Emperor began to have some suspicion of him; which as we
suppose was cause of what ensued, which was, that under color of a murder
committed, the Duke one night caused the s^^d Merveille to be beheaded, having
ended his process in two days. Master Francis b^^ng come to the Court,
fraught with a long counterfeit deduction of this s^orie (for the King had
addressed himself to all the Princes of Christendom, yea and to the Duke
himself for justice, for such an outrage committed upon his servant) had one
morning audience in the Kings councell-chamber: who for the foundation of his
cause having established and to that end projected many goodly and colorable
apparences of the fact: namely, that the Duke his master, had never taken
Merveille for other then a private gentleman, and his own subject, and who was
come thither about his private business, where he had never lived under other
name, protesting he had never known him to be one of the Kings household, nor
never heard of him, much less taken him for his Majesty's Agent. But the King
urging him with diverse objections and demands, and charging him on every side,
pr^st ^im so far with the execution done by night, and as it were by stealth,
that the ^eely man, being much entangled and suddenly surprised, as if he would
set an innocent face on the matter, answered, that for the love and respect of
his Majesty, the Duke his Master, would have been very loath that such an
execution should have been done by day. Here every man may guess whether he
were taken short or no, having tripped before so goodly a(...) as was that of
our King Francis the first. Pope Julius the second, having sent an Ambassador
to the King of England to animate him against our foresaid King: the Ambassador
having had audience touching his charge, and the King in his answer urging and
insisting upon the difficulty he found and foresaw in levying such convenient
forces, as should be required to withstand so mighty, and set upon so puisant
a King, and alleging certain pe^^ment reasons: The Ambassador fondly and
vn^itly replied, that himself had long before maturely considered them, and
had told the Pope of them. By which answer so far from his proposition (which
was with all speed, and without more circumstances to undertake and vngergoe a
dangerous war) the King of England took hold of the first argument which in
effect he afterward found true, which was, that the said Ambassador, in his
own particular intent, was more affected to the French side, whereof
advertising his master, his goods were all con^iscate, himself disgraced, and
he very hardly escaped with life.

The tenth Chapter.
Of ready or slow speech.

One ne furent a tous toutes graces donnes.

All Gods good graces are not gone To all, or of all any one. So do we see
that in the gift of eloquence, some have such a facility and promptitude, and
that which we call utterance, so easy and at command, that at all assaies, and
upon every occasion, they are ready and provided; and others more slow, never
speak any thing except much labored and premeditated. As Ladies and dainty
Dames are taught rules to take recreations and bodily exercises, according to
the advantage of what they have fairest about them. If I were to give the like
counsel, in those two different advantages of eloquence whereof Preachers and
pleading lawiers of our age seem to make profession; the slow speaker in mine
opinion should be the better preacher, and the other the better lawier. For
so much as charge of the first allowes-him as much leisure as he pleases to
prepare himself; moreover his cariere continues still in one kind without
interruption: whereas the Lawyers occasions urging him still upon any accident
to be ready to enter the lists: and the unexpected replies and answers of his
advers party, do often divert him from his purpose, where he is enforced to
take a new course. Yet is-it, that at the last enter-view which was at
Marseilles between Pope Clemens the seventh, and Francis the first, our King,
it happened cleane-contrarie, where Monsieur Poyet, a man of chief reputation
and all days of his life brought up to plead at the bar, whose charge being to
make an Oration before the Pope, and having long time before premeditated and
con'd the same by roat, yea, and as some report, brought it with him
ready-penned from Paris; the very same day it should have been pronounced; the
Pope suspecting he might happily speak something, might offend the other
Princes Ambassadors, that were about him, sent the argument, which he at that
time and place thought fittest to be treated of, to the king, but by fortune
clean contrary to that which Poyet, had so much studied for: So that his
Oration was altogether frustrate, and he must presently frame another. But he
perceiving himself unable for-it, the Cardinal Bellay was faineto supply his
place and take that charge upon him. The Lawyers charge is much harder than the
Preachers: (yet in mine opinion) shall we find more passable Lawyers then
commendable Preachers at least in France. It seems to be more proper to the
mind, to have her operation ready and sudden, and more incident to the
judgment, to have it slow and considerate. But who remains mute, if he have
no leisure to prepare himself, and he likewise to whom leisure gives no
advantage to say better, are both in one self degree of strangeness. It is
reported that Seuerus Cassius spoke better extempore, and without
premeditation. That he was more beholding to fortune, then to his diligence;
that to be interrupted in his speech redounded to his profit: and that his
adversaries feared to vrge-him, lest his sudden anger should redouble his
eloquence. I know this condition of nature by experience, which can-not abide a
vehement and laborious premeditation: except it hold a free, a voluntary, and
selfe-pleasing course, it can never come to a good end. We commonly say of some
compositions, that they smell of the oil, and of the lamp, by reason of a
certain harshnesse, and rudeness, which long plodding labor imprints in them
that be much elaborated. But besides the care of well-doing, and the contention
of the mind, over-stretched to her enterprise, does break and impeach
the-same; even as it happens unto water, which being closely pent-in, through
it is own violence and abundance, can not find issue at an open gullet. In
this condition of nature, whereof I now speak, this also is joined unto it,
that it desires not to be pricked forward by these strong passions, as the
anger of Cassius (for that motion would be over-rude) it ought not to be
violently shaken, but yeeldingly solicited: it desires to be rouzed and pricked
forward by strange occasions, both present and casual. If it go all-alone, it
does but languish and loyter behind: agitation is her life and grace. I cannot
well contain my self in mine own possession and disposition, chance has
more interest in it than my self; occasion, company, yea the change of my
voice, draws more from my mind than I can find therein, when by my self I
second and endevor to employ the same. My words likewise are better than my
writings, if choice may be had in so woorthlesse things. This also happens unto
me, that where I seek my self, I find not my self: and I find my self
more by chance, than by the search of mine own judgment. I shall perhaps
have cast-foorth some suttletie in writing, happily dull and harsh for another,
but sinooth and curious for my self. Let us leave all these complements and
quaintness. That is spoken by every man, according to his own strength. I
have so lost it, that I wot not what I would have said, and strangers have
sometimes found it before me. Had I always a razor about me, where that
happens, I should clean raze my self out. Fortune may at some other time make
the light thereof appear brighter unto me, than that of midday, and will make
me wonder at mine own faltring or sticking in the mire.

The eleventh Chapter.
Of Prognostications.

As touching Oracles it is very certain, that long before the coming of our
Savior Jesus Christ, they had begun to loose their credit: for we see that
Cicero labors Ci^. divine. lib. 2.
to find the cause of their declination: and these be his words: Cur isto modo
iam oracula Delphis non eduntur non modo nostra aetate, sediamdiu, vt nihil
possit esse contemptius? Why in like sort are not Oracles now uttered, not
only in our times, but a good while since, so as now nothing can be more
contemptible? But as for other Prognostikes, that were drawn from the anatomy
of beasts in sacrifice, to which Plato does in some sort ascribe the natural
constitution of the internal members of them, of the scraping of chickins, of
the flght of birds, Aues quasdam Id. not. deo^.
rerum augurandarum causa natas esse putamus. We are of opinion, certain birds
were even bred to prognosticate some things; of thunders, of turnings and
backe-recourse of rivers. Multa cernunt Id. ib. l. ^.
aruspices: multa augures provident: multa oraculis declarantur: multa
vaticinationibus: multa s^^nnijs: multa portentis. Soothsayers see much:
bird-prophets foore-see as much: much is foretold by Oracles; much by
prophesies; much by dreams; much by portentuous signs, and others, upon which
antiquity grounded most of their enterprises, as well public as private: our
religion has abolished them. And albeit there remain yet amongst us some
means of divination in the stars, in spirits, in shapes of the body, in
dreams, and elsewhere a notable example of the mad and found curiosity of our
nature, ammusing it self to preoccupate future things, as if it had not enough
to do to digest the present. Luca^. lib. 2. 4.


-- cur hanc tibirector Olympi
Sollicitis visum mort alibus addere curam,
Noscant ventur as vt dira per omnia clades?
Sit subitum quodcunque paras, sit caeca futuri 14.

Men's heminum fati, liceat sperare timenti.
Why pleased it thee, thou ruler of the spheres,
To add this care to mortals care-clog'd mind,
That they their misery know, ere it appears?
Let thy drifts sudden come; let men be blind
Toward future fate: oh let him hope that fears.
Ne vtile quidem est scire quid futurum sit: Miserum est enim nihil
preficientem angi. It is not Cic. not. Deor. lib. 3.
so much as profitable for us, to know what is to come, for it is a miserable
thing, a man should fret and be vexed, and do no good. Yet is it of much less
authority, lo here wherefore the example of Francis Marquis of Saluzzo has
seemed remarkable unto me: who being Lieutenant General unto Francis our
King, and over all his forces, which he then had beyond the Mountains in
Italy, a man highly favored in all our court, and otherwise infinitely
beholding to the King for that very Marquisate, which his brother had
forfeited: and having no occasion to do it, yea and his mind and affections
contradicting the same, suffered himself to be frighted and deluded (as it
has since been manifestly prooved) by the fond prognostications, which then
throughout all Europe were given out to the advantage of the Emperor Charles
the fifth, and to our prejudice and disadvantage (but specially in Italy, where
these foolish praedictions had so much possessed the Italians, that in Rome
were laid great wagers, and much money given out upon the exchange, that we
should utterly be overthrown) that after he had much condoled, yea and
complained with his secret friends, the unavoidable miseries, which he foresaw
prepared by the fates against the Crown of France, and the many friends he had
there, he unkindly revolted, and became a turne-cote on the Emperors ^^de, to
his intolerable loss and destruction, notwithstanding all the constellations
then reigning. But was drawn unto it as a man encompassed and beset by diverse
passions; for having both strong castles, and all manner of munition and
strength in his own hands, the enemies army under Antonio L^va about three
paces from him, and we nothing mistrusting him, it was in his power to do worse
than he did. For notwithstanding his treason we lost neither man nor town,
except Fossan: which long after was by us stoutly contested and defended.

Prudens futuri temporis exitum Hor. li. 3. ^d. 2^. 29.

Caliginosa nocte premit Deus,
Ridetque, si mortalis vltra.
Fas trepida. --
Ourwise God hides in pitch dark night
Of future time the event decreed,
And laughes at man, if man affright
Fear more, than he to fear hathneed.
Ille potens sui
Laetusque deget, cuilicet in diem
Dixisse, vixi, cras vel atra 41.

Nube pol^m pater occupato,
Vel sole puro.
He of himself lives merrily,
Who each day, I have li'd, can say,
To morrow let God charge the sky
With dark clouds, or fair sun-shine-ray.
Laetus in praesens animus, quod vltra est,
Oderit curare. Ib. 2. od. 16. 25.

For present time a merry mind
Hates to respect what is behind.
And those which take this word in a contrary sense are in the wrong. Ista sic
reciprocantur, Cic. divi. l. 1. ^.
vt and si diuinatio sit, dij sint: and dij sint, sit diuinatio. This
consequence is so reciprocal, as if there be any divination, there are Gods:
and if there be Gods, there is divination. Much more wisely Pacuvius.

Nam is it is qui linguam anium intelligunt, Ib. ^. Pac.

Plusque ex alieno i^cere sapiunt, quam ex suo,
Magis audiendum, quam auscult andum censeo.
Who understand what language birds express,
By their own, then beastes-livers knowing less,
They may be heard, not hearkned-to, I guess.
This so famous art of divination of the Tuskanes grew thus. A husbandman
digging very deep into the ground, with his plough-share, saw Tages, a
demy-God appear out of it, with an infantine face, yet fraught with an
aged-like wisdom. All men ran to see-him, and both his words and knowledge
were for many ages-after remembered, and collected, containing the principles
and means of this art. An offspring suitable to her progress. I would rather
direct affairs by the chance of dice, then by such frivolous dreams. And
truly in all commonwealths, men have ever ascribed much authority unto lot.
Plate in the policy which he imagines by discretion, ascribes the deciding
of many important effects unto it, and amongst other things would have
marriages between the good to be contrived by lot. And gives so large
privileges unto this casual election, that he appoints the children
proceeding from them to be brought up in the country; and those borne of the
bad to be banished and sent abroad. Notwithstanding if any of those so exiled
shall by fortune happen, whilst he is growing, to show some good hope of
himself, that he may be revoked and sent-for back, and such amongst the
first as shall in their youth give small hope of future good to be banished. I
see some that study, plod, and gloss their Almanackes, and in all accidents
allege their authority. A man were as good to say, they must needs speak
truth and lies. Quis est enim qui totum diem iaculans, non aliquando conlineet?
Cic. diu. lib. 2.
For who is he that shooting all day, sometimes hits not the white? I think
not the better of them, though what they say prove sometimes true. It were
more certain, if there were either a rule or a truth to lie ever. Seeing no
man records their fables, because they are ordinary and infinite; and their
praedictions are made to be of credit, because they are rare, incredible and
prodigious. So answered Diagoras surnamed the Atheist (being in Samothrace) to
him, who in showing him diverse vows and offerings hanging in the Temple,
brought thither by such as had escaped shipwreck, said thus unto him: You that
think the Gods to have no care of humane things, what say you by so many men
saved by their grace and help? Thus is it done, answered he: Those which were
drowned far exceeding their number, are not here set-forth. Cicero says,
That amongst all other Philosophers that have avowed and acknowledged the Gods,
only Xenophanes, the Colophonian has gone about to root out all manner of
divination. It is so much the less to bewondred at, if at any time we have
seen some of our Princes minds to their great damage, rely upon such like
vanities. I would to God, I had with mine own eyes seen those two wonders,
mentioned in the book of Ioachin the Abbat of Calabria, who foretold all the
Popes that should ensue, together with their names and shapes: And that of Leo
the Emperor, who fore-spake all the Emperors and Patriarchs of Greece. This
have I seen with mine own eyes, that in public confusions, men amazed at
their own fortune, give themselves headlong, as it were to all manner of
superstition, to search in heaven the causes and ancient threats of their
ill-lucke; and in my time are so strangely successful therein, as they have
persuaded me, that it is an ammusing of sharp and idle wits, that such as are
inured to this subtletie, by folding and unfolding them, may in all other
writings be capable to find out what they seeke-after. But above all, their
dark, ambiguous, fantastical, and prophetical gibrish, mends the matter
much, to which their authors never give a plain sense, that posterity may
apply what meaning and construction it shall please unto it. The Demon of
Socrates was peradventure a certain impulsion or will, which without the
advice of his discourse presented it self unto him. In a mind so well
purified, and by continual exercise of wisdom and virtue so well prepared, as
his was, it is likely, his inclinations (though rash and inconsiderate) were
ever of great moment, and worthy to be followed. Every man feels in
himself some image of such agitations, of a prompt, vehement and casual
opinion. It is in me to give them some authority, that afford so little to
our wisdom. And I have had some, equally weak in reason, and violent in
persuasion and disswasion (which was more ordinary to Socrates) by which I
have so happily and so profitably suffered my self to be transported, as they
might perhaps be thought to contain some matter of divine inspiration.

The twelfth Chapter.
Of Constancy.

The law of resolution and constancy implies not, we should not, as-much as
lies in our power shelter our selves from the mischiefs and inconveniences
that threaten-vs, nor by consequence fear, they should surprise-vs.
Contrariwise, all honest means for a man to warrant himself from evils, are
not only tolerable, but commendable. And the part of constancy is chiefly
acted, in firmly bearing the inconveniences, against which no remedy is to be
sound. So that, there is no nimblenesse of body, nor wealding of handweapons,
that we will reject, if it may in any sort defend-vs from the blow, meant
at-vs. Many most warlike nations in their conflicts and fights, used retreating
and flight as a principal advantage, and showed their backs to their enemy
much more dangerously than their faces. The Turks at this day retain
something of that humor. And Socrates in Plato does mock at Laches, because
he had defined fortitude, to keep her-selfe steadie in her rank against her
enemies; What, says he, were it then cowardice to beat them in giving them
place? And alleges Homer against him, who commends in Aencas his skill in
flying and giving ground. And because Laches being better advised, avoweth that
custom to be amongst the Scithians, and generally amongst all horsemen, he
alleges further unto him the example of the Lacedemonian footmen (a nation
above all other used to fight on foot) who in the battle of Plateae, unable
to open and to put to rowt the Persian Phalanx, advised themselves to scatter
and put themselves back, that so by the opinion of their flght, they might if
they should pursue them, rush in upon them, and put that so combined-masse to
rout. By which means they gained the victory. Touching the Scithians, it is
reported, that when Darius went to subdue them, he sent their King many
reproachful speeches, for so much as he ever saw him retire and give ground
before him, and to avoid the maine battle. To whom Indathirsez (for so was
his name) answered, that, They did it not for fear of him, nor any other man
living, but that it was the fashion of his nation to march thus: as having
neither cities, nor houses, nor manured land to defend, or to fear their
enemies should reap any commodity by them. But if he had so great a desire
to feed on them, he might draw nearer to view the place of their ancient
Sepulchers, and there he should meet with whom to speak his belly-full.
Notwithstanding when a man is once within reach of cannon-shot, and as it were
point-blancke before them, as the fortune of war does diverse times bring men
unto, it ill beseems a resolute mind to start-aside, or be daunted, at the
threat of a shot, because by the violence and suddenness thereof we deem it
inevitable: and there are some, who by lifting up of a hand, or stooping their
head, have sometimes given their fellows cause of laughter: yet have we seen,
that in the voyage, the Emperor Charles the fifth made against us in Provence,
the Marquis of Guasto, being gone out to survay the city of Arles, and shown
himself out of a winde-mill, under color of which he was come somewhat near
the Town, he was discovered by the Lord of Bonevall, and the Seneshall of
Agenois, who were walking upon the Theater Aux arenes (so called in French
because it is full of sand) who showing him to the Lord of Villiers,
Commissarie of the Artillery, he mounted a culverin so level, that had not
the Marquis perceived the fire, and so started aside, it was constantly
affirmed, he had been shot through the body. Likewise not many years before,
Lorence of Medicis, Duke of Vrbin, and father to the Queene-mother of France,
besieging Mondolphe, a place in Italy, in the province name Vicariate, seeing
fire given to a piece that stood upright upon him, stooped his head, and well
befell him that he plaide the ducke, for otherwise the bullet, which went right
over, and within a little of his head, had doubtless shot him through the
paunch. But to say truth, I will never think these motions were made with
discourse, for what judgment can you give of an aim, either high or low in a
matter so sudden? It may rather be thought that fortune favored their fear:
and which an other time might as well be a mean to make them fall into the
cannons-mouth, as to avoid the same. I cannot choose, if the crack of a musket
do suddenly streeke mine ears, in a place where I least look for it, but I
must needs start at-it: which I have seen happen to men of better sort than my
self. Nor do the Stoickes mean, that the Soul of their wisest man in any
sort resist the first visions and sudden fantasies, that surprise the same: but
rather consent that, as it were unto a natural subjection, he yields and
shrinks unto the loud clattering and roar of heaven, or of some violent
downfall; for example-sake, unto palenesse, and contraction. So likewise in
other passions, always provided, his opinion remains safe and whole, and the
situation of his reason, admit no tainting or alteration whatsoever: and he no
whit consent to his fright and sufferance. Touching the first part; the same
happens to him, that is not wise, but far otherwise concerning the second.
For the impression of passions does not remain superficial in him: but rather
penetrates even into the secret of reason, infecting and corrupting the same.
He judges according to them, and conformeth himself to them. Consider
precisely the state of the wise Stoicke:

Men's immota manet, lachrymae volvuntur inanes. Virg. A^n. lib. 4. 449.
His mind does firm remain,
Tears are distilled in vain.
The wise Peripatetike does not exempt himself from perturbations of the mind,
but does moderate them.

The thirteenth Chapter.
Of Ceremonies in the enterview of Kings.

THere is no subject so vain, that deserves not a place in this rapsodie. It
were a notable discourtesie unto our common rules, both toward an equal, but
more toward a great person, not to meet with you in your house, if he have
once warned you that he will come: And Margaret Queen of Navarre, was wont to
say to this purpose, That it was a kind of incivilitie in a gentleman, to
depart from his house, as the fashion is, to meet with him that is coming to
him, how worthy soever he be: and that it more agrees with civilitie and
respect, to stay for him at home, and there to entertain him: except it were
for fear the stranger should miss his way: and that it suffioeth to company
and wait upon him, when he is going away again. As for me, I oftentimes
forget both these vain offices; as one that endeavors to abolish all manner
of ceremonies in my house. Some will be offended at it, what can I do
withal? I had rather offend a stranger once, then my self every day; for it
were a continual subjection. To what end do men avoid the servitude of
Courts, and entertain the same in their own houses? Moreover it is a common
rule in all assemblies, that he who is the meaner man, comes first to the
place appointed, for so much as it belongs to the better man to be staid-for, and
waited upon by the other. Nevertheless we saw that at the enterview, prepared
at Merceilles between Pope Clement the seventh, and Francis the first, King of
France, the King having appointed all necessatie preparations, went himself
out of the Town, and gave the Pope two or three dayes-leasure, to make his
entry into it, and to refresh himself, before he would come to meet him
there. Likewise at the meeting of the said Pope with the Emperor at Bologna,
the Emperor gave the Pope advantage and leisure to be first there, and
afterward came himself. It is (say they) an ordinary ceremony at
enterparlies between such Princes, that the better man should ever come first
to the place appointed; yea before him in whose country the assembly is: and
they take it in this sense, that it is, because this complement should
testify, he is the better man, whom the meaner goes to seek, and that he
sueth unto him. Not only each country, but every City, yea and every vocation
has his own particular decorum. I have every carefully been brought up in
mine infancy, and have lived in very good company, because I would not be
ignorant of the good manners of our country of France, and I am persuaded I
might keep a scoole of them. I love to follow them, but not so cowardly, as my
life remain thereby in subjection. They have some painful forms in them,
which if a man forget by discretion, and not by error, he shall no whit be
disgraced. I have often seen men prove unmannerly by too much manners, and
importunate by overmuch courtesy. The knowledge of entertainment is otherwise
a profitable knowledge. It is, as grace and beauty are, the reconciler of the
first accoastings of society and familiarity: and by consequence, it opens
the entrance to instruct us by the example of others, and to exploit and
produce our example, if it have any instructing or communicable thing in it.

The fourteenth Chapter.
Men are punished by too-much opiniating themselves in a place without reason.

Valor has his limits, as other virtues have: which if a man out-go, he
shall find himself in the train of vice: in such sort, that unless a man
know their right bounds, which in truth are not on a sudden, easily hit upon,
he may fall into rashness, obstinacy, and folly. For this consideration grew
the custom we hold in wars, to punish, and that with death, those who
wilfully opiniate themselves to defend a place, which by the rules of war,
cannot be kept. Otherwise upon hope of impunitie, there should be no cotage,
that might not entertain an Army. The Lord Constable Momorancie at the siege
of Pavia, having been appointed to pass over the river T^si^e, and to quarter
himself in the suburbs of Saint Antonie, being impeached by a tower, that
stood at the end of the bridge, and which obstinately would needs hold out,
yea and to be battered, caused all those that were with-in it, to be hanged.
The same man afterward, accompanying my Lord the Dolphin of France in his
journey beyond the Alps, having by force taken the castle of Villane, and all
those that were within the same, having by the ^urie of the Soldiers bin put
to the sword, except the Captain, and his Ancient, for the same reason, caused
them both to be hanged and strangled: As did also, Captain Martin du Bellay,
the Governor of Turin, in the same country, the Captain of Saint Bony: all
the rest of his men having been massacred at the taking of the place. But for
so much as the judgment of the strength or weakness of the place, is taken by
the estimate and counterpoise of the forces that assail it (for some man might
justly opinionate himself against two culverins, that would play the madman to
expect thirty cannons) where also the greatness of the Prince conquering must
be considered, his reputation, and the respect that is due unto him: there is
danger a man should somewhat bend the balance on that side. By which terms it
happens, that some have so great an opinion of themselves, and their means,
and deeming it unreasonable, any thing should be worthy to make head against
them, that so long as their fortune continues, they overpasse what hill or
difficulty soever they find to withstand or resist them: As is seen by the
forms of sommonings, and challenges, that the Princes of the East, and their
successors yet remaining have in use, so fierce, so haughty, and so full of a
barbarous kind of commandment. And in those places where the Portugales
abated the pride of the Indians, they found some states observing this
universal and inviolable law, that what enemy soever he be, that is overcome
by the King in person, or by his Lieutenant, is exempted from all composition
of ransom or mercy. So above all, a man who is able should take heed, lest he
fall into the hands of an enemie-judge, that is victorious and armed.

The fifteenth Chapter.
Of the punishment of cowardice

I Have heretofore heard a Prince, who was a very great Captain, hold opinion,
that a soldier might not for cowardice of heart be condemned to death: who
sitting at his table heard report of the Lord of Veruins sentence, who for
yielding up of Bollein, was doomed to loose his head. Verily there is reason a
man should make a difference between faults proceeding from our weakness,
and those that grow from our malice. For in the latter we are directly bandied
against the rules of reason, which nature has imprinted in us; and in the
former it seems, we may call the same nature, as a warrant, because it has
left-vs in such imperfection and defect. So as diverse nations have judged, that
no man should blame us for any thing we do against our conscience. And the
opinion of those which condemn heretics and miscreants unto capital
punishments, is partly grounded upon this rule: and the same which
establishes, that a Judge or an advocate may not be called to account for any
matter committed in their charge through oversight or ignorance. But touching
cowardice, it is certain, the common fashion is, to punish the same with
ignominy and shame. And some hold that this rule was first put in practice by
the Lawgiver Charondas, and that before him the laws of Greece were wont to
punish those with death, who for fear did run away from a Battle: where he
only ordained, that for three days together, clad in women's attire, they
should be made to sit in the marketplace: hoping yet to have some service at
their hands, and by means of this reproach, they might recover their courage
again. Suffundere malis hominis sanguinem quam effundere: Rather moove a man's
blood to blush in his face, than remoove it by bleeding from his body.

It appears also that the Roman laws did in former times punish such as had
runaway, by death. For Animianus Marcellinus reports, that Julian the Emperor
condemned ten of his Soldiers, who in a charge against the Parthians, had
but turned their backs from it; first to be degraded, and then to suffer
death, as he says according to the ancient laws, who nevertheless,
condemns others for a like fault, under the ensign of bag and baggage to be
kept amongst the common prisoners. The sharp punishment of the Romans against
those Soldiers that escaped from Cannae: and in the same war, against those
that accompanied Ca. Fuluius in his defeat, reached not unto death, yet may a
man fear, such open shame may make them despair, and not only prove faint and
cold friends, but cruel and sharp enemies. In the time of our forefathers, the
Lord of Franget, Whilom Lieutenant of the Marshall of Chastillions company,
having by the Marshall of Chabanes been placed Governor of Fontarabie, instead
of the Earl of Lude, and having yielded the same unto the Spaniards, was
condemned to be degraded of all Nobility, and not only himself, but all his
succeding posterity declared villains and clownes, taxable and incapable to
bear arms; which severe sentence was put in execution at Lions. The like
punishment did afterward all the Gentlemen suffer, that were within Guise, when
the Earl of Nansaw entered the town: and others since. Nevertheless if there
were so gross an ignorance, and so apparent cowardice, as that it should
exceed all ordinary, it were reason it should be taken for a sufficient
proof of inexcusable treachery, and knaverie, and for such to be punished.

The sixteenth Chapter.
A trick of certain Ambassadors.

IN all my travels I did ever observe this custom, that is, always to learn
something by the communication of others (which is one of the bests schools
that may be) to reduce those I confer withal, to speak of that wherein they
are most conversant and skillful.

Basti al nochiero ragionar de'venti, Idem Propert. l. 2. d. 1. 43.

Albifolco de'^ori, and lesue piaghe
Conti il guerrier, conti il pastor gl' armenti.
Sailers of winds plow-men of beasts take keep,
Let Soldiers count their wounds, sheepheards their sheep.
For commonly we see the contrary, that many choose rather to discourse of any
other trade than their own; supposing it to be so much new reputation gotten:
witness the quip Archidamus gave Periander saying that he forsook the credit of
a good Physician, to become a paltry Poet. Note but how Caesar displaieth his
invention at large, when he would have us conceive his inventions how to build
bridges, and devises, how to frame other warlike engines; and in respect of
that how close and succinct he writes, when he speaks of the offices
belonging to his profession, of his valor, and of the conduct of his
warre-fare. His exploits prove him a most excellent Captain, but he would be
known for a skillful Ingenier, a quality somewhat strange in him. Dionysius
the elder was a very great chieftaine and Leader in war, as a thing best
sitting his fortune: but he greatly labored, by means of Poetry, to assume
high commendation unto himself, howbeit he had but little skill in it. A
certain Lawier was not long since brought to see a study, stored with all
manner of books, both of his own, and of all other faculties, wherein he
found no occasion to entertain himself withal, but like a fond cunning
clarke earnestly busied himself to gloss and censure a fence or barricado,
placed over the screw of the study, which a hundred Captains and Soldiers
see every day, without observing, or taking offense at them.

Optat ephippia b^s piger, optat arare caballus. Hor. lib. 1. epist. 14. 43.
The Ox would trappings wear,
The Horse, ploughs-yoake would bear.
By this course you never come to perfection, or bring any thing to good pass.
Thus must a man endeavor to induce the Architect, the Painter, the Shoemaker to
speak of their own trade, and so of the rest, every man in his vocation. And
to this purpose am I wont, in reading of histories (which is the subject of
most men) to consider who are the writers: If they be such as profess nothing
but bare learning, the chief thing I learn in them, is their style, and
language: if Physicians: I believe them in whatsoever they shall report
concerning the temperatenesse of the air, the health and complexion of
Princes, or of hurts and infirmities: If Lawiers, we should observe the
controversies of rights, titles, and pretenses of laws and customs, the
establishments of policies, and such like things: If Divines, we may note the
affairs of the Church, the Ecclesiastical censures, dispensations, cases of
conscience, and marriages: If Courtiers, manners, complements, ceremonies, and
entertainements: if Warriors, what belongs unto their charge, but chiefly the
managing and conduct of the achievements or exploits wherein they have bin
themselves in person: If Ambassadors, the negotiations, intelligences,
practices, policies, and manner how to direct, complot, and conduct them. And
therefore, what in an other Writer I should peradventure have cursorie passed
over, I have with some advisednesse considered and marked the same in the
history of the Lord of Langey, a man most expert, and intelligent in such
matters: which is, that after he had exactly set down and declared those
glorious, and farre-fetcht remonstrances of the Emperor Charles the fifth made
in the consistory of Rome, in the presence of the Bishop of Mascon, and the
Lord of Velly, our Ambassadors; wherein he entermixed many bitter and
outrageous words against us; and amongst others, that if his Captains and
Soldiers were not of much more faithfulness, and sufficiency in the art of
war, then our Kings, he would forthwith tie a rope about his neck, and go
ask him mercy: whereof he seemed to believe some thing: for afterward
whilst he lived, he chanced twice or thrice to utter the very same words.
Moreover, that he had challenged the king to fight with him, man to man in his
shirt, with Rapier and Dagger in a boat. The said Lord of Langey, following his
story, adds that the said Ambassadors making a dispatch of what had passed
unto the king, dissembled the chiefest part unto him, yea and concealed the two
precedent articles from him. Now me thought it very strange, that it should lie
in the power of an Ambassador to dispense with any point, concerning the
advertisements he should give unto his Master, namely of such consequence,
coming from such a person, and spoken in so great an assembly, whereas me
seemed it should have been the office of a trusty servant, truly and exactly
to set down things as they were, and in what manner they had succeeded: to the
end the liberty of disposing, judging and choosing, might wholly lie in the
master. For, to alter and conceal the truth from him, for fear he should
conster and take it otherwise than he ought, and le^t that might provoke him to
some bad resolution; and in the mean while to suffer him to be ignorant of his
own affairs, me thought should rather have appertained to him, that gives
the law, than to him that receives the same; to the Master or over-seer of the
school, and not to him who should think himself inferior, as well in
authority, as in wisdom and good counsel. Howsoever it were, I would be
loath to be so used in mine own small and particular business, we do so
willingly upon every slight occasion and pretense neglect and forgo
commandment, and are so far from obeying, that we rather vsurp a kind of
masterie, and free power: every man does so naturally aspire unto liberty and
authority, that no profit ought to be so dear unto a superior, proceeding
from those that serve him, as their simple and natural obedience. Whosoever
obeieth by discretion, and not by subjection, corrupts and abuses the office
of commanding. And P. Crassus he whom the Romans deemed five times happy, when
he was Consul in Asia, having sent a Grecian Inginer, to bring the greatest
of two ship-masts before him, which he had seen in Athens, therewith to frame
an engine of battery: This man under color of his skill, presumed to do
otherwise than he was bidden, and brought the lesser of the two masts which
according to his arts reason he deemed the fittest. Crassus having patiently
heard his reasons and allegations, caused him to be well whipped; preferring
the interest of true discipline, before that of the work. On the other side a
man might also consider, that this so strict obedience, belongs but to precise
and prefixed commandments. Ambassadors have a more scopefull and free charge,
which in many points depends chiefly of their disposition. They do not
merely execute, but frame and direct by their own advise and council, the
will of their Master. I have in my days seen some persons of commandment,
checked and found fa^lt withal, because they had rather obeyed the literal
sense, and bare words of the Kings letters, than the occasions of the affairs
they had in hand. Men of understanding and experience do yet at this day
condemn the custom of the Kings of Persia, which was to mince the
instructions given to their Agents, and Lieutenants so small, that in the least
accident they might have recourse to their directions and ordinances: This
delay, in so farre-reaching a scope of domination, having often brought great
prejudice, and notable damage unto their affairs. And Crassus writing unto a
man of that profession, and advertising him of the use whereto he purposed the
foresaid mast; seems he not to enter into conference with him concerning his
determination, and wish him to enterpose his censure or advise of it.

The seventeenth Chapter.
Of fear.

Obstupui, steteruntque comae, and vox faucibus haesit. Virg. A^n. lib. ^. 77^.
I stood aghast, my hair on end,
My jaw-tide tongue no speech would lend.
I Am no good Naturalist (as they say) and I know not well by what springs
fear does work in us: but well I wot it is a strange passion: and as
Physicians say, there is none does sooner transport our judgment out of his
due seat. Verily I have seen diverse become mad and senseless for fear: yea
and in him, who is most settled, and best resolved, it is certain that whilst
his fit continues, it begets many strange dazelings, and terrible
amazements in him. I omit to speak of the vulgar sort, to whom it sometimes
represents strange apparitions, as their fathers and grandfathers ghosts,
risen out of their graves, and in their winding sheets: and to others it
sometimes shows Larves, Hobgoblins Robbingood-fellowes, and such other
Bug-beares and Chimeraes. But even amongst Soldiers, with whom it ought to
have no credit at all, how often has she changed a flock of sheep into a
troop of armed men? Bushes and shrubbes into men-at-armes and Lanciers? our
friends into our enemies? and a red cross into a white? At what time the Duke
of Bourbon took Rome, an Ancient that kept sentinel, in the borough Saint
Peter, was at the first alarm surprised with such terror, that with his
colors in his hand, he suddenly threw himself through the hole of a breach
out of the City, and fell just in the midst of his enemies, supposing the
way to go straight in the heart of the City: but in the end, he no sooner
perceived the Duke of Burbons troops, advancing to withstand him, imagining it
to be some sallie the Citizens made that way, he better be-thinking himself,
turned head, and the very same way, he came out, he went into the town again,
which was more than three hundred paces distance toward the fields. The like
happened, but not so successefully unto Captain Iulius-his ensigne-bearer at
what time Saint Paul was taken from us by the Earl of Bures, and the Lord of
Reu, who was so frighted with fear, that going about to cast himself over the
town walls, with his Ancient in his hand, or to creep through a spike-hole, he
was cut in pieces by the assailants. At which siege likewise, that horror and
fear is very memorable, which so did choke, seize upon, and freeze the heart
of a gentleman, that having received no hurt at all, he fell down starke-dead
upon the ground before the breach. The like passion rage does sometimes
possess a whole multitude. In one of the encounters that Germanicus had with
the Germans, two mighty troops were at one instant so frighted with fear,
that both betook themselves to their heels, and ran away two contrary
ways, the one right to that place whence the other fled. It sometimes adds
wings unto our heels, as unto the first named, and other times it takes the
use of feet from us: as we may read if Theophilus the Emperor, who in a
battle he lost against the Agarenes, was so amazed and astonished, that he could
not resolve to escape away by flight: adeo pavor etiam auxilia formidat: Fear
is so afraid even of that should help. Until such time as Manuel, one of the
chief leaders in his army, having rouzed and shaken him, as it were out of a
dead sleep, said unto him, Sir, if you will not presently follow me, I will
surely kill you, for better were it you should loose your life, than being
taken prisoner, loose your Empire and all. Then does she show the utmost of her
power, when for her own service, she casts us off unto valor, which it has
exacted from our duty and honor. In the first set battle, the Romans lost
against Hanibal, under the Consul Sempronius, a troop of wel-nigh ten
thousand footmen, was so surprised with fear, that seeing no other way to
take, nor by what other course to give their baseness free passage, they
headlong bent their flight toward the thickest and strongest squadron of their
enemies, which with such fury it rowted and brake through, as it disranked,
and slew a great number of the Carthaginians: purchasing a reproachful and
disgraceful flight, at the same rate it might have gained a most glorious
victory. It is fear I stand most in fear of. For, in sharpness it
surmounteth all other accidents. What affection can be more violent and just
than that of Pompeyes friends, who in his own ship were spectators of that
horrible massacre? yet is it, that the fear of the Egyptian sails, which
began to approach them, did in such sort daunt and skare them, that some have
noted, they only busied themselves to hasten the mariners, to make what speed
they could, and by maine strength of oars to save themselves, until such
time, as being arived at Tire, and that they were free from fear, they had
leisure to bethink themselves, of their late loss, and give their plaints and
tears free passage, which this other stronger passion had suspended and
hindered.

Tum pavor sapientiam omnem mihi ex animo expectorat. 1. Ci^. Tusc. q. li. 4.
ex E^^. de Orat. l. 3.
Fear then vnbreasts all wit,
That in my mind did ^it.
Those who in any skir^ish or sudden bickering of war have been thoroughly
skared, sore-hurt, wounded, and gored as they be, are many times the next day
after, brought to charge again. But such as have conceived a true fear of
their enemies, it is hard for you to make them look them in the face again.
Such as are in continual fear to loose their goods, to be banished, or to
besubdued, live in incessant agony and languor; and thereby often loose both
their drinking, their eating, and their rest. Whereas the poor, the banished,
and seely servants, live often as carelessely and as pleasantly as the other.
And so many men, who by the impatience and urging of fear, have hanged,
drowned, and head long tumbled down from some rock, have plainly taught us,
that fear is more importunate and intolerable then death. The Graecians
acknowledge an other kind of it, which is beyond the error of our discourse:
proceeding, as they say, without any apparent cause, and from an heavenly
impulsion. Whole Nations and Armies are often seen surprised with it. Such was
that, which brought so wonderful a desolation to Carthage, where nothing was
heard but lamentable outcries, and frightfull exclamations: the inhabitants
were seen desperately to run out of their houses, as to a sudden alarm, and
furiously to charge, hurt, and ent^^*kill one another; as if they had been
enemies come to usurp and possess their City. All things were there in a
disordered confusion, and in a confused fury, until such time as by prayers
and sacrifices, they had appeased the wrath of their Gods. They call it to this
day, the Panike terror. ^^as. chil. 2. cent. 10. ad. 19. chil. 3. ce^. 7. ad. 3.


The eighteenth Chapter.
That we should not judge of our happiness, until after our death.

-- scilicet vltima semper
Expectanda dies homini est, dicique beatus O^id. M^^. lib. 3. 235.

Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera deb^t.
We must expect of man the latest day,
Nor er'e he die, he is happy, can we say.
THe very children are acquainted with the story of Croesus to this purpose:
who being taken by Cyrus, and by him condemned to die, upon the point of his
execution, cried out aloude: Oh Solon, Solon! which words of his, being
reported to Cyrus, who inquiring what he meant by them, told him, he now at
his own cost verified the advertisement Solon had before times given him:
which was, that no man, what cheerful and blandishing countenance soever
fortune showed them, may rightly deem himself happy, till such time as he
have passed the last day of his life, by reason of the uncertainty and
vicissitude of humane things, which by a very light motive, and slight
occasion, are often changed from one to another clean contrary state and
degree. And therefore Agesilaus answered one that counted the King of Persia
happy, because being very young, he had gotten the garland of so mighty and
great a dominion: yea but said he, Priame at the same age was not unhappy. Of
the Kings of Macedon, that succeeded Alexander the great, some were afterward
seen to become Ioyners and Scriveners at Rome: and of Tirants of Sicilie,
Schoolemasters at Corinth: One that had conquered half the world, and been
Emperor over so many Armies, became an humble, and miserable suter to the
raskally officers of a king of Egypt: At so high a rate did that great Pompey
purchase the irksome prolonging of his life but for five or six months. And
in our fathers days, Lodowicke Sforce, tenth Duke of Millane, under whom the
state of Italy had so long been turmoiled and shaken, was seen to die a
wretched prisoner at Loches in France, but not till he had lived and lingered
ten years in thraldom, which was the worst of his bargain. The fairest
Queen, wife to the greatest King of Christendom, was she not lately seen to
die by the hands of an executioner? Oh unworthy and barbarous cruelty! And a
thousand such examples. For, it seems that as the sea-billowes and surging
waves, rage and storm against the surly pride, and stubborn height of our
buildings. So is there above, certain spirits that envy the rising
prosperities and greatness here below.

Vsque adeo res humanas res abdita quaedam L^^ret. lib. 5. 12. 43.

Obterit, and pulchros fasces savasque secures
Proculcare, ac ludibrio sibi habere videtur.
A hidden power so men's states has out worn
Fair swords, fierce scepters, signs of honors borne,
It seems to trample and deride in scorn.
And it seems Fortune does sometimes narrowly watch the last day of our life,
thereby to show her power, and in one moment to overthrow, what for many years
together she had been erecting, and makes us cry after Laberius, Nimirum hac
die vna plus vixi, mihi quam vivendum fuit. Thus it is, I have lived longer by
this one day, than I should. So may that good advise of Solon be taken with
reason. But for so much as he is a Philosopher, with whom the favors or
disfavours of fortune, and good or ill luck have no place, and are not
regarded by him; and puissances and greatnesses, and accidents of quality, are
well nigh indifferent: I deem it very likely he had a further reach, and meant
that the same good fortune of our life, which depends of the tranquillity and
contentment of a welborne mind, and of the resolution and assurance of a well
ordered soul, should never be ascribed unto man, until he have been seen
play the last act of his comedy, and without doubt the hardest. In all the
rest there may besome mask: either these sophistical discourses of
Philosophy are not in us but by countenance, or accidents that never touch us
to the quick, give us always leisure to keep our countenance settled. But when
that last part of death, and of our selves comes to be acted, then no
dissembling will avail, then is it high time to speak plain english, and put
off all vizards: then whatsoever the pot contains must be shown, be it good
or bad, foul or clean, wine or water.

Nam verae voces tum demum pectore ab imo L^^res. lib. 3. 57.

Eijciuntur, and eripitur persona, manet res.
For then are sent true speeches from the heart,
We are our selves, we leave to play a part.
Lo here, why at this last cast, all our lives other actions must be tried
and touched. It is the master-day, the day that judges all others: it is the
day, says an ancient Writer, that must judge of all my forepassed years. To
death do I refer the essay of my studies fruit. There shall we see whether
my discourse proceed from my heart, or from my mouth. I have seen diverse, by
their death, either in good or evil, give reputation, to all their forepassed
life. Scipio, father in law to Pompey, in well dying, repaired the ill opinion,
which until that hour men had ever held of him. Epaminondas being demanded,
which of the three he esteemed most, either Chabrias, or Iphicrates, or
himself; It is necessary, said he, that we be seen to die, before your
question may well be resolved. Verily we should steal much from him, if he
should be weighed without the honor and greatness of his end. God has willed
it, as he pleased: but in my time three of the most execrable persons, that
ever I knew in all abomination of life, and the most infamous, have been seen
to die very orderly and quietly, and in every circumstance composed even unto
perfection. There are some brave and fortunate deaths. I have seen her cut the
twine of some man's life, with a progress of wonderful advancement, and with
so worthy an end, even in the flower of his growth, and spring of his youth,
that in mine opinion, his ambitious and haughty courageous designs, thought
nothing so high, as might interrupt them: who without going to the place where
he pretended, arived there more gloriously and worthily, than either his desire
or hope aimed at. And by his fall fore-went the power and name, whether by his
course he aspired. When I judge of other men's lives, I ever respect, how they
have behaved themselves in their end; and my chiefest study is, I may well
demean my self at my last gasp, that is to say, quietly, and constantly.

The nineteenth Chapter.
That to Philosophy, is to learn how to die.

CIcero says, that to Philosophy is no other thing, than for a man to prepare
himself to death: which is the reason, that study and contemplation does in
some sort withdraw our soul from us, and severally employ it from the body,
which is a kind of apprentisage and resemblance of death; or else it is, that
all the wisdom and discourse of the world, does in the end resolve upon this
point, to teach us, not to fear to die. Truly either reason mockes us, or it
only aims at our contentment, and in fine, bends all her travel to make us
live well, and as the holy Scripture says, at our ease. All the opinions of the
world conclude, that pleasure is our end, how be it they take diverse means
unto, and for it, else would men reject them at their first coming. For; who
would give ear unto him, that for it is end would establish our pain and
disturbance? The dissentions of philosophical sects in this case, are verbal:
Transcurramus solertissimas nugas: Let us run over such over-fine fooleries,
and subtle trifles. There is more wilfulness and wrangling among them, than
pertaines to a sacred profession* But what person a man undertakes to act, he
does ever therewithal personate his own. Although they say, that in virtue it
self, the last scope of our aim is voluptuousnes. It pleases me to importune
their ears still with this word, which so much offends their hearing: And if
it imply any chief pleasure or exceeding contentments, it is rather due to the
assistance of virtue, than to any other supply, voluptuousnes being more
strong, sinnowie; sturdie, and manly, is but more seriously voluptuous. And we
should give it the name of pleasure, more favorable, sweeter, and more
natural; and not term it vigor, from which it has his denomination. Should
this baser sensuality deserve this fair name, it should be by competencie, and
not by privilege. I find it less void of incommodities and crosses, than
virtue. And besides that, her taste is more fleeting, momentarie, and fading,
she has her fasts, her eves, and her travels, and both sweat and blood.
Furthermore she has perticularly so many wounding passions and of so several
sorts, and so filthy and loathsome a society waiting upon her, that she is
equivalent to penitencie. We are in the wrong, to think her incommodities
serve her as a provocation, and seasoning to her sweetness, as in nature one
contrary is vivified by another contrary: and to say, when we come to virtue,
that like successes and difficulties over-whelme it, and yield it austere and
inaccessible. Where as much more properly then unto voluptuousnes, they
ennobled, sharpen, animate, and raise that divine and perfect pleasure, which
it mediates and procures us. Truly he is very unworthy her acquaintance,
that counter-ballanceth her cost to his fruit, and knows neither the graces
nor use of it. Those who go about to instruct us; how her pursuit is very hard
and laborious, and her jovisance well pleasing and delightful: what else tell
they us, but that she is ever unpleasant and irksome? For, what humane mean
did ever attain unto an absolute enjoying of it? The perfectest have been
content but to aspire and approach her, without ever possessing her. But they
are deceived; seeing that of all the pleasures we know, the pursuit of them is
pleasant. The enterprise is perceived by the quality of the thing, which it
has regard unto: for it is a good portion of the effect, and consubstantiall.
That happiness and felicity, which shines in virtue, replenisheth her
approaches and appurtenances, even unto the first entrance and utmost bar.
Now of all the benefits of virtue, the contempt of death is the chiefest, a
mean that furnishes our life with an ease-full tranquillity, and gives us a
pure and amiable taste of it: without which every other voluptuousnes is
extinguished. Lo, here the reasons why all rules encounter and agree with this
article. And albeit they all lead us with a common accord to despise grief,
poverty, and other accidental crosses, to which man's life is subject, it is
not with an equal care: as well because accidents are not of such a
necessity, for most men pass their whole life without feeling any want or
poverty, and other-some without feeling any grief or sickness, as Xenophilus
the musician, who lived a hundred and six years in perfect and continual
health: as also if the worst happen, death may at all times, and whenever it
shall please us, cut off all other inconveniences, and crosses. But as for
death, it is inevitable.

Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium Hor. lib. 3. ^^. 3. 25.

Versatur vrna, serius, ocyus
Sors exitura, and nos inaeter-
number exitium impositura cymbae.
All to one place are driven, of all
Shook is the lot-pot, where-hence shall
Sooner or later drawn lots fall,
And to deaths boat for aye enthrall.
And by consequence, if she make us affeard, it is a continual subject of
torment, and which can no way be eased. There is no starting-hole will hide us
from her, she will find us wheresoever we are, we may as in a suspected
country starte and turn here and there: qua quasi Cic. fin. lib. 1.
saxum Tantalo semper impendet: Which evermore hangs like the stone over the
head of Tantalus: Our laws do often condemn and send malefactors to be
executed in the same place where the crime was committed: to which whilst they
are going, lead them along the fairest houses, or entertain them with the
best cheer you can,

non Siculae dapes Hor. l. 3. od. 1. 18.

Dulcem elaborabunt saporem:
Non avium, cithaeraeque cantus
Somnum reducent.
Not all King Denis dainty fare,
Can pleasing taste for them prepare:
No song of birds, no musikes sound
Can lullabie to sleep profound.
Do you think they can take any pleasure in it? or be any thing delighted?
and that the final intent of their voyage being still before their eyes, has
not altered and altogether distracted their taste from all these commodities
and allurements?

Audit iter, numer atque dies, spatioque viarum Claud in Ruff. 1. 2. 1. 137.

Metitur vitam, torquetur peste futura.
He hears his journey, count's his days, so measures he
His life by his ways length, vex't with the ill shall-be.
The end of our cariere is death, it is the necessary object of our aim: if
it affright us, how is it possible we should step one foot further without an
ague? The remedy of the vulgar sort is, not to think on it. But from what
brutall stupiditie may so gross a blindness come upon him? he must be made to
bridle his Ass by the tail,

Qui capite ipse suo instituit vest igia retro.

Who does a course contrary run
With his head to his course begun.
It is no marvel if he be so often taken tripping; some do no sooner hear
the name of death spoken of, but they are afraid, yea the most part will cross
themselves, as if they heard the Devil named. And because mention is made of
it in men's wills and testaments, I warrant you there is none will set his hand
to them, till the Physician have given his last doom, and utterly forsaken
him. And God knows, being then between such pain and fear, with what sound
judgment they endure him. For so much as this syllable sounded so unpleasantly
in their ears, and this voice seemed so ill-boding and unlucky, the Romans
had learned to allay and dilate the same by a Periphrasis. In liew of saying,
he is dead, or he has ended his days, they would say, he has lived. So it be
life, be it past or no, they are comforted: from whom we have borrowed our
phrases quondam, alias, or late such a one. It may happily be, as the common
saying is, the time we live, is worth the money we pay for it. I was borne
between eleven of the clock and noone, the last of February 1533. according
to our computation, the year beginning the first of January. It is but a
fortnight since I was 39. years old. I want at least as much more. If in the
mean time I should trouble my thoughts with a matter so far from me, it were
but folly. But what? we see both young and old to leave their life after one
selfsame condition. No man departs otherwise from it, than if he but now came
to it, seeing there is no man so crazed, bedrell, or decrepite, so long as he
remembers Met husalem, but thinks he may yet live twenty years. Moreover,
seely creature as thou art, who has limited the end of thy days? Happily thou
presumest upon Physicians reports. Rather consider the effect and experience.
By the common course of things, long since thou live by extraordinary
favor. Thou have already over-past the ordinary terms of common life: And
to prove it, remember but thy acquaintances and tell me how many more of them
have died before they came to thy age, than have either attained or outgone the
same: yea and of those that through renoune have ennobled their life, if thou
but register them, I will lay a wager, I will find more that have died before
they came to five and thirty years, than after. It is consonant with reason
and piety, to take example by the humanity of Jesus Christ, who ended his
humane life at three and thirty years. The greatest man that ever was being
no more than a man, I mean Alexander the great, ended his days, and died also
of that age. How many several means and ways has death to surprise us.

Quid quisque vitet, nunquum homini satis Hor. lib. 2. od. 13. 13.

Cautum est in horas.
A man can never take good heed,
Hourly what he may shun and speed.
Iomit to speak of agues and pleurisies; who would ever have imagined, that a
Duke of Brittanie should have been stifled to death in a throng of people, as
Whilome was a neighbor of mine at Lions, when Pope Clement made his entrance
there? Have thou not seen one of our late Kings slain in the midst of his
sportes? and one of his ancestors die miserably by the chocke of an hog?
Eschilus fore-threatned by the fall of an house, when he stood most upon his
guard, stricken dead by the fall of a Tortoise shell, which fell out of the
tallans of an Eagle flying in the air? and another choked with the kernel of
a grape? And an Emperor die by the scratch of a comb, whilst he was combing
his head: And Aemylius Lepidus with hitting his foot against a doore-seele?
And Aufidius with stumbling against the Consull-Chamber door as he was going
in thereat? And Cornelius Gallus the Praetor, Tigillinus Captain of the Roman
watch, Lodowike son of Guido Gonzaga, Marquis of Mantua, end their days
between women's thighs? And of a far worse example Speusippus the Plantonian
Philosopher and one of our Popes? Poor Bebius a judge whilst he demurreth the
suit of a plaintiff but for eight days, behold his last expired; And Caius
Julius a Physician, whilst he was anointing the eyes of one of his patients,
to have his ownesight closed for ever by death. And if amongst these examples,
I may add one of a brother of mine, called Captain Saint Martin, a man of
three and twenty years of age, who had already given good testimony of his
worth and forward valor, playing at tennis, received a blow with a ball, that
hit him a little above the right care, without appearance of any contusion,
bruise, or hurt, and never sitting or resting upon it, died within six hours
after of an Apoplexy, which the blow of the ball caused in him. These so
frequent and ordinary examples, happening, and being still before our eyes, how
is it possible for man to forgo or forget the remembrance of death? and why
should it not continually seem unto us, that she is still ready at hand to
take us by the throat? What matter is it, will you say unto me, how and in what
manner it is, so long as a man do not trouble and vex himself therewith? I am
of this opinion, that howsoever a man may shroud or hide himself from her
dart, yea were it under an oxe-hide, I am not the man would shrink back: it
suffices me to live at my ease; and the best recreation I can have, that do I
evertake; in other matters, as little vainglorious, and exemplare as you list.

-- praetulerim delirus inersque videri, Id. 2. epi. 2. 126.

Dum mea delectent mala me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere and ringi.
A dotard I had rather seem, and dull,
So me my faults may please make me a gull,
Than to be wise, and beat my vexed scull.
But it is folly to think that way to come unto it. They come, they go, they
trot, they dance: but no speech of death. All that is good sport. But if she
be once come, and on a sudden and openly surprise, either them, their wives,
their children, or their friends, what torments, what outcries, what rage, and
what despair does then overwhelme them? saw you ever any thing so drooping, so
changed, and so distracted? A man must look to it, and in better times
foresee it. And might that brutish carelessenesse lodge in the mind of a man
of understanding (which I find altogether impossible) she sels us her ware at
an over dear rate: were she an enemy by man's wit to be avoided, I would
advise men to borrow the weapons of cowardlinesse: but since it may not be: and
that be you either a coward or a runaway, an honest or valiant man, she
overtakes you,

Nempe and sugacempersequitur virum, Id. 3 ^d. 2. 14.

Nec parcit imbellis inuenta
Poplitibus, timidoque tergo.
She persecutes the man that flies,
She spares not weak youth to surprise,
But on their hammes and back turned plies.
And that no temper of cuirace may shield or defend you,

Ille licet ferro cautus se condat and aere, Propat. l. 3. and 17. 25.

Mors tamen inclusum protrahet inde caput.
Though he with iron and brass his head empale,
Yet death his head enclosed thence will hale.
Let us learn to stand, and combat her with a resolute mind. And begin to
take the greatest advantage she has upon us from her, let us take a clean
contrary way from the common, let us remove her strangeness from her, let us
converse, frequent, and acquaint our selves with her, let us have nothing so
much in mind as death, let us at all times and seasons, and in the vgliest
manner that may be, yea with all faces shapen and represent the same unto our
imagination. At the stumbling of a horse, at the fall of a stone, at the least
prick with a pin, let us presently ruminate and say with our selves, what if
it were death itself? and thereupon let us take heart of grace, and call our
wits together to confront her. A midst our bankets, seasts, and pleasures,
let us ever have this restraint or object before us, that is, the remembrance
of our condition, and let not pleasure so much mislead or transport us, that we
altogether neglect or forget, how many ways, our joys, or our feastings, be
subject unto death, and by how many hold-fasts she threatens us and them. So
did the Egyptians, who in the midst of their banquetings, and in the full of
their greatest cheer, caused the anatomy of a dead man to be brought before
them, as a memorandum and warning to their guests.

Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum, Hor. lib. 1. epi. 4. 13.

Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur hora.
Think every day shines on thee as thy last,
Welcome it will come, whereof hope was past.
It is uncertain where death looks for us; let us expect her every where: the
premeditation of death, is a fore-thinking of liberty. He who has learned to
die, has unlearned to serve. There is no evil in life, for him that has well
conceived, how the privation of life, is no evil. To know how to die, does
freevs from all subjection and constraint. Paulus Aem^^us answered one, whom
that miserable king of Macedon his prisoner sent to entreat him, he would not
lead him in triumph, let him make that request unto himself. Verily, if
Nature afforde not some help, in all things, it is very hard that art and
industry should go far before. Of my self, I am not much given to
melancholy, but rather to dreaming and sluggishnes. There is nothing wherewith
I have ever more entertained my self, than with the imaginations of death, yea
in the most licentious times of my age.

Iucundum, cum aetas florida ver ageret. Catul. ^leg. 4. 16
When my age flourishing
Did spend it is pleasant spring.
Being amongst fair Ladies, and in earnest play, some have thought me busied,
or musing with my self, how to digest some jealousy, or meditating on the
uncertainty of some conceived hope, when God he knows, I was entertaining my
self with the remembrance of some one or other, that but few days before was
taken with a burning fever, and of his sudden end, coming from such a feast
or meeting where I was my self, and with his head full of idle conceits, of
love, and merry glee; supposing the same, either sickness or end to be as near
me as him.

Iam fuerit, nec post, vnquam revocare licebit. Lucr, lib. 3. 947
Now time would be, no more
You can this time restore.
I did no more trouble my self or frown at such a conceit, then at any other.
It is impossible, we should not apprehend or feel some motions or startings at
such imaginations at the first, and coming suddenly upon us: but doubtless,
he that shall manage and meditate upon them with an impartial eye, they will
assuredly, in tract of time, become familiar to him: Otherwise for my part, I
should be in continual fear and agony; for no man did evermore distrust his
life, nor make less account of his continuance: Neither can health, which
hitherto I have so long enjoied, and which so seldom has bin crazed, lengthen
my hopes, nor any sickness shorten them of it. At every minute me thinks I
make an escape. And I incessantly record unto my self, that whatsoever may be
done another day, may be effected this day. Truly hazards and dangers do
little or nothing approach us at our end: And if we consider, how many more
there remain, besides this accident, which in number more than millions seem
to threaten us, and hang over us; we shall find, that be we sound or sick,
lusty or weak, at sea or at land, abroad or at home, fighting or at rest, in
the midst of a battle or in our beds, she is ever alike near unto us. Nemo
altero fragilior est, nemo in crastinum sui certior. No man is meaker then
other; none surer of himself (to live) till to morrow. Whatsoever I have to do
before death, all leisure to end the same, seems short unto me, yea were it
but of one hour. Some body, not long since turning over my writing tables,
found by chance a memorial of something I would have done after my death: I
told him (as indeed it was true,) that being but a mile from my house, and in
perfect health and lusty, I had made have to write it, because I could not
assure my self I should ever come home in safety; As one that am ever hatching
of mine own thoughts, and place them in my self: I am ever prepared about
that which I may be: nor can death (come when she please) put me in mind of any
new thing. A man should ever, as much as in him lies, be ready booted to take
his journey, and above all things, look he have then nothing to do but with
himself.

Quid brevifortes iaculamur aevo Hor. l. 2. ^d. 16.
Multa? To aim why are we ever bold,
At many things in so short hold?
For then we shall have work sufficient, without any more accrease. Some man
complains more that death does hinder him from the assured course of an hoped
for victory, than of death itself; another cries out, he should give place to
her, before he have married his daughter, or directed the course of his
childrens bringing up; another bewaileth he must forgo his wives company:
another moaneth the loss of his children the chiefest commodities of his
being. I am now, by means of the mercy of God, in such a taking, that without
regret or grieving at any worldly matter, I am prepared to dislodge, whenever
he shall please to call me: I am every where free: my farewell is soon taken
of all my friends except of my self. No man did ever prepare himself to quit
the world more simply, and fully, or more generally spoke of all thoughts of
it, then I am fully assured I shall do. The deadest deaths are the best.

-- Miser o miser (aiunt) omnia ademit, Lucr. lib. 3. 942
Vna dies infesta mihi tot praemia vitae: O wretch, O wretch, (friends cry) one
day,
All ioies of life has taken away:
And the builder,

-- maneant (says he) opera interrupta, minaeque Virg. A^n. lib. 4. 88.
Murorumingentes. The works vnfinisht lie,
And walls that threatened hie.
A man should design nothing so long before hand, or at least with such an
intent, as to passionate himself to see the end of it; we are all borne to be
doing.

Cum moriar, medium soluar and inter opus. Ovid. am. lib. 2. ^l. 10. 36.
When dying I my self shall spend.
Ere half by business come to end.
I would have a man to be doing, and to prolong his lives offices, as much as
lies in him, and let death seize upon me, whilst I am setting my cabiges,
careless of her dart, but more of my imperfect garden. I saw one die, who
being at his last gasp, incessantly complained against his destenie, and that
death should so unkindly cut him off in the midst of an history which he had
in hand, and was now come to the fifteenth or sixteenth of our Kings.

Illud in his rebus non addunt, nec tibi earum, L^cr. lib. 3. 944

Iam desiderium rerum super insidet vna.
Friends add not that in this case, now no more
Shall thou desire, or want things wished before.
A man should rid himself of these vulgar and hurtful humors. Even as
Churchyards were first placed adjoining unto churches, and in the most
frequented places of the City, to enure (as Lycurgus said) the common people,
women and children, not to be skared at the sight of a dead man, and to the end
that continual spectacle of bones, sculs, tombs, graves; and burials, should
forewarne us of our condition, and fatal end.

Quin etiam exhilarare viris convivia caede Syl. ^^a^. l. 11. 51.

Mos olim, and miscere epulis spectacula dira.
Certantum ferro, saepe and super ipsa cadentum
Pocula, resper sis non parco sanguine mensis.
Nay more, the manner was to welcome guests,
And with dire shows of slaughter to mix feasts.
Of them that fought at sharp, and with bords tainted
Of them with much blood, who over full cups fainted.
And even as the Egyptians after their feastings and carowsings, caused a
great image of death to be brought in and showed to the guests and bystanders,
by one that cried aloud, Drink and be merry, for such shall thou be when thou
art dead: So have I learned this custom or lesson, to have always death, not
only in my imagination, but continually in my mouth. And there is nothing I
desire more to be informed of, than of the death of men: that is to say, what
words, what countenance, and what face they show at their death; and in reading
of histories, which I so attentively observe. It appears by the shuffling and
hudling up of my examples, I affect no subject so particularly as this. Were I
a composer of books, I would keep a register, commented of the diverse
deaths, which in teaching men to die, should after teach them to live.
Dicearcus made one of that title, but of an other and less profitable end.
Some man will say to me, the effect exceedes the thought so far, that there
is no fence so sure, or cunning so certain, but a man shall either loose or
forget, if he come once to that point; let them say what they list: to
premeditate on it, gives no doubt a great advantage: and is it nothing, at the
least to go eso far without dismay or alteration, or without an ague? There
belongs more to it: Nature herself lends her hand, and gives us courage. If it
be a short and violent death, we have no leisure to fear it; if otherwise, I
perceive that according as I engage my self in sickness, I do naturally fall
into some disdain and contempt of life. I find that I have more ado to digest
this resolution, that I shall die when I am in health, than I have, when I am
troubled with a fever: for so much as I have no more such fast hold on the
commodities of life, whereof I begin to loose the use and pleasure, and view
death in the face with a less undaunted look, which makes me hope, that the
further I go from that, and the nearer I approach to this, so much more easily
do I enter in composition, for their exchange, Even as I have tried in many
other occurrences, which Caesar affirmed, that often somethings seem greater,
being far from us, than if they be near at hand: I have found that being in
perfect health, I have much more been frighted with sickness, than when I
have felt it. The jollitie wherein I live, the pleasure and the strength, make
the other seem so disproportionable from that, that by imagination I amplify
these commodities by one moitie, and apprehended them much more heavy and
burdensome, then I feel them when I have them upon my shoulders. The same I
hope will happen to me of death. Consider we by the ordinary mutations, and
daily declinations, which we suffer, how Nature deprives us of the night of our
loss and empairing: what has an aged man left him of his youths vigor, and of
his forepast life?

Heu senibus vitae portio quanta manet! Cor. Gal. lib. 1. 16.
Alas to men in years, how small
A part of life is left in all?
Caesar to a tired and crazed Soldier of his guard, who in the open street
came to him, to beg leave, he might cause himself to be put to death; viewing
his decrepit behavior, answered pleasantly: Do thou think to be alive
then? Were man all at once to fall into it, I do not think we should be able
to bear such a change, but being fair and gently led on by her hand, in a
slow, and as it were vnperceived descent, by little and little, and step by
step, she roules us into that miserable state, and day by day seeks to
acquaint us with it. So that when youth fails in us, we feel, nay we perceive
no shaking or transchange at all in our selves: which in essence and verity is
a harder death, then that of a languishing and irksome life, or that of age.
For So Much as the leap from an ill being, unto a not being, is not so dangerous
or steeple; as it is from a delightful and flowrishing being, unto a painful
and sorrowful condition. A weak bending, and faint stooping body has less
strength to bear and undergo a heavy burden: So has our soul. She must be
rouzed and raised against the violence and force of this adversary. For, as
(...)s impossible, she should take any rest whilst she fears: whereof if
she be assured (which is a thing exceeding humane condition) she may boast that
it is impossible, unquietness, torment, and fear, much less the least
displeasure should lodge in her.

Non vulius instantis tyranni Hor. lib. 3. ^d. 3.

Mente quatit solida, neque Auster,
Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae,
Nec fulminantis magna Iovis manus.
No urging tyrants threatening face,
Where mind is sound can it displace,
No troublous wind the rough seas Master,
Nor Jove's great hand the thunder-caster.
She is made Mistress of her passions, and concupiscence, Lady of indulgence, of
shame of poverty, and of all fortunes injuries. Let him that can, attain to
this advantage: Herein consists the true and Sovereign liberty, that affords
us means wherewith to jest and make a scorn of force and in justice, and to
deride imprisonment, gives, or fetters.

-- in manicis, and Li. 1. epi. 16. 76.

Compedibus, saevo te sub custode tenebo*
Ipse Deus simul atque volam, me solvet: opinor,
Hoc sensit moriar, more vltima linearerum est.
In gyves and fetters I will hamper thee,
Under a Iayler that shall cruel be:
Yet, when I will, God me deliver shall,
He thinks, I shall die: death is end of all.
Our religion has had no surer humane foundation, then the contempt of life.
Discourse of reason does not only call and summon us unto it. For why should
we fear to loose a thing, which being lost, cannot be moaned? but also, since
we are threatened by so many kinds of death, there is no more inconvenience to
fear them all, than to endure one: what matter is it when it comes, since it
is unavoidable? Socrates answered one that told him, The thirty Tyrants have
condemned thee to death; And Nature them, said he. What fondness is it to
carke and care so much, at that instant and passage from all exemption of pain
and care? As our birth brought us the birth of all things, so shall our death
the end of all things. Therefore is it as great folly to weep, we shall not
live a hundred years hence, as to wail we lived not a hundred years ago.
Death is the beginning of another life. So wept we, and so much did it cost us
to enter into this life; and so did we spoil us of our ancient veil in
entering into it. Nothing can be grievous that is but once. Is it reason so long
to fear, a thing of so short time? Long life or short life is made all one by
death. For long or short is not in things that are no more. Aristotle says,
there are certain little beasts along the river Hyspanis, that live but one
day; she which dies at 8. a clock in the morning, dies in her youth, and she
that dies at 5. in the afternoon, dies in her decrepitude, who of us does not
laugh, when we shall see this short moment of continuance to be had in
consideration of good or ill fortune? The most and the least in ours, if we
compare it with eternity, or equal it to the lasting of mountains, rivers,
stars, and trees, or any other living creature, is no less ridiculous. But
nature compels us to it. Depart says she, out of this world, even as you came
into it. The same way you came from death, to life return without passion or
amazement, from life to death: your death is but a piece of the worlds order,
and but a parcel of the worlds life.

-- inter se mortales mutua vivunt, Lucr. 2. 74. 77.
Et quasi cursores vitai lampada tradunt. Mortal men live by mutual
intercourse:
And yield their life-torch, as men in a course.
Shall I not change this goodly contexture of things for you? It is the
condition of your creation: death is a part of your selves: you fly from your
selves. The being you enjoy, is equally shared between life and death. The
first day of your birth does as well address you to-die, as to live.

Prima quae vitam dedit, hora carpsit. Sen. Her. f^r. ch^r. 3.
The first hour, that to men
Gave life, strait, cropped it then.
Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet: Manil. as^^^li. 4
As we are borne we die; the end
Does of the original depend.
All the time you live, you steal it from death: it is at her charge. The
continual work of your life, is to contrive death; you are in death, during
the time you continue in life: for, you are after death, when you are no longer
living. Or if you had rather have it so, you are dead after life: but during
life, you are still dying: and death does more rudely touch the dying, then the
dead, and more lively and essentially. If you have profited by life, you have
also been fed thereby, depart then satisfied.

Cur non vt plenus vitae conviva recedis? Lucr. l. 3 982.
Why like a full-fed guest,
Depart you not to rest?
If you have not known how to make use of it: if it were unprofitable to you,
what need you care to have lost it? to what end would you enjoy it longer?

-- cur amplius addere quaris Lucr. l. 3. 985.
Rursum quod pereat male, and ingratum occidat omne? Why seek you more to
gain, what must again
All perish ill, and pass with grief or pain?
Life in it self is neither good nor evil: it is the place of good or evil,
according as you prepare it for them. And if you have lived one day, you have
seen all: one day is equal to all other days: There is no other light, there
is no other night. This Sun, this Moon, these Stars, and this disposition,
is the very same, which your forefathers enjoyed, and which shall also
entertain your posterity.

Non alium ^id^re patres: aliumue nepotes
Aspicient.
No other saw our Sires of old,
No other shall their sons behold.
And if the worst happen, the distribution and variety of all the acts of my
comedy, is performed in one year. If you have observed the course of my four
seasons; they contain the infancy, the youth, the virilitie, and the old age
of the world. He has played his part: he knows no other wiliness belonging
to it, but to begin again, it will ever be the same, and no other,

-- Versamur ibidem, atque insumus vsque, 3.
We still in one place turn about,
Still there we are, now in, now out.
Atque inse sua per vestigia volvitur annus. ^. 2.
The year into it self is cast
By those same steps, that it has past.
I am not purposed to devise you other new sports.

Nam tibi praeterea quod machiner, inveniamque ^. 2. 978.

Quod placeat, nihil est, eadem sunt omnia semper.
Else nothing, that I can devise or frame,
Can please thee, for all things are still the same.
Make room for others, as others have done for you. Equality is the chief
groundwork of equity, who can complain to be comprehended where all are
contained? So may you live longenough, you shall never diminish any thing from
the time you have to die: it is bootelesse; so long shall you continue in that
state, which you fear, as if you had died being in your swathing-clothes, and
when you were sucking.

-- licet, quot vis, vivendo vincere secla, Mors aeterna tamen, nihil ominus
illa manebit.

Though years you live, as many as you will,
Death is eternal, death remains still.
And I will so please you, that you shall have no discontent.

In vera nescis nullum fore morte alium te,
Qui possit vivus tibi te lugere peremptum,
Stansque iacnetem.
Thou know no there shall be not other thou,
When thou art dead indeed, that can tell how
Alive to wail thee dying,
Standing to wail thee lying.
Nor shall you wish for life, which you so much desire.

Nec sibi enim quisquam tum se vitamque requirit,
Nec desiderium nostri nos afficit vllum.
For then none for himself himself or life requires: 9^^.

Nor are we of our selves affected with desires.
Death is less to be feared than nothing, if there were any thing less, than
nothing.

-- multo mortem minus ad nos esse putandum, Si minus esse potest quam quod
nihil esse videmus. Death is much less to us, we ought esteem, 970.

If less may be, then what does nothing seem.
Nor alive, nor dead, it does concern you nothing. Alive, because you are:
Dead, because you are no more. Moreover, no man dies before his hour. The time
you leave behind was no more yours, then that which was before your birth, and
concerns you no more.

Respice enim quam nil ad nos anteacta vetustas 1016.

Temporis aeterni fuerit,
For mark, how all antiquity fore-gone
Of all time e're we were, to us was none.
Wheresoever your life ends, there is it all. The profit of life consistes
not in the space, but rather in the use. Some man has lived long, that has
had a short life. Follow it whilst you have time. It consists not in number of
years, but in your will, that you have lived long enough. Did you think you
should never come to the place, where you were still going? There is no way but
has an end. And if company may solace you, does not the whole world walk the
same path?

-- Omnia te vita perfuncta sequenter. 1012.
Life past, all things at last
Shall follow thee as thou have past.
Do not all things moove as you do, or keep your course? Is there any thing
grows not old together with your self? A thousand men, a thousand beasts, and
a thousand other creatures die in the very instance that you die.

Nam nox nulla diem, neque noctem aurora sequuta est, lib. 2. 587.

Quae non audierit mistos vagitibus aegris
Ploratus mortis comites and funeris atri.
No night ensued day light: no morning followed night
Which heard not moaning mixed with sick-mens groaning
With deaths and funerals joined was that moaning.
To what end recoile you from it, if you cannot go back? You have seen many
who have found good in death, ending thereby many many miseries. But have you
seen any that has received hurt thereby? Therefore is it mere simplicity to
condemn a thing you never prooved, neither by your self nor any other. Why
do thou complain of me and of destiny? Do we offer thee any wrong? is it
for thee to direct us, or for us to govern thee? Although thy age be not come
to her period, thy life is. A little man, is a whole man, as well as a great
man. Neither men nor their lives are measured by the Ell. Chiron refused
immortality, being informed of the conditions thereof, even by the God of time
and of continuance, Saturn his father. Imagine truly how much an ever during
life would be less tolerable and more painful to a man, then is the life
which I have given him: Had you not death, you would then incessantly curse,
and cry out against me, that I had deprived you of it. I have of purpose and
wittingly blended some bitterness amongst it, that so seeing the commodity of
it is use, I might hinder you from over greedily embracing, or indiscreetly
calling for it. To continue in this moderation, that is neither to fly from
life, nor to run to death (which I require of you) I have tempered both the one
and other between sweetenes and sowrenes. I first taught Thales the chiefest
of your Sages and Wise men, that to live and die, were indifferent, which made
him answer one very wisely, who asked him, wherefore he died not; Because,
says he, it is indifferent. The water, the earth, the air, the fire, and
other members of this my universe, are no more the instruments of thy life,
then of thy death. Why fear thou thy last day? He is no more guilty, and
conferreth no more to thy death, then any of the others. It is not the last
step that causes weariness: it only declares it. All days march toward
death, only the last comes to it. Behold here the good precepts of our
universal mother Nature. I have oftentimes bethought my self whence it
proceeds, that in times of war, the visage of death (whether we see it in
us or in others) seems without all comparison much less dreadful and
terrible unto us, then in our houses, or in our beds, otherwise it should be an
army of Physicians and whiners, and she ever being one, there must needs be
much more assurance amongst contrie-people and of base condition, then in
others. I verily believe, these fearful looks, and astonishing countenances
wherewith we encompasse it, are those that more amaze and terrify us then
death: a new form of life: the outcries of mothers; the wailing of women and
children; the visitation of dismayed and swouning friends: the assistance of a
number of pale-looking, distracted, and whining servants; a dark chamber:
tapers burning round about; our couch beset round with Physicians and
Preachers; and to conclude, nothing but horror and astonishment on every side
of us: are we not already dead and buried? The very children are afraid of
their friends, when they see them masked; and so are we: The mask must as well
be taken from things, as from men, which being remooved, we shall find nothing
hid under it, but the very same death, that a seely varlet, or a simple
maide-servant, did lately suffer without amazement or fear. Happy is that
death, which takes all leisure from the preparations of such an equipage.

The twentieth Chapter.
Of the force of Imagination.

FOrtis imaginatio generat casum: A strong imagination begets chance, say
learned clearkes. I am one of those that feel a very great conflict and power
of imagination. All men are shockt therewith, and some overthrown by it. The
impression of it pierces me, and for want of strength to resist her, my
endeavor is to avoid it. I could live with the only assistance of holy and merry
hearted men. The sight of others anguishes does sensibly drive me into anguish;
and my sense has often usurped the sense of a third man. If one cough
continually, he provokes my lungs and throat. I am more unwilling to visit
the sick duty does engage me unto, than those to whom I am little beholding,
and regard least. I apprehend the evil which I study, and place it in me. I
deem it not strange that she brings both agues and death to such as give her
scope to work her will, and applaude her. Simon Thomas was a great Physician
in his days. I remember upon a time coming by chance to visit a rich old man
that dwelt in Toulouse, and who was troubled with the cough of the lungs, who
discoursing with the said Simon Thomas of the means of his recoverie, he told
him, that one of the best was, to give me occasion to be delighted in his
company, and that fixing his eyes upon the livelines and freshnes of my face,
and setting his thoughts upon the jolitie and vigor, wherewith my youthful age
did then flourish, and filling all his senses with my flourishing estate, his
habitude might thereby be amended, and his health recovered. But he forgot to
say, that mine might also be empaired and infected. Gallus Vibius did so well
enure his mind to comprehend the essence and motions of folly, that he so
transported his judgment from out his seat, as he could never afterward bring
it to his right place again: and might rightly boast, to have become a soole
through wisdom. Some there are, that through fear anticipate the hang-mans
hand; as he did, whose friends having obtained his pardon, and putting away the
cloth wherewith he was hood-winkt, that he might hear it read, was found
stark dead upon the scaffold, wounded only by the stroke of imagination. We
sweat, we shake, we grow pale, and we blush at the motions of our
imaginations; and wallowing in our beds we feel our bodies agitated and
turmoiled at their apprehensions, yea in such manner, as sometimes we are ready
to yield up the spirit. And burning youth (although asleep) is often therewith
so possessed and enfoulded, that dreaming it does satisfy and enjoy her
amorous desires.

Vt quasi transactis saepe omnibu'rebu' profundant
Fluminis ingentes fluctus, vest emque cruentent. Lucr. li. 4. 1027

And if all things were done, they power forth streams,
And bloody their night-garment in their dreams.
And although it be not strange to see some men have horns growing upon their
head in one night, that had none when they went to bed: notwithstanding the
fortune or success of Cyppus King of Italy is memorable, who because the day
before he had with earnest affection, assisted and been attentive at a
bul-ba^ting, and having all night long dreamed of horns in his head, by the
very force of imagination brought them forth the next morning in his forehead.
An earnest passion gave the son of Croesus his voice, which nature had denied
him. And Antiochus got an ague, by the excellent beauty of Stratonic^ so
deeply imprinted in his mind. Pliny reports to have seen Lucius Cossitius
upon his marriage day to have been transformed from a woman to a man. Pontanus
and others recount the like Metamorphosies to have happened in Italy these ages
past: And through a vehement desire of him and his mother,

V^tapuer solvit, quae foemina voverat Iphis.
Iphis a boy, the vows then paid, Guide. M^tam. lib. 9. ^94.

Which he vowed when he was a maid.
My self traveling on a time by Vitry in France, happened to see a man, whom the
Bishop of S^iss^^^ had in confirmation, named Germane, and all the inhabitants
there about have both known and seen to be a woman child, until she was two
and twenty years of age, called by the name of Marie. He was, when I saw him,
of good years, and had a long beard, and was yet unmarried. He says, that
upon a time leaping, and straining himself to over leap an other, he wot not
how, but where before he was a woman, he suddenly felt the instrument of a man
to come out of him; and to this day the maidens of that town and country have
a ^ong in use, by which they warn one another, when they are leaping, not to
strain themselves overmuch, or open their legs to wide, for fear they should
be turned to boys, as Marie Germane was. It is no great wonder, that such
accidents do often happen, for if imagination have power in such things, it is
so continually annexed, and so forcibly fastened to this subject, that least
she should so often fall into the relaps of the same thought, and sharpness
of desire, it is better one time for all, to incorporate this virile part unto
wenches. Some will not stick to ascribe the scarres of King Dagobert, or the
cicatrices of Saint Francis unto the power of Imagination. Othersome will say,
that by the force of it, bodies are sometimes remooved from their places. And
Celsus reports of a Priest, whose soul was ravished into such an ecstasy, that
for a long time the body remained void of all respiration and sense. Saint
Augustine speaks of an other, who if he but heard any lamentable and
wailefull cries, would suddenly fall into a swone, and be so forcibly carried
from himself, that did any chide and braule never so loud, pinch and thumpe
him never so much, he could not be made to stir, until he came to himself
again. Then would he say, he had heard sundry strange voices, coming as it
were from a far, and perceiving his pinches and bruses, woondered at them.
And that it was not an obstinate conceit, or wilful humor in him, or against
his feeling sense, it plainly appeared by this, because during his ecstasy, he
seemed to have neither pulse nor breath. It is very likely that the principal
credit of visions, of enchantments, and such extraordinary effects, proceeds
from the power of imaginations, working especially in the minds of the vulgar
sort, as the weakest and s^^liest, whose conceit and belief is so seized upon,
that they imagine to see what they see not. I am yet in doubt, these pleasant
bonds, wherewith our world is so fettered, and France so pestered, that nothing
else is spoken of, are happily but the impressions of apprehension, and effects
of fear. For I know by experience, that someone, for whom I may as well answer
as for my self, and in whom no manner of suspicion either of weakness or
enchantment might fall, hearing a companion of his make report of an
extraordinary faint sowning, wherein he was fallen, at such a time, as he least
looked for it, and wrought him no small shame, whereupon the horror of his
report did so strongly strike his imagination, as he ran the same fortune,
and fell into a like drooping: And was thence forward subject to fall into like
fits: So did the passionate remembrance of his inconvenience possess and
tyrannize him; but his fond doting was in time remedied by an other kind of
^aving. For himself avowing and publishing aforehand the infirmity he was
subject unto, the contention of his soul was solaced upon this, that bearing
his evil as expected, his duty thereby diminished, and he grieved less
thereat. And when at his choice, he has had law and power (his thought being
cleared and unmasked, his body finding it self in his right due and place) to
make the same to be felt, seized upon, and apprehended by others knowledge: he
has fully and perfectly recovered himself. If a man have once been capable,
he cannot afterward be incapable, except by a just and absolute weakness.
Such a michiefe is not to be feared, but in the enterprises, where our mind is
beyond all measure bent with desire and respect; and chiefly where
opportunity comes unexpected and requires a sudden dispatch. There is no
means for a man to recover himself from this trouble; I know some, who have
found to come unto it with their bodies as it were half glutted elsewhere,
thereby to stupifie or allay the heat of that fury, and who through age, find
themselves less unable, by how much more they be less able: And another, who
has also found good, in that a friend of his assured him to be provided with
a counter-battery of forcible enchantments, to preserve him in any such
conflict: It is not amiss I relate how it was. An Earl of very good place,
with whom I was familiarly acquainted, being married to a very fair Lady, who
had long been solicited for love, by one assisting at the wedding, did greatly
trouble his friends; but most of all an old Lady his kins-woman, who was chief
at the marriage, and in whose house it was solemnized, as she that much feared
such sorceries and witchcrats: which she gave me to understand, I comforted
her as well as I could, and desired her to rely upon me: I had by chance a
piece of golden plate in my trunk, wherein were engraven certain celestial
figures, good against the Sunne-beames, and for the headache, being fitly laid
upon the suture of the head: and that it might the better be kept there, it was
sewed to a riband, to be fastened under the chinne. A fond doting conceit, and
cosin-germane to that we now speak of* James Peletier had whilst he lived in
my house, bestowed that singular gift upon me; I advised my self to put it to
somevse, and told the Earl, he might happily be in danger, and come to some
misfortune as others had done, the rather because some were present, that would
not stick to procure him some ill luck, and which was worse, some spiteful
shame* but nevertheless I willed him boldly to go to bed: For I would show
him the part of a true friend, and in his need, spare not for his good to
employ a miracle, which was in my power; always provided, that on his honor
he would promise me faithfully to keep it very secret; which was only, that
when about midnight he should have his caudle brought him, if he had had no
good success in his business, he should make such and such a sign to me. It
fell out, his mind was so quailed, and his ears so dulled, that by reason of
the bond wherewith the trouble of his imagination had tied him, he could not
run on post: and at the hour appointed, made the sign agreed upon between
us, I came and whispered him in the ear, that under pretense to putvs all out
of his chamber, he should rise out of his bed, and in jesting manner take my
night-gowne which I had on, and put it upon himself (which he might well do,
because we were much of one stature) and keep it on till he had performed my
appointment, which was, that when we should be gone out of the Chamber, he
should withdraw himself to make water, and using certain jestures, I had
showed him, speak such words thrice over. And every time he spoke them he
should girt the ribband, which I put into his hands, and very carefully place
the plate thereto fastened, just upon his kidneyes, and the whole figure, in
such a posture. All which when he had accordingly done, and the last time so
fastened the ribband, that it might neither be untied nor stirred from his
place, he should then boldly and confidently return to his charge, and not
forget to spread my night-gowne upon his bed, but so as it might cover them
both. These fopperies are the chief of the effect. Our thought being unable so
to free it self, but some strange means will proceed from some abstruse
learning: Their inaniti^ gives them weight and credit. To conclude, it is most
certain, my Characters prooved more venerian than solare, more in action, than
in prohibition. It was a ready and curious humor drew me to this effect, far
from my nature. I am an enemy to crafty and fained actions, and hate all
suttletie in my hands, not only recreative, but also profitable. If the
action be not vicious, the course unto it, is faulty. Amasis king of Egypt,
took to wife Laodice, a very beauteous young virgin of Greece, and he that
before had in every other place found and showed himself a lusty gallant,
found himself so si ort, when he came to grapple with her, that he threatened
to kill her, supposing it had been some charm or sorcerie. As in all things
that consist in the fantasy, she addressed him to devotion. And having made his
vows and promises to Venus, he found himself divinely freed, even from the
first night of his oblations and sacrifices. Now they wrong us, to receive and
admit us with their wanton, squeamish, quarellous countenances, which setting
us a fire, extinguish us.

Pythagoras his niece was wont to say, That a woman which lies with a man,
ought, together with her petie-coate, leave off all bashfulnesse, and with her
petie-coate, take the same again. The mind of the assailant molested with
sundry different alarums, is easily dismayed. And he whom imagination has once
made to suffer this shame (and she has caused the same to be felt but in the
first acquaintances; because they are then burning and violent, and in the
first acquaintance and coming together, or trial a man gives of himself, he
is much more afraid and quaint to miss the mark he shootes at) having begun
ill he falls into an ague or spite of this accident, which afterward continues
in succeeding occasions. Married men, because time is at their command, and
they may go to it when they list, ought never to press or importune their
enterprise, unless they be ready. And it is better indecently to fail in
hanseling the nuptial bed, full of agitation and fits, by waiting for some or
other fitter occasion, and more private opportunity, lest sudden and alarmed,
then to fall into a perpetual misery, by apprehending an astonishment and
desperation of the first refusal. Before possession taken, a patient ought by
sallies, and diverse times, lightly assay and offer himself without vexing or
opiniating himself, definitively to convince himself. Such as know their
members docile and tractable by nature, let them only endeavor to countercosin
their fantasy. Men have reason to check the indocile liberty of this member,
for so importunately insinuating himself when we have no need of him, and so
importunately, or as I may say impertinently failing, at what time we have most
need of him; and so imperiously contesting by his authority, with ou^ will,
refusing with such fiercenes and obstinacy our sol^citations both mental and
manual. Nevertheless if a man inasmuch as he does gormandize and devour his
rebellion, and draws a trial by his condemnation, would pay me for to plead
his cause* I would peradventure make other of our members to be suspected to
have (in envy of his importance, and sweetness of his use) devised this
imposture, and framed this set quarrel against him, and by some malicious
complot armed the world against him, enviously charging him alone with a fault
common to them all. For I refer it to your thought, whether there be any one
particular part of our body, that does not sometimes refuse her particular
operation to our will and wish, and that does not often exercise and practice
against our will* All of them have their proper passions, which without any
leave of ours do either awaken or lull them asleep. How often do the forced
motions and changes of our faces, witness the secretest and most lurking
thoughts we have, and bewray them to bystanders? The same cause that does
animate this member, does also, unwitting to us, embolden our heart, our lungs,
and our pulses. The sight of a pleasing object, reflecting imperceptibly on us,
the flame of a contagious or aguish emotion. Is there naught besides these
muscles and veins, that rise and fall without the consent, not only of our
will, but also of our thought? We cannot command our hair to stand an end,
nor our skin to startle for desire or fear. Our hands are often carried
where we direct them not. Our tongue and voice are sometimes to seek of their
faculties, the one loses her speech, the other her nimblenesse. Even when we
have nothing to feed upon, we would willingly forbid it: the appetites to
eat, or list to drink, do not leave to moove the parts subject to them, even
as this other appetite, and so, though it be out of season, forsakes us, when
he thinks good. Those instruments that serve to discharge the belly, have their
proper compressions and dilatations, besides our intent, and against our
meaning, as these are destined to discharge the kidneis. And that which, the
better to authorize our wills power, Saint Augustine alleges, to have seen
one, who could at all times command his posterior, to let as many s^apes as he
would, and which Vives endeareth by the example of an other in his days, who
could let tunable and organized ones, following the tune of any voice
propounded unto his ears, infers the pure obedience of that member: than
which* none is commonly more indis^re^t and tumul^^ous. Seeing my self know
one so skittish and mutinous, that these forty years keeps his master in
such awe, that will he, or nill he, he will with a continual breath, constant
and vnintermitted custom break wind at his pleasure, and so brings him to
his grave. And would to God I knew it but by Histories, how that many times our
belly, being restrained thereof, brings us even to the gates of a pining and
languishing death: And that the Emperor, who gave us free leave to vent at all
times, and every where, had also given us the power to do it. But our will, by
whose privilege we advance this reproach, how much more likely, and consonant
to truth may we tax it of rebellion, and accuse it of sedition, by reason of
its unruliness and disobedience? Will she at all times do that, which we
would have her willingly to do? Is she not often willing to effect that,
which we forbid her to desire? and that to our manifest prejudice and damage?
Does she suffer her self to be directed by the conclusions of our reason? To
conclude, I would urge in defense of my client, that it would please the Judges
to consider, that concerning this matter, his cause being inseperably conjoined
to a consort, and indistinctly: yet will not a man address himself but to
him, both by the arguments and charges, which can no way appertain to his said
consort. For, his effect is indeed sometime importunately to invite, but to
refuse never: and also to invite silently and quietly. Therefore is the
saw^inesse and illegalitie of the accusers seen. Howsoever it be, protesting
that advocates and judges may wrangle, contend, and give sentence, what, and
how they please, Nature will in the mean time follow her course: who, had she
endued this member with any particular privilege, yet had she done but right,
and showed but reason. Author of the only immortal work, of mortal men.
Divine work according to Socrates; and love, desire of immortality, and
immortal Demon himself. Some man peradventure, by the effects of
imagination, leaves the pox or Kings evil here, which his companion carries
into Spain again: lo here why in such cases men are accustomed to require a
prepared mind, wherefore do Physicians labor and practice before hand the
conceit and credence of their patients, with so many false promises of their
recoverie and health, unless it be that the effect of imagination may supple
and prepare the imposture of their decoction? They knew that one of their
trades-master has left written, how some men have been found, in whom the
only sight of a potion has wrought his due operation: All which humor or
caprice is now come into my mind, upon the report which an Apothecarie,
whilome a servant in my fathers house, was wont to tell me, a man by knowledge
simple, and by birth a Switzer* a nation little vainglorious, and not much
given to lying, which was, that for a long time he had known a merchant in
Toulouse, sickish, and much troubled with the stone, and who often had need of
glisters, who according to the ^^ts and occurrences of his evil, caused them
diversely to be prescribed by Physicians. Which being brought him, no accustomed
form to them belonging was omitted, and would often taste whether they were
too hot, and view them well, and lying along upon his bed, on his bell^e, and
all complements performed, only injection excepted, which ceremony ended, the
Apothecarie gone, and the patient lying in his bed, even as if he had received
a glister indeed, he found and felt the very same effect, which they do that
have effectually taken them. And if the Physician saw it had not wrought
sufficiently, he would accordingly give him two or three more in the same
manner. My witness protests, that the sick man's wife, to save charges (for
he paid for them as if he had received them) having sometimes assaide to make
them only with luke warm water, the effect discovered the craft, and being
found not to work at all, they were forced to return to the former, and use
the Apothecarie. A woman supposing ^o have swallowed a pin with her bread,
cried and vexed herself, even as if she had felt an intolerable pain in her
throat, where she imagined the same to stick; but because there appeared
n^^ther swelling or alteration, a skillful man deeming it to be but a fantasy
conceived, or opinion, apprehended by eating of some gretty piece of bread,
which happily night prick her in the swallow, made her to vomit, and unknown
to her, cast a pin in that which she had vomited. Which the woman perceiving,
and imagining she had cast the same, was presently eased of her pain. I have
known a Gentleman, who having feasted a company of very honest Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen, in his own house, by way of sport, and in jest, boasted two or
three days after (for there was no such thing) that he had made them ea^e of a
baked Cat; whereat the Gentlewoman of the company apprehended such horror,
that falling into a violent ague and distemper of her stomach, she could by no
means be recovered. Even brute beasts, as well as we, are seen to be subject
to the power of imagination; witness some Dogs, who for sorrow of their
Masters death are seen to die, and whom we ordinarily see to startle and bark
in their sleep, and horses to neigh and struggle. But all this may be referred
to the narrow suture of the Spirit and the body, entercommunicating their
fortunes one unto another. It is another thing, that imagination does sometimes
work, not only against her own body, but also against that of others. And
even as one body ejecteth a disease to his neighbor, as does evidently appear
by the plague, pox, or sore eyes, that go from one to another.

Dum spectant oculi ^^sos, ^aeduntur and ipsi: ^uid. am. lib. 2. 219.

Multaque corporibus transitione nocent.
Eyes become sore, while they look on sore eyes:
By passage many ills our limbs surprise.
Likewise the imagination moved and tossed by some vehemence, does cast some
da^^, that may offend a strange object. Antiquity has held, that certain
women of Scithia, being provoked and vexed against some men, had the power to
kill them, only with their look. The Tortoises and the Estriges hatch the^^
eggs with their looks only, a sign that they have some ejaculative virtue.
And concerning witches they are said to have offensive and harm working eyes.
Virg. buc. ^^^. 3* ^03.


Nescio quis teneros oculus mi^i fascinat agnos. My tender Lambs I cannot see,
By what bad eye, bewitched be.
Magitians are but ill respondents for me. So it is, that by experience we see
women to transfer diverse marks of their fantasies, unto children they bear
in their wombes: witness she that brought forth a Blacke-a-more. There was also
presented unto Charles king of Bohemia, an Emperor, a young girl, borne about
Pisa, all shagd and hairy over and over, which her mother said, to have been
conceived so, by reason of an image of Saint John Baptist, that was so painted,
and hung over her bed. That the like is in beasts, is witnessed by Jacobs
sheep, and also by partriges and hares* that grow white by the snow upon
mountains. There was lately seen a cat about my own house, so earnestly
eyeing a bird, sitting upon a tree, that he seeing the Cat, they both so wistly
fixed their looks one upon another, so long, that at last, the bird tell down
as dead in the Cats paws, either drunken by his own strong imagination, or
drawn by some attractiue power of the Cat. Those that love hawking, have
happily heard the Falkners tale, who earnestly fixing his sight upon a Kite in
the air, laid a wager that with the only force of his look, he would make
it come stooping down to the ground, and as some report did it many times. The
Histories I borrow, I refer to the consciences of those I take them from. The
discourses are mine, and hold together by the proof of reason, not of
experiences: each man may add his example to them: and who has none,
considering the number and variety of accidents, let him not leave to think,
there are store of them. If I come not well for my self, let another come for
me. So in the study wherein I treat of our manners and motions, the fabulous
testimonies, always provided they be likely and possible, may serve to the
purpose, as well as the true, whether it happened or no, be it at Rome, or at
Paris, to John or Peter, it is always a trick of humane capacity, of which I
am profitably advised by this report. I see it and reap profit by it, as well
in shadow as in body. And in diverse lessons that often histories afford, I
commonly make use of that, which is most rare and memorable. Some writers there
are, whose end is but to relate the events. Mine, if I could attain to it,
should be to declare, what may come to pass, touching the same. It is justly
allowed in schools, to suppose similitudes, when they have none. Yet do not I
so, and concerning that point, in superstitious religion, I exceed all
historical credit. To the examples I here set down, of what I have read,
heard, done, or seen, I have sorbid my self so much as to dare to change the
least, or alter the idlest circumstances. My conscience does not falsify the
least jot. I wot not whether my insight does. Concerning this subject I do
sometimes enter into conceit, that it may well become a Divine, a Philosopher,
or rather men of exquisite conscience, and exact wisdom, to write histories.
How can they otherwise engage their credit upon a popular reputation? How can
they answer for the thoughts of unknown persons? And make their bare
conjectures pass for current payment? Of the actions of diverse members, acted
in their presence, they would refuse to bear witness of them, if by a judge
they were put to their corporal oath. And there is no man so familiarly known
to them, of whose inward intention they would undertake to answer at full I
hold it le^^e hazardous to write of things past, then present; forasmuch as the
writer is not bound to give account but of a borrowed truth. Some persuade me
to write the affairs of my time, imagining, I can see them with a sight less
blinded with passion, then other men, and perhaps nearer, by reason of the
access which fortune has given me to the chiefest of diverse factions. But
they will not say, how for the glory of Salust, I would not take the pains; as
one that am a vowed enemy to observance, to assiduitie, and to constancy, and
that there is nothing so contrary to my style, as a continued narration. I do
so often for want of breath break off and interrupt my self. I have neither
composition nor explication of any worth. I am as ignorant as a child of the
phrases and vowels belonging to common things. And therefore have I attempted
to say what I can, accommodating the matter to my power. Should I take any man
for a guide, my measure might differ from his. For, my liberty being so far,
I might happily publish judgments, agreeing with me, and consonant to reason,
yet unlawful and punishable. Plutarke would peradventure tell us of that which
he has written, that it is the work of others, that his examples are in all
and everiewhere true, that they are profitable to posterity, and presented
with a luster, that lights and directs us unto virtue, and that is his work.
It is not dangerous, as in a medicinable drugge, whether in an old tale or
report, be it thus or thus, so or so.

The one and twentieth Chapter.
The profit of one man is the d^mage of an other.

DEmades the Athenian condemned a man of the City, whose trade was to sell
such necessaries as belonged to burials, under color, he asked too much
profit for them: and that such profit could not come unto him without the death
of many people. This judgment seems to be ill taken, because no man
profits but by the loss of others: by which reason a man should condemn all
manner of gain. The Merchant thrives not but by the licentiousness of youth;
the Husband man by dearth of corn; the Architect but by the ruin of houses;
the Lawyer by suits and controversies between men: Honor it self, and
practice of religious Ministers, is drawn from our death and vices. No
Physician delights in the health of his own friend, says the ancient
Greek Comike: nor no Soldier is pleased with the peace of his City and so
of the rest. And which is worse, let every man sound his own conscience, he
shall find, that our inward desires are for the most part nourished and bred
in us by the loss and hurt of others; which when I considered, I began to
think, how Nature does not gainesay herself in this, concerning her general
policy: for Physicians hold, that The birth, increase, and augmentation of
every thing, is the alteration and corruption of another.

Nam quodcunque suis mutatum finibus exit, Lucr li. 687. 813. li. 2. 762. li.
3. 536.

Continuo hoc mors est illius, quod fuit ante.
What ever from it is bounds does changed pass,
That strait is death of that, which erst it was.
The two and twentieth Chapter.
Of custom, and how a received law should not easily be changed.

MY opinion is, that he conveied aright of the force of custom, that first
invented this tale; how a country woman having enured herself to cherish and
bear a young calfe in her arms* which continuing, she got such a custom,
that when he grew to be a great ox, she carried him still in her arms. For
truly, Custom is a violent and deceiving school mistress. She by little and
little, and as it were by stealth, establishes the foot of her authority in
us; by which mild and gentle beginning, if once by the aid of time, it have
settled and planted the same in us, it will soon discover a furious and
tyrannical countenance unto us, against which we have no more the liberty to
lift so much as our eyes: we Pllu. epis. 20.
may plainly see her upon every occasion to force the rules of Nature: Vsus
efficacissimus reru^ omnium magister. Use is the most effectual master of all
things. I believe Platoes den mentioned in his common wealth, and the
Physicians that so often quit their arts reason by authority; and the same
King who by means of her, ranged his stomach to be nourished with poison; and
the maiden that Albert mentions to have accustomed herself to live upon
spiders: and now in the new found world of the Indians, there were found
diverse populous nations, in far differing climates, that lived upon them;
made provision of them, and carefully fed them; as also of grasse-hoppers,
pissemires, lizards, and night-bats; and a toade was sold for six crowns in a
time that all such meats were scarce amongst them, which they boil, roste,
bake, and dress with diverse kinds of sawces. Others have been found to whom
our usual flesh and other meats were mortal and venomous. Consuetudinis Cic.
Tusc. q^. 2*
magna est vis, Perno^tant venatores in nive, in montibus vri se patiuntur:
Pugiles caestibus contusi, ne ingemiscunt quidem. Great is the force of
custom: Huntsmen wilwatch all night insnow, and endure to be scorched on the
hills: Fencers bruised with (and-bags or ^udgels, do not so much as groaue. These
foreign examples are not strange, if we but consider what we ordinarily find
by travel, and how custom quaileth and weakeneth our customary senses. We
need not go seek what our neighbors report of the Cataractes of Nile; and
what Phyl^sophers deem of the celestial music, which is, that the bodies of
it is circles, being solid smooth, and in their rolling motion, touching and
rubbing one against another, must of necessity produce a wonderful harmony:
by the changes and entercaprings of which, the revolutions, motions, cadences,
and carrols of the asters and planets are caused and transported. But that
universally the hearing senses of these low worlds creatures, dizzied and
lulled a sleep, as those of the Egyptians are, by the continuation of that
sound, how loud and great soever it be, can not sen^ibly perceive or
distinguish the same. Smiths, M^llers, Forgers, Armorers, and such other, could
not possibly endure the noise that commonly rings in their ears, if it did
pierce them as it does us. My perfumed Ierkin serves for my nose to smell
unto, but after I have worn it three or four days together, not I, but
others have the benefit of it. This is more strange, that notwithstanding long
intermissions, custom may join and establish the effect of her impression
upon our senses; as they prove that dwell near to bells or steeples. I have
my lodging near unto a tower* where both evening and morning a very great bell
does chime Ave marie and Cover-f^w, which jangling does even make the tower to
shake; at first it troubled me much, but I was soon acquainted with it, so
that now I am nothing offended with it, and many times it can not waken me out
of my sleep. Plato did once chide a child for playing with nuts, who answered
him. Thou chid^st me for a small matter. Custom replied Plato, is no small
matter. I find that our greatest vices, make their fitst habitein us, from our
infancy, and that our chief government and education, lies in our nurses
hands. Some mothers think it good sport to see a child wring off a
chickius-necke, and strive to beat a dog or cat. And some fathers are so fond
foolish, that they will conster as a good Augur or fore-boding of a martial
mind to see their sons misuse a poor peasant, or tug a lackey, that does
not defend himself; and impute it to a ready wit, when by some wily
disloyalty, or crafty deceit, they see them cousine and overreach their
fellows: yet are they the true seeds, or roots of cruelty, of tyranny, and of
treason. In youth they bud, and afterward grow to strength, and come to
perfection by means of custom.

And it is a very dangerous institution, to excuse so base and vile
inclinations, with the weakness of age, and lightness of the subject. First
it is nature that speaks, whose voice is then ^hriller, purer, and more
native, when it is tender, newer, and youngest. Secondly, the deformity of the
crime consists not in the difference between crowns and pinnes; it depends
of it self. I find it more just to conclude thus. Why should not he as well
deceive one of a crown, as he does of a pin? Then as commonly some do,
saying, alas, it is but a pin. I warrant you, he will not do so with
crowns. A man would carefully teach children to hate vices of their own
genuity, and so distinguish the desormity of them, that they may not only
eschew them in their actions, but above all, hate them in their hearts: and
what coloursoeuer they bear, the very conceit may seem odious unto them. I
know well, that because in my youth, I have ever accustomed my self to tread
a plain beaten path; and have ever hated to entermeddle any manner of deceit
of cousoning-craft, even in my childith sportes (for truly it is to be noted,
that Childrens plays are not sports, and should be deemed as their most
serious actions.) There is no pastime so slight, that inwardly I have not a
natural propension, and serious care, yea extreme contradiction, not to use
any deceit. I shuffle and handle the cards, as earnestly for counters, and
keep as strict an account, as if they were double ducats, when playing with
my wife or children, it is indifferent to me whether I win or loose, as I
do when I play in good earnest. How and wheresoever it be, mine own eyes will
suffice to keep me in office; none else do watch me so narrowly; nor that I
respect more. It is not long since in mine own house, I saw a little man, who
at Na^^^s, was borne without arms, and has so well fashioned his feet to
those services, his hands should have done him, that in truth they have almost
forgotten their natural office. In all his discourses he names them his
hands, he carveth any meat, he charge and shoots off a pistole, he threads a
needle, he sows, he writes, puttes off his cappe, combeth his head, plaieth
at cards and dice; shuffleth and handles them with a great dexterity as any
other man that has the perfect use of his hands: the money I have sometimes
given him, he has carried away with his feet, as well as any other could do
with his hands. I saw another, being a Child, that with the bending and
winding of his neck, (because he had no hands) would brandish a
two-hand-Sword, and manage a Holbard, as nimbly as any man could do with his
hands: he would cast them in the air, then receive them again, he would throw
a Dagger, and make a whip to yarke and lash, as cunningly as any Carter in
France. But her effects are much better discovered in the strange impressions,
which it works in our minds where it meets not so much resistance. What
cannot she bring to pass in our judgments, and in our conceits? Is there any
opinion so fantastical, or conceit so extravagant (I omit to speak of the
gross imposture of religions, wherewith so many great nations and so many
worthy and sufficient men have bin besotted, and drunken: For, being a thing
beyond the compass of our humane reason, it is more excusable if a man that is
not extraordinarily illuminated thereunto by divine favor, do loose and
mis-carrie himself therein) or of other opinions, is there any so strange, that
custom has not planted and established by laws in what regions soever it
has thought good? And this ancient exclamation is most just: Non pudet
physicum, id est speculatorem venatoremque naturae, ab animis consuetudine
imbutis quaerere testimonium veritatis? Is it not a shame for a natural
Philosopher, that is the Cic. Not De. l. 1.
watchman and hunts-man of nature, to seek the testimony of truth, from
minds endued and double did with custom? I am of opinion, that no fantasy
so mad can fall into humane imagination, that meets not with the example of
some public custom, and by consequence that our reason does not ground and
bring to a stay. There are certain people, that turn their backs toward
those they salute, and never look him in the face whom they would honor or
worship. There are others, who when the King spitteth, the most favored Lady
in his court stretched forth her hand; and in an other country, where the
noblest about him, stoop to the ground to gather his ordure in some fine
linen cloth: Let us here by the way insert a tale. A French Gentleman was ever
wont to blow his nose in his hand, (a thing much against our fashion)
maintaining his so doing; and who in witty jeasting was very famous. He asked
me on a time, what privilege this filthy excrement had, that we should have
a dainty linen cloth or handkercher to receive the same; and which is worse,
so carefully fold it up, and keep the same about us, which should be more
loathsome to ones stomach, than to see it cast away, as we do all our other
excrements and filth. Me thought he spoke not altogether without reason: and
custom had taken from me the discerning of this strangeness, which being
reported of an other country we deem so hideous. Miracles are according to
the ignorance wherein we are by nature, and not according to natures essence;
use brings the ^ight of our judgment a sleep. The barbarous heathen are
nothing more strange to us, then we are to them: nor with more occasion, as
every man would avow, if after he had traveiled through these farre-fetcht
examples, he could stay himself upon the discourses, and soundly confer
them. Humane reason is a tincture in like weight and measure, infused into all
our opinions and customs, what form soever they be of: infinite in matter:
infinite in diversity. But I will return to my theme. There are certain
people, where, except his wife and children, no man speaks to the King, but
through a trunk. Another nation, where virgins show their secret parts
openly, and married women diligently hide and cover them. To which custom,
this fashion used in other places, has some relation: where chastity is
nothing regarded but for marriage sake; and maidens may at their pleasure lie
with whom they list; and being with child, they may without fear of
accusation, spoil and cast their children, with certain medicaments, which
they have only for that purpose. And in another country, if a Merchant chance
to marry, all other Merchants that are bidden to the wedding, are bound to lie
with the bride before her husband, and the more they are in number, the more
honor and commendation is hers, for constancy and capacity: the like if a
gentleman or an officer marry; and so of all others: except it be a
day-labourer, or some other of base condition; for then must the Lord or Prince
lie with the bride; amongst whom (notwithstanding this abusive custom)
loyalty in married women is highly regarded, and held in special account,
during the time they are married. Others there are, where public brothelhouses
of men are kept, and where open mart of marriages are ever to be had: where
women go to the wars with their husbands, and have place, not only in
fight, but also in command, where they do not only wear jewels at their
noses, in their lips, and cheeks, and in their toes, but also big wedges of
gold through their pappes and buttocks, where when they eat, they wipe their
fingers on their thighs, on the bladder of their genitories, and the soles of
their feet, where not children, but brethren and nephews inherit; and in some
places, the nephews only, except in the succession of the Prince. Where to
order the community of goods, which amongst them is religiously observed,
certain Sovereign Magistrates have the general charge of husbandry and
telling of the lands, and of the distribution of the fruits, according to
every man's need, where they howl and weep at their childrens deaths, and joy
and feast at their old men's decease. Where ten or twelve men lie all in one
bed with all their wives, where such women as loose their husbands, by any
violent death, may marry again, others not: where the condition of women is
so detested, that they kill all the maiden children, so soon as they are
borne, and to supply their natural need, they buy women of their neighbors.
Where men may at their pleasure, without alleging any cause put away their
wives, but they (what just reason soever they have) can never put away their
husbands. Where husbands may lawfully sell their wives, if they be barren.
Where they cause dead bodies first to be boiled, and then to be brayed in a
mortar, so long till it come to a kind of pap, which afterward they mingle with
their wine, and so drink it. Where the most desired sepulcher that some wish
for, is to be devoured of dogs, and in some places of birds. Where some
think, that blessed souls live in all liberty, in certain pleasant fields
stored with all commodities, and that from them proceeds that Echo, which we
hear. Where they fight in the water, and shute exceeding true with their bows
as they are swimming. Where in sign of subjection men must raise their
shoulders, and stoop with their heads, and put off their shoes when they
enter their kings houses. Where Eunuchs that have religious women in keeping,
because they shall not be loved, have also their noses and lips cut off. And
Priests that they may the better acquaint themselves with their Demons, and
take their Oracles, put out their eyes* Where every man makes himself a God of
what he pleases: the hunter of a Lion or a Fox; the fisher, of a certain
kind of Fish; and frame themselves Idols of every humane action or passion:
the Sun, the Moon, and the earth are their chiefest Gods: the form of
swearing is, to touch the ground, looking upon the Sun, and where they eat
both flesh and fish raw. Where the greatest oath is to swear by the name of
some deceased man, that has lived in good reputat on in the country, touching
his grave with the hand. Where the new-yeares gifts that Kings send unto
Princes their vassals every year, is some fire, which when it is brought, all
the old fire is clean put out: of which new fire all the neighboring people
are bound upon pain laesae matestatis, to fetch for their uses. Where, when
the King (which often comes to pass) wholly to give himself unto devotion,
gives over his charge, his next successor is bound to do like, and convaieth
the right of the kingdom unto the third heir. Where they diversifie the form
of policy, according as their affairs seem to require: and where they depose
their Kings, when they think good, and appoint them certain ancient grave men
to undertake and wealde the kingdoms government, which sometimes is also
committed to the communaltie, Where both men and women are equally circumcised,
and alike baptized. Where the Soldier, that in one or diverse combat has
presented his King with seven enemies heads, is made noble. Where somelive
under that so ra^e and unsociable opinion of the mortality of souls. Where
women are brought a bed without pain of grief. Where women on both their legs
wear greavs of Copper: and if a louse bite them, they are bound by duty of
magnanimity to bite it again: and no maid dare marry, except she have first
made offer of her Virginity to the King. Where they salute one another laying
the forefinger on the ground, and then lifting it up toward heaven: where all
men bear burdens upon their head, and women on their shoulders. Where women
piss standing, and men cowring. Where in sign of true friendship they send
one another some of their own blood, and offer insense to men which they
intend to honor, as they do to their Gods: where not only kindred and
consanguinitie in the fourth degree, but in any furthest off, can by no means
be tolerated in marriages: where children suck till they be four, and
sometimes twelve years old, in which place they deem it a dismal thing to
give a child suck the first day of his birth Where fathers have the charge to
punish their male-children, and mothers only maide-children, and whose
punishment is to hang them up by the feet, and so to smoke them. Where women
are circumcised; where they eat all manner of herbs, without other
distinction, but to refuse those that have ill savor: where all things are
open, and how fair and rich soever their houses be, they have neither doors
nor windows, nor any chests to lock; yet are all thieves much more severely
punished there, than any where else; where, as monkies do, they kill lice with
their teeth, and think it a horrible matter to see them crushed between their
na^les; where men so long as they live never cut their hair, nor pair their
nales: another place where they only pair the nails of their right hand, and
those of the left are never cut, but very curiously maintained: where they
endeavor to cherish all the hair growing on the right side, as long as it will
grow: and very often shave away that of the left side: where in some Provinces
near unto us, some women cherish their hair before, and othersome that
behind, and shave the contrary: where fathers lend their children, and
husbands their wives to their guests, so that they pay ready money: where men
may lawfully get their mothers with child: where fathers may lie with their
daughters, and with their sons: where, in solemn assemblies and banquets,
without any distinction of blood or alliance, men will lend one another their
children. In some places men feed upon humane flesh, and in others, where it
is deemed an office of piety in children to kill their fathers at a certain
age: in other places fathers appoint what children shall live, and be
preserved, and which die and be cast out, whilst they are yet in their mothers
womb: where old husbands lend their wives to young men, for what use soever
they please: In other places, where all women are common without sin or
offense: yea in some places, where for a badge of honor, they wear as many
frienged tas^els, fastened to the skirt of their garment as they have lain
with several men. Has not custom also made a several commonwealth of women?
has it not taught them to manage Arms? to leavie Armies, to marshall men, and
to deliver battles? And that which strickt-searching Philosophy could never
persuade the wisest, does she not of her own natural instinct teach it to the
grofest headed vulgar? For we know whole nations, where death is not only
condemned, but cherished; where children of seven years of age, without
changing of countenance, or showing any ^igne of dismay endured to be whipped
to death; where riches and worldly pelf was so despised and holden so
contemptible, that the miserablest and need est wretch of a City would have
scorned to stoop for a pursefull of gold. Have we not heard of diverse most
fertile regions, plenteously yielding al manner of necessary victuals, where
nevertheless the most ordinary cates and daintiest dishes, were but bread,
watercresses, and water? Did not custom work this wonder in Chios, that
during the space of seven hundred years it was never found or heard of, that
any woman or maiden had her honor or honesty called in question? And to
conclude, there is nothing in mine opinion, that either she does not, or can
not: and with reason does Pindarus, as I have heard say, Call her the Queen
and Empress of all the world. He that was met beating of his father, answered,
It was the custom of his house; that his father had so beaten his grandfather,
and he his great-grandfather; and pointing to his son, said, this child shall
also beat me, when he shall come to my age. And the father, whom the son
haled and dragged through thick and thin in the street, commanded him to
stay at a certain door, for himself had dragged his father no further: which
were the bounds of the hereditarie and injurious demeanours the children of
that family were wont to show their fathers. By custom, says Aristotle, as
often as by sickness, do we see women tug and tear their hairs, bite their
nails, and eat cole and earth: and more by custom then by nature do men
meddle and abuse themselves with men. The laws of conscience, which we say to
proceed from nature, rise and proceed of custom: every man holding in
special regard, and inward veneration the opinions approved, and customs
received about him, can not without remorse leave them, nor without applause
apply himself unto them: when those of Creete would informer ages curse any
man, they besought the Gods to engage him in some bad custom. But the chiefest
effect of her power is to seize upon us, and so to entangle us, that it shall
hardly lie in us, to free our selves from her holde-fast, and come into our
wits again, to discourse and reason of her ordinances; verily, because we
suck them with the milk of our birth, and forasmuch as the worlds visage
presents it self in that estate unto our first view, it seems we are borne
with a condition to follow that course. And the common imaginations we find in
credit about us, and by our fathers seed infused in our soul, seem to be
the general and natural. Whereupon it follows, that whatsoever is beyond
the compass of custom, we deem likewise to be beyond the compass of
reason. God knows how for the most part, unreasonably. If as we, who study our
selves, have learned to do, every man that hears a just sentence, would
presently consider, how it may in any sort belonging unto his private state,
each man should find, that this is not so much a good word, as a good blow to
the ordinary sottishness of his judgment. But men receive the admonitions of
truth and her precepts, as directed to the vulgar, and never to themselves;
and in liew of applying them to their manners, most men most foolishly and
unprofitably apply them to their memory. But let us return to customs
soveraignety, such as are brought up to liberty, and to command themselves,
esteem all other form of policy, as monstrous and against nature. Those
that are enured to Monarchy do the like. And what facility soever fortune
affoordeth them to change, even when with great difficulty they have shaken
off the importunity of a tutor, they run to plant a new one with semblable
difficulties, because they can not resolve themselves to hate tutorship. It is
by the meditation of custom, that every man is contented with the place, where
nature has settled, him: and the savage people of Scotland have naught to do
with Touraine, nor the Scithians with Thessalie. Darius demanded of certain
Graecians, For what they would take upon them the Indians custom, to eat
their diseased fathers. (For such was their manner, thinking they could not
possibly give them a more noble and favorable tomb, than in their own
bowels) they answered him, That nothing in the world should ever bring them to
embrace so inhumane a custom: But having also attempted to persuade the
Indians to leave their fashion, and take the Graecians, which was to burn
their corpse, they were much more astonished thereat. Every man does so,
for so much as custom does so bleare us that we can not distinguish the true
visage of things.

Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quicquam Luc. l. x. 1037.

Principio, quod no^ minuant mirarier omnes
Paulatim.
Nothing at first so wondrous is, so great,
But all, t'admire, by little slake their heat.
Having other times gone about to endeare, and make some one of our
observations to be of force, and which was with resolute authority received in
most parts about us, and not desiring, as most men do, only to establish the
same by the force of laws and examples, but having ever bin from her
beginning, I found the foundation of it so weak, that my self, who was to
confirm it in others, had much ado to keep my countenance. This is the
receipt by which Plato undertakes to banish the unnatural and preposterous
loves of his time; and which he esteems Sovereign and principal. To wit,
that public opinion may condemn them; that Poets, and all men else may tell
horrible tales of them. A receipt by means whereof the fairest Daughters win
no more the love of their fathers, nor brethren most excellent in beauty, the
love of their sisters. The very fables of Thyestes, of Oedipus and of Macareus,
having with the pleasure of their songs infused this profitable opinion, in the
tender conceit of children. Certes, chaftitie is an excellent virtue, the
commodity whereof is very well known: but to use it, and according to nature
to prevail with it, is as hard as it is casie, to endeare it and to prevail
with it according to custom, to laws and precepts. The first and universal
reasons are of a hard perscutation. And our Masters pass them over in
gleaning, or in not daring so much as to taste them, at first sight cast
themselves headlong into the liberty or sanctuary of custom. Those that
will not suffer themselves to be drawn out of his original source, do also
commit a greater error, and submit themselves to savage opinions, witness
Chrysippus; who in so many several places of his compositions, inserted the
small account he made of conjunctions, how incestuous soever they were. He
that will free himself from this violent prejudice of custom, shall find
diverse things received with an undoubted resolution, that have no other anchor
but the hoarie head and frowning wrimples of custom, which ever attends them:
which mask being pulled off, and referring all matters to truth and reason, he
shall perceive his judgment, as it were over-turned, and placed in a much
surer state. As for example, I will then ask him, what thing can be more
strange than to see a people bound to follow laws, he never understood? Being
in all his domestical affairs, as marriages, donations, testaments,
purchases, and sales, necessarily bound to costo?mary rules, which for so much as
they were never written nor published in his own tongue, he cannot understand,
and whereof he must of necessity purchase the interpretation and use. Not
according to the ingenious opinion of Isocrates, who counsels his King to
make the Trafikes and negotiations of his subiests, free, enfranchized and
gainefull, and their debates, centroversies, and quarrels burthen-some, and
charged with great subsidies, and impositions: But according to a prodigious
opinion, to make open sale, and traffic of reason it self, and to give laws
a course of merchandise, is very strange. I commend fortune, for that (as our
Historians report) it was a Gentleman of Gaskonie, and my Countriman, that
first opposed himself against Charles the great, at what time he went about to
establish the Latin and Imperial laws amongst us. What is more barbarous
than to see a nation, where by lawful custom the charge of judging is sold,
and judgments are paid for with ready money; and where justice is lawfully
denied him, that has not wherewithal to pay for it; and that this
merchandise has so great credit, that in a political government there should
be set up a fourth estate of Lawyers, breath-sellers, and pettifoggers, and
joined to the three ancient states, to wit, the Clergy, the Nobility, and the
Communaltie; which fourth state having the charge of laws, and sometimes
authority of goods and lives, should make a body, apart, and several from
that of Nobility, whence double Laws must follow; those of honor, and those
of justice; in many things very contrary do those as rigorously condemn a lie
pocketed up, as these a lie revenged: by the law and right of arms he that
puts up an injury shall be degraded of honor and nobility; and he that
revengeth himself of it, shall by the civil Law incur a capital
punishment? He that shall address himself to the Laws to have reason for
some offense done unto his honor, dishonoreth himself. And who does not so,
is by the Laws punished and chastised. And of these so different parts, both
nevertheless having reference to one head; those having peace, these war
committed to their charge; those having the gain, these the honor: those
knowledge, these virtue: those reason, these strength: those the word, these
action: those justice, the sevalour: those reason these force: those a long
gown, and these a short coat, in partage and share. Touching indifferent
things, as clothes and garments, whosoever will reduce them to their true end,
which is the service and commodity of the body, whence depends their
original grace and comlines, for the most fantastical to my humor that may
be imagined, amongst others I will give them our square caps; that long hood of
plaited velvet, that hangs over our women's heads, with his parti-colored
traile and that vain and unprofitable model of a member, which we may not so
much as name with modesty, whereof notwithstanding we make public show, and
open demonstration. These considerations do nevertheless never distract a man
of understanding from following the common guise? Rather on the contrary, me
seems, that all several, strange, and particular fashions proceed rather of
folly, or ambitious effectation, than of true reason: and that a wise man
ought inwardly to retire his mind from the common press, and hold the same
liberty and power to judge freely of all things, but for outward matters, he
ought absolutely to follow the fashions and form customarily received.
Public society has naught to do with our thoughts; but for other things, as
our actions, our travel, our fortune, and our life, that must be accommodated
and left to it is service and common opinions: as that good and great Socrates,
who refused to save his life by disobeying the magistrate, yea a magistrate
most wicked and unjust. For that is the rule of rules, and general law of
laws, for every man to observe those of the place wherein he lives.

(...) Gnom. Grac. ^.
Laws of the the native place,
To follow, is a grace.
Lo here some of another kind. There rises a great doubt, whether any so
evident profit may be found in the change of a received law, of what nature
soever, as there is hurt in removing the same; for so much as a well settled
policy, may be compared to a frame or building of diverse parts joined
together with such a ligament as it is impossible to stir or displace one,
but the whole body must needs be shaken, and show a feeling of it. The
Thurians Lawgiver instituted, that, whosoever would go about, either to
abolish any one of the old Laws, or attempt to establish a new, should
present himself before the people with a roape about his neck, to the end,
that if his invention were not approved of all men, he should presently be
strangled. And he of Lacedaemon labored all his life to get an assured promise
of his citizens that they would never insringe any one of his ordinances. That
Ephore or Tribune, who so rudely cut off the two strings, that Phrin^s had
added unto music, respects not whether music be better or no with them,
or whether the accords of it be better filled, he has sufficient reason to
condemn them, because it is an alteration of the old form. It is that which
the old rustie sword of justice of Mars^ille did signify. I am distasted with
noveltie, what countenance soever it show: and I have reason so to be, for I
have seen very hurtful effects follow the same. That which so many years
since does so pressevs, has not yet exploited all But some may allege with
appearance, that by accident, it has produced and engendered all, yea both the
mischiefs and ruins, that since are committed without and against it: it is
that a man should blame and find fault with.

Heu pati^r telis vulnera facta meis, Ovid. epist. Phyl. 48.
A las I suffer smart
Procured by mine one dart.
Those which attempt to shake an Estate, are commonly the first overthrown by
the fall of it: he that is first moover of the same, reapeth not always the
fruit of such troubles; he beats and troubles the water for others to fish
in. The contexture and combining of this monarchy, and great building, having
bin dismissed and disolved by it, namely in her old years, gives as much
overture and entrance as a man will to like injuries. Royal Majesty does more
hardly fall from the top to the middle, then it tumbleth down from the middle
to the bottom. But if the inventors are more damageable, the imitators are more
vicious, to cast themselves into examples, of which they have both felt and
punished the horror and mischief. And if there be any degree of honor, even
in ill doing, these are indebted to others for the glory of the invention, and
courage of the first attempt. All sorts of new licentiousness do happily
draw out of this original and fruitful source, the images and patterns to
trouble our commonwealth. We may read in our very laws, made for the remedy
of the first evil, the apprentisage and excuse of all sorts of wicked
enterprises: And in favor of publikevices, they are named with new and more
pleasing words for their excuses, bastardizing and allaying their true titles:
yet it is to reform our consciences and our conceits, Honest a oration est. It
is an honest speech and well said. But the best pretense of innovation Teren.
And. act. 1. sce. 1.
or noveltie is most dangerous: Adeo nihil motum ex antiquo probabile est. So
nothing moved cut of the first place is allowable: Yet me seems (if I may
speak boldly) that it argues a great self-love and presumption, for a man
to esteem his opinions so far, that for to establish them, a man must be feign
to subvert a public peace, and introduce so many inevitable mischiefs, and so
horrible a corruption of manners, as civil wars, and alterations of a state
bring with them, in matters of such consequence, and to bring them into his
own country. It is not ill husbanded to advance so many certain and known
vices, for to combat contested and debatable errors? Is there any worse kind
of vices, than those which shocke a man's own conscience and natural
knowledge? The Senate durst give this defeat in payment about the
controversies between it and the people for the mystery of their religion: Ad
deos, id magis quam ad se pertinere: ipsos visuros, ne sacra suapolluantur:
That that did rather belong to the Gods than to them, and the Gods should look
to it, that their due rites were not polluted. A greeing with that, which the
Oracle answered those of Delphos* in the Median war, fearing the invasions of
the Persians. They demanded of that God what they should do with the
treasures consecrated to his Temple, whether hide, or carry them away: who
answered them, that they should remove nothing, but take care of themselves,
for he was able to provide for all things that were fit for him. Christian
religion has all the marks of extreme justice and profit, but none more
apparent then the exact commendation of obedience due unto magistrates, and
manutention of policies: what wonderful example has divine wisdom left us,
which to establish the welfare of humane kind, and to conduct this glorious
victory of hers against death and sin, would not do it but at the mercy of
our politik order, and has submitted the progress of it, and the conduct of
so high and worthy effect, to the blindness and injustice of our observations
and customs, suffering the innocentbloud of so many her favored elect to
run, and allowing a long loss of years for the ripening of this inestimable
fruit? There is much difference between the cause of him that follows the
forms and laws of his country, and him that undertakes to govern and
change them. The first alleges for his excuse, simplicity, obedience, and
example; whatsoever he does cannot be malice, at the most it is but ill luck.
Quis est enim, quem non move at Ci^. di^. l. 1.
clarissimis monument is testata consignataque antiquita? For who is he whom
antiquity will not move, being witnessed and signed with former monuments?
Besides that which Isocrates says, that defect has more part in moderation,
then has excess. The other is in much worse case. For he that medleth with
choosing and changing, usurps the authority of judging: and must resolve
himself, to see the fault of what he hunteth for, and the good of what he
brings in. This so vulgar consideration has confirmed me in my state, and
restrained my youth, that was more rash, from burthening my shoulders with so
filthy a burden, as to make my self respondent of so important a science.
And in this to dare, what in sound judgment I durst not in the easiest of
those wherein I had been instructed, and wherein the rashness of judging is of
no prejudice. Seeming most impious to me, to go about to submit public
constitutions and immovable observances, to the instabilitie of a private
fantasy (private reason is but a private jurisdiction) and to undertake that
on devine-lawes, which no policy would tolerate in civil law. Wherein
although man's reason have much more commerce, yet are they soverainly judges of
their judges: and their extreme sufficiency, serves to expound custom and
extend the use, that of them is received, and not to divert and innovate the
same. If at any time devine providence has gone beyond the rules, to which it
has necessary constrained us, it is not to give us a dispensation from them.
They are blows of lier divine hand, which we ought not imitate, but admire: as
extraordinary examples, marks of an express and particular avowing of the
several kinds of wonders, which for a testimony of her omnipotency it
offers us, beyond our orders and forces, which it is folly and impictie to
go about to represent, and which we ought not follow but contemplate with
admiration, and meditate with astonishment. Acts of her personage, and not of
ours. Co^ta protests very opportunely. Quum de religione agitur, T.
Coruncanum, P. Seipionem, P. Scaeuolam, Pontifices Ci^. De Not. l. 3 p.
maximos, non Zenonem, aut Cleanthem, aut Chrysippum, sequor. When we talk of
religion, I follow Titus Coruncanus, Publius Scipio, P. Scaeuola, and the
professors of religion, not Zeno, Cleanthes. or Chrysippus.

May God know it in our present quarrel, wherein are a hundred articles, yea,
great and deep articles, to be removed and altered, although many there are,
who may boast to have exactly survaid the reasons and foundations of one and
other faction. It is a number, if it be a number, that should have no great
mean to trouble us. But whither goes all this other throng? Under what
colors does it quarter it self? It follows of theirs, as of other weak and
ill applied medicines, the humors, that it would have purged in us, it has
enflamed exasperated, and sharpened, by her conflict, and still do remain in
our bodies. It could not by reason of her weakness purge us, but has rather
weakened us; so that we cannot now, void it, and by her operation we reap
nothing but long, continual, and intestine griefs and aches, yet is it, that
fortune, ever reserving her authority above our discourses, does sometimes
present us the urgent necessity, that laws must needs yield her some place:
And when a man resists the increase of an innovation, brought in by violence,
to keep himself eachwhere and altogether in rule and bridle against those
that have the keys of fields, to whom all things are lawful, that may in any
sort advance their desseigne, that have not law, nor order, but to follow their
advantage, it is a dangerous obligation and prejudicial inequality.

Aditum nocendi perfido praestat fides. Sen. Oed. Act. 3. se^. 1.
Trust in th'vntrustie, may
To hurt make open way.
For so much as the ordinary discipline of an estate, that has his perfect
health, does not provide for these extraordinary accidents, it presupposes a
body holding it self in his principal members and offices, and a common
consent to observe and obey it. Lawful proceeding, is a cold, dull, heavy,
and forced proceeding: and is not like to hold out against a licentious and
unbridled proceeding. It is yet as all men know, a reproach to those two great
personages, Octavius and Cato, in their civil wars; the one of Scilla, the
other of Caesar, because they rather suffered their country to incur all
extremities, then by her laws to aid her, or to innovate any thing. For
truly in these last necessities, where nothing is left to take hold by, it
were peradventure better, to shrug the shoulders, stoop the head, and somewhat
yield to the struck, then beyond possibility to make head and resist, and be
nothing the better, and give violence occasion to trample all underfoot: and
better were it to force the laws to desire but what they may, since they may
not what they would. So did he that ordained them to sleep four and twenty
hours: And he who for a time removed one day from the Calender: And another
who of the month of June made a second May. The Lacedaemonians themselves, so
strict obseruers of their countries ordinances, being urged by their Laws,
which precisely forbad and inhibited to choose one man twice to be their
Admiral, and on the other side their affairs necessarily requiring, that
Lysander should once more take that charge upon him, they created one Aracus
Admiral, but instituted Lysander superintendent of all maritine causes. And
with the same sutteltie, one of their Ambassadors being sent to the Athenians
for to obtain the change of some ordinance, Pericles alleging, that it was
expressly forbid to remove the table, wherein a law had once been set down,
persuaded him but to turn it, for that was not forbidden. It is that whereof
Plutarke commends Philopaemen, who being borne to command, could not only
command according to the laws, but the laws themselves, whenever public
necessity required it.

The three and twentieth Chapter.
Diverse events from one self same counsel.

I Ames Amiot, great Almoner of France, did once tell me this story, to the
honor of one of our Princes. (And so he was indeed by very good tokens, albeit
by offspring he were a stranger) that during our first troubles, at the siege of
Roane, the said Prince being advertised by the Queene-mother of a conspiracy
and enterprise, that should be attempted against his life, and by letters
particularly informed him of the party that should perform it, who was a
gentleman of An^ow, or Manse, and who to that purpose did ordinarily frequent
the said Princes court; he never imparted that secret or communicated that
warning to any man, but the next morrow walking upon Saint Catherins hill,
whence our battery played against the town (for it was, at what time we laid
siege to Roane) with the said Lord great Almoner: and another Bishop by his
side, he chanced to descrie the said gentleman, whom the Queene-mother had
described unto him, and caused him to be called, who being come before his
presence, said thus unto him, perceaving him already to wax pale, and tremble
at the alarums of his conscience: Master, such a one, I am fully persuaded you
foreimagine what I will charge you with, and your countenance does plainly show
it, you can conceal nothing from me: for I am so well instructed of your
business, that would you go about to hide it, you should but mar all you
have perfect knowledge of this and this thing, (which were the chiefest props
and devises of the secretest drifts of his complot and conspiracy) fail not
therefore as you tender your life, to confess the truth of all your purpose.
When the silly man saw himself so surprised and convicted (for the whole
matter had been discovered unto the Queen by one of the accomplices) he had no
other way, but to lift up his hands, and beg for grace and mercy at the
Princes hands, at whose feet he would have prostrated himself, but that he
would not let him: thus following his discourse. Come hither my friend, said
he, Did I ever do you any displeasure? Have I ever through any particular
hatred, wronged or offended any friend of yours? It is not yet three weeks
since I knew you, what reason might move you to conspire and enterprise my
death? The Gentleman with a faint-trembling voice, and selfe-accusing look
answered him, that no particular occasion had ever moved him to that, but the
interest of the general cause of his faction, and that some of them had
persuaded him, that to root out, and in what manner soever, to make away so
great an enemy of their religion, would be an execution full of piety, and a
work of supererogation. Then said the Prince, I will show you how much the
religion which I profess is more mild, than that whereof you make profession:
yours has persuaded you to kill me, without hearing me, having never been
offended by me: and mine, commaundes me to pardon you, convicted as you are,
that you would so treacherously and without cause have killed me. Go your way,
withdraw your self, let me never see you here again, and if you be wise,
hence-forward in your enterprises take bonester men for your counselors, than
those of your religion. The Emperor Augustus being in Gaul, received certain
advertisement of a conspiracy, that L. Cinna complotted against him, whereof
he purposed to be avenged, and for that purpose sent to all his friends against
the next morrow for advise and counsel, but passed the foregoing night with
great anxietie and unrest, considering that following his intent, he should
bring a young Gentleman, well borne, of a noble house, and great Pompeyes
nephew, to his death: which perplexity produced diverse strange discourses and
consideration in him. What? said he unto himself, Shall it ever be reported,
that I do live in fear, and suffer mine enemy to walk at his pleasure and
liberty? Shall he then go free, that has attempted and resolved to deprive
me of my life, which both by sea and land I have saved from so many civil
wars, and from so many battles? And now that I have established an universal
peace in the world, shall he be absolved and go unpunished, that has, not
only determined to murder, but to sacrifice me? (For, the complot of the
conspiracy was to murder him, when he should be at sacrifice.) After that,
having taken some rest with himself, he with a louder voice began to
exclaim and cry out against himself, saying, Why live thou, if the lives of
so many depend on thy death? Shall thy vengeance and cruelties never have an
end? Is thy life of that worth, as it may counter veil the sundry mischiefs
that are like to ensue, if it be preserved? Livia his wife being in bed with
him, perceiving his agony, and hearing his speeches, said thus unto him: And
may not women's counsels be admitted? Do as Physicians are wont, who when
their ordinary receipts will not work, have recourse to the contrary.
Hitherto thou could never do any good with severitie: Lepidus has followed
Savidienus, Murena Lepidus, Coepio Murena, Egnatius Scoepio, begin now to
prove what good lenity and clemency will do thee. Cinna is convicted,
pardon him: To annoy or hurt thee now, he is not able, and thou shall thereby
increase thy glory. Augustus seemed very glad to have found an Advocate of his
humor, and having thanked his wife, and countermaunded his friends, whom he
had summoned to the Counsel, commanded Cinna to be brought before him alone.
Then sending all men out of his chamber, and a chair prepared for Cinna to sit
in, he thus bespake him: First Cinna, I require to have gentle audience, and
that thou will not interrupt my speech, which ended, I will give thee time and
leisure to answer me: Thou know (oh Cinna) that when I had taken thee
prisoner in mine enemies camp, who wast not only become, but borne my foe; I
saved thee, then put thee in quiet possession of thy goods, and at last, have
so enriched thee, and placed thee in so high a degree, that even the
conquerours are become envious over the conquered. The Priests office, which
thou beggedst at my hands, I freely bestowed on thee, having first refused the
same to others, whose fathers and friends had in many battles shead their
blood for me: After all which benefits, and that I had in duty tied thee so
fast unto me, thou have notwithstanding undertaken to kill me. To whom Cinna
replied, crying alowde, That he had never so much as conceived so wicked a
thought, much less entertained the same. Oh Cinna, this is not according to
thy promise, answered then Augustus, which was, that thou would not
interrupt me: What I say, is true, thou have undertaken to murder me, in such
a place, on such a day, in such a company, and in such manner: and seeing him
so amazed in heart, and by his evidence stricken dombe, moved thereunto, not by
the condition of his promise, but by the guilt of his selfe-accusing
conscience; why would thou do it, replied he, is it because thou would
be Emperor? Truly the commonwealth is but in hard condition, if none but my
self hinder thee from the Empire. The^ can not so much as defend thine own
house, and did but lately loose a process, only by the favor of aseely
libertine. What? have thou no mean or power in any other matter, but to
attempt Caesar's life? I quit it, if there be no man but my self to impeach thy
hopes. Supposest thou that Paulus, that Fabius, that the Cossenians or the
Servillianes will ever permit thee? And so great a troop of noble men, noble,
not only in name, but such as by their virtues honor their nobility, will
ever suffer it? After many other such like discourses (for he talked with him
more than two hours) he said unto him; Away, oh Cinna, that life which once I
gave thee, as to an enemy, I now give thee again, as to a traitor, and a
patricide: let a true friendship from this day forward begin between us, let us
strive together, which of us two with a better faith shall out-goe the other,
and whether I have given thy life, or thou have received the same with great
confidence: and so left him. Shortly after he gave him the Consulship, blaming
him that he durst not ask it of him. And ever after held him as his dear
friend, and made him alone, heir and executor of his goods. Now after this
accident, which happened to Augustus in the xl. year of his age, there was never
any conspiracy or enterprise attempted against him; and he received a just
reward for his so great clemency. But the like succeeded not to our Prince, for
his mildness and lenity, could not so warrant him, but that afterward he fell
into the snares of the like treason: so vain and frivolous a thing is humane
wisdom: and contrary to al projects, devises, counsels, and precautions,
fortune does ever keep a full sway and possession of all events. We count
those Physicians happy and successful, that successefully end a desperate
cure, or come to a good issue: as if there were no other art but theirs, that
could not subsist of it self, and whose foundations were too feeble, to stand
and rely upon her own strength: and as if there were none but it, that
stands in need of fortunes helpe-affoording hand, for the effecting of her
operations. My conceit of it, is both the worst and the best a man may imagine:
for thanks be to God, there is no commerce between us: I am contrary to
others; for I ever despise it, and when I am sick, in stead of entering into
league or composition with it, I then begin to hate and fear it most: and
answer such as urge me to take Physic, that at least they will tarry till
such time as I have recovered my health and strength again; that then I may
the better be enabled to endure the violence and hazard of their potions. I let
nature work, and presuppose unto my self, that she has provided her self,
both of teeth and claws, to defend her self from such assaults as shall beset
her, and to maintain this contexture or frame, whose dissolution it so much
hates. In liew of bringing help unto her, when she most striveth, and is
combated by sickness, I greatly fear lest I bring succor unto her
adversary, and surcharge her with new enemies. Now I conclude, that not only
in Physic, but likewise in sundry more certain arts, fortune has great
share in them. The Poetical furies, which ravish and transport their Author
beyond himself, why shall we not ascribe them to his good fortune, since
himself confesses, that they exceed his strength and sufficiency, and
acknowledges to proceed from elsewhere, than from himself, and that they are
not in his power, no more than Orators say to have those strange motions and
extraordinary agitations, that in their art transport them beyond their
purpose? The like we see to be in painting, for sometimes the Painters hand
shall draw certain lines or draughts, so far exceeding his conception or
skill, that himself is forced to enter into admiration and amazement. But
fortune yet does much more evidently show, the share she has in all their
works, by the graces and beauties that often are found in them, not only
beyond the intent, but besides the very knowledge of the workman. A heedy
Reader shall often discover in other men's compositions, perfections
farre-differing from the Authors meaning, and such as happily he never dreamed
of, and illustrateth them with richer senses, and more excellent constructions.
As for military enterprises, no man is so blind but sees what share fortune
has in them: even in our counsels and deliberations, some chance or good luck
must needs be joined to them, for whatsoever our wisdom can effect, is no
great matter. The sharper and quicker it is, more weakness finds it in
itself, and so much the more does it distrust itself. I am of Sillaes
opinion: and when I nearest consider the most glorious exploites of war, me
thinks I see, that those who have the conduct of them, employ neither counsel
nor deliberation about them, but for fashion-sake, and leave the best part of
the enterprise to fortune, and on the confidence they have in her aid, they
still go beyond the limits of all discourse. Casual rejoycings, and strange
furies ensue among their deliberations, which for the most induce them to take
the counsel least grounded upon appearance or reason, and which quail their
courage beyond reason; whence it has succeeded unto diverse great Captains,
by giving credit to such rash counsels, and aleaging to their soldiers, that
by some divine inspiration, and other signs and prognostications, they were
encouraged to such and such enterprises. Lo here wherefore in this uncertainty
and perplexity, which the impuissances and inabilitie does bring us to see and
choose what is most commodious, for the difficulties which the diverse accidents
and circumstances of every thing draw with them: the surest way, if other
considerations did not invite us thereto, is, in my conceit, to follow the
party, wherein is most honesty and justice; and since a man doubts of the
nearest way, ever to keep the right. As in these two examples I have lately
mentioned, there is no doubt, but that it was more commendable and generous in
him, who had received the offense, to remit and pardon the same, than to have
done otherwise. If the first had but ill success, his good intent is not to be
blamed; and no man knows, had he taken the contrary way, whether he should
have escaped the end, to which his destiny called him; and then had he lost
the glory and commendations, of so seld-seene humanity. Sundry men possessed
with this fear, are read-of in ancient Histories; the greatest part of which
have followed the way of fore-running the conspiracies, which were complotted
against them, by revenge or tortures, but I see very few, that by this remedy
have received any good; witness so many Roman Emperors. He that perceives
himself to be in this danger, ought not much to rely upon his power, or hope
in his vigilancie. For, how hard a matter is it, for a man to warrant and
safeguard himself from an enemy, that masks under the visage of the most
officious and heartie-seeming friend we have? And to know the inward thoughts
and minde-concealed meanings of such as daily attend, and are continually with
us? It will little avail him to have foreign nations to his guard, and ever
to be encircled about with troops of Armed men; whosoever he be that resolves
to condemn his own life, may at any time become master of other men's lives.

Moreover that continual suspicion, which makes the Prince to mistrust every
body, should be a wonderful vexation to his mind. And therefore when Dion was
advertised that Callippus watched to kill him, could never find in his heart
to inform himself of it: affirming; He had rather die once, than ever live in
fear and misery, and to guard himself not only from his enemies, but from
his very friends. Which thing Alexander presented more lively and vndantedly by
effect, who by a letter of Parme^^o having received advertisement, that Phillip
his nearest and best regarded Physician, had with money been subborned and
corrupted by Darius, to poison him, who at the very instant that he gave
Phillip the letter to read, swallowed down a potion he had given him: was it
not to express his resolution, that if his friends would kill him, he would
not shun them, but consent to their treachery? This Prince is the Sovereign
pattern of hazardous attempts: yet know I not whether in all his life, he
showed an act of more resolute constancy, than this, nor an ornament so many
ways famous. Those which daily preach and buzze in Princes ears, under color
of their safety a hee^y diffidence and ever-warie distrustfulnesse, do naught
but tell them of their ruin, and further their shame and downfall. No noble
act is atchived without danger. I know one by his own complexion of a right
martial courage, and ready for any resolution, whose good and hopeful fortune
is daily corrupted by such verbal persuasions; as first to keep close with
his friends; never to listen to any reconciliation with his old enemies: to
stand upon his own guarde; never to commit himself to any stronger then
himself, what fair promse soever they make him, or whatsoever apparent profit
they seem to contain. I also know another, who because he did ever follow the
contrary counsel, and would never listen to such schoole-reasons, has beyond
all hope raised his fortune above the common reach. That boldness wherewith
they so greedily gape after glory, is always at hand, when ever need shall
be, as gloriously in a dublet as in an armor; in a cabinet as in a camp; the
arm held down, as lifted up. A wisdom so tenderly-precise, and so
precisely-circumspect, is a mortal enemy to haughty executions. Scipio, to
sound the depth of Siphax intent, and to discover his mind; leaving his army,
and abandoning the yet unsettled country of Spain, which under his new conquest
of it, was likely to be suspected, he I say, could pass into Affrike only with
two simple ships or small barks, to commit himself in a strange and foe
country, to engage his person, under the power of a barbarous King, under an
unknown faith, without either hostage, or letters of credence, yea without any
body, but only upon the assurance of the greatness of his courage, of his
successful good fortune, and of the promise of his high-raised hopes. Habita
fides ipsam plerumque fidem obligat. Most commonly trusting obliges
trustiness. To an ambicious and fameaspiring mind, contrariwise, a man must
yield little, and carry a hard hand against suspicions: Fear and distrust draw
on offenses and allure them. The most mistrustfull of our Kings established his
affairs, and settled his estate, especially because he had voluntarily given
over, abandoned and committed his life and liberty, to the hands and mercy of
his enemies: Seeming to put his whole confidence in them, that so they might
likewise conceive an undoubted affiance in him. Caesar did only confront his
mutinous legions, and oppose his hardly-ruled Armies, with the minde-quelling
authority of his countenance, and awemooving fierceness of his words: and
did so much trust himself and his fortune, that he no whit feared to abandon
and commit himself to a seditious and rebellious Army.

-- stetit aggere ful^^ Lucan. li. 5. 296.

Caspitis, intrepitus vultu, meruitque timeri
Nil metuens.
He on arampart stood of turfe vprear'd,
Fearelesse, and fearing none was to be feared.
True it is, that this undaunted assurance can not so fully and lively be
represented, but by those in whom the imagination or apprehension of death, and
of the worst that may happen, can strike no amazement at all: for, to represent
it fearefully-trembling, doubtful and uncertain, for the service of an
important reconciliation, is to effect no great matter: It is an excellent
motive to gain the heart and good will of others, for a man to go and submit
himself to them, provided it be done freely, and without constraint of any
necessity, and in such sort, that a man bring a pure and unspotted confidence
with him, and at least his countenance void of all scruple. Being yet a child,
I saw a gentleman, who had the command of a great City, and by a commotion of
a seditiously-furious people greatly put to his plunges, who to suppress the
rising-fire of this tumult, resolved to sally out from a strongly-assured
place, where he was safe, and yield himself to that many-headed monster
mutinous rowt; thrived so ill by it, that he was miserably slain amongst them:
yet deem I not his oversight to have been so great an issuing out, his
memory being of most men condemned, as because he took a way of submission,
and remissness, and attempted to extinguish that rage and hurly-burly, rather
by way of following, than of guiding, and by requiring suit, than by
demonstrative resolution: and I deem a gratiously-milde severitie, with a
military commandment, full of confidence and security, beseeming his rank,
and the dignity of his charge, had better availed him, had been more
successful, at least with more honor, and well seeming comeliness. There is
nothing less to be expected or hoped for at the hands of this
monstrous-faced-multitude, thus agitated by fury, then humanity and
gentleness; it will much sooner receive reverence, and admit fear. I might
also blame him, that having undertaken a resolution (in my judgment, rather
brave then rash) to cast himself inconsiderately, weak and unarmed, amidst a
tempestuous Ocean of senseless and mad men, he should have gone through-stitch
with it, and not leave the person he represented in the briers, whereas, after
he had perceived the danger at hand, he chanced to bleed at the nose; and then
to change that demisse and flattering countenance he had undertaken, into a
dismaide and drooping look, filling both voice and eyes with astonishment and
repentance: and seeking to squat himself, he the more enflamed, and called
them upon him. It was determined, there should be a general muster made of
diverse troops of armed men (a place fittest for secret revenges, and where
they may safest be achieved) there were most apparent reasons, that the place
was very unsure, or at least, to be suspected, by such as were to have the
principal and necessary charge to survey them. Diverse counsels were proposed,
sundry opinions heard, as in a subject of great difficulty, and on which
depended so many weighty consequences. My advise was, they should carefully
avoid to give any testimony of suspicion, or show of doubt, and that our
troops should be as full as might be, and the Fyles orderly ranked, and every
Soldier show an undaunted carriage, and vndismaied countenance, and in stead of
keeping some of our forces back (which thing most opinions aimed at) all
Captains should be put in mind to admonish their Soldiers to make their
sallies as orderly and as strong as might be, in honor of the assistance; and
spare no powder, which would serve as a gratification toward these suspectfull
troops, which afterward caused a mutual and profitable confidence. I find
the course that Iu^^^s Caesar held to be the best a man may take: First he
asseved by clemency to purchase the love of his very enemies, contenting
himself in the conspiracies that were discovered unto him, simply to show they
were not unknown to him, but had perfect notice of them. That done, he took a
most noble resolution, which was, without dread or dismay, or any care-taking,
to attend whatsoever might betide him, wholly abandoning and remitting himself
into the hands of the Gods and of fortune. For certainly, it is the state
wherein he was, when he was murdered in the Senate. A stranger having
published every where, that he could teach Dionysius the tyrant of Siracusa
away to understand and discover the very certainty of all the practices, his
subjects or any else should practice against him, if he would bestow a good
sum of money upon him: Dionysius being thereof advertised, sent for him, to
discover the secret and understand the truth of so necessary an art for his
preservation: the stranger told him, there was no other skill in his art, but
that he should deliver him a talent, and then boast he had learned the use of
so invaluable a secret of him. Dionysius allowed of his invention, and
forthwith caused six hundred crowns to be delivered him. It is not likely that
ever he would have given so great a sum of money to an unknown man, but in
reward of a most profitable instruction; for by way of this reputaion he kept
his enemies still in awe. And therefore do Princes wisely publish such
advertisements as they receive of the plots conspired, and treasons, practiced
against their lives and states, thereby to make men believe, that nothing can
be attempted against them, but they shall have knowledge of it. The Duke of
Athens committed many fond oversights in the establishing of his late tyranny
upon the Florentines, but this the chiefest, that having received the first
advertisement of the Monopolies and Complots the Florentines contrived against
him, by Matthew, surnamed Morozo, one of the accomplices, thinking to suppress
this warning, and conceal that any in the City were offended at him, or
grudged at his rule, caused him immediately to be put to death. I remember to
have heretofore read the story of a Roman (a man of special dignity) who
flying the tyranny of the Triumuirate, had many times by the sutteltie of his
invention, escaped those who pursued him. It fortuned upon a day, that a troop
of horsemen, who had the charge to apprehend him, passing along a hedge,
under which he lay lurking, had well nigh discovered him; which he perceiving,
and considering the dangers and difficulties he had so long endured, thinking,
to save himself from the continual and daily searches that every where were
made after him, and calling to mind the small pleasure he might hope of such a
life, and how much better it were for him to die once, than live in such
continual fear and agony, himself called them, and voluntarily discovered
his lurking hole, and that he might rid them and himself from further
pursuit and care, did willingly yield unto their cruelty. For a man to call
his enemies to aid him, is a counsel somewhat rash, yet think I, it were
better to embrace it, than remain still in the continual fit of such a fever
that has no remedy. But since the provisions of man may apply unto it, are
full of unquietness and uncertainty, much better is it with a full assurance
to prepare himself patiently to endure whatsoever may happen, and draw some
comfort from that, which a man is never sure shall come to pass.

The four and twentieth Chapter.
Of Pedantisme.

I Have in my youth oftentimes been vexed, to see a Pedant brought in, in most
of Italian comedies, for a vice or sporte-maker, and the nicke-name of Magister
to be of no better signification amongst us. For, my self being committed to
their tuition, how could I choose but be somewhat jealous of their reputation?
In deed I sought to excuse them by reason of the natural disproportion, that
is between the vulgar sort, and rate and excellent men, both in judgment and
knowledge: for so much as they take a clean contrary course one from another.
But when I considered, the choysest men were they, that most contemned them, I
was far to seek, and as it were lost my self, witness our good Bellaye:

Mais ie hay par sur tout vnscauoir pedantesque. Bellay.
A pedant knowledge, I
Detest out of all cry.
Yet is this custom very ancient; for Plutarch says, that Greek and Scholar,
were amongst the Romans, words of reproach and imputation. And coming
afterward to years of more discretion, I have found they had great reason,
and that, magis magnos clericos, non sunt magis magnos sapientes. The most
greatest Clerks is not the most wisest men. But whence it may proceed, that a
mind rich in knowledge, and of so many things, becomes thereby never
livelier nor more quicke-sighted; and a grose-headed, and vulgar spirit, may
without amendment, contain the discourse and judgment of the most excellent
wits, the world ever produced, I still remain doubtful. To receive so many,
so strange, yea and so great wits, it must needs follow (said once a Lady unto
me, yea one of our chiefest Princesses, speaking of some body) that a man's own
wit, force, droope, and as it were diminish it self, to make room for others.
I might say, that as plants are choked by overmuch moisture, and lamps dammed
with too much oil, so are the actions of the mind overwhelmed by
over-aboundance of matter and study: which occupied and entangled with so
great a diversity of things, loses the mean to spread and clear it self;
and that surcharge keeps it low-drooping and faint. But it is otherwise, for
our mind stretches the more by how much more it is replenished. And in
examples of former times, the contrary is seen, of sufficient men in the
managing of public affairs, of great Captains, and notable Counselors in
matters of estate, to have been therewithal excellently wise. And concerning
Philosophers, retired from all public negotiations, they have indeed sometimes
been vilified, by the comike liberty of their times, then opinions and
demeanors yielding them ridiculous. Will you make them judges of the right of a
process, or of the actions of a man? They are ready for it. They enquire
whether there be any life yet remaining, whether any motion. Whether man be any
thing but an Ox, what working or suffering is; what strange beasts law and
justice are. Speak they of the Magistrate, or speak they unto him? They do it
with an vnreverent and uncivil liberty. Hear they a Prince or a King
commended? He is but a shepherd to them, as idle as a Swain busied about
milking of his cattle, or shearing of his sheep: but yet more rudely. Esteem
you any man the greater for possessing two hundred acres of land? They scoff
at him, as men accustomed to embrace all the world, as their possession. Do you
boast of your Nobility, because you can blazon your descent of seven or eight
rich Grandfathers? They will but little regard you, as men that conceive not
the universal image of nature, and how many predecessors every one of us has
had, both rich and poor, kings and grooms, Greeks and Barbarians. And were
you lineally descended in the fiftieth degree from Hercules, they deem it a
vanity to vaunt or allege this gift of fortune. So did the vulgar sort
disdain them as ignorant of the first and common things, and as presumptuous
and insolent. But this Platonicall luster is far from that which our men stand
in need of. They were envied as being beyond the common sort, as despising
public actions, as having proposed unto themselves a particular and inimitable
life, aiming and directed at certain high discourses, and from the common use:
these are disdained as men beyond the ordinary fashion, as incapable of public
charges, as leading an unsociable life, and professing base and abject
customs, after the vulgar kind. Odi homines ignavos opera, Philosophos
sententia. Pac^^i^s Lip^. l. 1. c. 10.
I hate men that are fools in working, and Philosophers in speaking. As for
those Philosophers, I say, that as they were great in knowledge, so were they
greater in all action. And even as they report of that Syracusan Geometrician,
who being taken from his bookish contemplation, to show some practice of his
skill, for the defense of his country, reared suddenly certain terror-moving
engines, and showed effects far exceeding all men's conceit, himself
notwithstanding disdaining all this his handie-worke, supposing he had thereby
corrupted the dignity of his art; his engines and manual works being but the
apprentiships, and trials of his skill in sport. So they, if at any time they
have been put to the trial of any action, they have been seen to fly so high
a pitch, and with so lofty a flight, that men might apparently see their minds
and spirits were through the intelligence of things, become wonderfully rich
and great. But some perceiving the seat of politic government possessed by
unworthy and incapable men, have withdrawn themselves from it. And he who
demanded of Crates, how long men should Philosophize, received this answer,
until such time as they who have the conduct of our Armies be no longer
blockish asses. Heraclitus resigned the roialtie unto his brother. And to the
Ephesians, who reproved him for spending his time in playing with children
before the temple: he answered, And is it not better to do so, then to
govern the public affairs in your company? Others having their imagination
placed beyond fortune and the world, found the seat of justice, and the thrones
of Kings, to be but base and vile. And Empedocles refused the royalty, which
the Agrigentines offered him. Thales sometimes accusing the carke and care men
took about good husbandry, and how to grow rich; some replied unto him, that
he did as the Fox, because he could not attain unto it himself: which
hearing, by way of sport he would needs show by experience how he could at his
pleasure become both thriftie and rich; and bending his wits to gain and
profit, erected a traffike, which within one year brought him such riches, as
the skilfullest in the trade of thriving, could hardly in all their life devise
how to get the like. That which Aristotle reports of some, who called both
him, and Anaxagoras, and such like men, wise, and not prudent, because they
cared not for things more profitable: besides, I do not very well digest this
nice difference of words, that serves my find-fault people for no excuse: and
to see the base and needy fortune, wherewith they are content, we might rather
have just cause to pronounce them, neither wise nor prudent. I quit this first
reason, and think it better to say, that this evil proceeds from the bad
course they take to follow sciences; and that respecting the manner we are
instructed in them, it is no wonder if neither Scholars nor Masters, howbeit
they prove more learned, become no whit more sufficient. Verily the daily
care, and continual charges of our fathers, aymeth at nothing so much, as to
store our heads with knowledge and learning; as for judgment and virtue, that
is never spoken of. If a man pass by, cry out to our people; Oh what a wise
man goes yonder? And of another: Oh what a good man is yonder? He will not
fail to cast his eyes and respect toward the former. A third crier were
needful, to say, Oh what blocke-heads are those! We are ever ready to ask,
Has he any skill in the Greek and Latin tongue? can he write well? does he
write in prose or verse? But whether he be grown better or wiser, which
should be the chiefest of his drift, that is never spoken of, we should rather
enquire who is better wise, then who is more wise. We labor, and toil, and
plod to fill the memory, and leave both understanding and conscience empty.
Even as birds flutter and skip from field to field to pecke up corn, or any
grain, and without tasting the same, carry it in their bills, therewith to
feed their little ones; so do our pedants gleane and pick learning from
books, and never lodge it further then their lips, only to degorge and
cast-it to the wind. It is strange how fitly sottisnnesse takes hold of mine
example. Is not that which I do in the greatest part of this composition, all
one and self same thing? I am ever here and there picking and culling, from
this and that book, the sentences that please me, not to keep them (for I
have no storehouse to reserve them in) but to transport them into this: where,
to say truth, they are no more mine, then in their first place: we are (in mine
opinion) never wise, but by present learning, not by that which is past, and as
little by that which is to come. But which is worse, their Scholars, and their
little ones are never a whit the more fed or better nourished: but passes from
hand to hand, to this end only, thereby to make a glorious show, therewith to
entertain others, and with it is help to frame some quaint stories, or pretty
tales, as of a light and counterfeit coin, unprofitable for any use or
employment, but to reckon and cast acompts. Apud alios loqui didicerunt, non
ipsi secum. Non Se^. epist. 108.
est loquendum, sed gubernandum. They have learned to speak with others, not
with themselves, speaking is not so requisite as government. Nature, to show
that nothing is savage in whatsoever she produces, causes oftentimes, even in
rudest and most vnarted nations, productions of spirits to arise, that confront
and wrestle with the most artist productions. As concerning my discourse, is
not the Gaskonie proverb, drawn from a bag-pipe, pretty and quaint? Bouha
prou bouha, mas a remuda lous dits quem. You may blow long enough, but if once
you stir your fingers, you may go seek. We can talk and prate, Cicero
says thus, These are Platoes customs, These are the very words of Aristotle;
but what say we our selves? what do we? what judge we? A Peroquet would say as
much. This fashion puts me in mind of that rich Roman, who to his exceeding
great charge had been very industrious to find out the most sufficient men
in all sciences, which he continually kept about him, that if at any time,
occasion should be moved amongst his friends to speak of any matter
pertaining to Schollership, they might supply his place, and be ready to
assist him: some with discourse, some with a verse of Homer, othersome with a
sentence, eachone according to his skill or profession; who persuaded himself
that all such learning was his own, because it was contained in his servants
minds. As they do whose sufficiency is placed in their sumptuous libraries. I
know some, whom if I ask what he knows, he will require a book to
demonstrate the same, and durst not dare to tell me that his posteriors are
seabious, except he turn over his Lexicon to see what posteriors and scabious
is, we take the opinions and knowledge of others into our protection, and that
is all: I tell you they must be enfeoffed in us, and made our own. We may
very well be compared unto him, who having need of fire, should go fetch
some at his neighbors chimney, where finding a good fire, should there stay to
warm himself, forgetting to carry some home, what availes it us to have our
bellies full of meat, if it be not digested? if it be not transchanged in us?
except it nourish, augment, and strengthen us? May we imagine that Lucullus,
whom learning made and framed so great a Captain without experience, would
have taken it after our manner? We rely so much upon other men's arms, that we
disanull our own strength. Will I arm my self against the fear of death? it
is at Senecaes cost: will I draw comfort either for my self, or any other? I
borrow the same of Cicero. I would have taken-it in my self, had I been
exercised unto it, I love not this relative and begd-for sufficiency. Suppose
we may be learned by other men's learning. Sure I am, we can never be wise, but
by our own wisdom.

(...). Proverb ^amb.
That wise man I cannot abide,
That for himself cannot provide,
Ex quo Ennius: Nequidquam sapere sapientem, qui ipsi sibi prodesse non quiret.
Whereupon Ennius.
says Ennius. That wise man is vainly wise, who could not profit himself.

-- si cupidus, si Iuvenal Sat. 8. 14.
Vanus, and Euganea quantumvis vilior agna. If covetous, if vain (not wise)
Then any lamb more base, more nice.
Non enim paranda nobis solum, sed fruenda sapientia est. For, we must not
only purchase wisdom, Cic. Finib. lib. 1. p.
but enjoy and employ the same. Dionysius scoffeth at those Gramarians, who
ploddingly labor to know the miseries of Ulysses, and are ignorant of their
own; mocketh those Musicians, that so attentively tune their instruments, and
never accord their manners; derideth those Orators, that study to speak of
justice, and never put it in execution. Except our mind be the better, unless
our judgment be the sounder, I had rather my scholar had employed his time in
playingat Tennis; I am sure his body would be the nimbler. See but one of
these our university men or bookish scholars return from school, after he
has there spent ten or twelve years under a Pedants charge: who is so unapt
for any matter? who so unfit for any company? who so to seek if he come into
the world? all the advantage you discover in him, is, that his Latin and
Greek, have made him more sottish, more stupide, and more presumptuous, then
before he went from home. Whereas he should return with a mindfull-fraught, he
returns with a wind-puft conceit: in stead of plum-feeding the same, he has
only spunged it up with vanity. These Masters, as Plato speaks of
Sophisters (their cousin germans) of all men, are those, that promise to be
most profitable unto men, and alone, amongst all, that not only amend not what
is committed to their charge, as does a carpenter or a mason, but empaire and
destroy the same, and yet they must full dearly be paid. If the law which
Protagoras proposed to his disciples, were followed, which was, that either
they should pay-him according to his word, or swear in the temple, how much
they esteemed the profit they had received by his discipline, and accordingly
satisfy him for his pains, my Pedagogues would be aground, especially if they
would stand to the oath of my experience. My vulgar Perigordin-speech does
very pleasantly term such selfe-conceited wisards, Letter-ferits, as if they
would say letter stricken men, to whom (as the common saying is) letters have
given a blow with a mallet. Verily for the most part they seem to be
distracted even from common sense. Note but the plain husbandman, or the
vnwilie shoemaker, and you see them simply and naturally plod on their course,
speaking only of what they know, and no further; whereas these letter-puft
pedants, because they would feign raise themselves aloft, and with their
litterall doctrine which floteth up and down the superficies of their brain,
arm themselves beyond other men, they incessantly intricate and entangle
themselves: they utter lofty words, and speak golden sentences, but so that
another man does place, fit, and apply them. They are acquainted with Galen,
but know not the disease. They will stuff your head with laws, when God wot
they have not yet conceived the ground of the case. They know the Theorike of
all things, but you must seek who shall put it in practice. I have seen a
friend of mine, in mine own house, who by way of sport talking with one of
these pedanticall gulls, counterfeited a kind of fustian tongue, and spoke a
certain gibrish, without rhyme or reason, sans head or foot, a hotch-pot of
diverse things, but that he did often enterlace it with inke-pot terms,
incident to their disputations, to ammuse the bookish sot for a whole day long
with debating and contending; ever thinking he answered the Objections made
unto him; yet was he a man of letters, and reputation, a graduate, and wore a
goodly formal long gown.

Vos o patritius sanguis quos vivere par est Pers. sat. 1. 61.

Occipiticaeco, posticae occurrite sannae.
You noble bloods, who with a noddle blind,
Should live, meet with the mock that is made behind.
Whosover shall narrowly look into this kind of people, which far and wide
has spread it self, he shall find (as I have done,) that for the most part,
they neither understand themselves, nor others, and that their memory is many
times sufficiently full fraught, but their judgment ever hollow and empty:
except their natural inclination have of it self otherwise fashioned them. As
I have seen Adrianus Turnebus, who having never professed any thing but study
and letters, wherein he was, in mine opinion, the worthiest man that lived
these thousand years, and who notwithstanding had no Pedanticall thing about
him, but the wearing of his gown, and some external fashions, that could not
well be reduced, and incivilized to the courtiers cut; things of no
consequence. And I naturally hate our people, that will more hardly endure a
long roabe vncuriously worn, then a cross skittish mind: and that observe
what leg, or reverence he makes, note his garb or demeanor, view his boots, or
his hat, and mark what manner of man he is. For his inward parts, I deem him
to have been one of the most unspotted and truly honest minds that ever was. I
have sundry times of purpose urged him to speak of matters forth est from his
study, wherein he was so cleare-sighted, and could with so quick an
apprehension conceive, and with so sound a judgment distinguish them, that he
seemed never to have professed or studied other faculty then war, and
matters of state. Such spirits, such natures may be termed worthy, goodly, and
solid.

-- queis art benigna Iuven sat. 14. 34.
Et meliore luto fi^xit praecordia Titan, Whose bowels heavens-bright-Sunne
composed
Of better ^ old, art wel-disposed,
That maintain themselves against any bad institution. Now it suffices not
that our institution mar us not, it must change us to the better. There are
some of our Pa^haments and Courts, who when they are to admit of any officers,
do only examine them of their learning; others, that by presenting them the
judgment of some law cases, endeavor to sound their understanding. Me thinks
the latter keep the better style: And albeit these two parts are necessary,
and both ought to concur in one, yet truly should that of learning be less
prized then judgment, this may well be without the other, and not the other
without this. For as the Greek verse says.

(...). Com^^ Gr^^. (...).
Learning naught worth does lie,
Be not discretion by.
Whereto serves learning, if understanding be not joined to it? Oh would to
God, that for the good of our justice, the societies of Lawyers were as well
stored with judgment, discretion, and conscience, as they are with learning
and wit. Non vitae, sed scholae discimus. We ^^n epist. 106. f.
learn not for our life, but for the school. It is not enough to join
learning and knowledge to the mind, it should be incorporated unto it: it must
not be sprinkled, but dyed with it; and if it change not and better her estate
(which is imperfect) it were much better to leave it. It is a dangerous Sword,
and which hinders and offends her master, if it be in a weak hand, and
which has not the skill to manage the same: Vt fuerit melius non didicisse: So
as it were better that we had not learned. It is peradventure the cause, that
neither we, nor divinity require not much learning in women; and that Francis
Duke of Britannie, son to John the fifth, when he was spoken unto for a
marriage between him and Isabel a daughter of Scotland; and some told him she
was but meanly brought up, and without any instruction of learning, answered,
he loved her the better for it, and that a woman was wise enough, if she could
but make a difference between the shirt and dublet of her husbands. It is also
no such wonder (as some say) that our auncesters did never make any great
account of Letters, and that even at this day (except it be by chance) they
are not often found in our Kings or Princes chiefest councels and
consultations: And if the end to grow rich by them, which now-adaies is
altogether proposed unto us by the study of Law, of Physic, of Pedantisme,
and of Divinity; did not keep them in credit, without doubt you should see
them as beggarly and needy, and as much vilified as ever they were. And what
hurt I pray you, since they neither teach us to think well, nor do well?
Postquam docti prodiderunt, boni desunt. Se^. epist. 95.
Since men became learned, good men failed. Each other science is prejudicial
unto him, that has not the science of goodness. But may not the reason I
whilome sought for, also proceed thence? That our study in France, having as
it were no other aim but profit, but those less whom nature has produced to
more generous offices, then lucrative, giving themselves unto learning, or so
briefly (before they have apprehended any liking of them, retired unto a
profession that has no community with books) there are then none left,
altogether to engage themselves to study and Books, but the meaner kind of
people, and such as are borne to base fortune, and who by learning and letters
seek some mean to live, and enrich themselves. The minds of which people being
both by natural inclination, by example, and familiar institution, of the
basest stamp, do falsely reap the fruit of learning. For it is not in her
power to give light unto the mind, that has none, nor to make a blind man to
see. The mystery of it is not to afford him sight, but to direct it for him,
to address his goings, always provided he have feet of his own, and good,
strait, and capable legs. Knowledge is an excellent drug, but no drug is
sufficiently strong to preserve it self without alteration or corruption,
according to the fault of the vessel, that contains it. Some man has a
clear sight, that is not right-sighted; and by consequence sees what good is,
and does not follow it; and seeks knowledge, but makes no use of it. The
chiefest ordinance of Plato in his common wealth is, to give unto his Citizens
their charge, according to their nature. Nature can do all, and does all. The
crookt backed, or deformed, are unfit for any exercise of the body, and crooked
and mishappen minds improper for exercises of the mind. The bastard and vulgar
sort are unworthy of Philosophy. When we see a man ill shod, if he chance to
be a Shoemaker, we say it is no wonder, for commonly none goes worse shod then
they. Even so it seems, that experience does often show us, a Physician less
healthy, a Divine less reformed, and most commonly a Wiseman less sufficient
then an other. Aristo Chius had heretofore reason to say, that Philosophers
did much hurt to their auditors, forasmuch as the greatest number of minds are
not apt to profit by such instructions, which, if they take not a good, they
will follow a bad course: (...) Aristippi, acerbos ex Zenonis schola Cic. Not.
Deor. li. 3.
exire. They proceed licentious out of the School of Aristippus, but bitter
out of the School of Zeno. In that excellent institution which Zenophon gives
the Persians, we find, that as other Nations teach their children Letters, so
they taught theirs virtue. Plato said the eldest borne son, in their royal
succession, was thus taught. As soon as he was borne, he was delivered, not to
women, but to such Eunuchs, as by reason of their virtue were in chiefest
authority about the King. Their special charge was first to shapen his limbs
and body, goodly, and healthy; and at seven years of age, they instructed
and inured him to sit on horseback, and to ride a hunting: when he came to the
age of fourteen, they delivered him into the hands of four men, that is to
say, the wisest, the justest, the most temperate, and the most valiant of all
the nation. The first taught him religion; the second, to be ever upright and
true; the third, to become Master of his own desires; and the fourth, to fear
nothing. It is a thing worthy great consideration, that in that excellent, and
as I may term it, matchless policy of Lycurgus, and in truth, by reason of
her perfection, monstrous, yet notwithstanding, so careful for the education
of children, as of her principal charge, and even in the Muses bosom and
resting place, there is so little mention made of learning: as if that generous
youth disdaining all other yokes but of virtue, ought only be furnished, in
liew of tutors of learning, with masters of volour, of justice, of wisdom,
and of temperance. An example which Plato has imitated in his Laws. The
manner of their discipline was, to propound questions unto them, teaching the
judgment of men and of their actions: and if by way of reason or discourse,
they condemned or praised, either this man, or that deed, they must be told
the truth and best: by which means at once they sharpened their wits, and
learned the right. Af^^ages in Zenophon calls Cyrus to an account of his last
lesson: It is (says he) that a great lad in our School, having a little
coat, gave it to one of his fellows, that was of lesser stature than
himself, and took his coat from him, which was too big for him: our Master
having made me judge of that difference, I judged that things must be left in
the state they were in, and that both seemed to be better fitted as they were;
whereupon he showed me, I had done ill; because I had not only considered the
comeliness, where I should chiefly have respected justice, which required,
that none should be forced in any thing which properly belonged to him, and
said, he was whi^t for it, as we are in our countrie-townes, when we have
forgotten the first preterperfect tense or A^rist^e of (...). My Regent might
long enough make me a prolixe and cunning Oration in genere demonstrativo, in
the oratorie kind of praise or dispraise, before ever he should persuade me
his School is worth that. They have gone about to make the way shorter: and
since Sciences (even when they are right taken) can teach us nothing but
wisdom, honesty, integrity, and resolution; they have at first sight,
attempted to put their children to the proper of effects, and instruct them,
not by hearsay, but by assay of action, lively modelling and framing them,
not only by precepts and words, but principally by examples and works, that
it might not be a Science in their mind, but rather his complexion and
habitude; not a purchase, but a natural inheritance.

To this purpose when Agesilaus was demanded, what his opinion was, children
should learn: answered, What they should do being men. It is no marvel, if
such an institution have produced so admirable effects. Some say, that in other
Cities of Greece they went to seek for Rhetoricians, for Painters, and for
Musicians* whereas in L^^^d^m^^, they fought for Lawgivers, for Magistrates,
and Generals of a(...)s: In A44Span^^s men learned to say well, but here, to
do well: there to resolve a sophistical argument, and to confound the
imposture and amphibologie of words, captiously enterlaced together; here to
shake off the allurements of voluptuousness, and with an undaunted courage to
contemn the threats of fortune, and reject the menaces of death: those busied
and labored themselves about idle words, these after martial things: there
the tongue was ever in continual exercise of speaking, here the mind in an
incessant practice of well-doing. And therefore was it not strange, if
Antipater requiring fifty of their children for hostages, they answered clean
contrary to that we would do, that they would rather deliver him twice so
many men; so much did they value and esteem the loss of their countries
education. When Agesilau^ inv^t^^h Xenophon to send his children to Sparta,
there to be brought up; it is not, because they should learn Rhetorike, or
Logike, but, as himself says, to the end they may learn the worthiest and
best science that may be ^^o wit, the knowledge how to obey, and the skill how
to command. It is a sport to see Socrates, after his blunt manner, to mock
Hippias, who reports unto him, what great sums of money he had gained,
especially in certain little Cities, and small towns of Sicily, by keeping
school, and teaching letters, and that at Sparta he could not get a shilling.
That they were but Idiots and foolish people, who can neither measure nor
esteem; nor make no account of Grammar, or of Rythmes; and who only ammuse
themselves to know the succession of Kings, the establishing and declination of
estates, and such like trash of flim-flam tales. Which done, Socrates forcing
him particularly to allow the excellency of their form of public government,
the happiness and virtue of their private life, remits unto him to guess the
conclusion of the unprofitableness of his arts. Examples teach us both in
this martial policy, and in all such like, that the study of sciences does
more weaken and esteminate men's minds, then corroborate and adapt them to
war. The mightiest, yea the best settled estate, that is now in the world, is
that of the Turks, a nation equally instructed to the esteem of arms, and
disesteeme of letters. I find Rome to have been most valiant, when it was
least learned. The most warlike nations of our days, are the rudest and most
ignorant. The Scithians, the Parthians, and Tamburlane, serve to verify my
saying. When the Goths overran and ravaged Greece; that which saved all their
Libraries from the fire, was, that one among them, scattered this opinion, that
such trash of books and papers must be left untouched and whole for their
enemies, as the only mean, and proper instrument to divert them from all
military exercises, and ammuse them to idle, secure, and sedentarie
occupations. When our King Charles the eight, in a manner without unsheathing
his sword, saw himself absolute Lord of the whole kingdom of Naples, and of a
great part of Thuscanie, the Princes and Lords of his train, ascribed this
sudden, and unhoped for victory, and facility of so noble and prodigious a
conquest, only to this, that most of the Princes and nobility of Italy
ammused themselves rather to become ingenious and wise by learning, then
vigorous and warriers by military exercises.

The five and twentieth Chapter.
Of the institution and education of Children; to the Lady Diana of Foix,
Countess of Gurson.

I Never knew father, how crooked and deformed soever his son were, that
would either altogether cast him off, or not acknowledge him for his own: and
yet (unless he be merely besotted or blinded in his affection) it may not be
said, but he plainly perceives his defects, and has a feeling of his
imperfections. But so it is, he is his own. So is it in my self. I see better
then any man else, that what I have set down, is naught but the fond
imaginations of him, who in his youth has tasted nothing but the par^ng, and
seen but the superficies of true learning: whereof he has retained but a
general and shapelesse form: a smacke of every thing in general, but nothing
to the purpose in particular: After the French manner. To be short, I know
there is an art of Physic; a course of laws; four parts of the
Mathematikes; and I am not altogether ignorant, what they tend unto. And
perhaps I also know the scope and drift of Sciences in general, to be for the
service of our life. But to wade further, or that ever I tired my self with
plodding upon Aristotle (the Monarch of our modern doctrine) or obstinately
continued in the search of any one science: I confess I never did it. Nor is
there any one art, whereof I am able so much as to draw the first lineaments.
And there is no scholar (be he of the lowest form) that may not repute
himself wiser then I, who am not able to appose him in his first lesson: and
if I be forced to it, I am constrained very impertinently to draw in matter
from some general discourse, whereby I examine, and give a guess at his
natural judgment: a lesson as much unknown to them, as theirs is (...). I
^^ve not dealt or had commerce with any excellent book, except Plutarke or
Sene^^, from whom (as the Dan^ides) I draw my water, incessantly filling, and
as fast emptying: some thing whereof I fasten to this paper, but to my self
nothing at all. And touching books: History is my chief studi^, Poesy my
only delight, to which I am particularly affected: ^or as Cl(...)s said, that
as the voice being forciblie pent in the narrow g(...)t of a trumpet, at last
issues forth more strong and shriller, some seems, that a sentence cunningly
and closely couched in measure-keeping Posie, darts it self forth more
furiously, and ^ou^ds me even to the quick. And concerning the natural
faculties that are in me, (whereof behold here an essay) I perceive them to
faint under their own burden; my conceits, and my judgment march but
uncertain, and as it were groaping, straggering, and stumbling at every rush:
And when I have gone as far as I can, I have no whit pleased my self: for the
further I sail, the more land I descrie, and that so dimmed with fogges, and
over-cast with clouds, that my sight is so weakened, I cannot distinguish the
same. And then undertaking to speak indifferently of all that presents it
self unto my fantasy, and having nothing but mine own natural means to
employ therein, if it be my hap (as commonly it is) among good Authors, to
light upon those very places which I have undertaken to treat off, as even now
I did in Plutarke, reading his discourse of the power of imagination, wherein
in regard of those wise men, I acknowledge my self so weak, and so poor, so
dull and grose-headed, as I am forced both to pity and disdain my self, yet
am I pleased with this, that my opinions have often the grace to jumpe with
theirs, and that I follow them a loofe off, and thereby possess at least, that
which all other men have not; which is, that I know the utmost difference
between them and my self: all which notwithstanding I suffer my inventions to
run abroad, as weak and faint, as I have produced them, without bungling and
botching the faults, which this comparison has discovered to me in them. A man
had need have a strong back, to undertake to march foot to foot with these
kind of men. The indiscreet writers of our age, amidst their trivial
compositions, intermingle and wrest in whole sentences taken from ancient
Authors, supposing by such filching-theft to purchase honor and reputation to
themselves, do clean contrary. For, this infinite variety and dissemblance
of lustres, makes a face, so wan, so il-favored, and so ugly, in respect of
theirs, that they loose much more then gain thereby. These were two contrary
humors: The Philosopher Chrisippus was wont to foist-in amongst his books,
not only whole sentences, and other long long discourses, but whole books of
other Authors, as in one, he brought in Euripides his Medea. And Appollodorus
was wont to say of him, that if one should draw from out his books, what he
had stolen from others, his paper would remain blanke. Where as Epicurus
clean contrary to him in three hundred volumes, he left behind him, had not
made use of one allegation. It was my fortune not long since to light upon such
a place: I had languishingly traced after some French words, so naked and
shallow, and so void either of sense or matter, that at last I found them to be
naught but mere French words; and after a tedious and wearisome travel, I
chanced to stumble upon an high, rich, and even to the clouds-raised piece, the
descent whereof had it been somewhat more pleasant or easy, or the ascent
reaching a little further, it had been excusable, and to be borne-withall; but
it was such a steepie downe-fall, and by mere strength hewn out of the maine
rock, that by reading of the first six words, me thought I was carried into
another world: whereby I perceive the bottom whence I came to be so low and
deep, as I durst never more adventure to go through it; for, if I did stuff
any one of my discourses with those rich spoils, it would manifestly cause the
sottishness of others to appear. To reprove mine own faults in others,
seems to me no more insufferable, then to reprehend (as I do often) those of
others in my self. They ought to be accused everywhere, and have all places of
Sanctuary taken from them: yet do I know how over-boldly, at all times I
adventure to equal my self unto my filchings, and to march hand in hand with
them; not without a fond-hardie hope, that I may perhaps be able to bleare the
eyes of the judges from discerning them. But it is as much for the benefit of
my application, as for the good of mine invention and force. And I do not
furiously front, and body to body wrestle with those old champions: it is but
by sleights, advantages, and false-offers I seek to come within them, and if I
can, to give them a fall. I do not rashly take them about the neck, I do but
touch them, nor do I go so far as by my bargain I would seem to do; could I
but keep even with them, I should then be an honest man; for I seek not to
venture on them, but where they are strongest. To do as I have seen some, that
is, to shroud themselves under others arms, not daring so much as to show
their fingers ends unarmed, and to botch up all their works (as it is an easy
matter in a common subject, namely for the wiser sort) with ancient inventions,
here and there hudled-vp together. And in those who endeavored to hide what
they have filched from others, and make it their own, it is first a manifest
note of injustice, then a plain argument of cowardlinesse; who having nothing
of any worth in themselves to make show of, will yet under the countenance of
others sufficiency go about to make a fair offer: Moreover (oh great
foolishness) to seek by such cosening tricks to forestall the ignorant
approbation of the common sort, nothing fearing to discover their ignorance to
men of understanding (whose praise only is of value) who will soon trace out
such borrowed ware. As for me, there is nothing I will do less. I never spoke
of others, but that I may the more speak of my self. This concerns not
those mingle-mangles of many kinds of stuff, or as the Grecians call them
Rapsodies, that for such are published, of which kind I have (since I came to
years of discretion) seen diverse most ingenious and witty; amongst others,
one under the name of Capilupus; besides many of the ancient stamp. These are
wits of such excellence, as both here and elsewhere they will soon be
perceived, as our late famous writer Lipsius, in his learned and laborious work
of the Polit^kes: yet whatsoever come of it, for so much as they are but
follies, my intent is not to smother them, no more then a bald and hoarie
picture of mine, where a Painter has drawn not a perfect visage, but mine
own. For, howsoever, these are but my humors and opinions, and I deliver them
but to show what my conceit is, and not what ought to be believed. Wherein I
aim at nothing but to display my self, who peradventure (if a new prentiship
change me) shall be an other to morrow. I have no authority to purchase
belief, neither do I desire it; knowing well that I am not sufficiently taught
to instruct others. Some having read my precedent Chapter, told me not long
since in mine own house, I should somewhat more have extended my self in the
discourse concerning the institution of children. Now (Madam) if there were any
sufficiency in me, touching that subject, I could not better employ the same,
then to bestow it as a present upon that little lad, which ere long threatens
to make a happy issue from out your honorable womb: for (Madame) you are too
generous to begin with other then a man child. And having had so great a part
in the conduct of your successful marriage, I may challenge some right and
interest in the greatness and prosperity of all that shall proceed from it:
moreover, the ancient and rightful possession, which you from time to time
have ever had, and still have over my service, urges me with more then
ordinary respects, to wish all honor, welfare and advantage to whatsoever
may in any sort concern you and yours. And truly, my meaning is, but to show,
that the greatest difficulty, and importing all humane knowledge, seems to
be in this point, where the nurture and institution of young children is in
question. For, as in matters of husbandry the labor that must be used before
sowing, setting, and planting, yea in planting it self, is most certain and
easy. But when that which was sown, set, and planted, comes to take life;
before it come to ripeness, much ado, and great variety of proceeding
belongs to it. So in men, it is no great matter to get them, but being borne,
what continual cares, what diligent attendance, what doubts and fears, do
daily wait on their parents and tutors, before they can be nurtured and
brought to any good? The fore-shew of their inclination whilst they are young
is so uncertain, their humors so variable, their promises so changing, their
hopes so false, and their proceedings so doubtful, that it is very hard, (yea
for the wisest) to ground any certain judgment, or assured success upon
them. Behold Cymon, view Th^^^istocles, and a thousand others, how they have
differed, and fallen to better from themselves, and deceive the expectation of
such as knew them. The young whelps both of Dogs and Bears, at first sight
show their natural disposition, but men headlong embracing this custom or
fashion, following that humor or opinion, admitting this or that passion,
allowing of that of this law, are easily changed, and soon disguised; yet is
it hard to force the natural propension or readiness of the mind, whereby it
follows, that for want of heedie foresight in those that could not guide
their course well, they often employ much time in vain, to address young
children in those matters, whereunto they are not naturally addicted. All which
difficulties notwithstanding, mine opinion is, to bring them up in the best and
pro^^a^^^st studies, and that a man should slightly passe-over those fond
presages, and deceiving prognostikes, which we over-precisely gather in their
infancy. And (without offense be it said) me thinks, that Plato in his
commonwealth allows them too*too much authority.

Madame, Learning joined with true knowledge is an especial and graceful
ornament, and an implement of wonderful use and consequence, namely in persons
raised to that degree of fortune, wherein you are. And in good truth, learning
has not her own true form, nor can she make show of her beauteous
lineaments, if she fall into the hands of base and vile persons. [For, as
famous Torquato Tasso says; Philoso^phie being a rich and noble Queen, and
knowing her own worth, graciously smileth upon, and lovingly embraces Princes
and noble men, if they become suitors to her, admitting them as her minions, and
gently affoording them all the favors she can; whereas upon the contrary, if
she be wooed, and sued unto by clownes, mechanical fellows, and such base
kind of people, she holds her self disparaged and disgraced, as holding no
proportion with them. And therefore see we by experience, that if a true
Gentleman, or nobleman follow her with any attention, and wooed her with
importunity, he shall learn and know more of her, and prove a better
scholar in one year, then an ungentle, or base fellow shall in seven, though
he pursue her never so attentively.] She is much more ready and fierce to lend
her furtherance and direction in the conduct of a war, to attempt honorable
actions, to command a people, to treat a peace with a prince of foreign
nation, then she is to form an argument in Logic, to devise a Syllogisine, to
canvase a case at the bar, or to prescribe a receipt of pills. So (noble
Lady) for so much as I cannot persuade my self, that you will either forget or
neglect this point, concerning the institution of yours, especially having
tasted the sweetness thereof, and being descended of so noble and learned a
race. For we yet possess the learned compositions of the ancient and noble
Earls of Foix, from out whose heroicke loins your husband and you take your
offspring. And Francis Lord of Candale your worthy uncle, does daily bring
forth such fruits thereof, as the knowledge of the matchless quality of your
house shall hereafter extend it self to many ages; I will therefore make you
acquainted with one conceit of mine, which contrary to the common use I hold,
and that is all I am able to afford you, concerning that matter. The charge of
the Tutor, which you shall appoint your son, in the choice of whom consists
the whole substance of his education and bringing-vp; on which are many
branches depending, which (forasmuch as I can add nothing of any moment to it)
I will not touch at all. And for that point, wherein I presume to advise him,
he may so far forth give credit unto it, as he shall see just cause. To a
gentleman borne of noble parentage, and heir of a house, that aymeth at true
learning, and in it would be disciplined, not so much for gain or commodity
to himself (because so abject an end is far unworthy the grace and favor of
the Muses, and besides, has a regard or dependencie of others) nor for
external show and ornament, but to adorn and enrich his inward mind,
desiring rather to shape and institute an able and sufficient man, then a bare
learned man. My desire is therefore, that the parents or overseers of such a
gentleman be very circumspect, and careful in choosing his director, whom I
would rather commend for having a well composed and temperate brain, then a
full stuffed head, yet both will do well. And I would rather prefer wisdom,
judgment, civil customs, and modest behavior, then bare and mere litterall
learning; and that in his charge he hold a new course. Some never cease
brawling in their scholars ears (as if they were still po^ring in a tonell)
to follow their book, yet is their charge nothing else, but to repeat, what
has been told them before. I would have a tutor to correct this part, and
that at first entrance, according to the capacity of the wit he has in hand,
he should begin to make show of it, making him to have a smacke of all things,
and how to choose and distinguish them, without help of others, sometimes
opening him the way, other times leaving him to open-it by himself. I would
not have him to invent and speak alone, but suffer his disciple to speak when
his turn comes. Socrates, and after him Arc^silaus, made their scholars to
speak first, and then would speak them-selves. Obest plerumque ijs qui discere
volunt, auctoritas eorum, qui docent. Most ^^c. D^ Not. lib. 1.
commonly the authority of them that teach, hinders them that would learn^.

It is therefore meet, that he make him first trot-on before him, whereby he
may the better judge of his pace, and so guess how long he will hold out, that
accordingly he may fit his strength: for want of which proportion, we often
marre-all. And to know how to make a good choice, and how far forth one may
proceed (still keeping a due measure) is one of the hardest labors I know. It
is a sign of a noble, and effect of an vnd^nted spirit, to know how to second,
and how far forth he shall condescend to his childish proceedings, and how to
guide them. As for my self, I can better and with more strength walk up, then
down a ^ill. Those which according to our common fashion, undertake with one
selfsame lesson, and like manner of education, to direct many spirits of
diverse forms and different humors, it is no marvel if among a multitude of
children, they scarce meet with two or three, that reap any good fruit by their
discipline, or that come to any perfection. I would not only have him to
demand an account of the words contained in his lesson, but of the sense and
substance thereof, and judge of the profit he has made of-it, not by the
testimony of his memory, but by the witness of his life. That what he lately
learned, he cause him to set forth and pourtray the same into sundry shapes,
and then to accommodate-it to as many different and several subjects; whereby
he shall perceive, whether he have yet apprehended the same, and therein
enfeoffed himself, at due times taking his instruction from the institution
given by Plato. It is a sign of cruditie and indigestion for a man to yield up
his meat, even as he swallowed the same: the stomach has not wrought his full
operation, unless it have changed form, and altered fashion of that which was
given him to boil and concoct.

[We see men gape after no reputation but learning, and when they say, such a
one is a learned man, they think they have said enough;] Our mind does move
at others pleasure, as tied and forced to serve the fantasies of others, being
brought under by authority, and forced to stoop to the lure of their bare
lesson; we have been so subjected to harp upon one string; that we have no
way left-vs to descant upon voluntary: our vigor and liberty is clean
extinct. Nunquam tutelae suae fiunt. They never come to their own tuition. It
was my hap to be familiarlie acquainted with an honest man at Pisa, but such
an Aristotelian, as he held this infallible position; that a conformity to
Aristotle's doctrine was the true touchstone and squire of all solid
imaginations, and perfect verity; for, whatsoever had no coherencie with-it,
was but fond Chimeraes, and idle humors; in as much as he had knowne-all,
seen-all, and said-all. This proposition of his, being somewhat over-amply and
injuriously interpreted by some, made him a long time after to be troubled in
the inquisition of Rome, I would have him make his scholar narrowly to sift
all things with discretion, and harbor nothing in his head by mere
authority, or upon trust. Aristotle's principles shall be no more axioms unto
him, then the Stoikes or Epicurians. Let this diversity of judgments be
proposed unto him, if he can, he shall be able to distinguish the truth from
falsehood, if not, he will remain doubtful.

Che non men che saper dubbiar m'aggrada. Dant inferno, Can^. 12. 48.
No less it pleases me,
To doubt, then wise to be.
For if by his own discourse he embrace the opinions of Xenophon, or of Plato,
they shall be no longer theirs, but his. He that merely follows another,
traceth nothing, and seeks nothing: Non sumus sub Rege, fibi quisque se
vindicet. We are not under a Kings command, S^^. epist. 33.
every one may challenge himself, for let him at least know that he knows.
It is requisite he endeavor as much to feed himself with their conceits, as
labor to learn their precepts; which, so he know how to apply, let him
hardly forget, where, or whence he had them. Truth and reason are common to
all, and are no more proper unto him that spoke them heretofore, than unto him
that shall speak them hereafter. And it is no more according to Platoes
opinion, than to mine, since both he and I understand and see alike. The Be^s
do here and there suck this, and cull that flower, but afterward they produce
the honey, which is peculiarly their own, then is it no more Thyme or Majoram.
So of pieces borrowed of others, he may lawfully alter, transform, and
confound them, to shape out of them a perfect piece of work, altogether his
own; always provided, his judgment, his travel, study, and institution
tend to nothing, but to frame the same perfect. Let him hardly conceal, where,
or whence he has had any help, and make no show of any thing, but of that
which he has made himself. Pirates, filchers, and borrowers, make a show of
their purchaces and buildings, but not of that which they have taken from
others: you see not the secret fees o^ bribes Lawyers take of their Clients,
but you shall manifestly discover the alliances they make, the honors they get
for their children, and the goodly houses they build. No man makes open show of
his receit^, but every one of his gettings. The good that comes of study (or
at least should come) is to prove better, wiser, and honester. It is the
understanding power (said Epicharmus) that sees and hears, it is it, that
profits all, and disposes all, that moves, swayeth, and rules all: all
things else are but blind, senseless, and without spirit. And truly in
barring him of liberty to do any thing of himself, we make him thereby more
servile and more coward. Who would ever enquire of his scholar what he
thinks of Rethorike, of Grammar, of this, or of that sentence of Cicero?
Which things thoroughly fethered (as if they were oracles) are let fly into our
memory; in which both letters and sillables are substantial parts of the
subject. To know by roat is no perfect knowledge, but to keep what one has
committed to his memories charge, is commendable: what a man directly knows,
that will he dispose-of, without turning still to his book, or looking to his
pattern. A mere bookish sufficiency is unpleasant. All I expect of it, is an
imbellishing of my actions, and not a foundation of them, according to Platoes
mind, who says, constancy, faith, and sincerity, are true Philosophy; as
for other Sciences, and tending elsewhere, they are but garish paintings. I
would feign have Paluel or P^mpey, those two excellent dauncers of our time,
with all their nimblenesse, teach any man to do their lofty tricks, and high
capers, only with seeing them done, and without stirring out of his place, as
some Pedanticall fellows would instruct our minds without mooving or putting
it in practice. And glad would I be to find-one, that would teach us how to
manage a horse, to toss a pike, to shoote-off a piece, to play upon the l^te,
or to warble with the voice, without any exercise, as these kind of men would
teach us to judge, and how to speak well, without any exercise of speaking or
judging. In which kind of life, or as I may term it, Prentiship, what action
or object soever presents it-selfe unto our eyes, may serve-vs instead of a
sufficient book. A pretty pranke of a boy, a knavish trick of a page, a
foolish part of a lackey, an idle tale or any discourse-else, spoken either in
jest or earnest, at the table or in company, are even as new subjects for-vs
to worke-vpon: for furtherance whereof, commerce or common society among men,
visiting of fortaine countries, and observing of strange fashions, are very
necessary, not only to be able (after the manner of our young gallants of
France) to report how many paces the Church of S^^ta Rotonda is in length or
breadth, or what rich garments the curtezan Sig^ora Livia wea^eth, and the
worth of her hosen; or as some do, nicely to dispute how much longer or broader
the face of Nero is, which they have seen in some old ruins of Italy, then
that which is made for him in other old monuments elsewhere. But they should
principally observe, and be able to make certain relation of the humors and
fashions of those countries they have seen, that they may the better know, how
to correct and prepare their wits by those of others. I would therefore have
him begin even from his infancy to travel abroad; and first, that at one
shoot he may hit two marks, he should see neighbour-countries, namely where
languages are most different from ours; for, unless a man's tongue be fashioned
unto them in his youth, he shall never attain to the true pronuntiation of
them, if he once grow in years. Moreover, we see it received as a common
opinion of the wiser sort, that it agrees not with reason, that a child be
always nuzled, cockered, dandled, and brought up in his parents lap or sight;
for so much as their natural kindness, or as I may call it tender fondness
causes often, even the wisest, to prove so idle, so over-nice, and so
base-minded. For parents are not capable, neither can they find in their hearts
to see them checked, corrected, or chastised, nor endure to see them brought up
so meanly, and so far from daintiness, and many times so dangerously, as they
must needs be. And it would grieve them to see their children come home from
those exercises, that a Gentleman must necessarily acquaint himself with,
sometimes all wet and bemyred, other times sweatie, and full of dust, and to
drink being either extreme hot, or exceeding cold; and it would trouble them
to see him ride a rough-vntamed horse, or with his weapon furiously encounter a
skillful Fencer, or to handle and shoote-off a musket; against which there is
no remedy, if he will make him prove a sufficient, complete, or honest man: he
must not be spared in his youth; and it will come to pass, that he shall many
times have occasion and be forced to shocke the rules of Physic.

Vitamque sub dio and trepidis agat Her. li. 1. od. 2. 4.
In rebus. -- Lead he his life in open air,
And in affairs full of despair.
It is not sufficient to make his mind strong, his muskles must also be
strengthened: the mind is over-borne if it be not seconded: and it is too much
for hi^ alone to discharge two offices. I have a feeling how mine pants,
being joined to so tender and sensible a body, and that lies so heavy upon
it. And in my lecture, I often perceive how my Authors in their writings
sometimes commend examples for magnanimity and force, that rather proceed from
a thick skin and hardness of the bones. I have known men, women and children
borne of so hard a constitution, that a blow with a cudgel would less hurt
them, then a filip would do me, and so dull and blockish, that they will
neither stir tongue nor eiebrowes, beat them never so much. When wrestlers go
about to counterfeit the Philosophers patience, they rather show the vigor of
their sinnewes, then of their heart. For the custom to bear travel, is to
tolerate grief: Labor callum obducit dolori. Labor works a Cic. Tus. qu li.
2
hardness upon sorrow. He must be endured to suffer the pain and hardness
of exercises, that so he may be induced to endure the pain of the colicke, of
cauterie, of falls, of sprains, and other diseases incident to man's body: yea,
if need require, patiently to bear imprisonment, and other tortures, by which
sufferance he shall come to be had in more esteem and account: for according
to time and place, the good as well as the bad man may happily fall into them;
we have seen it by experience. Whosoever striveth against the laws, threats
good men with mischief and extortion. Moreover, the authority of the Tutor
(who should be sovereign over him) is by the cockering and presence of the
parents, hindered and interrupted: besides the awe and respect, which the
household bears him, and the knowledge of the means, possibilities, and
greatness of his house, are in my judgment, no small lets in a young
Gentleman. In this school of commerce, and society among men, I have often
noted this vice, that in lieu of taking acquaintance of others, we only
endeavor to make our selves known to them: and we are more ready to utter such
merchandise as we have, then to ingrosse and purchase new commodities. Silence
and modesty are qualities very convenient to civil conversation. It is also
necessary, that a young man be rather taught to be discrectly-sparing, and
close-handed, then prodigally-wastfull and lavish in his expenses, and moderate
in husbanding his wealth when he shall come to possess it. And not to take
pepper in the nose for every foolish tale that shall be spoken in his presence,
because it is an uncivil importunity, to contradict, whatsoever is not
agreeing to our humor: let him be pleased to correct himself. And let-him not
seem to blame that in others, which he refuses to do himself, nor go about
to withstand common fashions. Licet sapere sine pompa, sine invidia. A man may
be Sen. ipist. 103 f.
wise without ostentation, without envy. Let him avoid those imperious images
of the world, those uncivil behaviors, and childish ambition, wherewith
God-wot, too-too many are possessed: that is, to make a fair show of that, which
is not in him: endeavoring to be reputed other then indeed he is; and as if
reprehension and new devises were hard to come by, he would by that mean
acquire unto himself, the name of some peculiar virtue. As it pertains but
to great Poets to use the liberty of arts; so is-it tolerable but in noble
minds, and great spirits to have a pre-eminence above ordinary fashions. Si
quid Socrates and Aristippus Cic. Off. lib 1.
contra morem and consuetudinem fecerunt, idem sibi ne arbitretur licere: Magis
enim illi and divinis bonis hanc licentiam assequebantur. If Socrates and
Aristippus have done ought against custom or good manner, let not a man think
he may do the same: for they obtained this license by their great and
excellent good parts: He shall be taught, not to enter rashly into discourse or
contesting, but when he shall encounter with a Champion, worthy his strength;
And then would I not have him employ all the tricks that may fit his turn, but
only such as may stand him in most stead. That he be taught to be curious in
making choice of his reasons, loving pertinency, and by consequence brevitie.
That above all, he be instructed to yield, yea to quit his weapons unto truth,
as soon as he shall discern the same, whether it proceed from his adversary,
or upon better advice from himself; for, he shall not be preferred to any
place of eminency above others, for repeating of a prescript part; and he is
not engaged to defend any cause, further then he may approove it; nor shall he
be of that trade, where the liberty for a man to repent and re-advise himself
is sold for ready money. Neque, vt omnia, Cic. Acad. q^. lib. 4.
que praescripta and imperata sint, defendat, necessitate vlla cogitur. Nor is
he enforced by any necessity to defend and make good all that is prescribed
and commanded him. If his tutor agree with my humor, he shall frame his
affection, to be a most loyal and true subject to his Prince, and a most
affectionate and courageous Gentleman, in all that may concern the honor of
his Sovereign, or the good of his country. And endeavor to suppress in him
all manner of affection to undertake any action, otherwise then for a public
good and duty. Besides many inconveniences, which greatly prejudice our
liberty, by reason of these particular bonds; the judgment of a man that is
waged and bought, either it is less free and honest, or else it is blemished
with oversight and ingratitude. A mere and precise Courtier, can neither have
law nor will to speak or think, otherwise then favourablie of his Master, who
among so many thousands of his subjects, has made choice of him alone, to
institute and bring himvp with his own hand. These favors, with the
commodities that follow minion Courttiers, corrupt (not without some color of
reason) his liberty, and dazzle his judgment. It is therefore commonly seen,
that the Courtiers-language differs from other men's, in the same state, and to
be of no great credit in su^ch matters. Let therefore his conscience and
virtue shine in his speech, and reason be his chief direction. Let him be
taught to confess such faults as he shall discover in his own discourses,
albeit none other perceive them but himself; for it is an evident show of
judgment, and effect of sincerity, which are the chiefest qualities he aymeth
at. That wilfully to strive, and obstinately to contest in words, are common
qualities, most apparent in basest minds: That to re-advise and correct
himself, and when one is most earnest, to leave an ill opinion; are rare,
noble, and philosophical conditions. Being in company, he shall be put in
mind, to cast his eyes round about, and everywhere: For I note, that the
chief places are usually seized upon by the most unworthy, and less capable;
and that height of fortune is seldom joined with sufficiency. I have seen,
that whilst they at the upper end of a board were busy entertaining
themselves, with talking of the beauty of the hangings about a chamber, or of
the taste of some good cup of wine, many good discourses at the lower end, have
utterly been lost. He shall weigh the carriage of every man in his calling, a
Heardsman, a Mason, a Stranger, or a traveller; all must be employed; every one
according to his worth; for all helps to make-vp household; yea, the folly and
the simplicity of others, shall be as instructions to him. By controlling the
graces and manners of others, he shall acquire unto himself envy of the good,
and contempt of the bad. Let him hardly be possessed with an honest curiosity to
search out the nature and causes of all things: let him survay what soever is
rare and singular about him; a building, a fountain, a man, a place where any
battle has been fought, or the passages of Caesar or Charlemaint.

Quae tellus sit l^^ta gelu, quae putris ab aestu, Prop* ^i. 4 ^^. 3. 39.

Ventus in Italiam quis been vela ferat.
What land is parcht with heat, what clogged with frost,
What wind drives kindly to the Italian coast.
He shall endeavor to be familiarly acquainted with the customs, with the
means, with the state, with the dependances and alliances of all Princes; they
are things soon and pleasant to be learned, and most profitable to be known.
In this acquaintance of men, my meaning is, that he chiefly comprehend them,
that live but by the memory of books. He shall, by the help of Histories,
inform himself of the worthiest minds that were in the best ages. It is a
frivolous study, if a man list, but of invaluable worth, to such as can make
use of it. And as Plato says, the only study the Lacedemon^ans res^^ved for
themselves. What profit shall he not reap, touching this point, reading the
lives of our Plutarke? Always conditioned, the master bethink himself
whereto his charge tends, and that he imprint not so much in his scholars
mind the date of the ru^^e of Carthage, as the manners of H^nniball and Scipio,
nor so much where Marc^llus died, as because he was unworthy of his devoire he
died there: that he teach him not so much to know Histories, as to judge of
them. It is, amongst things that best agree with my humor, the subject to
which our spirits do most diversely apply themselves. I have read in T(...)
Livi^s a number of things, which peradventure others never read, in whom
Plutarke happly read a hundred ^ore, then ever I could read, and which perhaps
the author himself did never intend to ^^t down. To some kind of men, it is a
mere gramaticall study, but to others a perfect anatomy of Philosophy; by
means whereof, the secretest part of our nature is searched-into. There are in
Plutarke many ample discourses most worthy to be known: for in my judgment*
he is the chief work-master of such works, whereof there are a thousand,
whereat he has but slightly glanced; for with his finger he does but point us
out a way to walk in, if we list; and is sometimes pleased to give but a touch
at the quickest and maine point of a discourse, from whence they are by
diligent study to be drawn, and so brought into open marke^. As that saying
of his. That the inhabitants of Asia, served but one alone, because they could
not pronounce one only syllable, which is Non gave perhaps both subject and
occasion to my friend Beotie to compose his book of voluntary servitude. If
it were no more but to see Plutarke wrest a slight action to man's life; or a
word that seems to bear no such sense, it will serve for a whole discourse.
It is p(...)en of understanding should so much love brevitie, without doubt
their reputation is thereby better, but we the worse* Plutarke had rather we
should commend him for his judgment, then for his knowledge, he loves better
to leave a kind of longing-desire in us of him, then a sacietie. He knew very
well, that even in good things, too much may be said: and that Alexandridas did
justly reprove him, who spoke very good sentences to the Ephores, but they
were overtedious. Oh stranger, quoth he, thou speak what thou ought,
otherwise then thou should. Those that have lean and thin bodies stuff
them up with bumbasting. And such as have but poor matter, will puffe-it up
with lofty words. There is a marvelous cleerenesse, or as I may terme-it an
enlightening of man's judgment drawn from the commerce of men, and by
frequenting abroad in the world: we are all so contrived and compact in
ourselves, that our sight is made shorter by the length of our nose. When
Socrates was demanded whence he was, he answered, not of Athens, but of the
world; for he, who had his imagination more full, and farther stretching,
embraced all the world for his native City, and extended his acquaintance, his
society, and affections to all mankind: and not as we-do, that look no
further then our feet. If the frost chance to n^p the vines about my village,
my Priest does presently argue, that the wrath of God hangs over our head, and
threatens all mankind* and judges that the Pippe is already ^al^e upon the
Canibals.

In viewing these intestine and civil broiles of ours, who does not exclaim,
that this worlds vast-frame is near unto a dissolution, and that the day of
judgment is ready to fall on us? never remembering that many worse revolutions
have been seen, and that whilst we are plunged in grief, and overwhelmed in
sorrow, a thousand other parts of the worldbesides, are blessed with all
happiness, and wallow in pleasures, and never think on us? whereas, when I
behold our lives, our license, and impunitie, I wonder to see them so mild and
easy. He on whose head it haileth, thinks all the Hemispheare besides to be in
a storm and tempest. And as that dull-pated Savoyard said, that if the seely
king of France could cunningly have managed his fortune, he might very well
have made himself chief Steward of his Lords household, whose imagination
conceived no other greatness than his Masters; we are all insensible of this
kind of error: an error of great consequence and prejudice. But whosoever
shall present unto his inward eyes, as it were in a Table, the Idea of the
great image of our vniversall-mother Nature, attired in her richest roabes,
sitting in the throne of her Majesty, and in her visage shall read, so
general, and so constant a variety; he that therein shall view himself, not
himself alone, but a whole kingdom, to be in respect of a great circle; but
the smallest point that can be imagined, he only can value things according to
their essential greatness and proportion. This great universe (which some
multiply as Species under one Genus) is the true looking-glass wherein we
must look, if we will know whether we be of a good stamp, or in the right
byase. To conclude, I would have this worlds-frame to be my Scholars
choise-booke: So many strange humors, sundry sects, varying judgments,
diverse opinions, different laws, and fantastical customs teach-vs to judge
rightly of ours, and instruct our judgment to acknowledge his imperfections
and natural weakness, which is no easy an apprentiship: So many innovations
of estates, so many falls of Princes, and changes of public fortune, may, and
ought to teach us, not to make so great account of ou^s: So many names, so many
victories, and so many conquests buried in dark oblivion, makes the hope to
perpetuate our names, but ridiculous, by the surprising of ^en Argo lettiers,
or of a small cottage, which is known but by his fall. The pride and
fierceness of so many strange and gorgeous shows: the pride-puft majesty of
so many courts, and of their greatness, ought to confirm and as^ure our
sight, undauntedly to bear the affronts and thunderclaps of ours, without
seeling our eyes: So many thousands of men, low-laide in their graves afore-vs,
may encourage-vs, not to fear, or be ^is^aied to go meet so good company in
the other world; and so of all things else. Our life (said Pithagoras)
drawes-neare unto the great and populous assemblies of the Olympike games,
wherein some, to get the glory, and to win the goal of the games, exercise
their bodies with all industry; others, for greediness of gain, bring
thither marchand se to sell: others there are (and those be not the worst) that
seek after no other good, but to mark, how, wherefore, and to what end, all
things are done: and to be spectators or observers of other men's lives and
actions, that so they may the better judge and direct their own. Unto examples
may all the most profitable Discourses of Philosophy be sorted, which ought to
be the touchstone of humane actions, and a rule to square them by, to whom may
be said,

-- quid fas optare, quid asper Pers. sat. 3. 69.

V^^le ^ummus habet, patriae charisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri deceat, quem te Deus esse
Iussis, and humana qua part locatus es in re,
Quid sumus, aut quidnam victuri gignimur: --
What thou may wish, what profit may come clear, 67.

From new-stampt coin, to friends and country dear,
What thou ought give: whom God would have thee be,
And in what part among men he placed thee.
What we are, and wherefore,
To live here we were bore.
What it is to know, and not to know (which ought to be the scope of study)
what valor, what temperance, and what justice-is: what difference there-is
between ambition and avarice, bondage and freedom, subjection and liberty,
by which marks a man may distinguish true and perfect contentment, and how
far-forth one ought to fear or apprehend death, grief, or shame.

Et quo quemque modo fugiatque feratque laborem. Virg A^n. lib. ^ 853.
How every labor he may plie,
And bear, or every labor fly.
What wards or springs move-vs, and the causes of so many motions in-vs: For me
seems* that the first discourses, wherewith his conceit should be sprinkled,
ought to be those, that rule his manners, and direct his sense; which will both
teach him to know himself, and how to live, and how to die-well. Among the
liberal Sciences, let us begin with that which makes-vs free: Indeed, they may
all in some sort stead-vs, as an instruction to our life, and use of-it; as all
other things-else serve the same to some purpose or other. But let us make
especial choice of that; which may directly and pertinently serve the same. If
we could restrain and adapt the appurtenances of our life to their right byase
and natural limits, we should find the best part of the Sciences that now are
in use, clean out of fashion with us: yea, and in those that are most in use,
there are certain by-waies and deep-^lows most profitable, which we should
do-well to leave, and according to the institution of Socrates, limit the
course of our studies in those where profit is wanting*

-- sapere aude,
Incipe: vivendi qui recte prorogat ^oram, Hor. lib. 1. epist. 2. 40.

Rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis, at ille
Labitur, and lab^tur in omne volubilis aevum.
Be bold to be wise: to begin, be strong,
He that to live well does the time prolong,
Clowne-like expects, till down the stream be run;
That runs, and will run, till the world be done.
It is more simplicity to teach our children.

Quid moveant Pisces, animosaque signa Leonis,
Lotus and Hesperia quid Capricornus aq^^. Prop. li. 4. ^^ 1. 85.

What Pisces move, or hot-breath'd L^os beams,
Or Capricornus bathed in western streams.
The knowledge of the stars, and the motion of the eightspheare, before their
own.

(...) What longs it to the seven stars, and me,
Or those about Boots be.
Anaximenes writing to Pithagoras, says, with what sense can I ammuse my self
to the secrets of the Stars, having continually ^eath or bondage before mine
eyes? For at that time the Kings of Persia were making preparations to war
against his Country. All men ought to say so. Being beaten, with ambition,
with avarice, with rashness, and with superstition, and having such other
enemies unto life within him. Wherefore shall I study and take care about the
mobility and variation of the world? When he is once taught what is fit to
make him better and wiser, he shall be entertained with Logic, natural
Philosophy, Geometry, and Rhetoric, then having settled his judgment, look
what ^cience he does most addict himself unto, he shall in short time attain
to the perfection of it. His lecture shall be sometimes by way of talk and
sometimes by book: his tutor may now and then supply him with the same Author,
as an end and motive of his institution: sometimes giving him the pith and
substance of it ready chewed. And if of himself he be not so thoroughly
acquainted with books, that he may readily find so many notable discourses as
are in them to effect his purpose, it shall not be amiss, that some learned
man being appointed to keep him company, who at any time of need, may furnish
him with such munition, as he shall stand in need of; that he may afterward
distribute and dispense them to his best use. And that this kind of lesson be
more easy and natural then that of Gaza, who will make question? Those are
but harsh, thornie, and unpleasant precepts; vain* idle and immateriall words,
on which small hold may be taken; wherein is nothing to quicken the mind. In
this, the spirit finds substance to bide and feed upon. A fruit without all
comparison much better, and that will soon be ripe. It is a thing worthy
consideration, to see what state things are brought unto in this our age; and
how Philosophy, even to the wisest, and men of best understanding, is but an
idle, vain and fantastical name, of small use, and less worth, both in
opinion and effect. I think these Sophistries are the cause of it, which have
forestalled the ways to come unto it: They do very ill, that go about to
make it seem as it were inaccessible for children to come unto, setting it
forth with a wrimpled, gastlie, and frowning visage; who has ^asked her with
so counterfeit, pale, and hideous a countenance? There is nothing more
beauteous, nothing more delightful, nothing more gamesome; and as I may say,
nothing more fondly wanton: for she presents nothing to our eyes, and
preaches nothing to our ears, but sport and pastime. A sad and lowering look
plainly declares, that that is not her haunt. Demetrius the Gramarian, finding
a company of Philosophers sitting close together in the Temple of Delphos,
said unto them, Either I am deceived, or by your plausible and pleasant looks,
you are not in any serious and carnest discourse amongst your selves; to whom
one of them named Heracleon the Megarian answered, That belongs to them, who
busy themselves in seeking, whether the future tense of the verb (...) has a
double ^, or that labor to find the derivation of the comparatives, (...) and
of the superlatives (...) it is they, that must chafe in intertaining
themselves with their science: as for discourses of Philosophy they are wont
to glad, rejoice, and not to vex and molest those that use them.

Deprendas animi torment a latentis in aegro I^^^^ sa^. 9 18.

Corpore, deprendas and gaudia, sumit v^rumqu^
Inde ^abitum facies.
You may perceive the torments of the mind,
Hid in sick body, you the joys may find,
The face such habit takes in either kind.
That mind which harbors Philosophy, ought by reason of her sound health,
make that body also sound and healthie: it ought to make her contentment to
through-shine in all exterior parts: it ought to shapen and model all outward
demeanours to the model of it: and by consequence arm him that does possess
it, with a gracious stoutnesse, and lively audac^tie, with an active and
pleasing gesture, and with a settled and cheerful countenance. The most
evident token, and apparent sign of true wisdom, is a constant, and
unconstrained rejoicing, whose estate is like unto all things above the Moon,
that is, ever clear, always bright. It is Baroco and Baralip^on, that makes
their followers prove so base and idle, and not Philosophy; they know hi^not,
but by hearsay; what? Is it not she, that cleereth all storms of the mind?
And teaches misery, samine, and sickness to laugh? Not by reason of some
imaginary Epicicles, but by natural and palpable reasons. She aymeth at
nothing but virtue: it is virtue she seeks after; which as the school says,
is not pitched on the top of an high, steepie, or inaccessible hill; for they
that have come unto her, affirm, that cleane-contrarie, she keeps her stand,
and holds her mansion, in a fair, flourishing, and pleasant plain, whence as
from an high watch tower, she survaieth all things, to be subject unto her, to
whom any man may with great sacilitie come; if he but know the way or entrance
to her palace: for, the paths that lead unto her, are certain fresh, and
shadie green allies, sweet and flow^^e ways, whose ascent is even, easy, and
nothing wearisome, like unto that of heavens-vaults. For So Much as they have not
frequented this virtue, who gloriously, as in a throne of Majesty sits
sovereign, goodly, triumphant, lovely, equally delicious, and courageous,
protesting her-selfe to be a professed and irreconciliable enemy to all
sharpness, austeritie, fear, and compulsion; having nature for her guide,
fortune and voluptuousness for her companions; they according to their
weakness have imaginarily fained her, to have a foolish, sad, grim, quarelous,
spiteful, threatening, and disdainful visage, with an horride and unpleasant
look; and have placed her, upon a craggie, sharp, and unfrequented rock,
amidst desert cliffes, and uncouth crags, as a skar-crow, or bug-beare, to
affright the common people with. Now the tutour, which ought to know, that he
should rather seek to fill the mind, and store the will of his disciple, as
much, or rather more, with love and affection, then with awe, and reverence
unto virtue, may show and tell him, that Poets follow common humors, making
him plainly to perceive, and as it were palpably to feel, that the Gods have
rather placed labor and sweat at the entrances, which lead to V^nus chambers,
then at the doors, that direct to Pallas cabinets.

And when he shall perceive his scholar to have a sensible feeling of
himself, presenting Bradamant, or Angelica before him, as a Mistress to
enjoy, embelished with a natural, active, generous, and unspotted beauty, not
ugly, or Giant-like, but blithe and livelie, in respect of a wanton, soft,
affected, and artificiall-flaring beauty; the one attired like unto a young
man, coyfed with a bright-shining helmet, the other disguised and dressed about
the head like unto an impudent harlot, with embroyderies, frizelings, and
carcanets of pearls: he will no doubt deem his own love to be a man and no
woman, if in his choice he differ from that effeminate shepherd of Phrigia. In
this new kind of lesson, he shall declare unto him, that the prize, the glory,
and height of true virtue, consists in the facility, profit, and pleasure of
his exercises: so far from difficulty, and encumbrances, that children as well
as men, the simple as soon as the wise, may come unto her. Discretion and
temperance, not force or way-wardnesse are the instruments to bring him unto
her. Socrates (virtues chief favorite) that he might the better walk in the
pleasant, natural, and open path, of her progresies, does voluntarily and in
good earnest, quit all compulsion. She is the nurse and softer-mother of all
humane pleasures, who in making them just and upright, she also makes them sure
and sincere. By moderating them, she keeps them in ure and breath. In
limiting and cutting them off, whom she refuses; she whets-vs-on toward those
she leaves unto us; and plenteouslie leaves-vs them, which Nature pleases,
and like a kind mother gives us over unto sacietie, if not unto wearisomnesse,
unless we will peradventure say, that the rule and bridle, which stays the
drunkard before drunkenness, the glutton before surfeiting, and the let^her
before the loosing of his hair, be the enemies of our pleasures. If common
fortune faile-hir, it clearly scapes her; or she cares not for her, or she
frames another unto hir-selfe, altogether her own, not so fleeting, nor so
rolling. She knows the way how to be rich, mighty and wise, and how to lie
in sweet-perfumed beds. She loves life; she delights in beauty, in glory,
and in health. But her proper and particular office is, first to know how to
use such goods temperately, and how to loose them constantly. An office much
more noble, then severe, without which, all course of life is unnatural,
turbulent, and deformed, to which one may lawfully join those rocks, those
encumbrances, and those hideous monsters. If so it happen, that his Disciple
prove of so different a condition, that he rather love to give*eare to an idle
fable, then to the report of some noble voyage, or other notable and wise
discourse, when he shall hear it; that at the found of a Drum, or clang of a
Trumpet, which are wont to rowze and arm the youthly heat of his companions,
turns to another that calls him to see a play, tumbling, juggling tricks, or
other idle loose-time sports; and who for pleasuressake does not deem it more
delightsome to return all sweatie and weary from a victorious combat, from
wrestling, or riding of a horse, than from a Tennis-court, or dancing school,
with the prize or honor of such exercises; The best remedy I know for such a
one, is, to put him prentise to some base occupation, in some good town or
other, yea, were he the son of a Duke; according to Platoes rule, who says,
That children must be placed, not according to their fathers conditions, but
the faculties of their mind. Since it is Philosophy that teaches us to live,
and that infancy as well as other ages, may plainly read her lessons in the
same, why should it not be imparted unto young Scholars?

Vdum and molle lutum est, nunc nunc properandus, and acri Pers. sa^. ^^23.

Fingendus fine fine rota.
He Is moist and soft mould, and must by and by
Be cast, made up, while wheel whirl's readily.
We are taught to live, when our life is well-nigh spent. Many scholars have
been infected with that loathsome and marrow-wasting disease, before ever they
came to read Aristotle's treatise of Temperance. Cicero was wont to say, That
could be outlive the lives of two men, he should never find leisure to study
the Lyrike Poets. And I find these Sophisters both worse and more unprofitable.
Our child is engaged in greater matters; And but the first fifteen or
sixteen years of his life, are due unto Pedantisme, the rest unto action: let
us therefore employ so short time, as we have to live in more necessary
instructions. It is an abuse; remove these thornie quiddities of Logike,
whereby our life can no whit be amended, and betake our selves to the simple
discourses of Philosophy; know how to choose and fitly to make use of them:
they are much more easy to be conceived then one of Becace his tales. A child
coming from nurse is more capeable of them, then he is to learn to read or
write. Philosophy has discourses, whereof infancy as well as decaying
old age may make good use. I am of Plutarkes mind, which is, that Aristotle did
not so much ammuse his great Disciple about the arts how to frame Sillogismes,
or the principles of Geometry, as he endeavored to instruct-him with good
precepts, concerning valor, prowess, magnanimity, and temperance, and an
undaunted assurance not to fear any thing; and with such munition he sent him,
being yet very young, to subdue the Empire of the world, only with 30000.
footmen, 4000. horsemen, and 42000. Crowns in money. As for other arts and
sciences* he says Alexander honored them, and commended their excellency and
comeliness; but for any pleasure he took in them, his affection could not
easily be drawn to exercise them.

-- petite hinc invenesque senesque S^t. 5.64.
Finem animo certum, miserisque viatica canis. Young men and old, draw hence
(in your affairs)
Your minds set mark, provision for graire hairs.
It is that which Epicurus said in the beginning of his letter to Meniceus:
Neither let the youngest shun, nor the oldest weary himself in
philosophying, for who does otherwise seems to say, that either the season to
live happily is not yet come, or is already past. Yet would I not have this
young gentleman pent-vp, nor carelessly cast-off to the heedlesse choler, or
mesancholie humor of the hasty Schoolmasters. I would not have his budding
spirit corrupted with keeping-him fast-tied, and as it were laboring
fourteen or fifteen hours a day poaring on his book, as some do, as if he
were a day-labouring man; neither do I thinkeit fit, if at any time, by reason
of some solitary or melancholy complexion, he should be seen with an
over-indiscreet application given to his book, it should be cherished in him;
for, that does often make-him both unapt for civil conversation, and distracts
him from better employments: How many have I seen in my days, by an
over-greedie desire of knowledge, become as it were foolish? Carneades was so
deeply plunged, and as I may say besotted in it, that he could never have
leisure to cut his hair, or pare his nails: nor would I have his noble manners
obscured by the incivilitie and barbarisine of others. The French wisdom has
long since proverbially been spoken-of, as very apt to conceive study in her
youth, but most unapt to keep it long. In good truth, we see at this day, that
there is nothing lovelier to behold, then the young children of France; but for
the most part, they deceive the hope which was fore-apprehended of them: for
when they once become men, there-is no excellency at all in them. I have heard
men of understanding hold this opinion, that the Colleges to which they are
sent (of which there are store) do thus besot-them: whereas to our scholar, a
cabinet, a gardin, the table, the bed, a solitariness, a company, morning and
evening, and all hours shall be alike unto him, all places shall be a study
for him: for Philosophy (as a former of judgments, and modeler of customs)
shall be his principal lesson, having the privilege to entermedle her self
with all things, and in all places. Isocrates the Orator, being once requested
at a great banquet to speak of his art, when all thought he had reason to
answer, said, It is not now time to do what I can, and what should now be
done, I cannot do it; For, to present orations, or to enter into disputation
of Rhetorike, before a company assembled together to be merry, and make good
cheer, would be but a medlie of harsn and jarring music. The like may be
said of all other Sciences. But touching Philosophy, namely in that point
where it treats of man, and of his duties, and offices, it has been the
common judgment of the wisest, that in regard of the pl^asantnesse of her
conversation, she ought not to be rejected, neither at banquets, nor at
sportes. And Plato having invited her to his solemn feast, we see how kindly
she entertaineth the company with a mild behavior, fitly suting her self to
time and place, notwithstanding it be one of his learned and profitable
discourses.

Aeque pauperibus prodest, loc^pletibus aeque, Hor. lib. 1 epis^. 125.

Et neglecta aeque pueris senibusque nocebit.
Poor men alike, alike rich men it eases,
Alike it scorned, old and young displeases.
So doubtless he shall less be idle then others; for even as the paces we
bestow walking in a gallerie, although they be twice as many more, wearie-vs
not so much as those we spend in going a set journey: So our lesson being past
over, as it were, by chance, or way of encounter, without strict observance of
time or place, being applied to all our actions, shall be digested, and never
felt. All sports and exercises shall be a part of his study; running,
wrestling, music, dancing, hunting, and managing of arms, and horses. I
would have the exterior demeanor or decency, and the dispolition of his person
to be fashioned together with his mind: for, it is not a mind, it is not a
body that we erect, but it is a man, and we must not make two parts of him.
And as Plato says, They must not be erected one without another, but equally
be directed, no otherwise then a couple of horses matched to draw in one
selfsame ^eem^. And to heare-him, does he not seem to employ more time and
care in the exercises of his body: and to think that the mind is together
with the same exercised, and not the contrary? As for other matters, this
institution ought to be directed by a sweet-severe mildness; Not as some do,
who in liew of gently-bidding children to the banquet of letters, present them
with nothing but horror and cruelty. Let me have this violence and compulsion
removed, there is nothing that, in my seeming, does more bastardise and dizzie
a wel-borne, and gentle nature: If you would have him stand in awe of shame and
punishment, do not so much enure him to-it: accustom him patiently to endure
sweat and cold, the sharpness of the wind, the heat of the sun, and how to
despise all hazards. Remove from him all niceness and quaintness in clothing,
in lying, in eating, and in drinking: fashion him to all things; that he prove
not a fair and wanton-puling boy, but a lusty and vigorous boy: When I was a
child, being a man, and now am old, I have ever judged and believed the same.
But amongst other things, I could never away with this kind of discipline used
in most of our Colleges. It had peradventure been lesse-hurtfull, if they had
somewhat inclined to mildness, or gentle entreaty. It is a very prison of
captivated youth, and proves dissolute, in punishing it before it be so. Come
upon them when they are going to their lesson, and you hear nothing but
whipping and brawling, both of children tormented, and masters besotted with
anger and chafing. How wide are they, which go about to allure a child's mind to
go to his book, being yet but tender and fearful, with a stearne-frowning
countenance, and with hands-full of rods? Oh wicked and pernicious manner of
teaching! which Quintillian has very well noted, that this imperious kind of
authority, namely, this way of punishing of children, draws many dangerous
inconveniences with-in. How much more decent were it, to see their
school-houses and forms strewed with green boughs and flowers, then with
bloody burchen-twigs? If it lay in me, I would do as the Philosopher
Speusippus did, who caused the pictures of Gladness and Joy, of Flora, and of
the Graces, to be set-vp round about his school-house. Where their profit
lies, there should also be their recreation. Those meats ought to be
sugred-over, that are healthful for childrens stomakes, and those made bitter
that are hurtful for them. It is strange to see how careful Plato shows
himself in framing of his laws about the recreation and pastime of the youth
of his City, and how far he extends himself about their exercises, sports,
songs, leaping, and dancing, whereof he faith, that severe antiquity gave the
conduct and patronage unto the Gods themselves, namely, to Apollo, to the
Muses, and to Munerva. Mark but how far-forth he endevoreth to give a thousand
precepts to be kept in his places of exercises both of body and mind. As for
learned Sciences, he stands not much upon them, and seems in particular to
commend Poesy, but for Musickes-sake. All strangeness and self
particularitie in our manners, and conditions, is to be shunned, as an enemy
to society and civil conversation. Who would not be astonished at Demophons
complexion, chief steward of Alexanders household, who was wont to sweat in the
shadow, and quiver for cold in the sun? I have seen some to startle at the
smell of an apple, more then at the shot of a piece; some to be frighted with a
mouse, some ready to cast their gorge at the sight of a mess of cream, and
others to be scared with seeing a fetherbed shaken: as Germanicus, who could
not abide to see a cock, or hear his crowing. There may happily be some hidden
property of nature, which in my judgment might easily be removed, if it were
taken in time. Institution has gotten this upon me (I must confess with much
a do) for, except beer, all things else that are man's food agree
indifferently with my taste. The body being yet souple, ought to be
accommodated to all fashions and customs; and (always provided, his appetites
and desires be kept under) let a young man boldly be made fit for all Nations
and companies-yea, if need be, for all disorders and sorfetings; let him
acquaint himself with all fashions; That he may be able to do all things, and
love to do none but those that are commendable. Some strict Philosophers
commend not, but rather blame Calisthenes, for loosing the good favor of his
Master Alexander, only because he would not pledge him as much as he had drunk
to him. He shall laugh, jest, dally, and debauch himself with his Prince. And
in his debauching, I would have him out-go all his fellows in vigor and
constancy, and that he omit not to do evil, neither for want of strength or
knowledge, but for lack of will. Multum interest, vtrum peccare quis nolit,
aut nesctat. There is a great difference, whether one have no will, or no wit
to do amiss. I thought to have honored a gentleman (as great a stranger, and
as far from such riotous disorders as any is in France) by enquiring of him in
very good company, how many times in all his life he had bin drunk in
Germany, during the time of his abode there, about the necessary affairs of
our King; who took it even as I meant it, and answered three times, telling the
time and manner how. I know some, who for want of that quality, have been much
perplexed when they have had Ho. epist. 17. 23.
occasion to converse with that nation. I have often noted with great
admiration, that wonderful nature of Alcibiades, to see how easily he could
suit himself to so diverse fashions, and different humors, without prejudice
unto his health; sometimes exceeding the sumptuousness and pomp of the
Persians, and now and then surpassing the austeritie and frugalitie of the
Lacedaemonians, as reformed in Sparta, as voluptuous in Icnia.

Omnis Aristippum decuit color, and status, and res. 25.
All colors, states, and things are fit
For courtly Aristippus wit.
Such a one would I frame my Disciple,

-- quem duplici panno patientia velat. 29.
Mirabor, vitae via si conversa decebit, Whom patience clothes with suits of
double kind,
I muse, if he another way will find.
Personamque feret non inconcinnus vtramque. He not unfitly may,
Both parts and persons play.
Loe-heer my lessons, wherein he that acts them, profits more, then he that
but knows them, whom if you see, you hear, and if you hear him, you see
him. God forbid, says some body in Plato, that to Philosophize, be to learn
many things, and to exercise the arts. Hanc amplissimam omnium artium bcne
vivendi disciplinam, vita magis quam litter is persequuti Ci^. Tusc. q^. lib. 4.
sunt. This discipline of living well, which is the amplest of all other arts,
they followed rather in their lives, then in their learning or writing. Leo
Prince of the Phliasians, enquiring of Heraclides Ponticus, what art he
professed, he answered. Sir, I profess neither art nor science; but I am a
Philosopher. Some reproved Diogenes, that being an ignorant man, he did
nevertheless meddle with Philosophy, to whom he replied, so much the more
reason have I, and to greater purpose doc I meddle with-it. Hegesias praid him
upon a time to read some book unto him; You are a merry man, said he: As you
choose natural and not painted, right and not counterfeit figs to eat, why
do you not likewise choose, not the painted and written, but the true and
natural exercises? He shall not so much repeat, as act his lesson. In his
actions shall he make repetition of the same. We must observe, whether there be
wisdom in his enterprises, integrity in his demeanor, modesty in his
jestures, justice in his actions, judgment and grace in his speech, courage in
his sickness, moderation in his sports, temperance in his pleasures, order in
the government of his house, and indifferency in his taste, whether it be
flesh, fish, wine, or water, or whatsoever he feeds upon. Qui disciplinam
Ci^. ib. lib. 2.
suam non ost entationem scientiae, sed legem vitae putet: quique obtemperet
ipse sibi, and aecretis pareat. Who thinks his learning not an ostentation of
knowledge, but a law of life, and himself obayes himself, and does what is
decreed.

The true mirror of our discourses, is the course of our lives. Xeuxidamus
answered one that demanded of him, why the Lacedaemonians did not draw into a
book, the ordinances of prowess, that so their young men might read them; it
is, says he, because they would rather accustom them to deeds and actions,
then to books and writings, Compare at the end of fifteen or sixteen years
one of these collegiall Latinizers, who has employed all that while only in
learning how to speak, to such a one as I mean. The world is nothing but
babbling and words, and I never saw man, that does not rather speak more than
he ought, then less. Notwithstanding half our age is consumed that way. We
are kept four or five years learning to understand bare words, and to join
them into clauses, then as long in proportioning a great body extended into
four or five parts; and five more at least, ere we can succinctly know how to
mingle, join, and interlace them handsomely into a subtle fashion, and into one
coherent orb. Let-vs leave-it to those, whose profession is to do nothing
else. Being once on my journey toward Orleans, it was my chance to meet upon
that plain that lies on this side Clery, with two Masters of Arts, traveling
toward Bordeaux, about fifty paces one from another far-off behind them, I
descride a troop of horsemen, their Master riding foremost, who was the Earl
of Rochefocault; one of my servants enquiring of the first of those Masters of
arts, what Gentleman he was that followed him; supposing my servant had meant
his fellow-scholler, for he had not yet seen the Earls train, answered
pleasantly, He is no gentleman Sir, but a Gramarian, and I am a Logitian. Now,
we that contrariwise seek not to frame a Gramarian, nor a Logitian, but a
complete gentleman, let us give them leave to mispend their time; we have
elsewhere, and somewhat else of more import to do. So that our Disciple be
well and sufficiently stored with matter; words will follow apace, and if they
will not follow gently, he shall hale them-on perforce. I hear some excuse
themselves, that they cannot express their meaning, and make a semblance that
their heads are so full-stuft with many goodly things, but for want of
eloquence they can neither utter nor make show of them. It is a mere fopperie.
And will you know what? in my seeming, the cause is, They are shadows and
Chimeraes, proceeding of some formelesse conceptions, which they cannot
distinguish or resolve within, and by consequence are not able to produce them,
in as much as they understand not themselves: And if you but mark their
earnestness, and how they stammer and labor at the point of their deliverie,
you would deem, that what they go withal, is but a conceiving, and therefore
nothing near downelying; and that they do but lick that imperfect and
shapelesse lump of matter, As for me, I am of opinion and Socrates would have
it so, that he who has a clear and lively imagination in his mind, may
easily produce and utter the same, although it be in Bergamask, or Welsh, and
if he be dombe, by signs and tokens.

Vertaque praevisam rem non invita sequentur. Hor. art. poet. 311.
When matter we foreknow,
Words voluntary flow.
As one said, as poetically in his prose, Cum res animum occupavere, verba
ambiunt. When Sen. contr^u. lib. 7. proae.
matter has possessed their minds, they hunt after words: and another: Ipsae res
verba rapiunt. Things themselves will catch and carry words: He knows neither
Ablative, Conjunctive, Substantive, nor Gramar, no more does his Lackey, nor
any Oyster wife about the streets, and yet if you have a mind to it, he will
intertaine you your fill, and peradventure stumble as little and as seldom
against the rules of his tongue, as the best Master of arts in France. He has
no skill in Rhetoric, nor can he with a preface fore-stall and captivate the
Gentle Readers good will: nor cares he greatly to know it. In good sooth, all
this garish painting is easily defaced, by the luster of an inbred, and
simple truth; for these dainties and quaint devises, serve but to ammuse the
vulgar sort, unapt and incapable to taste the most solid, and firm meat: as
Afer very plainly declares in Cornelius Tacitus. The Ambassadors of Samos
being come to Cleomenes King of Sparta, prepared with a long prolixe Oration,
to stir him up to war against the tyrant Policrates, after he had listened a
good while unto them, his answer was: Touching your Exordium or beginning I
have forgotten it; the middle I remember not; and for your conclusion I will do
nothing in it. A fit, and (to my thinking) a very good answer; and the
Orators were put to such a shift, as they knew not what to reply. And what
said another? the Athenians from out two of their cunning Architects, were to
choose one to erect a notable great frame: the one of them more affected and
selfe-presuming, presented himself before them, with a smooth
fore-premeditated discourse, about the subject of that piece of work, and
thereby drew the judgments of the common people unto his liking; but the other
in few words, spoke thus: Lords of Athens, what this man has said, I will
perform. In the greatest earnestness of Ciceroes eloquence many were drawn
into a kind of admiration; But Cato jeasting at it, said, Have we not a
pleasant Consul? A quick cunning Argument, and a witty saying, whether it go
before, or come after, it is never out of season. If it have no coherence with
that which goes before, nor with what comes after; it is good and
commendable in itself. I am none of those that think a good Ryme, to make a
good Poem; let him hardly (if so he please) make a short syllable long, it is
no great matter: if the invention be rare and good, and his wit and judgment
have cunningly played their part. I will say to such a one; he is a good Poet,
but an ill Versifier.

Emunctae naris, durus componere versus. ^^r. lib 1. Cat. 4. 8. Lucil.
A man whose sense could finely pearce,
But harsh and hard to make a verse.
Let a man (says Horace) make his work loose all seames, measures, and joints.

Tempora certa modosque, and quod prius ordine verbum est, 58.

Posterius facias, praeponens vltima primis: 62.

Invenias etiam disiecti membra Poetae.
Set times and moods, make you the first word last,
The last word first, as if they were new cast:
Yet find th'unjoynted Poets joints stand fast.
He shall for all that, nothing gainsay himself, every piece will make a good
show. To this purpose answered Menander those that chid him, the day being at
hand, in which he had promised a Comedy, and had not begun the same, Tut-tut,
said he, it is already fi^ished, there wants nothing but to add the verse
vnto-it: for, having ranged and cast the plot in his mind, he made small
account of feet, of measures, or cadences of verses, which indeed are but of
small import in regard of the rest. Since great Ronzarde and learned Bellay,
have raised our French Poesy unto that height of honor, where it now-is: I
see not one of these petty-ballad-makers, or prentise-dogrell rymers, that does
not bumbast his labors with high swelling and heaven-disimbowelling words, and
that does not marshall his cadences very near as they do. Plus sonat quam
valet. The sound is more then the weight or worth. And Sen. epist. 40.
for the vulgar sort, there were never so many Poets, and so few good: but as
it has been easy for them to represent their rymes, so come they far short in
imitating the rich descriptions of the one, and rare inventions of the other.
But what shall he do, if he be urged with sophistical subtilt^es about a
Sillogisme? A gammon of Bacon makes a man drink, drinking quenches a man's
thirst, Ergo, a gammon of bacon quenches a man's thirst. Let him mock at-it, it
is more witty to be mocked at, then to be answered. Let him borrow this
pleasant counter-craft of Aristippus; Why shall I unbind that, which being
bound does so much trouble me? Some one proposed certain Logical quiddities
against Cleanthes, to whom Chrisippus said; use such juggling tricks to play
with children, and divert not the serious thoughts of an aged man to such idle
matters. If such foolish wiles, Contorta and aculeata sophismata, Ci^. Acad.
qu. lib. 4.
Intricate and fiinged sophismes, must persuade a lie, it is dangerous; but if
they prove void of any effect, and moove him but to laughter, I see not why he
shall beware of them. Some there are so foolish that will go a quarter of a
mile out of the way to hunt after a quaint new word, if they once get in chase;
Aut qui non verba rebus aptant, sedres extrinsecus arcessunt, quibus verba
conveniant. Or such as fit not words to matter, but fetch matter from abroad,
whereto words be fitted. And another, Qui a^icuius verbi decore placentis,
vocentur ad id quod non proposuerunt Sen. epist. 59.
scribere. Who are allured by the grace of some pleasing word, to write that
they intended not to write. I do more willingly wind up a witty notable
sentence, that so I may sew-it upon me, then unwind my thread to go fetch it.
Contrariwise, it is for words to serve and wait upon the matter, and not for
matter to attend upon words, and if the French tongue cannot reach vnto-it, let
the Gaskonie, or any other. I would have the matters to surmount, and so fill
the imagination of him that harkneth, that he have no remembrance at all of the
words. It is a natural, simple, and unaffected speech that I love, so written
as it is spoken, and such upon the paper, as it is in the mouth, a pithie,
sinnowie, full, strong, compendious, and material speech, not so delicate and
affected, as vehement and piercing.

Haec demum sapiet dictio, quae feriet. Epitaph. L^ca^. 6.
In fine, that word is wisely fit,
Which strikes the sense, the mark does hit.
Rather difficult then tedious, void of affection, free, loose and bold, that
every member of-it seem to make a body; not Pedanticall, nor Frier-like, nor
Lawyer-like, but rather downright, Souldier-like. As Suetonius calls that
of Julius Caesar, which I see no reason wherefore he calls it. I have
sometimes pleased my self in imitating that licenciousnesse or wanton humor
of our youths, in wearing of their garments; as carelessly to let their cloaks
hang down over one shoulder; to wear their cloakes scarf or bawdrikewise,
and their stockings loose-hanging about their legs. It represents a kind of
disdainful fierceness of these foreign embellishings, and neglect
carelessness of art: But I commend it more being employed in the course and
form of speech. All manner of affectation, namely in the liveliness and
liberty of France, is unseemly in a Courtier. And in a Monarchy every
Gentleman ought to address himself unto a Courtiers carriage. Therefore do we
well somewhat to incline to a native and careless behavior. I like not a
contexture, where the seames and pieces may be seen: As in a well compact
body, what need a man distinguish and number all the bones and veins
severally? Quae veritati operam Sen. epist. 40. m 75. p.
dat oration, incomposita sit and simplex. Quis accurate loquitur, nisi qui vult
putide l^qui? The speech that intends truth must be plain and vnpollisht:
Who speaks elaborately, but he that means to speak vnsavouredly? That
eloquence offers injury unto things, which altogether drawes-vs to
observe-it. As in apparel, it is a sign of pusillanimitie for one to mark
himself, in some particular and unusual fashion: so likewise in common
speech, for one to hunt after new phrases, and vnaccustomed-quaint words,
proceeds of a scholasticall and childish ambition. Let me use none other then
are spoken in the hals of Paris. Aristophanes the Gramarian was somewhat out of
the way, when he reproved Epicurus, for the simplicity of his words, and the
end of his art oratorie, which was only perspicuitie in speech. The imitation
of speech, by reason of the facility of it, follows presently a whole
nation. The imitation of judging and inventing, comes more slow. The greater
number of Readers, because they have found one selfsame kind of gown,
suppose most falsely to hold one like body. Outward garments and cloakes may
be borrowed, but never the sinews and strength of the body. Most of those that
converse with me, speak like unto these Essays; but I know not whether they
think alike. The Athenians (as Plato averreth) have for their part great care
to be fluent and eloquent in their speech; The Lacedaemonians endeavor to be
short and compendious; And those of Creet labor more to be plentiful in
conceits, then in language. And these are the best. Zeno was wont to say, That
he had two sorts of disciples; the one he called (...), curious to learn
things, and those were his darlings, the other he termed (...), who respected
nothing more then the language. Yet can no man say, but that to speak well, is
most gracious and commendable, but not so excellent as some make it: and I am
grieved to see how we employ most part of our time about that only. I would
first know mine own tongue perfectly, then my neighbors with whom I have most
commerce. I must needs acknowledge, that the Greek and Latin tongues, are
great ornaments in a gentleman, but they are purchased at over-high a rate.
Vse-it who list, I will tell you how they may be gotten better cheap, and much
sooner then is ordinarily used, which was tried in my self. My late father,
having by all the means and industry, that is possible for man, sought
amongst the wisest, and men of best understanding, to find a most exquisite and
ready way of teaching, being advised of the inconveniences then in use; was
given to understand, that the lingering while, and best part of our youth, that
we employ in learning the tongues, which cost them nothing, is the only cause
we can never attain to that absolute perfection of skill and knowledge, of the
Greeks, and Romans. I do not believe that to be the only cause. But so
it-is, the expedient my father found-out, was this; that being yet at nurse,
and before the first loosing of my tongue, I was delivered to a German (who
died since, a most excellent Physician in France) he being then altogether
ignorant of the French tongue, but exquisitely ready and skillful in the
Latin. This man, whom my Father had sent-for of purpose, and to whom he gave
very great intertainment, had me continually in his arms, and was mine only
overseer. There were also iojned unto him two of his countrymen, but not so
learned; whose charge was to attend, and now and then, to play with me; and all
these together did never intertaine me with other then the Latin tongue. As
for others of his household, it was an inviolable rule, that neither himself,
nor my mother, nor man, nor maide-servant, were suffered to speak one word in
my company, except such Latin words, as every one had learned to chat and
prattle with me, It were strange to tell how every one in the house profited
therein. My Father and my Mother learned so much Latin, that for a need they
could vnderstand-it, when they heard-it spoken, even so did all the household
servants, namely such as were nearest and most about-me. To be short, we were
all so Latinized, that the towns round about us had their share of-it;
insomuch as even at this day, many Latin names both of workmen and of their
tools, are yet in use among them. And as for my self, I was about six years
old, and could understand no more French or Perigordine, then Arabike, and that
without art, without books, rules, or gramer, without whipping or whining. I
had gotten as pure a Latin tongue as my Master could speak; the rather
because I could neither mingle or confound the same with other tongues. If for
an Essay they would give me a Theme, whereas the fashion in Colleges is, to
give it in French, I had it in bad Latin, to reduce the same into good. And
Nicholas Grucchi, who has written, De comitijs Romanorum, William G^erenti,
who has commented Aristotle: George Buchanan, that famous Scottish Poet, and
Marke-Antonie Muret, whom (while he lived) both France and Italy to this day,
acknowledge to have been the best Orator: all which have been my familiar
tutors, have often told me, that in mine infancy I had the Latin tongue so
ready and so perfect, that themselves feared to take me in hand. And Buchanan,
who afterward I saw attending on the Marshall of Brissacke, told me, he was
about to write a treatise of the institution of children, and that he took the
model and pattern from mine: for, at that time he had the charge and bringing
up of the young Earl of Brissack, whom since we have seen prove so worthy
and so valiant a captain. As for the Greek, wherein I have but small
understanding, my father purposed to make me learne-it by art; But by new and
uncustomed means, that is, by way of recreation and exercise. We did toss our
declinations, and conjugations to and fro, as they do, who by way of a certain
game at tables learn both Arithmetike and Geometry. For, amongst other things
he had especially been persuaded to make me taste and apprehend the fruits of
duty and science by an unforced kind of will, and of mine own choice; and
without any compulsion or rigor to bring me up in all mildness and liberty:
yea with such kind of superstition, that, whereas some are of opinion, that
suddenly to awaken young children, and as it were by violence to startle and
fright them out of their dead sleep in a morning (wherein they are more heavy
and deeper plunged then we) does greatly trouble and distemper their brains,
he would every morning cause me to be awakened by the sound of some instrument;
and I was never without a servant; Who to that purpose attended upon me. This
example may serve to judge of the rest; as also to commend the judgment and
tender affection of so careful and loving a father: who is not to be blamed,
though he reaped not the fruits answerable to his exquisite toil, and
painful manuring. Two things hindered the same; first the barrenness and
unfit soil: for howbeit I were of a ^ound and strong constitution, and of a
tractable and yielding condition, yet was I so heavy, so sluggish, and so
dull, that I could not be rouzed (yea were-it to go to play) from-out mine
idle drowzinesse. What I saw, I saw it perfectly; and under this heavy, and as
it were Lethe-complexion did I breed hardy imaginations, and opinions
farre-above my years. My spirit was very slow, and would go no further then
it was led by others; my apprehension blockish, my invention poor; and
besides, I had a marvelous defect in my weak memory: it is therefore no
wonder, if my father could never bring me to any perfection. Secondly, as
those that in some dangerous sickness, moved with a kind of hope-full and
greedy desire of perfect health again, give ear to every Leache or Emperike,
and follow all counsels, the good man being exceedingly fearful to commit any
oversight, in a matter he took so to heart, suffered himself at last to be
led away by the common opinion, which like unto the Cranes, follows ever
those that go before, and yielded to custom: Having those no longer about him,
that had given him his first directions, and which they had brought out of
Italy. Being but six years old I was sent to the College of Guienne, then
most flourishing and reputed the best in France, where it is impossible to add
any thing to the great care he had, both to choose the best and most sufficient
Masters, that could be found, to read unto me, as also for all other
circumstances pertaining to my education; wherein contrary to usual customs
of Colleges, he observed many particular rules. But so it is, it was ever a
College. My Latin tongue was forthwith corrupted, whereof by reason of
discontinuance, I afterward lost all manner of use: which new kind of
institution, stood me in no other stead, but that at my first admittance, it
made me to ouer-skip some of the lower forms, and to be placed in the highest.
For at thirteen years of age, that I left the College, I had read over the
whole course of Philosophy (as they call it) but with so small profit, that I
can now make no account of it. The first taste or feeling I had of books, was
of the pleasure I took in reading the fables of Ovids Metamorphosies; for,
being but seven or eight years old, I would steal and sequester my self
from all other delights, only to read them: For So Much as the tongue wherein
they were written was to me natural; and it was the easiest book I knew, and
by reason of the matter therein contained, most agreeing with my young age. For
of King Arthur, of Lancelot du Lake, of Amadis, of Huon of Bordeaux, and such
idle time-consuming, and wit-besotting trash of books wherein youth does
commonly ammuse it self, I was not so much as acquainted with their names, and
to this day know not their bodies, nor what they contain: So exact was my
discipline. Whereby I became more careless to study my other prescript
lessons. And well did it fall out for my purpose, that I had to deal with a
very discreet Master, who out of his judgment could with such dexterity
wink* at, and second my vntowardlinesse, and such other faults that were in
me. For by that means, I read-over Virgils Aeneades, Terence, Plautus, and
other Italian Comedies, allured thereunto by the pleasantness of their
several subjects: Had he been so foolishly-severe, or so sverely froward as
to cross this course of mine, I think verily I had never brought any thing
from the College, but the hate and contempt of Books, as does the greatest
part of our Nobility. Such was his discretion, and so warily did he behave
himself, that he saw and would not see: he would foster and increase my
longing: suffering me but by stealth, and by snatches to glut my self with
those Books; holding ever a gentle hand over me, concerning other regular
studies. For, the chiefest thing my father required at their hands (unto whose
charge he had committed me) was a kind of well-conditioned mildness, and
facility of complexion. And, to say truth, mine had no other fault, but a
certain dull-languishing, and heavy slothfulness. The danger was not, I
should do-ill, but that I should do nothing.

No man did ever suspect, I would prove a bad, but an unprofitable man:
foreseeing in me rather a kind of idleness, than a voluntary craftiness. I am
not so selfe-conceited but I perceive what has followed. The complaints that
are daily buzzed in mine ears are these; that I am idle, cold, and negligent
in offices of friendship, and duty to my parents, and kinsfolks; and touching
public offices, that I am over-singular and disdainefull. And those that are
most injurious cannot ask, wherefore I have taken, and why I have not paid?
but may rather demand, why I do not quit, and wherefore I do not give? I
would take it as a favor, they should wish such effects of supererogation in
me. But they are unjust and over-partiall, that will go about to exact that
from me, which I owe not, with more rigor than they will exact from themselves
that which they owe; wherein if they condemn me, they utterly cancel, both
the gratifying of the action, and the gratitude, which thereby would be due to
me. Whereas the active well-doing should be of more consequence, proceeding
from my hand, in regard I have no passive at all. Wherefore I may so much the
more freely dispose of my fortune, by how much more it is mine, and of my self
that am most mine own. Notwithstanding, if I were a great blazoner of mine
own actions, I might peradventure bar such reproaches, and justly vpbraid
some, that they are not so much offended, because I do not enough, as for that
I may, and it lies in my power to do much more then I do. Yet my mind ceased
not at the same time to have peculiar unto it self well-setled motions, true
and open judgments, concerning the objects, which it knew; which alone, and
without any help or communication it would digest. And amongst other things I
verily believe, it would have proved altogether incapable, and unfit to yield
unto force, or stoop unto violence. Shall I account or relate this quality of
my infancy, which was, a kind of boldness in my looks, and gentle
softness in my voice, and affability in my gestures, and a dexterity in
conforming my self to the parts I undertook? for before the age of the

Alter ab undecimo tum me vix ceperat annus: Virg. Buc. ^cl. 8. 39.
Years had I (to make even.)
Scarce two above eleven.
I have vnde-rgone and represented the chiefest parts in the Latin Tragedies of
Buchanan, Guerenti, and of Muret; which in great state were acted and played in
our college of Guienne: wherein Andreas Goveanus our Rector principal; who as
in all other parts belonging to his charge, was without comparison the chiefest
Rector of France, and my self (without ostentation be it spoken) was reputed,
if not a chief master, yet a principal Actor in them. It is an exercise I
rather commend than disalow in young gentlemen: and have seen some of our
Princes (in imitation of some of former ages) both commendably and honestly, in
their proper persons act and play some parts in Tragedies. It has heretofore
been esteemed a lawful exercise, and a tolerable profession in men of honor,
namely in Greece. Aristoni tragico actori rem aperit: huic and genus and
fortuna honesta erant: nec ars quia nihil tale apud Graecos Lib dec. 3. l. 4.
pudori est, ea deformaebat. He imparts the matter to Ariston a Player of
tragedies, whose progeny and fortune were both honest; nor did his profession
disgrace them, because no such matter is a disparagement amongst the Graecians.

And I have ever accused them of impertinencie, that condemn and disalow such
kinds of recreations, and blamed those of injustice, that refuse good and
honest Comedians, (or as we call them) Players, to enter our good towns, and
grudge the common people such public sports. Politic and wel-ordered
commonwealths, endevor rather carefully to unite and assemble their Citizens
together; as in serious offices of devotion, so in honest exercises of
recreation. Common society and loving friendship is thereby cherished and
increased. And besides, they cannot have more formal and regular pastimes
allowed them, then such as are acted and represented in open view of all, and
in the presence of the magistrates themselves: And if I might bear sway, I
would think it reasonable, that Princes should sometimes, at their proper
charges, gratify the common people with them, as an argument of a fatherly
affection, and loving goodness toward them: and that in populous and
frequented cities, there should be Theaters and places appointed for such
spectacles; as a diverting of worse inconveniences, and secret actions. But to
come to my intended purpose, there is no better way then to allure the
affection, and to entice the appetite: otherwise a man shall breed but asses
laden with Books. With jerkes of rods they have their satchels full of
learning given them to keep. Which to do well, one must not only harbor in
himself, but wed and mary the same with his mind.

The six and twentieth Chapter.
It is folly to refer Truth or Falsehood to our sufficiency.

IT is not peradventure without reason, that we ascribe the facility of
believing and easines of persuasion, unto simpl^ c^tie and ignorance: For me
seems to have learn theretofore, that belief was, as it were an impression
conceived in our mind, and according as the same was found either more soft,
or of leave resistance, it was easier to imprint any thing therein. Venecesse
est lancem in libra po^deribus impositis deprimi: sic animum perspicuis cedere.
As it is Cic. Acad. qu. l. 4
necessary a scale must go down the balla^^c when weights are put into it,
so must a mind yield to things that are manifest. Forasmuch therefore, as the
mind being most empty and without counterpoize, so much the more easily does
it yield under the burden of the first persuasion. And that is the reason why
children, those of the common sort, women, and sickefolks, are so subject to be
n^is-led, and so easy to swallow gudgeons. Yet on the other side it is a
sottish presumption to disdain and condemn that for false, which unto us
seems to bear no show of likelihood or truth: which is an ordinary fault in
those who persuade themselves to be of more sufficienc^e than the vulgar sort.
So was I sometimes wont to do, and if I heard any body speak, either of
ghosts walking, of foretelling future things, of enchantments, of witchcrafts,
or any other thing reported, which I could not well conceive, or that was
beyond my reach,

Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas, Hor. lib. 2. ep. 2. 208.

Nocturnos lemures, portentaque Thessali-
Dreams, magike terrors, witches, vncouth-wonders,
Night-walking sprites, Thessalian conjured thunders.
I could not but feel a kind of compassion to see the poor and seely people
abused with such follies. And now I perceive, that I was as much to be moaned
my-selfe: Not that experience has since made me to discern any thing beyond
my former opinions: yet was not my curiosity the cause of it, but reason has
taught me, that so resolutely to condemn a thing for false, and impossible, is
to assume unto himself the advantage, to have the bounds and limits of Gods
will, and of the power of our common mother Nature tied to his sleeue: And that
there is no greater folly in the world, then to reduce them to the measure of
our capacity* and bounds of our sufficiency* If we term those things
monsters or miracles to which our reason cannot attain, how many such do
daily present themselves unto our sight? Let us consider through what clouds,
and how blinde-folde we are led to the knowledge of most things, that pass our
hands: verily we shall find, it is rather custom, than science that remooveth
the strangeness of them from-vs:

-- iam nemo fessus saturusque viden^i, Lucr. li. 2.
Suspicere in caeli dignatur lucida templa. Now no man tired with glut of
contemplation
Deignes to have heavens bright Church in admiration.
And that those things, were they newly presented unto us, we should
doubtless deem them, as much, or more unlikely, and incredible, then any
other.

-- si nunc primum mortalibus adsint 1042:

Ex improviso, ceu sint obiecta repent,
Nil magis his rebus poterat mirabile dici,
Aut minus ante quod auderent fore credere gentes.
If now first on a sudden they were here
Among mortal men, object to eye or care,
Nothing, than these things, would more wondrous be,
Or that, men durst less think, ever to see.
He who had never seen a river before, the first he saw, he thought it to be
the Ocean: and things that are the greatest in our knowledge, we judge them to
be the extremest that nature works in that kind.

Scilicet and fluvius qui non est maximus, ei est Lib. 6. 671.

Qui non ante aliquem mayor em vidit, and ingens
Arbor homoque videtur, and omnia de genere omni
Maxima quae vidit quisque, haec ingentia fingit.
A stream none of the greatest, may so seem
To him, that never saw a greater stream.
Trees, men, seem huge, and all things of all sorts,
The greatest one has seen, he huge reports.
Consuetudine oculorum assuescunt animi, neque admirantur, neque requirunt
rations carum Cic. Not. D^. l. 2
rerum, quas semper vident. Minds are acquainted by cust^me of their eyes, nor
do they admire, or enquire the reason of those things, which they continually
behold. The noveltie of things does more incite us to search-out the causes,
than their greatness: we must judge of this infinite power of nature, with more
reverence, and with more acknowledgement of our own ignorance and weakness.
How many things of small likelihood are there, witnessed by men, worthy of
credit, whereof if we cannot be persuaded, we should at least leave them
insuspence? For, to deem them impossible, is by rash presumption to presume
and know how far possibility reaches. If a man did well understand, what
difference there is between impossibility, and that which is unwonted, and
between that which is against the course of nature, and the common opinion of
men, in not believing rashly, and in not disbeleeving easily; the rule of
Nothing too-much, commanded by Chilon, should be observed. When we find in
Froysard, that the Earl of Foix, (being in Bearn*) had knowledge of the
defeature at Iuberoth, of king John of Castile, the morrow next it happened, and
the means he alleges for it, a man may well laugh at it: And of that which
our Annals report, that Pope Honorius, the very same day, that King Philip
Augustus died at Mantes, caused his public funerals to be solemnized, and
commanded them to be celebrated throughout all Italy. For, the authority of
the witnesses has peradventure no sufficient warrant to restrain us. But
what? if Plutarke, besides diverse examples which he alleges of antiquity,
says to have certainly known, that in Domitians time, the news of the
battle lost by Antonius in Germanis many days iourneies thence, was published
at Rome, and divulged through the world, the very same day it succeeded: And if
Caesar holds, that it has many times happened, that report has foregone the
accident: Shall we not say, that those simple people have suffered themselves
to be cousoned and seduced by the vulgar sort, because they were not as
cleare-sighted as we? Is there any thing more dainty, more unspotted, and more
lively then Plinies judgment, whenever it pleases him to make show of it?
Is there any farther from vanity? I omit the excellency of his learning and
knowledge, whereof I make but small reckoning: in which of those two parts do
we exceed him? Yet there is no scholar so meanly learned, but will convince
him of lying, and read a lecture of contradiction against him upon the
progress of natures works. When we read in Bouchet the miracles wrought by
the relics of Saint Hillarie, his credit is not sufficient to bar us the
liberty of contradicting him: yet at randon to condemn all such like
histories, seems to me a notable impudency. That famous man Saint Augustine,
witnesses to have seen a blind child, to recover his sight, over the
relics of Saint Gervase and Protaise at Milene: and a woman at Carthage, to
have been cured of a canker, by the sign of the holy Cross, which a woman
newly baptized made unto her: and Hesperius a familiar friend of his, to have
expelled certain spirits, that molested his house, with a little of the earth
of our Saviors sepulcher; which earth being afterward transported into a
church, a Paralitike man was immediately therewith cured: and a woman going in
procession, having as she past-by with a nose-gaie touched the case wherein
Saint Stevens bones were, and with the same afterward rubbed her eyes, she
recovered her sight, which long before she had utterly lost: and diverse other
examples, where he affirms to have bin an assistant himself. What shall we
accuse him of, and two other holy Bishops, Aurelius and Maximinus, whom he
calls for his witnesses? Shall it be of ignorance, of simplicity, of malice,
of facility, or of imposture? Is any man living so impudent, that thinks he may
be compared to them, whether it be in virtue or piety, in knowledge or
judgment, in wisdom or sufficiency? Qui vi rationem nullam afferrent, ipsa
autoritate me frangerent: Who Cic* Di^. li. 1.
though they alleged no reason, yet might subdue me with their very
authority. It is a dangerous fond hardiness, and of consequence, besides the
absurd temerity it draws with it, to despise what we conceive not. For, after
that according to your best understanding, you have established the limits of
truth, and bounds of falsehood, and that it is found, you must necessarily
believe things, wherein is more strangeness, then in those you deny; you have
already bound your self to abandon them. Now that which me thinks brings as
much disorder in our consciences, namely in these troubles of religion wherein
we are, is the dispensation Catholics make of their belief. They suppose to
show themselves very moderate and skillful, when they yield their adversaries
any of those articles now in question. But besides that, they perceive not what
an advantage it is for him that charge you, if you but once begin to yield
and give them ground; and how much that encorageth him to pursue his point:
those articles which they choose for the lightest, are oftentimes most
important. Either a man must wholly submit himself to the authority of our
Ecclesiastical policy, or altogether dispense himself from it: It is not
for us to determine what part of obedience we owe unto it. And moreover, I may
say it, because I have made trial of it, having sometimes used this liberty
of my choice, and particular election, not regarding certain points of the
observance of our Church, which seem to bear a face, either more vain, or
more strange; coming to communicate them with wisemen, I have found that those
things have a most solid and steadie foundation, and that it is but
foolishness and ignorance, makes us receive them with less respect and
reverence then the rest. Why remember we not, what, and how many contradictions
we find and feel even in our own judgment? How many things served us but
yesterday as articles of faith, which to day we deem but fables? Glory and
curiosity are the scourges of our souls. The latter induces us to have an
oar in every ship, and the former forbids us to leave any thing vnresolved or
undecided.

The seven and twentieth Chapter.
Of Friendship.

COnsidering the proceeding of a Painters work I have; a desire has possessed
me to imitate him: He makes choice of the most convenient place and middle of
every wall, there to place a picture, labored with all his skill and
sufficiency; and all void places about it he fills up with antike Boscage or
Crotesko works; which are fantastical pictures, having no grace, but in the
variety and strangeness of them. And what are these my compositions in truth,
other than antike works, and monstrous bodies, patched and hudled up together
of diverse members, without any certain or well ordered figure, having neither
order, dependencie, or proportion, but casual and framed by chance?

Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne. Hor. art. poe. 4.
A woman fair for parts superior,
Ends in a fish for parts inferior.
Touching this second point I go as far as my Painter, but for the other and
better part I am far behind: for my sufficiency reaches not so far, as
that I dare undertake, a rich, a pollished, and according to true skill, and
arte-like table. I have advised my self to borrow one of Steven de la Boitie,
who with this kind of work shall honor all the world. It is a discourse he
entitled, Voluntary Servitude, but those who have not known him, have since
very properly rebaptized the same. The against one. In his first youth he writ,
by way of Essaie, in honor of liberty against Tyrants. It has long since
been dispersed amongst men of understanding, not without great and well
deserved commendations: for it is full of wit, and contains as much learning
as may be: yet does it differ much from the best he can do. And if in the age I
knew-him in, he would have undergone my dessigne, to set his fantasies down in
writing, we should doubtless see many rare things, and which would very
nearly approach the honor of antiquity: for especially touching that part of
natures gifts, I know none may be compared to him. But it was not long of him,
that ever this Treatize, came to man's view, and I believe he never saw it
since it first escaped his hands: with certain other notes concerning the
edict of January, famous by reason of our intestine war, which happily may in
other places find their deserved praise. It is all I could ever recover of his
relics (whom when death seized, he by his last will and testament, left with
so kind remembrance, heir and executor of his library and writings) besides
the little book, I since caused to be published: To which his pamphlet I am
particularly most bounden, for so much as it was the isntrumental mean of our
first acquaintance. For it was showed me long time before I saw him; and gave
me the first knowledge of his name, addressing, and thus nourishing that
unspotted friendship, which we (so long as it pleased God) have so sincerely,
so entire and inviolably maintained between us, that truly a man shall not
commonly hear of the like; and amongst our modern men no sign of any such is
seen. So many parts are required to the erecting of such a one, that it may
be counted a wonder, if fortunce once in three ages contract the like. There is
nothing to which Nature has more addressed us than to society. And Aristotle
says, that perfect Lawgivers have had more regardfull care of friendship then
of justice. And the utmost drift of it is perfection is this. For generally, all
those amities which are forged and nourished by voluptuousness or profit,
public or private need, are thereby so much the less fair and generous, and
so much the less true amities, in that they intermeddle other causes, scope,
and fruit with friendship, then it self alone: Nor do those four ancient
kinds of friendships; Natural, sociall, hospitable, and venerian, either
particularly or conjointly beseem the same. That from children to parents may
rather be termed respect: Friendship is nourished by communication, which by
reason of the overgreat disparitie cannot be found in them, and would happly
offend the duties of nature: for neither all the secret thoughts of parents can
be communicated unto children, lest it might engender an unbeseeming
familiarity between them, nor the admonitions and corrections (which are the
chiefest offices of friendship) could be exercised from children to parents.
There have nations been found, where, by custom, children killed their
parents, and others, where parents slew their children, thereby to avoid the
hindrance of enter-bearing one another in after times: for naturally one
depends from the ruin of another. There have Philosophers been found
disdaining this natural conjunction, witness Aristippus, who being urged with
the affection he ought his children, as proceeding from his loins, began to
spit, saying, That also that excrement proceeded from him, and that also we
engendered worms and lice. And that other man, whom Plutarke would have
persuaded to agree with his brother, answered, I care not a straw the more for
him, though he came out of the same womb I did. Verily the name of Brother is
a glorious name, and full of loving kindness, and therefore did he and I term
one another sworn brother: but this commixture, dividence, and sharing of
goods, this joining wealth to wealth, and that the riches of one shall be the
poverty of another, does exceedingly distemper and distract all brotherly
aliance, and lovely conjunction: If brothers should conduct the progress of
their advancement and thrift in one same path and course, they must necessarily
oftentimes hinder and cross one another. Moreover, the correspondencie and
relation that begets these true and mutually-perfect amities, why shall it
be found in these? The father and the son may very well be of a far
differing complexion, and so many brothers: He is my son, he is my kinsman;
but he may be a fool, a bad, or a peevish-minded man. And then according as
they are friendships, which the law and duty of nature does command-vs, so
much the less of our own voluntary choice and liberty is there required
unto it: And our genuine liberty has no production more properly her own,
then that of affection and amity. Sure I am, that concerning the same I have
assaied all that might be, having had the best and most indulgent father that
ever was, even to his extremest age, and who from father to son was
descended of a famous house, and touching this rare-seene virtue of brotherly
concord very exemplare:

-- and ipse Hor. l. 2. od. 2. 6.
Notus in fratres animi paterni, To his brothers known so kind,
As to bear a fathers mind.
To compare the affection toward women unto it, although it iproceed from our
own free choice, a man cannot, nor may it be placed in this rank: Her fire, I
confess it

( -- neque enim est de^ nescta nostri Quae dulcem curis miscet amaritiem.)
(Nor is that Goddess ignorant of me,
Whose bitter sweetes with my cares mixed be.)
to be more active, more fervent, and more sharp. But it is a rash and
wavering fire, waving and diverse: the fire of an ague subject to fits and
stints, and that has but slender hold-fast of us. In true friendship, it is a
general and universal heat, and equally tempered, a constant and settled heat,
all pleasure and smoothnes, that has no pricking or stinging in it, which the
more it is in lustful love, the more is it but a ranging and mad desire in
following that which flies us,

Come segue la lepre il cacciatore Ariof. can. 10. ^^. 7.

Al freddo, al caldo, alla montagna, al lito,
Ne piu l'estima poiche presa vede,
E sol dietro a chi sugge affrettail piede.
Even as the huntsman does the hare pursue,
In cold, in heat, on mountains, on the shore,
But cares no more, when he her tan'e espies,
Speeding his pace, only at that which flies.
As soon as it creeps into the terms of friendship, that is to say, in the
agreement of wills, it languisheth and vanishes away: enjoying does loose it,
as having a corporal end, and subject to sacietie. On the other side,
friendship is enjoyed according as it is desired, it is neither bred, nor
nourished, nor increases but in jovissance, as being spiritual, and the mind
being refined by use and custom. Under this chief amity, these fading
affections have sometimes found place in me, lest I should speak of him, who
in his verses speaks but too much of it. So are these two passions entered into
me in knowledge one of another, but in comparison never: the first flying a
high, and keeping a proud pitch, disdainfully beholding the other to pass her
points far under it. Concerning marriage, besides that it is a covenant which
has nothing free but the entrance, the continuance being forced and
constrained, depending elsewhere then from our will, and a match ordinarily
concluded to other ends: A thousand strange knots are there in commonly to be
unknit, able to break the web, and trouble the whole course of a lively
affection; whereas in friendship, there is no commerce or business depending on
the same, but it self. Seeing (to speak truly) that the ordinary sufficiency
of women, cannot answer this conference and communication, the nurse of this
sacred bond: nor seem their minds strong enough to endure the pulling of a
knot so hard, so fast, and durable. And truly, if without that, such a genuine
and voluntary acquaintance might be contracted, where not only minds had
this entire jovissance, but also bodies, a share of the aliance, and where a
man might wholly be engaged: It is certain, that friendship would thereby be
more complete and full: But this sex could never yet by any example attain
unto it, and is by ancient schools rejected thence. And this other Greek
license is justly abhorred by our customs, which notwithstanding, because
according to use it had so necessary a disparitie of ages, and difference of
offices between lovers, did no more sufficiently answer the perfect union and
agreement, which here we require: Quis est enim iste amor Cic. Tusc. que. 4.
amicitiae? curneque deformem adolescentem quisquam amat, neque for mosum
senem? For, what love is this of friendship? why does no man love either a
deformed young man, or abeantifull old man? For even the picture the Academic
makes of it, will not (as I suppose) disavowe me, to say thus in her behalf:
That the first fury, enspired by the son of Venus in the lovers heart, upon the
object of tender youths-flower, to which they allow all insolent and passionate
violences, an immoderate heat may produce, was simply grounded upon an
external beauty; a false image of corpor all generation: for in the spirit it
had no power, the sight whereof was yet concealed, which was but in his
infancy, and before the age of budding. For, if this fury did seize upon a
base minded courage, the means of it is pursuit, where riches, gifts, favor to
the advancement of dignities, and such like vile merchandise, which they
reproove. If it fell into a most generous mind, the interpositions were
likewise generous: Philosophical instructions, documents to reverence
religion, to obey the laws, to die for the good of his country: examples of
valor, wisdom and justice. The lover endevoring and studying to make himself
acceptable by the good grace and beauty of his mind (that of his body being
long since decayed) hoping by this mental society to establish a more firm
and permanent bargain. When this pursuit attained the effect in dueseason,
(for by not requiring in a lover, he should bring leisure and discretion in his
enterprise, they require it exactly in the beloved; for as much as he was to
judge of an internal beauty, of a difficile knowledge, and abstruse discovery)
then by the interposition of a spiritual beauty was the desire of a spiritual
conception engendered in the beloved. The latter was here chiefest; the
corporal, accidental and second, altogether contrary to the lover. And
therefore do they prefer the beloved, and verify that the gods likewise
prefer the same: and greatly blame the Poet Aeschylus, who in the love
between Achilles and Patroclus ascribes the lovers part unto Achilles, who was
in the first and beardlesse youth of his adolescency, and the fairest of the
Graecians. After this general community, the mistress and worthiest part of
it, predominant and exercising her offices (they say the most availeful
commodity did thereby redound both to the private and public) That it was the
force of countries received the use of it, and the principal defense of
equity and liberty: witness the comfortable loves of Hermodiu and
Aristogiton. Therefore name they it sacred and divine, and it concerns not them
whether the violence of tyrants, or the demisnesse of the people be against
them: To conclude, all can be alleged in favor of the Academy, is to say,
that it was a love ending in friendship, a thing which has no bad reference
unto the Stoical definition of love: Amorem conatum esse amicitiae facienda ex
Cic. ibid.
pulehritudinis specie. That love is an endevor of making friendship by the show
of beauty. I return to my description in a more equitable and equal manner.
Omnino amicitiae corroboratis iam confirmatis^ Cic. Ami^.
ingenijs and aetatibus indicandae sunt. Clearly friendships are to be indge
by wits, and ages already strengthened and confirmed. As for the rest, those we
ordinarily call friends and amities, are but acquaintances and familiarities,
tied together by some occasion or commodities, by means whereof our minds are
entertained. In the amity I speak of, they entermixe and confound themselves
one in the other, with so universal a commixture, that they wear out, and can
no more find the seame that has conjoined them together. If a man urge me to
tell wherefore I loved him, I feel it cannot be expressed, but by answering;
Because it was he, because it was my self. There is beyond all my discourse,
and besides what I can particularly report of it, I know not what inexplicable
and fatal power, a mean and Mediatrix of this indissoluble union. We sought
one another, before we had seen one another, and by the reports we heard one
of another; which wrought a greater violence in us, than the reason of reports
may well bear: I think by some secret ordinance of the heavens, we embraced
one another by our names. And at our first meeting, which was by chance at a
great feast, and solemn meeting of a whole towneship, we found ourselves so
surprised, so known, so acquainted, and so combinedly bound together, that
from thence forward, nothing was so near unto us, as one unto another. He writ
an excellent Latin Satyr; since published; by which he excuses and
expounds the precipitation of our acquaintance, so suddenly come to her
perfection; Sithence it must continue so short a time, and begun so late (for
we were both grown men, and he some years older than myself) there was no
time to be lost. And it was not to be modelled or directed by the pattern of
regular and remiss friendship, wherein so many precautions of a long and
preallable conversation are required. This has no other Idea than of it self,
and can have no reference but to it self. It is not one especial
consideration, nor two, nor three, nor four, nor a thousand: It is I wot not
what kind of quintessence, of all this commixture, which having seized all my
will, induced the same to plunge and loose it self in his, which likewise
having seized all his will, brought it to loose and plunge it self in mine,
with a mutual greediness, and with a semblable concurrance. I may truly say,
loose, reserving nothing unto us, that might properly be called our own, nor
that was either his, or mine. When Lelius in the presence of the Roman
Consuls, who after the condemnation of Tiberius Gracchus, pursued all those
that had been of his acquaintance, came to enquire of Caius Blosius (who was
one of his chiefest friends) what he would have done for him, and that he
answered: All things, What? All things? replied he: And what if he had willed
thee to burn our Temples? Blosius answered, He would never have commanded such
a thing. But what if he had done it? replied Lelius: The other answered, I
would have obeyed him: If he were so perfect a friend to Gracchus, as
Histories report, he needed not offend the Consuls with this last and bold
confession, and should not have departed from the assurance he had of Gracchus
his mind. But yet those, who accuse this answer as seditious, understand not
well this mystery: and do not presuppose in what terms he stood, and that he
held Gracchus his will in his sleeve, both by power and knowledge. They were
rather friends than Citizens, rather friends than enemies of their country,
or friends of ambition and trouble. Having absolutely committed themselves one
to another, they perfecty held the reins of one another inclination: and let
this yoke be guided by virtue and conduct of reason (because without them it is
altogether impossible to combine and proportion the same.) The answer of
Blosius was such as it should be. If their affections miscarried, according to
my meaning, they were neither friends one to other, nor friends to themselves.
As for the rest, this answer soundes no more than mine would do, to him that
would in such sort enquire of me; if your will should command you to kill your
daughter, would you do it? and that I should consent unto it: for, that
bears no witness of consent to do it: because I am not in doubt of my will,
and as little of such a friends will. It is not in the power of the worlds
discourse to remove me from the certainty I have of his intentions and
judgments of mine: no one of it is actions might be presented unto me, under
what shape soever, but I would presently find the spring and motion of it. Our
minds have jumped so vnitedly together, they have with so fervent an aflection
considered of each other, and with like affection so discovered and sounded,
even to the very bottom of each others heart and entrails, that I did not only
know his, as well as mine own, but I would (verily) rather have trusted him
concerning any matter of mine, than my self. Let no man compare any of the
other common friendships to this. I have as much knowledge of them as another,
yea of the perfectest of their kind: yet will I not persuade any man to
confound their rules, for so a man might be deceived. In these other strict
friendships a man must march with the bridle of wisdom and precaution in his
hand: the bond is not so strictly tied, but a man may in some sort distrust the
same. Love him (said Chilon) as if you should one day hate him again. Hate
him as if you should love him again. This precept, so abominable in this
sovereign and mistress Amity, is necessary and wholesome in the use of vulgar
and customarie frendships: toward which a man must employ the saying Aristotle
was wont so often to repeat, Oh you my friends, there is no perfect friend.

In this noble commerce, offices and benefits (nurses of other amities) deserve
not so much as to be accounted of: this confusion so full of our wills is
cause of it: for even as the friendship I bear unto my self, admits no
accrease, by any succor I give my self in any time of need, whatsoever the
Stoickes allege; and as I acknowledge no thanks unto my self for any service
I do unto my self, so the union of such friends, being truly perfect, makes
them loose the feeling of such duties, and hate, and expel from one another
these words of division, and difference; benefit, good deed, duty, obligation,
acknowledgement, prayer, thanks, and such their like. All things being by
effect common between them; wills, thoughts, judgments, goods, wives,
children, honor, and life; and their mutual agreement, being no other than
one soul in two bodies, according to the fit definition of Aristotle, they can
neither lend or give ought to each other. See here the reason why Lawmakers,
to honor marriage with some imaginary resemblance of this divine bond,
inhibite donations between husband and wife; meaning thereby to infer, that
all things should peculiarly be proper to each of them, and that they have
nothing to divide and share together. If in the friendship whereof I speak, one
might give unto another, the receiver of the benefit should bind his fellow.
For, each seeking more than any other thing, to do each other good, he who
yields both matter and occasion, is the man shows himself liberal, giving
his friend that contentment, to effect toward him what he desires most. When
the Philosopher Diogenes wanted money, he was wont to say; That he re-demanded
the same of his friends, and not that he demanded it: And to show how that is
practiced by effect, I will relate an ancient singular example. Eudamidas the
Corinthian had two friends. Charixenus a Sycionian, and Aretheus a Corinthian;
being upon his deathbed, and very poor, and his two friends very rich, thus
made his last will and testament. To Aretheus, I bequeath the keeping of my
mother, and to maintain her when she shall be ^lde: To Charixenus the marrying
of my daughter, and to give her as great a dowry as he may: and in case one of
them shall chance to die before, I appoint the surviver to substitute his
charge, and supply his place. Those that first saw this testament, laughed and
mocked at the same; but his heirs being advertised thereof, were very well
pleased, and received it with singular contentment. And Charixenus one of them,
dying five days after Eudamidas, the substitution being declared in favor of
Aretheus, he carefully and very kindly kept and maintained his mother, and of
five talents that he was worth, he gave two and a half in marriage to one only
daughter he had, and the other two and a half to the daughter of Eudamidas,
whom he married both in one day. This example is very ample, if one thing were
not, which is the multitude of friends: For, this perfect amity I speake-of, is
indivisible; each man does so wholly give himself unto his friend, that he has
nothing left him to divide elsewhere: moreover he is grieved that he is
double, triple, or quadruple, and has not many souls, or sundry wills, that he
might confer them all upon this subject. Common friendships may be divided;
a man may love beauty in one, facility of behavior in another, liberality
in one, and wisdom in another, paternity in this, fraternity in that man, and
so forth: but this amity which possesses the soul, and swaies it in all
soveraigntie, it is impossible it should be double. If two at one instant
should require help, to which would you run? Should they crave contrary
off^ces of you, what order would you follow? Should one commit a matter to your
silence, which if the other knew would greatly profit him, what course would
you take? Or how would you discharge your self? A singular and principal
friendship dissolveth all other duties, and freeth all other obligations. The
secret I have sworn not to reveal to another, I may without perjury impart
it unto him, who is no other but my self. It is a great and strange wonder
for a man to double himself; and those that talk of tripling, know not, nor
cannot reach unto the height of it. Nothing is extreme, that has his like.
And he who shall presuppose, that of two I love the one as well as the other,
and that they enter-love one another, and love me as much as I love them: he
multiplieth in brotherhood, a thing most singular, and alonely one, and then
which one alone is also the rarest to be found in the world. The remainder of
this history agrees very well with what I said; for, Eudamidas gives as a
grace and favor to his friends to employ them in his need: he leaves them as
his heirs of his liberality, which consists in putting the means into their
hands, to do him good. And doubtless, the force of friendship is much more
richly shown in his deed, then in Aretheus. To conclude, they are imaginable
effects, to him that has not tasted them; and which makes me woonderfully to
honor the answer of that young Soldier to Cyrus, who enquiring of him, what he
would take for a horse, with which he had lately gained the prize of a race,
and whether he would change him for a Kingdom? No surely my Liege (said he)
yet would I willingly forgo him to gain a true friend, could I but find a
man worthy of so precious an alliance. He said not ill, in saying, could I but
find. For, a man shall easily find men fit for a superficial acquaintance;
but in this, wherein men negotiate from the very center of their hearts, and
make no spare of any thing, it is most requisite, all the wards and springs be
sincerely wrought, and perfectly true. In confederacie^, which hold but by one
end, men have nothing to provide for, but for the imperfections, which
particularly do interest and concern that end and respect. It is no great
matter what religion my Physician and Lawyer is of: this consideration has
nothing common with the offices of that friendship they owe-mee. So do I in
the familiar acquaintances, that those who serve-me contract with me. I am
nothing inquisitive whether a Lackey be chaste or no, but whether he be
diligent: I fear not a gaming Muletier, so much as if he be weak; nor a hot
swearing Cook, as one that is ignorant and unskillful; I never meddle with
saying what a man should do in the world; there are over many others that do
it; but what my self do in the world.

Mihi sic vsus est: Tibi, vt opus est facto, face. Ter. Heau. act. ^ scen. 1.
28.
So is it requisite for me;
Do thou as needful is for thee.
Concerning familiar table-talke, I rather acquaint my self with, and follow a
merry conceited humor, than a wise man: And in bed I rather prefer beauty,
then goodness; and in society or coversation of familiar discourse, I respect
rather sufficiency, though without Preua' hommie, and so of all things else.
Even as he that was found riding upon an hobbyhorse, playing with his
children, besought him, who thus surprised him, not to speak of-it, until he
were a father himself, supposing the tender fondness, and fatherly passion,
which then would possess his mind, should make him an impartial judge of
such an action. So would I wish to speak to such as had tried what I speak
of: but knowing how far such an amity is from the common use, and how seld
seen and rarely found, I look not to find a competent judge. For, even the
discourses, which stern antiquity has left us concerning this subject, seem
to me but faint and forcelesse in respect of the feeling I have of*it: And in
that point the effects exceed the very precepts of Philosophy.

Nil ego contul^rim iucundo sanus amico. Hor. li. 1. Sat. 5. 44.
For me, be I well in my wit,
Naught, as a merry friend, so fit.
Ancient Menander accounted him happy, that had but met the shadow of a true
friend: verily he had reason to say so, especially if he had tasted of any: for
truly, if I compare all the rest of my forepassed life, which although I have
by the mere mercy of God, past at rest and ease, and except the loss of so
dear a friend, free from all grievous affliction, with an ever-quietnesse of
mind, as one that have taken my natural and original commodities in good
payment, without searching any others: if, as I say, I compare-it all unto the
four years, I so happily enjoied the sweet company, and deare-deare society
of that worthy man, it is naught but a vapor, naught but a dark and yrkesome
light. Since the time I lost him,

quem semper acerbum, Virg. Aen. 5. 49.

Semper honoratum (sic Di^ voluistis) habebo,
Which I shall ever hold a bitter day,
Yet ever honored (so my God to obey)
I do but languish, I do but sorrow: and even those pleasures, all things
present-me with, in stead of yielding me comfort, do but redouble the grief
of his loss. We were copartners in all things. All things were with us at
half; me thinks I have stolen his part from him.

-- Nec fas esse v^^a me voluptate hic frui Ter Heau. act. 1. scen 1. 97.
D^crevi, tantisper dum ille abest meus particeps. I have set down, no joy
enjoy I may,
As long as he my partner is away.
I was so accustomed to be ever two, and so enured to be never single, that me
thinks I am but half my self. Hor. li. 2. ^d. 17. 5.


Illam me^ si partem animae tulit,
Maturior vis, quid moror altera,
Nec charits aeque nec superstes,
Integer? Ille dies vtramque
Duxit ruinam.
Since that part of my soul riper fate reft me,
Why stay I here the other part he left me?
Nor so dear, nor entire, while here I rest:
That day has in one ruin both oppressed.
There is no action can betide me, or imagination possess me, but I hear him
saying, as indeed he would have done to me: for even as he did excel me by an
infinite distance in all other sufficiencies and virtues, so did he in all
offices and duties of friendship.

Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus, Lib. 1. ^d. 24. 1.

Tam chari capitis?
What modesty or measure may I bear,
In want and wish of him that was so dear?
O misero frater adempte mihi! Catul. ele. 4. 20. 92. 23. 95.

Omnia tecumv^ aperierunt gaudia nostra,
Quae tuus in vita dulcis alebat amor.
Tu mea, tu moriens fregisti commoda frater, 21 94

Tecum vna tota est nostra sepulta anima,
Cuius ego interitu tota de mente fugaui
Haec studia, atque omnes delicias animi. 25

Alloquar? audiero nunquam tua verba loquentem?
Nunquam ego te vita frater amabili^r,
Aspiciam post hac? at certe semper amabo. El. 1. 9.

O brother reft from miserable me,
All our delight's are perished with thee,
Which thy sweet love did nourish in my breath*
Thou all my good have spoiled in thy death:
With thee my soul is all and whole enshrinde,
At whose death I have cast out of mind
All my minds sweete-meates, studies of this kind;
Never shall I, hear thee speak, speak with thee?
Thee brother, then life dearer, never see?
Yet shall thou ever be beloved of me.
but let-vs a little hear this young man speak, being but sixteen years of
age.

Because I have found this work to have since bin published (and to an ill
end) by such as seek to trouble and subvert the state of our commonwealth,
nor caring whether they shall reform it or no; which they have fondly inserted
among other writings of their invention, I have revoked my intent, which was to
place-it here. And lest the Authors memory should any way be interessed with
those that could not thoroughly know his opinions and actions, they shall
understand, that this subject was by him treated of in his infancy, only by
way of exercise, as a subject, common, bare-worne, and wyer-drawne in a
thousand books. I will never doubt but he believed what he writ, and writ as
he thought: for he was so conscientious, that no lie did ever pass his lips,
yea were it but in matters of sport or play: and I know, that had it bin in his
choice, he would rather have bin borne at Venice, than at Sarlac; and good
reason why: But he had an other maxim deeply imprinted in his mind, which
was, carefully to obey, and religiously to submit himself to the laws, under
which he was borne. There was never a better Citizen, nor more affected to the
welfare and quietness of his country, nor a sharper enemy of the changes,
innovations, newfangles, and hurly-burlies of his time: He would more willingly
have employed the utmost of his endeavors to extinguish and suppress, then to
favor or further them: His mind was modelled to the pattern of other best
ages. But yet in exchange of his serious treatise, I will here set you down
another, more pithie, material, and of more consequence, by him likewise
produced in that tender age.

The eight and twentieth Chapter.
Nine and twenty Sonnets of Steven de la Boetie, to the Lady of Grammont,
Countess of Guissen.

MAdame, I present you with nothing that is mine, either because it is already
yours, or because I find nothing therein worthy of you. But wheresoever these
verses shall be seen, for the honor which thereby shall redound to them, by
having this glorious Corisand^ of Andoms for their guide, I thought it good to
adorn them with your worthy name. I have deemed this present fit for your
Ladyship, for so much as there are few Ladies in France, that either can better
judge of Poesy, or fitter apply the use of it, then your worthy self: and
since in these her drooping days, none can give it more life, or vigorous
spirit, than you, by those rich and high-tuned accords, wherewith amongst a
million of other rar^ beauties, nature has richly graced you. Madame, these
verses deserve to be cherished by you: and I am persuaded you will be of mine
opinion, which is, that none have come out of Gaskonie, that either had more
wit, or better invention, and that witness to have proceeded from a richer
vain. And let no jealousy possess you, inasmuch as you have but the
remainder of that, which whilome I caused to be printed under the name of my
Lord of Foix, your worthy, noble and dear kinsman: For truly, these have a
kind of liveliness, and more piercing Emphasis than any other, and which I
can not well express: as he that made them in his Aprils youth, and when he
was enflamed with a noble-glorious flame, as I will one day tell your honor in
your care. The other were afterward made by him in favor of his wife, at what
time he wooed and solicited her for marriage, and began to feel I wot not what
martiall-chilnesse, and husbands-coldnesse. And I am one of those, whose
opinion is, that divine Poesy does no where fadge so well, and so effectually
applaudeth, as in a youthful, wanton, and unbridled subject. The
abovementioned nine and twenty Sons of Boetie, and that in the former
impressions of this book were here set down, have since been printed with
his other works.

The nine and twentieth Chapter.
Of Moderation.

AS if our sense of feeling were infected, we corrupt by our touching, things
that in themselves are fair and good. We may so seize on virtue, that if we
embrace it with an over greedy and violent desire, it may become vicious.
Those who say, There is never excess in virtue, because it is no longer virtue
if any excess be in it, do but jest at words.

Insani sapiens nomen ferat, aequus iniqui, Hor. lib. 1. epi. 6. 25.

Vltra quam satis est, virtut em si pet at ipsam.
A wise man mad, just unjust, may I name,
More then is meet, even virtue if he claim.
Philosophy is a subtle consideration. A man may love virtue too much, and
excessively demean himself in a good action. Gods holy word does apply it
self to this byase. Be not wiser then you should, and be soberly wise. I have
seen some great men, blemish the reputation of their religion, by showing
themselves religious beyond the example of men of their quality. I love
temperate and indifferent natures. Immoderation toward good, if it offend me
not, it amazeth, and troubles me how I should call it. Neither Pausanias his
mother, who gave the first instruction, and for her sons death brought the
first stone: Not Posthumous the Dictator, that brought his own son to his
end, whom the heat and forwardness of youth, had happily before his rank, made
to charge his enemies, seem so just as strange unto me. And I neither love to
persuade or follow so savage and so dear a virtue. The Archer that overshootes
his mark, does no otherwise than he that shoots short. Mine eyes trouble me
as much in climbing up toward a great light, as to go down in the dark.
Caliscles in Plato says, The extremity of Philosophy to be hurtful: and
persuades no man to wade further into it, then the bounds of profit: And that
taken with moderation, it is pleasant and commodious, but in the end it makes a
man wild and vicious, disdainful of religion and of common laws: an enemy
of civil conversation: a foe to humane sensuality, and worldly pleasures:
incapable of all politic administration; and unfit to assist others or to
help himself: apt to be without revenge buffeted, and bassled. He says true:
for in her excess, she enthralleth our natural liberty, and by an
importunate wile, diverts us from the fair and plain path, which nature
traceth out for us. The love we bear to women, is very lawful; yet does
Divinity bridle and restrain the same. I remember to have read in Saint
Thomas, in a place where he condemns marriages of kinsfolks in forbidden
degrees, this one reason amongst others: that the love a man bears to such a
woman may be immoderate; for, if the wedlock, or husband-like affection be
sound and perfect, as it ought to be, and also surcharged with that a man owes
to alliance and kindred, there is no doubt, but that surcrease may easily
transport a husband beyond the bounds of reason. Those Sciences that direct the
manners of men, as Divinity and Philosophy, medleth with all things. There is
no action so private and secret may be concealed from their knowledge and
jurisdiction. Well do they learn that search and censure their liberty. It
is women communicate their parts as much as a man list to wantonize with them:
but to physic them bashfulnesse forbids them. I will then in their behalf
teach husbands this, if there be any too much flesht upon them: which is, that
the very pleasures they have by the familiarity of their wives, except
moderately used; they are reprooved: and not only in that, but in any other
unlawful subjects, a man may trespass in licentiousness and offend in
excess. Those shameless endearings, which the first heat suggests unto us in
that sportfull delight, are not only indecently, but hurtfully employed
toward our wives. Let them at least learn impudency from another hand. They
are ever broad-waking when we need them. I have used no means but natural
and simple instruction. Marriage is a religious and devout bond: and that is
the reason the pleasure a man has of it, should be a moderate, stayed, and
serious pleasure, and mixed with severitie, it ought to be a voluptuousness
somewhat circumspect and conscientious. And because it is the chiefest of
generation, there are that make a question, whether it be lawful to require
them of copulation, as well when we have no hope of children, as when they are
over-aged, or big with child. It is an homicide, according to Plato.
Certain nations (and amongst others, the Mahometane) abhor Conjunction with
women great with child. Many also with those that have their monthly disease.
Zenobia received her husband but for one charge; which done, all the time of her
conception, she let him go at randon, and that past, she gave him leave to
begin again: a notable and generous example of marriage.

Plato borrows the narration (of some needy and hunger-starven Poet) of this
sport. That Jupiter one day gave his wife so hot a charge, impatient to stay
till she came to bed, he laid her along upon the floor, and by the vehemence
of his pleasure forgot the urgent and weighty resolutions lately concluded upon
with the other gods of his caelestiall court; boasting he found it as sweet at
that time, as he had done, when first he spoiled her of her virginity, by
stealth and unknown to their parents. The Kings of Persia, called for their
wives, when they went to any solemn feast, but when much drinking and wine
began to heat them in good earnest they sent them to their chambers, seeing
they could no longer refrain, but must needs yield to sensual tie, lest they
should be partakers of their immoderate lust; and in their stead sent for
other women, whom this duty of respect might not concern. All pleasures and
gratifications are not well placed in all sorts of people. Epaminondas had
caused a dissolute young man to be imprisoned: Pelopidas entreated him, that
for his sake he would set him at liberty, but he refused him, and yielded to
free him at the request of an harlot of his, which likewise sued for his
enlargement; saying, it was a gratification due unto a Courtizan, and not to a
Captain. Sophocles being partner with Pericles in the Pretorship, seeing by
chance a fair boy to pass by: Oh what a beauteous boy goes yonder! said he
to Pericles: That speech were more fitting another then a Praetor, answered
Pericles, who ought not only to have chaste hands, but also unpolluted eyes.
Aelius Verus the Emperor, his wife complaining that he followed the love of
other women, answered he did it for conscience sake, for so much as marriage was
a name of honor, and dignity, and not of foolish and lascivious lust. And our
Ecclesiastical History, has with honor preserved the memory of that wife,
which sued to be devorced from her husband, because she would not second and
consent to his over-insolent and lewd embracements. To conclude, there is no
voluptuousness so just, wherein excess and intemperance is not reproachful
unto us. But to speak in good sooth, is not a man a miserable creature? He is
scarce come to his own strength by his natural conditions, to taste one only
complete, entire and pure pleasure, but he laboreth by discourse to cut it
off: he is not wretched enough, except by art and study he augment his misery.

Fortunae miseras auximus art vias. Propert. li. 3. cl. 6.32.
Fortunes unhappy ill,
We amplify by skill.
Humane wisdom does foolishly seek to be ingenious in exercising her-selfe
to abate the number, and diminish the pleasure of sensualities, that pertain
to us: as it does favorably and industriously in employing her devises, to
paint and set a luster on evils, before our eyes, and therewith to recreate our
sense. Had I been chief of a faction, I would have followed a more natural
course, which to say true, is both commodious and sacred, and should
peradventure have made my self strong enough to limite the same. Although our
spiritual and corporal Physicians: as by covenant agreed upon between them,
find no way of recoverie, nor remedies for diseases of body and mind, but by
torment, grief and pain, watching, fasting, haire-shirts, far and solitary
exile, perpetual prison, rods and other afflictions, have therefore been
invented: But so, that they be truly afflictions, and that there be some
stinging sharpness in them: And that the success be not as Gallios was, who
having been confined to the i will of Lesbos, news came to Rome, that there he
lived a merry life; and what the Senate had laid upon him for a punishment,
redounded to his commodity: whereupon they agreed to revoke him home to his
own house and wife, strictly enjoining him to keep the same, thereby to
accommodate their punishment to his sense and feeling. For he to whom fasting
should procure health and a merry heart, or he to whom poison should be more
healthie then meat, it would be no longer a wholesome receipt, no more then
drugs in other medicines, are of no effect to him that takes them with appetite
and pleasure. Bitterness and difficulty are circumstances fitting their
operat on. That nature which should take Reubarbe as familiar, should no doubt
corrupt the use of it; it must be a thing that hurts the stomach, if it shall
cure it: and here the common rule fails, that infirmities are cured by their
contraries: for one ill cures another. This impression has some reference to
this other so ancient, where some think they gratify both heaven and earth by
killing and massacring themselves, which was universally embraced in all
religions. Even in our fathers age; Amurath at the taking of Isth^us,
sacrificed six hundred young Graecians to his fathers soul: to the end their
blood might serve as a propitiation to expiate the sins of the deceased. And
in the new countries discovered in our days yet uncorrupted, and virgins, in
regard of ours, it is a custom well nigh received everiewhere. All their
idolles are sprinkled with humane blood, not without diverse examples of
horrible cruelty. Some are burnt alive, and half roasted drawn from the fire,
that so they may pull out their hearts and entrails; othersome, yea women are
fleade quick, and with their yet-bleeding skins, they invest and cover others.
And no less of examples of constant resolution. For these wretched sacrifiable
people, old men, women and children, some days before, go themselves begging
their alms, for the offering of their sacrifice, and all of full glee,
singing, and dancing with the rest, they present themselves to the slaughter.
The Ambassadors of the Kings of Mexico, in declaring and magnifying the
greatness of their Master to Fernando Cortez, after they had told him, that
he had thirty vassals, whereof each one was able to levy a hundred thousand
combatants, and that he had his residence in the fairest and strongest City
under heaven, added moreover, that he had fifty thousand to sacrifice for every
year: verily some affirm that they maintain continual wars with certain
mighty neighboring Nations, not so much for the exercise and training of
their youth, as that they may have store of prisoners taken in war to supply
their sacrifices. In another province, to welcome the said Cortez, they
sacrificed fifty men at one clap. I will tell this one story more: Some of
those people having been beaten by him, sent to know him, and to entreat him
of friendship. The messengers presented him with three kinds of presents, in
this manner: Lord, if thou be a fierce God, that love to feed on flesh and
blood, here are five slaves, eat them, and we will bring thee more: if thou be
a gently mild God, here is incense and feathers; but if thou be a man, take
these birds and fruits, that here we present and offer unto thee.

The thirtieth Chapter.
Of the Caniballes.

AT what time King Pirrhus came into Italy, after he had survaide the
marshalling of the Army, which the Romans sent against him: I w^^ not, said
he, what barbarous men these are (for so were the Graecians wont to call all
strange nations) but the disposition of this Army, which I see, is nothing
barbarous. So said the Graecians of that which Flaminius sent into their
country: And Phillip viewing from a Tower the order and distribution of the
Roman camp, in his kingdom under Publius Sulpitius Galba. Lo how a man
ought to take heed, lest he over-weeningly follow vulgar opinions, which
should be measured by the rule of reason, and not by the common report. I have
had long time dwelling with me a man, who for the space of ten or twelve years
had dwelt in that other world, which in our age was lately discovered in those
parts where Villegaignon first landed, and surnamed Antartike France. This
discovery of so infinite and vaste a country, seems worthy great
consideration. I wot not whether I can warrant my self, that some other be not
discovered hereafter, sithence so many worthy men, and better learned then we
are, have so many ages been deceived in this. I fear me our eyes be greater
then our bellies, and that we have more curiosity then capacity. We embrace
all, but we fasten nothing but wind. Plate makes Solon to report, that he had
learned of the Priests of the city of Says in Egypt, that whilom, and before
the general Deluge, there was a great Island called Atlantis, situated at the
Plat. Time.
mouth of the strait of Gibraltar, which contained more firm land then
Affrike and Asia together. And that the Kings of that country, who did not
only possess that Island, but had so far entered into the maine land, that of
the breadth of Affrike, they held as far as Egypt; and of Europes length, as
far as Tus^ame: and that they undertook to invade Asia, and to subdue all
the nations that compass the Mediterranean Sea, to the gulf of Mare-Maggiore,
and to that end they traversed all Spain, France and Italy, so far as
Greece, where the Athenians made head against them; but that a while after,
both the Athenians themselves, and that great Island, were swallowed up by the
Deluge. It is very likely this extreme ruin of waters wrought strange
alterations in the habitations of the earth: as some hold that the Sea has
divided Sicilie from Italy,

Haecloca vi quondam, and vasta convulsa ruina Virg. A^n. lib. 3. 414. 416.

Dissiluisse ferunt, cum protinus vtr aque tellus
Vna foret.
Men say, sometimes this land by that forsaken,
And that by this, were split, and ruine-shaken,
Whereas till then both lands as one were taken.
Cypres from Soria, the Island of Negroponte from the maine land of Be^tia, and
in other places joined lands that were sundred by the Sea, filling with mudde
and sand the channels between them.

-- sterilisque diu palus apt aqueremis Hor. art. Poet. 65.
Vi^inas vrbes alit, and grave sentit aratrum. The fenne long barren, to be
rowed in, now
Both feeds the neighbor towns, and feels the plow.
But there is no great appearance, the said Island should be the new world we
have lately discovered; for, it well-nigh touched Spain, and it were an
incredible effect of inundation, to have remooved the same more then twelve
hundred leagues, as we see it is. Besides, our modern Navigations have now
almost discovered, that it is not an Island, but rather firm land, and a
continent, with the East Indias on one side, and the countries lying under the
two Poles on the other; from which if it be divided, it is with so narrow a
strait, and intervalle, that it no way deserves to be named an Island: For, it
seems there are certain motions in these vast bodies, some natural, and
other some febricitant, as well as in ours. When I consider the impression my
river of Dordoigne works in my time, toward the right shore of her descent,
and how much it has gained in twenty years, and how many foundations of
diverse houses it has overwhelmed and violently carried away; I confess it to
be an extraordinary agitation: for, should it always keep one course, or had
it ever kept the same, the figure of the world had ere this been overthrown:
But they are subject to changes and alterations. Sometimes they overflow and
spread themselves on one side, sometimes on another; and other times they
contain themselves in their natural beds or channels. I speak not of sudden
^^undations, whereof we now treat the causes. In Modoc along the Seacoast, my
brother the Lord of Arsacke, may see a town of his buried under the sands,
which the Sea casts up before it: The tops of some buildings are yet to be
discerned. His Rents and Demaines have been changed into barren pastures. The
inhabitants thereabouts affirm, that some years since, the Sea encrocheth so
much upon them, that they have lost four leagues of firm land: These sands
are her forerunners. And we see great hillokes of gravel mooving which march
half a league before it, and usurp on the firm land. The other testimony of
antiquity, to which some will refer this discovery, as in Aristotle (if at
least that little book of unheard of woonders be his) where he reports that
certain Carthaginians having sailed ad^wart the Atlant^^^ Sea, without the
strait of Gibraltar, after long time, they at last discovered a great fertile
Island; all replenished with goodly woods, and watered with great and deep
rivers, far distant from all land, and that both they and others, allured by
the goodness and fertility of the soil, went thither with their wives,
children, and household, and there began to enhabite and settle themselves. The
Lords of Carthage seeing their country by little and little to be dispeopled,
made a law and express inhibition, that upon pain of death no more men
should go thither, and banished all that were gone thither to dwell, fearing
(as they said) that in success of time, they would so mu tiply as they might
one day supplant them, and overthrow their own estate. This narration of
Aristotle, has no reference unto our new found countries. This servant I had,
was a simple and rough-hewen fellow: a condition fit to yield a true
testimony. For, subtle people may indeed mark more curiously, and observe
things more exactly, but they amplify and gloss them: and the better to
persuade, and make their interpretations of more validity, they cannot choose
but somewhat alter the story. They never represent things truly, but fashion
and mask them according to the visage they saw them in; and to purchase credit
to their judgment, and draw you on to believe them, they commonly adorn,
enlarge, yea, and Hyperbolise the matter. Wherein is required either a most
sincere Reporter, or a man so simple, that he may have no invention to build
upon, and to give a true likelihood unto false devises, and be not wedded to
his own will. Such a one was my man; who besides his own report, has many
times showed me diverse Mariners, and Merchants, whom he had known in that
vovage. So am I pleased with his information, that I never enquire what
Cosmographers say of it. We had need of Topographers to make us particular
narrations of the places they have been in. For some of them, if they have the
advantage of us, that they have seen Palestine, will challenge a privilege,
to tell us news of all the world besides. I would have every man write what he
knows, and no more: not only in that, but in all other subjects. For one may
have particular knowledge of the nature of one river, and experience of the
quality of one fountain, that in other things knows no more then another
man: who nevertheless to publish this little scantling, will undertake to
write of all the Phisickes. From which vice proceed diverse great
inconveniences. Now (to return to my purpose) I find (as far as I have
been informed) there is nothing in that nation, that is either barbarous or
savage, unless men call that barbarism which is not common to them. As
indeed, we have no other aim of truth and reason, then the example and Idea of
the opinions and customs of the country we live in. There is ever perfect
religion, perfect policy, perfect and complete use of all things. They are
even savage, as we call those fruits wild, which nature of her self, and of
her ordinary progress has produced: where as indeed, they are those which
our selves have altered by our artificial divises, and diver ted from their
common order, we should rather term savage. In those are the true and most
profitable virtues, and natural properties most lively and vigorous, which in
these we have bastardized, applying them to the pleasure of our corrupted
taste. And if notwithstanding, in diverse fruits of those countries that were
never tilled, we shall find, that in respect of ours they are most excellent,
and as delicate unto our taste; there is no reason, art should gain the point
of honor of our great and puissant mother Nature. We have so much by our
inventions, surcharged the beauties and riches of her works, that we have
altogether over-choaked her: yet where ever her purity shines, she makes our
vain, and frivolous enterprises woonderfully ashamed.

Et veniunt hederae sponte sua melius, Propert. l. 1. cl. 2. 10.

Surgit and in solis formosior arbutus antris,
Et volucres nulla duleius art canunt.
Ivies spring better of their own accord,
Vnhanted plots much fairer trees afford,
Birds by no art much sweeter notes record.
All our endevous or wit, cannot so much as reach to represent the nest of the
least birdlet, it is contexture, beauty, profit and use, no nor the web of a
seely spider. All things (says Plato) are produced, either by nature, by
fortune, or by art. The greatest and fairest by one or other of the two first,
the least and imperfect by the last. Those nations seem therefore so barbarous
unto me, because they have received very little fashion from humane wit, and
are yet near their original naturalitie. The laws of nature do yet command
them, which are but little bastardized by ours, And that with such purity, as
I am sometimes grieved the knowledge of it came no sooner to light, at what
time there were men, that better than we could have judged of it. I am sorry,
Lycurgus and Plato had it not* for me seems that what in those nations we see
by experience, does not only exceed all the pictures wherewith licentious
Poesy has proudly imbellished the golden age, and al her quaint inventions to
feign a happy condition of man, but also the conception and desire of
Philosophy. They could not imagine a genuitie so pure and simple, as we s^e
^by experience; nor ever believe our society might be maintained with so
little art and humane combination. It is a nation, would I answer Plato, that
has no kind of traffike, no knowledge of Letters, no intelligence of numbers,
no name of magistrate, nor of politic superiority; no use of service, of
riches or of poverty; no contracts, no successions, no partitions, no
occupation but idle; no respect of kindred, but common, no apparel but
natural, no manuring of lands, no use of wine, corn, or mettle. The very
words that import lying, fal^hood, treason, dissimulations, covetousnes, envy,
detraction, and pardon, were never heard of amongst them. How dissonant would
he find his imaginary common-weath from this perfection?

Hos natura modes primum dedit. Nature at first vprise,
These manners did devise.
Furthermore, they live in a country of so exceeding pleasant and temperate
situation, that as my testimonies have told me, it is very rare to see a sick
body amongst them; and they have further assured me, they never saw any man
there, either shaking with the palsy, toothlesse, with eyes dropping, or
crooked and stooping through age. They are seated along the seacoast,
encompassed toward the land with huge and steepie mountains, having between
both, a hundred leagues or thereabout of open and champaine ground. They have
great abundance of fish and flesh, that have no resemblance at all with ours,
and eat them without any sawces, or skill of Cookerie, but plain boiled or
broiled. The first man that brought a horse thither, although he had in many
other voyages conversed with them, bred so great a horror in the land, that
before they could take notice of him, they slew him with arrows. Their
buildings are very long, and able to contain two or three hundred souls,
covered with barks of great trees, fastened in the ground at one end,
enterlaced and joined close together by the tops, after the manner of some of
our Granges; the covering whereof hangs down to the ground, and steadeth them
as a flancke. They have a kind of wood so hard, that ryving and cleaving the
same, they make blades, swords, and grid-irons to broile their meat with.
Their beds are of a kind of cotton cloth, fastened to the house-roofe, as our
ship-cabbanes: everic one has his several cowch; for the women lie from their
husbands. They rise with the Sun, and feed for all day, as soon as they are
up: and make no more meals after that. They drink not at meat, as Suidas
reports of some other people of the East, which drank after meals, but
drink many times a day, and are much given to pledge carowses. Their drink is
made of a certain root, and of the color of our Claret wines, which lasts
but two or three days; they drink it warm: It has somewhat sharp taste,
wholesome for the stomach, nothing heady, but laxative for such as are not used
unto it, yet very pleasing to such as are accustomed unto it. Instead of
bread, they use a certain white composition, like unto Corianders confected. I
have eaten some, the taste whereof is somewhat sweet and wallowish. They spend
the whole day in dancing. Their young men go a hunting after wild beasts
with bows and arrows. Their women busy themselves therewhil'st with warming
of their drink, which is their chiefest office. Some of their old men, in the
morning before they go to eating, preach in common to all the household,
walking from one end of the house to the other, repeating one selfsame
sentence many times, till he have ended his turn^ (for their buildings are a
hundred paces in length) he commends but two things unto his auditorie, First,
valor against their enemies, then lovingnesse unto their wives. They never
miss (for their restraint) to put men in mind of this duty, that it is their
wives which keep their drink lukewarm, and well-seasoned. The form of
their beds, cords, swords, blades, and wooden bracelets, wherewith they
cover their handwrists when they fight, and great Canes open at one end, by the
sound of which they keep time and cadence in their dancing, are in many
places to be seen, and namely in mine own house. They are shaven all-over,
much more close and cleaner than we are, with no other Razors than of wood or
stone. They believe their souls to be eternal, and those that have deserved
well of their Gods, to be placed in that part of heaven where the Sun rises,
and the cursed toward the West in opposition. They have certain Prophets and
Priests, which commonly abide in the mountains, and very seldom show
themselves unto the people; but when they come down, there is a great feast
prepared, and a solemn assembly of many towneships together (each Grange as
I have described makes a village, and they are about a French league one from
another.) The Prophet speaks to the people in public, exhorting them to
embrace virtue, and follow their duty. All their moral discipline contains
but these two articles; first an vndismaied resolution to war, then an
inviolable affection to their wives. He does also Prognosticate of things to
come, and what success they shall hope for in their enterprises: he either
persuades or disswadeth them from war; but if he chance to miss of his
divination, and that it succeed otherwise than he foretold them, if he be
taken, he is hewn in a thousand pieces, and condemned for a false Prophet. And
therefore he that has once misreckoned himself is never seen again.
Divination is the gift of God; the abusing whereof should be a punishable
imposture. When the Divines amongst the Scithians had foretold an untruth, they
were couched along upon hurdles full of heath or brushwood, drawn by oxen, and
so manicled hand and foot, burned to death. Those which manage matters subject
to the conduct of man's sufficiency, are excusable, although they show the
utmost of their skill. But those that gull and conicatch us with the assurance
of an extraordinary faculty, and which is beyond our knowledge, ought to be
double punished; first because they perform not the effect of their promise,
then for the rashness of their imposture and vnadvisednesse of their fraud.
They war against the nations, that lie beyond their mountains, to which they
go naked, having no other weapons then bows, or wodden swords, sharp at one
end, as our broaches are. It is an admirable thing to see the constant
resolutuion of their combats, which never end but by effusion of blood and
murder: for they know not what fear or rowts are. Every Victor brings home
the head of the enemy he has slain as a Trophey of his victory, and
fastneth the same at the entrance of his dwelling place. After they have long
time used and entreated their prisoners well, and with all commodities they can
devise, he that is the Master of them; summoning a great assembly of his
acquaintance; tieth a cord to one of the prisoners arms, by the end whereof
he holds him fast, with some distance from him, for fear he might offend him,
and gives the other arm, bound in like manner, to the dearest friend he has,
and both in the presence of all the assembly kill him with swords: which
done, they roste, and then ear him in common, and send some slices of him to
such of their friends as are absent. It is not as some imagine, to nourish
themselves with it, (as anciently the Scithians wont to do,) but to represent
an extreme, and inexpiable revenge. Which we prove thus; some of them
perceiving the Portugales, who had confederated themselves with their
adversaries, to v^e another kind of death, when they took them prisoners;
which was, to bury them up to the middle, and against the upper part of the
body to shoot arrows, and then being almost dead, to hang them up; they
supposed, that these people of the other world (as they who had sowed the
knowledge of many vices amongst their neighbors, and were much more cunning in
all kinds of evils and mischief then they) undertook not this manner of
revenge without cause, and that consequently it was more smartfull, and cruel
then theirs, and thereupon began to leave their old fashion to follow this. I
am not sorry we note the barbarous horror of such an action, but grieved, that
prying so narrowly into their faults we are so blinded in ours. I think there
is more barbarism in eating men alive, then to feed upon them being dead; to
mangle by tortures and torments a body full of lively sense, to roast him in
pieces, to make dogs and swine to gnawe and tear him in mammockes (as we
have not only read, but seen very lately, yea and in our own memory, not
amongst ancient enemies, but our neighbors and fellow-citizens; and which is
worse, under pretense of piety and religion) then to roast and eat him after
he is dead. Chrysippus and Zeno, arch pillars of the Stoicke sect, have
supposed that it was no hurt at all, in time of need, and to what end soever,
to make use of our carrion bodies, and to seed upon them, as did our
forefathers, who being besieged by Caesar in the City of Alexia, resolved to
sustain the famine of the siege, with the bodies of old men, women, and other
persons unserviceable and unfit to fight.

Vascones (fama est) alimentis talibus vsi ^ure sat. 15 93

Produxere animas.
Gascoynes (as same reports)
Lived with meats of such sorts.
And Physicians fear not, in all kinds of compositions availefull to our
health, to make use of it, be it for outward or inward applications: But there
was never any opinion found so unnatural and immodest, that would excuse
treason, treachery, disloialty, tyranny, cruelty, and such like, which are
our ordinary faults. We may then well call them barbarous, in regard of
reasons rules, but not in respect of v^^^ at exceed them in all kind of
barbarism. Their wars are noble and generous, and have as much excuse and
beauty, as this humane infirmity may admit: they aim at naught so much, and
have no other foundation amongst them, but the mere jelousie of virtue. They
contend not for the gaining of new lands; for to this day they yet enjoy that
natural vbertie and fruitesulnesse, which without laboring toil, does in
such plenteous abundance furnish them with all necessary things, that they
need not enlarge their limits. They are yet in that happy estate, as they
desire no more, then what their natural necessities direct them: whatsoever is
beyond it, is to them fuperfluous. Those that are much about one age, do
generally enter-call one another brethren, and such as are yoonger, they call
children, and the aged are esteemed as fathers to all the rest. These leave
this full possession of goods in common, and without division to their heirs,
without other claim or title, but that which nature does plainly impart unto
all creatures, even as she brings them into the world. If their neighbors
chance to come over the mountains to assail or invade them, and that they get
the victory over them, the Victors conquest is glory, and the advantage to be
and remain superior in valor and virtue: else have they nothing to do with
the goods and spoils of the vanquished, and so return into their country,
where they neither want any necessary thing, nor lack this great port on, to
know how to enjoy their condition happily, and are contented with what nature
affoord^th them. So do these when their turn comes. They require no other
ransom of their prisoners, but an acknowledgement and confession that they are
vanquished. And in a whole age, a man shall not find one, that does not rather
embrace death, then either by word or countenance remissely to yield one jot of
an invincible courage. There is none seen that would not rather be slain and
devoured, then sue for life, or show any fear: They use their prisoners with
all liberty, that they may so much the more hold their lives dear and
precious, and commonly entertain them with threats of future death, with the
torments they shall endure, with the preparations intended for that purpose,
with mangling and slicing of their members, and with the feast that shall be
kept at their charge. All which is done, to wrest some remiss, and exact some
faint-yeelding speech of submission from them, or to possess them with a
desire to escape or run away; that so they may have the advantage to have
danted and made them afraid, and to have forced their constancy. For certainly
true victory consists in that only point.

-- Victoria nulla est (...)
Quam quae confessos animo quoque subingat hosts. No conquest such, as to
suppress
Foes hearts, the conquest to confess.
The Hungarians, a most warre-like nation, were whilome wont to pursue their
pray no longer then they had forced their enemy to yield unto their mercy.
For, having wrested this confession from-him, they set him at liberty without
offense or ransom, except it were to make him swear, never after to bear
arms against them. We get many advantages of our enemies, that are but
borrowed and not ours: It is the quality of porterly-rascall, and not of
virtue, to have stronger arms, and sturdier legs: Disposition is a dead and
corporal quality. It is a trick of fortune to make our enemy stoop, and to
bleare his eyes with the Sunnes-light: It is a pranke of skill and knowledge to
be cunning in the art of fencing, and which may happen unto a base and
woorthlesse man. The reputation and worth of a man consists in his heart and
will: therein consists true honor: Constancy is valor, not of arms and legs,
but of mind and courage? it consists not in the spirit and courage of our
horse, nor of our arms, but in ours. He that obstinately fails in his
courage, Si succiderit, de genu pugnat, If he slip or fall, he fights upon his
knee. He that in danger of imminent death, is no whit danted in his
assuredness; he that in yielding up his ghost be holding his enemy with a
scornful and fierce look, he is vanquished, not by us, but by fortune: he is
slain, but not conquered. The most valiant, are often the most unfortunate. So
are there triumphant losses in envy of victories. Not those
foure-sister-victories, the fairest that ever the Sun beheld with his
all-seeing eye, of Salamis, of Plateae, of Micale, and of Sicilia, durst ever
dare to oppose all their glory together, to the glory of the King L^onidas his
discomsiture and of his men, at the passage of Thermopylae: what man did ever
run with so glorious an envy, or more ambitious desire to the goal of a
combat, then Captain Ischolas to an evident loss and overthrow? who so
ingeniously or more politikely did ever assure himself of his welfare, then
he of his ruin? He was appointed to defend a certain passage of Peloponesus
against the Arcadians, which finding himself altogether unable to perform,
seeing the nature of the place, and inequality of the forces, and resolving,
that whatsoever should present it self unto his enemic, must necessarily be
utterly defeated: On the other side, deeming it unworthy both his virtue and
magnanimity, and the Lacedemonian name, to ^a^le or faint in his charge,
between these two extremities he resolved upon a mean and indifferent course,
which was this. The yoongost and best disposed of his troop, he reserved for
the service and defense of their country, to which he sent them back; and
with those whose loss was least, and who might best be spared, he determined
to maintain that passage, and by their death to force the enemy, to purchase
the entrance of it as dear as possibly he could; as indeed it followed. For
being suddenly environed round by the Arcadians: After a great slaughter made
of them, both himself and all his were put to the sword. Is any Trophey
assigned for conquerours, that is not more duly due unto these conquered? A
true conquest respects rather an undaunted resolution: and honorable end,
then a fair escape, and the honor of virtue does more consist in combating
then in beating. But to return to our history, these prisoners, howsoever
they are dealt withal, are so far from yielding, that contrariwise during
two or three months that they are kept, they ever carry a cheerful
countenace, and urge their keepers to hasten their trial, they outragiously
defic, and injure them. They vpbraid them with their cowardlinesse, and with
the number of battles, they have lost again theirs. I have a song made by a
prisoner, wherein is this clause, Let them boldly come altogether, and flock
in multitudes, to feed on him; for with him they shall feed upon their fathers,
and grandfathers, that heeretosore have served his body for food and
nourishment: These muscles, (says he) this flesh, and these veins, are your
own; fond men as you are, know you not that the substance of your forefathers
limbs is yet tied unto ours? Taste them well, for in them shall you find the
relish of your own flesh: An invention, that has no show of barbarism, Those
that paint them dying, and that represent this action, when they are put to
execution, delineate the prisoners spitting in their executioners faces, and
making mowes at them. Verily, so long as breath is in their body, they never
cease to brave and defy them, both in speech and countenance. Surely, in
respect of us these are very savage men: for either they must be so in good
sooth, or we must be so indeed: There is a woondrous distance between their
form and ours. Their men have many wives, and by how much more they are
reputed valiant, so much the greater is their number. The manner and beauty in
their marriages is woondrous strange and remarkable: For, the same jealousy
our wives have to keep us from the love and affection of other women, the same
have theirs to procure it. Being more careful for their husbands honor and
content, then of any thing else: They endeavor and apply all their industry,
to have as many rivals as possibly they can, forasmuch as it is a testimony of
their husbands virtue. Our women would count it a wonder, but it is not so: It
is virtue properly Matrimonial; but of the highest kind. And in the Bible,
Lea, Rachell, Sara, and Jacobs wives, brought their fairest maiden servants
unto their husbands beds. And Livia seconded the lustful appetites of Augustus
to her great prejudice. And Stratonica the wife of king Dei^tarus did not only
bring a most beauteous chamber-maide, that served her, to her husbands bed, but
very carefully broughtvp the children he begot on her, and by all possible
means aided and furthered them to succeed in their fathers roialtie. And least
a man should think, that all this is done by a simple, and servile, or awefull
duty unto their custom, and by the impression of their ancient customs
authority, without discourse or judgment, and because they are so blockish,
and dull-spirited, that they can take no other resolution, it is not amiss,
we allege some evidence of their sufficiency. Besides what I have said of
one of their warlike songs, I have another amorous canzonet, which begins in
this sense: Adder stay, stay good adder, that my sister may by the pattern of
thy partie-coloured coat draw the fashion and work of a rich lace, for me to
give unto my love; so may thy beauty, thy nimblenesse or disposition be ever
preferred before all other serpents. The first couplet is the burden of the
song. I am so conversant with Poesy, that I amy judge, this invention has no
barbarism at all in it, but is altogether Anacreontike. Their language is a
kind of pleasant speech, and ^ath a pleasing sound, and some affinity with
the Greek terminations. Three of that nation, ignorant how dear the knowledge
of our corruptions will one day cost their repose, security, and happiness,
and how their ruin shall proceed from this commerce, which I imagine is
already well advanced, (miserable as they are to have suffered themselves to be
so cosoned by a desire of newfangled novelties, and to have quit the
calmness of their climate, to come and see ours) were at Roane in the time of
our late King Charles the ninth, who talked with them a great while. They were
showed our fashions, our pomp, and the form of a fair City; afterward some
demanded their advise, and would needs know of them what things of note and
admirable they had observed amongst us: they answered three things, the last of
which I have forgotten, and am very sorry for it, the other two I yet remember.
They said, First, they found it very strange, that so many tall men with long
beards, strong and well armed, as it were about the Kings persen (it is very
likely they ^ent the Switzers of his guard) would submit themselves to obey a
beardlesse child, and that we did not rather obuse one amongst them to command
the rest. Secondly (they have a manner of phrase whereby they call men but a
moytie one of another.) They had perceived, there were men amongst us f^ll
gorged with all sorts of commodities, and others which hunger-starved, and
bare with need and poverty, begged at their gates: and found it strange,
these moyties so needy could endure such an injustice, and that they took not
the others by the throat, or set fire on their houses. I talked a good while
with one of them, but I had so bad an interpreter, and who did so ill apprehend
my meaning, and who through his foolishness was so troubled to conceive my
imaginations, that I could draw no great matter from him. Touching that point,
wherein I demanded of him, what good he received by the superiority he had
amongst his countriemen (for he was a Captain and our Mariners called him
King) he told me, it was to march foremost in any charge of war: further, I
asked him, how many men did follow him, he showed me a distance of place, to
signify they were as many as might be contained in so much ground, which I
guessed to be about 4. or 5. thousand men: moreover I demanded, if when wars
were ended, all his authority expired; he answered, that he had only this
left him, which was, that when he went on progress, and visited the villages
depending of him, the inhabitants prepared paths and highways athwart the
hedges of their woods, for him to pass through at ease. All that is not very
ill; but what of that? They wear no kind of breeches nor hosen.

The one and thirtieth Chapter.
That a man ought soberly to meddle with judging of divine laws.

THings unknown are the true scope of imposture, and subject of Legerdemaine:
forasmuch as strangeness it self does first give credit unto matters, and
not being subject to our ordinary discourses, they deprive us of means to
withstand them. To this purpose, said Plato* it is an easy matter to please,
speaking of the nature of the Gods, then of men's: For the Auditors ignorance
lends a fair and large cariere, and free liberty, to the handling of secret
hidden matters. Whence it follows, that nothing is so firmly believed, as
that which a man knows least; nor are there people more assured in their
reports, then such as tell us fables, as Al^humists, Prognosticators,
Fortune Tellers, Palmesters, Physicians, idgenus omne, and such like. To which,
if I durst, I would join a rabble of men; that are ordinary interpreters and
controulers of Gods secret desseignes, presuming to find out the causes of
every accident, and to pry into the secrets of Gods divine will, the
incomprehensible motives of his works. And howbeit, the continual variety and
discordance of events drive them from one corner to another, and from East to
West, they will not leave to follow their bowl, and with one small pen^ill
draw both white and black. There is this commendable observance in a certain
Indian nation, who if they chance to be discomfited in any skirmish or battle,
they publicly beg pardon of the Sun, who is their God, as for an unjust
action, referring their good or ill fortune to divine reason, submitting their
judgment and discourses unto it. It suffiseth a Christian to believe, that all
things come from God, to receive them from his divine, and inscrutable wisdom
with thanksgiving, and in what manner soever they are sent him, to take them in
good part. But I utterly disalow a common custom amongst us, which is to
ground and establish our religion upon the prosperity of our enterprises. Our
belief has other sufficient foundations, and need not be authorized by
events. For the people accustomed to these plausible arguments, and agreeing
with his taste, when events sort contrary and disadvantageous to their
expectation, they are in hazard to waver in their faith: As in the civil
wars, wherein we are now for religions sake, those which got the advantage,
at the conflict of Roch^labe^lle, making great joy and bone-fires for that
accident, and using that fortune, as an assured approbation of their faction:
when afterward they come to excuse their disaster of Mort-contour and Iarnac,
which are scourges and fatherly chastisements: if they have not a people wholly
at their mercy, they will easily make him perceive, what it is to take two
kinds of corn out of one sa^ke: and from one and the same mouth to blow both
hot and cold. It were better to entertain it with the true foundations of
verity. It was a notable Seabattle, which was lately gained against the
Turks, under the conduct of Don John of Austria. But it has pleased God to
make us at other times both see and feel other such, to our no small loss and
detriment. To conclude, it is no easy matter to reduce divine things unto our
balance, so they suffer no impeachment: And he that would yield a reason, why
Arrius and Leo his Pope, chief Principals, and maine supporters of this
here^ie, died both at several times, of so semblable and so strange deaths
(for being forced through a violent bellie-ach to go from their disputations
to their close-stoole, both suddenly yielded up their ghosts on them) and
exaggerate that divine vengeance by the circumstance of the place, might also
add the death of Hel^ogabalus unto it, who likewise was slain upon a privy.
But what? Ireneus is found to be engaged in like fortune: Gods intent being to
teach us, that the good have some thing else to hope for, and the wicked
somewhat else to fear, then the good or bad fortune of this world: He manageth
and applies them according to his secret disposition: and depriveth us of the
means, thereby foolishly to make our profit. And those, that according to
humane reason will thereby prevail, do but mock themselves. They never give
one touch of it, that they receive not two for it. S. Augustine gives a
notable trial of it upon his adversaries. It is a conflict, no more decided by
the arms of memory, than by the weapons of reason. A man should be satisfied
with the light, which it pleases the Sun to communicate unto us by virtue of
his beams; and he that shall lift up his eyes to take a greater within his
body, let him not think it strange, if for a reward of his overweening and
arrogancy he loses his sight. Quis hominum potest scire consilium De^^ Wisd.
9. 13.
aut quis poterit cogitare, quid velit dominus? Who amongst men can know Gods
counsel, or who can think what God will do?

The two and thirtieth Chapter.
To avoid voluptuousness in regard of life.

I Have noted the greatest part of ancient opinions to agree in this: That when
our life affords more evil than good, it is then time to die: and to preserve
our life to our torment and incommoditie, is to spur and shocke the very
rules of nature: as say the old rules.

(...). G^om. Graec. 0.

Or live without distress,
Or die with happiness.
(...). Ib.

It Is good for them to die,
Whom life bring's infamy.
(...). Soph. S^^b. ^er. 118.

It Is better not to live,
Then whetchedly not thrive.
But to drive off the contempt of death to such a degree, as to employ it to
distract, and remoov^ himself from honors, riches, greatness, and other
goods and favors, which we call the goods of fortune: as if reason had not
enough to do, to persuade us to forgo and leave them, without adding this new
surcharge unto it, I had neither seen the same commanded nor practiced until
such time as one place of Seneca came to my hands, wherein counselling Lucilius
(a man mighty and in great authority about the Emperor) to change this
voluptuous and pompous life, and to withdraw himself from this ambition of the
world, to some solitary, quiet and philosophical life: about which Lucilius
alleged some difficulties: My advise is (says he) that either thou leave and
quit that life, or thy life altogether: But I persuade thee to follow the
gentler way, and rather to untie than break what thou have so ill ^^it:
always provided thou break it, if thou can not otherwise untie the same.
There is no man so base minded, that loves not rather to fall once, then ever
to remain in fear of falling. I should have deemed this counsel agreeing with
the Stoickes ^udenes: But it is more strange it should be borrowed of Epicurus,
who to that purpose writes this consonant unto Idomeneus. Yet think I to have
noted some such like thing amongst our own people, but with christian
moderation. Saint Hilarie Bishop of Poitiers, a famous enemy of the Arrian
heresy, being in Syria, was advertised that Abra his only daughter whom he
had left athome with her mother, was by the greatest Lords of the country
solicited and sued unto for marriage, as a damsel very well brought up,
fair, rich, and in the prime of her age: he writ unto her (as we see) that she
should remoove her affections, from all the pleasures and advantages might be
presented her: for, in his voyage he had found a greater and worthier match or
husband of far higher power and magnificence, who should present and endowe her
with roabes and jewels of invaluable price. His purpose was to make her loose
the appetite and use of worldly pleasures, and wholly to wed her unto God. To
which, deeming his daughters death, the shortest and most assured way, he never
ceased by vows, prayers, and orisons, humbly to beseech God to take her out of
this world, and to call her to his mercy, as it came to pass; for ^^ee
deceased soon after his return: whereof he showed manifest tokens of singular
gladness. This man seems to endeere himself above others, in that at first
^ight he addresseth himself to this mean, which they never embrace but
subsidiarily, and sithence it is toward his only daughter. But I will omit
the success of this story, although it be not to my purpose. Saint Hilaries
wife, having understood by him, how her daughters death succeeded with his
intent and will, and how much more happy it was for her to be dislodged from
out this world, then still to abide therein, conceived so lively an
apprehension of the eternal and heavenly blessedness, that with importunate
instancie she solicited her husband, to do as much for her. And God, at their
earnest entreatie, and joynt-common prayers, having soon after taken her unto
himself: it was a death embraced with singular and mutual contentment to both.

The three and thirtieth Chapter.
That fortune is oftentimes met withal in pursuit of reason.

THe inconstancy of Fortunes diverse wavering, is the cause she should
present us with all sorts of visages. Is there any action of justice more
manifest then this? Caesar Bor^^^ Duke of Val^ntino^s, having resolved to
poison Adrian Cardinal of Cornetto, with whom Pope Alexander the ^^xt, his
father and he were to sup that night in Vaticane, sent certain bottles of
empoysoned wine before, and gave his Butler great charge to have a special care
of it. The Pope coming thither before his son, and calling for some drink;
the butler supposing the Wine had been so carefully commended unto him for the
goodness of it, immediately presented some unto the Pope, who whilst he was
drinking, his son came in and never imagining his bottles had been touched,
took the cup and pledged his father, so that the Pope died presently; and the
son, after he had long time been tormented with sickness, recovered to
another worse fortune. It sometimes seems, that when we least think on her,
she is pleased to sport with us. The Lord of Estree, the guidon to the Lord
of Vand^sme, and the Lord of Liques, Lieutenant to the Duke of Ascot, both
servants to the Lord of Founguesell^s sister, albeit of contrary factions (as
it happneth among neighboring bordurers) the Lord of Liques got her to wife:
But even upon his wedding day, and which is worse, before his going to bed,
the bridegroom desiring to break a staff in favor of his new Bride and
Mistress, went out to skirmish near to Saint Omer, where the Lord of Estree
being the stronger took him prisoner, and to endeare his advantage, the Lady
her self was feign,

Coni^gis ant^ ^^actan^vi dimittere collum, Catul. ^l^. 4. 81

Quam veniens vna atque altera rursus hyems
Noctibus in longis auidum saturasset amorem,
Her new feeres neck for'st was she to forgo,
Ere winters one and two returning sloe,
In long nights had ful-fil'd
Her love so eager wil'd.
in courtesy, to sue unto him for the deliverie of his prisoner, which he
granted; the French Nobility never refusing Ladies any kindness. Seems she
not to be a right artist? Constantine the son of H^len ^ounded the Empire of
Constantinople, and so, many ages after, Constantin^ the son of H^len ended
the same. She is sometimes pleased to envy our miracles: we hold an opinion,
that King Clovis besieging A^goulesme, the walls by a divine favor ^e^l of
themselves. And Bouchet borrows of some author, that King Robert beleagring a
City, and having secretly stolen away from the siege to Orleans, there to
solemnize the feasts of Saint Aignan, as he was in his earnest devotion, upon a
certain passage of the Mass, the walls of the town besieged, without any
battery, fell flat to the ground. She did altogether contrary in our wars
of Millane: For, Captain Rens^, beleagring the City of Eronna for us, and
having caused a forcible mine to be wrought under a great curtine of the
walls, by force whereof, it being violently flowne up from out the ground, did
notwithstanding, whole and unbroken, fall so right into his foundation again,
that the besieged found no inconvenience at all by it. She sometimes plays
the Physician. Jason Therius being utterly forsaken of all Physicians, by
reason of an impostume he had'm his breast, and desirous to be rid of it,
though it were by death, as one of the forlorn hope, rusht into a battle
amongst the thickest thro^g of his enemies, where he was so rightly wounded
acrosse the body, that his impostume brake, and he was cured. Did she not
exceed the Painter Protogenes in the skill of his trade? who having perfected
the image of a weary and panting dog, and in all parts over-tired, to his
content, but being unable, as he desired, hvely to represent the drivel or
slaver of his mouth vexed against his own work, took his sponge, and moist as
it was with diverse colors, thr^^ ^t at the picture, with purpose to blot and
deface all he had done: fortune did so fitly and rightly carry the same
toward the dogs chaps, that there it perfectly finished, what his art could
never attain unto. Does she not sometimes address and correct our counsels?
Isahell Queen of England, being to repasse from Zeland into her kingdom with
an army, in favor of her son against her husband, had utterly been cast
away, had she come unto the Port intended, being there expected by her enemies:
But fortune against her will, brought her to another place, where she safely
landed. And that ancient fellow, who hurling a stone at a dog, misst him, and
there withal hit and slew his stepdame, had she not reason to pronounce this
verse,

T(...)
Chance of it self, than we,
Does better say and see?
Fortune has better advise then we. Icetes had practiced and subor^ed two
soldiers to kill ^smole^n, then residing at Adra^^ in S^e^ly. They appointed a
time to do, as he should be assisting at some sacrifice; and scattering then
selves amongst the multitude, as they were winking one upon another, to show
how they had a very ^t opportunity to do the deed: Lo here a third man,
that with a huge blow of a sword, strikes one of them over the head and fels
him dead to the ground and so runs away. His fellow suppoting himself
dis^^vered, and undone, runs to the altar, suing for sanctuary, with promise
to confess the truth; Even as he was declaring the conspiracy, behold the
third man, who had likewise been taken, whom as a murderer the people tugged
and haled through the throng toward ^^^oleon and the chiefest of the assembly,
where he humbly calls for mercy, alleging that he had justly murdered the
murderer of his father, whom his good chance was to ^^de there, averring by
good witnesses, before them all, that in the City of the Leontines, his father
had been proditoriously slain by him, on whom he had now revenged himself.
In meede whereof, because he had been so fortunate (in seeking to right his
fathers untimely death) to save the common-father of the S^cilians from so
imminent a danger, he had ten Attike mines awarded him. This fortune in her
directions exceeds all the rules of humane wisdom. But to conclude, is not
an express application of her favor, goodness, and singular piety
manifestly discovered in this action? Ignat^us the Father and the Son, both
banished by proscription by the Triumvirs of Rome resolved on this generous
act, to yield their lives one into another hands, and thereby frustrate the
Tyrants cruelty. They furiously with their keen rapiers drawn, ran one against
another: Fortune so directed their points, that each received his mortal
stroke; adding to the honor of seld-seene an amity, that they had just so much
strength left them, to draw their armed and bloody hands from out their goared
wounds, in that plight, so fast to embrace, and so hard to claspe one another,
that the hangmen were forced, at one stroke, and together, to cut off both
their heads; leaving their bodies for ever tied in so honorable a knot, and
their wounds so joined, that they lovingly drew and sucked each others blood,
breath, and life.

The four and thirtieth Chapter.
Of a defect in our policies.

MY whilome-father, a man who had no help but from experience, and his own
nature, yet of an unspotted judgment, has heer-tofore told me, that he much
desi^ed to bring in this custom, which is, that in all cities there should be
a certain appointed place, to which, whosoever should have need of any thing,
might come and cause his business to be registered by some officer appointed
for that purpose: As for example, if one have pearls to sell, he should say, I
seek to sell some pearls: and another, I secke to buy some pearls: Such a man
would feign have company to travel to Paris; Such a one enquireth for a
servant of this or that qual^ties; Such a one seeks for a Master; another a
workman; Some this; some that; every man as he needed. And it seems that
this means of enter-warning one another; would b^ing no small co^^oditie unto
common commerce and society; For there are ever ^onditions that enter-seeke
one another, and because they understand not one another, they leave men in
great n^^es^^tie. I understand, to the infamous reproach of our age, that even
in our sight, two ^ost excellent men in knowledge, have miserably perished for
want of food and other necessaries: L^lius Gregorius Giraldus in Italy, and
Sebast^an^^ Castalio in Germa^ie: And I verily believe there are many
thousands, who had they known or understood their wants, would either have
sent for them, and with large stipends entertained them, or would have convaide
them succor, where ever they had been. The world is not so generally
corrupted, but I know some, that would earnestly wish, and with hearty
affections desire, the goods which their forefathers have left them, might, so
long as it shall please fortune they may enjoy them, be employed for the relief
of rare, and supply of excellent men's necessity, and such as for any kind of
worth and virtue are remarkable; many of which are daily seen to be pursued by
ill fortune even to the utmost extremity, and that would take such order for
them, as had they not their ease and content, it might only be imputed to
their want of reason or lack of discretion. In this Oeconomicke or household
order my father had this order, which I can commend, but no way follow: which
was, that besides the day book of household affairs, wherein are reg^stred at
least expenses, paiments, gi^ts, bargains and sales, that require not a
Nota^^es hand to them, which book a receiver had the keeping of: he appointed
another journall-booke to one of his servants, who was h^s clarke, wherein he
should insert and orderly set down all accidents worthy the noting, and day by
day register the memories of the history of ^as house: A thing very pleasant
to read, when time began to wear out the remembrance of them, and fit for us
to pass the time withal, and to resolve some doubts: when such a work was
begun, when ended, what way or course was taken, what accidents happened, how
long it continued; all our voyages; where, and how long we were from home; our
marriages, who died, and when; the receiving of good or bad tidings, who came,
who went, changing or remooving of household officers, taking of new, or
discharging of old servants, and such like matters. An ancient custom, and
which I would have all men use and bring into fashion again in their several
homes: and I repent my self, I have so foolishly neglected the same.

The five and thirtieth Chapter.
Of the use of Apparel.

WHatsoever I aim at, I must needs force some of customs contradictions, so
carefully has she barred all our entrances. I was devising in this chil-cold
season, whether the fashion of these late discovered Nations to go naked, be a
custom forced by the hot temperature of the air, as we say of the Indians
and Moors, or whether it be an original manner of manking. Men of
understanding, forasmuch as whatsoever is contained under heaven (as says the
holy Writ) is subject to the same laws, are wont in suchlike considerations,
where natural laws are to be distinguished from those invented by man, to
have recourse to the general policy of the world, where nothing that is
counterfeit can be admitted. Now all things being exactly furnished else-whence
with all necessaries to maintain this being, it is not to be imagined that we
alone should be produced in a defective and indigent estate, yea, and in such a
one, as can not be maintained without foreign help. My opinion is, that even
as all plants, trees, living creatures, and whatsoever has life, is naturally
seen furnished with sufficient furniture to defend it self from the injury
of all wethers:

Proptereaque fere res omnes, aut corio sunt, Lucr. lib. 4. 932.

Aut seta, aut conchis, aut callo, aut cortice tectae.
Therefore all things almost we covered mark,
With hide, or hair, or shells, or brawne, or bark.
Even so were we: But as those who by an artificial light extinguish the
brightness of the day, we have quenched our propermeanes, by such as we have
borrowed. And we may easily discern, that only custom makes that seem
impossible unto us, which is not so: For of those nations that have no
knowledge of clothes, some are found situated under the same heaven, and
climate, or parallel, that we are-in, and more cold and s^arper the^ours.
Moreover, the tenderest parts of us are ever bare and naked, as our eyes, face,
mouth, nose, and ears; and our countrie-swaines (as our forefathers wont) most
of them at this day go bare-breasted down to the navill. Had we been borne
needing petti-coats and breeches, there-is no doubt, but nature would have
armed that which she has left to the battery of seasons and fury of wethers,
with some thicker skin or hide, as she has done our fingers ends, and the
soales of our feet. Why seems this hard to be believed? Between my fashion of
apparel, and that of one of my countrie-clownes, I find much more difference
between him and me, then between his fashion, and that of a man who is
clothed but with his bare skin. How many men (especially in Turkey,) go ever
naked for devotions sake? A certain man demanded of one of our loytring
rogues, whom in the deep of frostie Winter, he saw wandering up and down with
nothing but his shirt about-him, and yet as blithe and lusty as an other that
keeps himself muffled and wrapped in warm furs up to the ears; how he could
have patience to go so. And have not y^^, good sir,) answered he) your face all
bare? Imagine I am all face. The Italians report (as far as I remember) of the
Duke of Florence his fool, who when his Lord asked him, how being so ill clad,
he could endure the cold, which he hardly was able to do himself; To whom the
fool replied; Master, use but my receipt, and put all the clothes you have
upon you, as I dee all mine; you shall feel no more cold then I do. King
Massinissa, even in his oldest days, were-it never so cold, so frostie, so
stormy, or sharp wether, could never be induced, to put some thing on his
head, but went always bareheaded. The like is reported of the Emperor S^verus.
In the battles that past between the Egyptians, and the Persians, Herodotus
says, that both himself and diverse others took special notice, that of such
as lay slain on the ground, the Egyptians sculs were without comparison much
harder then the Persians: by reason that these go ever with their heads covered
with coifs and turbants, and those from their infancy ever shaven and
bare-headed. And King Agesilaus, even in his decrepite age, was ever wont to
wear his clothes both winter and Summer alike. Suetonius affirms, that
Caesar did ever march for most before his troops, and most commonly
bare-headed, and on foot, whether the sun shone, or it rained. The like is
reported of Hanniball,

-- tum vertice nudo, Syl. Ital. 250.
Excipere insanos imbres, coel^que ruinam. Bare-headed then he did endure,
Heavens ruin and mad-raging shower.
A Venetian that has long dwelt amongst them, and who is but lately returned
thence, writteth, that in the Kingdom of Pegu, both men and women, having all
other parts clad, go ever barefooted, yea, and on horseback also. And Plato
for the better health and preservation of the body does earnestly persuade,
that no man should ever give the feet and the head other cover, then Nature
has allotted them. He whom the Polonians choose for their king next to ours,
who may worthily be esteemed one of the greatest princes of our age, does never
wear gloves, nor what wether soever it be, winter or summer, other bonnet a
broad than in the warm house. As I cannot endure to go vnbuttoned or
untrussed, so the husbandmen neighboring about me, would be, and feel
themselves as fettred or hand-bound, with going so. Varro is of opinion, that
when we were appointed to stand bare-headed before the gods, or in presence of
the Magistrates, it was rather done for our health, and to enure and arme-vs
against injuries of the wether, than in respect of reverence. And since we are
speaking of cold, and are Frenchmen, accustomed so strangely array our selves
in party-colored suits (not IN, because I seldom wear any other then black
or white, in imitation of my father) let-vs add this one thing more, which
Captain Martyn du Bellay relates in the voyage of Luxemburg, where he says
to have seen so hard frosts, that their munition-wines were feign to be cut
and broken with hatchets and wedges, and shared unto the Soldiers by weight,
which they carried a way in baskets; and Ovid.

Nudaque consistunt formam servantia testae Ovid Trist. l 3. el. 10. 23.

Vina, nec hausta meri, sed data frusta bibunt.
Bare wines, still keeping form of caske, stand fast,
Not gulpes, but gobbets their wine they taste.
The frosts are so hard and sharp in the emboguing of the Meotis fennes, that
in the very place where Mithridates Lieutenant had delivered a battle to his
enemies, on hard ground, and drie-footed, and there defeated them; the next
summer, he there obtained another sea-battle against them. The Romans suffered
a great disadvantage in the fight they had with the Carthaginians nere unto
Placentia, for so much as they went to their charge with their blood congealed,
and limbs benumbed, through extreme cold: whereas Hanniball, had caused many
fires to be made through-out his camp, to warm his soldiers by, and a
quantity of oil to be distributed amongst them, that therewith anointing
themselves, they might make their sinews more supple and nimble, and harden
their pores against the bitter blasts of cold wind, which then blewe, and
nipping piercing of the air. The Graecians retreat from Babylon into their
country, is renowned, by reason of the many difficulties and encombrances they
encountered withal, and were to surmount: whereof this was one, that in the
mountains of Armenia, being surprised and encircled with so horrible and great
quantity of snow, that they lost both the knowledge of the country, and the
ways: wherewith they were so straitely beset, that they continued a day and a
night without eating or drinking; and most of their horses and cattle died: of
their men a great number also deceased; many with the glittring and whiteness
of the snow, were stricken blind: diverse through the extremity were lamed,
and their limbs shrunken up, many stark stiff, and frozen with cold,
although their senses were yet whole. Alexander saw a nation, where in winter
they bury their fruite-bearing trees under the ground, to defend them from the
frost: a thing also used amongst some of our neighbors. Touching the subject
of apparel: the King of Mexico was wont to change and shift his clothes four
times a day, and never wore them again, employing his leavings and cast-sutes
for his continual liberalities and rewards; as also neither pot nor dish, nor
any implement of his kitchen or table were twice brought before him.

The six and thirtieth Chapter.
Of Cato the younger.

IAm not possessed with this common error, to judge of others according to
what I am my self. I am easy to believe things differing from my self.
Though I be engaged to one form, I do not tie the world unto it, as every man
does? And I believe and conceive a thousand manners of life, contrary to the
common sort: I more easily admit and receive difference then resemblance in
us. I discharge as much as a man will, another being of my conditions and
principles, and simply consider of it in my self, without relation, framing it
upon it is own model. Though my self be not continent, yet do I sincerely
commend and allow the continency of the Capuchines, and Theatines, and highly
praise their course of life. I do by imagination, insinuate my self into
their place: and by how much more they be other then my self, so much the more
do I love and honor them. I would gladly have every man judged apart, and not
be drawn my self in consequence by others examples. My weakness does no way
alter the opinions I should have of the force and vigor of those that deserve
it. Sunt, qui nihil suadent, quam quod se imitari posse confidunt. There be
Cic. Orat. ad Br.
such as advise to nothing, but what they trust themselves can imitate.
Crawling on the face of the earth, I cease not to mark, even into the clouds,
the inimitable height of some heroicke minds. It is much for me to have a
formal and prescript judgment, if the effects be not so, and at least to
maintain the chief part exempted from corruption. It is something to have a
good mind, when my forces fail me. The age we live in (at least our climate)
is so dull and leaden, that not only the execution, but the very imagination
of virtue is far to seek, and seems to be no other thing than a College
supposition, and a gibrish-word.

-- virtutem verba putant, vt Lucum ligna: Hor. ep. 6. l. 1. 31.
Virtue seems words to these,
As trees are wood, or woods are tree.
Quam vereri d^berent, etiam si percipere non possent. Which yet they should
reverence, though they could not reach unto. It is an eare-ring or pendent to
hang in a cabinet, or at the tongues end, as well as at an ear for an
ornament. There are no more virtuous actions known; those that bear a show of
virtue, have no essence of it: for profit, glory, custom, fear, and other
like strange causes direct us to produce them. Justice, valor, integrity,
which we then exercise, may by others consideration, and by the countenance
they publicly bear, be termed so: but with the true workman, it is no virtue
at all. There is another end proposed; another efficient cause. Virtue allows
of nothing, but what is done by her, and for her alone. In that great battle
at Potidaea which the Graecians under Pausanias gained of Mardonius and the
Persians, the victors following their custom, coming to share the glory and
prise of the victory between them, ascribed the pre-excellencie of valor in
that conflict to the Spartane nation. The Spartanes imparciall judges of
virtue, when they came to decide, to what particular man of their country, the
honor to have done best in that day, should of right belong; they found that
Aristodemus had most courageously engaged and hazarded himself: Yet gave him
not the prise of honor of it, because his virtue had been thereunto incited,
by an earnest desire to purge himself from the reproach and infamy, which he
had incurred in the action at Thermopyles, and from all daring ambition to die
courageously, thereby to warrant his former imputation. Our judgments are yet
sick, and follow the depravations of our customs. I see the greatest part of
our spirits to affect wit, and to show themselves ingenious, by obscuring and
detracting from the glory of famous and general ancient actions, giving them
some base and malicious interpretation, fondly and enviously charging them with
vain causes, and frivolous occasions. A subtle invention no doubt. Let any
man present me, with the most excellent and blameless action, and I will
oppose it with fifty vicious and bad intentions, all which shall carry a face
of likeli-hood. God knows (to him that will extend them) what diversity of
images our internal will does suffer: They do not so maliciously as grosely
and rudely endeavor to be ingenious with all their railing and detraction. The
same pain a man takes to detract from these noble and famous names, and the
very same liberty, would I as willingly take to lend them my shoulders to
extol and magnify them. I would endeavor to charge these rare and
choise-figures, selected by the consent of wise men, for the worlds example, as
much, and as high, as my invention would give me leave with honor, in a
plausible interpretation, and favorable circumstance. And a man must think,
that the diligent labors of our invention, are far beyond their merit. It is
the part of honest minded men to pourtray virtue, as fair as possible fair
may be. A thing which would no whit be mis-seeming or indecent, if passion
should transport us to the favor and pursuit of so sacred forms, what these
do contrary, they either do it through malice or knaverie, with purpose to
reduce and suit their belief to their capacity, where of I lately spoke: or
rather as I think, because their sight is not of sufficient power or clearnes,
nor addressed to conceive or apprehend the farre-shining brightness of virtue in
natural and genuine purity: As Plutarke says, that in his time, some imputed
the cause of Cato the yongers death to the fear he had conceived of Caesar:
whereat he has some reason to be moved: by which a man may judge, how much
more he would have been offended with those that have ascribed the same unto
ambition. Oh foolish people! He would no doubt have performed a fair action,
so generous and so just, rather with ignominy, then for glory. This man was
truly a pattern, whom nature chose to show how far humane virtue may reach,
and man's constancy attaine-vnto. But my purpose is not here to treat this
rich argument: I will only confront together the sayings of five Latin Poets
upon Catoes commendacions, and for the interest of Cato, and by incidencie for
theirs also. Now ought a gentleman well-bred, in respect of others, find the
two former somewhat languishing. The third more vigorous, but suppressed by the
extravagancie of force. He will judge there were yet place for one or two
degrees of invention, to reach unto the fourth, in consideration of which he
will through admiration join hands for the last (yet first in some degree and
space, but which space he will swear can by no humane spirit be filled-vp) he
will be much amazed, he will be much amated. Lo here are wonders, we have more
Poets than judges and interpreters of poesy. It is an easier matter to frame
it; then to knowe-it: Being base and humble, it may be judged by the precepts
and art of it: But the good and lofty, the supreme and divine, is beyond
rules, and above reason. Whosoever discerns her beauty, with a constant,
quicke-seeing, and settled look, he can no more see and comprehend the same
then the splendour of a lightning flash. It has no community with our
judgment; but ransacketh and ravisheth the same. The fury which pricks and
moves him that can penetrate her, does also stricke and wound a third man, if
he heare-it either handled or recited, as the Adamant stone draws, not only a
needle, but infuseth some of her faculty in the same to draw others: And it is
more apparently seen in theaters, that the sacred inspiration of the Muses,
having first stirred up the Poet with a kind of agitation unto choler, unto
grief, unto hatred, yea and beyond him self, whether and how soever they
please, does also by the Poet strike and enter into the Actor, and consequently
by the Actor, a whole auditorie or multitude. It is the ligament of our senses
depending one of another. Even from my infancy, Poesy has had the virtue to
transpierce and transport me. But that lively and feeling-mouing that is
naturally in me, has diversely been handled, by the diversity of forms, not
so much higher or lower (for they were ever the highest in every kind) as
different in color. First a blithe and ingenious fluidity, then a
quaint-witie, and lofty conceit. To conclude, a ripe and constant force. Ovid,
Lucan, and Virgill, will better declare it. But here our Gallants are in their
full cariere.

Sit Cato dum viuit sane vel Caesare mayor. Mart. lib. epig. 32. 5.
Let Cato Junior, while he
does live, greater than Caesar be.
Says one.

-- and inuictum devicta morte Catonem, Manil. astr. lib. 4. 87.
Cato unconquered, death being vanquished. Says another: And the third
speaking of the civil wars between Caesar and Pompey.

Victrix causa dijs placuit, sed victa Catoni. Lucan. bell. ciu. lib. 1. 127.
The cause that overcame with Gods was greater;
But the cause overcome pleased Cato better.
And the fourth upon Caesar's commendations:

Et cuncta terrarum subacta, Hor. lib. 2. ad 1. 23.

Praeter atrocem animum Catonis.
Of all the earth all parts inthralled,
Catoes mind only unappalled.
And the hartes-master, after he has enstalled the names of the greatest
Romans in his picture, ends thus:

-- his dantem iura Catonem. Chief justice Cato do decree Vir. Aen. lib. 8.
670.

Laws that for righteous souls should be.
The seven and thirtieth Chapter.
How we weep and laugh at one selfsame thing.

WHen we read in Histories, that Antigonus was highly displeased with his
son, at Plut. vit. Pyrth f.
what time he presented unto him the head of King Pirrhus his enemy, slain
but a little before in fight against him; which he no sooner saw, but he burst
forth a weeping. And that Renate Duke of Loraine, wept for the death of
Charles Duke of Burgundy, whom he had eftsoons discomfired, and was as an
assistant mourner at his funeralles: And that in the battle of Auroy (which the
Earl of Montfort had gained against the faction of Charles de Blois, for the
Duchy of Britanie) the victorious conqueror met with the body of his enemy
deceased, mourned very grievously for him; a man must not suddenly exclaim.

Ecosi auvien', che l'animo ciaseuna
Sua passion, sotto contrary manto
Ricuopre, con la vista hor chiara, hor bruna.
So happens it, the mind covers each passion
Under a cloak of colors opposite,
To sight now clear, now dark, in diverse fashion.
When Caesar was presented with Pompeis head, Histories report that he turned
his looks aside, as from a ghastly and unpleasing spectacle. There has been
so long a correspondencie and society in the managing of public affairs,
mutually between them, such a community of fortunes, so many reciprocal
offices and bonds of alliance, that a man cannot think his countenance to have
been forced, false, and w^ly, as this other supposes.

-- tutumque putauit I am bonus esse socer, lacrymas non sponte cadentes Lucan.
lib. 9. 1040.
Effudit gemitusque expressit pectore laeto. Now to be kind indeed he did not
doubt
Father in law, tears, which came hardly out
He shed, and groans expressed
From inward pleased breast.
For certainly, howbeit the greatest number of our actions be but masked and
painted over with dissimulation, and that it may sometimes be true,

Haredis fletus sub persona risus est. Aul. Gell. noct. At. li. 17. c. 14.
The weeping of an heir, is laughing under a visard or disguise. Yet must a
man consider, by judging of his accidents, how our minds are often agitated by
diverse passions; For (as they say) there is a certain assembly of diverse
humors in our bodies, whereof she is sovereign mistress, who most ordinarily,
according to our complexions does command us: so in our mind, although it
contain several motions that agitate the same, yet must one chiefly be
predominant. But it is not with so full an advantage, but for the volubilitie
and supplenesse of our mind, the weakest may by occasion reobtaine the place
again, and when their turn comes, make a new charge, whence we see, not
only children, who simply and naturally follow nature, often to weep and
laugh at one selfsame thing; but none of us all can vaunt himself, what
wished for, or pleasant voyage soever he undertake, but that taking leave of
his family and friends, he shall feel a chilling and panting of the heart, and
if he shed not tears, at least he puts his foot in the stirrup with a sad and
heavy cheer. And what gentle flame soever does warm the heart of young
virgins, yet are they hardly drawn to leave and forgo their mothers, to
betake them to their husbands: whatsoever this good fellow say;

Est ne nouis nuptis odio Venus, unne parentum Catul. eleg. 2. 15

Frustrantur falsis gaudia lacrymulis,
Vbertim thalami quas intra limina fundunt?
Non, it a me diui, veragemunt, uiverint.
Do young Birds hate indeed fresh Venus toys,
Or with false tears delude their parents joys,
Which in their chambers they power out amain?
So help me God, they do not true complain.
So is it not strange to mourn for him dead, whom a man by no means would
have alive again. When I chide my boy, I do it with the best heart I have:
They are true and not fained imprecations: but that fit past over, let him have
need of me, I will gladly do him all the good I can, and by and by I turn
over another leaf. If I chance to call one knave or ass, my purpose is not,
for ever to enfeoffe him with those nicknames; nor do I think to say, tongue
thou lie, if immediately after I call him an honest man. No quality does
embrace us purely and universally. If it were not the countenance of a fool to
speak alone, or to him self, there would scarce be day, or hour, wherein
somebody should not hear me mutter and grumble to my self, and against my
self. A () in the fools teeth, yet do not I think it to be my definition. He
that sees me sometimes to cast a frowning look upon my wife, or sometimes a
loving countenance, and thinks, that either of them is but fained, he is a
fool. Nero taking leave of his mother, whom he sent to be drowned, felt
notwithstanding the emotion of that motherly farewell, and at one instant was
stricken with horror and pity. It is said, that the Sunnes-light, is not of
one continued piece, but that it so incessantly, and without intermission does
cast so thick new rays, one in the neck of another upon us, that we cannot
perceive the space between them. Lucr. l 5. 281.


Largus enim liquidi fons luminis aethereus sol
Inrigat assidue caelum candore recenti,
Suppedit atque nouo confestim lumine lumen.
Heavens Sun the plenteous spring of liquid light
Still heaven bedewes with splendour fresh and bright,
Still light supplies with light of fresher sight.
So does our mind cast her points diversely and imperceptibly. Artabanus
surprised Xerxes his nephew, and chid him for the sudden changing of his
countenance. He was to consider the unmeasurable greatness of his forces at
the passage of Hellespont, for the enterprise of Greece. First he was suddenly
assailed by an excessive joy, to see so many thousands of men at his service,
and witnessed the same by the alacrity and cheerefulnes of his countenance:
And immediately at that very moment, his thoughts suggesting, how so many lives
were to be consumed, and should come to nothing (at the furthest, within one
age) he began to frown his brows, and grew so pensive, that he wept. We have
with a resolute and inexorable mind pursued the revenge of an injury, and
felt a singular content for the victory; yet upon better advice do we weep:
it is not that we weep for: the thing is as it was, there is nothing changed:
But that our mind beholdes the thing with another eye, and under an other
shape it presents it self unto us. For every thing has diverse faces, sundry
byases, and several Iustres. Aliance, kindred, old acquaintances, and long
friendship seize on our imagination, and at that instant, passionate the same
according to their quality; but the turn or change of it, is so violent, that
it escapes-vs

Nil adeo fieri celeriratione videtur, L. 3. 183.

Quam si men's fieri proponit and inchoat ipsa.
Ocius ergo animus quam res se perciet vlla,
Ante oculos quarum in promptu natura videtur.
Nothing in so quick sort seems to be done,
As mind set on a thing, and once begun,
The mind that swifter stirs before our eyes,
Then any thing, whose form we soon comprize.
And therefore, intending to continue one body of all this pursuit, we deceive
our selves. When Timoleon weepeth the murder he has perpetrated with so
mature and generous a determination, he weepeth not for the liberty restored to
his country, nor the tyrant, but he weepeth for his brother. One part of his
duty is acted, let us permit him to play the other.

The eight and thirtieth Chapter.
Of Solitariness.

LEt us leave apart this outworne comparison, between a solitary and an
active life: And touching that goodly saying under which ambition and avarice
shroud themselves; that we are not borne for our particular, but for the
public good: Let us boldly refer our selves to those that are engaged; and let
them beat their conscience, if on the contrary, the states, the charges, and
this trash of the world, are not rather sought and sued for to draw a private
commodity from the public. The bad and indirect means wherethrough in our
age men canvase and toil to attain the same, do manifestly declare the end
thereof to be of no great consequence. Let us answer ambition, that her-selfe
gives us the taste of solitariness. For what does she shun so much as
company? What seeks she more then elbow-roome? There is no place, but there
are means and ways to do well or ill* Nevertheless if the saying of Bias be
true; That the woorst part is the greatest: Or that which Ecclesiastes says,
That of a thousand there is not one good.

Rari quippe boni numero vix sunt totidem, quot I^^^. sat. 13. 26

The^arum portae, vel divit^s ostia Nili:
Good men are rare, so many scarce (I fear)
As gates of Thebes, mouths of rich Nilus were.
Contagion is very dangerous in a throng. A man must imitate the vicious, or
hate them: both are dangerous: for to resemble them is perilous, because they
are many, and to hate many is hazardous, because they are dissemblable, and
Merchants that travel by sea, have reason to take heed, that those which go
in the same ship, be not dissolute, blasphemers, and wicked, judging such
company unfortunate. Therefore Bias said plesantly to those, that together with
him passt the danger of a great storm, and called to the Gods, for help:
Peace my masters, lest they should hear, that you are here with me. And of a
more military example, Albuberque Viecroy in India for Emanuel King of
Portugal, in an extreme danger of a seatempest, took a young boy upon his
shoulders, for this only end, that in the common peril his innocence might be
his warrant, and recommending to Gods favor, to set him on shore: yet may a
wise man live every where contented, yea and alone, in the throng of a Palace:
but if he may choose, he will (says he) Avoid the sight of it. If need
require, he will endure the first: but if he may have his choice, he will choose
the latter. He thinks he has not sufficiently rid himself from vices, if he
must also contest with other men's faults. Charondas punished those for wicked,
that were convicted to have frequented ^ewd companies. There is nothing so
dis-sociable and sociable as man the one for his vice the other for his nature,
And I think Antisthenes did not satisfy him that vpbraided him with his
conversation with the wicked, saying, That Physicians live amon^st the sick.
Who if they stead sicke-mens healths, they empaire their own, by the
infection, continual visiting, touching and frequenting of diseases. Now (as I
suppose) the end is both one, thereby to live more at leisure, and better at
ease. But man does not always seek the best way to come unto it, who often
supposes to have quit affairs, when he has but changed them. There is not
much less vexation in the government of a private family, than in the
managing of an entire state: wheresoever the mind is busied, there it is al.
And though domestical occupations be less important, they are as importunate.
Moreover, though we have freed our selves from the court, and from the market,
we are not free from the principal torments of our life.

-- ratio and prudentia curas, Hor. li. 1. epist. 11. 25.
Non locus eff^si late maris arbiter aufert. Reason and wisdom may set cares
aside,
Not place the Arbiter of seas so wide.
Shift we, or change we places never so often, ambition, avarice, irresolution,
fear and concupiscences never leave us.

Et past equitem sedet atra cura. Ho. l. 3. od. 1. 39


Care looking grim and black, does sit
Behind his back that rides from it.
They often follow us, even into immured cloisters, and into schools of
Philosophy; nor do hollow rocks, nor wearing of haire-shirts, nor continual
fastings rid us from them.

hoeret laterilethalis arundo. The shaft that death implide Vir. Aen. l. 4. 73

Sticks by the flying side.
It was told Socrates, that one was no whit amended by his travel: I believe
it well (said he) for he carried himself with him.

Quid terras alio calentes Hor. li. 2. od. 16. 18.

Sole mutamus? patria quis ex^l
Se quoque fugit?
Why change we soyles warmed with another Sun?
Who from whom banished has himself out-runne?
If a man do not first discharge both himself and his mind from the burden
that presses her, remooving from place to place will stir and press her the
more; as in a ship, wares well stowed, and closely piled, take up least room,
you do a sicke-man more hurt than good, to make him change place, you settle
an evil in remooving the same; as stakes or poles, the more they are stirred
and shaken, the faster they stick, and sink deeper into the ground. Therefore
is it not enough, for a man to have sequestered himself from the concourse of
people: it is not sufficient to shift place, a man must also severe himself
from the popular conditions, that are in us. A man must sequester and recover
himself from himself.

-- rupiiam vincula, dicas, Nam luctata canis nodum arripit, attamen illa Pers.
sat. 5. 158
Cum fugit, a collo trahitur pars longa catenae. You will say happily I my bonds
have quit,
Why so the striving dog the knot has bit;
Yet when he flies, much chain does follow it.
We carry our fetters with us: is it not an absolute liberty; we still cast
back our looks toward that we have left behind: our mind does still run
on it; our fancy is full of it.

-- nisi purgatum est pectus, quae praelia nobis ^^cr. lib. 5. 44
Atque pericula tunc ingratis ins^^^andum? Quantae conscindunt hominem
cuppe^inis acres Sollicitum curae, quantique perinde timores? Quidve superbia,
spurcitia, ac petulantia, quantas Effi^iu^t clades* quid luxus desid^esque?
Unless our breast be purged, what wars must we
What per^ls then, though much displeased, see*
How great fears, how great cares of sharp desire
Do careful man d^stract, torment, enfire?
Uncleanness, wantonness, sloth, r^ot, pride,
How great calamities have these implide?
Our evil is rooted in our mide: and it cannot escape from it self.

In culpa est animus, qui se non effugit vnquam, Hor. l. 1. epist. 14* 15*
The mind is greatest fault must lie,
Which from it self can never fly,
Therefore must it be reduced and brought into it self: It is the true
solitariness, and which may be enjoyed even in the frequencie of peopled
Cities, and Kings courts: but it is more commodiously enjoied apart. Now
sithence we undertake to live solitary, and without company, let us cause
our contentment to depend of our selves: Let us shake off all bonds that tie
us unto others: Gain we that victory over us, that in good earnest we may
live solitary, and therein live at our ease. Stilphon having escaped the
combustion of his City, wherein he had lost, both wife, and children, and all
his goods; Demetrius Polsorcetes seeing him in so great a ruin of his
Country, with an vnaffrighted countenance, demanded of him, whether he had
received any loss; He answered, Not and that (thanks given to God) he had lost
nothing of his own. It is that, which Antisthenes the Philosopher said very
pleasantly, That man ought to provide himself with munitions, that might float
upon the water, and by swimming escape the danger of shipwarcke with him.
Verily, a man of understanding has lost nothing, if he yet have himself. When
the City of Nola was overrun by the Barbarians, Paulinus Bishop thereof,
having lost all he had there, and being their prisoner, prayed thus unto God:
Oh Lord deliver me from feeling of this loss: for thou know as yet they
have touched nothing that is mine. The riches that made him rich, and the goods
which made him good, were yet absolutely whole. Behold what it is to choose
treasures well, that may be freed from injury; and to hide them in a place,
where no man may enter, and which can not be betrayed but by our selves. A man
that is able, may have wives, children, goods, and chiefly health, but not so
tie himself unto them, that his felicity depend on them. We should reserve a
storehouse for our selves, what need soever chance; altogether ours, and wholly
free, wherein we may hoard-vp, and establish our true liberty, and principal
retreit and solita^^nesse, wherein we must go alone to our selves, take out
ordinary entertainment, and so privatelie, that no acquaintance or
communication of any strange thing may therein ^ind place: there to discourse,
to mediate and laugh, as, without wife, without children, and goods, without
train, or servants; that if by any occasion they be lost, it seem not strange
to us to pass it over; we have a mind moving and turning in it self; it may
keep it self company; it has wherewith to offend and defend, wherewith to
receive, and wherewith to give. Let us not fear that we shall faint and droop
through tedious and mind-tyring idleness in this solitariness.

In solis sis tibi turba locis. Be thou, when with thee is not any,
As good unto thy self as many.
Virtue is contented with it self, without discipline, without words, and
without effects. In our accustomed actions, of a thousand there is not one
found that regards us: he whom thou see so furiously, and as it were besides
himself, to clamber or crawle up the city walls, or breach, as a point blank
to a whole volie of shot, and another all wounded and skarred, crazed and
faint, and wel-nie hunger-starven, resolved rather to die, then to open his
enemy the gate, and give him entrance; do thou think he is there for
himself? No verily, It is peradventure for such a one, whom neither he, nor
so many of his fellows ever saw, and who happly takes no care at all for them;
but is there-whilst wallowing up to the ears in sensuality, sloth, and all
manner of carnal delights. This man whom about midnight, when others take
their rest, thou see come out of his study meagre-looking, with
eyes-trilling, flegmatike, squalide, and spauling, do thou think, that
plodding on his books he does seek how he shall become an honester man; or more
wise, or more content? There is no such matter. He will either die in his
pursuit, or teach posterity the measure of Plautus verses, and the true
Orthographie of a Latin word. Who does not willingly chop and counterchange
his health, his ease, yea, and his life for glory, and for reputation? The
most unprofitable, vain, and counterfeit coin, that is in use with us. Our
death is not sufficient to make us afraid, let us also charge our selves with
that of our wives, of our children, and of our friends, and people. Our own
affairs do not sufficiently trouble and vex us; Let us also drudge, toil,
vex, and torment our selves with our neighbors and friends matters.

Vah quemquamne hominem in animum instituere, aut T^r. Ad^l. act. 1 ^^^^. 1. 13.

Parare, quod sit charius, quam ipse est sibi?
Fie, that a man should cast, that aught, then he
Himself of himself more beloved should be.
Solitariness me seems has more appearance and reason in those which have
given their most active and flourishing age unto the world, in imitation of
Thales. We have lived long enough for others, live we the remainder of our life
unto our selves: let us bring home our cogitations and inventions unto our
selves, and unto our ease. It is no easy matter to make a safe retreit: it
does overmuch trouble us with joining other enterprises vnto-it. Since God
gives us leisure to dispose of our dislodging. Let-vs prepare our selves
vnto-it, pack we up our baggage. Let us betimes bid our company farewell.
Shake we off these violent hold-fasts, which elsewhere engage us, and estrange
us from our selves. These so strong bonds must be untied, and a man may
est-soones love this or that, but wed nothing but himself, That is to say, let
the rest be our own: yet not so combined and glued together, that it may not
be sundred, without fleaing-vs, and therewithal, pull away some piece of our
own. The greatest thing of the world, is for a man to know how to be his own.
It is high time to shake-off society, since we can bring nothing to it. And he
that cannot lend, let him take heed of borrowing. Our forces faile-vs: retire
we them, and shut them up into our selves. He that can suppress and confound
in himself the offices of so many amities, and of the company, let him do
it. In this fall, which makes us, inutile, irksome, and importunate to others;
let him take heed he be not importunate, irksome, and unprofitable to himself.
Let him flatter, court and cherish himself, and above all, let him govern
himself, respecting his reason, and fearing his conscience, so that he may not
without shame stumble or trip in their presence. Rarum est enim, vt satis se
quisque vereatur. For it is a rare matter, that every man sufficiently should
stand in awe and reverence of himself. Socrates says, That young men ought to
be instructed, and men exercised in well doing; and old men withdraw themselves
from all civil and military negotiations, living at their own discretion,
without obligation to any certain office. There are some complexions, more
proper for these precepts of retreit than others. Those which have a tender and
demisse apprehension, a squeamish affection, a delicate will, and which can not
easily subject or employ it self (of which both by natural condition and
propense discourse, I am one) will better apply themselves unto this counsel*
then active minds, and busy spirits; which embrace all, every where engage,
and in all things passionate themselves; that offer, that present, and yield
themselves to all occasions. A man must make use of all these accidental
commodities, and which are without us, so long as they be pleasing to us; but
not make them our principal foundation: It is not so, nor reason, nor nature
permit-it. Why should we against their laws subject our contentment to the
power of others? Moreover, to anticipate the accidents of fortune; for a man to
deprive himself of the commodities he has in possession, as many have done
for devotion, and some Philosophers by discourse; to serve themselves, to lie
upon the hard ground, to pull out their own eyes, to cast their riches into
the Sea, to seek for pain and smart (some by tormenting this life, for the
happiness of another; othersome placing themselves on the lowest step, thereby
to warrant themselves from a new fall) is the action of an excessive virtue.
Let stern^r and more vigorous complexions make their lurking glorious and
exemplar.

-- tuta and parvula laudo, Hor lib. 1. epist. 15. 42.
Cum res deficiunt, satis inter vilia for it is: Verum vbi quid melius contingit
and vnctius, idem Hos sapere, and solos aio been vivere, quorum Conspicitur
ni^^dis fundata pecunia villis. When riches fail, I praise the safe estate,
Though small; base things do not high thoughts abate.
But when t's better, finer with me, I
They only live well, and are wise, do cry,
Whose coin in fair farms does well-grounded lie.
There is work enough for me to do without going so far. It suffices me
under fortunes favor, to prepare my self for her disfavour; and being at
ease, as ^ar as imagination may attain unto, to represent the evil to come
unto my self: Even as we enure our selves to Tilts and Tourneyes, and
counterfeit war in time of peace. I esteem not Arcesilaus the Philosopher
less reformed, because I know him to have used household implements of gold and
silver, according as the condition of his fortune gave him leave, I rather
value him the more, then if he had not done-it, for so much as he both moderately
and liberally made use of them. I know unto what limits natural necessity
goes; and I consider the poor almes-man begging at my door, to be often more
plumb-checkt, in better health and liking then I am: Then do I enter into his
estate, and assay to frame and suit my mind unto his byase. And so overrunning
other examples, albeit I imagine death, poverty, contempt, and sickness to be
at my heels, I easily resolve my self, not to apprehend any fear of that,
which one of less worth then my self does tolerate and undergo with such
patience: And I can not believe, that the baseness or shallowness of
understanding, can do more then vigor and far-seeing, or that the effects and
reason of discretion, can not reach to the effects of custom and vs^. And
knowing what slender hold-fast these accessorie commodities have, I omit not in
full jovyssance of them, humbly to beseech God of his mercy (as a sovereign
request) to make me contented with my self, and with the goods proceeding from
me. I see some gallantly-disposed young men, who notwithstanding their
faire-seeming show, have many boxes-full of pills in their coffers at home, to
take when the rhume shall assail them; which so much the less they fear,
when they think the remedy to be at hand. So must a man do: as also if he
feel himself subject to some greater infirmity, to store himself with
medicaments that may assuage, supple, and stupifie the part grieved. The
occupation a man should choose for such a life, must neither be painful nor
tedious, otherwise, in vain should we account to have sought our abiding
there, which depends from the particular taste of every man. Mine does no way
accommodate it self to husbandry. Those that love it, must with moderation
apply themselves unto it.

Conentur sibi res, non se submittere rebus. Endeavor they things to them to
submit, Epist. 1. 19.

Not them to things (if they have Horace wit)
Husbandry is otherwise a servile office, as Salust terms it: It has more
excusable parts, as the care of gardening, which Xenophon ascribes to Cyrus: A
mean or mediocritie may be found, between this base and vile carking care,
extended and full of toiling labor, which we see in men that wholly plunge
themselves therein, and that profound and extreme retchlesnesse to let all
things go at six and seven, which is seen in others.

-- Democriti pecus edit agellos Epist. 12. 12.
Cultaque, dum peregre est animus sine corpore velox. Cattle destroyde
Democritus-his sets,
While his mind bodilesse vagaries fets.
But let-vs hear the counsel, which Pliny the younger gives to his friend
Cornelius Rusus, touching this point of Solitariness: I persuade thee in this
full-gorged and fat retreit, wherein thou art, to remit this base and abject
care of husbandry unto thy servants, and give thy self to the study of
letters, whence thou may gather something, that may altogether be thine own.
He means reputation: like unto Ciceroes humor, who says, That he will employ
his solitariness and residence from public affairs, to purchase unto
himself by his writings an immortal life.

-- vsque adeone Pers. sa^. 1. 27.
Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter? Is it then nothing-worth
that thou do know,
Unless what thou do know, thou others snow?
It seems to be reason, when a man speaks to withdraw himself from the
world, that one should look beyond him. These do-it but by halfes. Indeed they
set their match against the time they shall be no more: but pretend to reap the
fruit of their dessignes, when they shall be absent from the world, by a
ridiculous contradiction. The imagination of those, who through devotion seek
solitariness, filling their minds with the certainty of heavenly promises, in
the other life, is much more soundly consorted. They propose God as an object
infinite in goodness, and incomprehensible in power, unto themselves. The
soul has therein, in all free liberty, wherewith to glut her-selfe.
Afflictions and sorrows, redound to their profit, being employed for the
purchase and attaining of health, and eternal gladness. Death, according to
ones wish, is a passage to so perfect an estate. The sharpness of their rules,
is presently made smooth and easy by custom; and carnal concupiscences,
rejected, abated, and ^ulled a sleep by refusing them; for nothing entertaineth
them but use and exercise. This only end of another life, blessedly immortal,
does rightly merit we should abandon the pleasures and commodities of this our
life. And he that can enlighten his soul with the flame of a lively faith and
hope, really and constantly, in his solitariness, ^th build unto himself a
voluptuous and delicious life, far surmounting all other lives. Therefore does
neither the end nor middle of this counsel please me. We are ever falling into
a relaps, from an ague to a burning fever. This plodding occupation of books,
is as painful as any other, and as great an enemy unto health, which ought
principally to be considered. And a man should not suffer himself to be
inveagled by the pleasure he takes in them: It is the same pleasure, that
loses the thriving husbandman, the greedy-covetous, the sinning-voluptuous,
and the puft-vp ambitious. The wisest men teach us sufficiently to beware and
thield-vs from the treasons of our appetites, and to discern true and perfect
pleasures, from delights blended and entermingled with more pain. For, most
pleasures, (say they) tickle, fawn upon, and embrace-vs, with purpose to
strangle-vs, as did the thieves whom the Egyptians termed Phili^^as: And if
the headache would seize upon us before drunkenness, we would then beware of
too much drinking: but sensuality the better to entrap-vs, marches before,
and hides her tracke from-vs. Books are delightful; but if by continual
frequenting them, we in the end loose both health and cheerfulness (our best
parts (let us leave them. I am one of those who think their fruit can no way
countervaile this loss. As men that have long time selt themselves enfeebled
through some indisposition, do in the end yield to the mercy of Physic, and
by art have certain rules of life prescribed them, which they will not
transgress: So he that with-drawes himself, as distasted and over-tired with
the common life, ought likewise to frame and prescribe this unto the rules of
reason; direct and range the same by premeditation, and discourse. He must bid
all manner of travel farewell, what show soever it bear; and in general shun
all passions that any way empeach the tranquillity of mind and body, and
follow the course best agreeing with his humor.

Vnusquisque sua noverit ire via. Proport. lib. 2. el. 25. ^8.
His own way every man
Tread-out directly can.
A man must give to thriving-husbandrie, to laborious study, to toilesome
hunting, and to every other exercise, the utmost bounds of pleasure; and beware
he engage himself no further, if once pain begin to intermeddle it self with
her; we should reserve business and negotiations, only for so much as is
behoofefull to keep us in breath, and to warrant us from the inconveniences
which the other extremity of a base, faint-harted idleness draws after it.
There are certain barren and thornie sciences, which for the most part are
forged for the multitude: they should be left for those, who are for the
service of the world. As for my self, I love no books, but such as are
pleasant, and easy, and which tickle me, or such as comfort and counsel me,
to direct my life and death.

-- tacitum sylvas inter reptare salubres Hordib. 1. epist. 4. 4.
Curantem quidquid dignum sapiente bonoque est. Silently creeping midst the
wholesome wood
With care what is for a wiseman and a good.
The wiser sort of men, having a strong and vigorous mind may frame unto
themselves an altogether spiritual life. But mine being common, I must help to
uphold my self by corporal commodities: And age having estsoones dispoiled me
of those that were most suitable to my fantasy. I instruct and sharpen my
appetite to those remaining, most sortable this other season. We must tooth-and
nail retain the use of this lives pleasures, which our years snatch from us,
one after another:

Carpamus dulcia, nostrum est, Pers. sat. 5. 155

Quod vivis, cinis and maenes and fabula fies.
Pluck we sweet pleasures: we thy life give thee.
Thou shall a tale, a ghost, and ashes be.
Now concerning the end of glory, which Pliny, and Cicero propose unto us, it
is far from my discourse: The most opposite humor to solitary retiring, is
ambition. Glory and rest, are things, that cannot squat in one same form: as
far as I see, these have naught but their arms and legs out of the throng,
their mind and intent is further and more engaged in them then ever it was.

Tun* vetule auriculis alienis colligis escas? Pers. sat. 1. 22.
Gatherst thou dotard these years,
Fresh baits, fine food, for others ears?
They have gone-backe that they might leap the better, and with a stronger
motion make a nimbler offer amidst the multitude. Will you see how they
shoot-short by a corns breadth? let us but counterpoise the advice of two
Philosophers, and of two most different sects: The one writing to Idomeneus,
the other to Lucilius their friends, to divert them from the managing of
affairs and greatness, unto a solitary kind of life. You have (say they)
lived hither to swimming and floating adrift, come and die in the haven; you
have given the past of your life ^^^o light, give the remainder unto darkness.
It is impossible to give-over occupations, if you do not also give-over the
fruits of them: Therefore clear your self from all care and glory. There is
great danger, lest the glittering of your fore-passed actions should overmuch
dazzle you, yea, and follow you even to your den. Together with other
concupiscences, shake off that which comes from the approbation of others.
And touching your knowledge and sufficiency, take you no care of them, they
will loose no whit of their effect; if your self be any thing the better for
them. Remember but him, who being demanded, to what purpose he toyled so much
about an Art, which could by no means come to the knowledge of many. Few are
enough for me; one will sufi^ce, yea, less than one will content me, answered
he. He said true: you and another are a sufficient theater one for another; or
you to your self alone. Let the people be one unto you, and one ^e all the
people to you: It is a base ambition to go about to draw glory from ones
idleness, and from ones lurking-hole. A man must do as some wild beasts,
which at the entrance of their caves, will have no manner of footing seen. You
must no longer seek, what the world says of you, but how you must speak unto
your-selfe: withdraw your self into your self; but first prepare yourselfe to
receive your self: it were folly to trust to your self, if you cannot
govern your self. A man may as well fail in solitariness, as in company,
there are ways for-it, until such time as you have framed your self such,
that you dare not halt before yourselfe, and that you shall be ashamed of, and
bear a kind of respect unto your self, Obversentur Cic. Tusc. qu. lib. 2.
species honestae animo: Let honest Ideaes still represent themselves before
your mind: Ever present Cato, Phocion, and Aristides unto your imagination, in
whose presence even fools Sen^c. epist. 11.
would hide their faults, and establish them as controulers of all your
intentions. If they be disordered and untuned, their reverence will order and
tune them again: they will contain you in a way, to be contented with your
self; to borrow nothing but from your self, to settle and stay your mind in
assured and limited cogitations, wherein it may best please it self, and
having gotten knowledge of true felicities, which according to the measure a
man understands them, he shall accordingly enjoy, and with them rest satisfied,
without wishing a further continuance, either of life or name. Lo here the
counsel of truly-pure, and purely-true philosophy, not of a vainglorious,
boasting, and prating philosophy, as is that of the two first.

The nine and thirtieth Chapter.
A consideration upon Cicero.

ONe word more in comparison of these two. There are gathered out of Ciceroes
writing^ and from Plinies, (in mine opinion little agreeing with his uncle)
infinite testimonies of a nature beyond measure ambitious. Amongst others, that
they openly solicit the Historians of their times, not to forget them in their
writings: and fortune, as it were in spite* has made the vanity of their
request to continue even to our days, and long since the histories were lost.
But this exceeds all hearts-basenesse in persons of that s^ampe, to have gone
about to draw some principal glory from prating and speaking, even to employ
their private Epistles written to their friends; in such sort, as some missing
the opportunity to be sent, they notwithstanding cause them to be published,
with this worthy excuse, that they would not loose their travel and
lucubrations. Is it not a seemly thing in two Roman Consuls, chief
magistrates of the commonwealth, Empress of the world, to spend their time in
wittily devising, and closely hudling-vp of a quaint missive or witty epistle,
thereby to attain the reputation, that they perfectly understand their
mother tongue? What could a seely Schoolmaster, who gets his living by such
trash, do worse? If the acts of Xenophon, or of Caesar had not by much exceeded
their eloquence, I can not believe, they would ever have written them. They
have endeavored to recommend unto posterity, not their sayings, but their
doings. And if the perfection of well-speaking might bring any glory suitable
unto a great personage, Scipio and Le^ius would never have resigned the honor
of their Comedies, and the elegancies, and smooth-sportfull conceits of the
Latin tongue, unto an Affrican servant: For, to prove this labor to be theirs,
the exquisit eloquence, and excellent invention thereof does sufficiently
declare it: and Terence himself does avouch it-: And I could hardly be removed
from this opinion. It is a kind of mockery and injury, to raise a man to
worth, by qualities mis-seeming his place, and vnfittting his calling, although
for some other respects praise-worthie; and also by qualities that ought not to
be his principal object. As he that would commend a King to be a cunning
Painter, or a skillful Architect, or an excellent Harquibuzier, or a never
missing runner at the Ring. These commendations acquire a man no honor, if
they be not presented altogether with those that are proper and convenient unto
him, that is to say, justice, and the skill to govern, and knowledge to direct
his people both in peace and war. In this sort does Agriculture honor Cyrus,
and Eloquence Charlemaine, together with his knowledge in good letters. I have
in my time seen some, who by writing did earnestly get both their titles and
living, to disavow their aprentissage, mar their pen, and affect the ignorance
of so vulgar a quality; and which our people holds, to be seldom found
amongst wisemen, endeavoring to be commended for better qualities. Demosthenes
his companions in their embassage to Philip, praised their Prince to be fair,
eloquent, and a good quaffer. Demostenes said, they were commendations rather
fitting a woman, an advocate, and a sponge, then a King.

Imperet bellante prior, iacentem Hor. car. secul. 51.

Lenis in hostem.
Better he rule, who merciful will rue
His foe subdued, then he that can subdue.
It is not his profession to know, either how to hunt cunningly, or to dance
nimbly.

Orabunt causas alij, coelique meatus Virg Aen. lib. 6. 850.

Describent radio, and fulgentia sider a dicent;
Hic regere imperio populos sciat. --
Others shall causes plead, describe the skies
Motion by instrument, say how stars rise?
But let him know to rule (just, valiant, wise.)
Plutarke says moreover, That to appear so absolutely excellent in these
lesse-necessarie parts, is to produce a witness against himself, to have ill
spent his hours, and fondly bestowed his study, which might better have been
employed to more behoofefull and profitable use. So that Philip King of
Macedon, having heard great Alexander his son sing at a feast a vie with the
best Musicians: Art thou not ashamed (said he unto him) to sing so well? And to
the same Philip, said a Musician, against whom he contended about his Art, God
forbid, my Sovereign, that ever so much hurt should befall you, that you
should understand these things better than my self. A King ought to be able to
ansere, as Ipicrates did the Orator who in his invective urged him in this
manner: And what art thou thou should so brave-it? Art thou a man at Arms?
Art thou an Archer? Art thou a Pike-man? I am none of all those, but I am he
who command all those. And Antisthenes made-it as an argument of little valor
in Ism^nias, when some commended him to be an excellent Flutist. Well I wot,
that when I hear some give themselves to imitate the phrase of my Essays, I
would rather have them hold their peace: They do not so much raise the words,
as depresse the sense; so much the more sharply, by how much more obliquely.
Yet am I deceived if some others take not more hold on the matter; and how well
or ill soever, if any writer has scattered the same, either more material, or
at least thicker on his paper: That I may collect the more, I do but huddle up
the arguments or chief heads. Let me but add what follows them, I shall
daily increase this volume. And how many stories have I glanced-at therein,
that speak not a word, which whosoever shall unfold, may from them draw
infinite Essays? Nor they, nor my allegations do ever serve simply for
examples, authority, or ornament. I do not only respect them for the use I
draw from them. They often (beyond my purpose) produce the seed of a richer
subject, and bolder matter, and often collaterally, a more harmonious tune,
both for me, that will express no more in this place, and for them that shall
hit upon my tune.

But returning to virtue, I find no great choice, between him that can speak
nothing but evil, Sen. epist. 115. p.
and one that can talk nothing but to talk well. Non est ornamentum vir^le
concinnitas. Finenesse is no great grace for a man. Wise men say, that in
respect of knowledge, there is nothing but Philosophy, and in regard of
effects, but Virtue; which is generally fit for all degrees, and for all
orders. Something there is alike in these two other Philosophers; for they also
promise eternity to the Epistles, they write to their friends. But after
another fashion, and to a good purpose, accommodating themselves to others
vanity; For they send them word, that if care to make themselves known unto
future ages, and respect of renown, does yet retain them in the managing of
affairs, and makes them fear solitariness, and a retired life, to which they
would call them, that they take no more pains for it: forasmuch as they have
sufficient credit with posterity, by answering them; and were it but by the
Epistles they write unto them, they will make their name as famous, and as
farre-knowen, as all their public actions might do. Besides this difference,
they are notfrivolous, idle, and trivial Epistles, and only compact and held
together with exquisite choice words, hudled-vp and ranged to a just smoothe
cadence, but stufft and full of notable sayings, and wise sentences; by which a
man does not only become more eloquent, but more wise, and that teach us, not
to say well, but to do well. Fie on that eloquence, which leaves us with a
desire of it, and not of things: unless a man will say, that Ciceroes being so
exceedingly perfect, does frame it self a body of perfection. I will further
allegea story, which to this purpose we read of him, to make us palpably
feel his natural condition. He was to make an Oration in public, and being
urged b^t^mes to prepare himself for it, Eros one of his servants came to tell
him, the Auditorie was deferred till the morrow next; he was so glad of it,
that for so good news he gave him his liberty. Touching this subject of
Epistles, thus much I will say; It is a work wherein my friends are of opinion
I can do something: And should more willingly have undertaken to publish my
gifts, had I had who to speak unto. It had been requisite (as I have had
other times) to have had a certain commerce to draw me on, to encorage me, and
to uphold me. For, to go about to catch the wind in a net, as others do, I
cannot; and it is but a dream. I am a sworn enemy to all falsifications. I
should have bin more attentive, and more assured, having a friendly and strong
direction, than to behold the diverse images of a whole multitude: and I am
deceived, if it had not better succeeded with me. I have naturally a comicall
and familiar style: But after a manner peculiar unto my self, inept to all
public Negotiations, answering my speech, which is altogether close, broken,
and particular: I have no skill in ceremonious letters, which have no other
substance, but a fair contexture of complemental phrases and courteous words. I
have no taste nor faculty of these tedious offers of ser^ice and affection. I
believe not so much as is said, and am nothing pleased to say more than I
believe. It is far from that which is used now adays: For, there was never
so abject and servile a prostitution of presentations; life, soul, devotion,
adoration, servant, slave; all these words are so generally used, that when
they would express a more emphaticall intent and respective will, they have no
means left them to express it. I deadly hate to hear a flatterer: which is
the cause I naturally affect a pithy, sinnowie, dry, round, and harsh kind of
speech; which, of such as have no further acquaintance with me, is judged to
incline to disdain. I honor them most, whom I seem to regard least: And where
my mind marches most cheerfully, I often forget the steps of gravitie: And I
offer my self but saintly and rudely to those whose I am indeed, and present
my self least, to such as I have most given my self. M^ thinks they should
read it in my heart, and that the expression of my words, wrongeth my
conception. To welcome, to take leave, to bid farewell, to give thanks, to
salute, to present my service, and such verbal complements of the ceremonial
laws of our civilitie, I know no man so sottishly-barren of speech, as my
self. And I was never employed to indite Letters of favor or commendatorie,
but he for whom they were, judged them dry, barren, and faint. The Italians
are great Printers of Epistles, where of I think I have a hundred several
Volumes. I deem those of Hanniball Caro to be the best. If all the paper I
have heretofore scribled for Ladies were extant, at what time my hand was
truly transported by my passion, a man should happily find some page worthy to be
communicated unto idle and fond-doting youth, embabuinized with this fury. I
ever write my letters in posthast, and so rashly-head long, that howbeit I
write intolerablie ill, I had rather write with mine own hand, than employ
another: for I find none that can follow me, and I never copy them over
again. I have accustomed those great persons that know me, to endure blots,
blurs, dashes, and botches, in my letters, and a sheet without folding or
margin. Those that cost me, either most labor or study, are they that are
least worth. When I once begin to traile them, it is a sign my mind is not
upon them. I commonly begin without project: the first word begets the second.
Our modern letters are more fraught with borders, and prefaces, than with
matter, as I had rather write two, then fold and make up one, which charge I
commonly resign to others: So likewise when the matter is ended, I would
willingly give another the charge, to add these long orations, offers,
prayers, and imprecations, which we place at the end of them, and wish heartily,
some new fashion would discharge us of them. As also to superscribe them with a
legend of qualities, titles, and callings, wherein, lest I might have tripped,
I have often times omitted writing, especially to men of Justice, Lawyers, and
Financiers. So many innovations of offices, so difficult a dispensation and
ordinance of diverse names and titles of honor, which being so dearly bought,
can neither be exchanged or forgotten without offense. I likewise find-it
graceless and idly-fond, to charge the front and inscription of the many
books and pamphlets, which we daily cause to be imprinted with them.

The fortieth Chapter.
That the taste of goods or evils does greatly depend on the opinion we have of
them.

MEn (says an ancient Greek sentence) are tormented by the opinions they have
of things, and not by things themselves. It were a great conquest for the ease
of our miserable humane condition, if any man could establish every where this
true proposition. For if evils have no entrance into-vs, but by our judgment,
it seems that it lies in our power, either to contemn or turn them to our
good. If things yield themselves unto our mercy, why should we not have the
fruition of them, or apply them to our advantage? If that which we call evil
and torment, be neither torment, nor evil, but that our fancy only gives it
that quatie, it is in us to change-it: and having the choice of it, if none
compell-vs, we are very fools, to bandie for that party, which is irksome
unto us: and to give infirmities, indigence and contempt, a sharp and ill
taste, if we may give them a good: And if fortune simply affoord-vs the
matter, it lies in us to give-it the form. Now that that which we term
evil, is not so of it self, or at least, such as it is, that it depends of us
to give-it another taste, and another countenance (for all comes to one) let us
see whether it can be maintained. If the originall-being of those things we
fear, had the credit of it is own authority to lodge it self in us, alike
and semblable would it lodge in all: For men be all of one kind, and except the
most or least, they are furnished with like means to judge, and instruments to
conceive. But the diversity of opinions, which we have of those things, does
evidently show, that but by composition they never enter into-vs. Some one
peradventure does lodge them in himself, as they are in essence, but a
thousand others give them a new being, and a contrary. We account of death, of
poverty, and of sorrow, as of our chiefest parts. Now death, which some of all
horrible things call the most horrible, who knows not, how others call it, the
only haven of this lives-torments? the sovereign good of nature? the only
sta^e of our liberty? and the ready and common receipt of our evils? And as
some do, fearefully-trembling, and senslesly-affrighted, expect her coming,
others endure it more easily then life: And one complains of her facility;

Mors vt inam pavidos vitae subducere nolles, ^^can. lib. 4. 580.

Sed virtus to sola daret!
O death! I would thou would let cowards live,
That resolved valor might thee only give!
But let us leave these glorious minds: Theodorus answered Lysimachus, who
threatened to kill him: Thou shall do a great exploit to come to the strength
of a Cantharides. The greatest number of Philosophers are found to have either
by design prevented, or hastened and furthered their deaths. How many popular
persons are seen brought unto death, and not to a simple death, but entermixt
with shame, and sometimes with grievous torments, to embrace it with such an
undaunted assurance; some through stubborn wilfulness, other-some through a
natural simplicity, in whom is nothing seen changed from their ordinary
condition; settling their domestical affairs, recommending themselves unto
their friends, preaching, singing, and entertaining the people: yea, and
sometimes uttering words of ^esting and laughter, and drinking to their
acquaintance, as well as Socrates? One who was led to the gallows, desired
it might not be through such a street, for fear a Merchant should set a Ser^ant
on his back, for an old debt. Another wished the hangman not to touch his
throat, lest he should make him swowne with laughing, because he was so
ticklish. Another answered his confessor, who promised him he should suppe
that night with our Savior in heaven, Go thither your self to supper, for I
use to fast a nights. Another upon the Gibbet calling for drink, and the
hangman drinking first, said, he would not drink after him, for fear he
should take the pox of him. Every man has heard the tale of the Piccard, who
being upon the ladder ready to be thrown down, there was a wench presented
unto him, with this offer (as in some cases our law does sometimes tolerate)
that if he would marry her, his life should be saved, who after he had a while
beheld her, and perceving that she halted, said hastily, Away, away, good
bang-man, make an end of thy business, she limps. The like is reported of a man
in Denmark, who being adjudged to have his head cut off, and being upon the
scaffold, had the like condition offered him, but refused it, because the wench
offered him was jaw-falne, long che^kt, and sharpe-nosed. A young ladde at
Tholous, being accused of here^ie, in all points touching his belief, referred
himself wholly to his Masters faith, (a young scholar that was in prison with
him) and rather chose to die, than he would be persuaded his Master could
err. We read of those of the Town of Arras, at what time king Lewis the
eleventh took it, that amongst the common people many were found, who rather
than they would say, God save the King, suffered themselves to be hanged. And
of those base-minded jesters or buffons, some have bin seen, that even at the
point of death, would never leave their jesting and scoffing. He whom the
heads-man threw off from the Gallows, cried out, Row the Gally, which was his
ordinary byword. Another, who being at his last gasp, his friends had laid
him upon a pallet alongest the fireside, there to breathe his last, the
Physician demanding where his grief pained him? Answered, between the bench
and the fire: And the Priest to give him the last unction, seeking for his
feet, which by reason of his sickness were shruncken up, he told him, My good
friend you shall find them at my legs ends, if you look well. To another
that exhorted him to recommend himself to God, he asked, who is going to him?
And the follow answering, your self shortly: If it be his good pleasure, I
would to God it might be to morrow night, replied he: Recommend but your self
to him, said the other, and you shall quickly be there: It is best then,
answered he, that my self carry mine own commendations to him. In the
Kingdom of Narsinga, even at this day their Priests wives are buried alive
with the bodies of their dead husbands. All other wives are burnt at their
husbands funerals, not only constantly, but cheerfully. When their king dies,
his wives, his concubines, his minions, together with all his officers and
servants, which make a whole people, present themselves so merrily unto the
fire, wherein his body is burned, that they manifestly seem^ to esteeme-it as
a great honor, to accompany their deceased master to his ashes. During our
last wars of Millaine, and so many takings, losses, miseries, and calamities
of that City, the people impatient of so many changes of fortune, took such
a resolution unto death, that I have heard my father say; he kept account of
five and twenty chief householders, that in one week made them-selves away:
An accident which has some affinity with that of the Xanthians, who being
besieged by Brutus, did pell-mell-headlong, men, women, and children
precipitate themselves into so furious a desire of death, that nothing can be
performed to avoid death, which these did not accomplish to avoid life: So that
Brutus had much ado, to save a very small number of-them. Every opinion is of
sufficient power to take hold of a man in respect of life. The first Article of
that courageous oath, which the Country of Greece did swear, and keep, in the
Median war, was, that every particular man should rather change his life unto
death, than the Persian laws for theirs. What a world of people are daily
seen in the Turkish wars, and the Graecians, more willing to embrace a
sharp, a bitter, and violent death, then to be uncircumcised and baptized? An
example whereof no religion is incapable. The Kings of Castile having banished
the Jews out of their Country, king John of Portugal for eight crowns a
man, sold them a retreit in his dominion, for a certain time, upon condition
(the time expired) they should avoid, and he find them ships to transport them
into Affrike. The day of their departure come, which past, it was expressed,
that such as had not obeyed, should for-ever remain bondslaves; ships were
provided them, but very scarce and sparingly: And those which were embarked,
were so rudely, churlishly, and villainously used, by the passengers and
mariners; who besides infinite other indignites, loitred so long on the seas,
now forward, now backward, that in the end, they had consumed all their
victuals, and were forced, if they would keep themselves alive, to purchase
some of them, at so excessive a rate, and so long, that they were never set a
shore, til they had brought them so bare, that they had nothing l^^t them but
their shirts. The news of this barbarous inhumanity being reported to those
that were yet on land, most of them resolved to yield and continue
bound-slaves: whereof some made a semblance to change their religion. Emanuel
that immediately succeeded John, being come to the Crown, first set them at
liberty, then changing his mind, commanded them to depart out of his
dominions, and for their passages assigned them three ports. He hoped, as
Bishop Osorius reports, (a Latin Historian of our ages, not to be despised)
that the favor of the liberty, to which he had restored them, having failed to
convert them unto Christianity, the difficulty to commit themselves unto
mariners and pirates robberies, to leave a Country where they were settled with
great riches, for to go seek unknown and strange regions, would bring them
into Portugal again. But seeing all his hopes frustrate, and that they
purposed to pass away, he cut off two of the three ports he had promised
them, that so the tedious distance and incommoditie of the passage might
retain some, or rather that he might have the mean to assemble them all
together in one place, for a fitter opportunity of the execution he intended,
which was this. He appointed that all their children under fourteen years of
age, should be taken from out the hands of their parents, and remooved from
their sight and conversation, to some place where they might be brought-vp, and
instructed in our religion. He says that this effect caused an horrible
spectacle: The natural affection between the fathers and the children;
moreover the zeal unto their ancient faith, striving against this violent
ordinance. Diverse fathers and mothers were ordinarily seen to kill
themselves, and with a more cruel example through compassion and love, to
throw their young children into pittes and wells, thereby to shun the Law.
The term, which he had prefixed them being expired, for want of other means,
they yielded unto thraldom. Some became Christians, from whose faith and race,
even at this day (for it is a hundred years since) few Portugalles assure
themselves; although custom, and length of time be much more forcible
counselors unto such mutations, that any other compulsion. In the Town of
Castelnaw Darry, more then fifty Albigeois, all heretics, at one time, with a
determined courage, suffered themselves to be burned alive, all in one same
fire, before they would recant and disavow their opinions. Quoties non modo
ductores nostri, sed vniversi etiam exercitus, ad non dubiam mortem
concurrerunt? How often have, not only our Leader (says Tully) C^^, Tus^. qu
l. ^
but also our whole armies run roundly together to an undoubted death? I have
seen one of my samiliar friends run furiously on death, with such, and so
deeply in his heart rooted affection, by diverse visages of discourse, which I
could never suppress in him, and to the first that offered it self masked
with a luster of honor, without apprehending any sharp or violent end,
therein to precipitate himsefe. We have many examples in our days: yea in very
children of such as for fear of some slight incomodity have yielded unto
death. And to this purpose says an ancient Writer, what shall we not fear, if
we fear that, which cowardice it self has chosen for her retrait? Here to
huddle up a long bead-rowle of those of all sexes, conditions, sects, in most
happy ages, which either have expected death most constantly, or sought for it
voluntarily, and not only sought to avoid the evils of this life, but some,
only to shun the sacietie of living any longer: and some; for the hope of a
better condition elsewhere, I should never have done. The number is so
infinite, that verily it would be an easier matter for me to reckon up those
that have feared the same. Only this more. Pirro the philosopher, finding
himself upon a very tempestuous day in a boat, showed them whom he perceived
to be most affrighted through fear, and encouraged them by the example of an
hog, that was amongst them, and seemed to take no care at all for the storm:
Shall we then dare to say, that the advantage of reason, whereat we seem so
much to rejoice, and for whose respect we account our selves Lords and
Emperors of all other creatures, has been infused into us for our torment?
What avails the knowledge of things, if through them we become more demisse?
If thereby we loose the rest and tranquillity wherein we should be without
them? and if it makes us of worse condition then was Pirrhos hog? Shall we
employ the intelligence, heaven has bestowed upon us for our greatest good, to
our ruin? repugning natures desseigne and the universal order and vicissitude
of things, which implies that every man should use his instruments and means
for his own commodity? Well (will some tell me) let your rule fit you against
death; but what will you say of indigence and necessity? what will you also
say of minde-grieving sorrow, which Aristippus, Hieronimus, and most of the
wisest have judged the last evil? and those which denied the same in words,
confessed the same in effect? Possidonius being extremely tormented with a
sharp and painful sickness, Pompey came to see him, and excused himself
he had chosen so unfit an hour to hear him discourse of Philosophy: God
forbid (answered Possidonius) that over pain should so far usurp upon me,
as to hinder me from discoursing of so worthy a subject. And thereupon began
to speak of the contempt of pain. But there whilst she played her part, and
incessantly pinched and urged him; against whom he exclaimed: Pain, do what
thou list, I shall never be drawn to say, that thou art an evil. That saying,
which they would make of such consequence, what does it infer against the
contempt of pain it contends but for the word. And if the pangs thereof moove
him not there whilst, why breaks he off his discourse for it? Why thinks he to
work a great exploit, not to call it an evil? All does not consist in
imagination. Here we judge of the rest. It is assured learning that here does
play her part, our own senses are judges of it?

Qui nisi sunt very; ratio quoque falsa sit omnis. Luor^. 4. 487.
Which senses if they be not true,
All reason's false, it must ensue.
Shall we make our skin believe, the stripes of a whip do tickle it? and
persuade our taste, that Aloes be wine of Graves? Pirrhos hog is here in our
predicament. He is nothing danted at death, but if you beat him, he will
grunt, cry and torment himself. Shall we force the general law of nature,
which in all living creatures under heaven is seen to tremble at pain? The
very trees seem to groan at offenses. Death is but felt by discourse, because
it is the motion of an instant.

Aut fuit, aut veniet, nihil est praesentis in illa. Death has come, or it
will not miss;
But in it nothing present is.
Morsque minus poenae, quam mor a mortis habet. Orid. epis. Ariad. 82.
Deaths pain's less, roundly acted,
Then when death is protracted.
A thousand beasts, a thousand men, are sooner dead then threatened. Besides,
what we principally call fear in death, it is pain her customary
forerunner. Nevertheless if we must give credit to an ancient father, Malam
mortem non facit, nisi quod sequitur mortem. Nothing, but what follows death,
makes death to be evil. And I might more truly say, that neither that which
goes before, no^ that which comes after, is no appurtenance of death, we
falsely excuse our selves. And I find by experience, that it is rather the
impatience of the imagination of death, that makes us impatient of the pain,
and that we feel it twofold grievous, forasmuch as it threats us to die. But
reason accusing our weakness, to fear so sudden a thing, so unavoidable, so
insensible; we take this other more excusable pretense. All evils that have no
other danger, but of the evil, we count them dangerlesse. The tooth-^ch, the
pain of the gowt, how grievous soever, because they kill not, who reckons
them in the number of maladies? Well, suppose that in death we especially
regard the pain: As also, poverty has nothing to be feared for, but what she
casts upon us through famine, thirst, cold, heat, and other miseries, it
makes us feel and endure. So have we nothing to do but with pain. I will
willingly grant them, that it is the woorst accident of our being. For, I am
the man that hate and shun it as much as possible may be; because hitherto
(thanks be unto God) I have no commerce or dealing with her: But it is in our
power, if not to dissanull, at least to diminish the same, through patience:
And though the body should be moved thereat, yet to keep the mind and reason
in good temper. And if it were not so, who then has brought virtue, valor,
force, magnanimity, and resolution into credit, Where shall they play their
part, if there be no more pain defied? Avida est periculi virtus, Sen. quar.
von. cap. 4.
Virtue is desirous of danger. If a man must not lie on the hard ground, armed
at all assaies, to endure the heat of the scorching Sun, to feed hungerly
upon a horse, or an ass, to see himself mangled and cut in pieces, to have a
bullet plucked out of his bones, to suffer incisions, his flesh to be
stitcht-vp, cauterized, and searched, all incident to a martial man; how shall
we purchase the advantage and pre-eminence, which we so greedily seek-after,
over the vulgar sort? It is far from avoiding the evil and pains of it, as
wise men say, that of actions equally good, one should most be wished to be
done, wherein is most pain and grief. Non enim hilaritate nec lascivia risu
aut ioco comite levitatis, sed saepe etiam tristes firmitate and Cic. de fin.
lib. 2.
constantia sunt beati. For men are not happy by mirthfulnesse, or wantonness,
or laughing, or jesting, which is the companion of lightness; but often, even
those that are sorrowful, through their strong heart and constancy. And
therefore was it impossible to persuade our fathers, that conquests achieved
by maine force, in the hazard of war were not more available and
advantageous, then those obtained in all security by practices and stratagems.

Laetius est, quoties magno sibi constat honestum. Luca. ^^ 9. 40.
Honesty makes chiefest cheer,
When it does cost it self most dear.
Moreover, this ought to comfort us, that naturally, if pain be violent, it is
also short; if Cic. de fin. lib. 2. Epic.
long, it is easy: Si gravis, br^vis; si longus, levis. If it be grievous, it
is short; if it be long, it is light. Thou shall not feel-it over long; if thou
feel-it over much, it will either end it self, or end thee: All comes to one:
If thou bear not it, it will bear thee away* Memineris maximos morte finiri,
parvos multa habere intervalla requietis; mediocrium nos esse dominos: vt si
tolerabiles Lib. 1.
sint, feram^s: sin minus, e vita, quum ea non placeat, tanquam e theatro
exeamus. Remember the greatest are ended with death, the lesser have many
pauses of rest; we are masters of the mean ones: so as if they be tolerable,
we may bear them; if not, we may make an Exit from our life which does not
please, as from a stage. That which makes us endure pain with such impatience,
is, that we are not accustomed to take our chief contentment in the soul, and
that we do not sufficiently rely on her; who is the only, and sovereign
mistress of our condition. The body has (except the least or most) but one
course, and one by ase. The soul is variable in all manner of forms, and
rangeth to her self, and to her estate, whatsoever it be, the senses of the
body, and all other accidents. Therefore must she be studied, enquired, and
sought-after: and her powerful springs and wards should be rowzed up. There
is neither reason, nor prescription, nor force can avail against her
inclination and cho^se. Of so infinite byases, that she has in her disposition,
let us allow her one suitable and fit to our rest and preservation: Then shall
we not only be sheltered from all offense, but if it please her, also
gratified and flattered of all grievances and evils. She indifferently makes
profit of all; even errors and dreams, do profitably bestead her, as a
loyal matter, to bring-vs unto safety and contentment. It may easily be
seen, that the point of our spirit, is that which sharpneth both pain and
pleasure in us. Beasts wanting the same, leave their free and natural senses
unto their bodies: and by consequence, single well nigh in every kind, as they
show by the semblable application of their movings. If in our members we did
not trouble the jurisdiction, which in that belongs unto them; it may be
thought, we should be the better for-it, and that nature has given them a just
and moderate temperature toward pleasure and toward pain. And it can not choose
but be good and just, being equal and common. But since we have freed and
alienated our selves from her rules, to abandon our selves unto the vagabond
liberty of our fantasies: let us at least help to bend them to the most
agreeing side. Plato fears our sharp engaging unto pain and voluptuousness,
for so much as he over-strictly tieth and binds the soul unto the body: I am
rather opposite unto him, because it is sundred and loosed from it. Even as an
enemy becomes more furious when we fly from him, so does pain grow more
proud if it see-vs tremble under it. It will stoop and yield upon better
compositions to him that shall make head against-it. A man must oppose and
bandie against it. In recoyling and giving ground, we call and draw on, the
ruin threatning-vs. Even as the body is more steadie and strong to a charge,
if it stand stiffely to it, so is the soul. But let us come to examples
properly belonging unto weak-backt men, as I am, where we shall find, that it
is with pain, as with stones, which take either a higher or deeper color,
according to the foil that is laid under them, and holds no other place in
us then we give-it. Tantum doluerunt, quantum doloribus se inseruerunt. August.
So much they grieved, as they interessed themselves in griefs. We feel a dash
of a chirurgions razor more then ten blews with a sword in the heat of fight.
The painful throws of childbearing, deemed both by Physicians, and by the
word of God to be ver^e great, and which our women pass with so many
ceremonies, there are whole Nations that make no reckoning of them. I omit to
speak of the Lacedemonian women; but come we to the Swizzers of our
Infanterie, what change do you perceive in them? But that trudging and
trotting after their husbands, to day you see them carry the child about their
neck, which but yesterday they bare in their womb. And those counterfeit
roging Gyptians, whereof so many are daily seen amongst us, do they not wash
their children so soon as they are borne? And in the next river that comes to
hand? Besides so many harlots, which daily steal their children in the
deliverie as in the conception. The heauteous and noble Lady of Sabinus a
Roman Patritian, for the interest of others, did alone, without any bodies help
or assistance, and without noise or groaning endure the bearing, and deliverie
of two twins. A simple lad of Lacedemon, having stolen a Fox (for they more
feared the shame of their foolishness in stealing, then we fear the pain or
punishment of mis deeds) and hiding the same under his cloak, endured rather
to have his guts gnawne out by her, then to discover himself. An other who
offering incense at a sacrifice, suffered his flesh to burn to the bone, by a
coal fallen into his sleeve, rather then he would trouble that sacred mysteri^.
And a great number have been seen, for the only essay of virtue, following
their institution, that at the age of seven years, without so much as
changing their countenance, have endured to be whipped to death. And Cicero
has seen whole troops, to beat one a^ other so long, Cic Tuse quaest. lib. 5.
with their ^^sts, with their feet, and with their teeth, till they have
fainted and fallen down half dead, before ever they would confess to be
overcome. Nunquam (...) m^s vi^ceret, est enim ea semper invicta, sed nos
vmbris, deli^ijs, otio, languore, desid^^, animum infecimus: opinionibus
maloque more delinitum mollivimus. Custom should never overcome nature, for
she is still invincible: but we have infected our mind with shadows,
daintiness, idleness, faint* hartednesse, sloughtfulnesse, and have
effeminated it, inveagled with opinions, and evil custom. Every man knows
the story of S^^vola, who being entered the enemies camp, with a full
resolution to kill their Chieftaine, and having missed of his purpose, to
check his effect with a stranger invention, and to clear his country,
confessed unto Prosenna, (who was the King he intended to kill) not only his
dessigne, but added more-over, that in his camp there were a great many
Romans, who had undertaken and sworn the very same enterprise, and were
confederates with him. And to make show of his dread less magnanimity, having
caused a pan of burning coals to be brought, he saw and suffered his right arm
(in penance that it had not effected his project) to be par^hed and wel-nigh
roasted off: until such time as his enemy himself, feeling a kind of remorce
full horror, commanded the fire to be carried away. What shall we say of him,
that would not vouchsafe to leave, or so much as to interrupt the reading of
his book, whilst he had an incision made into him? And of him who resolved to
skoffe and laugh, even in spite and contempt of the tortures, which were
inflicted upon him, so that the raging cruelty of the hangmen, that held him,
and all the inventions of torments that could be devised, being redoubled upon
him, one in the neck of another, gave him over? But he was a Philosopher.
What? of one of Caesar's gladiators, who with a cheerful and smiling
countenance endured his wounds to be slit and sounded? Quis mediocris gladiator
ingemuit? Quis vultum mutavit vnquam? Quis non modo stet^^, verum Cic. Tuse
quaest. lib. 2.
etiam decubuit turpiter? Quis ^um decubuisset, ferrum recipere ^^ssus, collum
contraxit? What mean Fencer has once gro^ed? Which of them has once changed
his countenance? Which of them not only has s^ood up, but even fallen with
shame? Which of them when he was down, and was willed to take his death, did
once shrinke-in his neck? But let us join some women unto them. Who has not
heard of her at Paris, which only to get a fresher hew of a new skin, endured
to have her face flead all over? There are some, who being ^ound, and in perfect
health, have had some teeth puld-out, thereby to frame a daintier and more
pleasing voice, or to set them in better order. How many examples of contempt
of pain or smart have we of that kind and sex? What can they not do? What
will they not do? What fear they to do? So they may but hope for some
amendment of their beauty?

Vellere queis cura est albos a stirpe capillos, Tibul. lib. ^. ^l. ^. 43.

Et faci^m dempta pelle r^ferre novam.
Who take great care to root out their gray hair,
And skin fleade off a new face to repair.
I have seen some swallow gravel, ashes, coals, dust, tallow, candles, and
for the no^ce, labor and toil themselves to spoil their stomach, only to
get a pale bleake color. To become slender in wast, and to have a straight
spagnolized body, what pinching, what guirding, what cingling will they not
endure; Yea sometimes with yron-plates, with whalebones, and other such trash,
that their very skin, and quick flesh is eaten-in and consumed to the bones;
Whereby they sometimes work their own death. It is common to diverse nations
of our times, to hurt and gash themselves in good earnest, to give credit to
their words. And our king reports sundry examples, of what himself saw in
Poloni^, and toward himself, But besides what I know to have by some been
imitated in France; when I came from the famous Parliament of Blois; I had a
little before seen a wench in Picardi^ to witness the vehemency of her
promises, and also her constancy, with the bodkin she wore in her hair, to
give hir-selfe four or five thrusts in her arm, which made her skin to
crack and gush out blood. The Turks are wont to wound and scarre themselves
for their Ladies sakes, and that the mark may the better appear, and continue
the longer, they will presently lay fire upon the cuttes; and to stanch the
blood, and better to form the cicatrice, they will keepe-it on, an incredible
while. Honest men that have seen it, have written the same, and sworn it unto
me. And for ten Aspers you shall daily find some amongst them, that will give
themselves a deep gash with a Scimitarie, either in their arms or thighs. I
am very glad witnesses are so ready at hand; where we have most need of them:
For, Christendom affords many. And after the example of our holy guide,
there have been diverse, who for devotion would needs bear the cross. We
learn by a worthy testimony of relig^on, that Saint Jews the King wore a
haire-shirt, until such time as he was so aged, that his confessor gave him a
dispensation for-it; and that every friday he caused his priests to beat his
shoulders with five little iron chains, which to that purpose were ever carried
with his nightgeare. William our last duke of Guienne, father to that Eleonore,
who transferred that Duchy unto the houses of France and England, the last
ten or twelve years of his life, for penancesake wore continually a cor^elet,
under a religious habit. Foulkes Earl of A^^ou went to Jerusalem, there with a
rope about his neck, to be whiped by two of his servants, before our Saviors
sepulcher. Do we not upon every good friday, in sundry places, see a great
number of men and women, scourge and beat themselves so long till they bruise
and tear their flesh, even to the bones; I have often seen it my self, and
that without enchantment, And some say (for they are masked) there were some
amongst them, who for money would undertake thereby to warrant other men's
religion, by a contempt of smart full pain, so much the greater, by how much
the stings of devotion are of more force, the those of covetousnes. Q. Maximus
buried his son who had been Consul: Marcus Ca^o his being elected Praetor and
L. Paulus both his, within few days, with so cheerful and settled a
countenance, and with out any show of sorrow. I have sometimes by way of
^esting told one, that he had confronted divine justice: For, the violent
death of three tall children of his, coming unto his cares all upon one day,
and sent-him, as it may be imagined, as a great scourge: he was so far from
mourning, that he rather took it as a favor and singular gratification at
Gods hand. I do not follow these monstrous humors. Yet have I lost two or
three my self, whilst they were young and at nurce, if not without apprehension
of sorrow; yet without continuance of grief. And there is no accident wounds
men ac^p^r, or goes so near the heart, as the loss of children. I see diverse
other common occasions of affliction, which were I assailed by them, I should
scarcely feel. And I have contemned and neglected some, when it has pleased
God to visit me with them, on which the world sets so ugly and balefull a
countenance, that I hardly dare boast of them without blushing. Ex quo
intelligitur, non in natura, Cic. ib. l 3.
sed in opinione esse aegretudinem. Whereby it is understood, that grief
consists not in nature, but opinion. Opinion is a power full, boold, and
unmeasurable party. Who does ever so greedily search after rest full ease and
quietness, as Alexander and Caesar have done after difficulties and
vnquietnes^e? Terez, the father of Sitalcez, was wont to say, that when he had
no ^arres, he thought there was no difference between him and his
horse-keeper. Cato the Consul, to assure himself of certain towns in
Spain, having only interdicted some of their inhabitants to wea^e arms, many
of them killed themselves: Ferox gens nullam vitam rat^ sine arm^s ^sse. A
fierce kind of people, that thought there was no life without arms. How many
know we who have abandoned and forsaken the pleasure of an ease-full and
quiet life in their houses, and to live with their friends and acquaintance; to
follow the toyling-horror of unfrequented deserts, and that yielded and cast
themselves unto the abiectnesse, contempt and vilifying of the world, wherewith
they have so pleased themselves, as nothing more; Cardinal Boreme^s, who died
lately at Milane, in the midst of the pleasures and debawches to which his
Nobility, and the great riches he possessed, enticed him, and the air of Italy
afforded him, and his youth allured him, did ever keep himself in so an austere
form of life, that the same gown which served him in Summer he wore in winter.
He never lay but upon straw; the hours which he might conveniently spare from
his charge; he bestowed in continual study, ever kneeling, and having a small
quantity of bread and water by his books side, which was all the provision
for his repast, and time he employed in study. I know some who wittingly have
drawn both profit and preferment from cuckoldrie, the only name whereof is so
yrkesome and bail-ful to so many men. If sight be not the most necessary of our
censes, at last is it the most pleasing: the most plausible and profitable of
our members, seem those thatserve to beget us: not withstanding diverse have
mortaly hated them, only because they were over mucham^able, and for their
worthssake have rejected them. So thought he of his e^es, that voluntarily put
them out. The most common and ^oundest part of men, holds multitude of
children to be a sign of great happiness and comfort; So do I, and many
others, the want of them. And when Thales was demanded Wherefore he did not
marie, he answered, because he would leave no issue or line of himself behind
him. That our opinon endeareth and increases the price of things, it is seen
in a great number of them, which we do not regard to esteem them; but for our
use. And we neither consider their qualities nor vtilities, but only our cost
to recover and attain them: as if it were a part of their substance; and we
call that worth in them, not what they bring-vs, but what we bring to them.
According as it weighs, and is of consequence, so it serves. Whereupon I
perceive, we are thriftie husbands of what we lay out. Our opinion never
suffers-it to run a false gallop. The price gives a Diamond his title,
difficulty to virtue, pain unto devotion, and sharpness unto physic. Such
a one to come unto poverty, cast those few crowns he had into the same sea,
wherein so many others, with such carke, danger, and care, on all parts seek
to fish for riches. Epicurus says, that to be rich is no ^ase, but a charge of
affairs. Verily, it is not want, but rather plenty that causes avarice. I
will speak of mine own experience, concerning this subject. I have lived in
three kinds of condition, since I came out of my infancy. The first time,
which continued well-nigh twenty years, I have passt-it over, as one who had
no other means but casual, and depending from the direction and help of
others; without any certain maintenance, or regular prescription. My expenses
were so much the more carelessely layed-out, and lavishly employed, by how much
more they wholly depended on fortunes rashness and exhibition. I never lived so
well at case: my fortune was never to find my friends purse s^utte: besides
which, I was to frame my self to all necessities: the care I took to pay
every man at his prefixed day, which a thousand times they have prolonged,
seeing the care I took to satisfy them. So that I had gotten unto my self
the credit of a thriftie kind of good husbandry, though it were something
shifting and deceiptful. I do naturally feel a kind of pleasing contentment
in paying of my debts, as if I rid my self of a burthenous weight, and free
my self from the yoke of bondage and ingratitude. Besides, methinks I feel
a kind of delight, that tickleth me to the quick, in performing a lawfully-iust
action, and contenting of others. I except payments that require delays,
covenants, and after reckonings: for, if I ^^^d any body that will undertake
them, I blusningly and injuriously defer them as long as I can, for fear of
that altercation or wrangling, to which my humor and manner of speech is
altogether incompatible. There is nothing I hate more then driving of
bargains: It is a mere commerce of dodging and impudency. After an hours
debating and paltring, both parties will go from their words and oaths for
the getting or saving of a shilling: yet did I borrow with great disadvantage.
For, having no heart to borrow before others, or by word of mouth, I would
adventure it upon a piece of paper, which with some has no great power to move
or force to persuade, and which greatly helps to refuse, I was wont to commit
the succesle of my wants more freely and more carelessely unto fortune, then I
have done since unto my wit and providence. Most good-husbands thinke-it
strange and horrible to live on such uncertainties but they remember not, that
most men in the world live so. How many good and well-borne men have
heretofore, and are daily seen to neglect and leave at six and seven, their
patrimonies and certain goods, to follow and seek after court holy water, and
wavering-favours of Princes and of fortune; Caesar engaged and endebted
himself above a million of gold, more then he was worth to become Caesar. And
how many merchants and poor beginners, set-vp and begin their traffike by
the sale of their farms or cottages which they venture to the Indias*

Tot per impotentia freta; Catul. epig. 4. 18
In so great scarsitie of devotion, we have thousands of Colleges, which
pass the time very conveniently, daily gaping and expecting from the
liberality of the heavens, what they must dine withal to morrow. Secondly;
they consider not, that this certainty on which they ground themselves; is not
much less uncertain and hazardous, then hazad it-selfe. I see misery as near
beyond two thousand crownesrent, as if it were hard at hand* for, besides that
fortune has many-many means to open a hundred gaps for poverty to enter-at,
even through the thickest of our riches, and that often there is no mean
between the high est and lowest fortune.

Fortuna ^itrea est: tum* quum splendet, frangitur. Pr^^ Sene^f*
Fortune is glasse-like, brittle as it is bright:
Light-gon, Light-broken, when it lends best light.
And to turn all our defenses, and raisings of high walls topsie-turvie: I
find that want and necessity is by diverse or different causes, as ordinarily
seen to accompany and follow those that are rich in goods, as those that have
none at all: and that peradventure it is somewhat less incommodious, when it is
alone, then when it meets with riches: They rather come from order, then from
receite: Faber est suae quisque fortunae. Ever, man is the forger of his Eras.
chil 2. cent. 4. ^id. 63.
own fortune. And me thinks that a rich man, who is needy, full of
business, carke and toil, and troubled in mind, is more miserable, then he
that is simply poor. In div^^ijs inopes, Sen. epist. 74. P.
quod* genus egestatis gravissium est. In their abundance indigent, which is
the most grievous kind of indigence. The richest and greatest princes are
ordinarily urged by poverty and need unto extreme necessities. For, can any
be more extreme, then thereby to become Tirants, and unjust usurpers of their
subjects goods, My second manner of life has been to have money; which when I
had once fingred, according to my condition I sought to hoord up some against a
raignie day; esteeming that it was no having, unless a man had-ever some what
besides his ordinary expenses in possession: and that a man should not trust
that good, which he must live in hope to receive; and that, be his hope never
so likely, he may many ways be prevented. For, I would say unto my self;
what if I should be surprised by this chance, o^ that accident? What should I
do then? And in pursuit of these vain and vicious imaginations, I endeavored
by hook or crook, and by wi^e or wit to provide by this superfluous sparing
for all inconveniences that might happen: And I could answer him, that would
allege the number of inconveniences to be ouer-infinite? which if they
followed not all men, they accompanied some, and happily the greatest number.
An apprehension which I did not pass with out some painful care. I kept the
matter secret, and I (that dare say so much of myself) would never speak of
my money but falsely; as others do, who being rich, would seem to be poor,
or being poor would appear rich: and dispense with their conscience, never
to witness sincerely what they are worth. Oh ridiculous and shameful
prudence. Did I travel any where? me thought I was never sufficiently
provided; and the more I had laden my self with coin, the more I had also
burdened myself with fear: sometimes of my wayes-safetie, othertimes of
their trust that had the charge of my sumpters and baggage, whereof as some
others that I know, me thought I was never thoroughly assured, except it were
still in my sight. Left I my keys or my purse behind me? how many suspicions
and thornie imaginations, and which is worse, incommunicable did incessantly
haunt-me? My mind was ever on my halfepenney; my thoughts ever that way. The
sum being rightly cast, there is ever more pain in keeping, then in getting
of money. If I did not altogether so much as I say, I at the least endeavored to
do-it. Of commodity I had little or nothing. To have more means of expenses,
is ever to have increase of sorrow. For (as said Bion) The hairy man does
grieve as much a^ the bald, if he have his hair pulld out. And after you are
once accustomed, and have fixed your thoughts upon a heap of money, it is no
longer at your service? you dare not diminish-it? it is a building, which if
you touch or take any part from-it, you will think it will all fall.
Necessity must first pinch you by the throat, and touch you near, before you
will lay hands on it. And I should sooner pawn my clothes, or sell my horse,
with less care and compulsion, then make a breach into that beloved purse,
which I kept in store. But the danger was, that a man can hardly prefix any
certain limits unto his desire (they are hard to be found in things a man
deemeth good) and continue at one stay in sparing: A man shall ever increase
this heap, and augment-it from one number to another; yea so long, til he
basely and niggardly deprive himself of the enjoying of his own goods, and
wholly fix-it on the safe-keeping of them, and never use them. According to this
kind of usage, those are the richest people of the world, that have the charge
of keeping the gates and walls of a rich City. Every monied man is covetous,
according to mine opinion. Plato marshalleth this humane or corporal goods;
health, beauty, strength, riches: And riches, says he, are not blind, but
cleere-seeing, if they be illuminated by wisdom. Dionysius the younger, plaide
a notable part; who being advertised, that one of his Siracusans, had hidden a
certain treasure under the ground, commanded him to bring it unto him, which he
did, reserving secretly one part of it unto himself, with which he removed
his dwelling unto another City, where having lost the humor of hoarding-vp of
treasure, began to live a spending and riotous kind of life: which Dionysius
hearing, commanded the remainder of his treasure, and which he had taken from
him, to be restored unto him; saying, That sit hence he had learned how to make
use of it, he did most willingly redeliver the same unto him. I was some
years of the same humor: I wot not what good Demon did most profitably
remoove me from it, like to the Siracusan, and made me to neglect my sparing.
The pleasure I apprehended of a far and chargeable journey, having
overthrown this foolish imagination in me; From which I am fallen into a third
kind of life (I speak what I think of it) assuredly much more pleasing and
formal: which is, that I measure my garment according to my cloth, and let my
expenses go together with my coming in; sometimes the one, other-whilst the
other exceedes: But they are never far a sunder. I live from hand to mouth,
from day to day, and have I but to supply my present and ordinary needs, I am
satisfied: As for extraordinary wants, all the provisions of the world will
not suffice them. And it is folly to expect that fortune will ever sufficiently
arm us against her-selfe. It is with our own weapons that we must combat
her. Casual arms will betray us, when we shall have most need of them. If I
lay up any thing, it is for the hope of some employment at hand, and not to
purchase lands, whereof I have no need, but pleasure and delight. Non esse
cupidum, pecunia est: non esse emacem, vectigal est. It is current coin, not
to be covetous: it is a thriftie income, not to Cis. Parad. ^ls.
be still buying. I am neither possessed with fear, that my goods shall fail
me, nor with desire they should increase and multiply. Divitiarum fructus est
in copia: copiam declarat satietas. The fruit of riches is in plenty:
sacietie content with enough approoves that plenty. And I singularly Ibid.
gratify my self this correction came upon me in an age naturally inclined to
covetousness, and that I am free from that folly so common and peculiar to old
men, and the most ridiculous of all humane follies. Feraulez who had passed
through both fortunes, and found, that increase of goods, was no accrease of
appetite, to drink, to eat, to sleep, or to embrace his wife; and who on the
other side felt heavily on his shoulders, the importunity of ordering and
directing his O^conomicall affairs, as it does on mine, determine with
himself to content a poor young man, his faithful friend, greedily gaping
after riches, and frankely made him a present donation of all his great and
excessive riches; as also of those, he was likely every day to get by the
liberality and bounty of his good master Cyrus, and by war: always
provided, he should undertake to entertain and finde-him honestly, and in
good sort, as his guest and friend. In which estate they lived afterward most
happily, and mutually content with the change of their condition.

Lo hear a part, I could willingly find in my heart to imitate. And I much
commend the fortune of an old prelate, whom I see, to have so clearly
given-over his purse, his receites, and his expenses, now to one of his chosen
servants, and now to another, that he has lived many years as ignorant of his
household affairs, as any stranger. The confidence in others honesty, is no
light testimony of ones own integrity: therefore does God willingly favourit.
And for his regard, I see no household order, neither more worthily directed,
nor more constantly managed then his. Happy is that man, that has so
proportionably directed his estate, as his riches may discharge and supply the
same, without care or encombrance to himself; and that neither their
consultation or meetings may in any sort interrupt other affairs or disturb
other occupations, which he follows, more convenient, more quier, and better
agreeing with his heart. Therefore does ease and indigencie depend from every
man's own opinion; and wealth and riches no more then glory or health, have
either more pre-eminence or pleasure, then he who possesses them, lends
them. Every man is either well or ill, according as he finds himself. Not he
whom another thinks content, but he is content indeed, that thinks he is so
himself: And only in that, opinion gives it self essence and verity.
Fortune does us neither good nor ill: She only offereth-vs the seed and
matter of it, which our mind more powerful then she, turns and applies as
best it pleases: as the efficient cause and mistress of condition, whether
happy or unhappy. External accessions take both savor and color from the
internal constitution: As garments do notwarme-vs by their heat, but by ours,
which they are fit to cover, and nourish: he that with clothes should cover a
cold body, should draw the very same service from them by cold. So is snow and
ice kept in summmer. Verily as unto an idle and lazy body, study is but a
torment; abstinence from wine to a drunkard, is a vexation; frugalitie is a
hearts sorrow to the luxurious; and exercise molesteth an effeminate body: so
is it of all things else. Things are not of themselves so irksome, nor so hard,
but our baseness, and weakness makes them such. To judge of high land great
matters, a high and great mind is required; otherwise we atribute that vice
unto them, which indeed is ours. A straight oar being under water seems to
be crooked. It is no matter to see a thing, but the matter is how a man does
see the same. Well, of so many discourses, which diversely persuade men to
contemn death, and patiently to endure pain, why shall we not find some on
to make for our purpose; And of so several and many kinds of imagnations, that
have persuaded the same unto others why does not every man apply one unto
himself, that is most agreeing with his humor; If he cannot digest a strong
and abstersive drugge, for to remove his evil, let him at least take a
lenitive pill to ^ase the same. Opinio est quaedum effoeminata ac lev^s: nec in
dolor magis, quam Cic. Tuse. quest lib. 2.
eadem in voluptate: qua, quum liquescimus flu^m^sque mollitia, apis aculeum
five clamore far non possumus. Totum in eo est, vt tibi imperes. There is a
certain effeminate and light opinion, and that no more in sorrow, then it is
in pleasure, where by when we melt and run over in dainty tenderness, we
cannot abide to be stung of a Be, but must rore and cry out. This is the
total sum of all, that you be master of your self. Moreover, a man does
not escape from Philosophy, by making the sharpnes of pains, and humane
weakness to prevail so far beyond measure: for, she is compelled to cast
hirselfe over again unto these in vincible replication. If it be bad to live
in necessity, at least there is no necessity, to live innecessitie. No man is
long time ill, but by his own fault. He that has not the heart to endure
neither life nor death, and that will nither resist nor run away, what shall
a man do to him;

The one and fortieth Chapter.
That a man should not communicate his glory.

OF all the follies of the world, the most universal, and of most men received
is the care of reputation, and study of glory, to which we are so wedded,
that we neglect, and castoff riches, friends, repose, life and health (goods
effectual and substantial) to follow that vain image, and idlie-simple
voice, which has neither body, nor hold-fast.

Lafama, ch^inuaghisce a un dolce suon^ ^ass. G^^r. can. 14.

Glisuperbi mortali, and par si bella,
Evn echo, un sogno, anzid un sogn^ un o^bra,
Ch^dogn^ vent^ si dilegua and sg^mbra,
Fame that enveagl's high aspiring men
With her harmonious sound, and seems so fair,
An Echo is, a dream, dreams shadow rather
Which flies and fleetes as any wind does gather.
And of men's unreasonable humors, it seems, that the best philosophers do
most slowly, and more unwillingly clear themselves of this, then of another:
it is the most peevish the most froward, and the most opinative. Quia etiam
been proficientes animos tentare non cessat. Cic. pro. Arc. po.
Because it cease not to tempt even those Minds that profit best. There are
not many whereof reason does so evidently condemn vanity, but it is so deeply
rooted in us, as I wot not whether any man could ever clearly discharge
himself of it. When you have alleged all the reasons you can, and believed
all to disavowe and reject her, she produces contrary to your discourses, so
intestine inclination, that you have small hold against her. For (as Cicero
says,) Even those that oppugn her, will nevertheless have the books they
write against her, to bear their names upon their fronts, endevoring to make
themselves glorious by dispisi^g of glory. Al other things fall within the
compass of commerce: we lend our goods, we employ our lives, if our friends
stand in need of-vs: But seldom shall we see a man communicate his honor,
share his reputation, and imparte his glory unto others. Catulus Luctatius in
the wars against the Cymbres, having done the utmost of his endeavors to stay
his soldiers that fled before their enemies, put-himselfe amongst the
runne-awaies, and dissembled to be a coward, that so they might rather seem
to follow their Captain, then fly from the enemy: This was a neglecting and
leaving off his reputation, to conceal the shame and reproach of other. When
Charles the fifth passed into Provence, the year a thousand five hundred thirty
seven, some are of opnion, that Anthony de Leva, seeing the emperor his master
resolutely obstinate to undertake that voyage, and deeming it wonderfully
glorious, maintained nevertheless the contrary, and discouncelled him from-it,
to the end all the honor and glory of this counsel might be attributed unto
his Master; and that it might be said, his good advise and foresight to have
been such, that contrary to al men's opinions, he had achieved so glorious an
enterprise: Which was, to honor and magnify him at his own charges. The
Thracian Ambassadors comforting Achileonida the Mother of Brasidas, for the
death of her son, and highly extolling and commending him, said, he had not
left his equal behind him. She refused this private commendation, and
particular praise, assigne-it to the public state. Do not tell me that (quoth
she,) For I know the City of Sparta has many greater, and more valiant
Citizens then he was. At the battle of Creey, Edward the black Prince of
Wales, being yet very young, had the leading of the vant-gard: The greatest and
chief violence of the fight, was in his quarter: The Lords and Captains that
accompanied him, perceiving the great danger, sent unto King Edward the princes
father, to come and help them: which when he hard, he enquired what plight his
son was-in, and how he did, and hearing that he was living, and on
horseback; I should (quoth he) offer him great wrong to go now, and deprive
him of the honor of this combats, victory, which he already has so long
sustained; what danger soever there be in-it, it shall wholly be his: and would
neither go nor send unto him: knowing, that if he had gone, or sent, it would
have been said, that without his aid all had been lost, and that the
advantage of this exployt would have been ascribed unto him. Semper enim quod
postremum adiectum est, id rem totam videtur traxisse. For, ever more that
which was last added, seems to have drawn on the whole matter. In Rome many
thought, and it was commonly spoken, that the chiefest glorious deeds of
Scipio, were partly due unto Lalius, who notwithstanding did ever advance the
greatness, further the glory, and second the renown of Scipio, without any
respect of his own. And Theopompus King of Sparta, to one who told him that
the commonwealth should subsist and continue still, for so much as he could
command so well: No, said he, it is rather, because the people know so well how
to obey. As the women that succeeded in the Peere-domes of France, had
(notwithstanding their sex^) right to assist, and privilege to plead in cases
appertaining to the iuridictions, of Peers. So the Ecclesiastical Peers,
notwithstanding their profession and function, were bound to assist our Kings
in their wars, not only with her friends, servants, and tenants, but in
their own person. The Bishop of Beauvais, being with Philip Augustus in the
battle of Bovines, did very courageously take part with him in the effect; but
thought he should not be partaker of the fruit and glory of that bloody and
violent exercise. He overcame, and forced that day many of the enemies to
yield, whom he delivered unto the first gentleman he met withal, to rifle, to
take them prisoners, or at their pleasure to dispose of them. Which he also did
with William Earl of Salisbury, whom he delivered unto the Lord John of Neste,
with a semblable subtletie of conscience, unto this other. He desired to fell
and strike down a man, but not to wound or hurt him: and therefore never sought
but with a great clubbe. A man in my time being accused to the King, to have
laid violent hands upon a Priest, denied it very stoutly, for so much as he had
only thumped and trampled him with his feet.

The two and fortieth Chapter.
Of the inequality that is between us.

PLutarke says in some place, That he finds no such great difference between
beast and beast, as he finds diversity between man and man. He speaks of
the sufficiency of the mind, and of internal qualities. Verily I find
Epaminondas so far (taking him as I suppose him) from some that I know (I
mean capable of common sense) as I could find in my heart to endeare upon
Plutarke; and say there is more difference between such and such a man, than
there is diversity between such a man, and such a beast.

Hem vir viro quid praestat! T^r. Ph^r. act. 5. sc. 3.
O Sir, how much has one,
An other man out-gone?
And that there be so many degrees of spirits, as there are steps between
heaven and earth, and as innumerable. But concerning the estimation of men, it
is marvel, that except our selves, no one thing is esteemed but for i'ts
proper qualities. We commend a horse, because he is strong and nimble, I^^en.
sat. 8. 57


-- volucrem
Sic laudamus equum, facili cui plurima palma
Fervet, and exultat rauco victoria circo.
We praise the horse, that bears most belles with flying,
And triumphs most in races, hoarce with crying,
and not for his furniture: a graie-hound for his swiftness, not for his
choler: a hawke for her wing, not for her cranes or belles. Why do we not
likewise esteem a man for that which is his own? He has a goodly train of
men following him, a stately palace to dwell in, so great credit amongst men;
and so much rent coming in: Alas, all that is about him, and not in him. No
man will buy a pig in a poke. If you cheapen a horse, you will take his saddle
and clothes from him, you will see him bare and abroad: or if he be covered as
in old times they wont to present them unto Princes to be sold, it is only his
least necessary parts, lest you should ammuse your self to consider his
color, or breadth of his crupper; but chiefly to view his legs, his head,
his eyes, and his foot, which are the most remarkable parts, and above all to
be considered and required in him,

Regibus hic mos est, vbi equos mercantur, apertos Ho l. 1. sat ^. 86

Inspiciunt, ne si facies, vt saepe, decora
Molli ful^a pede est, emptorem inducat hiantem,
Quod pulchrae clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix.
This is Kings manner, when they horses buy,
They see them bare, lest if, as often we try,
Fair face have soft hoofes, gulled the buyer be,
They buttockes round, short head, high crest may see.
When you will esteem a man, why should you survey him all wrapped, and
envellopped? He then but shows us those parts, which are no whit his own:
and hides those from us, by which alone his worth is to be judged. It is the
goodness of the sword you seek after, and not the worth of the scabbard; for
which peradventure you would not give a farthing, if it want his lyning. A man
should be judged by himself, and not by his complements. And as an ancient
says very pleasantly: Do you know wherefore you esteem him tall. You account
the height of his pattens: The Base is no part of his stature: Measure him
without his stiltes. Let him lay aside his riches and external honors, and
show himself in his shirt. Has he a body proper to his functions, sound and
cheerful? What mind has he? Is it fair, capable and unpolluted, and
happily provided with all her necessary parts? Is she rich of her own, or of
others goods? Has fortune nothing of hirs to survay therein? If broade-waking
she will look upon a naked sword: If she care not which way her life goes
from her, whether by the mouth or by the throat; whether it be settled, equable,
and contented: It is that a man must see and consider, and thereby judge the
extreme differences that are between us: Is he

-- sapiens, sibique imperiosus,
Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vin^ula terrent, Li. 2. sat. 7. 83.

Responsare cupidinibus, contemnere honores
Fortis, and in s^ipso totus teres atque rotundus,
Externi ne quid valeat per l^ue morari,
In quem manca ruit semper fortuna? --
A wise man, of himself commander high,
Whom want, nor death, nor bands can terrify,
Resol^d t'affront desires, honors to skorne,
All in himself, close, round and neately-borne,
As nothing outward on his smooth can stay,
Against whom still fortune makes a lame assay.
Such a man is five hundred degrees beyond kingdoms and principalities:
Himself is a kingdom unto himself.

Sapiens polipse singit fortunam sibi. Plan. Tr^n. act. 2. scen. 2.
Trust me, who bears a wise man's name,
His fortune to himself may frame.
What is there else for him to wish for?

-- nonne videmus Lu^r. li. 2. 15.

Nil aliud sibi naturam latrare, nisi vt quoi
Corpore seiunctus dolor absit, mente fruatur,
Iucundo sensu cura se^otus metuque?
See we not nature nothing else does bark
Unto hir-selfe, but he, whose bodies bark
Is free from paines-touch, should his mind enjoy,
Remo'd from care and fear, with sense of joy?
Compare the vulgar troops of our men unto him, stupide, base, servile,
wavering, and continually floting on the tempestuous Ocean of diverse passions,
which toss and retosse the same, wholly depending of others: There is more
difference, then is between heaven and earth, and yet such is the blindness
of our custom, that we make little or no account of it. Whereas, if we
consider a Cottager and a King, a noble and a handy-crafts man, a magistrate
and a private man, a rich man and a poor; an extreme disparitie does
immediately present it self unto our eyes, which, as a man may say, differ in
nothing, but in their clothes. In Thrace. the King was after a pleasant manner
distinguished from his people, and which was much endeared: He had a religion
apart: a God several unto himself, whom his subjects might no ways adore: It
was Mercury: And he disdained their gods, which were Mars, Bacchus, and Diana;
yet are they but pictures, which make no essential dissemblance. For, as
enterludeplaiers, you shall now see them on the stage, play a King, an Emperor,
or a Duke, but they are no sooner off the stage, but they are base rascals,
vagabond abjects, and porterly hirelings, which is their natural and original
condition: Even so the Emperor, whose glorious pomp does so dazzle you in
public:

Scilicet and grandes viridi cum luc^ s^^aragdi Luer. li* 4. 117.

Auro includuntur, teriturque Thalassina vestis
Assidue, and Veneris sudorem exercita potat.
Great emerald's with their grasse-greene-light in gold
Are closed, nor long can marriage linen hold,
But worn with use and heat
of Venerie drink's the sweat.
View him behind the curtain, and you see but an ordinary man, and
peradventure more vile, and more seely, then the least of his subjects. Ille
beatus introrsum est; istius bracteata f^licit S^^. ^pi^^. 115.
as est. One is inwardly happy: an others f^licitie is plated and guilt-over.
Cowardice, irresolution, ambition, spite, anger, and envy, moove and work in
him as in another:

Non enim gazae, neque consularis H^. l. 2. ^^. 16. 9

Summou^t lictor, miseros tumltus
Mentis and curas laqueata circum
-- Tecta voluntas:
Nor treasures, nor Maires officers remoove
The miserable tumults of the mind,
Or cares that lie about, or fly above
Their high-roof't houses with huge beams combinde.
And fear, and care, and suspect, haunt and follow him, even in the midst of
his armed troops.

Reveraque met us hominum, curaeque sequaces, Lu^^. l. 2. 46.

Nec metuunt sonitus armorum, nec fera tela,
Audacterque inter reges, rerumque potentes
Versantur, neque fulgorem reverentur ab aur^.
Indeed men's still-attending cares and fear,
Nor armor's clashing, nor fierce weapons fear,
With Kings converse they boldly, and kings peers,
Fearing no lightning that from gold appeeres.
Does the ague, the megrim, or the gout spare him more then us? When age shall
once seize on his shoulders, can then the tall yeomen of his guarde discharge
him of it? When the terror of ruthles-balefull death shall assail him, can he
be comforted by the assistance of the gentlemen of his chamber? If he chance to
be jealous or capricious, will our lowtingcurtzies, or putting off of hattes,
bring him in tune again? His bedstead enchased all with gold and pearls has
no virtue to allay the pinching pangues of the cholike.

Nec calidae citius decedunt corpore febres, Id. ib. 34.

Tex^ilibus si in picturis ostroque rubenti
Iacteris, quam si plebeia in vest cubandum est.
Fevers no sooner from thy body fly
If thou on arras or red scarlet lie
Tossing, then if thou rest
On coverlets home-drest.
The flatterers of Alexander the great, made him believe, that he was the son
of Jupiter; but being one day sore-hurt, and seeing the blood gush out of his
wounds: And what think you of this? (Said he unto them) Is not this blood of a
lively red hew, and merely humane? Me thinks, it is not of that temper, which
Homer faineth to trill from the gods wounds. Hermodorus the Poet made certain
verses in honor of Antigonus, in which he called him the son of Phoebus; to
whom he replied; My friend, He that emptieth my close-stoole knows well,
there is no such matter. He is but a man at all assaies: And if of himself he
be a man ill borne, the Empire of the whole world cannot restore him.

-- puella Pers. sat. 2. 37.
Hunc rapiant, quicquid calcaverit, hic rosa fiat. Wenches must ravish him,
what ever he
Shall tread upon, eftsoons a rose must be.
What of that? If he be of a gross, stupide, and senseles mind:
voluptuousness and good fortune it self, are not perceived without vigor,
wit, and liveliness.

Haec peri^de sunt, vt illius animus qui ea possidet, Ter. Heaut. act. 1. sc^n.
2. 21.

Qui vti scit, ei bona, illi qui non vtitur recte, mala.
These things are such, as the possessors mind,
Good, if well used; if ill, them ill we find.
Whatsoever the goods of fortune are, a man must have a proper sense to favor
them: It is the enjoying, and not the possessing of them, that makes us happy.

Non domus and fundus, non aeris aceruus and a^ri,
Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febres, Ho^. 1. ^p. 2. 47

Non animo curas, valeat possessor oportet,
Qui comportatis rebus been cogitat vti.
Qui cupit, aut metuit, invat illum sic domus aut res,
Vt lippum pictae tabulae, fomenta podagram.
Not house and land, and heaps of coin and gold
Rid agues, which their sick Lords body hold,
Or cares from mind: th'owner must be in health,
That well does think to use his hoarded wealth.
Him that desires or fears, house, goods, delight,
As foments do the gout, pictures sore-sight.
He is a fool, his taste is wallowish and distracted, he enjoys it more,
then one that has a great cold, does the sweetness of Greek wine, or a
horse the riches of a costlyfaire furniture, wherewith he is trapped. Even as
Plato says, That health, beauty, strength, riches, and all things else he
calls good, are equally as ill to the unjust, as good to the just; and the
evil contrariwise. And then* where the body and the soul are in ill plight,
what need these external commodities? Seeing the least prick of a needle,
and passion of the mind is able to deprive us of the pleasure of the worlds
Monarchy. The first fit of an ague, or the first gu^rd that the gout gives
him, what availes his goodly titles of Majesty?

Totus and argento conflatus, totus and auro. All made of silver fine, Tibul.
1. El. 7. 71.

All gold pure from the mine.
does he not forthwith loose the remembrance of his palaces and states? If he
be angry or vexed, can his principality keep him from blushing, from growing
pale, from gnas^ing his teeth like a Bedlam? Now if it be a man of worth, and
well borne, his royalty, and his glorious titles will add but little unto his
good fortune.

Si ventri been, si lateri est pedibusque tuis, nil Hor. l. 1. ^p. 12. 5

Diviti^ poterunt regales addere ma^us.
If it be well with belly, feet, and sides,
A Kings estate no greater good provides.
He sees they are but illusions, and vain deceit^. He may happily be of King
Seleucus his advise: That he who fore-knew the weight of a scepter, should he
finde-it lying on the ground, he would not daine to take-it up. This he said,
by reason of the w^^ghtie, irksome and painful charges, that are incident
unto a good King. Truly, it is no small matter to govern others, since so
many cross^s and difficulties offer themselves, if we will govern our selves
well. Touching commanding of others, which in show seems to be so sweet,
considering the imbecilitie of man's judgment, and the difficulty of choice in
new and doubtful things. I am confidently of this opinion, that it is much
more easy and plausible to follow, then to guide: and that it is a great
settling of the mind, to be tied but to one beaten*path, and to answer but for
himself.

Vt satius multo iam sit, parere quietum, ^^^. li. 5. 11 37.

Quam regere imperio resv^lle. --
Much better it is, in quiet to obey,
Then to desire with Kings*power all to sway.
Seeing Ciru^ said, That it belongs not to a man to command, that is not of
more worth, then those whom he commands. But King Hieron in Xenophon adds
moreover, That in truelyenioying of carnal sensualities, they are of much
worse condition, then private men; forasmuch as ease and facility, depriveth
them of that sowre-swee^e tickling, which w^ find in them.

Pingu^s amor nimiumque potens, in toedia nobis Orid. am. li. 2. el. 19* 25.

Vertitur, and stomacho dulcis vt esca noc^t.
Fat over-powerfull love does loathsome grow,
As fulsome sweete-meates stomachs overthrow.
Think we, that high-minded men take great pleasure in music? The satietie
thereof makes it rather tedious unto them. Feasts, banquets, revels, dancings,
masks and turneys, rejoice them that but seldom see them, and that have much
desired to see them: the taste of which-becommeth cloysome and unpleasing to
those that daily see, and ordinarily have them: Nor do Ladies tickle those,
that at pleasure and without suspect may be glutted with them. He that cannot
stay till he be thirsty, can take no pleasure in drinking. Enterludes and
commedies rejoice and make us merry, but to players they are tedious and
tastelesse. Which to prove, we see, it is a delight for Princes, and a
recreation for them, sometimes to disguise themselves, and to take upon them a
base and popular kind of life.

Plerumque gratae principibus vices, Hor. li. 3. ^d 29. 13.

Mundaeque parvo sub lare pauperum
Coe^ae sine aulaeis and ostro,
Solicitam explicuere front ^m.
Princes do commonly like enterchange,
And cleanely meals where poore-men poorly house,
Without all tapistry or carpets strange,
Vnwrinkled have their care-knit, thought-bent brows.
Nothing does sooner breed a distaste or satietie, then plenty. What long-ing
lust would not beealaide, to see three hundred women at his dispose and
pleasure, as has the Grand Turk in his Seraille? And what a desire and show
of hawking had he reserved to himself from his ancestors, that never went
abroad without seven thousand falkners at least? Besides which, I think, the
luster of greatness, brings no small incommodities to the enjoying of sweeter
pleasures: they lie too open, and are too much in sight. And I wo^ not why a
man should longer desire them to conceal or hide their fault: For, what in us
is indis^retion, the people judges to be tyranny, contempt, and disdain of
the laws in them: And besides the ready inclination unto vice, it seems they
also add unto it the pleasure of gourmandizing, and to prostrate public
observances under their feet. Verily Plato in his Gorgias, defines him to be
a tyrant, that in a City has leave and power to do what ever he list. And
therefore often, the show and publication of their vice hurts more then the
sin in self. Every man fears to be spied and controlled; which they are
even in their countenances and thoughts: All the people esteeming to have right
and interest to judge of them. And we see that blemishes grow either lesser or
bigger, according to the eminence, and light of the place, where they are set,
and that a mole or a wart in ones forehead is more apparently perceived, then a
scarre in another place. And that is the reason why Poets feign Jupiters loves
to have been effected under other countenances, than his own; And of so many
amorous-shifts, and love practices, they impute to him, there is but one (as
far as* I remember) where he is to be seen in his greatness and majesty.
But return we to Hieron^* he also relates, how many incommodities he finds
in his royalty, being so barred, that he cannot at his liberty travel to go
whether he pleases, being as it were a prisoner within the limits of his
country; and that in all his actions he is encircled and hemd-in with an
importunate and tedious mult^tude. Truly, to see our Princes all alone,
sitting at their meat, beleagred-round with so many talkers, whisperers, and
gazing beholders, unknown what they are or whence they come, I have often
rather pitied then envied them. King Alphonsus was wont to say, that
burthen-bearing asses were in that; in far better condition than Kings; for,
their masters suffer them to feed at their ease, whereas Kings cannot obtain
that privilege of their servants. And it could never fall into my mind, that
it might be any special commodity to the life of a man of understanding, to
have a score of find-faults, pickethanks, and controlers about his
close-stoole, nor that the service of a man, that has a thousand pound rent a
year, or that has taken Casal, or defended Sienna, is more commodious or
acceptable to him, then that of a sufficient, and well-experienced groom*
Princelike advantages, are in a manner but imaginary preheminences. Every
degree of fortune, has some image of Principality. Caesar terms all the
Lords, which in his time had justice in France, to be Kinglets, or petie Kings.
And truly, except the name of Sire, we go very far with our Kings. Look
but in the Provinces remote and far from the court: As for example, in
Britanie, the attending train, the flocking subjects, the number of officers,
the many affairs, the diligent service, the obsequious ceremonies of a Lord,
that lives retired, and in his own house, brought up amongst his own
servants, tenants, and followers: And note also the high pitch of his
imaginations, and humors, there is no greater royalty can be seen: He
hears no more talk of his master, then of the Persian king, and happily but
once a year: And knows but some farre-fetcht, and old kindred or pedigree,
which his Secretary finds or keeps upon some ancient record or evidence.
Verily our laws are very free, and the burden of soveraigntie, does scarsly
concern a gentleman of France twice in his whole life. Essential and
effectual subjection amongst us does not respect any, but such as allure
themselves unto it, and that affect to honor, and love to enrich themselves by
such service: For he that can shroud and retire himself in his own home, and
can manage and direct his house without suits in law, or quarrel with his
neighbors, or domestical encombrances, is as free as the Duke of Venice.
Paucos servitus, plures Senec. epist. 2 2.
servitutem tenent. Service holds few, but many hold service. But above all
things Hieron seems to complain, that he perceives himself deprived of all
mutual friendship, reciprocal society, and familiar conversation, wherein
consists the most perfect and sweetest fruit of humane life. For, what
undoubted testimony of affection and good will, can I expect or exact from
him, that will-he, or nill he, owes me all he has, all he can? Can I make
account of his humble speech, of his low-lowting curtzie, or of his courteous
offers, since it lies not in his power to refuse them me? The honor we
receive of those which fear and stand in awe of us, is no true honor. Such
respects are rather due to royalty, to majesty, then to me.

-- maximum hoc regni bonum est, S^n Thyest. act. 2. scen. 1.

Quod facta domini cogitur populus sui
Quam far, tam laudare.
This is chief good of Princes dominations,
Subjects are forced their sov'raignes acts and fashions
To bear with patience, pass with commendations.
Do I not see, that both the badde and the good King are served alike? That
he who is hated, and he that is beloved are both courted alike? And the one as
much fawned upon as the other? My predecessor was served with the same
apparances, and waited upon with the like ceremonies, and so shall my successor
be. If my subjects offend me not, it is no testimony of any good affection.
Wherefore shall I take it in that sense, sithence they cannot, if they would?
No man follows me for any friendship that is between him and me: inasmuch as
no firm friendship can be contracted, where is so small relation, so slender
correspondencie, and such disparity. My high degree has excluded me from the
commerce of men. There is too great an inequality, and distant disproportion.
They follow for countenance, and of custom, or rather my fortune then my
self: hoping thereby to increase theirs. Whatsoever they say, all they do unto
me, is but a gloss, and but dissimulation, their liberty being every where
brideled, and checked by the great power I have over them. I see nothing about
me, but inscrutable hearts, hollow minds, fained looks, dissembled speeches,
and counterfeit actions. His Courtiers one day commended Julian the Emperor for
ministering of right, and doing of justice; I should easily grow proud (said he)
for these praises* if they came from such as durst either accuse or discommend
my contrary actions, should I commit any. All the true commodities that Princes
have, are common unto them with men of mean fortune. It is for Gods to mount
winged horses, and to feed on Ambrosia. They have no other sleep, nor no other
appetite then ours. Their steel is of no better temper, then that wherewith we
arm our selves. Their crown, their diadem can neither hide them from the
Sun, or shelter them from the rain. Dioclesian that wore one so much
reverenced, and so fortunate, did voluntarily resign the same, to withdraw
himself unto the pleasure of a private life; but a while after, the urgent
necessity of public affairs requiring his presence, and that he should
return to reassume his charge again, he answered those that solicited him
unto it; you would never undertake to persuade me to that, had you but seen
the goodly ranks of trees, which myself have planted in mine Orchard, or the
fair muske-melo^s, I have set in my garden. According to Anacharsis his
opinion, The happiest estate of a well-ordered common wealth should be, where
all other things being equally common, precedencie should be measured, and
preferments suited according to virtue and desert, and the contrary according
to vice. At what time King Pirrhus undertook to pass into Italy, Cyneas his
wise and trusty counselor, going about to make him perceive the vanity of
his ambition, one day bespake him thus. My good sir, (said he) To what end do
you prepare for so great an enterprise? He answered suddenly, To make my self
lord of Italic. That done, what will you do then? (replied Cyneas) I will then
pass (said Pirrhus) into Gaul, and then into Spain: And what afterward? I
will then invade Affrike, and subdue the same, and at last, when I shall have
brought all the world under my subjection, I will then take my rest, and live
contented at mine ease. Now, for Gods sake Sir, (replied Cynoas) Tell me, what
hinders you, that you be not now, if so you please, in that estate? Wherefore
do you not now place your self, where you mean to aspire, and save so much
danger, so many hazards, and so great troubles as you enterpose between both?

Nimirum quia non been norat quae esset habendi Lucr. lib. 5. 14. 43.

Finis, and omnino quoad crescat vera voluptas
The cause forsooth, he knew not what should be the end
Of having, nor how far true pleasure should extend.
I will conclude and shut up this treatise with an ancient verse, which I
singularly applaud, and deem fit to this purpose.

Mores cuique sui fingunt fortunam. Cic. Parad. 5. cor. Nep.
Every man's manners and his mind,
His fortune to him frame and find.
The three and fortieth Chapter.
Of sumptuarie Laws, or Laws for moderating of expenses.

THE manner wherewith our Laws assay to moderate the foolish and vain expenses
of table-cheare and apparel, seems contrary to it is end. The best course
were to beget in men a contempt of gold and silk-wearing, as of vain and
unprofitable things, whereas we increase their credit and price: A most
indirect course to withdraw men from them. As for example, to let none but
Princes eat dainties, or wear velvets, and clothes of Tissew, and interdict
the people to do-it, what is-it but to give reputation unto those things, and
to increase their longing to use them? Let Kings boldly quit those badges of
honor; They have many other besides: Such excess is more excusable in other
men, then in Princes. We may, by the examples of diverse Nations, learn sundry
better fashions to distinguish our selves and our degrees (which truly I
esteem requisite in an estate,) without nourishing to that purpose, this so
manifest corruption and apparent inconvenience. It is strange how custom in
these indifferent things does easily encroch and suddenly establish the
footing of her authority. We had scarce worn cloth one whole year at the
Court, what time we mourned for our King Henry the second, but certainly in
every man's opinion, all manner of silks were already become so vile and
abject, that was any man seen to wear them, he was presently judged to be
some country fellow, or mechanical man. They were left only for Chyrurgians
and Physicians. And albeit most men were apparreled a-like, yet were there
other sufficient apparent distinctions of men's qualities. How soon do plain
chamoy-jerkins, and greasy canvase doublets creep into fashion and credit
amongst our soldiers, if they lie in the field? And the garishnesse,
neatness, and riches of silken garments grow in contempt and scorn? Let Kings
first begin to leave these superfluous expenses, we shall all follow; and
within a month, without edicts, ordinances, proclamations, and acts of
Parliament, it will be observed as a law. The statutes should speak contrary,
as thus. That no man or woman, of what quality soever, shall, upon pain of
great forfeitures, wear any manner of silk, of skarlet, or any goldsmiths
work, except only Enterlude-players, Harlots, and Curtizans- With such an
invention did Zaleucus whilome correct the corrupted manners of the Locrines.
His ordinances were such Be it enacted that ^o woman of free condition shall
have any more then one maidservant to follow her when she goes abroad, except
when she shall be drunken: And further, that she may not go out of the City
by night, nor wear any jewels of gold, or precious stones about her, nor any
gown beset with goldsmiths work, or imbroiderie, except she be a
publike-professed whore: and moreover, that except panders and bawdes, it shall
not be lawful for any man to wear any gold-rings on his fingers, nor any rich
garments, as are such of cloth made in the City of Miletum. So did he by these
reproachful exceptions ingeniously drive his Citizens from vain superfluities,
and pernicious dainties. It was a most profitable course, by honor and ambition
to allure men unto their duty and obedience. Our Kings have the power to
address all these external reformations. Their inclination serves them as a
law. Quicquid Principes faciunt, praecipere videntur. Whatsoever Princes do,
that, they seem to command. The rest of France takes the model of the court,
as a rule unto it self to follow. Let Courtiers first begin to leave-off and
loath these filthy and apish breeches, that so openly show our secret parts;
the bumbasting of long pease-cod-bellied doublets, which makes us seem so far
from what we are, and which are so combersome to arm: These long, effeminate,
and daugling locks: That fond custom to kiss what we present to others, and
Besolas manos in saluting of our friends: (a ceremony heretofore only due
unto Princes;) And for a gentleman to come to any place of respect, without his
rapier by his side, all unbraced, all untrust, as if he came from his
close-stoole: And that, against our forefathers manner, and the particular
liberty of our French nobility, we should stand bare-headed, aloofe-off from
them, wheresoever they be, and as about them, about many others: So many
petty-kings, and petty-petty-kinglets have we now adays: And so of others like
newfangled and vicious introductions: They shall soon be seen to vanish and
be left. Although but superficial faults, yet are they of evil presages. And
we are warned, that the foundation or maine summers of our houses fail and
shrink, when we see the quarters bend, or walls to break. Plato in his Laws,
thinks there is no worse plague, or more pernicious in his City, then to
suffer youth, to have the reins of liberty in her own hand, to change in
their attires, in their gestures, dances, exercises, and songs, from one form
to an other: And to remove their judgment, now to this, now to that place;
following newfangled devises, and regarding their inventors: By which, old
customs are corrupted, and ancient institutions despised. In all things,
except the wicked, mutation is to be feared; yea, even the alteration of
seasons, of winds, of livings, and of humors. And no laws are in perfect
credit, but those to which God has given some ancient continuance: So that no
man know their offspring, nor that ever they were other then they are.

The four and fortieth Chapter.
Of Sleeping.

REason does appoint-vs ever to walk in one path, but not always to keep one
place: And that a wiseman should not permit humane passions to stray from the
right carrier; he may (without prejudice unto his duty) also leave-it unto
them either to hasten or to slow his pace, and not place himself as an
immovable and impassible Colossus. Were virtue herself corporeal and
incarnate, I think her pulse would beat and work stronger, marching to an
assault, then going to dinner: For, it is necessary that she heat and move
herself. I have therefore mark't-it as a rare thing; to see great personages
sometimes, even in their weightiest enterprises, and most important affairs,
hold themselves so resolutelyassured in their state, that they do not so much
as break their sleep for them. Alexander the great, on the day appointed for
that furious-bloodie battle against Darius, slept so soundly and so long that
morning, that Parmenion was feign to enter his chamber, and approaching near
unto his bed, twice or thrice to call him by his name, to awaken him, the hour
of the battle being at hand, and urging him. Otho the Emperor having
determined to kill himself, the very same night, after he had given order for
his domestical affairs, shared his money amongst his servans, and whetted the
edge of a sword, wherewith he intended to wound himself, expecting no other
thing, but to know whether all his friends were gone to rest, fell into so
sound a sleep, that the grooms of his chamber heard him snort in another
room. This Emperors death has many parts semblable unto that of great Cato,
and namely this: For, Cato being prepared to defeat himself, whilst he
expected to hear news, whether the Senators, whom he caused to retire, were
lanched out from the haven of Vtica, fell so fast asleep, that he was heard to
snort into the next chamber: And he whom he had sent toward the port, having
awaked him, to tell him, the storm was so rough, that the Senators could not
conveniently put out to sea, he sent another, and lying down a new, fell
asleep again, until the last messenger assured him, they were gone. We may
also compare him unto Alexander, in that great and dangerous storm, which
threatened him, by the sedition of Metellus the Tribune, who labored to publish
the decree of Pompeys re-appeal into the City, together with his army, at
what time the commotion of Catiline was on foot: against which decree only
Cato did insist, and to that purpose had Metellus and he had many injurious
speeches, and menaced one another in the Senate House: And it was the next day,
they were like to come to the execution in the marketplace, where Metellus,
besides the favor of the common people, and of Caesar then conspiring and
complotting for the advancement of Pompey, should come, accompanied with a
multitude of strange and fortaine slaves and fencers, to do their utmost: And
Cato strengthened with his only constancy, and with an vnmated resolve: So
that his kinsmen, his familiars, and many honest men took great care, and were
in heavy anxietie and pensiveness for him: of which many never left him all
night, but sat up together, without rest, eating, or drinking, by reason of
the danger they saw prepared for him; yea, his wife and sisters did naught but
weep and wail, and for his sake torment themselves in their house, whereas
contrariwise he alone comforted every body, and blamed them, for their
demissenesse: And after he had supped, (as he was wont) he went quietly to his
bed, and slept very soundly until the next morning, that one of his
copartners in the Tribune-ship, came to call him, to go to the skirmish. The
knowledge we have of this man's vnmated-haughtie heart, by therest of his life;
may make us judge with all security, that it only proceeded from a spirit, so
far elevated above such accidents, that he dained not so much as to trouble his
mind with them, no more then with ordinary chances. In the sea fight, which
Augustus gained against Sextus Pompeius in Sicilie, even at the instant he
should go to fight, was surprised with so heavy a sleep, that his friends were
compelled to awaken-him, to give the signal of the battle; which afterward
gave occasion unto Marcus Antonius, to charge him with this imputation, that he
had not dared with open eyes to survay the marshalling of his army, and that
his heart would not suffice him, to present himself unto his soldiers, until
such time that Agrippa brought him news of the victory he had obtained of his
enemies. But concerning young Marius, who committed a greater error (for on the
day of his last battle against Sylla, after he had marshalled his army, and
given the word or signal of the battle) he lay down in the shadow under a
tree, a while to rest himself, and fell so fast asleep, that he could hardly
be awaked with the rout and flight of his men, having seen no part of the
fight, they say, it was because he was so exceedingly aggravated with travel,
and over-tired with weariness, and want of sleep, that nature was overcome,
and could no longer endure. And touching this point, Physicians may consider;
whether sleep be so necessary, that our life must needs depend of-it: For we
find that Perseus King of Macedon, prisoner at Rome, being kept from sleep, was
made to die; but Pliny aleadgeth, that some have lived a long time without any
sleep at all. And Herodotus reports, There are Nations, where men sleep and
wake by half years. And those that write the life of Epimenides the wise,
affirm, that he slept the continual space of seven and fifty years.

The five and fortieth Chapter.
Of the battle of Dreux.

THere happened diverse rare accidents, and remarkable chances in our battle of
Dreux: but those who do not greatly favor the reputation of the Duke of Guise,
do boldly aledge, that he cannot be excused, to have made a stand, and
temporised with the forces he commanded, whilst the Lord Constable of France,
General of the Army, was engaged and suppressed with the enemies Artillery,
and that it had been better for him, to hazard himself, to charge the enemy
flankwise, then by expecting any advantage, to have him come behind him, to
suffer so reproachful an overthrow, and so shameful a loss. But omitting what
the event thereof witnessed, he that shall without passion debate the matter,
shall easily (in my conceit) confess, that the aim and drift, not only of a
Captain, but of every particular Soldier, ought chiefly to respect a victory
in great: And that no particular occurrences, of what consequence soever, or
what interest may depend on them, should never divert-him from that point.
Philopoemen in an encounter with Machanidas, having sent before, a strong
troop of Archers, and good mark men, to begin the skirmish: and the enemy,
after he had put them to route and dis-ranked them, ammusing himself in mainly
pursuing them, and following the victory along the maine battle, where
Philopoemen was, although his soldiers were much moved and offended to see
their fellows put to the worst, he could not be induced to bouge from his
place, nor make head against his enemy, to succor his men; but rather, having
suffered them to be defeated, and cut in pieces before his face, began then to
charge his enemies in the battalion of their Infanterie, when he perceived them
forsaken of their horsemen: And albeit they were Lacedaemonians, forasmuch as he
charged them, at what time (supposing to have gained the day) they began to
disorder themselves, he easily overcame them; which done, he pursued
Machanidas. This case, is cousin-german unto that of the Duke of Guise. In that
sharpe-bloodie battle of Agesilaus against the Boeotians, which Xenophon (who
was there present) says, To have been the whottest and rudest, that ever he
had seen: Agesilaus refused the advantage, which fortune presented him, to let
the battalion of the Boeotians pass, and to charge them behind, what certain
victory soever he saw likely to follow the same, esteeming that it were rather
skill then valor, and to show his prowess, and matchlesse-haughtie courage,
chose rather to charge them in the front of their forces: But what followed? He
was well beaten, and himself sore-hurt, and in the end compelled to leave his
enterprise, and embrace the resolution, which in the beginning he had refused,
causing his men to open themselves, to give passage unto that torrent of the
Boeotians; who when they were pastthrough, perceiving them to march in disaray,
as they who persuaded themselves to be out of all danger, he pursued them, and
charged them flank-wise. All which notwithstanding, he could never put to
route, or force them runaway, for they, orderly, and fair and softly made
their retreit, ever showing their face, until such time as they got safely
into their houlds and trenches.

The six and fortieth Chapter.
Of Names.

WHat diversity soever there-be in herbs, all are shuffled-vp together under
the name of a sallade. Even so, upon the consideration of names, I will here
huddlevpa gallymafrie of diverse articles. Every several nation has some
names, which, I wot not how are sometimes taken in ill part, as with us Jack,
Hodge, Tom, Will, Bat, Benet, and so forth. Item, it seems that in the
genealogies of Princes, there are certain names fatally affected; as Ptolomeus
with the Egyptians, Henry's in England, Charles in France, Baldwins in
Flanders, and Williams in our ancient Aqustanie, whence some say came the name
of Gui^nne; which is but a cold invention: As if in Plato himself there were
not some as harsh and ill-founding. Item, it is an idle matter, yet
nevertheless, by reason of the strangeness, worthy the memory, and recorded
by an oculare witness, that Henry Duke of Normandy son to Henry the
second King of England, making a great feast in France, the assembly of the
Nobility was so great, that for pastimes sake, being, by the resemblance of
their names, divided into several companies: in the first were found a hundred
and ten Kinghts sitting at one table, and all called Williams; besides private
Gentlemen and servants. It is as pleasant to distribute the tables by the names
of the assistants, as it was unto Geta the Emperor, who would have all his
messes or dishes served-in at his table orderly according to the first letters
of their names; As for example, those that began with P. as pig, pie, pike,
puddings, pouts, porke, pancakes, etc. were all served in together; and so of
all the rest. Item, it is a common saying, That it is good to have a good name:
As much to say, good credit, or good reputation. Yet verily it is very
commodious to have a well-sounding and smooth name, and which is easy to be
pronounced, and facile to be remembered: For, Kings, Princes, Lords, and
Magistrates know and remember us the better by them, and will not so soon
forget-vs. Mark but of those that serve and follow-vs, whether we do not more
ordinarily command, and sooner employ such, whose names come readier to our
tongue, or memory. I have seen our King Henry the second, who could never ^
it on the right name of a Gentleman of Gascoigne; and did ever call a Lady
waiting on the Queen, by the general surname of her house, because that of
her father was so harsh, and hard to be remembered. And Socrates says, It ought
to be a fathers special care, to give his children good and easie-sounding
names. Item, it is reported, that the foundation of our Lady the great at
Poitiers had this beginning; A licentious young man having his dwelling house
where the Church now stands, had one night gotten a wench to lie with him,
who so soon as she came to bed, he demanded her name, who answered, Marie:
The young man hearing that name, was suddenly so stricken with a motive of
religion, and an awefull respect unto that sacred name, of the virgin Marie,
the blessed mother of our Savior and Redeemer, that he did not only presently
put her away from him, but reformed all the remainder of his succeeding life:
And that in consideration of this miracle, there was first erected a Chapel
in the place where this young man's house stood, consecrated unto that holy name,
and afterward the fair great church, which yet continues. This vocale and
auricular correction, and so full of devotion, struck right unto his soul.
This other following, of the same kind, insinuated itself by the corporal
senses. Pythagoras being in company with two young men, whom he heard complot
and consult (being somewhat heated with feasting and drinking) to go and ravish
a chast-house, commanded immediately the minstrels to change their tune; and so
by a solemn, grave, severe, and spondaicall kind of music, did sweetly
inchaunt allay, and in-trance their rashviolent* and lawless lust. Item, shall
nor succeeding posterity say, that our modern reformation has been exact and
delicate, to have not only oppugned and resisted errors and vices, and filled
the world with devotion, humility, obedience, peace, and every other kind of
virtue, but even to have combated their ancient names of baptism, Charles,
Lewis, Francis, to people the world with Methusalem, Ezechiel, Malachie, much
better feeling of a lively faith? A Gentleman my neighbor, esteeming the
commodities of ancient times in regard of our days, forgot not to aledge the
fierceness and magnificence of the names of the Nobility of those times, as
Don Grumedan* Quedragan, and Agesilan: And that, but to hear them sounded, a
man might easily perceive; they had been other manner of men; then Peter,
Gui^^o^, or Michell. Item; I commend and am much beholding to James Amiot; in
the course of a French oration of his to have still kept the full ancient Latin
names, without disguising or changing them, to give them a new-French cadence.
At the first they seemed somewhat harsh unto the Reader; but now, by reason of
the credit, which his Plutarke has deservedly gotten amongst-vs, custom has
removed all strangeness from-vs. I have often wished that those who write
histories in Latin, would leave-vs our names whole, and such as they are: For,
altering Va^demont, to Vallemontanus, and metamorphosing them, by suring them
to the Grecian or Latin tongue, we know not what to make of them, and are
often at a nonplus. To conclude my discourse; It is an ill custom, and of
exceeding bad consequence in our country of France, to call every man by the
name of his Town, Manor, Hamlet, or Lordship, as the thing that does most
confound houses, and bring sur-names out of knowledge. A cadet or
yonger-brother of a good house, having had for his appanage a Lordship, by
whose name he has been known and honored, cannot well forsake and leave the
same ten years after his death; His Lord-ship comes unto a stranger, who
does the like: Guess then where we are, and how we shall do to come to the
perfect knowledge of these men. We need not go far for other examples, but
look into our Royal house, where so many partages, so many sur-names, and so
many several titles have so encumbred-vs, that the original of the stock is
utterly lost. There is so much liberty in these mutations, that even in my
time, I have seen no man nor woman advanced by fortune unto some extraordinary
preferment, that has not immediately had adjoined unto him or her Genealogicall
titles, new and unknown to their fathers, and that has not been engraffed
into some noble stock or family. And as good luck serves, the basest
vpstart, and most obscure houses are most apt unto adulteration, and
falsification. How many private Gentlemen have ^e in France, which according to
their account, and blazoning of their gentry, are of the royal blood or race?
I believe more then others. Was it not prettily said, and with a good grace, by
one of my friends? There was a great company bandied together about a quarrel
which a Gentleman had with another, who in very truth had some prerogative of
titles, honors, and alliances above the common sort of Nobility; upon which
word of his prerogative, every one seeking to equal himself unto him,
alleged, some one of spring, some another, some the resemblance of his name,
some of his arms, othersome an old far-fetcht pedigree, and the meanest of
them to be the great grandchild of some King beyond the Seas. When they came
all to dinner, this man whom hitherto they had all followed, in liew of taking
his wonted place, making low-lowting reverences, went to the lowest end of the
board, entreating the company to hold him excused, that through
rash-vnadvisednesse he had hitherto lived with them companion-like, but now
being lately informed of their right qualities, he began to know them according
to their ancient degrees, and that it did not duly belong unto him to sit above
so many Princes. And after he had acted his play, he began to rail upon them
with a thousand injuries; saying thus unto them. For the love of God content
your selves, with what your forefathers have been contented, and with the state
whereto God has called-vs: we have sufficient if we can maintain it well,
let-vs not disparage the fortune and condition of our predecessors; and
reject-we these fond imaginations, which can not fail any man, whatsoever he
be, that is so impudent as to allege them. Crests, Arms, and Coats have no
more certainty then surnames. I bear Azure seem of trefoiles, a Lions Paw in
faece, Or, armed Gules. What privilege has this Coat, that it should for
ever continue particularly to my house? A son in law will transfer the same
into an other family: Some silly-vpstart purchaser of Arms will make it his
chief coat. There is nothing wherein meet so many alterations, and so much
confusion.

But this consideration draws me perforce unto an other field. Let us
somewhat narrowly search-into, and for Gods sake consider, on what foundation
we ground this glory and reputation, for which the world is turned
topsie-turvie. On what do we establish this transitory renown, which with so
great mind-possessing toil, and industry we seek and gape-after? In fine, it
is Peter or William, that bears the same (marke-it well Reader) and to whom
it belongs. Is not hope a courageous faculty, which in a mortal subject,
and in a moment, seeks to vsurp infinite, and immensitie, and to replenish his
masters indigence with the possession of al things he can imagine or desire,
before it would? Nature has given us a pleasant joy to play withal in that.
Is it Peter or William. And what is that but a word for all mouths? or three or
four dashes of a pen, first, so easy to be varied, as I would willingly ask
those, whom the honor of so many victories concerns, or whether Guesquin, or
Glesquin, or Gueaquin? yet were there more appearance here, then in Lucian that.
did sue T. for,

-- non levia aut ludicra petuntur Virg. Ae^. lib. 12. ^64.
Pr^mia: No light prize, no reward in jest
Is hunted after as the best.
The wager goes deep: The question is, which letter must be paid with so
many sieges, battles, hurts, emprisonments, and services done unto the Crown
of France by her ever-renowmed Constable. Nicholas Denis^t has had no care but
of the letters of his name, and has changed all the contexture of them,
there-out to frame the Earl of Alsinois, whom he has honored and presented
with the glory of his Poesy and Painting. And Su^tonius the Historian has
loved but the sense of his own, and having taken away Lenis, which was his
fathers surname, has left Tranquillus successor of his compositions
reputation. Who would believe, Captain Bayard has no honor, but that which he
has borrowed from the acts of Peter Terraill? And that Antonio Escalin (even
before his eyes) suffered Captain P^^lin, and the Baron of La Guard* to steal
so many Navigations, voyages, and attempts, both by sea and land from him?
Secondarily, they are dashes, and tricks of the pen, common unto a thousand
men. How many are there in all races or families both of one name and surname?
And how many in diverse families, races, ages, and countries? History has
known three Socrates, five Platoes, eight Aristotle's, seven Xenophons, twenty
Demetrius, twenty Theodores: besides which, imagine how many came not to her
knowledge. Who lets my horse boy to call himself Pompey the Great? But
after all, what means, what devises, are there that annex unto my horse keeper
deceased, or to that other who had his head cut off in Egypt, or that join
unto them this glorified, and far-renowmed word, and these pendashes, so much
honored, that they may thereby advantage themselves?

Id cinerem and manes credis curare sepult^s? Lib. 4. 3^.
Think you, ghost's buried, ashes dead,
Care much how we alive are sped?
What feeling motion of revenge have the two companions in chief valor amongst
men; Epaminondas of that glorious verse, which so many ages since is so common
in our mouths for him?

Consilijs nostris laus est a^trita Laco^um. C^^. Tus^. q^. ^^. 5.
By our complots the haught-renowne.
Of Spartan Gallants was brought down.
And Affrican^^ of that other:

A sole exoriente, supra Ma^tis paludes Ibid.

Nemo est, qui factis me ^q^iparare qu^at?
From Sunrise to the Scythian-lake, of fame
None in exploits can equalize my name.
Those that survive are tickled with the pleasure of these words, and by them
solicited with jelousie and desire, do presently without consideration
transmit by fantasy this their proper motion of revenge unto the deceased; and
with a fond-deceiving hope persuade themselves, when their turn comes to be
capable of-it. God he knowes-it, nevertheless,

-- adhaec se Iuven sat. 10. 137.

Romanus Graiusque and Barbarus Induperator
Erexit, causas discriminis atque labori^
Inde habuit, tanto mayor fame sitis est, quam
Virtutis.
Heerto himself the Roman General,
The Grecian, the Barbarian, roused and raised*
He^re hence drew cause of perils, travailes all:
So more, then to be good, thirst to be praised.
The seven and fortieth Chapter.
Of the vncertainti^ of our judgment.

IT is even as, that verse says,

(...) Of words on either side,
A large doale they divide.
There is law sufficient to speak every where, both pro and contra; As for
example:

Vinse Hannibal, and non seppe vsar'poi Pet. Par. 1. son. 86. 1.

Ben la vitt^riosa sua ventura.
Hanniball conquered, but he knew not after
To use well his victorious good fortune.
He that shall take this part, and with our men go about, to make that
oversight prevail, that we did not lately pursue our fortune at Montcontour:
Or he that shall accuse the King of Spain, who could not use the advantage he
had against-vs at Saint Quintin, may say this fault to have proceeded from a
mind drunken with his good fortune, and from a courage ful-gorged with the
beginning of good luck; loses the taste how to encrease-it, being already
hindered from digesting what he has conceived of-it: He has his hands full,
and can not take hold any more: Unworthy that ever fortune should cast so
great a good into his lap: For, what profit has he of-^t, if notwithstanding,
he give his enemy leisure and means to recover himself? What hope may one
have, that he will once more adventure to charge these re-enforced and
reunited forces, and new armed with despite and vengeance, that durst-not, or
knew-not how to pursue them being dismayed and put to rout?

Dum fortuna calet, dum conficit omnia terror. Lu^an. l. 7. 734.
While fortune is at height in heat,
And terror works all by great.
But to conclude, what can he expect better, then what he has lately lost? It
is not, as at Fence, where the number of venies given, gets the victory: So
long as the enemy is on foot, a man is newly to begin. It is no victory,
except it end the war. In that conflict where Caesar had the worse, near ^he
City of Oricum, he reprochfully said unto Pompeis Soldiers, That he had
utterly been overthrown, had their Captain known how to conquer: and paid
him home after another fashion when it came to his turn. But why may not a man
also hold the contrary? That ^t is the effect of an insatiate and
rash-headlong mind, not to know how to limit or periode his covetousness:
That it is an abusing of Gods favors, to go about to make them loose the
measure he has prescribed them, and that anew to cast himself into danger
after the victory, is once ^ore to remit the same unto the mercy of fortune:
That one of the chiefest policies in military profession, is, not to drive his
enemy unto despair. Sill^ and Marius in the sociall war, having discomfited
the Marsians, seeing one squadron of them yet on foot, which through despair,
like furious beasts were desperately coming upon them, could not be induced to
stay or make head against them. If the fervor of Monsieur de Foix had not
drewne-him over rashly and moodily to pursue the straglers of the victory at
Rave^na, he had not blemished the same with his untimely death; yet did the
fresh-bleeding memory of his example serve to preserve the Lord of A^gusen from
the like inconvenience, at Serisoles. It is dangerous to assail a man, whom
you have bereaved of all other means to escape or shift for himself, but by
his weapons: for, necessity is a violent school-mistris, and which teaches
strange lessons: Gravissimi sunt m^rsu^ irritatae necessicatis. No biting so
grievous, as that of necessity provoked and enraged.

Vincuur haud gratis ingula qui prov^^at host^m. Lu^^n. l. 4. 278.
For naught you overcome him not,
Who bids his foe come cut his throat.
And that is the reason, why (...) empeached the King of Lacedemo^ who came
from gaining of a victory against the Mantinaeans, from going to charge a
thousand Argians, that were escaped whole from the discom^ture; but rather to
let them pass with all liberty, lest he should come to make trial of provoked
and despited virtue, through and by ill fortune. Clodomire king of Aquitaine,
after his victory, pursuing Gondemar king of B^rgundie, vanquished and running
away, forced him to make a stand, and make head again, but his unadvised
wilfulness deprived him of the fruit of the victory, for he dyed in the
action. Likewise he that should choose, whether it were best to keep his
soldiers richly and sumptuously armed, or only for necessity, should seem to
yield in favor of the first, whereof was Sertorious, Philopoemen. Brutus,
Caesar, and others, urging that it is ever a spur to ^^^^^ and glory, for a
soldier to see himself gorgiously attired, and richly armed, and an occasion
to yield himself more obstinate to sight, having the care to save his arms,
as his goods and inheritance. A reason (says Xenophon) why the Asiatikes
carried with them, when they went to wars their wives and Concubines, with
all their jewels and chiefest wealth. And might also incline to the other side,
which is, that a man should rather remoove from his soldier, all care to
preserve himself, than to encrease-it unto him* for, by that means he shall
doubly fear to hazard or engage himself, seeing these rich spoils do rather
increase an earnest desire of victory in the enemy: and it has been
observed, that the said respect has sometimes wonderfully encouraged the
Romans against the Samnites. Antiochus showing the Army, he prepared against
them, gorgeously accountred with all pomp and stateliness, unto Hanniball,
and demanding of him, whether the Romans would be contented with-it: yea
verily, answered the other, they will be very well pleased with-it: They must
needs be so, were they never so covetous. Licurgus forbad his Soldiers, not
only all manner of sumptuousness, in their equipage, but also to uncase or
strip their enemies, when they overcame them, willing, as he said, that
frugalitie and poverty should shine with the rest of the battle. Both at
sieges, and elsewhere, where occasion brings us near the enemy, we freely
give our soldiers liberty, to brave, to disdain, and injury him with all
manner of reproaches: And not without appearance of reason; for, it is no small
matter, to take from them all hope of grace and composition, in presenting unto
them, that there is no way left to expect-it, from-him, whom they have so
egregiously outraged, and that there is no remedy left but from victory. Yet
had Vitelluis but bad success in that; for, having to deal with Otho, weaker
in his Soldiers valor, and oflong disaccustomed from war, and effeminated
through the delights and pleasures of the City, himself in the end set them
so on fire with his reproachsull and injurious words, vpbrayding them with
their pusilanimitie and faint-hartednesse, and with the regret of their Ladies,
banquettings and sensualities, which they had left at Rome, that he put them
into heart again, which no persuasions or other means could do before; and
thereby drew them, whom naught could have driven, to fight, and fall upon him.
And verily, when they are injuries that touch a man to the quick, they shall
easily urge him, who was very backward to fight for his Kings quarrel, to be
very forward in his own cause or interest. If a man but consider of what
consequence the preservation, and importance, the safety of a general is in
an Army, and how the enemies chiefest aim, is at the fairest mark, which is
the head, from which all other depend, it seems that that counsel can not be
doubted of, which by sundry great Chieftaines we have seen put in practice,
which is, in the beginning of the fight, or in the fury of the battle, to
disguise themselves. Notwithstanding the inconvenience a man may by this means
incur, is no less then that mischief, which a man seeks to avoid: For the
Captain being unseen and unknown of his Soldiers, the courage they take by
his example, and the heart they keep by his presence, is therewithal empaired
and diminished; and loosing the known ensigns, and accustomed marks of their
Leader, they either deem him dead, or dispairing of any good success, to be
fled. And touching experience, we sometimes see-it to favor the one, and
sometimes the other party. The accident of Pirrhus in the battle he had
against the Consul Levinus in Italy, serves us for both uses: For, by
concealing himself under the arms of Demogacles, and arming him with his
own, indeed he saved his life, but was in great danger to fall into the other
mischief, and loose the day. Alexander, Caesar, Lueullus, loved (at what time
they were to enter fight) to arm and attire themselves with the richest arms,
and garish clothes they had, and of particular bright-shining colors. Agis,
Agesilaus, and that great G^lippus, contrary, would ever go to wars meanly
accou^red, and without any imperial ornament. Among other reproaches, that
Pompey is charged withal in the battle of Pharsalia, this is one special,
that he idly lingered with his Army, expecting what his enemy would attempt;
forasmuch as that (I will hear borrow the very words of Plutarke, which are
of more consequence then mine) weakneth the violence, that running gives the
first blows, and therewithal remooveth the charging of the Combattants one
against another, which more, then any other thing is wont to fill them with
fury and impetuositie, when with vehemence they come to enter-shocke one
another, augmenting their courage by the cry and running; and in a manner
alayeth and quaileth the heat of the Soldiers: Loe-here what he says
concerning this. But had Caesar lost, who might not also have said, that
contrariwise the strongest and firmest situation, is that, wherein a man keeps
his stand without budging, and that who is settled in his march, closing, and
against any time of need, sparing his strength in himself, has a great
advantage against him, that is in motion and disordered, and that running has
already consumed part of his breath? Moreover, that an army being a body
composed of so many several parts, it is impossible it should in such fury
advance it self with so just a march, and proportioned a motion, and not
break and dis-ranke, or at least alter her ordinance, and that the nimblest be
not grapling before his fellows may help-him. In that drearie battle of the
two Persian brethren, Clearchus the Lacedemonian, who commanded the Graecians
that followed Cycus his faction, led them fair and gently without any
hast-making to their charges; but when he came within fistie paces of his
enemies, he bad them with all speed to run unto it; hoping by the shortness of
the distance to manage their order and direct their breath; in the mean time
giving them the advantage of the impetuositie, both for their bodies, and for
their shooting-armes. Others have ordered this doubt in their army after this
manner: If your enemies headlong run upon you, stay for them and bouge not: If
they without stirring stay for you, run with fury upon them.

In the passage which the Emperor Charles the fifth made into Provence, our
king Francis the first, stood a good while upon this choice; whether it were
best, by way of prevention, to go and meet with him in Italy, or to stay his
coming into France: and albeit he considered what an advantage it is, for one
to preserve his house from the troubles and mischiefs that war brings with
it, to the end that possessing her whole strength, it may continually in all
times of need, store him with money, and supply him with all other helps; and
considering how the necessity of direful war, does daily enforce a
General to make spoil of goods, and waste the Country, which cannot well be
done in our own goods and country: and if the countriman does not as patiently
endure this ravage at his friends hands, as at his enemies, so as seditions may
ensue amongst our own factions, and troubles among our friends: That license
to rob and spoil, which in his Country may not be tolerated, is a great
furtherauce in a Soldier, and makes him the more willing, to endure the
miseries and toylings that follow war: And what a hard matter it is to keep
the Soldier in office and heart, who has no other hope of profit, but his bare
pay, and is so near his wife, his children, his friends, and his home: That he
who lays the cloth, is ever put to the greatest charges: That there is more
pleasure in assailing than in defending: And that the apprehension of a
battell-lost in our own home and entrails, is so violent, that it may easily
snake the whole frame, and distemper the whole body. Seeing there is no
passion so contagious, as that of fear, nor so easy apprehended and taken
a-trust, or does more furiously possess all parts of man: And that the Cities
or Towns, which have either heard the bustling noise of the Tempest, or seen
the sparkles of this all consuming fire at their gates, or have perhaps
received their captains wounded, their Citizens pursued, and their Soldiers
spoiled, and all out of breath, if they be not more then obstinately-constant,
it is a thousand to one, if in that brunt of fury, they do not headlong cast
themselves into some desperate resolution: yet did he conclude and chose this
resolve for the best. First to revoke his forces, he had beyond the Mountains
in Italy, and to stay his enemies approches. For, he might on the contrary
part imagine, that being in his own Country, and amidst good friends, he had
the better leisure to re-enforce his decayed forces, and more opportunity, to
strengthen Towns, to munite Castles, to store Rivers with all necessaries they
wanted, and to keep all passages at his devotion, which done, all the ways
should be open for him, and might by them have all manner of victuals, money,
and other hab^lements of war brought-him, in safety, and without convoy: that
he should have his subjects so much the more affectionate unto him, by how much
nearer they should see the danger: That having so many Cities, Towns, Houlds,
Castles, and Bars for his security, he might at all times, according to
apportunitie and advantage, appoint and give law unto the fight: And if he were
pleased to temporize, whilst he took his ease, kept his forces whole, and
maintained himself in safety, he might see his enemy consume and waste
himself, by the difficulties which daily must necessarily assault, environ and
combate-him, as he who should be engaged in an enemie-countrie and foe-land;
Where he should have nothing, nor meet with any thing, either before, or behind
him, or of any side; that did not offer him continual war: no way nor means
to refresh, to ease or give his army elbow-roome, if any sickness or
contagion should come amongst his men; nor shelter to lodge his hurt and maimed
Soldiers: where neither money, munition, nor victuals might come unto him, but
at the swords point; where he should never have leisure to take any rest, or
breath; where he should have no knowledge of places, passages, woods, foords,
rivers, or country, that might defend him from ambuscados, or surprises: And
if he should unfortunately chance to loose a battle, no hope to save, or
means to reunite the relics of his forces. And there want not examples to
strengthen both sides. Scipio found-it better for him to invade his enemies
country of Africa, then to defend his own, and fight with him in Italy,
where he was, wherein he had good success. But contrariwise, Hanniball, in the
same war wrought his own overthrow, by leaving the conquest of a foreign
country, for to go and defend his own. The Athenians having left the enemy
in their own land, for to pass into Sicilie, had very ill success, and were
much contraried by fortune: whereas Agathocles King of Siracusa prospered and
was favored by her, what time he passed into Africa, and left the war on
soote in his own country. And we are accustomed to say with some show of
reason, that especially in matters of war, the events depend (for the
greatest part) on fortune; which seldom will yield, or never subject her-selfe
unto our discourse or wisdom, as say these ensuing verses.

Et male consultis pretium est, prudentia fallax, Manil. astr. lib. 4. 95.

Nec fortuna probat causas sequiturque merentes:
Sed vaga per cunctos nullo discrimine fertur:
Scilicet est aliud quod nos cogatque regatque
Maius, and in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
It Is best for ill-advis'd, wisdom may fail,
Fortune proves not the cause that should prevail,
But here and there without respect does sail,
A higher power forsooth us over-drawes,
And mortal states guides with immortal laws.
But if it be well taken, it seems that our counsels and deliberations, do
as much depend of her; and that fortune does also engage our discourses and
consultations in her trouble and uncertainty. We reason rashly, and discourse
at randon, says Timeus in Plato: For, even as we, so have our discourses great
participation with the temeritie of hazard.

The eight and fortieth Chapter.
Of Steedes, called in French Destriers.

BEhold, I am now become a Gramarian, I, who never learned tongue but by way of
roat, and that yet know knot what either Adjective, Conjunctive, or Ablative
means. As far as I remember, I have sometimes heard-say, that the Romans had
certain horses, which they called Funales, or Dextrarios, which on the right
hand were led-by as spare horses, to take them fresh at any time of need: And
thence it comes, that we call horses of service Destriers. And our ancient
Romans do ordinarily say, to Adexter, in steed of, to accompany. They also
called Desultorios equos, certain horses that were so taught, that
mainly-running with all the speed they had, joining sides to one another,
without either bridle or saddle, the Roman gentlemen armed at all assayes, in
the midst of their running-race, would cast and recast themselves from one to
an other horse. The Numidian men at arms, were wont to have a second
spare-horse led by hand, that in the greatest fury of the battle, they might
shift and change horse: Quibus, desultorum in modum, binos Live bell pun. dec. 3.
l. 3.
trahentibus equos, inter acerrimam soepe pugnam in recentem equum ex fesso
armatis transultare, mos erat. Tanta velocitas ipsis, tamque docile equorum
genus. Whose manner was, as if they had been vaulters, leading two horses with
them in armor to leap from their tired horse to the freshone, even in the
hottest of the fight. So great agilitie was in themselves, and so apt to be
taught was the race of their horses. There are many horses found, that are
taught to help their master, to run upon any man shall offer to draw a naked
sword upon them; furiously to leap upon any man, both with feet to strike, and
with teeth to bite, that shall affront them; but that for the most part they
rather hurt their friends then their enemies. Considering also, that if they
once be grapled, you can not easily take them-off, and you must needs stand to
the mercy of their combat. Artibius, General of the Persian army had very
ill luck to be mounted upon a horse fashioned in this school, at what time he
sought man to man against Onesilus King of Salamis; for, he was the cause of
his death, by reason the shield-bearer or squire of Onesilus cut him with a
faulchon between the two shoulders, even as he was leaping upon his master.
And if that, which the Italians report be true, that in the battle of Fornovo.
King Charles his horse with kicking, winching, and flying, rid both his master
and himself from the enemies that encompast-him, to dismount or kill him, and
without that, he had been lost: He committed himself to a great hazard, and
escaped a narrow scowring. The Mammalukes boast, that they have the nimblest and
readiest horses of any men at arms in the world. That both by nature they are
instructed to discern, and by custom taught to distinguish their enemy, on
whom they must leap and wince with feet, and bite with teeth, according to the
voice their master speaks, or rider gives them. And are likewise taught to
take up from the ground, lances, darts, or any other weapons with their mouths,
and as he commands to present them to their rider. It is said of Casar, and
of Pompey the Great, that amongst their many other excellent qualities, they
were also most cunning and perfect horsemen; and namely of Caesar, that in his
youth being mounted upon a horse, and without any bridle, he made him run a
full cariere, make a sudden stop, and with his hands behind his back perform
what ever can be expected of an excellent ready horse. And even as nature was
pleased to make both him and Alexander two matchless miracles in military
profession, so would you say, she has also endeavored, yea, enforced herself
to arm them extraordinarily; For, all men know, that Alexanders horse called
Bucephalus, had a head shaped like unto that of a bull; that he suffered no man
to get-on and sit-him, but his master; that none could wealde and manage him
but he; what honors were done him after his death, all know, for he had a
City erected in his name. Caesar likewise had another, who had his fore-feet
like unto a man's, with hoofes cloven in form of fingers, who could never be
handled, dressed, or mounted but by Caesar, who when he died, dedicated his image
to the Goddess Venus. If I be once on horseback, I alight very unwillingly;
for, it is the seat I like best, whether I be sound or sick. Plato
commendeth-it to be availefu^ for health: And Pliny affirms the same to be
healthful for the slomacke, and for the joints And sithence we be fallen into
this subject, let us a little sollow-it I pray you. We read of a law in
Xenophon, by which all men that either had or were able to keep a horse, were
expressly forbidden to travel and go a foot. Trogus and Iust^^us report, that
the Parthians were not only accustomed to war on horseback, but also to
dispatch all their business, and negotiate their affairs both public and
private; as to batgaine, to buy, to sell, to parlie, to meet* to entertain one
another, and to converse and walk together; and that the chiefest difference
between free men and servants amongst them, is, that the first ever ride, and
the other go always on-foote. An institution first devised by King Cyrus.
There are many examples in the Roman histories (and Suetonius does more
particularly note it in Caesar) of Captains that commanded their horsemen to
alight, whenever, by occasion, they should be urged unto it, thereby to
remove all manner of hope from their Soldiers to save themselves by flight, and
for the advantage they hoped-for in this manner of fight: Quo haud dubie superat
Romanus Wherein vndantedly the Romans Live. dee. 1. li. 3. and 7.
is superior to all says Titus Livius: yet shall we see, that the first
provision, and chief means they used to bridle rebellion amongst their new
conquered nations, was to deprive them of all arms and horses. Therefore find
we so often in Caesar; Arma proferri, i^menta Cas. comment. lib. 7.
produci, obsides dari iubet: He commands all their armor should be brought
forth, all their cattle should be driven out, and hostages should be
delivered. The great Turk does not permit at this day any Christian or Jew, to
have or keep any horse for himself, throughout all his large Empire. Our
ancestors, and especially at what time we had wars with the English, in all
solemn combats, or set battles, would (for the most part) alight from their
horses, and fight on foot, because they would not adventure to hazard so
precious a thing as their honor and life, but on the trust of their own
proper strength, and vigor of their undaunted courage, and confidence of their
limbs. Let Chrisanthes in Xenephon say what he pleases: whosoever fights on
horseback, engages his valor, and hazardeth his fortune on that of his
horse; his hurts, his stumbling, his death, draws your life and fortune into
consequence, if he chance to startle or be afraid, then are you induced to
doubt or fear: if to leap forward, then to become rash and fond-hardie: if he
want a good mouth or a timely spur, your honor is bound to answer for-it.
And therefore do not I finde-it strange, that those combats were more firm and
furious, then those which now we see foughten on horse* back.

-- cedebant pariter, pariterque ruebant Virg. Aen. l. ^. 756.
Victores, victique, neque his fuga nota, neque illis. The victors and the
vanquished both together
Gave back, came on: the flight was known in neither.
Their battles are seen much better compact and contrived: They are now but
bickerings and routs: primus clamor atque impetus rem decernit. The first
shoute and shocke makes an end of the matter. And the thing we call to help
us, and keep us company in so great and hazardous an adventure, ought as much
as possible may be, lie still in our disposition and absolute power. A I would
counsel a gentleman to choose the shortest weapons, and such as he may best
assure himselfe-of. It is most apparent, that a man may better assure himself
of a sword he holds in his hand, then of a bullet shot out of a pistol, to
which belong so many several parts, as powder, stone, lock, snap-hanse,
barrel, stoke, scowring-piece, and many others, whereof if the least fail, or
chance to break, and be distempered, it is able to overthrow, to hazard, or
miscarry your fortune. Seldom does that blow come or light on the mark it is
aymed-at, which the air does carry.

Et quo far velint permittere vulnera a ventis, Lucan. l 8. 384.

Ensis habet vires, and gens quaecunque virorum est,
Bellae gerit gladij.
Giving winds leave to give wounds as they list,
But swords have strength, and right men never mist
With sword t'assalt, and with sword to resist.
But concerning that weapon, I shall more amply speak of-it, where I will
make a comparison between ancient and modern arms: And except the
astonishment and frighting of the ear, which nowadaies is grown so familiar
amongst men, that none does greatly feare-it; I think it to be a weapon of
small effect, and hope to see the use of-it abolished. That wherewith the
Italians were wont to throw, with sire in-it, was more frightfull and
terrour-moving. They were accustomed to name a kind of ^avelin, Phalarica,
armed at one end with an iron pike of three foot long, that it might pierce an
armed man-through, which lying in the field they used to lanch or hurl with
the hand, and sometimes to shoot out of certain eng^nes, for to defend
besieged places: the staff whereof being wreathed about with hempor flax, all
pitched and oiled over, flying in theayre, would soon be set-afre, and
lighting upon any body or target, deprived the party ^^t therewith, of all use
of weapons or limbs: Me thinks nevertheless, that coming to graple, it
might as well hind^^ the assailant, as trouble the assailed, and that the ground
strewed with such burning truncheons, might in a pell-mell-consusion produce a
common incommoditie

-- mag^um stridens contorta phalarica venit Virg. Aen. l. 9. 705.
Fulminis acta modo. With monstrous buzzing came a fire-dart thirled.
As if a thunderbolt had there been whirled.
They had also other means, to the use of which, custom enured them, and that
be reason of inexperience seem incredible to-vs; wherewith they supplied the
defect of our powder and bullets. They with such fury darted their Piles, and
with such force hurled their iavelins, that they often pierced two targets and
two armed men through, as it were with a spit. They hit as sure and as far
with their slings, as with any other shot: Saxis globosis funda, Liu. dec. 4.
l. 8.
mare apertum incessentes: coronas modici circuli magno ex intervallo loci
assueti traijcere: non capita modo hostium vulnerabant, sed quem locum
destinassent. While they were boys, with round stones in a sling, making ducks
and drakes upon the sea, they accustomed to cast through round marks of small
compass a great distance off: whereby they, not only hit and hurt the heads
of their enemies, but would strike any place they aymed-at. Their battering or
murdering pieces represented, as well the effect, as the clattering and
thundering noise of ours: ad ictus moenium cum terribili sonitu editos, pavor
and trepidatio coepit. At the battery of the walls made wilk a terrible
noise, fear and trembling began to attach them within. The Gauls our
ancient forefathers in Asia, hated mortally such treacherous and flying
weapons, as they that were taught to fight hand to hand, and with more courage.
Non tam patentibus plagis moventur, vbila^gior quam Live. dec. 4. l. 8.
altior plaga est, etiam gloriosius se pugnare putant; i^demquum acul^us
sagitiae aut glandis abdit^ introrsus tenui vulnere in speciem vri^^tum in
rabiem and p^^dorem tam paruae periment is pestis versi, prosternunt corpora
humi. They are not so much moved with wide gashes, where the wound is more
broad then it is deep, there they think, that they fight with more ravery;
but when the s^ing of an arrow or a bullet, with a small wound to show gals
them inwardly, then falling into rage and shame that so slight a hurt should
kill them, they cast their bodies on the ground.

A model or picture very near unto an harquebusada. The ten thousand
Graecians in their long-lingring, and farre-famous retreat, encountered with a
certain nation, that exceedingly much endomaged them with stiff strong and
great blows, and so long arrows, that taking them-vp, they might throw them
after the manner of a dart, and with them pierce a target and an armed man
through and through. The engines which Dionysius invented in Siracusa, to
shoot and cast mighty big arrows, or rather timber-pieces, and huge-great
stones, so far and with such force, did greatly represent, and come very
near our modern inventions. We may not also forget, the pleasant seat, which
one named master Peter Pol, doctor in divinity used to sit upon his mule, who
as Monstrelet reports, was wont to ride up and down the streets of Paris,
ever sitting sideling, as women use. He also says in another place, that the
Gascoines had certain horses so fiece and terrible, taught to turn and stop
suddenly in running, whereat the French, the Piccards, the Flemmings, and
Brabantins (as they who were never accustomed to see the like) were greatly
amazed, and thought it a wonder: I use his very words. Caelar speaking of those
of Swethen, says, In any skirmish or fight on horseback, they often alight
to combat on foot, having so trained and taught their horses, that so long as
the fight lasts, they never bouge from their masters side, that if need
require, they may suddenly mount-vp again: and according to their natural
custom, there is nothing accounted more base or vile, then to use saddles or
bardels, and they greatly contemn and scorn such as use them: So that a few
of them fear not to encounter with a troop far exceeding them in number.
That which I have other times wondered-at, to see a horse ^a^^^ioned and
taught, that a man having but a wande in his hand, and his bridle loose hanging
over his ears, might at his pleasure manage, and make him turn, stop, run,
cariere, trot gallop, and what ever else may be expected of an excellent ready
horse, was common amongst the Massilians, who never used either bridle or sadle.

Et gens quae nudo residens Massilia dor^o, L^ca^. li. 4. 681

Or a leu^flectit fraenorum n^^cia. virga.
Massilian horsemen on bare horse-backe-sit
Manage with light rod, without reins or bit.
Et Numid^ infr^nt cingunt. Vir. Aen. l. 4. 41

Numidians who their horses ride
Without bit, round about us bide.
Equisine fraenis, deformis ipse cursus, rigida ceruice and extent^ capite
currentium: The horses being without bridles, their course is ill favored,
they running with a stiff neck, and out-stretch't head (like a roasted Pigg:)
Alphonsus King of Spain, that first established the order of Knights, called
the order of the Bend or skarfe, amongst other rules devised this one that none
of them, upon pain to forfait a mark of silver, for every time offending,
should ever ride either mule or mulet; as I lately read in Guevaras epistles,
of which whosoever called them his golden epistles, gave a judgment far
different from mine. The Courtier says, That before his time, it was counted a
great shame in a gentleman to be seen riding upon a mule: Whereas the
Abyssines are of a contrary opinion, who accordingly as they are advanced, to
places of honor, or dignity, about their Prince, called Prester-Iohn, so do
they more and more affect in sign of pomp and state, to ride upon large-great
mules. Xenophon reports, that the Assirians were ever wont to keep their
horses fast-tied in fetters or gyves and ever in the stable, they were so wild
and furious. And for that they required so much time to vnshackle, and to
harnish them, (least protracting of so long time, might, if they should chance
at unawares, and being unready, to be surprised by their enemies, endomage
them) they never took up their quarter in any place, except it were well dyked
and entrenched: His Cirus, whom he makes so cunning in horsemanship, did
always keep his horses at a certain stint, and would never suffer them to
have any meat before they had deserved the same by the sweat of some
exercise. If the Scithians in time of war chanced to be brought to any
necessity of victuals, the readiest remedy they had, was to let their horses
blood, and there with all quenched their thirst, and nourished themselves.

Venit and epoto Sarmata pastus equo Mart spectat. 3 4.
The Scithian also came, who strangely feeds
On drinking-out his horse (or that he bleedes)
Those of Crotta being hardly besieged by Metellus, were reduced to so hard a
pinch, and strait necessity of all manner of other beverage, that they were
forced to drink the stale or urine of their horses. To verify how much better
cheap the Turks do both levy, conduct, and maintain their armies, then we
Christans do; They report, that besides their soldiers never drink any thing
but water, and feed on nothing but rice, and drie-salt flesh, which they
reduce into a kind of powder (whereof every private man does commonly carry so
much about him, as will serve for a months provision) and for a shift, will
live a long time with the blood of their horses; wherein they use to put a
certain quantity of salt, as the Tartares and Moskovites do. These new
discovered people of the Indies, when the Spaniardes came first amongst them,
esteemed that as well men as horses, were either gods, or creatures far beyond,
and excelling their nature in nobility. Some of which, after they were
vanquished by them, coming to sue for peace and beg pardon at their hands, to
whom they brought presents of gold, and such viands as their country yielded;
omitted not to bring the same, and as much unto their horses, and with as
solemn Oration as they had made unto men, taking their neighings, as a
language of truce and composition. In the hither Indies, the chief and
royallest honor was anciently wont to be, to ride upon an Elephant; the second
to go in Coaches drawn with four horses; the third, to ride upon a Camel;
the last and basest, was to be carried or drawn by one horse alone. Some of
our modern Writers report, to have seen some Countries in that climate, where
the people ride oxen, with packe-saddles, stirrops, and bridles, by which they
were carried very easily Quintus Fabius Maximus Rutilianus, warring against the
Samnites, and seeing that his horsemen, in three or four charges they gave,
had missed to break and run through his enemies battalion, at last resolved
thus, that they should all unbridle their horses, and with maine force of
sharp spurs prick and broach them; which done, the horses as enraged, took
such a running, through, and athwart the enemies camp, arms and men, that
naught was able to resist them; and with such a fury, that by opening,
shouldring, and overthrowing, the battallion, they made way for his Infanterie,
which there committed a most bloody slaughter, and obtained a notable victory.
The like was commanded and effected by Quintus Fulvius Flaccus against the
Celtiberians: Id cum maiore vi equorum faciet is, si eff: oenatos Live. d^^. 4.
l. 1^.
in hoctes equos immittitis; quod saepe Remanos equites cumlaude fecisse
memoriae prod^^um est. Detractisque fraenis bis vltro curoque cum magna strage
hostium, infractis omnibus have is, transcurrerunt. That shall you do with
more violence of horse, if you force your horse unbridled on the enemy; which
it is recorded, the Roman horsemen have often performed with great proof and
praise. So pulling of the bridles, they twice ran through forward, and back
again with great slaughter of the enemy, all their lances broken.

The duke of Moscovie did anciently owe this reverence unto the Tartares, at
what time soever they sent any Ambassadors to him, that he must go meet them
on foot, and present them with a goblet full of mares-milke (a drink counted
very delicious amongst them which whilst they were drinking, if any drop
chanced to be spilt upon their horses hairs, he was, by duty, bound to lick
the same up with his tongue. The army which the Emperor Baiazeth had sent into
Russia, was overwhelmd by so horrible a tempest of snow, that to find some
shelter and to save themselves from the extremity of the cold, many advised to
kill and vnpanch their horses, and enter into their panches, to enjoy and find
some ease by that vital heat. Baiazeth after that bloody and tragical
conflict wherein he was overthrown by the Scithian Tamburlane, in seeking to
escape, had no doubt saved himself, by the swiftness of an Arabian mare, on
which he was mounted that day, if unluckily he had not been forced to let her
drink her fill in passing over a river, which made her so faint and foundred,
that he was easily overtaken and apprehended by those that pursued him. The
common saying is, that to let a horse stale after a full cariere, does take
down his speed, but I would never have thought that drinking had done it, but
rather strengthened and heartned him.

Croesus passing along the city of Sardis, found certain thickets, wherein
were great store of snakes and serpents, on which his horses fed very hungerly,
which thing as Herodotus says was an ill-boding-prodigie unto his affairs. We
call him an entire horse, that has his full mane, and whole ears, and which
in show, or at a muster, does not exceed others. The Lacedaemonians having
defeated the Athenians in Sicilte, returning in great pomp and glory from the
victory, into the City of Siracusa, among other Bravadoes of theirs, caused
such horses as they had taken from their enemies to be shorn all over, and so
led them in triumph. Alexander fought with a nation called Da^as, where they
went to war two and two, all armed upon one horse, but when they came to
combat, one must alight, and so successively one fought on foot, and the
other on horse back, each in his turn one after another. I am persuaded that
in respect of sufficiency, of comeliness, and of grace on horseback, no Nation
goes beyond us. A good horseman, (speaking according to our phrase) seems
rather to respect an vndismayed courage, then an affected clean seat. The man
most skillfull, best and surest-sitting comeliest-graced, and nimblest-handed,
to sit, to ride, and manage a horse conningly, that ever I knew, and that best
pleased my humor, was Monsieur de Carnavalet, who was Master of the horse unto
our King Henry the second. I have seen a man take his full cariere, standing
boult-vp-right on both his feet in the saddle, leap down to the ground
from-it, and turning back take-off the saddle, and presently set-it on again
as fast as ever it was, and then leap into it again, and all this did he
whilst his horse was running as fast as might be with his bridle on his neck.
I have also seen him ride over a bonet or cap, and being gone a good distance
from it, with his bowshooting backward, to stick many arrows in the same; then
sitting still in the saddle to take up any thing from the ground: To set one
foot to the ground, and keep the other in the stirrup, and continnally
running do a thousand such tumbling and apish tricks, wherewith he got his
living. There have in my time two men been seen in Constantinople, both at
once upon one horse, and who in his speediest running, would by turns, first
one, and then another, leap down to the ground, and then into the saddle
again, the one still taking the others place. And another, who only with
teeth, and without the help of any hand, would bridle, curry, rub, dress,
saddle, guirt, and harnish his horse. Another that between two horses, and
both sadled, standing vp-right, with one foot in the one, and the second in
the other, did bear another man on his arms, standing vp-right, run a full
speedy course, and the uppermost to shoot and hitte any mark with his arrows.
Diverse have bin seen, who standing on their heads, and with their legs
out-stretched-aloft, having many sharp-pointed cimitaries fastened round about
the saddle, to gallop a full speed. While I was a young lad, I saw the Prince
of Sul^^on^ at Naples, manage a young, a rough, and fierce horse, and show all
manner of hors-man-ship; To hold testons or realles under his knees, and toes,
so fast, as if they had been nailed there, and all to show his sure, steedy,
and vnmovable sitting.

The nine and fortieth Chapter.
Of ancient customs,

I Would willingly excuse our people for having no other pattern or rule of
perfection, but his own customs, his own fashions: For, it is a common vice,
not only in the vulgar sort, but as it were in all men, to bend their aim,
and frame their thoughts unto the fashons, wherein they were borne. I am
pleased when he shall see Fabricius or Laelius, who because they are neither
attired nor fashioned according to our manner, that he condemn their
countenance to be strange, and their carriage barbarous. But I bewail his
particular indiscretion, in that he suffers him self to be so blinded, and
deceived by the authority of present custom, and that if custom pleases, he
is ready to change opinion, and vary advise, every month, nay every day, and
judges so diversely of himself. When he wore shortwasted doublets, and but
little lower then his breast, he would maintain by militant reasons, that the
waste was in his right place: but when not long after he came to wear them so
longwasted, yea almost so low as his privities, then began he to condemn the
former fashion, as fond, intolerable and deformed; and to commend the latter,
as comely, handsome, and commendable. A new fashion of apparel creeps no
sooner into use, but presently he blames and dispraiseth the old, and that
with so earnest a resolution, and universal a consent, that you would say, it
is some kind of madness, or selfe-fond humor, that giddieth his understanding.

And for as much as our changing or altering of fashions, is so sudden and
newfangled, that the inventions, and new devises of all the tailors in the
world, cannot so fast invent novelties, it must necessarily follow that
neglected, and stale rejected fashions do often come into credit and use
again: And the latest and newest, within a while-after come to be outcast and
despised, and that one self same judgment within the space of fifteen or
twenty years admits, not only two or three different, but also clean
contrary opinions, with so light and incredible inconstancy, that any man
would wonder at it. There is no man so suttle-crafty amongst us, that suffers
not himself to be enveigled and overreached by this contradiction, and that
is not insensibly dazeled, both with his inward and external eyes. I will
here huddle-vp some few ancient fashions that I remember: Some of them like
unto ours, other-some far differing from them: To the end, that having ever
this continual variation of humane things in our mind, we may the better
enlighten and confirm our transported judgment. That manner of fight which we
use now adays with rapier and cloak, Caes Bell. ci^. l. 1.
was also used among the Romans, as says Caesar. Sinistris sagos involvunt,
gladiosque distringnnt: They wrap their left arms in their clokes, and draw
their swords. We may to this day observe this vice to be amongst us, and which
we have taken from them, that is, to stay such passengers as we meet by the
way, and force them to tell us, who they are, whence they come, whither they
go, and to count it as an injury, and cause of quarrel, if they refuse to
answer our demand. In Baths, which our forefathers used daily before meals, as
ordinarily as we use water to wash our hands, when first they came into them,
they washed but their arms and legs, but afterward (which custom lasted
many after-ages; and to this day continues amongst diverse nations of the
world) their whole body over, with compounded and perfumed waters, in such sort
as they held it as a great testimony of simplicity, to wash themselves in
pure and uncompounded water: Such as were most delicate, and effeminate, were
wont to perfume their whole bodies over and over, three or four times every
day* And often (as our French women have lately taken up) to pick and snip out
the hairs of their forehead, so they of all their body.

Quod pectus, quod cruratibi, quodbrachia vellis. Mart. lib. 2. epi. 62. 1.
That you from breast, legs, arms, the hair
Neately pull off (to make them fair.)
Although they had choice of ointments fit for that purpose.

Psilotro nitet, aut arida latet abdita creta. Lib. 6. epi. 93. 9.
She shines with ointments that make hair to fall,
Or with dry chalk she over-covers all.
They loved to lie soft, and on fine downe-beds, alleging lying on hard
matresses as a sign of patience. They fed lying on their beds, near after the
manner of the Turks nowadaies.

Inde thoro pater Aeneas sic orsus ab alto. Virg. Aen. l. 2. 2
Father Aeneas thus began say,
From stately couch where then he lay.
And it is reported of Cato Junior, that after the battle of Pharsalia, and
that he began to mourn and bewail the miserable state of the commonwealth,
and ill condition of public affairs, he ever eat sitting on the ground,
following an austere, and observing a strict kind of life. The Besolas manos
was used as a sign of honor and humility, only toward great persons. If
friends met, after friendly salutations, they used to kiss one another, as the
Venetians do at this day.

Gratatusque darem cum dulcibus osculaverbis. O^id. Pont. l. 4. (...)


Give her I would with greetings graced,
Kisses with sweet words enterlaced.
And in saluting or suing to any great man, they touched his knees. Pasicles
the Philosopher, brother unto Crates, coming to salute one, whereas he should
have carried his hand to his knee, carried the same unto his genitories. The
party saluted, having rudely push't him away; What? quoth he, is not that part
yours as well as the other? Their manner of seeding was as ours, their fruit
last. They were wont to wipe their tails (this vain superstition of words
must be left unto women) with a sponge, and that is the reason why Spongia in
Latin is counted an obscene word: which sponge was ever tied to the end of a
staff, as witnesses the story of him, that was carried to be devoured of the
wild beasts before the people, who desiring leave to go to a privy before his
death, and having no other means to kill himself, thrust down the sponge and
staff, he found in the privy, into his throat, wherewith he choked himself.
Having ended the delights of nature, they were wont to wipe their privities
with perfumed wool.

At ^^^i nil faciam, sed lot a mentula land. Mart. li. 11. ^. pig. 52. 11.
To thee no such thing will I bring,
But with washed wool another thing.
In every street of Rome were placed tubs, and such vessels for passengers to
make water-in.

Pusi saepe lacum propter, se ac dolia curta Lu^r. l. 4. 1018.

Somno deiuncti credunt extollere veslem.
Children asleep often think they take up all
Near to some pissing tub, some lake (some wall.)
They used to break their fast, and nonchion between meals, and all summer
time, had men that sold snow up and down the streets, wherewith they
refreshed their wines; of whom some were so dainty, that all winter long they
used to put snow into their wine, not deeming it cold enough. Principal, and
noble men had their cup-bearers, tasters, carvers and buffons to make them
merry. In Winter their viandes were brought and set on the board upon arches,
as we use chafing disnes; and had portable kitchins (of which I have seen
some) wherein might be drawn, wheresoever one list, a whole service and mess
of meat.

Has vobis epulas habete lauti,
Nos offendimur ambulante caena. Mart. l. 7. ^ pig. 47. 5.

Take you daintie-mouth'd such stirring feasts;
With walking meals we are offended guests.
And in summer they often caused cold water (being carried through pipes) to
drill upon them as they sat in their dining-chambers, or low parlers, wherein
cesterns, they kept store of fish alive, which the bystanders might at their
pleasure, choose and take with their hands, and have-it dressed every man
according to his fantasy. Fish has ever had this privilege, as at this day
it has; that chief Gentlemen, are pleased, and have skill to dress-it best:
And to say truth, the taste of fish is much more delicate and exquisit, then
that of flesh at least in mine. But in all manner of magnificence,
delitiousnes, riotous gluttony, inventions of voluptuousnes, wantonness, and
sumptuositie, we truly endevor, as much as may be, to equal and come near
them: For, our will and taste is as much corrupted as theirs, but our skill and
sufficiency is far short of them: Our wit is no more capable, and our
strength no more able to approach and match them in these vicious and
blame-worthie parts, then in virtuous and commendable actions: For, both
proceed from a vigor of spirit, and farre-reaching wit; which, without
comparison, was much greater in them, then now in us. And minds, by how much
more strong and excellent they are, so much less faculty and means have
they, to do, either excellently well, or notoriously ill. The chiefest aim
amongst them was a mean or mediocrity. The Foremost or Last, in writing or
speaking, had no signification of pre-eminence or greatness, as may evidently
appear by their writings. They would as familiarly and as soon say. Oppius
and Caesar, as Caesar and Oppius; and as indifferently, I and thou, as thou and
I. And that is the reason why I have heretofore noted in the life of Flaminius,
in our French Plutarke, a place, where it seems that the Author, speaking of
the jealousy of glory, that was between the Aetolians and the Romans, for
the gain of a battle, which they had obtained in common, makes for the
purpose, that in Greek songs the Aetolians were named before the Romans,
except there be some Amphibologie in the French words: for, in that tongue I
reade-it. When Ladies came unto slooves or hot-houses, they made-it not dainty
to admit men into their company, and to be washed, rubbed, chafed and
anointed by the hands of their grooms and pages.

Inguina succinctus nigra tibi servus alut a
-- Stat, quoties calidis nuda foveris aquis. Epig* ^* (...)

Your man, whose loins black lether guird's, stand's-by,
Whilst in warm water you starke-naked lie.
They also used to sprinkle themselves all over with certain powders, thereby
to alay and repress all manner of filth or sweat. The ancient Gauls (says
Sidonius Apollinaris) wore their hair long before, and all the hinder part of
their head shaven, a fashion that our wanton youths and effeminate gallants,
have lately renewed, and in this newfangled and fond-doting age, brought up
again, with wearing of long-dangling locks before. The ancient Romans, paid
the watermen their fare or due so soon as they came into the boat, whereas
we pay-it when they set us on shore.

-- dum as exigitur, dum mula ligatur, Hor. l. 1. sat. 5. 13.
Tota abit hora. While they call for their fare, tie drawe-mule to,
There runn's away, a full hour, if not two.
Women were wont to lie on the utmost side of the bed, and therefore was Caesar
called Suet Iul. Ca^ Sponda Regis Nicomedis: King Nicomedes his beds side: They
took breath while they were c. 49. drinking and used to baptize, or put water
in their wines.

-- quis puer ocius Hor. l. 2. ^d. 1^* 18.
Restinguet ardentis falerni pocula praetereunte limpha? What boy of mine or
thine
Shall cool our cup of wine
With running water fine?
Those cousening and minde-deceiving countenances of lake is were also amongst
them

O Jane, a tergo quem nulla ciconia pinsit Pers. sat. 1. 58.

Nec manus auriculas imitata est mobilis albas,
Nec linguae quantum sitiet canis Apula tantum.
O Ianus, whom behind no Storks-bill does deride,
Nor nimble hand resembling mak's ears white and wide,
Nor so much tongue lil'd out as dogs with thirst ore-dride
The Argian and Roman Ladies, mourned in white, as our dames wont to do; and
if I might be credited, and beare-sway amongst them, they should continue it
still. But because there are many books, that treat of this argument I will
say no more of-it.

The fiftieth Chapter.
Of Democritus and Heraclitus.

IVdgement is an instrument for all subjects, and medleth every where. And
therefore in the Essays I make of it, there is no manner of occasion, I seek
not to employ therein. If it be a subject I understand not my self, therein I
make trial of it, sounding afar off the depth of the ford, and finding the
same over deep for my reach, I keep my self on the shore. And to
acknowledge not to be able to wade through, is a part of it is effect, yea of
such whereof he vanteth most. If I light upon a vain and idle subject, I assay
to try, and endevor to see, whether I may find a good ground to work upon,
and matter to frame a body, and wherewith to build and vnder-lay-it. Sometimes
I address my judgment and contrive-it to a noble and out-worne subject,
wherein is nothing found subsisting of it self, the high way to it, being so
bare-trodden, that it cannot march, but in other steps. There he pleases
himself in choosing the course he thinks best, and a thousand paths sometimes
he says, this or that was best chosen. I take my first Argument of fortune:
All are alike unto me: And I never purpose to handle them thoroughly: For, there
is nothing wherein I can perceive the full perfection: Which they do not that
promise to show it-vs. Of a hundred parts and visages that every thing has,
I take one, which sometimes I slightly runne-over, and other times but
cursorily glance-at. And yet other whilst I pinch it to the quick. And give it
a Stockado, not the widest, but the deepest I can. And for the most part I love
to seize upon them by some unwonted luster. I would adventure to treat and
discourse of some matter to the depth; knew I my self less, or where I
deceived in mine own impuissance; Scattering here one and there another word:
Scantlings taken from their maine groundwork, disorderly dispersed, without
any well-grounded design and promise. I am not bound to make it good, nor
without varying to keep my self close tied vnto-it; whenever it shall
please me to yield my self to doubt, to uncertainty, and to my Mistress form,
which is ignorance. Each motion shows and discovers what we are. The very
same mind of Caesar, we see in directing, marshalling, and setting the battle
of Pharsalia, is likewise seen to order, dispose, and contrive, idle, trifling
and amorous devises. We judge of a horse, not only by seeing him ridden, and
cunningly managed, but also by seeing him trot, or pace; yea, if we but look
upon him as he stands in the stable. Amongst the functions of the soul, some
are but mean and base. He that sees her no further, can never know her
thoroughly. And he that sees her march her natural and simple pace, does
peradventure observe her best. The winds of passions take her most in her
highest pitch, seeing she entirely coucheth hirselfe upon every matter, and
wholly therein exercises hirselfe: and handles but one at once; not according
to-it, but according to hirselfe. Things several in themselves have
peradventure, weight, measure, and condition: But inwardly, in us, she
cuttes-it out for them, as she understands the same hirselfe. Death is
fearful and ugly unto Cicero; wished-for and desired of Cato: and indifferent
unto Socrates. Health, welfare, conscience, authority, riches, glory,
beauty, and their contraries are dispoyled at the entrance, and receive a new
vesture at the souls hand. Yea, and what color she pleases; brown, bright
green, sad, or any hew else: sharp or sweet, deep or superficial, and
what each of them pleases. For, none of them did ever verify their styles,
their rules, or forms in common; each on severally is a Queen in her own
estate. Therefore let us take no more excuses from external qualites of
things. To us it belongs to give our selves accoumpt of it. Our good, and our
evil has no dependancy, but from our selves. Let us offer our vows and
offerings unto it; and not to fortune. She has no power over our manners. Why
shall I not judge of Alexander, as I am sitting and drinking at Table, and
talking in good company? Or if he were playing at Chesse, what string of his
wit does not touch or harp on this fond-childish, and time-consuming play? I
loathe and shunne-it, only because there is not sport enough in it, and that in
his recreation, he is over serious with us, being ashamed I must apply that
attention thereunto, as might be employed on some good subject. He was no more
busied in levying his forces and preparing for his glorious passage into India;
nor this other in disintangling and discovering of a passage, whence depends
the welfare and safety of mankind. See how much our mind troubles this
ridiculous ammuzing, if all her sinnewes bandy not. How amply she gives every
one Law in that, to know and directly to judge of himself. I do not more
universally view and feel my self in any other posture. What passion does not
exercise us thereunto? Choler, spite, hatred, impatience, and vehement
ambition to overcome, in a matter wherein it were happily more excusable to be
ambitious for to be vanquished. For, a rare pre-excellency, and beyond the
common reach, in so frivolous a thing, is much mis-seeming a man of honor. What
I say of this example, may be spoken of all others. Every parcel, every
occupation of a man, accus th, and shows him equal unto another. Democritus
and Heraclitus were two Philosophers, the first of which, finding and deeming
humane condition to be vain and ridiculous, did never walk abroad, but with a
laughing, scornful and mocking countenance: Whereas Heraclitus taking pity
and compassion of the very same condition of ours, was continually seen with
a sad, mournful, and heavy cheer, and with tears trickling down his
blubbered eyes. Iuuen. Sa^. 10. 28.


-- Alter
Ridebat quoties a limine moverat vnum
Protuleratque pedem, fl bat contrarius alter.
One from his door, his foot no sooner past,
But straight he laughed; the other wept as fast.
I like the first humor best, not because it is more pleasing to laugh, then to
weep; but for it is more disdainefull, and does more condemn us then the
other. And me thinks we can never be sufficiently despised, according to our
merit. Bewailing and commiseration, are commixed with some estimation of the
thing moaned and wailed. Things scorned and contemned, are thought to be of no
worth. I cannot be persuaded, there can be so much ill luck in us, as there is
apparent vanity, nor so much malice, as sottishness. We are not so full of
evil, as of voydnesse and inanitie. We are not so miserable, as base and
abject. Even so Diogenes, who did nothing but triflle, toy, and dally with
himself, in rumbling and rolling of his tub, and flurting at Alexander,
accoumpting us but flies, and bladders puffed with wind, was a more sharp, a
more bitter, and a more stinging judge, and by consequence, more jus^ and
fitting my humor, then Timon, surnamed the hater of all mankind. For look
what a man hates, the same thing he takes to heart. Timon wished all evil might
light on-vs; He was passionate in desiring our ruin. He shunned and loathed
our conversation as dangerous and wicked; and of a depraved nature: Whereas the
other so little regarded us, that we could neither trouble nor alter him by
our contagion; forsook our company, not for fear, but for disdain of our
commerce: He never thought us capable or sufficient to do either good or
evil. Of the same stamp was the answer of Statilius to whom Bru^us spoke to
win him to take part, and adhere to the conspiracy against Caesar: He
allowed the enterprise to be very just, but disalowed of the men that should
perform the same, as unworthy that any man should put him self in any
adventure for them: Conformable to discipline of Hegesias, who said, That a
wise man ought never to do any thing but for himself; forasmuch as he alone
is worthy to have any action performed for him: and to that of Theodorus, who
thought it an injustice, that a wise man should in any case hazard himself for
the good and benefit of his country, or to endanger his wisdom for fools.
Our own condition is as ridiculous as risible as much to be laughed at as able
to laugh.

The one and fiftieth Chapter.
Of the vanity of Words.

ARethorician of ancient times, said, that his trade was, to make small things
appear and seem great. It is a shooemaker, that can make great shoes for a
little foot. Had he lived in Sparta, he had doubtless been well whipped,
for professing a false, a couzening and deceitful art. And I think,
Archidamus King of that City did not without astonishment listen unto the
answer of Thucydides, of whom he demanded, whether he, or Pericles, was the
strongest and nimblest wrestler; whose answer was this, Your quection Sir, is
very hard to be decided; for if in wrestling with him, I give him a fall, with
his fair words he persuades those that saw him on the ground, that he never
fell, and so gets the victory. Those that mask and paint women, commit not so
foul a fault, for it is no great loss, though a man see them not, as they
were naturally borne and unpainted: Whereas these profess to deceive and
beguile, not our eyes, but our judgment; and to bastardize and corrupt the
essence of things. Those commonwealths, that have maintained themselves in a
regular, formal, and well governd estate, as that of Creete and Lacedemon, did
never make any great esteem of Orators. Ariston did wisely define Rhetorike to
be a Science, to persuade the vulgar people: Socrates and Plato, to be an Art
to deceive and flatter. And those which deny it in the general description,
do every where in their precepts verify the same. The Mahometanes, by reason
of it is invtilitie, forbid the teaching of it to their children. And the
Athenians, perceiving how pernicious the profession and use thereof was, and of
what credit in their City, ordained, that their principal part, which is to
moove affections, should be dismissed and taken away, together with all
exordiums and perorations. It is an instrument devised, to busy, to manage,
and to agitate a vulgar and disordered multitude; and is an implement employed,
but about distempered and sick minds, as Physic is about crazed bodies. And
those where either the vulgar, the ignorant, or the generality have had all
power, as that of Rhodes, those of Athens, and that of Rome, and where things
have ever been in continual disturbance and vproare, thither have Orators and
the professors of that Art flocked. And verily, if it be well looked into, you
shall find very few men in those commonwealths, that without help of
eloquence have attamed to any worthy estimation and credit: ` Pompey, Caesar,
Crassus, Lucullus, Lentulus Metellus, have thence taken their greatest stay and
furtherance, whereby they have ascended unto that height and greatness of
authority, whereunto they at last attained, and against the opinion of better
times have more prevailed with words than with arms. For, L. Voluminous
speaking publicly in favor of the election, which some had made of Quintus
Fabius, and Publius Decius, to be Consuls; says thus; They are men borne unto
war, of high spirits, of great performance, and able to effect any thing, but
rude, simple, and vnarted in the combat of talking; minds truly Consulare.
They only are good Pretors, to do^ justice in the City (says he) that are
subtle, cauteleus, well-spoken, wily and lippe-wise. Eloquence has chiefly
flourished in Rome when the commonwealths affairs have been in worst estate,
and that the devouring Tempest of civil broils, and intestine wars did most
agitate and turmoyle them. Even as a rank, free and untamed soil, bears
the rank est and strongest weeds, whereby it seems that those commonweals,
which depend of an absolute Monarch, have less need of-it then others: For,
that foolishness and facility, which is found in the common multitude, and
which does subject the same, to be managed, persuaded, and led by the ears, by
the sweet alluring and sense-entrancing sound of this harmony, without duly
weighing, knowing, or considering the truth of things by the force of reason:
This facility and easy yielding, I say, is not so easily found in one only
ruler, and it is more easy to warrant him from the impression of this poison,
by good institution and sound counsel, There was never seen any notable or
farre-renowmed Orator to come out of Macedon or Persia. What I have spoken
of-it, has been upon the subject of an Italian, whom I have lately
entertained into my service. Who during the life of the whilom cardinal Caraffa
served him in the place of steward of his house. Enquiring of his charge, and
particular quality, he told me, a long, formal, and eloquent discourse of the
science or skill of epicurisme and gluttony, with such an Oratory-gravitie, and
Magistrale countenaunc, as if he had discoursed of some high mysterious point
of divinity, wherein he has very methodically decifred and distinguished
sundry differences of appetites: First of that which a man has fasting, then
of that men have after the first, the second, and third service. The several
means how sometimes to please-it simply, and other times to sharpen and provoke
the same; the policy and rare invention of his sawces: First, in general
terms, then part cularizing the qualities and several operations of the
ingredients, and their effects: The differences of salades according to their
distinct seasons, which must be served in warm, and which cold: The manner how
to dress, how to adorn, and embellish them, to make them more pleasing to the
sight. After that, he entered into a large and farre-fetcht narration, touching
the true order, and due method of service, full of goodly and important
considerations.

-- Nec minimo sane discrimine refert, Sat. 5. 127.
Quo geslu lepores, and quo gallina secetur. What grace we use, it makes small
difference, when
We carue a Hare, or else break up a Hen.
And all that filled up and stuffed with rich magnificent words, well couched
phrases, oratorie figures, and patheticall metaphors; yea such as learned men
use and employ in speaking of the Government of an Empire, which made me
remember my man.

Hoc salsum est, hoc adustum est, hoc lautum est parum, Ter. Adel. act. 3. sat.
4. 62.

Illudrecte, iterum sic memento, sedulo,
Moneo quae possum pro mea sapientia.
Postremo tanquam in speculum, in patinas, Demea,
Inspicere iubeo, and moneo quid facto vsus sit.
This dish is salt, this burnt, this not so fine,
That is well done, do so again; Thus I
As my best wisdom serves, all things assign.
Lastly Sir, I command, they neatly pry,
On dishes, as a glass,
And show what needful was.
Yet did those strict Graecians commend the order and disposition, which Paulus
Ae^^^^us observed in the banquet he made them at his return from Macedon: But
here I speak not of the effects, but of the words. I know not whether they
work that in others, which they do in me. But when I hear our Architects
mouth-out those big and rattling words of Pilasters, Architraves, Cornixes,
Frogtispices, Corinthian, and Dorike works and suchlike fustian-termes of
theirs, I cannot let my wandering imagination from a sudden apprehension of
Apollidonius his palace, and I find by effect, that they are the seely, and
decayed pieces of my Kitchin-doore. Do but hear one pronounce Metonymia
Metaphore, Allegory, Etimologie, and other such trash-names of Grammar, would
you not think, they meant some form of a rare and strange language; They are
titles and words that concern your chamber-maides tittle-tattle. It is a
foppery and cheating trick, cousin-Germane unto this, to call the offices of
our estate by the proud titles of the ancient Romans, though they have no
resemblance at al of charge, and less of authority and power. And this
likewise, which in mine opinion will one day remain as a reproach unto our age,
unworthily and vndeservedly to bestow on whom we list the most glorious
Surnames and loftiest titles, wherewith antiquity in many long-continued ages
honored but one or two persons. Plato has by such an universal consent
borne-away the surname of Divine, that no man did ever attempt to envy him for
it. And the Italians, which vaunt (and indeed with some reason) to have
generally more lively, and far reaching wits, and their discourse more sound
and sinnowy, then other nations of their times, have lately therewith
embellished Peter Aretine; in whom except it be an high-raised, proudly-pufft,
mind-moving, and heart-danting manner of speech, yet in good sooth more than
ordinary, witty and ingenious; But so new fangled, so extravagant, so
fantastical, so deep-labored; and to conclude, besides the eloquence, which be
it as it may be, I cannot perceive any thing in it, beyond or exceeding that of
many other writers of his age, much less that it in any sort approaches that
ancient divinity. And the surname Great, we attribute and fasten the same on
Princes, that have nothing in them exceeding popular greatness.

The two and fiftieth Chapter.
Of the parcimony of our Forefathers.

ATtilius Regulus, General of the Romans army in Affrike, in the midst of
his glory and victory against the Carthaginians, writ unto the commonwealth,
that a hyne or plough-boy whom he had left alone to oversee and husband his
land (which in all was but seven acres of ground) was run away from his charge,
and had stolen from him all his implements and tools, belonging to his
husbandry, craving leave to be discharged, and that he might come home to look
to his business, for fear his wife and children should thereby be endomaged:
the Senate took order for him, and appointed another man to look to his land
and business, and made that good unto him, which the other had stolen from
him, and appointed his wife and children to be maintained at the commonwealths
charge. Cato the elder returning Consul from Spain, sold his horse of service,
to save the money he should have spent for his transport by sea into Italy: And
being chief governor in Sardinia, went al his visitations a foot, having no
other train, but one officer of the common-welth, who carried his gown, and a
vessel to do sacrifice in, and for the most part carried his male himself. He
boasted that he never woare gown, that cost him more then ten crowns, nor
sent morethen one smilling sterling to the market for one whole days
provision, and had no Country house rough-cast or painted over. Scipio
Aemilianus after he had triumphed twice, and twice been Consul, went on a
solemn Legation, accompanied and attended-on only with seven servants. It is
reported that Homer had never any more then one servant. Plato three, and Zeno
chief of the Stoikes sect, none at al. Tiberius Gracchus, being then one of
the principal men amongst the Romans and sent in commission about weighty
matters of the commonwealth was allotted but sixpence halfe-penie a day for
his charges.

The three and fiftieth Chapter.
Of a saying of Caesar.

IF we shall sometimes ammuse our selves and consider our estate, and the time
we spend in controlling others, and to know the things that are without us;
would we but emploie the same in sounding our selves thoroughly, we should
easily perceive how all this our contexture is built of weak and decaying
pieces. It is not an especial testimony of imperfection, that we cannot
settle our contentment on any one thing, and that even of our own desire and
imagination, it is beyond our power to choose what we stand in need of?
Whereof the disputation that has ever been amongst Philosophers bears
sufficient witness, to find out the chief felicity or summum bonum of man,
and which yet does, and shall eternally last without resolution or agreement.

-- aum abest quod avemus, id exuperare videtur Iuer. li. 3. 25.
Caet era, post aliud cum contigit illud avemus, Et sitis aequatenet. While
that is absent which we wish, the rest
That seems to pass, when ought else is addressed,
That we desire, with equal thirst oppressed.
Whatsoever it be that falls into our knowledge and jovissance, we find, it
does not satisfy us, and we still follow and gape after future, uncertain,
and unknown things, because the present and unknown please us not, and do
not satisfy us. Nor (as I think) because they have not sufficiently wherewith
to satiate and please us, but the reason is, that we apprehend and seize on
them with an unruly, disordered, and diseased taste and hold-fast.

Nam cum vidit hic ad vsum quae flagitat vsus, Luer. lib. 9.

Omnia iam ferme mortalibus esse parata,
Diuitijs homines and honor and laud potentes
Affluere, atque bona natorum excellere fama,
Nec minus esse domi, cuiquam tamen anxia corda,
Atque animum infestis cogi seruire querelis:
Intellexit ibi vitium va^ facere ipsum,
Omniaque illius vitio corrumpier in^us
Quae collata foris and commoda quaeque venirent.
For when the wiseman saw, that all almost,
That use requires, for men prepared was,
That men enriches, honors, praises boast,
In good report of children others pass,
Yet none at home did bear less pensive heart,
But that the mind was forced to serve complaint,
He knew, that fault the vessel did empart,
That all was marred within by vessels taint,
What ever good was wrought by any art.
Our appetite is irresolute, and uncertain; it can neither hold nor enjoy any
thing handsomely and after a good fashion. Man supposing it is the vice and
fault of things he possesses, feeds and fills himself with other things,
which he neither knows, nor has understanding of, whereto he applies both
his desires and hopes, and takes them as an honor and reverence to himself; as
says Caesar, Communs fit vitio naturae, vt invisis, latit antibus atque in Cas.
b^l. civ. li. 2.
cognitis rebus magis confidamus, vehementiusque exterreamur. It happens by the
common fault of nature, that both we are more confident, and more terrified by
things unseen, things hidden, and unknown.

The four and fiftieth Chapter.
Of vain Subtilties, or subtle Devises.

THere are certain frivolus and vain inventions, or as some call them,
subtilties of wit, by means of which, some men do often endevor to get credit
and reputation: as diverse Poets, that frame whole volumes with verses beginning
with one letter: we see Eggs, Wings, Hatchets, Crosses, Globes, Columns, and
diverse other suchlike figures anciently fashioned by the Graecians, with the
measure and proportion of their verses, spreading, lengthning, and shortning
them, in such sort as they justly represent such and such a figure. Such was
the science and profession of him, who long time busied himself, to number how
many several ways the letters of the Alphabet might be ranged, and found-out
that incredible number mentioned by Plutarke. I allow of his opinion, who
having one brought before him, that was taught with such industry, and so
curiously to cast a grain of Millet with his hand, that without ever missing,
he would every time make-it go through a needles-eye; and being entreated to
bestow some thing upon him, (as a reward for so rare a skill,) very pleasantly
and worthily, commanded, that this cunning workman should have two or thee
peckes of Millet delivered him, to the end his rare art and witty labor
might not remain without da lie exercise. It is a wonderful testimony of our
judgments imbecilitie, that it should commend and allow of things, either for
their rareness, or noveltie, or for their difficulty, though neither
goodness or profit be joined unto them. We come but now from my house, where
we have a while recreated our selves, with devising who could find out most
things, that held by both extreme ends; As for example, Sire, is in our
tongue a title only given to the most imminent person of our state, which is
the King, and yet is commonly given to some of the vulgar sort, as unto
Merchants and Pedlers, and nothing concerns those of the middle sort, and
that are between both. Women of chiefest calling and quality are called
Dames, the mean sort Damoisels, and those of the basest rank, are also
entitled ` Dames. The clothes of estate, which we see set over tables and
chaires, are only allowed in Princes houses, yet we see them used in Tavernes.
Democritus was wont to say, That Gods and beasts, had quicker senses and
sharper wi^s then men, who are of the middle rank. The Romans used to wear
one self same garment on mourning and on festival days. It is most certain,
that both an extreme fear, and an exceeding heat of courage, do equally
trouble and distemper the belly. The nickname of Iremblam, wherewith Zanchi^
the twelst King of Navarre was surnamed, teaches, that boldness, as well as
fear, engender a startling and shaking of the limbs. Those which armed, either
him, or any other of like nature, whose skin would quiver, assa ed to re-assure
him, by diminishing the danger wherein he was like to fall; you have no perfect
knowledge of me (said he,) for if my flesh knew how far my courage will
ere-long carrie-it, it would presently fall into a flat swoune. That chillness,
or as I may term it, faintness, which we feel after the exercises of Venus,
the same does also proceed of an over vehement appetite and disordred heat.
Excessive heat and extreme cold do both hoile and roast. Aristotle says, That
leaden vessels doc as well melt and consume away by an excessive cold and rigor
of winter, as by a vehement heat. Both desire and sati^tie fill the seats with
sorrow, both above and under voluptuousness. Folly and wisdom meet in one
point of feeling and resolution, about the suffering of humane accidents. The
wiser sort does gourmandise and command evil, and others know it not. The
latter, (as a man would say) short of accidents, the other, beyond. Who after
they have well weighed and considered their qualities, and duly measured, and
rightly judged what they are, over-leap them by the power of a vigorous
courage. They disdain and tread them under foot, as having a strong and
solid mind, against which, if fortunes darts chance to light, they must of
necessity be blunted and abated, meeting with so resisting a body, as they
cannot pierce, or make any impression therein. The ordinary and mean
condition of men abides between these two extremities; which are those that
perceive and have a feeling of michiefes, but can not endure them. Both
infancy and decrepitude meet with weakness of the brain. Covetise and
profusion in a like desire to acquire and hoard-vp. It may with likelyhoode be
spoken, that there is a kind of Abecedarie ignorance, preceding science: an
other doctorall, following science: an ignorance, which science does beget:
even as it spoileth the first. Of simple, lesse-curious, and least-instructed
spirits are made good christians, who simply believe through reverence and
obedience, and are kept in awe of the laws. In the mean vigor of spirits, and
slender capacity is engendered the error of opinions: They follow the appearance
of the first sense; and have some title to interpret-it foolishness and
sottishness, that we are confirmed in ancient ways, respecting us, that are
nothing therein instructed by study. The best, most-setled, and
clearest-seeing spirits, make another sort of well-beleevers, who by long and
religious investigation, penetrate a more profound, and find-out a more
abstruse light in scriptures, and discover the misterious and divine secrets of
our ecclesiastical policy. And therefore see we some of them, that have
reached unto this last rank, by the second, with wonderful fruit and
confirmation; as unto the furthest bounds of christian intelligence: and enjoy
their victory with comfort, thans-giving, reformation of manners, and great
modesty. In which rank, my purpose is not to place these others, who to purge
themselves from the suspicion of their forepassed errors, and the better to
assure us of them, become extreme, indiscreet, and unjust in the conduct of
our cause, and tax and taint the same with infinite reproaches of violence. The
simple peasants are honest men; so are Philosophers, (or as our time names
them, strong and clear natures) enriched with a large instruction of
profitable sciences. The mongrell sort of husbandmen, who have disdained the
first form of ignorance of letters, and could never reach unto the other (as
they that sit between two stools, of which besides so many others I am one)
are dangerous, peevish, foolish, and importunate, and they which trouble the
world most. Therefore do I (as much as lies in me) withdraw my self into the
first and natural seat, whence I never assaied to depart. Popular and merely
natural Poesy, has certain graces, and inbred liveliness, whereby it
concurreth and compares it self unto the principal beauty of perfect and
artificial Poesy, as may plainly be seen in the Villannelles, homely gigs,
and country songs of Gasconie, which are brought unto us from Nations, that
have no knowledge at all, either of any learning, or so much as of writing.
Mean and indifferent Poesy, and that consists between both, is skorned,
and contemned, and passes without honor or esteem. But forasmuch as since
the passage has been opened unto the spirit, I have found (as it commonly
happens) that we had apprehended that which is neither so nor so for a
difficult exercise, and of a rare subject; And that since our invention has
been set on fire, it discovers an infinite number of like examples; I will
only add this one: That if these Essays were worthy to be judged-of, it
might in mine opinion happen, that they would not greatly please the common and
vulgar spirits, and as little the singular and excellent. The first will
understand but little of them, the latter overmuch; they might perhaps live
and rub out in the middle region.

The five and fiftieth Chapter.
Of Smells and Odors.

IT is reported of some, namely of Alexander, that their sweat, through some
rare and extraordinary complexion, yielded a sweet smelling savor; whereof
Plutarke and others seek to find out the cause. But the common sort of bodies
are clean contrary, and the best quality they have, is to be clear of any
smell at all. The sweetness of the purest breaths has nothing more perfect in
them, then to be without savor, that may offend-vs: as are those of
healthy-sound children. And therefore says Plautus;

Mulier tum been, olet, vbi nihil olet. Pla^. Mostel. act. 1. sc. 3.


Then smel's a woman purely well,
When she of nothing else does smell.
The most exquisit and sweetest savor of a woman, it is to smell of nothing;
and sweet, well-smelling, strange savours, may rightly be held suspicious in
such as use them; and a man may lawfully think, that who uses them, doth-it
to cover some natural defect: whence proceed these ancient Poetical sayings.

To smell sweet, is to stink,
Rides nos Coracine nil olentes, Mart. li. 6. epig. 55. 4

Malo quam been olere, nil olere,
You laugh at us that we of nothing savor,
Rather smell so, then sweeter (by your savor.) And else where.
Post hume non been olet, qui been semper olet. Li. 2. epig. 12. 4.
Good fir, he smells not ever sweet,
Who smells still sweeter then is meet.
Yet love I greatly to be entertained with sweet smells, and hate exceedingly
all manner of sour and ill savours, which I shall sooner smell, then any other.

-- Namque sagacius vnus odoror, Hor. epod. 12. 4.

Polypus, an gravis hirsutis cubet hircus in alis,
Quam canis acer vbi lateat sut.
Sooner smell I, whether a cancred nose,
Or rank gote-smell in hairie arme-pits lie,
Then sharpest hounds, where rowting bores repose.
The simplest and meerely-naturall smells, are most pleasing unto me; which care
ought chiefly to concern women. In the very heart of Barbary, the Scithian
women, after they had washed themselves, did sprinkle, dawbe, and powder all
their bodies and faces over, with a certain odoriferous drug, that grows in
their Country: which dust and dawbing being taken away, when they come near
men, or their husbands, they remain very clean, and with a very
sweet-savouring perfume. What odor soever it be, it is strange to see, what
hold it will take on-me, and how apt my skin is to receive it. He that
complains against nature, that she has not created man with a fit instument,
to carry sweet smells fast-tied to his nose, is much to blame: for, they carry
themselves. As for me in particular, my mostachoes, which are very thick,
serve me for that purpose. Let me but approach my gloves or my hand-kercher to
them, their smell will stick upon them a whole day. They manifest the place I
come from. The close-smacking, sweetnesse-moving, love-alluring, and
greedismirking kisses of youth, were heretofore wont to stick on them many
hours after; yet am I little subject to those popular diseases, that are taken
by conversation, and bred by the contagion of the air: And I have escaped
those of my time, of which there has been many and several kinds, both in the
Towns about me, and in our Army. We read of Socrates, that during the time of
many plagues and relapses of the pestilence, which so often infested the City
of Athens, he never forsook or went out of the Town: yet was he the only
man, that was never infected, or that felt any sickness. Physicians might (in
mine opinion) draw more use and good from odours, then they do. For, my self
have often perceived, that according unto their strength and quality, they
change and alter, and move my spirits, and work strange effects in me: which
makes me approve the common saying, that the invention of incense and perfumes
in Churches, so ancient and so far-dispersed throughout all nations and
religions, had an especial regard to rejoice, to comfort, to quicken, to
rowze, and to purify our senses, that so we might be the apter and readier
unto contemplation. And the better to judge of it, I would I had my part of the
skill, which some Cooks have, who can so curiously season and temper strange
odors with the savor and relish of their meats. As it was especially observed
in the service of the King of Tunes, who in our days landed at Naples, to
meet and enter-parly with the Emperor Charles the fifth. His viands were so
exquisitely farced, and so sumptuously seasoned with sweet odoriferous drugs,
and aromaticall spices, that it was found upon his book of account, the
dressing of one peacocke, and two fesants amounted to one hundred ducats;
which was their ordinary manner of cooking his meats. And when they were
carved-vp, not only the dining chambers, but all the rooms of his palace,
and the streets round about-it were replenished with an exceeding odoriferous
and aromaticall vapor, which continued a long time after. The principal care
I take, wheresoever I am lodged, is to avoid, and be far from all manner of
filthy, foggy, ill-savouring, and unwholesome aires. These goodly Cities of
strangely-seated Venice, and huge-built Paris, by reason of the muddie, sharp,
and offending savors, which they yield; the one by her fennie and marish
situation, the other by her du^tie uncleanness, and continual mire, do
greatly alter and diminish the favor which I bear them.

The six and fiftieth Chapter.
Of Prayers and Orisons.

I Propose certain formelesse and irresolute fantasies, as do those scholars,
who in schools publish doubtful and sophistical questions to be disputed and
canvased: not to establish the truth, but to find-it out: which I submit to
their judgments, to whom the ordering and directing, not only of my actions
and compositions, but also of my thoughts, belongs. The condemnation, as well
as the approbation of them, will be equally acceptable and profitable unto me,
deeming-it absurd and impious, if any thing be, either ignorantly, or
unadvisedly set down in this rapsodie, contrary unto the sacred resolutions,
and repugnant to the holy prescriptions of the Catholic, Apostolic, and
Roman Church, wherein I was borne, and out of which I purpose not to die. And
therefore always referring my self unto their censures that have all power
over me, do I meddle so rashly, to write of all manner of purposes and
discourses, as I do here. I wot not whether I be deceived, but sithence, by an
especial and singular favor of Gods divine bounty, a certain form of
Prayer, has, by the very mouth of God, word by word been prescribed and
directed unto us, I have ever thought the use of-it, should be more ordinary
with us, then it is. And might I be believed, both rising and going to bed,
sitting down and rising from boorde, and going about any particular action or
business, I would have all good Christians, to say the Pater noster, and if no
other prayer, at least not to omit that. The Church may extend, amplify, and
diversifie prayers according to the need of our instruction: For, I know it is
always the same substance, and the same thing. But that one should ever have
this privilege, that all manner of people, should at all times, and upon every
occasion have it in their mouth: For, it is most certain, that only it
contains whatsoever we want, and is most fit, and effectual in all events.
It is the only prayer I use in every place, at all times, and upon every
accident; and in stead of changing, I use often repetition of it: whence it
comes to pass, that I remember none so well as that one. I was even now
considering, whence this general error comes, that in all our desseignes
and enterprises, of what nature soever, we immediately have recourse unto God,
and in every necessity, we call upon his holy name: And at what time soever
we stand in need of any help, and that our weakness wants assistance, we
only invoke him, without considering whether the occasion be just or unjust;
and what estate or action we be in, or go about, be it never so vicious or
unlawful, we call upon his name and power. Indeed, he is our only protector,
and of power to affoord-vs all manner of help and comfort; but although he
vouchsafe to honor us with this joy-bringing fatherly adoption, yet is he as
just as he is good; and as good and just, as he is mighty: But oftener uses
his justice than his might, and favors us according to the reason of the
same, and not according to our requests. Plato in his laws makes three sorts
of injurious belief in the Gods: First, that there is none at all; Secondly,
that they meddle not with our affairs; Thirdly, that they never refuse any
thing unto our vows, offerings, and sacrifices. The first error, according to
his opinion, did never continue immutable in man, even from his first infancy
unto his latter age. The two succeeding may admit some constancy. His justice
and power are inseparable. It is but in vain to implore his power in a bad
cause. Man must have an unpolluted soul when he prays (at least in that
moment he addresseth himself to pray) and absolutely free from all vicious
passions; otherwise we our selves present him the rods to scourge us withal.
In liew of redressing our fault, we redouble the same, by presenting him with
an affection fraught with irreverence, sin, and hatred, to whom only we
should sue for grace and forgiveness. Loe-heere, why I do not willingly
commend those Pharisaicall humors, whom I so often behold, and more then
ordinary, to pray unto God, except their actions immediately preceding or
succeeding their prayers witness some show of reformation or hope of amendment.

-- Si nocturnus adulter Iuven. sat. 8. 144.
Tempora sanctonico velas adoperta cucullo. If in a cape-cloake-hood
befrenchifide
Thou a night-whore-munger thy head do hide.
And the state of a man that commixeth devotion unto an execrable life, seems
in some sort to be more condemnable, then that of one, that is conformable unto
himself, and every way dissolute. Therefore does our Church continually
refuse, the favor of her entrance and society, unto customs and manners,
wilfully-obstinate on some egregious villainy. We only pray by custom and
use, and for fashion-sake, or to say better, we but read and pronounce our
prayers: To conclude, it is nothing but a show of formalitie, and a formal
show. And it greeveth me to see many men, who at grace before and after meat,
will with great show of devotion, cross themselves three or four times, (and
it vexes me so much the more, when I call to mind, that it is a sign I
greatly reverence, and have in continual use, yea, if I be but gaping) and
there-whilst, shall you see them bestow all other hours of the day in all
manner of hatred, malice, covetousness, and injustice. Many hours spend they
about vice, but one to God, and that as it were by way of recompense and
composition. It it wondrous to see, so far different and diverse actions,
continue with so even a tenor, that no interruption or alteration at all can be
perceived, either about their confines, or passage from one unto another. What
prodigious conscience can be at any harts-case, fostring, and feeding with so
mutual, quiet, and agreeing society in one self same mansion, both crime and
judge? A man whose Paillardize and Iuxurie, does incessantly sway and rule the
head, and who judges the same ab hominable and most hateful in the sight of
God; what says he unto his all-seeing Majesty, when he opens his lips,
either of mouth or heart, to speak to him of-it? He reclaimeth himself, but
falls suddenly again. If the object of his divine justice, and his presence
should strike, (as he says) and chastise his soul, how short-soever the
penitence were; fear it self would so often cast his thought on-it, that he
would presently perceive himself master of those vices, which are habituated*
inbred, settled, and enfleshed in him. But what of those, which ground a whole
life upon the fruit and benefit of that sin, they know to be mortal? How
many trades, professions, occupations, and vacations, have we daily and
continually used, frequented, and allowed amongst us, whose essence is vicious
and most pernicious? And he that would needs confess himself unto me, and of
his own accord told me, that for fear of loosing his credit, and to keep the
honor of his offices; he had for a whole age, made show and profession, and
acted the effects of a religion, which in his own selfe-accusing conscience,
he judged damnable, and clean contrary unto that he had in his heart: How
could he admit and foster so contradictorie and impious a discourse in his
heart? With what language entertain they divine justice concerning this
subject? Their repentance, consisting in visible amends, and manageable
reparation; they loose both toward God and us, the means to allege the same.
Are they so malapart and fond-hardie as to crave pardon without satisfaction,
and sans repentance? I think it goes with the first, as with these last: But
obstinacy is not herein so easy to be vanquished. This so sudden
contrariety, and violent volubilitie of opinion, which they faine-vnto-vs,
seems to me a miracle. They present-vs with the state of an indigestible
agony. How santasticall seemed their imagination unto me, who these latter
years had taken up a fashion, to check and reproove all men, that professed
the Catholic Religion, in whom shined any extraordinary brightness of
spirit, saying, that it was but fained: and to do him honor, held, that
whatsoever he said in appearance, he could not inwardly choose but have his
belief reformed according to their byase. It is a peevish infirmity, for a
man to think himself so firmly grounded, as to persuade himself, that the
contrary may not be believed: And more peevish also, to be persuaded by such a
spirit, that prefers I wot not what disparitie of fortune, before the hopes
and threats of eternal life, They may believe me: If any thing could have
attempted my youth, the ambition of the hazard, and difficulty, which followed
this late-moderne enterprise, should have had good part therein. It is not
without great reason, in my poor judgment, that the Church forbids the
confused, rash and indiscreet use of the sacred and divine songs, which the
holy spirit has indicted unto David. God ought not to be commixed in our
actions, but with awful reverence, and an attention full of honor and
respect. The word or voice is too divine, having no other use but to exercise
our lungs, and to please our ears. It is from the conscience and not from the
tongue that it must proceed. It is not consonant unto reason, that a prentise
or shop-keeping boy, amiddest his idle, vain, and frivolous conceits, should
be suffered to entertain himself, and play therewith. Nor is it seemly, or
toollerable, to see the sacred book of our beliefes-Mysteries, tossed up and
down and played withal, in a shop, or a hall, or a kitchen. They have
heretofore been accounted mysteries, but through the abuse of times, they are
now held as sports and recreations. So serious, and venerable a study should
not, by way of pastime, and tumultuarie be handled. It ought to be a fixed, a
purposed, and settled action, to which this preface of our office sursum corda
should ever be adjoined; and the very exterior parts of the body, should with
such a countenance, be referred unto it, that to all men's eyes it may witness
a particular attention and duteous respect. It is not a a study fitting all
men, but only such as have vowed themselves vnto-it, and whom God has, of his
infinite mercy, called thereto. The wicked, the ungodly, and the ignorant are
thereby empaired. It is no history to be fabulously reported, but a history
to be dutifully reverenced, awfully feared, and religiously adored. Are they
not pleasantly conceited, who because they have reduced the same into the
vulgar tongues, and that all men may vnderstand-it, persuade themselves, that
the people shall the better conceive and digest the same? Consisteth-it but in
the words, that they understand not all they find written? Shall I say more? By
approaching thus little unto it, they go back from it. Mere ignorance, and
wholly relying on others, was verily more profitable and wiser, then is this
verbal, and vain knowledge, the nurse of presumption, and sourse of
temeritie. Moreover, I am of opinion, that the uncontrolled liberty, that all
men have to wrest, dissipate, and wyre-draw a word so religious, and important,
to so many several idiomes, has much more danger then profit following-it.
The Jews, the Mahometans, and well-nigh all other nations, are wedded unto,
and reverence the language, wherein their mysteries and religion had originally
been conceived; and any change or translation has not without appearance of
reason been directly forbidden. Know we whether there be Judges enough in Basque
and in Brittanie to establish this translation made in their tongue? The
universal Church has no more difficult and solemn judgment to make. Both in
speaking and preaching the interpretation is wandering, free, and mutable, and
of one parcel; so is it not alike. One of our Grecian Historians, does justly
accuse his age, for as much as the secrets of Christian religion were dispersed
in all public places, and even amongst the basest artificers; and that every
man might, at his pleasure, dispute of it, and at randon speak his mind of the
same. And it should be a great shame for us, who by the unspeakable grace of
God enjoy the pure and sacred mysteries of piety, to suffer the same to be
profaned in the mouths of ignorant and popular people, seeing the very
Gentiles interdicted Socraetes and Plato, and the wisest, to meddle, enquire or
speak of things committed unto the Priests of Delphos. Saying moreover, That
the factions of Princes, touching the subject of Divinity, are armed, not with
Zeal, but with anger. That zeal depends of divine reason and justice,
holding an orderly and moderate course, but that it changes into hatred and
envy, and in steed of corn and grape, it produces nettles and darnell, if it
be directed by humane passion. And justly says this other, who counselling the
Emperor Theodosius, affirmed that disputations, did not so much appease and
^ull asleep the schisms of the Church, as stir up and cause horesies. And
therefore it behooved, to avoid all contentions, controversies, and logical
arguings, and wholly and sincerely refer himself unto the prescriptions and
orders of faith, established by our forfathers. And Andronicus the Emperor,
finding by chance in his palace, certain principal men very carnestly
disputing against Lapodius, about one of our points of great importance,
taunted and rated them very bitterly, and threatened if they gave not over, he
would cause them to be cast into the river. Children and women do now-adaies
govern and sway the oldest and most experienced men concerning Ecclesiastical
Laws: whereas the first that Plato made, forbids them to enquire after the
reason of civil Laws, and which ought to stand in place of divine ordinances.
Allowing aged men to communicate the same amongst themselves, and with the
Magistrate, adding more-over, always provided it be not in the presence of
young men, and before prosane persons. A notable Bishop has left written, that
in the other end of the world, there is an Island called of our predecessors
Dioscorida, very commodious, and fertile of all sorts of fruits and trees, and
of a pure and wholesome air; whose people are Christians, and have Churches
and Altars; adorned with nothing else but crosses, without other images; great
observers of fastings and holy days; exact payers of their priests tithes; and
so chaste, that none of them may lawfully all his life long know any more then
one wife. And in all other matters so well pleased with their fortune, that
being seated in the midst of the sea, they have and know no use of ships: and
so simple, that of their religion, which they so diligently and awfully
observe, they know not, nor understand so much as one only word. A thing
incredible, to him that know not how the Pagans, who are so devout and zealous
idolaters, know nothing of their Gods, but only their bare names and statues.
The ancient beginning of Menalippe, a tragedy of Euripides, imports thus.
Eurip.


O Jupiter, car de toy rien sinon,
Ie ne cogn^is seulement que le nom.
O Jupiter, for unto me,
Only the name is known of thee.
I have also in my time heard certain writings complained-of, for so much as
they are merely humane and Philosophical, without meddling with divinity. He
that should say to the contrary (which a man might do with reason) that
heavenly doctrine, as a Queen and governesse does better keep her rank apart;
that she ought to be chief ruler and principal head every where, and not
suffragant and subsidiarie. And that peradventure examples in Grammar,
Rethorike, and Logike, might more fitly and sortably be taken from elsewhere,
then from so sacred and holy a subject, as also the arguments of theaters,
plots of plays, and grounds of public spectacles. That mysteriously-divine
reasons are more venerably and reverently considered alone, and in their native
style, then joined and compared to humane discourse. That this fault is oftener
seen, which is, that Divines write too humanely, then this other, that
humanists write not Theologically enough. Philosophy, says S. Chrysostom, is
long since baenished from sacred schools, as an unprofitable servant, and
deemed unworthy to behold, but in passing by the entry, or the vestrie of the
sacred treasures of heavenly doctrine. That the forms of humane speech, are
more base, and ought by no means to make any use of the dignity, majesty,
and pre-eminence of divine speech. As for my part, I give it leave to say,
Verbis indisciplinatis, with undisciplined words, Fortune, destiny, chance,
accident, fate, good luck, ill luck, the Gods, and other phrases, as best it
pleases. I propose humane fantasies and mine own, simply as humane conceits,
and severally considered; not as settled, concluded, and directed by celestial
ordinance, incapable of any doubt or alteration. A matter of opinion, and not
of faith. What I discourse according to my self, not what I believe according
unto God, with a laicall fashion, and not a clericall manner; yet ever most
religious. As children propose their essays, instructable, not instructing.
And might not a man also say without appearance, that the institution, which
wills, no man shall dare to write of Religion, but sparingly, and reservedly,
except such as make express profession of it, would not want some show of
profit and justice; and happily to me to be silent. It has bin told me, that
even those which are not of our consent, do flatly inhibite amongst themselves
the use of the sacred name of God in all their vulgar and familiar discourses.
They would have no man use it as an interjection, or exclamation, nor to be
alleged as a witness, or compariton; wherein I find they have reason. And
howsoever it be, that we call God to our commerce and society, it should be
zealously, seriously, and religiously. There is (as far as I remember) such a
like discourse in Xenophon, wherein he declares, That we should more rarely
pray unto God: for as much as it is not easy, we should so often settle our
minds in so regular, so reformed, and so devout a seat, where indeed it ought
to be, to pray aright and effectually: otherwise our prayers are, not only
vain and unprofitable, but vicious. Forgive us (say we) our offenses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us. What else infer we by that petition,
but that we offer him our soul void of all revenge and free from all rancour?
We nevertheless invoke God and call on his aid, even in the complot of our
grievousest faults, and desire his assistance in all manner of injustice and
iniquity.

Quae nisi seductis nequeas committere divis. Pers. sat. 2. 4.
Which you to Saints not drawn aside,
Would think unfit to be applide.
The covetous man sueth and prays unto him for the vain increase and
superfluous preservation of his wrong-gotten treasure. The ambitious, he
importuneth God for the conduct of his fortune, and that he may have the
victory of all his desseignes. The thief, the pirate, the murderer, yea and
the traitor, all call upon him, all implore his aid, and all solicit him, to
give them courage in their attempts, constancy in their resolutions, to remove
all lets and difficulties, that in any sort may withstand their wicked
executions, and impious actions; or give him thanks, if they have had good
success; the one if he have met with a good booty, the other if he return
home rich, the third if no man have seen him kill his enemy, and the last,
though he have caused any execrable mischief. The Soldier, if he but go to
besiege a cottage, to scale a Castle, to rob a Church, to pettard a gate, to
force a religious house, or any villainous act, before he attempt-it, prays to
God for his assistance, though his intents and hopes be full-fraught with
cruelty, murder, covetise, luxury, sacri-ledge, and all iniquity.

Hoc ipsum quo in Iovis aurem impellere tentas,
Dic agedum, Staio, proh Iuppiter, o bone, clamet, 21.

Iuppiter, at sese non clamet Iuppiter ipse.
Go-to then, say the same to some bad fellow,
Which thou prepar'st for Gods ears: let him bellow,
O God, good God; so God,
On himself would not plod.
Margaret Queen of Navarre, makes mention of a young Prince (whom although she
name not expressly, yet his greatness has made him sufficiently known) who
going about an amorous assignation, and to lie with an Advocates wife of Paris,
his way lying along a Church, he did never pass by so holy a place, whether
it were in going or coming from his lechery, and cukolding-labour, but would
make his prayers unto God, to be his help and furtherance. I would feign have
any impartial man tell me, to what purpose this Prince invoked and called on
God for his divine favor, having his mind only bent to sin, and his
thoughts set on luxury: Yet does she allege him for a special testimony of
singular devotion. But it is not only by this example, a man might verify,
that women are not very fit to manage or treat matters of Religion and
Divinity. A true and hearty prayer, and an unfeigned religious reconciliation
from us unto God, cannot likely fall into a wicked and impure soul, especially
when Satan swaieth the same. He that calls upon God for his assistance,
whilst he is engulphed and wallowing in filthy sin, does as the cutpurse,
that should call for justice unto his aid, or those that produce God in
witness of a lie.

-- tacito mala vota susurro Lucan. li. 5. 94.
Concipimu^. With silent whispering we,
For ill things suppliants be.
There are few men, that would dare to publish the secret requests they make to
God.

Haud cuivis promptum est, murmurque humilesque susurros Pers. sat. 2. 6.

Tollere de Templis, and aperto vivere voto.
From Church low-whispering murmurs to expel,
It Is not for all, or with known vows live well.
And that is the reason, why the Pithagorians would have them public, that all
might hear them, that no man should abusively call on God, and require any
indecent or unjust thing of him, as that man;

-- clare cum dixit, Apollo, Hor. lib. 1. epist. 16. 59.

Labra movet metuens audiri: pulchra Laverna
Da mihi fallere, da iustum sanctumque videri.
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus ^bijce nubem.
When he alowd has said, Apollo hear,
Loath to be heard, Goddess of thieves, said he,
Grant me to cosen, and yet just appear,
My faults in night, my fraud's in clouds let be.
The Gods did grievously punish the impious vows of Oedipus, by granting them
unto him. His prayer was, that his children might between themselves decide in
arms the succession of his estate; he was so miserable, as to be taken at his
word. A man should not request that all things follow our will, but that it may
follow wisdom. Verily, it seems, that we make no other use of our prayers,
then of a company of gibrish phrases: And as those who employ holy and sacred
words about witchcraft and magical effects; and that we imagine their effect
depends of the contexture, or sound, or succession of words, or from our
countenance. For, our soul, being full-fraught with concupiscence, and all
manner of ungodly thoughts, nothing touched with repentance, nor moved with new
reconciliation toward God, we headlong present unto him those heedlesse words,
which memory affoordeth our tongue, by which we hope to obtain an expiation
and remission of our offenses. There is nothing so easy, so sweet, so
comfortable and favorable, as the law of God; she (of his infinite mercy)
calls us unto him, how faulty and detestable soever we be; she gently
stretches forth her arms unto us, and mildely receives us into her lap, how
guilty, polluted, and sinful soever we are, and may be in aftertimes. But in
recompense of so boundless and unspeakable a favor, she must be thankfully
accepted, and cheerfully regarded: and so gracious a pardon must be received
with a gratitude of the soul, and at least, in that instant, that we address
our selves unto her presence; to have our soul grieved for her faults,
penitent of her sins, hating those passions and affections, that have caused
or provoked us to transgress his laws, to offend his Majesty, and to break
his commaundments. Plato says, That neither the Gods, nor honest men will ever
accept the offering of a wicked man.

Immunis aram si tetigit manus, Li. 3. od. 23. 17.

Non sumptuosa blandior hostia
Mollivit aversos Penates,
Far pio and saliente mica.
If guiltless hand the Altar tuch,
No offering, cost it never so much,
Shall better please our God offended,
Then corn with crackling-corne-salt blended.
The seven and fiftieth Chapter.
Of Age.

I Cannot receive that manner, whereby we establish the continuance of our
life. I see that some of the wiser sort do greatly shorten the same, in
respect of the common opinion. What said Cato Junior, to those who sought to
hinder him from killing himself? Do I now live the age, wherein I may justly
be reproved to leave my life too soon? Yet was he but eight and forty years
old. He thought that age very ripe, yea, and well advanced, considering how
few men come vnto-it. And such as entertain themselves with, I wot not what
kind of course, which they call natural, promises some few years beyond,
might do-it, had they a privilege that could exempt them from so great a
number of accidents, unto which each one of us stands subject by a natural
subjection, and which may interrupt the said course, they propose unto
themselves. What fondness is-it, for a man to think he shall die, for, and
through, a failing and defect of strength, which extreme age draws with-it,
and to propose that term unto our life, seeing it is the rarest kind of all
deaths, and least in use? We only call it natural, as if it were against
nature to see a man break his neck with a fall; to be drowned by shipwreck;
to be surprised with a pestilence, or pleurisy, and as if our ordinary
condition did not present these inconveniences unto us all. Let us not flatter
ourselves with these fond-goodly words; a man may peradventure rather call
that natural, which is general, common and universal. To die of age, is a
rare, singular, and extraordinary death, and so much less natural then
others: It is the last and extremest kind of dying: The further it is from us,
so much the less is it to be hoped for: Indeed it is the limit, beyond which
we shall not pass, and which the law of nature has prescribed unto us, as
that which should not be outgon by any; but it is a rare privilege peculiar
unto her self, to make us continue vnto-it. It is an exemption, which through
some particular favor she bestows on some one man, in the space of two or
three ages, discharging him from the crosses, troubles, and difficulties, she
has enterposed between both, in this long cariere and pilgrimage. Therefore
my opinion is, to consider, that the age unto which we are come, is an age
whereto few arive: since men come not unto it by any ordinary course, it is a
sign we are very forward. And since we have past the accustomed bounds, which
is the true measure of our life, we must not hope, that we shall go much
further. Having escaped so many occasions of death, wherein we see the world to
fall, we must acknowledge that such an extraordinary fortune, as that is,
which maintains us, and is beyond the common use, is not likely to continue
long. It is a fault of the very laws, to have this false imagination: They
allow not a man to be capable and of discretion, to manage and dispose of his
own goods, until he be five and twenty years old, yet shall he hardly
preserve the state of his life so long. Augustus abridged five years of the
ancient Roman Laws, and declared, that for any man that should take upon him
the charge of judgment, it sufficed to be thirty years old. Servius Tullius
dispensed with the Knights, who were seven and forty years of age, from all
voluntary services of war. Augustus brought them to forty and five. To send
men to their place of sojourning before they be five and fifty or three score
years of age, me seems, carries no great appearance with-it. My advice would
be, that our vacation, and employment should be extended as far as might be for
the public commodity; but I blame some, and condemn most, that we begin not
soon enough to employ our selves. The same Augustus had been universal and
supreme judge of the world, when he was but nineteen years old, and would
have another to be thirty, before he shall be made a competent judge of a
cottage or farm. As for my part, I think our minds are as full grown and
perfectly joynted at twenty years, as they should be, and promise as much as
they can. A mind which at that age has not given some evident token or earnest
of her sufficiency, shall hardly give-it afterward; put her to what trial you
list. Natural qualities and virtues, if they have any vigorous or beauteous
thing in them, will produce and show the same within that time, or never. They
say in Daulphine,

Si l'espine nou picque quand nai, French. prove.

A peine que picque iamai.
A thorn, unless at first it prick,
Will hardly ever pearce to the quick.
Of all humane honorable and glorious actions, that ever came unto my
knowledge, of what nature soever they be, I am persuaded, I should have a
harder task, to number those, which both in ancient times, and in ours, have
been produced and achieved before the age of thirty years, then such as were
performed after: yea, often in the life of the same men. May not I boldly speak
it of those of Hanniball, and Scipio his great adversary? They lived the
better part of their life with the glory which they had gotten in their youth:
And though afterward they were great men, in respect of all others, yet were
they but mean in regard of themselves. As for my particular, I am verily
persuaded, that since that age, both my spirit and my body, have more
decreased then increased, more recoyled then advanced. It may be, that
knowledge and experience shall increase in them, together with life, that
bestow their time well: but vivacitie, promptitude, constancy, and other parts
much more our own, more important and more essential, they droope, they
languish, and they faint.

-- vbi iam validis quassatum est viribus aevi Lucr. li. 3. 457.

Corpus, and obtusis ceciderunt viribus artus,
Claudicat ingenium, delirat linguaque mensque.
Whence once the body by shrewd strength of years
Is shook, and limbs drawne-downe from strength that wears,
Wit halts, both tongue and mind
Do daily dote, we find.
It is the body, which sometimes yields first unto age; and other times the
mind: and I have seen many, that have had their brains weakened before their
stomach or legs. And forasmuch, as it is a disease, little or nothing
sensible unto him that endureth-it, and makes no great show, it is so much the
more dangerous. Here I exclaim against our Laws, not because they leave us so
long, and late in working and employment, but that they set us a work no
sooner, and it is so late before we be employed. Me thinks that considering
the weakness of our life, and seeing the infinite number of ordinary rocks,
and natural dangers it is subject unto, we should not so soon as we come into
the world, alot so great a share thereof unto unprofitable wantonness in
youth, il-breeding idleness, and slow-learning prentissage.

The end of the first Book.
THE ESSAYS OR MORAL, POLITIC AND MILITARY Discourses Of LO. MICHAEL de
Montaigne, Knight Of the noble Order of St. MICHAEL, and one of the Gentlemen
in Ordinary of the French king HENRY the Third his Chamber.

THE SECOND BOOK.

1613.

THE ESSAYS OF MICHAEL LORD OF MONTAIGNE.
The second Book.
The first Chapter.
Of the inconstancy of our actions.

THose which exercise themselves in controuling humane actions, find no such
let in any one part, as to piece them together, and bring them to one same
luster: For, they commonly contradict one an other so strangely, as it seems
impossible they should be parcels of one Warehouse. Young Marius* is sometimes
found to be the son of Mars, and other times the child of Venus. Pope
Bonifae^ the Eight, is reported to have entered into his charge, as a Fox; to
have carried himself therein, as a Lion; and to have died like a dog. And who
would think it was Nero, that lively image of cruelty, who being required to
sign (as the custom was) the sentence of a criminal offender, that had been
condemned to die, that ever he should answer? Oh would to God I could never
have written! So near was his heart grieved to doom a man to death. The world
is so full of such examples, that every man may store himself; and I wonder to
see men of understanding trouble themselves with sorting these parcels:
Sithence (me seems) irresolution is the most apparent and common vice of our
nature; as witnesses that famous verse of Publius the Comoedian:

Malum consilium est, quod mutari non potest. The counsel is but bad, Pub. Mi^.

Whose change may not be had.
There is some appearance to judge a man by the most common conditions of his
life; but seeing the natural instability of our customs and opinions; I have
often thought, that even good Authors do ill, and take a wrong course,
wilfully to opinionate themselves about framing a constant and solid
contexture of us. They choose an universal air, and following that image,
range and interpret all a man's actions; which if they cannot wrest
sufficiently, they remit them unto dissimulation. Augustus has escaped their
hands; for there is so apparent, so sudden and continual a variety of actions
found in him, through the course of his life, that even the boldest judges and
strictest censurers, have been feign to give him over, and leave him
undecided. There is nothing I so hardly believe to be in man, as constancy, and
nothing so easy to be found in him, as inconstancy. He that should distinctly
and part by part, judge of him, should often jumpe to speak truth. View all
antiquity over, and you shall find it a hard matter, to choose out a dozen of
men, that have directed their life unto one certain, settled, and assured
course; which is the surest drift of wisdom. For, to comprehend all in one
word, says an ancient writer, and to embrace all the rules of our life into
one, it is at all times to will, and not to will one same thing. I would not
vouchsafe, (says he) to add anything; always provided the will be just: for,
if it be unjust, it is impossible it should ever continue one. Verily, I have
heretofore learned, that vice is nothing but a disorder, and want of measure,
and by consequence, it is impossible to fasten constancy unto it. It is a
saying of Demosthenes, (as some report,) That consultation and deliberation, is
the beginning of all virtue; and constancy, the end and perfection. If by
reason or discourse we should take a certain way, we should then take the
fairest: but no man has thought on it.

Quod petijt, sper^^, repetit quod nuper omisit, Hor. l. 1. epist. 1. 98.

Astuat, and vitae disconvenit or dine toto.
He scorn's that which he sought, seek's that he scorned of late,
He flows, ebbes, disagrees in his life's whole estate.
Our ordinary manner is to follow the inclination of our appetite, this way and
that way; on the left, and on the right hand; upward and downe-ward, according
as the wind of occasions does transport us: we never think on what we would
have, but at the instant we would have it: and change as that beast that takes
the color of the place wherein it is laid. What we even now purposed, we alter
by and by, and presently return to our former biase: all is but changing,
motion, and inconstancy:

Ducimur vt nervis alienis mobile lignum. (...). sat. 7. 82.
So are we drawn, as wood is shooved,
By others sinnewes each way moved.
We go not, but we are carried: as things that flote, now gliding gently, now
hulling violently; according as the water is, either stormy or calm.

-- nonne videmus
Quid sibi quisque velit nescire and quaerere semper, Luer. l. 3* 1100

Commutare locum quasi onus deponere possit?
See we not, every man in his thoughts height
Knows not what he would have, yet seeks he straight
To change place, as he could lay down his weight?
Every day new toies, each hour new fantasies, and our humors moove and
fleet with the fleetings and movings of time.

Tales sunt hominum mentes, quali Pater ipse Cic. Fr^g^.

Iuppiter auctifero lustravit lumine terras.
Such are men's minds, as that great God of might
Survaies the earth with increase bearing light.
We floate and waver between diverse opinions: we will nothing freely, nothing
absolutely, nothing constantly. Had any man prescribed certain Laws, or
established assured policies in his own head; in his life should we daily see,
to shine an equality of customs, an assured order, and an infallible relation
from one thing to another ( Empedocles noted this deformity to be amongst the
Agrigentines, that they gave themselves so over unto delights, as if they
should die tomorrow next, and built as if they should never die) the discourse
thereof were easy to be made. As is seen in young Cato: He that touched but
one step of it, has touched all. It is an harmony of well according tunes and
which cannot contradict it self. With us it is clean contrary, so many
actions, so many particular judgments are there required. The surest way (in
mine opinion) were to refer them unto the next circumstances, without entering
into further search, and without concluding any other consequence of them.
During the late tumultuous broiles of our mangled estate, it was told me, that
a young woman, not far from me, had headlong cast her self out of a high
window, with intent to kill hirselfe, only to avoid the ravishment of a
rascaly-base soldier, that lay in her house, who offered to force her: and
perceiving that with the fall she had not killed hirselfe, to make an end of
her enterprise, she would have cut her own throat with a knife, but that
she was hindered by some that came-into her: Nevertheless having sore wounded
hirselfe, she voluntarily confessed, that the Soldier had yet but urged her
with importunate requests, suing-solicitations, and golden bribes* but she
feared he would in the end have obtained his purpose by compulsion: by whose
earnest speeches, resolute countenance, and gored blood (a true testimony of
her chaste virtue) she might appear to be the lively pattern of an other
Lucrece, yet know I certainly, that both before that time, and afterward, she
had been enjoyed of others upon easier composition. And as the common saying
is; Fair and soft, as squemish-honest as she seems, although you miss of
your intent, conclude not rashly an inviolable chastity to be in your
Mistress; For, a groom or a horse-keeper may find an hour to thrive in; and
a dog has a day. Antigonus having taken upon him to favor a Soldier of his,
by reason of his virtue and valor, commanded his Phisicians to have great
care of him, and see whether they could recover him of a lingering and inward
disease, which had long tormented him, who being perfectly cured, he afterward
perceived him to be nothing so earnest and diligent in his affairs, demanded
of him, how he was so changed from himself, and become so ocwardish: your
self good sir (answered he) have made me so, by ridding me of those in
firmities, which so did grive me, that I made no account of my life. A Soldier
of Lucullus, having by his enemies been robbed of all he had, to revenge
himself undertook a notable and desperate atempt upon them; and having
recovered his losses, Lucullus conceived a very good opinion of him, and with
the greatest shows of assured trust and loving kindness he could bethink
himself, made especial account of him, and in any dangerous enterprise
seemed to trust and employ him only:

Verbis quae timido quoque possent addere mentem: Hor. l. 2. epist. 2. 34.
With words, which to a coward might
Add courage, had he any spright.
Employ (said he unto him) some wretch-stripped and robbed soldier

-- (quantumvis rusticus ibit, 39.
Ibit eo, quo vis, qui zonam perdidit, inquit.) (None is, says he, so
clownish, but will-on,
Where you will have him, if his purse be gone)
and absolutely refused to obey him. When we read that Mahomet, having
outragiouslie rated Chasan, chief leader of his Ianizers, because he saw his
troup wel-nigh defeated by the Hungarians, and he to behave himself but
faintly in the fight, Chasan without making other reply, alone as he was, and
without more ado, with his weapon in his hand rushed furiously in the thickest
throng of his enemies that the first met withal, of whom he was instantly
slain: This may happily be deemed, rather a rash conceit, than a justification;
and a new spite, then a natural p^owes. He whom you saw yesterday so
boldly-venturous, wonder not if you see him a dastardly meacoke to morrow next:
for either anger or necessity, company or wine, a sudden fury or the clang of
a trumpet, might rowze-vp his heart, and stir up his courage. It is no heart nor
courage so framed by discourse or deliberation: These circumstances have settled
the same in him: Therefore is it no marvel if by other contrary circumstance
he become a craven and change copy. This supple variation, and easy yielding
contradiction, which is seen in us, has made some to imagine, that we had
two souls and others, two faculties; whereof every one as best she pleases,
accompanies and does agitate-vs; the one toward good, the other toward evil.
For so much as such a rough diversity cannot well sort and agree in one simple
subject. The blast of accidents, does not only remove me according to his
inclination; for besides, I remove and trouble my self by the instability of
my posture, and whosoever looks narrowly about himself, shall hardly see
himself twice in one same state. Sometimes I give my soul one visage, and
sometimes another, according unto the posture or side I lay her in. If I speak
diversely of my self, it is because I look diversely upon my self. All
contrarieties are found in her, according to some turn or remooving, and in
some fashion or other. Shamefast, bashful, insolent, chaste, luxurious,
peevish, prattling, silent, fond, doting, labourious, nice, delicate, ingenious,
slow, dull, froward, humorous, debonaire, wise, ignorant, false in words,
true speaking, both liberal, co, vetous, and prodigal. All these I perceive
in some measure or other to be in me, accorning as I stir or turn my
self; And whosoever shall heedefully survay and consider him self, shall
find this volubilitie and discordance to be in himself, yea and in his very
judgment. I have nothing to say entirely, simply, and with soliditie of my
self, without confusion, disorder, blending, mingling; and in one word,
Distinguo is the most universal part of my logike. Although I ever purpose to
speak good of good, and rather to enterprete those things, that will bear it,
unto a good sense; yet is it that, the strangenes of our condition admits
that we are often urged to do well by vice it self, if well doing were not
judged by the intention only. Therefore may not a courageous act conclude a
man to be valiant. He that is so, when just occasion serves, shall ever be so,
and upon all occasions. If it were an habitude of virtue, and not a sudden
humor, it would make a man equally resolute at all assayes, in all accidents:
Such alone, as in company; such in a single combat, as in a set battle; For,
whatsoever some say, valor is all alike, and not one in the street or town,
and another in the camp or field. As courageously should a man bear a
sickness in his bed, as a hurt in the field and fear death no more at home in
his house, then abroad in an assault. We should not then see one same man enter
the breach, or charge his enemy with an assured and undoubted fierceness, and
afterward having escaped that, to vex, to grive and torment himself like unto
a seely woman, or faint-hearted milke-soppe for the loss of a suit, or death
of a child. If one chance to be carelessly base-minded in his infancy, and
constantly-resolute in poverty; if he be timorously-fearefull at sight of a
Barbers razor, and afterward stowtlyvndismayed against his enemies swords: The
action is commendable, but not the man. Diverse Graecians (says Cicero) can not
endure to look their enemy in the face, yet are they most constant in their
sickenesses; whereas the Cimbrians, and Celtiberians, are mere contrary. Nihil
enim potest esse aequabile, quod non a certa ratione proficiscatur: For nothing
can bear Cic. Tusc. qu. l. 2. f.
it self even, which proceeds not from resolved reason. There is no valor
more extreme in his kind, than that of Alexander; yet is it but in species,
nor every where sufficiently full and universal. As incomparable as it is, it
has his blemishes, which is the reason that in the idleest suspicions, he
apprehends at the conspiracies of his followers against his life, we see him
so earnestly to vex, and so desperately to trouble himself: In search and
pursuit whereof he demeaneth himself with so vehement and indiscreet an
injustice, and with such a demisse fear, that even his natural reason is
thereby subverted. Also the superstition, wherewith he is so thoroughly tainted,
bears some show of pusilanimitie. And the unlimited excess of the repentance
he showed for the murder of Clitus, is also a witness of the inequality of
his courage. Our matters are but parcels hudled-vp, and pieces patched
together, and we endeavor to acquire honor by false means, and untrue tokens.
Virtue will not be followed, but by her-selfe: And if at any time we borrow
her mask, upon some other occasion, she will as soon pull-it from our face.
It is a lively hew, and strong die, if the soul be once dyed with the same
perfectly, and which will never fade or be gone, except it carry the skin
away with-it. Therefore to judge a man, we must a long time follow, and very
curiously mark his steps; whether constancy do wholly subsist and continue
upon her own foundation in him, Cui vivendi via consider at a atque provisa
est, who has forecast and considered the way of life; whether the variety of
occurrences make him change his pace (I mean his Cic. parad. 5.
way, for his pace may either be hastened or slowed) let him run on: such a
one (as says the imprease of our good Talbot) goes before the wind. It is
no marvel (says an old writer) that hazard has such power over-vs, since
we live by hazard. It is impossible for him to dispose of his particular
actions, that has not in gross directed his life unto one certain end. It is
impossible for him to range all pieces in order, that has not a plot or form
of the total frame in his head. What avayleth the provision of all sorts of
colors unto one that knows not what he is to draw? No man makes any certain
design of his life, and we deliberate of it but by parcels. A skillful archer
ought first to know the mark he aims at, and then apply his hand, his bow,
his string, his arrow and his motion accordingly. Our counsels go a stray,
because they are not rightly addressed, and have no fixed end. No wind makes
for him, that has no intended port to saile-vnto. As for me, I allow not
greatly of that judgment, which some made of Sophocles, and to have concluded
him sufficient in the managing of domestical matters, against the accusation
of his own Son, only by the sight of one of his tragedies. Nor do I commend
the conjecture of the Parians, sent to reform the Milesians, as sufficient to
the consequence they drew thence. In visiting and surveying the I Will, they
marked the Lands that were best husbanded, and observed the country houses
that were best governed. And having registered the names of their owners; and
afterward made an assembly of the Townes-men of the City, they named and
instituted those owners as new governors and magistrates, judging and
concluding, that being good husbands and careful of their household affairs,
they must consequently be so of public matters. We are all framed of flaps and
patches and of so shapelesse and diverse a contexture, that every piece and
every moment plaieth his part. And there is as much difference found between
us and our selves, as there is between our selves and other. Magnam rem puta,
vnum hominem agere. Esteem it a great matter, to play but one man.

Since ambition may teach men both valor, temperance, liberality, yea and
justice: Since covetousness may settle in the mind of a Shop-prentise-boy,
broughtvp in ease and idleness, a dreadlesse assurance to leave his homebred
ease, and forgo his place of education, and in a small bark to yield himself
unto the mercy of blustering waves, merciless winds and wrathful Neptune; and
that it also teaches discretion and wisdom; And that Venus hirself
ministers resolution and hardiness unto tender youth as yet subject to the
discipline of the rod, and teaches the ruthlesse Soldier, the soft and
tenderly effeminate heart of women in their mothers lappes.

Hac duce custodes furtim transgressa iacentes, Tib. l. 2. el. 1. 75.

-- Ad invenem tenebris sola puella venit.
The wench by stealeh her lodged guards having stripped,
By this guide, sole, in the dark, to the yonker skipt.
It is no part of a well-grounded judgment, simply to judge our selves by our
exterior actions: A man must throughl sound himself, and dive into his heart,
and there see by what wards or springs the motions stir. But forasmuch as it
is a hazardous and high enrerprise, I would not have so many to meddle with it
as do.

The second Chapter.
Of Drunkenness.

THe world is nothing but variety, and dissemblance. Vices are all alike, in
as much as they are all vices: And so do happily the Stoikes mean it. But
though they are equally vices, they are not equal vices; And that he who has
started a hundred steps beyond the limits

Quos vltra citraque nequit consistere rectum, Hor. l. 1. sat. 1. 107.
On this side, or beyond the which
No man can hold a right true pitch.
is not of worse condition, then he that is ten steps short of it, is no whit
credible: and that sacrilege is not worse then the stealing of a Colewort out
of a Garden.

Nec vincet ratio, tantandem vt peccet, inemque, Sat. 3. 115.

Quiteneros caules alieni fregerit horti,
Et qui nocturnus divum sacra legerit. --
No reason can evict, as great or same sinnetaints
Him that breaks in an others Garden tender plants,
And him that steals by night things consecrate to Saints.
There is as much diversity in that as in any other thing. The confusion of
order and measure of crimes, is dangerous: Murderers, Traitors and Tyrants,
have too much gain by it: it is no reason their conscience should be eased, in
that some is either idle or lascivious, or less assiduous unto devotion. Every
man poiseth upon his fellows sin, and elevates his own. Even teachers do
often range it ill in my conceit. As Socrates said, that the chiefest office of
wisdom, was to distinguish goods and evils. We others, to whom the best is
ever in vice, should say the like of knowledge, to distinguish vices. Without
which, and that very exact, both virtuous and wicked men remain confounded and
unknown. Now drunkenness amongst others, appears to me a gross and brutish
vice. The mind has more part else where; and some vices there are, which (if
it may lawfully be spoken) have a kind of I wot not what generosity in them.
Some there are, that have learning, diligence, valor, prudence, wit, cunning,
dexterity, and subtlety joined with them; whereas this is merely corporal,
and terrestrial. And the grosest and rudest nation, that lives amonst us at
this day, is only that which keeps it in credit. Other vices but alter and
distract the understanding, whereas this utterly subverteth the same, and
astonieth the body.

-- cum vini vis penetravit, Luer. l. 3. 479.

Consequitur gravitas membrorum, praepediuntur
Crur a vacillanti, tardescit lingua, madet men's,
Nant oculi, clamor, singultus, inrgia gliscunt
When once the force of wine has inly pierst,
Limbes-heavinesse is next, legs feign would go,
But reeling can not, tongue drawles, minds dispersed,
Eyes swim, cries, hickups, brables grow.
The worst estate of man, is where he loses the knowledge and governemen of
himself. And amongst other things, it is said, that as must wine boiling and
working in a vessel, works and sends upward what ever it contains in the
bottom, so does wine cause those that drink excessively of it, work up, and
break out their most concealed secrets.

-- tu sapientium Hor. l. 3. ^d. 21. 14.

Curas, and arcanum iocoso
Consilium retegis Lyaeo.
Thou (wine-cup) do by wine reveal
The cares, which wise men would conceal,
And close drifts, at a merry meal.
Josephus reports, that by making an Ambassador to tipple-square, whom his
enemies had sent unto him, he wrested all his secrets out of him. Nevertheless
Augustus having trusted Lucius Piso, that conquered Thrace, with the secretest
affairs he had in hand, had never cause to be discontented with him; Nor
Tiberius with Cossus, to whom he imparted all his seriousest counsels, although
we know them both to have so given themselves to drinking of wine, that they
were often feign to be carried from the Senate, and both were reputed notable
drunkards.

-- Hesterno inflatum venas de more Lyaeo. Vir. luc. ^c. 6. 15. ^
Veins pufft up, as is used always,
By wine which was drunk yesterday.
And as faithfully as the complot and purpose to kill Caesar committed unto
Cimber, who would daily be drunk with quaffing of wine, as unto Cassius, that
drunk nothing but water whereupon he answered very pleasantly. What? shall I
bear a Tyrant, that am not able to bear wine? We see our carowsing tospot
German soldiers, when they are most plunged in their cups, and as drunk as
Rats, to have perfect remembrance of their quarter, of the watch word, and of
their files.

-- nec facilis victoria de madidis, and Ivue. sat. 15. 47
Blaesis, atque mero titubantibus. -- Nor is the conquest easy of men sow'st,
Lisping and reeling with wine they carow'st.
I would never have believed so sound, so deep and so excessive drunkenness,
had I not read in Histories, that Attalus having envited to sup with him (with
intent to do him some notable indignity) the same Pausanias, who for the same
cause killed afterward Philip King of Macedon, (a King who by the eminent fair
qualities that were in him, bore a testimony of the education he had learned in
the house and company of Epaminondas) made him so dead-drunke, that insensibly
and without feeling, he might prostitute his beauty as the body of a common
hedge-harlot, to Mulettiers, Grooms and many of the abject servants of his
house. And what a Lady (whom I much honor and highly esteem) told me,
protesting, that near Bordeaux, toward Castres, where her house is, a widow
Country-woman, reputed very chaste and honest, suspecting hirselfe to be with
child, told her neighbors, tha had she a husband, she should verily think
she were with child. But the occasion of this suspicion increasing more and
more, and perceiving hirselfe so big-bellied, that she could no longer
conceal it, she resolved to make the Parrish-priest acquainted with it, whom
she entreated to publish in the Church, that whosoever he were, that was
guilty of the fact, and would avow it, she would freely forgive him, and if
he were so pleased, take him to her husband. A certain swain or hyne-boy of
hers, emboldned by this proclamation, declared, how that having one holliday
found her well-tippled with wine, and so sound asleep by the chimnie side,
lying so fit and ready for him, that without a waking her he had the full use
of her body. Whom she accepted for her husband, and both live together at this
day. It is assured that antiquity has not greatly described this vice. The
compositions of diverse Philosophers speak but sparingly of it. Yea, and some
of the Stoikes deeme-it not amiss for man sometimes to take his liquor
roundly, and drink drunk thereby to recreate his spirits.

Hoc quoque virtutum quondam certamine magnum Cor. Gal. el. 1.

Socratem palmam promeruisse ferunt.
They say, in this too, Socrates the wise,
And graet in virtues combats, bare the prize.
Cato that strict censurer, and severe corrector of others, has been reproved
for much drinking,

Narratur and prisci Catonis Hor. l. 3. od. 21. 11.

Saepe mero caluisse virtus.
It Is said, by use of wine repeated,
Old Catoes virtue often was heated.
Cyrus that so far-renowned King, amongst his other commendations, meaning to
prefer himself before his brother Artaxerxes, and get the start of him,
aleageth, that he could drink better, and tipple more then he. And amongst the
best policed and formalest nations, the custom of drinking, and pleadging of
healths was much in use. I have heard Silvius, that excellent Physician of
Paris affirm that to preserve the vigor of our stomach from empairing, it is
not amiss once a month to rowze up the same by this excess of drinking; and
lest it should grow dull and stupide thereby to stir it up. And it is
written, that the Persians, after they had well tippled, were wont to consult
of their chiefest affairs. My taste, my relish and my complexion, are sharper
enemies unto this vice, then my discourse: For, besides that I captivate more
easily my conceits under the authority of ancient opinions, indeed I finde-it
to be a fond, a stupide and a base kind of vice, but less malicious and
hurtful then others; all which shocke, and with a sharper edge wound public
society. And if we cannot give our selves any pleasure, except (as they say)
it cost-vs something; I find this vice to be less chargeable unto our
conscience then others; besides, it is not hard to be prepared, difficult to be
found; a consideration not to be despised. A man well advanced in years and
dignity, amongst three principal commodities he told me to have remaining in
life, counted this: and where shall a man more rightly finde-it, then amongst
the natural? But he tooke-it ill, delicateness, and the choice of wines is
therein to be avoided. If you prepare your voluptuousnes to drink it with
pleasure and daintily neat, you tie your self unto an inconvenience to
drinke-it other then is always to be had. A man must have a milder, a loose
and a freer taste. To be a true drinker, a man should not have so tender and
squeamish a palate. The Germans do in a manner drink aqually of all sorts of
wine with like pleasure. Their end is rather to gulpe it down freely, then to
taste it kindly. And to say truth they have it better cheap. Their
voluptuousness is more plenteous and fuller. Secondarily, to drink after the
French manner, as two draughts and moderatly, is overmuch to restrain the
favors of that God. There is more time and constancy required thereunto. Our
forefathers were wont to spend whole nights in that exercise, yea often times
they joined whole long days unto them. And a man must proportion his ordinary
more large and firm. I have in my days seen a principal Lord; a man of
great employment and enterprises, and famous for good success, who without
straining himself, and eating but an ordinary meales-meat, was wont to drink
little less then five pottles of wine, yet at his rising seemed to be nothing
distempered, but rather as we have found to our no small cost in managing of
our affairs, over-wise and considerate. The pleasure of that, whereof we would
make account in the course of our life ought to be employed longer space. It
were necessary, as shop-boyes or laboring people, that we should refuse no
occasion to drink* and continually to have this desire in our mind. It
seems that we daily shorten the use of this: and that in our houses, (as I
have seen in mine infancy) breakefasts, nunchions, and beavers should be more
frequent and often used, then now adays they are. And should we thereby in
any sort proceed toward amendment? Noverily. But it may be, that we have
much more given our selves over unto paillardise and all manner of luxury then
our fathers were. They are two occupations, that enter-hinder one another, in
their vigor. On the one side, it has empaired and weakened our stomach, and on
the other, sobriety serves to make us more jolly-quaint, lusty, and wanton
for the exercise of love matters. It is a wonder to think on the strange tales
I have heard my father report, of the chastity of his times. He might well
speak of it, as he that was both by art and nature proper for the use and
solace of Ladies. He spoke little and well, few words, but to the purpose, and
was ever wont to entermixe some ornament taken from vulgar books, and above
all, Spanish, amongst his common speeches: And of all Spanish authors, none was
more familiar unto him then Marcous Aurelius. His demeanor and carriage was
ever mild, meek, gentle, and very modest, and above all, grave and stately.
There is nothing he seemed to be more careful* of, then of his honesty, and
observe a kind of decency of his person, and orderly decorum in his habites,
were it on foot or on hosebacke. He was exceeding nice in performing his word
or promise; And so strictly conscientious and obsequous in religion, that
generally he seemed rather to incline toward superstition, then the contrary.
Though he were but a little man, his courage and vigor was great: he was of an
upright, and well proportioned stature, of a pleasing, cheerefull-looking
countenance, of a swarthy hue, nimbly addicted, and exquisitely nimble unto all
noble and gentleman* like exercises. I have seen some hollow staves of his
filled with lead, which he wont to use and exercise his arms withal, the
better to enable himself to pitch to bar, to throw the sledge, the cast the
pole and to play at fence: and shoes with leaden soles, which he wore to enure
himself, to leap, to vault and to run. I may without blushing say, that in
memory of himself, he has left certain pety miracles amongst us. I have seen
him when he was past threescore years of age mock at all our sports, and
out-countenance our youthful pastimes, with a heavy furred Gown about him to
leap into his saddle; to make the pommada round about a Table upon his thumb;
and seldom to ascend any stairs without skipping three or four steps at
once. And concerning my discourse, he was wont to say, that in a whole
Province there was scarce any woman of quality, that had an ill name. He
would often report strange familiarities, namely of his own, with very honest
women, without any suspicion at all. And protested very religiously, that
when he was married, he was yet a pure Virgin; yet had he long time followed
the wars beyond the Mountains, and therein served long, whereof he has
left a Iournall-Booke of his own collecting, wherein he has particularly
noted, whatsoever happened day by day worthy the observation, so long as he
served, both for the public and his particular use. And he was well stricken
in years, when he took a wife. For returning out of Italy, in the year of
our Lord, one thousand five hundred eight and twenty, and being full three and
thirty years old, by the way he chose himself a wife. But come we to our
drinking again. The incommodities of age, which need some help and
refreshing, might with some reason beget in me a desire or longing of this
faculty: for, it is in a man the last pleasure, which the course of our years
steals upon us. Good fellows say, that natural heat is first taken in our
feet: That properly belongs to infancy. From thence it ascends unto the
middle region, where it is settled and continues a long time: and in mine
opinion, there produces the only true, and mooving pleasures of this
corporal life. Other delight and sensualities in respect of that, do but
sleep* in the end, like unto a vapor, which by little and little exhaleth,
and mounteth aloft, it comes unto the throat, and there makes her last bode.
Yet could I never conceive, how any man may either increase or prolong the
pleasure of drinking beyond thirst, and in his imagination frame an artificial
appetite, and against nature. My stomach could not well reach so far: it is
very much troubled to come to an end of that which it takes for his need. My
constitution is, to make an account of drinking, but to succeed meat, and
therefore do I ever make my last draught the greatest. And forasmuch as in
age, we have the roof of our mouths commonly furred with rhume, or
distempered, distasted and altered through some other evil constitution, wine
seems better unto us and of a quicker relish, according as our pores be
either more or less open and washed. At least I seldom relish the same very
well, except it be the first draught I take. Anacharsis wondered to see the
Graecians drink in greater glasses at the end of their meals, then in the
beginning. It was (as I imagine) for the very same reason, that the Germans
doe-it, who never begin to carouse, but when they have well fed. Plato
forbids children to drink any wine, before they be eighteen years of age,
and to be druncke before they come to forty. But to such as have once attained
the age of forty* he is content to pardon them, if they chance to delight
themselves with it, and allows them somewhat largely to blend the influence of
Dionisius in their banquets, that good God, who bestows cheerfulness upon
men, and youth unto aged men, who lays and aswageth the passions of the
mind, even as iron is made flexible by the fire: and in his profitable laws
drinking-meetings or quaffing companies as necessary and commendable (always
provided there be a chief leader amongst them to contain and order them)
drunkenesse being a good and certain trial of every man's nature; and
therewithal proper to give aged men the courage to make merry in dancing and
in music; things alowable and profitable, and such as they dare not undertake
being sober and settled. That wine is capable to supply the mind with
temperance, and the body with health. Notwithstanding, these restrictions,
partly barrowed of the Carthaginians, please him well. Let those forebeare it
that are going about any expedition of war. Let every magistrate, and all
judges abstain from* it at what time they are to execute their charge, and to
consult of public affairs* Let none bestow the day in drinking, as the time
that is due unto more serious negotiations, nor the nights wherein a man
intends to get children. It is reported, that Stilpo the Philosopher, finding
himself surcharged with age, did purposely hasten his end, by drinking of pure
wine. The like cause (though not wittingly) did also suffocat the vital forces,
crazed through old age of the Philosopher Arcesilaus. But it is an old and
pleasant question, whether a wisemans mind were like to yield unto the force
of wine.

Si munitae adhibet vim sapientiae. Od. 28. 4.
If unresisted force it bends,
Against wisdom which it self defends.
Unto what vanity does the good opinion we have of our selves provoke-vs? The
most temperate and perfectest mind of the world, finds it too great a task
to keep hirselfe upright, lest she fall by her own weakness. Of a thousand
there is not one perfectly righteous and settled but one instant of her life,
and question might be made, whether according to her natural condition she
might at any time be so. But to join constancy unto it, in her last
perfection: I mean if nothing should shocke her: which a thousand accidents
may do. Lucretius that famous Poet, may philosophy and bandie at his pleasure:
Lo where he lies senseless of an amorous potion. Thinks any man, that an
Apoplexy cannot as soon astonish Socrates, as a poor laboring man? Some of
them have by the force of a sickness, forgot their own names, and a slight
hurt has overthrown the judgment of others. Let him be as wise as he can, in
the end he is but a man; what is more frail, more miserable, or more vain?
Wisdom forces not our natural conditions.

Sudores itaque and pallorem existere toto Lucr. l. 3. 155.

Corpore, and infringi linguam vocemque aboriri
Caligare oculos, sonare aures, succidere artus,
Denique concidere ex animi terrore videmus.
We see therefore, palenesse and sweats ore* grow,
Our bodies, tongues do falter, voice does break,
Eyes dazzle, ears buzze, joints do shrincke below,
Lastly we swone by hart-fright, terrors weak.
He must feel his eyes against the blow that threatens him, being near the
brimme of a precipise, he must cry out like a child. Nature having purposed to
reserve these light marks of her authority unto herself, in expugnable unto
our reason, and to the Stoicke virtue: to teach him his mortality, and our
insipiditie. He waxes pale for fear, he blusheth for shame he groaneth
feeling the cholike, if not with a desperate and lowd-roaring voice, yet with a
low, smothered and hoarse-sounding noise.

Humani a se nihil alienum putat, Ter. Heau^. act. 1. sce. 1. 25
He thinks, that nothing strange be can,
To him, that longs to any man.
Giddie-headed Poets, that feign what they list, dare not so much as discharge
their Heroes Virg. Aeu. l. 6. ^
from tears.

Sic fatur lachrymans, classique immittit habenas. So said he weeping, and so
said,
Himself hand to the steerage laid.
Let it suffice him to bridle his affections, and moderate his inclinations;
for, it is not in him to bear them away. Plutarke himself, who is so perfect
and excellent a judge of humane actions, seeing Brutus and Torquatus to kill
their own children, remains doubtful, whither virtue could reach so far,
and whether such men were not rather moved by some other passion. All actions
beyond the ordinary limits, are subject to some sinister interpretation:
Forasmuch as our taste does no more come unto that which is above it, then to
that which is under it. Let us omit that other sect, which makes open
profession of fiercenes. But when in the very same sect, which is esteemed the
most demisse, we hear the bragges of Metrodorus: Occupavite, Fortuna, atque
cepi: omnesque aditus tuos interclusi vt ad me aspirare non Metr. Cic. Tusc.
qu^st. l. 5.
posses. Fortune, I have prevented, caught, and overtaken thee: I have mured
and ramd up all thy passages, whereby thou might attain unto me. When
Anaxarcus, by the appointment of Nicocreon, the tyrant of Cipres, being laid
along in a trough of stone, and smoten with iron sledges, cease not to cry
out, streeke, smite, and break; it is not Anaxarchus, it is but his veil you
martyr so. When we hear our martyrs, in the midst of a flame cry a loud
unto the Tyrant, this side is roasted enough, chop-it, eat it, it is full
roasted, now begin on the other. When in Josephus we hear a child all to rent
with biting snippers, and pierced with the breath of Antiochus, to defy him to
death, cry with a lowde-assured and vndismaid voice; Tyrant thou loosest time,
lo I am still at mine ease; where is that smarting pain, where are those
torments, wherewith whilom thou did so threaten me? My constancy does more
trouble thee, then I have feeling of thy cruelty: Oh faint-hearted varlet,
do thou yield when I gather strength? Make me to fainte or shrink, cause
me to moan or lament, force me to yield and sue for grace if thou can;
encourage thy satellities, harten thy executioners; lo how they droope, and
have no more power; arm them, strengthen them, flesh them. Verily we must
needs confess there is some alteration, and some fury (how holy soever) in
those minds. When we come unto these Stoic evasions; I had rather be furious
then voluptuous: the saying of Antisthenes. (...), Rather would I be mad, then
Antist. Diogen. L^^rs. l. 6. c. 1.
merry. When Sextu^s tells us, he had rather be surprised with pain, then
sensuality; when Epicurus undertakes to have the gout, to wantonize and faune
upon him, and refusing ease and health, with a hearty cheerfulness defy all
evils, and scornefully despising less sharp griefs, disdayning to grapple
with them, he blithely desires and calls for sharper, more forcible, and
worthy of him:

Spumantemque dari pecora inter inerei^ votis
Optat aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte leonem: Virg. Ae^. l 4. 158.

He wished, among hartlesse beasts some foming Bore,
Or mountaine-Lyon would come down and rore.
Who would not judge them to be prankes of a courage remooved from his wonted
seat? Our mind cannot out of her place attain so high. She must quit it and
raise her self a loft, and taking the bridle in her teeth, carry and transport
her man so far, that afterward he wonder at himself, and rest amazed at his
actions. As in exploites of war, the heat and earnestness of the fight does
often provoke the noble-minded-souldiers, to adventure on so dangerous
passages, that afterward being better advised, they are the first to wonder at
it. As also Poets, are often surprised and rapt with admiration at their own
labors, and forget the trace, by which they past so happy a career. It is
that, which some term a fury or madness in them. And as Plato says, that a
settled and reposed man, does in vain knock at Poesies gate. Aristotle
likewise says, that no excellent mind is freely exempted from some or other
entermixture of folly. And he has reason, to call any starting or
extraordinary conceit (how commendable soever) and which exceeds our
judgment and discourse, folly. For So Much as wisdom, is an orderly and
regular managing of the mind, and which she addresseth with measure, and
conducteth with proportion; And take her own word for-it. Plato disputes
thus; that the faculty of prophesiyng and divination is far above-vs, and that
when we treat it, we must be besides our selves: our wisdom must be darkened
and over shadowed by sleep, by sickness, or by drowzinesse; or by some
celestial fury, ravished from her own seat.

The third Chapter.
A custom of the I Will of Cea.

IF, as some say, to philosophate be to doubt; with much more reason, to rave
and fantastiquize, as I do, must necessarily be to doubt: For, to enquire and
debate, belongs to a scholar, and to resolve appertains to a cathedral
master. But know, my cathedral, it is the authority of Gods divine will, that
without any contradiction does sway-vs, and has her rank beyond these humane
and vain contestations. Philip being with an armed hand entered the Country of
Peloponnesus, some one told Damidas, the Lacedaemonians were like to endure
much, if they sought not to reobtaine his lost favor. Oh varlet as thou art
(answered he.) And what can they suffer, who have no fear at all of death?
Agis being demanded, how a man might do to live free, answered; Despising and
contemning to die. These and a thousand like propositions, which concur in
this purpose, do evidently infer some thing beyond the patient expecting of
death it self, to be suffered in this life: witness the Lacedemonian child,
taken by Antigonus, and sold for a slave, who urged by his master, to perform
some abject service; Thou shall see (said he) whom thou have bought; for, it
were a shame for me to serve, having liberty so near at hand, and
therewithal threw himself headlong down from the top of the house.
Antipater, sharply threatening the Lacedaemonians, to make them yield to a
certain request of his; they answered, should thou menace us worse then
death, we will rather die. And to Philip, who having written unto them, that he
would hinder all their enterprises; What? (say they) will thou also hinder us
from dying? That is the reason, why some say, that the wiseman lives as long
as he ought, and not so long as he can. And that the favourablest gift, nature
has bequeathed-vs, and which removes all means from-vs to complain of our
condition, is, that she has left-vs the key of the fields. She has appointed
but one entrance unto life, but many a thousand ways out of it: Well may we
want ground to live upon, but never ground to die in. As Boiocatus answered the
Romans. Why do thou complain against this world? It does not contain
thee: If thou live in pain and sorrow, thy base courage is the cause of-it,
To die there wants but will.

Vbique mors est: optime hoc cavit Deus, Sen. Theb. Act. 1. sce. 1.

Eripere vitam nemo non homini potest:
At nemo mortem: mill ad hanc aditus patent.
Each where death is: God did this well purvay,
No man but can from man life take away,
But none barr's death, to it lies many'a way.
And it is not a receipt to one malady alone; Death is a remedy against all
evils: It is a most assured haven, never to be feared, and often to be sought:
All comes to one period, whether man make an end of himself, or whether he
endure* it; whether he run before his day, or whether he expect* it: whence
soever it come, it is ever his own, where ever the thread be broken, it is all
there, it is the end of the web. The voluntariest death, is the fairest. Life
depends on the will of others, death on ours. In nothing should we so much
accommodate our selves to our humors, as in that. Reputation does nothing
concern such an enterprise, it is folly to have any respect unto it. To live
is to serve, if the liberty to die be wanting. The common course of curing any
infirmity, is ever directed at the charge of life: we have incisions made into
us, we are cauterized, we have limbs cut and mangled, we are let blood, we are
di^ted. Go we but one step further, we need no more physic, we are perfectly
whole. Why is not our jugular or throat vein as much at our command as the
mediane? To extreme sicknesses, extreme remedies. Servius the Gramarian being
troubled with the gowt, found no better means to be rid of it, then to apply
poison to mortify his legs. He cared not whether they were Podagrees or no, so
they were insensible. God gives us sufficient privilege, when he places us
in such an estate, as life is worse then death unto us. It is weakness to
yield to evils, but folly to foster them. The Stoikes say, it is a convenient
natural life, for a wiseman, to forgo life, although he abound in all
happiness; if he do it opportunely: And for a fool to prolong his life,
albeit he be most miserable, provided he be in most part of things, which they
say to be according unto nature. As I offend not the laws made against
thieves, when I cut mine own purse, and carry away mine own goods; nor of
destroyers when I burn mine own wood: so am I nothing tied unto laws made
against murderers, if I deprive my self of mine own life. Hegesias was wont
to say, that even as the condition of life, so should the quality of death
depend on our election. And Diogenes meeting with the Philosopher Speufippus,
long time afflicted with the dropsy, and therefore carried in a litter, who
cried out unto him; All hail Diogenes: And to thee no health at all, (replied
Diogenes) that endurest to live in so wretched an estate. True it is, that a
while after, Speusippus as overtired with so languishing a condition of life,
compassed his own death. But this goes not without some contradiction: For,
many are of opinion, that without the express commandment of him, that has
placed us in this world, we may by no means forsake the garrison of it, and
that it is in the hands of God only, who therein has placed-vs, not for our
selves alone, but for his glory, and others service, when ever it shall please
him to discharge us hence, and not for us to take leave: That we are not borne
for our selves, but for our Country: The Laws for their own interest require
an account at our hands for our selves, and have a just action of murder
against-vs. Else as forsakers of our own charge, we are punished in the other
world.

Proxima deinde tenent moestiloca, qui sibi let hum Virg. Aen. li. 6. 434.

Insontes p^perere manu, lucemque perosi
Proi^cere animas. --
Next place they lamentable hold in hell,
Whose hand their death caused causeless, (but not well)
And hating life did thence their souls expel.
There is more constancy in using the chain that holds-vs, then in breaking
the same; and more trial of steadfastness in Regulus, then in Cato. It is
indiscretion and impatience that hastneth our way. No accidents can force a man
to turn his back from lively virtue: She seeketh-out evils and sorrows as
her nourishment. The threats of fell tyrants, tortures and torments;
executioners and torturers, do animate and quicken her.

Duris vt ilex t^nsa bipennibus ^^^. l. 4. o^. 4. 57.

Nigrae feraci frondis in Algid^
Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso
Ducit opes animumque ferro.
As holme-tree does with hard axe lopt
On hills with many holme-trees topt,
From loss, from cuttings it does feel,
Courage and store rise even from steel.
And as the other says.

Non est vt put as virtus, pater, Sen. Theb. Act. 1. sc^. 1.

Timere vitam, sed magis ingentibus
Obstare, nec se vertere ac retro dare.
Sir, it is not virtue, as you understand,
To fear life, but gross mischief to withstand,
Not to retire, turn back, at any hand.
Rebus in adversis facile est contemnere mortem. M^^t. li. 11. ^pi. 57. 15.

Fortius ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
It Is easy in cross chance death to despise:
He that can wretched be, does stronger rise.
It is the part of cowardlinesse, and not of virtue, to seek to squat it self
in some hollowlurking hole, or to hide her self under some massy tomb,
thereby to shun the strokes of fortune. She never forsakes her course, nor
leaves her way, what stormy weather soever crosse-her.

Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidam ferient ruina. ^^r. ^. 3. ^d. ^. 7.

If the world broken should upon her fall,
The ruins may her strike, but not appall,
The avoiding of other inconveniences does most commonly drive us into this,
yea, sometimes the shunning of death, makes us to run into it. Mart. li. 2.
^pig. 80. 2.


Hic, rogo, non furor est, ^^ moriare, mori? Madness is it not, say I,
To die, lest you should die?
As those who for fear of a break-necke downfall, do headlong cast
themselves into-it.

-- multos in summa pericula misit Lucan. l. 7. 104.

V^^turi timor ipse mali: fortissimus ille est,
Qui promptus metuenda pati, si cominus instent,
Et differ potest.
The very fear of ils to come, has sent
Many to mighty dangers: strongest they,
Who fearful things to endure are ready bent,
If they confront them, yet can them delay.
-- vsque adeo mortis formidine, vitae L^cr. l. 3. 79.

Percipit humanos odium, luc^sque videndae,
Vt sibi consciscant moerenti pectore let hum,
Ob^i^i fontem curarum hunc esse timorem.
So far by fear of death, the hate of life,
And seeing-light, does men as men possess,
They grieving kill themselves to end the strife,
Forgetting, fear is spring of their distress.
Plato in his laws, alots him that has deprived his nearest and dearest
friend of life (that is to say, himself) and abridged him of the destinies
course, not constrained by any public judgment, nor by any lewd and
inevitable accident of fortune, nor by any intolerable shame or infamy, but
through baseness of mind, and weakness of a faint-fearfull courage, to have
a most ignominious, and ever-reproachfull burial. And the opinion which
disdaineth our life, is rediculous: For, in fine it is our being. It is our all
in all. Things that have a nobler and richer being, may accuse ours: But it is
against nature, we should despise, and carelessly set our selves at naught: It
is a particular infirmity, and which is not seen in any other creature, to
hate and disdain himself. It is of like vanity, that we desire to be other,
then we are. The fruit of such a desire does not concerne-vs, forasmuch as it
contradicts and hinders it self in it self. He that desires to be made
of a man an Angel, does nothing for himself: He should be nothing the better
by it: And being no more, who shall rejoice or conceive any gladness of this
change or amendment for him?

Debet enim mis^re forte aegreque futurum est, ^b. 905.

Ipse quoque esse in eo tum tempore, cum male possit
Accidere,
For he, who shall perchance prove miserable,
And speed but ill, should then himself be able
To be himself, when ills may chance unstable.
The security, indolencie, impassibilitie, and privation of this lives-evils,
which we purchase at the price of death, bring us no commodity at all. In
vain does be avoid war, that can not enjoy peace; and boot^lesse does ^^
shun pain, that has no means to feel rest. Amongst those of the first
opinion, great questioning has been, to know what occasions are sufficiently
just and lawful to make a man undertake the killing of himself, they call
that (...) a reasonable orderly outlet. For, although they say, a man must
often die Alex. Aphr^d.
for slight causes, since these that keep us alive, are not very strong; yet
is some measure required in them. There are certain fantastical and
braine-sicke humors, which have not only provoked particular men, but whole
Nations to defeat themselves. I have heretofore alleged some examples of them:
And moreover we read of certain Mi^^sian virgins, who upon a surious
conspiracy hanged themselves one after an other, until such time as the
Magistrate provided for it, appointing that such as should be found so hanged,
should with their own halters be dragged naked through the streets of the
City. When Threicion persuades Cleom^nes to kill himself, by reason of the
bad and desperate estate his affairs stood in, and having escaped a more
honorable death in the battle which he had lately lost, moves him to accept
of this other, which is second to him in honor, and give the conqueror no
leisure to make him endure, either another death, or else a shameful life.
Cleomenes with a Lacedemonian and Stoike courage, refuses this counsel as
base and effeminate: It is a receipt, (says he) which can never fail me, and
whereof a man should make no use, so long as there remains but one inch of
hope: That to live, is sometimes constancy and valor; That he will have his
very death serve his Country, and by it, show an act of honor and of virtue.
Threicion then believed, and killed himself. Cleomenes did afterward as much,
but not before he had tried and assayed the utmost power of fortune. All
inconveniences are not so much worth, that a man should die to eschew them.
Moreover, there being so many sudden changes, and violent alterations in
humane things, it is hard to judge in what state or point we are justly at the
end of our hope:

Sperat and in s^va victus gladiator arena,
-- Sit licet infesto pollice turba minax.
The Fencer hopes, though down in lists he lie,
And people with turned hand threat's he must die.
All things, says an ancient Proverb, may a man hope-for, so long as he
lives: yea, but, answers Seneca, wherefore shall I rather have that in
mind; that fortune can do all things for him that is living, then this; that
fortune has no power at all over him, who knows how to die? Joseph is seen
engaged in so an apparant-approaching danger, with a whole nation against him,
that according to humane reason, there was no way for him to escape;
notwithstanding being (as he says) counseled by a friend of his, at that
instant, to kill himself, it fell out well for him to opinionate himself yet
in hope: for fortune, beyond all man's discourse, did so turn and change that
accident, that without any inconvenience at all, he saw himself delivered:
whereas on the contrary Brutus and Cassius, by reason of the downfall and
rashness, wherewith before due time and occasion, they killed themselves; did
utterly loose the relics of the Roman liberty, whereof they were protectors.
The Lord of Ang^^^^ in the battle of Serisolles, as one desperate of the
combats success, which on his side went to wrack, attempted twice to run
himself through the throat with his rapier, and thought by precipitation to
bereave himself of the enjoying of so notable a victory. I have seen a
hundred Hares save themselves even in the Gray-hounds jaws: Aliquis carni^ics
suo superstes S^^. epist. 13.
suit. Some man has outlived his Hangman.

Multa dies variusque labor mutabilis evi Virg. Ae^. li. 11. 416.

Rettulit in melius, multos alterna revisens
Lusit, and in solido rursus fortuna locavit.
Time, and of turning age the diverse strain,
Has much to better brought, fortunes turned train,
Has many mocked, and set them fast again.
Pliny says, there are but three sorts of sicknesses, which to avoid, a man
may have some color of reason to kill himself. The sharpest of all is the
stone in the bladder, when the urine is there stopped. Seneca, those only,
which for long time disturb and distract the offices of the mind. To avoid a
worse death, some are of opinion, a man should take it at his own pleasure.
Democritus chief of the Aetolians, being led captive to Rome, found means to
escape by night: but being pursued by his keepers, rather then he would be
taken again, ran himself through with his Sword. Antinous and Theodotus,
their City of Epirus being by the Romans reduced unto great extreamitie,
concluded, and persuaded all the people to kill themselves. But the counsel,
rather to yield, having prevailed: they went to seek their own death, and
rushed amidst the thickest of their enemies, with an intention, rather to
strike, than to ward themselves. The Island of Gosa, being some years since
surprised and over run by the Turks, a certain Sicilian therein dwelling,
having two fair daughters ready to be married, killed them both with his own
hands, together with their mother, that came in to help them. That done,
running out into the streets, with a crossebow in one hand, and a caliver in
the other, at two shoots, slew the two first Turks that came next to his gates,
then resolutely drawing his Sword, ran furiously among them; by whom he was
suddenly hewn in pieces: Thus did he save himself from slavish bondage,
having first delivered his own from-it. The Jewish women, after they had
caused their children to be circumcized, to avoid the cruelty of Antiochus,
did headlong precipitate themselves and them unto death. I have heard-it
credibly reported, that a gentleman of good quality, being prisoner in one of
our Gaoles, and his parents advertized that he should assuredly be condemned,
to avoid the infamy of so reproachful a death, appointed a Priest to tell
him, that the best remedy for his deliverie, was to recommend himself to such
a Saint, with such and such a vow, and to continue eight days without taking
any sustenance, what faintness or weakness soever he should feel in himself.
He believed them, and so without thinking on it, was delivered both of life and
danger. Scribonia persuading L^bo his nephew to kill himself, rather then to
expect the stroke of justice, told him, that for a man to preserve his own
life, to put it into the hands of such as three or four days after should
come and seek it, was even to dispatch another man's business, and that it was
no other, then for one to serve his enemies, to preserve his blood, therewith
to make food. We read in the Bible, that Nicanor the persecutor of Gods Law,
having sent his Satellites to apprehend the good old man Rasi^s, for the honor
of his virtue, surnamed the father of the Jews; when that good man saw no
other means left him, his gate being burned, and his enemies ready to lay
hold on him, chose, rather then to fall into the hands of such villains, and
be so basely abused, against the honor of his place to die nobly, and so
smote himself with his own sword; but by reason of his haste, having not
thoroughly slain himself, he ran to throw himself down from an high wall,
amongst the throng of people, which making him room, he fell right upon his
head. All which notwithstanding, perceiving life to remain in him, he took
heart again; and getting up on his feet, all goared with blood, and laden
with strokes, making way through the prease, came to a craggie and
downe-steepie rock, where unable to go any further, by one of his wounds,
with both his hands he pulled out his guts, and tearing and breaking them, cast
them amongst such as pursued him, calling and attesting the vengeance of God to
light upon them. Of all violences committed against conscience, the most in
mine opinion to be avoided, is that which is offered against the chastity of
women, forasmuch as there is naturally some corporal pleasure commixt with it:
And therefore the dissent cannot fully enough be joined thereunto: And it
seems, that force is in some sort, intermixed with some will. The
ecclesiastical Story has in especial reverence, sundry such examples of
devout persons, who called for death to warrant them from the outrages which
some tyrants prepared against their religion and consciences. Pe^agia and
Sophron^a, both canonized; the first, together with her mother and sisters, to
escape the outrageous rapes of some soldiers, threw her self into a river;
the other, to shun the force of Maxentius the Emperor, slew her self. It
shall peradventure redound to our honor in future ages, that a wise Author of
these days, and namely a Parisian, does labor to persuade the Ladies of our
times, rather to hazard upon any resolution, than to embrace so horrible a
counsel of such desperation. I am sorry, that to put amongst his discourses,
he knew not the good saying I learnt of a woman at Toulouse, who had passed
through the hands of some soldiers: God be praised (said she) that once in my
life, I have had my belly-full without sin. Verily these cruelties are not
worthy of the French courtesy. And God be thanked, since this good
advertisement; our air is infinitely purged of them. Let it suffice, that in
doing it, they say, No, and take it, following the rule of Marot. The history
is very full of such, who a thousand ways have changed a lingering-toylsome
life with death. Lucius Aruntius killed himself (as he said) to avoid what
was past, and eschew what was to come. Granius Sylvanus, and Statius Proximus,
after they had been pardoned by Nero, killed themselves, either because they
scorned to live by the favor of so wicked a man, or because they would not
another time be in danger of a second pardon, seeing his so easie-yeelding unto
suspicious and accusations against honest men. Spargapises son unto Queen
T^miris, prisoner by the law of war unto Cyrus, employed the first favor
that Cyrus did him, by setting him free, to kill himself, as he who never
pretended to reap other fruit by his liberty, then to revenge the infamy of
his taking upon himself. Boges a Governor for king Xerxes in the country of
Ionia, being besieged by the Athenians army under the conduct of Cymon, refused
the composition, to return safely, together with his goods and treasure into
Asia, as one impatient to survive the loss of what his Master had given him in
charge; and after he had stoutly-and even to the last extremity, defended the
Town, having no manner of victuals left him; first he cast all the gold, and
treasure, with whatsoever he imagined the enemy might reap any commodity by,
into the river Strimon; Then having caused a great pile of wood to be set on
fire, and made all women, children, concubines and servants to be stripped, and
thrown into the flames, afterward ran-in himself, where all were burned.
Ninache^uen a Lord in the East Indies, having had an inkling of the king of
Portugales Viceroyes deliberation to dispossess him, without any apparent
cause, of the charge he had in Mala^a, for to give it unto the king of Campar;
of himself resolved upon this resolution. First he caused an high scaffold to
be set up, somewhat longer then broad, underpropped with pillars, all
gorgeously hanged with rich tapistrie, strewed with flowers, and adorned with
precious perfumes: Then having put-on a sumptuous long roab of cloth of gold,
richly beset with store of precious stones of inestimable worth, he came out of
the palace into the street, and by certain steps ascended the scaffold, in
one of the corners whereof, was a pile of aromaticall wood set afire. All the
people of the City were flocked together, to see what the meaning of such
unaccustomed preparation might tend unto. Ninache^uen with an vndanted-bold,
yet seeming-discontented countenance, declared the manifold obligations, which
the Portugal Nation was endebted unto him for; expostulated how faithfully and
truly he had dealt in his charge; that having so often witnessed, armed at all
assayes for others; that his honor was much dearer unto him then life, he was
not to forsake the care of it for himself; that fortune refusing him all
means to oppose himself against the injury intended against him, his
courage, at the least willed him to remoove the feeling thereof, and not become
a laughing stock unto the people, and a triumph to men of less worth then
himself: which words as he was speaking, he cast himself into the fire.
Sextilia the wife of Scaurus and Praxea wife unto Labeo, to encourage their
husbands, to avoid the dangers, which pressed them, wherein they had no share
(but in regard of the interest of their conjugal affection) voluntarily engaged
their life, in this extreme necessity, to serve them, as an example to
imitate, and company to regard. What they performed for their husbands;
Cocceius Nerva acted for his country, and though less profitable, yet equal
in true-love. That famous interpreter of the laws, abounding in riches, in
reputation, in credit, and flourishing in health about the Emperor, had no
other cause to rid himself of life, but the compassion of the miserable
estate, wherein he saw the Roman commonwealth. There is nothing can be added
unto the daintiness of Fulvius wives death, who was so inward with Augustus.
Augustus perceiving he had blabbed a certain secret of importance, which he
on-trust had revealed unto him; one morning coming to visit him, he seemed to
frownevpon him for-it; whereupon as guilty, he returns home, as one full of
despair, and in pitteous sort told his wife, that sithence he was fallen into
such a mischief, he was resolved to kill himself; she as one no whit
dismaide, replide unto him; Thou shall do but right, since having so often
experienced the incontinence of my tongue, thou have not learnt to beware of
it, yet give me leave to kill my self first, and without more ado, ran her
self through with a sword. Vibius Virius dispairing of his Cities safety,
besieged by the Romans, and mistrusting their mercy; in their Senates last
consultation, after many remonstrances employed to that end, concluded, that
the best and fairest way, was to escape fortune by their own hands. The very
enemies should have them in more honor, and Hanniball might perceive what
faithful friends he had forsaken: Enviting those that should allow of his
advise, to come, and take a good supper, which was prepared in his house, where
after great cheer, they should drink together whatsoever should be presented
unto him: a drink that shall deliver our bodies from torments, free our minds
from injuries, and release our eyes and ears from seeing and hearing so many
horrible mischiefs, which the conquered must endure at the hands of most
cruel and offended conquerors: I have (quoth he) taken order, that men fit for
that purpose shall be ready, when we shall be expired, to cast us into a great
burning pile of wood. Diverse approved of his high resolution, but few did
imitate the same. Seven and twenty Senators followed him; who after they had
attempted to stifle so irksome, and suppress so terror-mooving a thought,
with quaffing and swilling of wine, they ended their repast by this deadly
mess: and entre-embracing one another, after they had in common deplored and
bewailed their countries misfortunes; some went home to their own houses,
othersome stayed there, to be entombed with Vibius in his own fire; whose
death was so long and lingering, for so much as the vapor of the wine having
possessed their veins, and slowed the effect and operation of the poison, that
some lived an hour after they had seen their enemies enter Capua, which they
carried the next day after, and incurred the miseries, and saw the calamities,
which at so high a rate they had sought to eschew. Taurea Iubellius, another
citizen there, the Consul Fulvius returning from that shameful slaughter,
which he had committed of 225. Senators, called him churlishly by his name, and
having arested him; Command (quoth he) unto him, that I al^o be massacred after
so many others, that so thou may brag to have murdered a much more valiant
man then ever thou wast. Fulvius, as one enraged, disdaining him; forasmuch as
he had newly received letters from Rome contrary to the inhumanitie of his
execution, which inhibited him to proceed any further; Iubellius continuing his
speech, said; sithence my Country is taken, my friends butchered, and having
with mine own hands slain my wife and children, as the only mean to free
them from the desolation of this ruin; I may not die the death of my
fellow-citizens, let us borrow the vengeance of this hateful life from virtue:
And drawing a blade, he had hidden under his garments, therewith ran himself
through, and falling on his face, died at the Consuls feet. Alexander besieged
a city in India* the inhabitants whereof, perceiving themselves brought to a
very narrow pinch, resolved obstinately to deprive him of the pleasure he might
get of his victory, and together with their city, in despite of his
humanity, set both the Town and themselves on a light fire, and so were all
consumed. A new kind of warring, where the enemies did all they could, and
fought to save them, they to loose themselves, and to be assured of their
death, did all a man can possible effect to warrant his life. Astapa a City in
Spain, being very weak of walls, and other defenses, to withstand the Romans
that besieged the same; the inhabitants drew all their riches, and wealth into
the marketplace, whereof having made a heap, and on the top of it placed their
wives and children, and encompassed and covered the same with dry brush wood,
that it might burn the easier, and having appointed fifty lusty young men of
theirs for the performance of their resolution, made a sallie, where following
their determined vow, seeing they could not vanquist, suffered themselves to be
flame every mothers child. The fifty, after they had massacred every living
soul remaining in the City, and set fire to the heap, joyfully leaped
there-into, ending their generous liberty in a state rather insensible, then
dolorous and reproachful; showing their enemies, that if fortune had been so
pleased, they should as well have had the courage to bereave them of the
victory, as they had to yield it them both vain and hideous, yea, and mortal
to those, who allured by the glittering of the gold, that moulten ran from out
the flame, thick and threefold approaching greedily unto it, were therein
smothered and burned, the foremost being unable to give back, by reason of the
throng that followed them. The Abideans pressed by Philip, resolved upon the
very same, but being prevented, the King whose heart yerned and abhorred to
see the fond-rash precipitation of such an execution (having first seized-vpon
and saved the treasure, and movables, which they had diversely condemned to the
flames and utter spoil) retiring all the Soldiers, granting them the full
space of three days to make themselves away, that so they might do it with
more order and leisure: which three days they replenished with blood and
murder beyond all hostile cruelty: And which is strange, there was no one
person saved, that had power upon himself. There are infinite examples of
suchlike popular conclusions, which seem more violent, by how much more the
effect of them is more universal. They are less then several, what discourse
would not do in every one, it does in all: The vehemence of society,
ravishing particular judgments. Such as were condemned to die in the time of
Tiberius, and delaide their execution any while, lost their goods, and could
not be buried; but such as prevented the same, in killing themselves, were
solemnly enterred, and might at their pleasure, bequeath such goods as they had
to whom they list. But a man does also sometimes desire death, in hope of a
greater good. I desire (says Saint Paul) to be out of this world, that I may
be with Jesus Christ: and who shall release me out of these bonds? Cleombrotus
Ambraciota having read Platoes Phaedon, was so possessed with a desire and
longing for an after-life, that without other occasion or more ado, he went
and headlong cast himself into the sea. Whereby it appears how improperly we
call this voluntary dissolution, despair; unto which the violence of hope
does often transport-vs, and as often a peaceful and settled inclination of
judgment. Jacques du Castle Bishop of Soissons, in the voyage which Saint
Jews undertook beyond the Seas, seeing the King and all his Army ready to
return into France, and leave the affairs of Religion imperfect, resolved
with himself rather to go to heaven; And having bidden his friends farewell, in
the open view of all men, rushed alone into the enemies troops of whom he was
forthwith hewn in pieces. In a certain kingdom of these late-discovered
Indies, upon the day of a solemn procession, in which the Idols they adore,
are publicly carried up and down, upon a chariot of exceeding greatness:
besides that, there are many seen to cut and slice great mammocks of their
quick flesh, to offer the said Idols; there are numbers of others seen, who
prostrating themselves along upon the ground, endure very patiently to be
mouldred and crushed to death, under the Chariots wheels, thinking thereby to
purchase after their death, a veneration of holiness, of which they are not
defrauded. The death of this Bishop, armed as we have said, argues more
generositie, and less sense: the heat of the combat ammusing one part of it.
Some commonwealths there are, that have gone about to sway the justice, and
direct the opportunity of voluntary deaths. In our City of Marseille, they
were wont in former ages, ever to keep some poison in store, prepared and
compounded with hemlocke, at the Cities charge, for such as would upon any
occasion shorten their days, having first approved the reasons of their
enterprise unto the six hundred Elders of the Town, which was their Senate:
For, otherwise it was unlawful for any body, except by the Magistrates
permission, and for very lawfully-vrgent occasions, to lay violent hands upon
himself. The very same law was likewise used in other places. Sextus Pompeius
going into Asia, passed through the Island of Cea, belonging to Negropont; it
fortuned whilst he abode there, (as one reports that was in his company)
that a woman of great authority, having first yielded an account unto her
Citizens, and showed good reasons why she was resolved to end her life,
earnestly entreated Pompey to be an assistant at her death, that so it might be
esteemed more honorable, which he assented unto; and having long time in vain
sought, by virtue of his eloquence (wherein he was exceeding ready) and force
of persuasion, to alter her intent, and remove her from her purpose, in the end
yielded to her request. She had lived four score and ten years in a most
happy estate of mind and body, but then lying on her bed, better adorned
then before she was accustomed to have-it, and leaning on her elbow, thus she
bespake: The Gods, Oh Sextus Pompeius and rather those I forgo, then those I go
unto, reward and appay thee, for that thou have vouchsafed to be both a
counselor of my life, and a witness of my death. As for my part, having
hitherto ever tasted the favorable visage of fortune, for fear the desire of
living overlong should make me taste of her frowns, with an happy an
successful end, I will now depart, and license the remainder of my soul,
leaving behind me two daughters of mine, with a legion of grandchildren and
nephews. That done, having preached unto, and exhorted all her people and
kinsfolks to an unity and peace, and divided her goods amongst them, and
recommended her household Gods unto her eldest daughter, with an
assuredly-staide hand she took the cup, wherein the poison was, and having
made her vows unto Mercury, and prayers, to conduct her unto some happy
place in the other world, roundly swallowed that mortal potion; which done,
she entertained the company with the progress of her behavior, and as the
parts of her body were one after another possessed with the cold operation of
that venom; until such time as she said, she felt-it work at the heart and
in her entrals, she called her daughter to do her the last office, and close
her eyes. Pliny reports of a certain Hiperborean nation, wherein, by reason
of the mild temperature of the air, the inhabitants thereof, commonly never
die, but when they please to make themselves away, and that being weary and
tired with living, they are accustomed at the end of a longlong age; having
first made merry and good cheer with their friends, from the top of an
heigh-steedie rock, appointed for that purpose, to cast themselves headlong
into the Sea. Grieving-smart, and a worse death seem to me the most excusable
incitations.

The fourth Chapter.
To Morrow is a new day.

I Do with some reason, as me seems, give prick and praise unto Jacques
Amiot above all our French writers, not only for his natural purity, and pure
elegancy of the tongue, wherein he excels all others, nor for his
indefatigable constancy of so long and toyle-some a labor, nor for the
unsearchable depth of his knowledge, having so successefully-happy been able to
explain an Author so close and thornie, and unfold a writer so mysterious and
entangled (for, let any man tell me what he list; I have no skill of the
Greek, but I see through out all his translation a sense so closely-joynted,
and so pithily-continued, that either he has assuredly understood and inned
the very imagination, and the true conceit of the Author, or having through a
long and continual conversion, lively planted in his mind a general Idea of
that of Plutarke, he has at least lent him nothing that does be^^e him, or mis
seem him) but above all, I kon him thanks that he has had the hap to choose,
and knowledge to cull out so worthy a work, and a book so fit to the purpose,
therewith to make so invaluable a present unto his Country. We that are in the
number of the ignorant had been utterly confounded, had not his book raised us
from out the dust of ignorance: God-a-mercy his endeavors we dare not both
speak and write: Even Ladies are therewith able to confront Masters of arts: It
is our breviarie. If so good a man chance to live, I bequeath Xenophon unto
him, to do as much. It is an easier piece of work, and so much the more
agreeing with his age. Moreover, I wot not how me seems, although he roundly
and clearly disin^angle himself from hard passages, that notwithstanding his
style is more close and nearer it self, when it is not labored and wrested,
and that it glideth smoothly at his pleasure. I was even now reading of that
place, where Plutarke speaks of himself, that Rusticus being present at a
declamation of his in Rome, received a packet from the Emperor, which he
temporized to open until he had made an end: wherein (says he) all the
assistants did singularly commend the gravitie of the man. Verily, being on the
instance of curiosity, and on the greedy and insatiate passion of news,
which with such indiscreet impatience, and impatient indiscretion, induces us
to neglect all things, for to entertain a new-come guest, and forget all
respect and countenance, wheresoever we be, suddenly to break-vp such letters
as are brought-vs; he had reason to commend the gravitie of Rusticus: to which
he might also have added the commendation of his civilitie and courtesy, for
that he would not interrupt the course of his declamation; But I make a
question, whether he might be commended for his wisdom: for, receiving
unexpected letters, and especially from an Emperor, it might very well have
fortuned, that his deferring to read them, might have caused some notable
inconvenience. Rechlesnesse is the vice contrary unto curiosity; toward
which I am naturally inclined, and wherein I have seen many men so extremely
plunged, that three or four days after the receiving of letters, which has
been sent them, they have been found in their pockets yet vnopened. I never
opened any, not only of such as had been committed to my keeping, but of such
as by any fortune came to my hands. And I make a conscience, standing near
some great person, if mine eyes chance, at unawares, to steal some knowledge of
any letters of importance that he reads. Never was man less inquisitive, or
pryed less into other men's affairs, then I. In our fathers time; the Lord of
Bo^^ieres was like to have lost Turwin, for so much as being one night at supper
in very good company, he deferred the reading of an advertisement, which was
delivered him of the treasons that were practiced and complotted against that
City, where he commanded. And Plutarke himself has taught me, that Julius
Caesar had escaped death, if going to the Senate House, that day wherein he was
murdered by the Conspirators, he had read a memorial which was presented unto
him. Who likewise reports the story of Archias, the Tyrant of Thebes, how
the night foregoing the execution of the enterprise that Pelopidas had
complotted to kill him, thereby to set his Country at liberty: another
Archias of Athens writ him a letter, wherein he particularly related unto him
all that was conspired and complotted against him; which letter being delivered
him whilst he ^ate at supper, he deferred the opening of it, pronouncing this
byword: To morrow is a new day, which afterward was turned to a Proverb in
Greece. A wise man may, in mine opinion, for the interest of others, as not
unmannerly to break company, like unto Rusticus, or not to discontinue some
other affair of importance, remit and defer to understand such news as are
brought him: but for his own private interest or particular pleasure, namely,
if he be a man having public charge, if he regard his dinner so much, that he
will not break-it off, or his sleep, that he will not interrupt-it: to do it,
is inexcusable. And in former ages was the Consulare-place in Rome, which they
named the most honorable at the table, because it was more free and more
accessible for such as might casually come in, to entertain him that should be
there placed. Witness, that though they were sitting at the board, they
neither omitted nor gave over the managing of other affairs, and following of
other accidents. But when all is said, it is very hard, chiefly in humane
actions, to prescribe so exact rules by discourse of reason, that fortune do
not sway, and keep her right in them.

The fifth Chapter.
Of Conscience.

MY brother the Lord of Bronze and my self, during the time of our civil
wars, traveling one day together, we fortuned to meet upon the way with a
Gentleman, in outward semblance, of good demeanor: He was of our contrary
faction, but forasmuch as he counterfaited himself otherwise; I knew it not.
And the worst of these tumultuous intestine broils, is, that the cards are so
shuffled (your enemy being neither by language nor by fashion, nor by any
other apparent mark distinguished from you; nay, which is more, brought up
under the same laws and customs, and breathing the same air) that it is a
very hard matter to avoid confusion and shun disorder. Which consideration,
made me not a little fearful to meet with our troops, especially where I was
not known, lest I should be urged to tell my name, and happly do worse. As
other times before it had befalne me; for, by such a chance, or rather
mistaking, I fortuned once to loose all my men and horses, and hardly escaped
my self: and amongst other my losses, and servants that were slain, the
thing that most grieved me, was the untimely and miserable death of a young
Italian Gentleman, whom I kept as my Page, and very carefully brought-vp, with
whom dyed, as forward, as budding and as hopeful a youth as ever I saw. But
this man seemed so fearfully-dismaid, and at every encounter of horsemen, and
passage, by, or through any Town that held for the King, I observed him to be
so strangely distracted, that in the end I perceived, and ghessed they were but
guilty alarums that his conscience gave him. It seemed unto this seely man,
that all might apparently, both through his blushing selfe-accusing
countenance, and by the crosses he wore upon his upper garments, read the (...)
intentions of his faint-hart. Of such marvailous-working power is the sting of
conscience: which often induces us to bewray, to accuse, and to combat our
selves; and for want of other evidences she produces our selves against our
selves,

Occultum quatsente anim^ tortore flagellum. Iuven. Sat. 13. 195.
Their mind, the tormentor of sin,
Shaking an unseen whip within.
The story of Bessus the Poenian is so common, that even children have it in
their mo^ths, who being found fault withal, that in mirth he had beaten-downe
a neast of young Sparrowes, and then killed them, answered, he had great reason
to do-it, for so much as those young birds ceased not ^alsely to accuse him to
have m^rthered his father, which parricide was never suspected to have been
committed by him; and until that day had layen secret; but the revengefull
suries of the conscience, made the same party to reveal it, that by all right
was to do penance for so hateful and unnatural a murder. Hesiodus
corrects the saying of Plato. That punishment does commonly succeed the
guilt, and follow sin at hand: for, he affirms, that it rather is borne at
the instant, and together with sin it self, and they are as twins borne at
one birth together. Whosoever expects punishment, suffers the same, and
whosoever deferveth it, he does expect* it. Imp^e^se does invent, and iniquity
does frame torments against it self.

Malum consilium consultori pessimum. Eras. chil. 1. cent. 2. ad 14.
Bad counsel is worst for the counceller that gives the counsel. Even as the
Waspe stingeth and offends others, but her self much more; for, in hurting
others, she loses her force and sting for ever.

-- vitasque in vulnere ponunt. Virg. Georg. li 4. 238.
They, while they others sting,
Death to themselves do bring.
The Can^harides have some part in them, which by a contrariety of nature
serves as an antidot or counterpoison against their poison: so likewise, as
one takes pleasure in vice, there is a certain contrary displeasure
engendered in the conscience, which by sundry irksome and painful
imaginations, perplexeth and tormenteth us, both waking and asleep.

Quippe vbi se multi per somnia saepe loquentes, Luer. l. 5. 1168.

Aut morbo delirantes procraxe ferantur,
Et celata diu in medium peccata dedisse.
Many in dreams often speaking, or unhealed,
In sickness raving have themselves revealed,
And brought to light their sins long time concealed.
Apollodorus dreamed he saw himself first flead by the Scythians, and then
boiled in a pot, and that his own heart murmured, saying; I only have caused
this mischief to light upon thee. Epicurus was wont to say, that no lurking
hole can shroud the wicked; for, they can never assure themselves to be
sufficiently hidden, sithence conscience is ever ready to disclose them to
themselves.

-- prima est haec vl^io, quod se Iuven. Sat. 13. ^
Iudice nemo n^cens absolvitur. This is the first revenge, no guilty mind
Is quitted, though it self be judge assigned.
Which as it does fill us with fear and doubt, so does it store us with
assurance and trust. And I may boldly say, that I have waded through many
dangerous hazards, with a more untired pace, only in consideration of the
secret knowledge I had of mine own will, and innocence of my desseignes.

Conscia men's vt cuique sua est, ita concipit intra Ovid. ^ast. l^b. 1. 485.

-- Pectora pro facto spemque metumque suo.
As each man's mind is guilty, so does he
Inlie breed hope and fear, as his deeds be.
Of examples, there are thousands; It shall suffice us to allege three only,
and all of one man. Scipio being one day accused before the Roman people, of
an urgent and capital accusation; in stead of excusing himself, or flattering
the Judges; turning to them, he said. It will well beseem you to undertake to
judge of his head, by whose means you have authority to judge of all the
world. The same man, another time, being vehemently urged by a Tribune of the
people, who charged him with sundry imputations, in liew of pleading or
excusing his cause gave him this sudden and short answer. Let us go (quoth
he) my good Cit^zens; let-vs forthwith go (I say) to give hearty thanks unto
the Gods for the victory, which even upon such a day as this is, they gave me
against the Carthaginians. And therewith advancing h^^ self to march before
the people, all the assembly, and even his accuser him self did vndelayedly
follow him toward the Temple. After that, Pe^^lius having been a^^mated and
stirred up by C^^^ to solicit and demand a strict account of him, of the
money (...) had ^^auaged, and which was committed to his trust, whilst he was
in the Province of (...); Scipio being come into the Senate House, of purpose
to answer for himself, pull^ng ou^ the book of his accounts from under his
gown, told them all, that that book contained truly, both the receipt and
laying out thereof; and being required to deliver the same unto a Clarke to
register it, he refused to doe-it, saying, he would not do himself that wrong
or indignity; and thereupon with his own hands, in presence of all the
Senate, tore the book in pieces. I cannot apprehend or believe, that a
guiltie-cauterized conscience could possil lie dissemble or cou^terfet such an
vndismaied assurance: His heart was naturally too great, and enured to overhigh
fortune (says T^tus Livi^s) to know how to be a criminal offender, and
stoopingly to yield himself to the baseness, to defend his innocence.
Torture and racking are dangerous inventions, and seem rather to be trials of
patience then Essays of truth. And both he that can, and he that cannot endure
them, conceal the truth. For, wherefore shall pain or smart, rather compel me
to confess that, which is so indeed, then force me to tell that which is not?
And contrariwise, if he who has not done that whereof he is accused, is
sufficiently patient to endure those torments; why shall not he be able to
tolerate them, who has done it, and is guilty indeed; so dear and worthy a
reward as life being proposed unto him? I am of opinion, that the ground of his
invention, proceeds from the consideration of the power and faculty of the
conscience. For, to the guilty, it seems to give a kind of furtherance to
the torture, to make him confess his fault, and weakneth and dismayeth him:
and on the other part, it encourages and strengthens the innocent against
torture. To say truth, it is a mean full of uncertainty and danger. What
would not a man say; nay, what not do, to avoid so grievous pains, and shun
such torments?

Etiam innocents cogit mentiri dolor. Sen. prover.
Torment to lie sometimes will drive,
Even the most innocent alive.
Whence it follows, that he whom the Judge has tortured, because he shall
not die an innocent, he shall bring him to his death, both innocent and
tortured. Many thousands have thereby charged their heads with false
confessions. Amongst which I may well place Phylotas, considering the
circumstances of the end^ctment that Alexander framed against him, and the
progress of his torture. But so it is, that (as men say) it is the least evil
humane weakness could invent: though, in my conceit, very in humanely, and
therewith all most unprofitably. Many Nations less barbarous in that, then
the Grae^ian, or the Roman, who term them so, judge it a horrible and cruel
thing, to rack and torment a man for a fault whereof you are yet in doubt. Is
your ignorance long of him? What can he do withal? Are not you unjust, who
because you will not put him to death without some cause, you do worse then
kill him? And that it is so, consider but how often he rather chooses to die
guiltless, then pass by this information, much more painful, then the
punishment or torment; and who many times, by reason of the sherpnesse of it,
preventeth, furthereth, yea, and executes the punishment. I wot not whence I
heard this story, but it exactly has reference unto the conscience of our
Justice. A country woman accused a soldier before his General, being a most
severe Iustic^r, that he, with violence, had snatched from out her poor
childrens hands, the smal^ remainder of some pappe or water gruell, which she
had only left to sustain them, for so much as the Army had ravaged and wasted
all. The poor woman, had neither witness nor proof of it; It was but her
yea, and his no; which the General perceiving, after he had summoned her to be
well advised what thee spoke, and that she should not accuse him wrongfully;
for, if she spoke an untruth, she should then be culpable of his accusation:
But she constantly persisting to charge him, he forthwith, to discover the
truth, and to be thoroughly resolved, caused the accused Soldiers belly to be
ripped, who was found faulty, and the poor woman to have said true; whereupon
she was discharged. A condemnation instructive to others.

The sixth Chapter.
Of Exercise or Practice.

IT is a hard matter (although our conceit do willingly apply it self unto
it) that Discourse and Instruction, should sufficiently be powerful, to direct
us to action, and address us to performance, if over and besides that, we do
not by experience exercise and frame our mind, to the train whereunto we will
range-it: otherwise, when we shall be on the point of the effects, it will
doubtless find it self much engaged and empeached. And that is the reason why
amongst Philosophers, those that have willed to attain to some greater
excellence, have not been content, at home, and at rest to expect the rigors of
fortune, for fear she should surprise them unexperienced and find them
novices, if she should chance to enter fight with them; but have rather gone to
meet and front her before, and witting-earnestly cast themselves to the trial
of the hardest difficulties. Some have thereby voluntarily forsaken great
riches, only to practice a voluntary poverty: others have willingly found
out labor, and an austeritie of a toylesome life, thereby to harden and envre
themselves to evil, and travel: othersome have frankly deprived themselves of
the dearest and best parts of their body, as of their eyes, and members of
generation, lest their over-pleasing, and too-too wanton service, might in any
sort mollify and distract the constant resolution of their mind. But to die,
which is the greatest work we have to do, exercise can nothing avail us
thereunto. A man may, by custom and experience, fortify himself against
grief, sorrow, shame, want, and such like accidents: But concerning death, we
can but once feel and try the same. We are all novices, and new to learn
when we come unto it. There have, in former times, been found men so good
husbands and thriftie of time, that even in death they have assayde to taste and
savor it; and bent their mind to observe and see, what manner of thing that
passage of death was; but none did ever yet come back again to tell us
tidings of-it.

-- nemo expergi^us extat Lu^r. 3. 973.
Frigida quem semel est vit aipausasequut^. No man does ever-ofter wake,
Whom once his life's cold rest does take.
Canius Julius, a noble Roman, a man of singular virtue and constancy, having
been condemned to death by that lewdly-mischievous monster of men, Caligula:
besides many marvelous evident assurances he gave of his matchless resolution,
when he was even in the nicke to endure the last stroke of the executioner; a
Philosopher, being his friend, interrupted him with this question, saying:
Canius, in what state is your soul now; what does she; what thoughts possess
you now; I thought (answered he) to keep me ready and prepared with all my
force, to-see whether in this instant of death, so short and so near at hand,
I might perceive some dislodging or distraction of the soul, and whether it
will show some feeling of her sudden departure; that (if I apprehend or learn
anything of her) I may afterward, if I can, return, and give advertisement
thereof unto my friends. Loe-here a Philosopher, not only until death, but even
in death it self: what assurance was it, and what fiercenes of courage, to
will that his own death should serve him as a lesson, and have leisure to
think elsewhere in a matter of such consequence;

-- it is hoc animi morientis habebat. Lucan. l. ^. 63^
This power of mind had he,
When it from him did flee.
Me seems nevertheless, that in some sort there is a mean to familiarize
our selves with it, and to assay-it. We may have some experience of it, if not
whole and perfect, at least such as may not altogether be unprofitable, and
which may yield us better fortified and more assured. If we cannot attain
unto it, we may at least approch-it, and discern the same: And if we cannot
enter her sort, yet shall we see and frequent the approches vnto-it. It is not
with out reason we are taught to take notice of our sleep, for the resemblance
it has with death. How easily we pass from waking to sleeping; with how
little interest we loose the knowledge of light, and of ourselves. The faculty
of sleep might happily seem unprofitable, and against nature, sithence it
depriveth us of all actions, and barreth us of all sense, were it not that
nature does thereby instruct us, that she has equally made us, as well to live,
as to die; and by life presents the eternal state unto us, which she after
the same reserveth for us, so to accustom us thereunto, and remove the fear
of it from us. But such as by some violent accident are fallen into a faintnes
of heart, and have lost all senses, they, in mine opinion, have well-nigh
been, where they might behold her true and natural visage: For, touching the
instant or moment of the passage, it is not to be feared, it should bring any
travel or displeasure with-it, forasmuch as we can have, nor sense, nor
feeling without leisure. Our sufferances have need of time, which is so short,
and plunged in death, that necessarily it must be insensible. It is the
approches that lead unto it we should fear; and those may fall within the
compass of man's experience. Many things seem greater by imagination, then by
effect. I have passed over a good part of my age in sound and perfect health. I
say, not only sound, but blithe and wantonly-lustfull. That state full of
lust, of prime and mirth, made me deem the consideration of sicknesses so
yrkesome and horrible, that when I came to the experience of them, I have found
their fittes but weak, and their assaults but faint, in respect of my
apprehended fear. Lo here what I daily prove. Let me be under a roof, in a
good chamber, warme-clad, and well at ease in some tempestuous and stormy
night. I am exceedingly perplexed, and much grieved for such as are abroad,
and have no shelter: But let me be in the storm my self, I do not so much as
desire to be elsewhere. Only to be continually pent up in a chamber, seemed
in tolerable to me. I have now enured my self to live a whole week, yea a
month in my chamber full of care, trouble, alteration and weakness; and have
found, that in the time of my best health I moaned such as were sick, much
more, then I can well moan my self when I am ill at ease: and that the power
of my apprehension did well-nigh half endeare the essence and truth of the
thing it self. I am in good hope the like will happen to me of death: and that
it is not worth the labor I take for so many preparations as I prepare against
her; and so many helps as I call ^osustaine, and assemble to endure the ^^ocke
and violence of it. But hab ornab we can never take too much advantage of it.
During our second or third troubles (I do not well remember which) I fortuned
one day, for recreation-sake, to go forth and take the air, about a league
from my house, who am seated even in the bowels of all troubles of our civil
wars of France, supposing to be most safe, so near mine own ho^e and
petreite, that I had no need of better attendance or equipage. I was mounted
upon a very easie-going nagge, but not very sure. At my returning home again,
a sudden occasion being offered me, to make use of this nagge in a piece of
service, whereto he was neither trained not accustomed, one of my men (a-strong
sturdie fellow) mounted upon a young strong-headed horse, and that had a
desperate hard mouth, fresh, lusty and in breath; to show his courage, and to
out-goe his fewoes, fortuned with might and maine to set spurs unto him, and
giving him the bridle, to come right into the path where I was, and as a
Colossus with his weight riding over me and my nagge, that were both very
little, he overthrew us both, and made us fall with our heels upward: so that
the nagge lay along astonished in one place, and I in a trance grovelling on the
ground ten or twelfe paces wide of him; my face all torn and bruised, my sword
which I had in my hand a good way from me, my girdle broken, with no more
motion or sense in me then a stock. It is the only swowning that ever I felt
yet. Those that were with me, after thy had assayed all possible means to
bring me to my self again, supposing me dead, took me in their arms, and
with much ado were carrying me home to my-house, which was about half a french
league thence: upon the way, and after I had for two hours space, by all, bin
supposed dead and past all recoverie, I began to stir and breathe: for, so
great abundance of blood was fallen into my stomach, that to discharge it,
nature was forced to roweze up her spirits. I was imediately set upon my feet,
and bending forward, I presently cast up, n quantity as much clottie pure
blood, as abucket will hold, and by the way was constra^ned to do the like
diverse times before I could get home, whereby I begane to recover ^^ttle life,
but it was by little and little, and so long adoing, that my chief senses were
much more enclining to death then to life.

Per che dubbiosa ancor del suo riterne
Nons' assicura at tonita la mente.
For yet the mind doubtful it is return
Is not assured, but astonished.
The remenbrance whereof (which yet I bear deeply imprinted in my mind)
representing me her visage and Idea so livele and so naturally, does in some
sort reconcile me unto her. And when I began to see, it was with so dim, so
weak and so troubled a sight, that I could not discrene any thing of the light,

-- come quel ^'hor'aepre, hor chiude Gliocchij, mezzo tral sonno el esser
desto. As he that sometimes opens, sometimes shuts
His eyes, between sleep and awake.
Touching the function of the soul, they started up and came in the same
progress as those of the body. I perceived my self all bloody; for my
doublet was all sullied with the blood I had cast. The first conceit I
apprehended, was, that I had received some shot in my head; and in truth, at
the same instant, there were diverse that shot round about us. Me thought, my
self had no other hold of me, but of my lippes-ends. I closed mine eyes, to
help (as me seemed) to send it forth, and took a kind of pleasure to linger
and languishingly to let my self go from my self. It was an imagination
swimming superficially in my mind, as weak and as tender as all the rest: but
in truth, not only exempted from displeasure, but rather commixt with that
pleasant sweetness, which they feel that suffer themselves to fall into a
soft-slumbring and sense-entrancing sleep. I believe it is the same state,
they find themselves in, whom in the agony of death we see to droop and faint
through weakness: and am of opinion, we plain and moan them without cause,
esteeming that either they are agitated with grieveous pangs, or that their
soul is pressed with painful cogitations. It was ever my conceit, against
the opinion of many, yea and against that of Stephanus la Boetie, that those
whom we see, so overwhelmed, and faintly-drooping at the approches of their
end, or utterly cast down with the lingering tediousnes of their deseases, or
by accident of some apoplexy, or falling-evill,

-- ( vi morbi saepe ^oactus Luer. li. 3. 490.

Ante oculos aliquis nostros vt fulminis ictu.
Concidit, and spumas agit, ingemit, and fremit artus,
Desipit, extent at neruos, torquetur, anhelat,
Inconstanter and in iactando membra fatigat)
(Some man by force of sickness driu'n does fall,
As if by thunder stroke, before our eyes;
He fomes, he groans, he trembles over all,
He raves, he stretches, he is vexed, panting lies,
He tyr's his limbs by tossing,
Now this now that way crossing.)
or hurt in the head, whom we hear throb and rattle, and send forth groans and
gaspes, although we gather some tokens from them, whereby it seems, they have
yet some knowledge left and certain motions we see them make with their body: I
say, I have ever thought, they had their soul and body buried and a sleep.

Viuat and est vitae nescius ipse suae. Ovid. trist. lib. 1. el. 3. 12.


He lives yet knows not he,
That he alive should be.
And I could not believe, that at so great an astonishment of members, and
deffailance of senses, the soul could maintain any force within, to know
hirselfe; and therefore had no manner of discourse tormenting them, which might
make them judge and feel the misery of their condition, and that consequently
they were not greatly to be moaned. As for my self, I imagine no state so
intolerable nor condition so horrible, as to have a feelingly-afflicted soul,
void of means to disburthen and declare hir-selfe: As I would say of those we
send to execution, having first caused their tongne to be cut out, were it not
that in this manner of death, the most dumb seems unto me the fittest, namely
if it be accompanied with a resolute and grave countenance. And as those
miserable prisoners which light in the hands of those hard-harted and villenous
Soldiers of these times, of whom they are tormented with all manner of cruel
entreatie, by compulsion to draw them unto some excessive and impossible
ransom, keeping them all that while in so hard a condition and place, that
they have no way left them to utter their thoughts and express their misery.
The Poets have fained, there were some Gods, that favored the release of such
as sufferd so languishing deaths. -- hunc ego Diti Virg. Aen. lib. 4. 703. ^r^.
Sacrumiussa fero, teque isto corpore soluo.

This to death sacred, I, as was my charge,
Do bear, and from this body thee enlarge.
And the faltering speeches and uncertain answers, that by continual ringing
in their ears and incessantvrging them are sometimes by force wrested from them
or by the motions which seem to have some simpathie with that whereof they are
examined, is notwithstanding no witness, that they live at least a perfect sound
life. We do also in yawning, before fleep fully seize upon us, apprehend as it
were in a slumber, what is done about us, and with a troubled and uncertain
hearing, follow the voices, which seem to sound but on the outward limits of
our soul; and frame answers according to the last words we heard, which taste
more of chance then of sense: which thing now I have proved by experience, I
^ake no doubt, but hitherto, I have well judged of it. For, first lying as in a
trance, I labo^^ed even with my na les to open my doublet (for I was unarmed)
and well I wot, that in ^^y imagination I felt nothing did hurt me. For, there
are several motions in us, which preceed not of our free will*

Sem^animesque micant digiti* ferrumque retractant. lib. 10. 396.
The halfe-dead fingers stir, and feel,
(Though it they cannot stir) for steel.
Those that fall, do commonly by a natural impulsion cast their arms abroad
before their falling, which shows, that our members have certain offices,
which they lend one to another, and possess certain agitations, apart from our
discourse:

Falciferos memorant currus abscindere membra, Leur. li. 3.

Vt tremere in terra videatur ab artubus, id quod
Decidit abscissum, cum men's tamen atque hominis vis
Mobilitate mali non quit sentire dolorem.
They say, sith-bearing chariots limbs bereave,
So as on earth, that which cut off they leave,
Does seem to quake, when yet man's force and mind
Does not the pain, through so quick motion, find.
My stomach was surcharged with clotted blood, my hands of themselves were
still running to it, as often they are wont (yea against the knowledge of our
will) where we feel it to itch. There are many creatures, yea and some men, in
whom after they are dead, we may see their muskles to close and stir. All men
know by experience, there be some parts of our bodies, which often without any
consent of ours, do stir, stand and lie down again. Now these passions,
which but exteriourly touch us, can not properly be termed ours; For, to make
them ours, a man must wholly be engaged unto them: And the pains that our feet
or hands feel whilst we sleep, are not ours. When I came near my house,
where the tidings of my fall was already come, and those of my household met
me, with such outcries as are used in like times, I did not only answer some
words, to what I was demanded, but some tell me, I had the memory to command
my men to give my wife a horse, whom I perceived to be over-tired, and
laboring in the way, which is very hilly, foul, and rugged. It seems this
consideration proceeded from a vigilant soul: yet was I clean distracted
from-it, they were but vain conceits, and as in a cloud, only moved by the
sense of the eyes and ears: They came not from my self. All which
notwithstanding, I knew neither whence I came, nor whither I went, nor could I
understand or consider what was spoken unto me. They were but light effects,
that my senses produced of themselves, as it were of custom. Whatsoever the
soul did assist-it with, was but a dream, being lightly touched, and only
sprinkled by the soft impression of the senses. In the mean time my state was
verily most pleasant and easefull. I felt no manner of care or affliction,
nither for my self nor others. It was a slumbering, langushing and extreme
weakness, without any pain at all. I saw mine own house and knew it not;
when I was laid in my bed, I felt great ease in my rest, For I had been
vilely hurred and haled by those poor men, which had taken the pains to carry
me upon their arms a long and wearysome way, and to say truth, they had all
been wearied twice or thrice over, and were feign to shift several times.
Many remedies were presently offered me, but I took none, supposing verily I
had been deadly hurt in the head. To say truth, it had been a very happy
death: For, the weakness of my discourse hinderd me from judging of it, and
the feeblenes of my body from feeling the same. Me-thought I was yielding up
the ghost so gently, and after so easy and indolent a manner, that I feel no
other action less burdensome then that was. But when I began to come to
life again and recover my former strength,

Vt tandem sensus convaluere mei, Ovid. Trist. li. 1 ^l. 3. 14.
At last when all the sprites I bear,
Recalled and recollected were,
which was within two or three hours after, I presently felt my self full of
aches and pains all my body over; for, each part thereof was with the violence
of the fall much bruised and tainted; and for two or three nights after I found
my self so ill, that I verily supposed I should have had another fit of death:
But that a more lively, and sensible one: (and to speak plain) I feel my
bru^^^ yet, and fear me shall do while I live: I will not forget to tell you,
that the last thing I could rightly fall into again, was the remembrance of
this accident, and I made my men many times to repeat me over and over again,
whither I was going, whence I came, and at what hour that chance befell me,
before I could thoroughly conceive it. Concerning the manner of my falling they
in favor of him who had bin the cause of it, concealed the truth from me, and
told me other flim flam tales. But a while after, and the morrow next when my
memory began to come to it self again, and represent the state unto me,
wherein I was at the instant, when I perceived the horse riding over me (for
being at my heels, I chanced to epsy him, and held my self for dead; yet
was the conceit so sudden, that fear had no leisure to enter my thoughts) me
seemed it was a flashing or lightning, that smote my soul with shaking, and
that I came from another world. This discourse of so slight an accident, is but
vain and frivolous, were not the instructions I have drawn from thence, for
my use: For truly, for a man to acquaint himself with death, I find no better
way, then to approach unto it. Now as Pliny says, every man is a good
discipline unto himself always provided he be able to pry into himself.
This is not my doctrine, it is but my study; And not another man's lesson, but
mine own. Yet ought no man to blame me if I impart the same. What serves my
turn, may happily serve another man's; otherwise I mar nothing, what I make
use of, is mine own. And if I play the fool, it is at mine own cost, and
without any other bodies interest. For it is but a kind of folly, that dies in
me, and has no train. We have notice but of two or three former ancients,
that have trodden this path; yet can we not say, whether altogether like unto
this of mine, for we know but their names. No man since has followed their
steps: it is a thorny and crabbed enterprise, and more then it makes show of,
to follow so strange and vagabond a path, as that of our spirit: to penetrate
the shady, and enter the thicke-covered depths of these internal winding
crankes; To choose so many, and settle so several aires of his agitations: And
it is a new extraordinary ammusing, that distracts us from the common occupation
of the world, yea and from the most recommended: Many years are past since I
have no other aim, whereto my thoughts bend, but my self, and that I
control and study nothing but my self. And if I study any thing else, it is
imediatly to place it upon, or to say better, in my self. And me thinks I
err not, as commonly men do in other sciences, without all comparison less
profitable. I impart what I have learned by this, although I greatly con^ent
not my self with the progress I have made therein. There is no description so
hard, nor so profitable, as is the description of a man's own life. Yet must a
man handsomely trim up, yea and dispose and range himself to appear on the
Theater of this world. Now I continually trick up my self; for I incessantly
describe my self. Custom has made a man's speech of himself, vicious. And
obstinately forbids it in hatred of boasting, which ever seems closely to
follow ones self witnesses, whereas a man should wipe a childs nose, that is
now called to un nose himself.

In vicium ducis culpae fuga. Her. art poet. 31
Some shunning of some sin,
Do draw some further in.
I find more evil then good by this remedy: But suppose it were true, that
for a man to entertain the company with talking of himself, were necessarily
presumption: I ought not following my general intent, to refuse an action,
that publishes this crazed quality, since I have it in my self: and I should
not conceal this fault, which I have not only in use, but in profession.
Nevertheless to speak my opinion of it, this custom to condemn wine is much
to blame, because many are therewith made drunk. Only good things may be
abvsed. And I believe this rule has only regard to popular defects: They are
snaffles wherewith neither Saints, nor Philosophers, nor Devines, whom we hear
so gloriously to speak of then sulves, will in any sort be bridled. No more
do I, though I be no more the one then other. If they write purposely or
directly of it, yet when occasion does conveniently lead them unto it, feign
they not, headlong to cast themselves into the listes? Whereof does Scraetes
treat more at large, then of himself? To what does he more often direct his
Disciples discourses, then to speak of themselves, not for their books
lesson, but of the essence and mooving of their soul? We religiously shriue
our selves to God and our confessor as our neighbors to all the people. But
will some answer me, we report but accusation; we then report all: For,
even our virtue it self is faulty and repentable; My art and profession, is
to live. Who forbids me to speak of it, according to my sense, experience, and
custom; Let him appoint the Architect to speak of buildings, not according to
himself, but his neighbors, according to another skill, and not his own. If
it be a glory, for a man to publish his own worth himself, why does not
Cicero prefer the eloquence of Hortensius, and Hortensius that of Ciceror. Some
may peradventure suppose that by deeds and effects and not simply by words, I
witness of my self. I principally set forth my cogitations; a shapeletle
subject, and which cannot fall within the compass of a worke-manlike
production: with much ado can I set it down in this ayrie body of the voice.
Wiser men, and more learned and devout, have lived avoiding all apparent
effects. Effects would speak more of fortune, then of me. They witness their
part, and not mine; unless it be conjecturally and uncertainly: Parcels of a
particular show: I wholly set forth and expose my self: It is a Sceletos; where
at first sight appear all the veins, muskles, gristles, sinnewes, and
tendons, each several part in his due place. The effect of the cough produces
one part, that of palenesse ot panting of the heart another, and that
doubtfully. I write not my gests, but my self and my essence. I am of opinion
that a man must be very wise to esteem himself, and equally conscientious to
give testimony of it: be it low, be it high indifferently. If I did absolutely
seem good and wise unto my self, I would boldly declare it. To speak less
of himself then he possesses, is folly and not modesty. To pay himself for
less then he is worth, is baseness and pusilanimity, says Aristotle. No
virtue aides it self with false-hood; and truth is never a matter of error.
And yet for a man to say more of himself, then he can well prove, is not ever
presumption, though often sottishness. For a man to over-weene, and please
himself exceedingly with what he is, and fall into indifereet love with
himself, is in my conceit, the substance of this vice. The best remedy to cure
him, is to do clean contrary to that which those appoint, who inforbidding
men to speak of themselves, do consequently also inhibite more to think of
themselves. Pride consists in conceit: The tongue can have no great share in
it. For one to ammuse on himself, is in their imagination to please himself:
And for a man to frequent and practice himself, is at an over-deare rate to
please himself. But this excess does only breed in them, that but
superficially feel and search themselves, that are seen to follow their
affairs, which call idleness and fondness, for a man to entertain, to
applaud and to endeare himself, and frame Chimeraes, or build Castles in the
air; deeming themselves as a third person and strangers to themselves. If any
be besotted with his own knowledge, looking upon himself, let him cast his
eyes toward former ages, his pride shall be abated, his ambition shall be
quailed; for there shall he find many thousands of spirits, that will clean
suppress and tread him under. If he fortune to enter into any
selfe-presumption of his own worth, let him but call to remembrance the lives
of Scipio and Epaminondas; so many armies, and so many Nations, which leave him
so far behind them. No particular quality shall make him proud, that therewith
shall reckon so many imperfect and weak qualities that are in him and at last,
the nullity of humane condition. For So Much as Socrates had truly only nibled
on the precept of his God, to know himself, and by that study had learned to
contemn himself, he alone was esteemed worthy of the name of Wise. Whosoever
shall so know himself, let him boldly make himself known by his own mouth:

The seventh Chapter.
Of the recompenses or rewards of Honor.

THose which write the life of Augustus Caesar, note this in his military
discipline, that he was exceeding liberal and lavish in his gifts to such as
were of any desert; but as sparing and strait-handed in mere recompenses of
honor. Yet is it that himself had been liberally gratified by his Uncle with
military rewards, before ever he went to wars. It has been a witty
invention, and received in most parts of the worlds Commonwealths, to
establish and ordain certain vain and worthles marks, therewith to honor
and recompense virtue: As are the wreathes of Laurel, the Chaplets of Oak,
and the Garlands of Myrtle, the form of a certain peculiar garment; the
privilege to ride in Coch through the City; or by night to have a Torch
carried before one: Some particular place to sit-in in common assemblies; the
prerogatives of certain surnames and titles, and proper additions in arms,
and such like things; the use whereof has been diversely received according to
the opinions of Nations, which continues to this day. We have for our part,
together with diverse of our neighbour-Nation, the orders of Knighthood, which
only were established to this purpose. Verily it is a most laudable use, and
profitable custom, to find means to reward the worth, and acknowledge the
valor of rare and excellent men, to satisfy and content them with such
payments, as in no sort charge the common wealth, and put the Prince to no cost
at all. And that which was ever known by ancient experience, and at other
times we have plainly perceived amongst ourselves, that men of quality, were
ever more jealous of such recompenses, then of others, wherein was both gain
and profit: which was not without reason and great appearance. If to the prize,
which ought simply to be of honor, there be other commodities and riches
joined, this kind of commixing, in stead of increasing the estimation thereof,
does empaire, dissipate, and abridge-it. The order of the Knights of Saint
Michaell in France, which of so long continuance has bin in credit amongst
us, had no greater commodity then that it had no manner of communication with
any other advantage or profit, which has hecretofore been the cause, that
there was no charge or state of what quality soever, whereto the nobility
pretended with so much desire, or aspired with more affection, as it did to
obtain that order; nor calling, that was followed with more respect or
greatness. Virtue embracing with more ambition, and more willingly aspiring
after a recompense, that is merely and simply her own, and which is rather
glorious, then profitable. For, to say truth, other gifts have novse so
worthy; masmuch, as they are employed to all manner of occasions. With riches a
man does reward the service of a groom, the diligence of a messenger, the
hopping of a dancer, the tricks of a vaulter, the breath of a lawyer, and the
basest offices a man may receive; yea, with the same paultry pelf money, vice
is paid and sin requited, as flattery, murder, treason, Maqu^relage, and
what not? It is then no marvel, if virtue does less willingly desire this
kind of common trash, money, then that which is only proper and peculiar to
h^rselfe, and is altogether noble and generous. Auguctus had therefore reason,
to be much more niggardly and sparing of this last, then of the former,
forasmuch has honor is a privilege which draws his principal essence from
rareness: And so does virtue it self.

Cu^ malus est nemo, quis bonus esse potest? Mart. l. 12. epig. 82. 2.
To him who good can seem,
Who does none bad esteem?
We shall not see a man highly regarded, or extraordinarily commended, that is
curiously careful to have his children well nurtured, because it is a common
action, how just and worthy praise soever it be: no more then one great tree,
where the forest is full of such. I do not think that any Spartane Citizen
did boastingly glorify himself for his valor, because it was a popular virtue
in that Nation: And as little for his fidelity, and contempt of riches. There
is no recompense falls unto virtue, how great soever it be, if it once have past
into custom: And I wot not whether we might call it great, being common. Since
then the rewards of honor, have no other prize and estimation then that few
enjoy it, there is no way to disannull them, but to make a largess of them.
Were there now more men found deserving the same then in former ages, yet
should not the reputation of it be corrupted. And it may easily happen that
more deserve-it: For, there is no virtue, does so easily spread it self as
military valian^^e. There is another, true, perfect, and Philosophical, whereof
I speak not (I use this word according to our custom) far greater and more
full then this, which is a force and assurance of the soul, equally contemning
all manner of contrary accidents, upright, vn^forme, and constant, whereof ours
is but an easy and glimmering raie. Custom, institution, example and fashion,
may effect what ever they list in the establishing of that I speak-of, and
easily make it vulgar, as may plainly be seen by the experience our civil
warts give-vs of-it, And whosoever could now join us together, and eagerly
flesh al our people to a common enterprise, we should make our ancient military
name and chivalrous credit to flourish again. It is most certain that the
recompense of our order did not in former times only concern prowis, and
respect valor; it had a further aim. It was never the reward or payment of a
valiant soldier; but of a famous Captain. The skill to obey could not deserve
so honorable an hire: for, cast we back our eyes to antiquity, we shall
perceive, that for the worthy obtaining thereof, there was required more
universal war like experinesse, and which might embrace the greatest part,
and most parts of a military man; Neque enim eadem militares and imperatoriae
arts sunt; for the same arts and parts belong not to a general and common
Soldier; and who besides that, should also be of a fit and accommodable
condition for such a dignity. But I say, that if more men should now adays be
found worthy of it, then have bin heretofore, yet should not our Princes be
more liberal of it: and it had bin much better, not to bestow it upon all them
to whom it was due, then for ever to loose, (as of late we have done) the use
of so profitable an invention. No man of courage vouch^afeth to advantage
himself of that which is common unto many. And those which in our days, have
least merited that honorable recompense, seem, in all appearance, most to
disdain it, by that means to place themselves in the rank of those to whom
the wrong is offered by unworthy bestowing and vilifying of that badge, which
particularly was due unto them. Now by defacing and abolishing this to suppose,
suddenly to be able to bring into cridite, and renew a semblable custom, is no
convenient enterprise, in so licentious, so corrupted, and so declining an age,
as is this wherein we now live. And it will come to pass that the last shall
even from her birth incur the incommodities, which have lately ruined and
overthrown the other. The rules of this new orders-dispensation had need to be
otherwise wrested and constrained, for to give it authority: and this
tumultuous season is not capable of a short and ordered bridle. Besides, before
a man is able to give credit unto it, it is requisite a man loose the memory of
the first, and of the contempt whereinto it is fallen. This place might admit
some discourse upon the consideration of valor, and difference between this
virtue and others: But Plutarch having often spoken of this matter, it were in
vain here for me to repeat what he says of it. This is worthy to be
considered, that our nation gives the chief pre-eminence of all virtue unto
valiancy, as the Etymology of the word shows, which comes of valor, or
worth: and that according to our received custom, when after the phrase of our
court and nobility we speak of a worthy man, or of an honest man, we thereby
infer no other thing than a valiant man; after the usual Roman fashion. For,
the general denomination of virtue does amongst them take her Etymology, of
force or might. The only proper and essential form of our nobility in France,
is military vocation. It is very likely, that the first virtue that ever
appeared amongst men, and which to some has given pre-eminence over others,
has bin this by which the strongest and more courageous have become masters
over the weakest, and purchased a particular rank and reputation to
themselves: Whereby this honor and dignity of speech is left unto it: or else
these nations being very warlike, have given the price unto that of virtues,
which was the worthiest and more familiar unto them. Even as our passion, and
this heartpanting, and mind-vexing careful diligence, and diligent
carfulness, which we continually apprehend about women's chastity, causes;
also that a good woman, an honest woman, a woman of honor and virtue, does in
effect and substance, signify no other thing unto us, than a chaste wife or
woman; as if to bind them to this duty, we did neglect all others, and gave
them free liberty to commit any other fault, to covenant with them, never to
quit or forsake this one.

The eight Chapter.
Of the affection of fathers to their children. To the Lady of Estissac.

MAdame, if strangeness do not save, or novelty shield me, which are wont
to give things reputation, I shall never, with honesty, quit my self of this
enterprise; yet is it so fantastical, and bears a show so different from
common custom, that that may happily purchase-it free passage. It is a
melancholy humor, and consequently a hateful enemy to my natural complexion,
bredde by the anxietie, and produced by the anguish of carking care, whereinto
some years since I cast my self, that first put this humorous conceit of
writing into my head. And finding my self afterward wholly unprovided of
subject, and void of other matter. I have presented my self unto my self for
a subject to write, and argument to descant upon. It is the only book in the
world of this kind, and of a wild extravagant design. Moreover, there is
nothing in it worth^e the marking but this fantasticalnesse. For, to so vain a
ground and base a subject, the worlds best workman, could never have given a
fashion deserving to be accompted-of. Now (worthy Lady) sithence I must
pourtray my self to the life, I should have forgotten a part of importance, if
therewithal I had not represented the honor I have ever yeeleed to your
deserts, which I have especially been willing to declare in the forefront of
this Chapter; For as much as amongst your other good parts, and commendable
qualities, that of loving amity, which you have shown to your children,
holds one of the first ranckes. Whosoever shall understand and know the age,
wherein your late husband the Lord of Estissac left you a Widow, the great and
honorable matches have been offered you (as worthy and as many as to any other
Lady in France of your condition) the constant resolution, and resolute
constancy, wherewith so many years you have sustained, and even in spite, or
a thwart so manifold thorny difficulties; the charge and conduct of their
affairs, which have tossed, turmoyled and remooved you in all corners of
France, and still hold you besieged; the happy and successful forwardness
you, which only through your wisdom or good fortune have given them, he will
easily say with me, that in our age we have no pattern of motherly affection
more exemplare; than yours. I praise God (Madam) it has been so well
employed: For, the good hopes, which the young Lord of Estissac, your son
gives of himself, fore-shew an undoubted assurance, that when he shall come
to years of discretion, you shall reap the obedience of a noble, and find the
acknowledgement of a good child. But because, by reason of his childhood, he
could not take notice of the exceeding kindness and many-fold offices he has
received from you, my meaning is, that if ever these my compositions shall
happly one day come into his hands (when peradventure I shall neither have
mouth nor speech to declare it unto him) he receive this testimony in all
verity from me; which shall also more lively be testified unto him by the good
effects, (whereof, if so it please God, he shall have a sensible feeling) that
there is no Gentleman in France, more endebted to his mother, then he; and that
hereafter he cannot yield a more certain proof of his goodness, and
testimony of his virtue, then in acknowledging and confessing you for such. If
there be any truely-naturall law, that is to say, any instinct, universally and
perpetually imprinted, both in beasts and us, (which is not without
controversy) I may, according to mine opinion, say, that next to the care,
which each living creature has to his preservation, and to fly what does hurt
him; the affection which the engenderer bears his offspring, holds the
second place in this rank. And forasmuch as nature seems to have recommended
the same vnto-vs, aiming to extend, increase, and advance, the successive parts
or parcels of this her frame. It is no wonder if back*againe it is not so
great from children unto fathers. This other Aristotelian consideration
remembered: That he who does benefit another, loves him better than he is
beloved of him again: And he to whom a debt is owing, loves better, than he
that owes: And every workman loves his work better, than he should be
beloved of it again, if it had sense or feeling. Forasmuch as we love to be;
and being consists in moving and action. Therefore is every man, in some sort
or other in his own workmanship. Whosoever does a good deed, exercises a
fair and honest action: Whosoever receives, exercises only a profitable
action. And profit is nothing so much to be esteemed or loved as honesty.
Honesty is firm and permanent, affording him that did it, a constant
gratification. Profit is very slipperie, and easily lost, nor is the memory
of it so sweet, or so fresh. Such things are dearest unto us, that have cost us
most: And to give, is of more cost then to take. Since it has pleased God to
endow-vs with some capacity of discourse, that as beasts we should not servily
be subjected to common laws, but rather with judgment and voluntary liberty
apply our selves unto them; we ought somewhat to yield unto the simple
authority of Nature: but not suffer her tyrannically to carrie-vs away: only
reason ought to have the conduct of our inclinations. As for me, my taste is
strangely distasted to it is propensions, which in us are produced without the
ordinance and direction of our judgment. As upon this subject I speak-of, I
cannot receive this passion, wherewith some embrace children scarsly borne,
having neither motion in the soul, nor form well to be distinguished in the
body, whereby they might make themselves lovely or amiable. And I could never
well endure to have them brought up or nursed near about me. A true and well
ordered affection, ought to be borne and augmented, with the knowledge they give
us of themselves; and then, if they deserve-it (natural inclination marching
hand in hand with reason) to cherish and make much of them, with a perfect
fatherly love and loving friendship, and conformably to judge of them if they
be otherwise, always yielding our selves unto reason, notwithstanding naturll
power. For the most part; it goes clean contrary, and commonly feel our
selves more moved with the sports, idleness, wantonness, and infant-trifles
of our children, than afterward we do with all their actions, when they be
men: As if we had loved them for our pastimes, as we do apes, monkies, or
perokitoes, and not as men. And some that liberally furnish them with sporting
bables while they be children, will miserably pinch it in the least expense for
necessaries when they grow men. Nay, it seems that the jelousie we have to
see them appear into, and enjoy the world, when we are ready to leave them,
makes us more sparing and close-handed toward them. It vexes and grieveth us
when we see them following us at our heels, supposing they solicit us to be
gone hence: And if we were to fear that since the order of things bears,
that they cannot indeed, neither be, nor live, but by our being and life, we
should not meddle to be fathers. As for me, I deem it a kind of cruelty and
injustice, not to receive them into the share and society of our goods, and to
admit them as Partners in the understanding of our domestical affairs (if
they be once capable of it) and not to cut off and shut- up our commodities to
provide for theirs, since we have engendered them to that purpose. It is mere
injustice to see an old, crazed, sinnow-shronken, and nigh dead father sitting
alone in a Chimny-corner, to enjoy so many goods as would suffice for the
preferment and entertainment of many children, and in the mean while, for want
of means, to suffer them to loose their best days and years, without
thrusting them into public service and knowledge of men; whereby they are
often cast into despair, to seek, by some way how unlawful soever to provide
for their necessaries. And in my days, I have seen diverse yong-men, of good,
houses so given to stealing and filching, that no correction could divert them
from it. I know one very well alied, to whom, at the instance of a brother of
his (a most honest, gallant, and virtuous Gentleman) I spoke to that purpose,
who boldly answered and confessed unto me, that only by the rigor and covetise
of his father he had been forced and driven to fall into such lewdness and
wickedness. And even at that time he came from stealing certain jewels from a
Lady, in whose bedchamber he fortuned to come with certain other Gentlemen
when she was rising, and had almost been taken. He made me remember a tale I
had heard of an other Gentleman, from his youth so fashioned and inclined to
this goodly trade of pilfering, that coming afterward to be heir and Lord of
his own goods, resolved to give over that manner of life, could
notwithstanding (if he chanced to come near a shop, where he saw any thing he
stood in need of) not choose but steal the same, though afterward he would
ever send money and pay for it. And I have seen diverse so inured to that vice,
that amongst their companions, they would ordinarily steal such things, as
they would restore again. I am a Gascoine, and there is no vice wherein I have
less skill: I hate it somewhat more by complexion, then I accuse it by
discourse. I do not so much as desire another man's goods.

And although my Countrymen be indeed somewhat more taxed with this fault,
then other Provinces of France, yet have we seen of late days, and that
sundry times men well borne and of good parentaeg in other parts of France in
the hands of justice, and lawfully convicted of many most horrible robberies. I
am of opinion that in regard of these debauches and lewd actions, fathers may,
in some sort, be blamed, and that it is only long of them. And if any shall
answer me, as did once a Gentleman of good worth and understanding, that he
thriftily endeavored to hoard up riches, to no other purpose, nor to have any
use and commodity of them, then to be honored, respected and suingly sought
unto by his friends and kinsfolks, and that age having bereaved him of all
other forces, it was the only remedy he had left to maintain himself in
authority with his household, and keep him from falling into contempt and
disdain of all the world. (And truly according to Aristotle, not only
old age, but each imbecility, is the promoter, and motive of covetousness.
That is something, but it is a remedy for an evil, whereof the birth should
have been hindered, and breeding a voyded. That father may truly be said
miserable, that holds the affection of his children tied unto him by no other
means, then by the need they have of his help, or want of his assistance, if
that may be termed affection: A man should yield himself respectable by virtue
and sufficiency, and amiable by his goodness, and gentleness of manners. The
very cinders of so rich a matter, have their value: so have the bones and
relics of honorable men, whom we hold in respect and reverence. No age can
be so crazed and drooping in a man that has lived honorably, but must needs
prove venerable, and especially unto his children, whose minds ought so to be
directed by the parents, that reason and wisdom, not necessity and need, nor
rudeness and compulsion, may make them know and perform their duty.

-- and errat long, mea quidem sententia, Ter. Adel^^. act. 1. see. 1. 39

Qui imperium credat esse gravius aut stabilius,
Vi quod fit, quam illud quod amicitia adiungitur;
In mine opinion he does much mistake,
Who, that command more grave, more firm does take,
Which force does get, then that which friendships make.
I utterly condemn all manner of violence in the education of a young spirit,
brought up to honor and liberty. There is a kind of slavishnesse in
churlish-rigor, and servility in compulsion; and I hold, that that which can
not be compaessed by reason, wisdom and discretion, can never be attained by
^orce and constraint. So was I brought up: they tell me, that in all my youth,
I never felt rod but twice, and that very lightly. And what education I have
had my self, the same have I given my children. But such is my ill hap, that
they die all very young: yet has Leonora my only daughter escaped this
misfortune, and attained to the age of six years, and somewhat more: for the
conduct of whose youth, and punishment of her childisn faults (the indulgence
of her mother applying it self very mildely unto it) was never other means
used but gentle words. And were my desire frustrate, there are diverse other
causes to take hold-of, without reproving my discipline, which I know to be
just and natural. I would also have been much more religious in that toward
male-children, not borne to serve as women, and of a freer condition. I should
have loved to have stored their mind with ingenuity and liberty. I have seen
no other effects in rods, but to make childrens minds more remis^e, or more
maliciously headstrong. Desire we to be loved of our children? Will we remove
all occasions from them to wish our death? (although no occasion of so horrible
and unnatural wishes, can either be just or excusable) nullum scelus rationem
habet, no ill deed has a good reason.

Let us reasonably accommodate their life, with such things as are in our
power. And therefore should not we marry so young, that our age do in a manner
confound it self with theirs. For, this inconvenience does vnavoidably cast us
into many difficulties, and encombrances. This I speak, chiefly unto Nobility,
which is of an idle disposition, or lo^tering condition, and which (as we say)
lives only by her lands or rents: for else, where life stands upon gain;
plurality and company of children is an easefull furtherance of husbandry. They
are as many new implements to thrive, and instruments to grow rich. I was
married at thirty years of age, and commend the opinion of thirty-five, which
is said to be Aristotle's. Plato would have no man married before thirty, and
has good reason to scoff at them that will defer it till after fifty-five,
and then marry; and condemns their breed as unworthy of life and sustenance.
Thales appointed the best limits, who by his mother, being instantly urged to
marry whilst he was young, answered that it was not yet time; and when he came
to be old he said it was no more time. A man must refuse opportunity to every
importunate action. The ancient Gauls deemed it a thamefull reproach, to have
the acquaintance of a woman before the age of twenty years, and did especially
recommend unto men that sought to be trained up in wars, the careful
preservation of their maidenhead, until they were of good years, for so much
as by loosing it in youth, courages are thereby much weakened and greatly
empaired, and by copulation with women, diverted from all virtuous action.

Mahor cogiunto a gi^ vinetta sposa,
Lieto hemat de'figl^ era invilito
Ne gli affetti di padre and di marito.
But now conjoined to a fresh-springing spouse,
Joyed in his children, he was thought* abased,
In passions twixt a Sire, and husband placed.
Muleasses King of Thunes, he whom the Emperor Charles the fifth restored unto
his own state again, was wont to vpbraid his fathers memory, for so
dissolutely-frequenting of women, terming him a sloven, effeminate, and a
lustful engenderer of children. The Greek story does note Iecus the
Tarentine, Chryso, Astylus, Diopomus and others, who to keep their bodies
tough and strong for the service of the Olympicke courses, wrestlings and such
bodily exercises, they did, as long as they were possessed with that care,
heedefully abstain from all venerian acts, and thouching of women. In a
certain country of the Spanish Indies, no man was suffered to take a wife,
before he were forty years old, and women might marry at ten years of
age. There is no reason, neither is it convenient, that a Gentleman of five and
thirty years, should give place to his son, that is but twenty: For then is
the father as seemly, and may as well appear, and set himself forward, in all
manner of voyages of wars, as well by land as sea, and do his Prince as good
service, in court, or else where, as his son: He has need of all his parts,
and ought truly to impart them, but so, that he forget not himself for others:
And to such may justly that answer serve, which fathers have commonly in their
mouths: I will not put off my clothes before I be ready to go to bed. But a
father over-burthend with years, and crazed through sickness, and by reason
of weakness and want of health, barred from the common society of men, does
both wrong himself, injure his, idely and to no use to hoorde up, and keep
close a great heap of riches, and deal of pelf. He is in state good enough,
if he be wise to have a desire to put off his clothes to go to bed. I will not
say to his spirt, but to a good warm night gown, As for other pomp and trash
whereof he has no longer use or need; he ought willingly to distribute and
bestow them amongst those, to whom by natural decree they ought to belong. It
is reason he should have the use, and bequeath the fruition of them, since
nature does also deprive him of them, otherwise without doubt there is both
envy and malice stirring. The worthiest action, that ever the Emperor Charles
the fifth performed was this, in imitation of some ancients of his quality,
that he had the discretion to know, that reason commanded us, to strip or shift
our selves when our clothes trouble and are too heavy for us, and that it is
high time to go to bed, when our legs fail us. He resigned his means, his
greatness and Kingdom to his Son, at what time he found his former undaunted
resolution to decay, and force to conduct his aslaires, to droope in himself,
together with the glory he had thereby acquired.

Solue senescentem mature se^^s equum, ne Mor. 1. ^ep. 1. 8.

Peccet ad extremum ridendus, and ilia ducat,
If you be wise, the horse grown* old be times cast off,
Least he at last fall lame, soulter, and breed a skoffe.
This fault, for a man not to be able to know himself betimes, and not to
feel the impuissance and extreme alteration, that age does naturally bring,
both to the body and the mind (which in mine opinion is equal, if the mind
have but one half) has lost the reputation of the most part of the greatest
men in the world. I have in my days both seen and fam^liarly known some men
of great authority, whom a man might easily descerne, to be strangely fallen
from that ancient sufficiency, which I know by the reputation they had thereby
attained* unto in their best years. I could willingly for their honors sake
have wis^t them at home about their own business, discharged from all
negotiations of the commonwealth and employments of war, that were no longer
fit for them. I have sometimes been familiar in a Gentleman's house, who was
both an old man and a widdower, yet lusty of his age. This man had many
daughters ^ariageable, and a son grown to man's state, and ready to appear
in the world, a thing that drew* on, and was the cause of great charges, and
many visitations, wherein he took but little pleasure, not only for the
continual care he had to save, but more by reason of his age, he had betaken
himself to a manner of life far different from ours. I chanced one day to
tell him somewhat boldly (as my custom is) that it would better beseem him to
give us place, and resign his chief house to his son (for he had no other
mannor-house conveniently well furnished) and quietly retire himself to some
farm of his, where no man might trouble him, or disturb his rest, since he
could not otherwise avoid our importunity, seeing the condition of his
children; who afterward followed my counsel, and found great ease by it. It is
not to be said, that they have any thing given them by such a way of
obligation, which a man may not recall again: I, that am ready to play such a
part, would give over unto them the full possession of my house, and enjoying
of my goods, but with such liberty and limited condition, as if they should
give me occasion, I might repent my self of my gift, and revoke my deed. I
would leave the use and fruition of all unto them, the rather because it were
no longer fit for me to weald the same. And touching the disposing of all
matters in gross, I would reserve what I pleased unto my self. Having ever
judged, that it must be a great contentment to an aged father, himself to
direct his children in the government of his houshold-affaires, and to be able
whilst himself lives, to check and control the demeanors: storing them
with instruction and advised counsel according to the experience he has had of
them, and himself to address the ancient honor and order of his house in the
hands of his successors, and that way warrant himself of the hopes he may
conceive of their future conduct and after success. And to this effect, I
would not shun their company. I would not be far from them, but as much as
the condition of my age would permit, enjoy and be a partner of their sports,
mirths, and feasts. If I did not continually live amongst them (as I could not
well without offending their meetings and hindering their recreation, by reason
of the peevish frowardness of my age, and the trouble of my infirmities, and
also without forcing their rules, and resisting the form of life, I should
then follow) I would at least live near them, in some corner of my house, not
the best and fairest in show, but the most easefull and commodious. And not as
some years since, I saw a Deane of S. Hillarie of Poictiers, reduced by reason
and the incommoditie of his melancholy to such a continual solitariness, that
when I entered into his chamber he had never remooved one step out of it in two
and twenty years before: yet had all his faculties free and easy, only a
rheum excepted that fell into his stomach. Scarce once a week would he suffer
any body to come and see him. He would ever be shut up in his chamber all
alone, where no man should come, except a boy, who once a day brought him
meat, and who might not tarry there, but as soon as he was in, must go out
again. All his exercise was sometimes to walk up and down his chamber, and
now and then read on some book (for he had some understanding of letters) but
obstinately resolved to live and die in that course, as he did shortly after. I
would endeavor by a kind of civil demeanor and mild conversation, to breed
and settle in my children a trueharty-loving friendship, and unfeigned good will
toward me. A thing easily obtained amongst well-borne minds: For, if they
prove, or be such surly-furious beasts, or given to churlish disobedience, as
our age brings forth thousands, they must as beasts be hated, as churls
neglected, and as degenerate avoided. I hate this custom, to forbid children
to call their fathers father, and to teach them another strange name, as of
more reverence: As if nature had not sufficiently provided for our authority.
We call God-almightie by the name of father, and disdain our children should
call us so. I have reformed this fault in mine own household. It is also
folly and injustice to deprive children, especially being of competent age, of
their fathers familiarity, and ever to snew them a surly, austere, grim, and
disdainefull countenance, hoping thereby to keep them in awefull fear and
duteous obedience. For, it is a very unprofitable proceeding, and which makes
fathers yrkesome unto children; and which is worse, ridiculous. They have youth
and strength in their hands, and consequently, the breath and favor of the
world; and do with mockery and contempt receive these churlish fierce, and
tyrannical countenaunces, from a man that has no lusty blood left him,
neither in his heart, nor in his veins; mere bugge-beares, and scar-crowes,
to scare birds with all. If it lay in my power to make my self feared, I had
rather make my self beloved. There are so many sorts of defects in age, and
so much impuissance: It is so subject to contempt, that the best purchase it
can make, is the good will, love and affection of hers. Commandment and fear
are no longer her weapons. I have known one whose youth had bin very imperious
and rough, but when he came to man's age, although he live in as good plight
and health as may be, yet he chaseth, he scoldeth, he brawleth, he fights, he
swears, and biteth, as the most boistrous and tempestuous master of France,
he frets and consumes himself with ca^ke and care and vigilance (all which is
but a juglin and ground for his familier to play upon, and cozen him the more)
as for his goods, his garners, his cellers, his coffers, yea his purse, whilst
himself keeps the keys of them, close in his bosom and under his boulster,
as charily as he does his e^es, other enjoy and command the better part of
them; whilst he pleases and fla^tereth himself, with the ^^ggardly sparing
of his table, all goes to wrack, and is lavishly wasted in diverse corners of
his house, in play, in riotous spending, and in soothingly entertaining the
accounts or tales of his vain chafing, foresight and providing. Every man
watches and keeps sentinel against him, if any silly or needless servant
do by fortune apply himself unto it, he is presently made to suspect him: A
quality on which age does immediately bite of itself. How many times has he
vaunted and applauding himself told me of the strict orders of his house, of
his good husbandry, of the awe he kept his household in, and of the exact
obedience, and regardfull reverence he received of all his family, and how
cleare-sighted he was in his own business:

Ille solus nescit omnia. Ter. Adel. act. 4. scen. 2. 9.
Of all things none but he,
Most ignorant must be.
I know no man that could produce more parts, both natural and artificial,
fit to preserve his maisterie, and to maintain his absoluteness, than he
does; yet is he clean fallen from them like a child. Therefore have I made
choice of him, amongst many such conditions that I know, as most exemplare. It
were a matter beseeming a scholasticall question, whether it be better so, or
otherwise. In his presence all things give place unto him. This vain course is
ever left unto his authority, that he is never gaine-said. He is had in awe, he
is feared, he is believed, he is respected his belly-full. Does he discharge
any boy or servant? he presently trusseth up his pack, then is he gone; but
whether? only out of his sight, not out of his house. The steps of age are
follow, the senses so troubled, the mind so distracted, that he shall live and
do his office, a whole year in one same house, and never be perceived. And
when fit time or occasion serves, Letters are produced from far places,
humbly suing, and pitifully complaining, with promises to do better, and to
amend, by which he is brought into favor and office again. Does the master
make any bargain, or dispatch that pleases not? it is immediately smothered
and suppressed, soon after forging causes, and devising colorable excuses, to
excuse the want of execution or answer. No foreign Letters being first
presented unto him, he sees but such as are fit for his knowledge. If
peradventure they come unto his hands, as he that trusts some one of his men
to read them unto him, he will presently devise what he thinks good, whereby
they often invent, that such a one seems to ask him forgiveness, that
wrongeth him by his Letter. To conclude, he never looks into his own
business, but by a disposed, designed and as much as may be pleasing image, so
contrived by such as are about him, because they will not stir up his choler,
moove his impatience, and exasperate his frowardness. I have seen under
different forms, many long and constant, and of like effect oeconomies. It is
ever proper unto women, to be read^ly bent to contradict and cross their
husbands. They will with might and maine hand-over head, take hold of any
color to thwart and withstand them: the first excuse they meet with, serves
them as a plenary justification. I have seen some, that would in gross steal
from their husbands, to the end (as they told their Confessors) they might
give the greater alms. Trust you to such religious dispensations. They think
no liberty to have, or managing to possess sufficient authority, if it come
from their husbands consent: They must necessarily usurp it, either by wily
craft or maine force, and ever injuriously, thereby to give it more grace and
authority. As in my Discourse, when it is against a poor old man, and for
children, then take they hold of this Title, and therewith gloriously serve
their turn and passion, and as in a common servitude, easily usurp and
monopolize against his government and domination. If they be men-children,
tall, of good spirit and forward, then they presently suborne, either by
threats, force or favor, both Steward, Bail^ffe, Clarke, Receiver, and all the
Fathers Officers, and Servants. Such as have neither wife nor children, do
more hardly fall into this mischief: but yet more cruelly and unworthily. Old
Cato was wont to say, So many servants, so many enemies. Note whether according
to the distance, that was between the purity of his age, and the corruption of
our times, he did not fore-warne us, that Wives, Children, and Servants are to
us so many enemies. Well fittes it decrepitude to store us with the sweet
benefit of ignorance and vnperceiving facility wherewith we are deceived.

If we did yield unto it, what would become of us? Do we not see that even
then, if we have any suites in law or matters to be decided before judges, both
Lawyers and Judges, will commonly take part with, and favor our childrens
causes against us, as men interessed in the same? And if I chance not to spy,
or plainly perceive how I am cheated, cozoned and beguiled. I must of
necessity discover in the end, how I am subject and may be cheated, beguiled,
and cozoned. And shall the tongue of man ever be able to express the
invaluable worth of a friend, in comparison of these civil bonds? The lively
image and Idea whereof; I perceive to be amongst beasts so unspotted. Oh with
what religion do I respect and observe the same! If others deceive me, yet do
I not deceive my self, to esteem my self capable, and of power to look unto
my self, nor to trouble my brains to yield my self unto it. I do beware and
keep my self from such treasons, and cunny-catching in mine own bosom, not
by an unquiet, and tumultuary curiosity, but rather by a diversion and
resolution. When I hear the state of any one reported or discoursed of, I
ammuse not my self on him, but presently cast mine eyes on my self, and all
my wits together, to see in what state I am, and how it goes with me.
Whatsoever concerns him, the same has relation to me. His fortunes forewarne
me, and summon up my spirits that way. There is no day nor hour, but we
speak that of others, we might properly speak of our selves, could we as well
enfold, as we can unfold our consideration. And many Authors do in this
manner wound the protection of their cause, by over-rasnly running against that,
which they take hold-of, thirling such darts at their enemies, that might with
much more advantage be cast at them. The Lord of Monluc, late one of the Lord
Marshals of France, having lost his son, who died in the Island of Madera, a
worthy, forward and gallant young gentleman, and truly of good hope; amongst
other his griefs and regrets, did greatly moove me to condole, the infinite
displeasure and heartes-sorrow that he felt, in as much as he had never
communicated and opened himself unto him: for, with his austere humor and
continual endevoring to hold a grimme-sternfatherly gravity over him, he had
lost the means, perfectly to find and thoroughly to know his son, and so to
manifest unto him, the extreme affection he bare him, and the worthy judgment
he made of his virtue. Alas (was he wont to say) the poor lad, saw never any
thing in me, but a severe-surly-countenance, full of disdain, and happily was
possessed with this conceit, that I could neither love nor esteem him
according to his merits. Ay-me, to whom did I reserve, to discover that
singular and loving affection, which in my soul I bare unto him? Was it not he
that should have had all the pleasure and acknowledgement thereof? I have
forced and tormented my self to maintain this vain mask, and have utterly
lost the pleasure of his conversation, and therwithal his good will, which
surely was but faintly cold toward me, for so much as he never received but rude
entertainment of me, and never felt but a tyrannical proceeding in me
toward him. I am of opinion, his complaint was reasonable and well grounded.
For, as I know by certain experience, there is no comfort so sweet in the
loss of friends, as that our own knowledge or conscience tells us, we never
omitted to tell them every thing, and expostulate all matters unto them, and to
have had a perfect and free communication with them. Tell me my good friend, am
I the better or the worse by having a taste of it? Surely I am much the better.
His grief does both comfort and honor me. Is it not a religious and pleasing
office of my life, for ever to make the obsequies thereof? Can there be any
pleasure worth this privation? I do unfold and open my self as much as I can
to mine own people, and willigly declare the state of my will and judgment
toward them, as commonly I do toward all men: I make haste to produce and
present my self, for I would have no man mistake me, in what part soever.
Amongst other particular customs, which our ancient Gauls had, (as Caesar
affirms) this was one, that children never came before their fathers, nor
were in any public assembly seen in their company, but when they began to
bear arms; as if they would infer, that then was the time, fathers should
admit them to their acquaintance and familiarity. I have also observed another
kind of indiscretion in some fathers of our times, who during their own life,
would never be induced to acquaint or impart unto their children, that share or
portion, which by the Law of Nature, they were to have in their fortunes: Nay,
some there are, who after their death bequeath and commit the same aucthority,
over them and their goods, unto their wives, with full power and law to dispose
of them at their pleasure. And my self have known a Gentleman, a chief
officer of our crown, that by right and hope of succession (had he lived unto
it) was to inherit above fifty thousand crowns a year good land, who at the
age of more then fifty years fell into such necessity and want, and was run so
far in debt, that he had nothing left him, and as it is supposed died for
very need; whilst his mother in her extreme decrepitude, enjoyed all his
lands and possessed all his goods, by virtue of his fathers will and testament,
who had lived very near foure-score years. A thing (in my conceit) no way to
be commended, but rather blamed. Therefore do I think, that a man but little
advantaged or bettered in estate, who is able to live of himself, and is out
of debt, especially if he have children, and goes about to marry a wife, that
must have a great joynter out of his lands, assuredly there is no other debt,
that brings more ruin unto houses then that. My predecessors have commonly
followed this counsel, and so have I, and all have found good by it. But those
that dissuade us from marrying of rich wives, lest they might prove over
disdainefull and peevish, or less tractable and loving, are also deceived to
make us neglect and for-goe a real commodity, for so frivolous a conjecture.
To an unreasonable women, it is all one cost to her, whether they pass under
one reason, or under another. They love to be where they are most wronged.
Injustice does allure them; as the honor of their virtuous actions enticeth
the good. And by how much richer they are, so much more mild and gentle are
they: as more willingly and gloriously chaste, by how much fairer they are. Some
color of reason there is, men should leave the administration of their goods
and affairs unto mothers, whilst their children are not of competent age, or
fit according to the laws to manage the charge of them: And il has their
father brought them up, if he cannot hope, these coming to years of
discretion, they shall have no more wit, reason, and sufficiency, then his
wife, considering the weakness of their sex. Yet truly were it as much
against nature, so to order things, that mothers must wholly depend of their
childrens descretion. They ought largely and competently to be provided,
wherewith to maintain their estate, according to the quality of their house
and age: because need and want is much more unseemly and hard to be endured
in women, than in men: And children rather then mothers ought to be charged
therewith. In general, my opinion is, that the best distribution of goods, is
when we die, to distribute them according to the custom of the Country. The
Laws have better thought upon them then we: And better it is to let them err
in their election, then for us rashly to hazard to fail in ours. They are not
properly our own, since without us, and by a civil prescription, they are
appointed to certain successors. And albeit we have some further liberty, I
think it should be a great and most apparent cause to induce us to take from
one, and bar him from that, which Fortune has allotted him, and the common
Laws and Justice has called him unto: And that against reason we abuse this
liberty, by suting the same unto our private humors and frivolous fantasies.
My fortune has been good, inasmuch as yet it never presented me with any
occasions, that might tempt or divert my affections from the common and lawful
ordinance. I see some, toward whom it is but labor lost, carefully to
endeavor to do any good offices. A word il taken defaceth the merit of ten
years. Happy he, that at this last passage is ready to sooth and applaud their
will. The next action transporteth him; not the best and most frequent offices,
but the freshest and present work the deed. They are people that play with
their wills and testaments, as with apples and rods, to gratify or chastize
every action of those who pretend any interest thereunto. It is a matter of
overlong pursuit, and of exceeding consequence, at every instance to be thus
dilated, and wherein the wiser sort establish themselves once for all, chiefly
respecting reason, and public observance. We somewhat overmuch take these
masculine substitutions to heart, and propose a ridiculous eternity unto our
names. We also over-weight such vain future conjectures, which infant-spirits
give-vs. It might peradventure have been deemed injustice, to displace me from
out my rank, because I was the dullest, the slowest, the vnwillingest, and
most leaden-pated to learn my lesson o any good, that ever was, not only of
all my brethren, but of all the children in my Country; were the lesson
concerning any exercise of the mind or body. It is folly to try any
extraordinary conclusions upon the trust of their divinations, wherein we are
so often deceived. If this rule may be contradicted, and the destinies
corrected, in the choice they have made of our heirs, with so much more
appearance, may it be done in consideration of some remarkable and enormous
corporal deformity; a constant and incorrigible vice; and according to us
great esteemers of beauty; a matter of important prejudice. The pleasant
dialogue of Plato the lawgiver, with his citizens, will much honor this
passage. Why then (say they) perceiving their end to approach, shall we not
dispose of that which is our own, to whom and according as we please? Oh Gods
what cruelty is this? That it shall not be lawful for us, to give or bequeath
more or less according to our fantasies, to such as have served us, and taken
pains with us in our sickenesses, in our age, and in our business? To whom the
Lawgiver answers in this manner; my friends (says he) who doubtless shall
shortly die it is a hard matter for you, both to know your selves, and what is
yours, according to the Delphike in scription: As for me, who am the maker of
your laws, I am of opinion that neither your selves are your own, nor that
which you enjoy. And both you and your goods, past and to come, belong to your
family; and moreover both your families and your goods are the common wealths:
Wherefore, least any flatterer, either in your age, or in time of sickness, or
any other passion, should unadvisedly induce you to make any unlawful
convayance or unjust will and testament, I will look to you and keep you
from-it. But having an especial respect both to the universal interest of
your City, and particular state of your houses, I will establish laws, and by
reason make you perceive and confess, that a particular commodity ought to
yield to a public benefit. Follow that course merely, whereto human
necessity does call you. To me it belongs, who have no more regard to one
thing, then to another, and who as much as I can, take care for the general, to
have a regardfull respect of that which you leave behind you. But to return to
my former discourse, me thinks, we seldom see that woman borne, to whom the
superiority or majesty over men is due, except the motherly and natural;
unless it be for the chastisement of such, as by some fond-febricitant humor
have voluntarily submitted themselves unto them: But that does nothing concern
old women, of whom we speak here. It is the appearance of this consideration,
has made us to frame, and willingly to establish this law (never seen else
where) that barreth women from the succession of this crown, and there are few
principalities in the world, where it is not aleaged, as well as here, by a
likely and apparent reason, which authoriseth the same. But fortune has given
more credit vnto-it in some places, then in other some. It is dangerous to
leave the dispensation of our succession unto their judgment, according to the
choice they shall make of their children, which is most commonly unjust and
fantastical. For, the same unruly appetite, and distasted relish, or strange
longings, which they have when they are great with child, the same have they a^
al times in their minds. They are commonly seen to affect the weakest, the
simplest and most abject, or such (if they have any) that had more need to
suck. For, wanting reasonable discourse to choose, and embrace what they ought,
they rather suffer themselves to be directed, where natures impressions are
most single, as other creatures, which take no longer knowledge of their
yong-ones, then they are sucking. Moreover, experience does manifestly snew
unto us, that the same natural affection, to which we ascribe so much
authority, has but a weak foundation. For a very small gain, we daily take
mothers own children from them and induce them to take charge of ours; Do we
not often procure them to bequeath their children to some fond, filthy,
sluttish, and vnhealthie nurce, to whom we would be very loath to commit ours,
or to some brutish Goat, not only forbidding them to nurce and feed their
own children (what danger soever may betide them) but also to have any care of
them, to the end they may the more diligently follow, and carefully attend the
service of ours? Whereby we soon see through custom a certain kind of
bastard-affection to be engendered in them, more vehement then the natural, and
to be much more tender and careful for the well fare and preservation of other
men's children, then for their own. And the reason why I have made mention of
Goats, is, because it is an ordinary thing round about me where I dwell, to
see the country women, when they have not milk enough to feed their infants
with their own breasts, to call for Goats to help them. And my self have
now two lack is waiting upon me, who except it were eight days never sucked
other milk then Goats; They are presently to come at call, and give young
infants suck, and become so well acquainted with their voice, that when they
hear them cry; they run forthwith unto them. And if by chance they have any
other child put to their teates, then their nurseling, they refuse and reject
him, and so does the child a strange Goat. My self saw that one not long
since, from whom the father took a Goat, which he had sucked two or three
days, because he had but borrowed it of one his neighbors, who could never be
induced to suck any other, whereby he shortly died; and as I verily think, of
mere hunger. Beasts as well as we do soon alter, and easily bastardize their
natural affection. I believe, that in that, which Hero dotus reports of a
certain province of Libia, there often follows great error and mistaking. He
says, that men do indifferently use, and as it were in common frequent women;
And that the child as soon as he is able to go, coming to any solemn
meetings and great assemblies, led by a natural instinct finds out his own
father: where being turned loose in the midst of the multitude, look what
man the child does first address his steps unto, and then go to him, the
same is ever afterward reputed to be his right father. Now if we shall duly
consider this simple occasion of loving our children, because we have begotten
them, for which we call them our other selves. It seems there is another
production coming from us, and which is of no less recommendation and
consequence. For what we engender by the mind, the fruits of our courage,
sufficiency, or spirit, are brought forth by a far more noble part, then the
corporal, and are more, our own. We are both father and mother together in
this generation: such fruits cost us much dearer, and bring us more honor,
and chiefly if they have any good or rare thing in them. For, the value of our
other children, is much more their, then ours. The share we have in them is
but little; but of these all the beauty, all the grace, and all the worth is
ours. And therefore do they represent, and resemble us much more lively then
others. Plate adds moreover, that these are immortal issues, and immortalize
their fathers, yea and deifie them, as Licurgus, Solen, and Minos. All
histories being full of examples of this mutual friendship of fathers toward
their children, I have not thought it amiss to set down some choice one of
this kind. Heliodorus that good Bishop of Tricea, loved rather to loose the
dignity, profit and devotion of so venerable a Prelateship, then to for-goe his
daughter, a young woman to this day commended for her beauty, but happily
somewhat more curiously and wantonly pranked-vp then beseemed the daughter of a
churchman and a Bishop, and of over-amorous behavior. There was one Labienus in
Rome, a man of great worth and authority, and an ongst other commendable
qualities, most excellent in all manner of learning, who (as I think) was the
son of that great Labienus, chief of all the captains that followed and
were under Caesar in the wars again the Gauls, and who afterward taking
great Pompeys part, behaved himself so valiantly and so constantly, that he
never forsook him until Caesar defeated him in Spain. This Labienus of whom
I spoke, had many that envied his virtues; But above all (as it is likely)
courtiers, and such as in his time were favored of the Emperors, who hated his
franknes, his fatherly humors, and distaste he bare still against tyranny,
wherewith it may be supposed he had stuffed his books and compositions. His
adversaries vehemently pursued him before the Magistrate of Rome, and prevailed
so far, that many of his works which he had published were condemned to be
burned. He was the first on whom this new example of punishment was put in
practice, which after continued long in Rome, and was executed on diverse
others, to punish learning, studies, and writings with death and consuming
fire. There were neither means enough, or matter sufficient of cruelty,
unless we had entermingled amongst them things, which nature has exempted
from all sense and sufferance, as reputation, and the inventions of our mind:
and except we communicated corporal mischiefs unto disciplines and monuments
of the Muses. Which loss Labienus could not endure, nor brook to survive
those his dear, and highly-esteemed issues: And therefore caused himself to
be carried, and shut up alive within his ancestors monument, where, with a
dreadlesse resolution, he at once provided, both to kill himself and be buried
together. It is hard to show any more vehement fatherly affection, than that.
Cassius Severus, a most eloquent man, and his familiar friend, seeing his
Books burnt, exclamed, that by the same sentence he should therewithal be
condemned to be burned alive, for he still bare and kept in mind, what they
contained in them. A like accident happened to Geruntius Cord^^s, who was
accused to have commended Brutus and Cassius in his Books. That base, servile,
and corrupted Senate, and worthy of a far worse master then Tiberius,
adjudged his writings to be consumed by fire And he was pleased to accompany
them in their death; for, he pined away by abstaining from all manner of meat.
That notable man Lucane, being adjudged by that lewd varlet Nero to death; at
the latter end of his life, when al his blood was well nigh spent from out the
veins of his arm, which by his Physician he had caused to be opened, to
hasten his death, and that a chilling cold began to seize the uttermost parts
of his limbs, and approach his vitale spirits, the last thing he had in memory,
was some of his own verses, written in his book of the Pharsalian wars,
which with a distinct voice he repeated, and so yielded up the ghost, having
those last words in his mouth. What was that but a kind, tender, and fatherly
farewell which he took of his children? representing the last adewes, and
parting imbracements, which at our death we give unto our dearest issues? And
an effect of that natural inclination, which in that last extremity puts us in
mind of those things, which in our lifetime we have held dearest and most
precious? Shall we imagine that Ep^curus, who (as himself said) dying
tormented with the extreme pain of the chollike, had all his comfort in the
beauty of the doctrine, which he left behind him in the world, would have
received as much contentment of a number of well-borne, and betterbred children
(if he had had any) as he did of the production of his rich compositions? And
if it had been in his choice, to leave behind him, either a counterfeit,
deformed, or ill-borne child, or a foolish, trivial, and idle book, not
only he, but all men in the world besides of like learning and sufficiency,
would much rather have chosen, to incur the former then the latter mischief.
It might peradventure be deemed impiety, in Saint Augustine (for example-sake)
if on the one part one should propose unto him, to bury all his books, whence
our religion receives so much good, or to interre his children (if in case he
had any) that he would not rather choose to bury his children; or the issue of
his loins, then the fruits of of his mind. And I wot not well, whether my
self should not much rather desire to beget and produce a
perfectly-well-shaped, and excellently-qualited infant, by the acquaintance of
the Muses, then by the copulation of my wife. Whatsoever I give to this, let
the world allow of it as it please, I give it as purely and irrevocable, as any
man can give to his corporal children. That little good which I have done him,
is no longer in my disposition. He may know many things, that my self know no
longer, and hold of me what I could not hold my self: and which (if need
should require) I must borrow of him as of a stranger. If I be wiser then he,
he is richer then I. There are few men given unto Poesy, that would not
esteem it for a greater honor, to be the fathers of Virgils Aeneidos, then of
the goodliest boy in Rome, and that would not rather endure the loss of the
one then the perishing of the other. For, according to Aristotle, Of all
workmen, the Poet is principally the most amorous of his productions and
conceited of his Labors. It is not easy to be believed, that Epaminondas, who
vanted to leave some daughters behind him, which unto all posterity, should one
day highly honor their father (they were the two famous victories, which he
had gained of the Lacedaemonians) would ever have given his free consent, to
change them, with the best-borne, most gorgeous, and goodliest damsels of all
Greece: or that Alexander, and Caesar, did ever wish to be deprived of the
greatness of their glorious deeds of war, for the commodity to have
children and heirs of their own bodies, how absolutely-perfect, and well
accomplished so ever they might be. Nay, I make a great question, whether
Phidtas or any other excellent statuary, would as highly esteem, and dearly
love the preservation, and successful continuance of his natural children,
as he would an exquisite and match-lesse-wrought Image, that with long study,
and diligent care he had perfected according unto art. And as concerning those
vicious and furious passions, which sometimes have inflamed some fathers to the
love of their daughters, or mothers toward their sons; the very same, and
more partially-earnest is also found in this other kind of childe-bearing and
aliance. Witness that which is reported of Pigmalion, who having curiously
framed a goodly statue, of a most singularly-beauteous woman, was so
strange-fondly, and passionately surprised with the lustful love of his own
workmanship, that the Gods through his raging importunity were feign in favor
of him to give it life.

Tentatum mollescit ebur, positoque rigore Orid. Meta^. lib. 10. 283.

Subsidit digitis*
As he assaid it, th'yvorie softened much,
And (hardness left) did yield to fingers touch.
The ninth Chapter.
Of the Parthians Arms.

IT is a vicious fond fashion of the Nobility and gentry of our age, and full
of nice-tendernesse, never to betake themselves to arms, except upon some
urgent and extreme necessity: and to quit them as soon as they perceive the
least hope or appearance, that the danger is past: Whence ensue many disorders,
and inconveniences: For, every one running and calling for his arms when the
alarm is given, some have not yet buckled their cuirace, when their fellows
are already defeated. Indeed our forefathers would have their Caske, Lance,
Gantlets, and Shields carried, but so long as the service lasted, themselves
would never leave-off their other pieces. Our troops are now all confounded
and disordered, by reason of bag and baggage, of carriages, of lackies, and
foote-boies, which because of their masters arms they carry, can never leave
them. Titus Livius; speaking of the French, says, Intolerantissima laboris
corpora vix arma humer is gerebant. Their bodies most impatient of labor Live.
d^^. 1. l. 10
could hardly bear armor on their backs. Diverse Nations, as they did in
former times, so yet at this day, are seen to go to the wars, without any
thing about them, or if they had, it was of no defense; but were all naked and
bare.

Tegmina queis capitum raptus de subere cortex. Virg. Aen. lib. 742.
Whose caske to cover all their head.
Was made of bark from Corke-tree flayed.
Alexander the most daring and hazardous Captain that ever was, did very
seldom arm himself: And those which amongst us neglect them, do not thereby
much empaire their reputation. If any man chance to be slain for want of an
armor, there are as many more that miscary with the over-heavy burden of
their arms, and by them are engaged, and by a counterbuffe are bruised, or
otherwise defeated. For in truth to see the unweildy weight of our and their
thickness, it seems we but endeavor to defend our selves, and we are rather
charged then covered by them. We have enough to do, to endure the burden of
them, and are so engived and shackled in them, as if we were to fight but with
the shocke or brunt of our arms: And as if we were as much bound to defend
them, as they to shield us. Cornelius Facitus does pleasantly quip and jest at
the men of war of our ancient Gauls, so armed, only to maintain themselves,
as they that have no mean, either to offend or to be offended, or to raise
themselves being overthrown. Lucullus seeing certain Median men at arms,
which were in the front of Tigranes Army, heavily and vnweildely armed, as in
an yron-prison, apprehended thereby an opinion, that he might easily defeat
them, and began to charge them first, and got the victory. And now that our
Musketeers, are in such credit, I think we shall have some invention found
to immure us up, that so we may be warranted from them, and to train us to the
wars in Skonces and Bastions, as those which our fathers caused to be carried
by Elephants. A humor far different from that of Scipio the yoonger, who
sharply reprooved his soldiers, because they had scattered certain Calthrops
under the water along a dike, by which those of the Town that he besieged
might sally out upon him, saying; that those which assailed, should resolve to
enterprise and not to fear: And had some reason to fear, that this provision
might secure and lull their vigilance asleep to guard themselves. Moreover he
said to a young man, that showed him a fair shield he had; Indeed good youth,
it is a fair one, but a Roman soldier ought to have more confidence in his
right hand, than in his left. It is only custom that makes the burden of our
arms intolerable unto us.

L'usberg^ in dosso haveano, and l'elmo intesta,
Due di quells guerrier de i quali io canto.
Ne notte o di depo ch'entrar^ inquesta Ariest^ Orl, ^an. 12. stan. 30

Stanza, gl' havean m^^ messi da cant^;
Che facile a portar come la vesta
Eralor, perch in vso l'havean tanto.
Cuirasse on back did those two warriors bear,
And caske on head, of whom I make report,
Nor day, nor night, after they entered there,
Had they them laid aside from their support:
They could with ease them as a garment wear,
For long time had they used them in such sort.
The Emperor Caracalla in leading of his Army was ever wont to march a foot
armed at all assaies. The Roman footmen carried not their morions, sword and
target only, as for other arms (says Cicero) they were so accustomed to wear
them continually, that they hindered them no more then their limbs: Arma enim,
membra militis esse dicunt: for they say armor and weapon, are a soldiers
limbs. But there withal such victuals as they should need for a fortnight and a
certain number of stakes, to make their rampards or palisadoes with; so much
as weighed threescore pound weight. And Marius his soldiers thus laden,
marching in battelarray, were taught to march five leagues in five hours, yea
six if need required. Their military discipline was much more laborsome then
ours: So did it produce far different effects. Scipto the younger, reforming his
army in Spain, appointed his soldiers to eat no meat but standing, and
nothing sodden or roasted. It is worth the remembrance how a Lacedemonian
soldier being in an expedition of war, was much noted and blamed, because
he was once seen to seek for shelter under a house: They were so hardened to
enduree all manner of labor and toil, that it was counted a reprechfull
infamy for a soldier to be seen under any other roof then that of
heavens-vault, in what weather soever: Were we to do so, we should never lead
our men far. Marcellinus a man well trained in the Roman wars, does curiously
observe the manner which the Parthians used to arm themselves, and notes it
so much the more, by how much it was far different from the Romans. They had
(says he) certain arms so curiously enter-wrought as they seemed to be made
like feathers, which nothing hindered the stirring of their bodies, and yet so
strong, that our darts hitting them, did rather rebound, or glance by, then
hurt them (they be the scales our ancestors were so much wont to use.) In
another place, they had (says he) their horses stiff and strong, covered with
thick hides, and themselves armed from head to foot, with massy iron plates
so artificially contrived, that where the joints are, there they furthered the
motion, and helped the stirring. A man would have said, they had been men made
of iron: For they had pieces so handsomely fitted and so lively representing the
form and parts of the face; that there was no way to wound them, but at
certain little holes before their eyes, which served to give them some light,
and by certain chinckes about their nostrils, by which they hardly drew breath

Flexilis inductis hamatur lamina membris, Glaud. in Ruff. l. 2. 358.

Horribilis visu, credas simulacr a moveri
Ferrea, cognatoque viros spirare metallo.
Par Vestitus equis, ferrata front minantur,
Ferratosque mevent securs vulneris armos.
The bending plate is hook't on limbs ore-spread,
Fearful to sight, steel images seemed led,
And men to breath in metal with them bredde.
Like furniture for horse, with steeled head,
They threat, and safe from wound,
With barred limbs tread the ground,
Loc-heere a description, much resembling the equipage of a complete
French-manat arms, with all his bardes. Plutarke reports that Demetrius
caused two Armours to be made, each one weighing six score pounds, the one for
himself, the other for Alcinus, the chief man of war, that was next to him,
whereas all common Armours weighed but threescore.

The tenth Chapter.
Of Books.

I Make no doubt but it shall often be fall me to speak of things, which are
better, and with more truth handled by such as are their crafts-masters. Here
is simply an Essay of my natural faculties, and no whit of those I have
acquired. And he that shall tax me with ignorance, shall have no great victory
at my hands; for hardly could I give others reason for my discourses, that give
none unto my self, and am not well satisfied with them. He that shall make
search after knowledge, let him seek it where it is: there is nothing I
profess less. These are but my fantasies, by which I endeavor not to make
things known, but myself. They may happily one day be known unto me, or have
bin at other times, according as fortune has brought me where they were
declared or manifested. But I remember them no more. And if I be a man of some
reading, yet I am a man of no remembering, I conceive no certainty, except it
be to give notice, how far the knowledge I have of it, does now reach. Let
no man busy himself about the matters, but on the fashion I give them. Let
that which I borrow be survaid, and then tell me whether I have made good
choice of ornaments, to beautify and set forth the invention, which ever
comes from me. For, I make others to relate (not after mine own fantasy, but
as it best falls out) what I can not so well express, either through vnskill
of language, or want of judgment. I number not my borrowings, but I weigh
them. And if I would have made their number to prevail, I would have had twice
as many. They are all, or almost all of so famous and ancient names, that me
thinks they sufficiently name themselves without me. If in reasons,
comparisons and arguments, I transplant any into my soil, or confound them
with mine own, I purposely conceal the Author, thereby to bridle the
rashness of these hasty censures, that are so headlong cast upon all manner
of compositions, namely young writings, of men yet living; and in vulgar, that
admit all the world to talk of them, and which seems to convince the
conception and public design alike. I will have them to give Plutarch a bobbe
upon mine own lips, and vex themselves, in wronging Seneca in me. My
weakness must be hidden under such great credites. I will love him that shall
trace, or vnfeather me; I mean through clearenesse of judgment, and by the
only distinction of the force and beauty of my Discourses. For my self, who
for want of memory, am ever to seek, how to try and refine them, by the
knowledge of their country, know perfectly, by measuring mine own strength,
that my soil is no way capable, of some over-pretious flowers, that therein I
find set, and that all the fruits of my increase could not make it amends.
This am I bound to answer-for, if I hinder my self, if there be either
vanity, or fault in my Discourses, that I perceive not or am not able to
discern, if they be showed me. For, many faults do often escape our eyes; but
the infirmity of judgment consists in not being able to perceive them, when
another discovers them unto us. Knowledge and truth may be in us without
judgment, and we may have judgment without them: Yea, the acknowledgement of
ignorance, is one of the best and surest testimonies of judgment that I can
find. I have no other Sergeant of band to marshall my rapsodies, than fortune.
And look how my humors or conceits present them-selves, so I shuffle them
up. Sometimes they prease out thick and thee-folde, and other times they come
out languishing one by one. I will have my natural and ordinary pace seen as
loose, and as shuffling as it is. As I am, so I go on plodding. And besides,
these are matters, that a man may not be ignorant of, and rashly and casually
to speak of them. I would wish to have a more perfect understanding of things,
but I will not purchase it so dear, as it cost. My intention is to pass the
remainder of my life quietly, and not laboriously, in rest, and not in care.
There is nothing I will trouble or vex my self about, no not for Science it
self, what esteem soever it be-of. I do not search and toss over Books, but
for an honester recreation to please, and pastime to delight my self: or if I
study, I only endeavor to find out the knowledge that teaches or handles
the knowledge of my self, and which may instruct me how to die well, and how
to live well.

Has meus ad metas sudet oportet equus. ^^opert. l. 4. ^l. 1. 70.
My horse must sweating run,
That this goal may be won.
If in reading I fortune to meet with any difficult points, I fret not my
self about them, but after I have given them a charge or two, I leave them as
I found them. Should I earnestly plod upon them I should loose both time and my
self; for I have a skipping wit. What I see not at the first view, I shall
less see it, if I opinionate my self upon it. I do nothing without
blithnesse* and an over obstinate continuation and plodding contention, does
dazzle, dull and weary the same: My sight is thereby confounded and diminished. I
must therefore withdraw-it, and at fittes go to it again. Even as to judge
well of the luster of scarlet we are taught to cast our eyes over it, in
running it over by diverse glances, sudden glimpses, and reiterated reprisings.
If one book seem tedious unto me, I take another, which I follow not with any
earnestnes, except it be at such hours as I am idle, or that I am weary with
doing nothing. I am not greatly affected to new books, because ancient Authors
are in my judgment more full and pithie: nor am I much addicted to Greek
books, forasmuch as my understanding can well rid his work with a childish and
apprentise intelligence. Amongst modern books merely pleasant. I esteem
Bocace his Decameron, Rabelais, and the kisses of John the second (if they may
be placed under this title) worth the paines-taking to read them. As for
Amadis and such like trash of writings, they had never the credit so much as to
allure my youth to delight in them. This I will say more, either boldly or
rashly, that this old and heavie-pased mind of mine, will no more be pleased
with Aristotle, or tickled with good Ovid: his facility, and quaint
inventions, which heretofore have so ravished me, they can now adays scarcely
entertain me. I speak my mind freely of all things, yea of such as
peradventure exceed my sufficiency, and that no-way I hold to be of my
jurisdiction. What my conceit is of them, is also to manifest the proportion of
my insight, and not the measure of things. If at any time I find my self
distasted of Platoes Axiochus, as of a forceles work, due regard had to such
an Author, my judgment does nothing believe it self: It is not so fond-hardy,
or selfe-conceited, as it durst dare to oppose it self against the authority
of so many other famous ancient judgments, which he reputeth his regents and
masters, and with whom he had rather err. He chafeth with, and condemns
himself, either to rely on the superficial sense, being unable to pierce into
the center, or to view the thing by some falce luster. He is pleased only to
warrant himself from trouble and unruliness: As for weakness he acknowledges
and ingeniously auoweth the same. He thinks to give a just interpetation to
the apparances which his conception presents unto him, but they are shallow and
imperfect. Most of Aesopes fables have diverse senses, and several
interpretations: Those which Mythologize them, choose some kind of color
well-suting with the fable; but for the most part, it is no other then the
first and superficial gloss: There are others more quick, more sinnowie,
more essential and more internal, into which they could never penetrate; and
thus think I with them. But to follow my course; I have ever deemed that in
Poesy, Virgil, Lucretius, Catullus, and Horace, do doubtless by far hold the
first rank: and especially Virgil in his Georgiks, which I esteem to be the
most accomplished piece of work of Poesy: In comparison of which one may
easily discern, that there are some passages in the Aeneidos, to which the
Author (had he lived) would no doubt have given some review or correction: The
fifth book whereof is (in my mind) the most absolutely perfect. I also love
Lucan, and willingly read him, not so much for his style, as for his own
worth, and truth of his opinion and judgment. As for good Terence, I allow the
quaintnes and grace of his Latin tongue, and judge him wonderful conceited and
apt, lively to represent the motions and pashions of the mind, and the
condition of our manners: our actions make me often remember him. I can never
read him so often, but still I discover some new grace and beauty in him.
Those that lived about Virgils time, complained that some would compare
Lucretius unto him. I am of opinion, that verily it is an unequal comparison;
yet can I hardly assure my self in this opinion whenever I find my self
entangled in some notable passage of Lucretius. If they were moved at this
comparison, what would they say now of the fond, hardy and barbarous
stupiditie of those which now adays compare Ariosto unto him? Nay what would
Artosto say of it himself?

O seclum insipiens and infac^tum Catul. epig. 40. 8.
O age that has no wit,
And small conceit in it.
I think our ancestors had also more reason to cry out against those that
blushed not to equal Plautus unto Terence (who makes more show to be a
Gentleman) then Lucretius unto Virgil. This one thing does greatly advantage
the estimation and preferring of Terence, that the father of the Roman
eloquence, of men of his quality does so often make mention of him; and the
censure, which the chief judge of the Roman Poets gives of his companion. It
has often come unto my mind, how such as in our days give themselves to
composing of comedes (as the Italians who are very happy in them) employ three
or four arguments of Terence and Plautus to make up one of theirs. In one
only comedy they will huddle up five or six of Bocaces tales. That which
makes them so to charge themselves with matter, is the distrust they have of
their own sufficiency, and that they are not able to undergo so heavy a
burden with their own strength. They are forced to find a body on which they
may rely and lean themselves: and wanting matter of their own wherewith to
please us, they will have the story or tale to busy and ammuse us: where as in
my Authors it is clean contrary: The elegancies, the perfections and ornaments
of his manner of speech, make us neglect and loose the longing for his subject.
His quaintness and grace do still retain us to him. He is every where
pleasantly conceited,

Liquidus puroque simillimus amni, Hor. li 2. epist. 2. 120.
So clearely-neate, so neately-cleare,
As he a fine-pure River were.
and does so replenish our mind with his graces, that we forget those of the
fable. The same consideration draws me somewhat further. I perceive that good
and ancient Poets have shunned the affectation and enquest, not only of
fantastical, new fangled, Spagniolized, and Petrarchisticall elevations, but
also of more sweet and sparing inventions, which are the ornament of all the
Poetical works of succeeding ages. Yet is there no competent judge, that
finds them wanting in those ancient ones, and that does not much more admire
that smoothly equal neatness, continued sweetness, and flourishing
comeliness of Catullus his Epigrams, then all the sharp quippes, and witty
girds, wherewith Martial does whet and embellish the conclusions of his. It is
the same reason I spoke of erewhile, as Martial of himself. Minus illi
ingenio laborandum fuit, in cuius locum materia successerat. He needed the
Mart. praef l. 8.
less work with his wit, in place whereof matter came in supply; The former
without being moved or pricked cause themselves to be heard loud enough: they
have matter to laugh at every where, and need not tickle themselves; where as
these must have foreign help: according as they have less spirit, they must
have more body. They leap on horseback: because they are not sufficiently
strong in their legs to march on foot. Even as in our dances, those base
conditioned men that keep dancing-schooles, because they are unfit to
represent the port and decency of our nobility, endeavor to get commendation
by dangerous lofty tricks, and other strange tumbler-like friskes and motions.
And some Ladies make a better show of their countenances in those dances,
wherein are diverse changes, cuttings, turnings, and agitations of the body,
then in some dances of state and gravity, where they need but simply to tread
a natural measure, represent an unaffected carriage, and their ordinary grace;
And as I have also seen some excellent Lourdans, or Clownes attired in their
ordinary worky-day clothes, and with a common homely countenance, afford us
all the pleasure that may be had from their art: Prentises and learners that
are not of so high a form, to besmeare their faces, to disguise themselves,
and in motions to counterfeit strange visages, and antickes, to enduce us to
laughter. This my conception is no where better discerned, then in the
comparison between Virgils Aeneidos, and Orlando Furios^. The first is seen
to soar aloft with full-spread wings, and with so high and strong a pitch,
ever following his point; the other faintly to hover and flutter from tale to
tale, and as it were skipping from bough to bough, always distrusting his own
wings, except it be for some short flight, and for fear his strength and
breath should fail him, to sit down at every fields-end.

Excursusque breves tent at Virg. Aen. lib. 4. 194.
Out-lopes sometimes he does assay,
But very short, and as he may.
Loe-here then, concerning this kind of subjects, what Authors please me best:
As for my other lesson, which somewhat more mixeth profit with pleasure,
whereby I learn to range my opinions, and address my conditions; the Books
that serve me thereunto, are Plutarke (since he spoke French,) and Seneca; Both
have this excellent commodity for my humor, that the knowledge I seek in
them, is there so scatteringly and loosely handled, that whosoever reads them
is not tied to plod long upon them, whereof I am incapable. And so are
Plutarkes little works, and Senecaes Epistles; which are the best and most
profitable parts of their writings. It is no great matter to draw me to them,
and I leave them where I list. For, they succeed not, and depend not one of
another. Both jumpe and suite together, in most true and profitable opinions:
And fortune brought them both into the world in one age. Both were Tutors unto
two Roman Emperors: Both were strangers, and came from far Countries; both
rich and mighty in the commonwealth, and in credit with their masters. Their
instruction is the prime and cream of Philosophy, and presented with a
plain, unaffected, and pertinent fashion. Plutarke is more uniform and
constant; Seneca more waving and diverse. This does labor, force, and extend
himself, to arm and strengthen virtue against weakness, fear, and vicious
desires; the other seems nothing so much to fear their force or attempt, and
in a manner scorneth to hasten or change his pace about them, and to put
himself upon his guarde. Plutarkes opinions are Platonicall, gentle and
accommodable unto civil society: Senacaes Stoicall and Epicurian, further
from common use, but in my conceit, more proper particular, and more solid. It
appears in Seneca, that he somewhat inclines and yields to the tyranny of
the Emperors which were in his days; for, I verily believe, it is with a
forced judgment, he condemns the cause of those noblie-minded murderers of
Caesar: Plutarke is every where free and open-hearted; Seneca, full-fraught
with points and sallies, Plutarke stuffed with matters. The former does moove and
inflame you more; the latter, content, please, and pay you better: This does
guide you, the other drive you on. As for Cicero, of all his works, those that
treat of Philosophy (namely moral) are they which best serve my turn, and
square with my intent. But boldly to confess the truth, (For, Since the bars
of impudency were broken down, all curbing is taken away) his manner of
writing seems very tedious unto me, as does all suchlike stuff. For, his
prefaces, definitions, divisions, and Etymologies, consume the greatest part of
his Works; whatsoever quick, witty, and pithie conceit is in him, is
surcharged, and confounded by those his long and far-fetcht preambles. If I
bestow but one hour in reading him, which is much for me; and let me call to
mind what substance, or juice I have drawn from him, for the most part, I
find nothing but wind and ostentation in him: for he is not yet come to the
arguments, which make for his purpose, and reasons that properly concern the
knot or pith I seek-after. These Logical and Aristotelian ordinances are not
availfull for me, who only endeavor to become more wise and sufficient, and
not more witty or eloquent. I would have one begin with the last point: I
understand sufficiently what death and voluptuousness are: let not a man busy
himself to anatomize them. At the first reading of a Book, I seek for good
and solid reasons, that may instruct me how to sustain their assaults. It is
nether gramaticall subtilties, nor logical quiddities, nor the witty
contexture of choice words, or arguments, and syllogismes, that will serve my
turn. I like those discourses that give the first charge to the strongest,
part of the doubt; his are but flourishes, and languish every where. They are
good for Schools, at the bar, or for Orators and Preachers, where we may
slumber: and though we wake a quarter of an hour after, we may find and trace
him soon enough. Such a manner of speech is fit for those Judges, that a man
would corrupt by hook or crook, by right or wrong, or for children and the
common people, unto whom a man must tell all, and see what the event will be. I
would not have a man go about, and labor by circumlocutions, to induce and win
me to attention, and that (as our Herolds or Criers do) they shall ring out
their words. Now hear me, now listen, or ^o^yes. The Romans in their Religion
were wont to say, Hoc age; which in ours we say, Sursum corda. There are so
many lost words for me. I come ready prepared from my house. I need no
allurement nor sauce; my stomach is good enough to digest raw meat: And
whereas with these preparatives and flourishes, or preambles, they think to
sharpen my taste, or stir my stomach, they cloy and make it wallowish. Shall
the privilege of times excuse me from this sacrilegious boldness, to deem
Platoes Dialogismes to be as languishing, by over-filling and stuffing his
matter? And to bewail the time that a man, who had so many thousands of things
to utter, spends about so many, so long, so vain, and idle interloquutions,
and preparatives? My ignorance shall better excuse me, in that I see nothing in
the beauty of his language. I generally enquire after Books, that use
sciences, and not after such as institute them. The two first, and Pliny, with
others of their rank, have no Hoc age in them, they will have to do with men,
that have forewarned themselves; or if they have, it is a material and
substantial Hoc age, and that has his body apart. I likewise love to read
the Epistles and ad Atticum, not only because they contain a most ample
instruction of the History, and affairs of his times, but much more because
in them I descrie his private humors. For, (as I have said elsewhere (I am
wonderful curious, to discover and know, the mind, the soul, the genuine
disposition, and natural judgment of my Authors. A man ought to judge their
sufficiency, and not their customs, nor them by the show of their writings.
Which they set forth on this worlds Theater. I have sorrowed a thousand times,
that ever we lost the book, that Brutus writ of Virtue. Oh it is a goodly
thing to learn the Theorike of such as understand the practice well. But
for so much as the Sermon is one thing, and the Preacher an other: I love as much
to see Brutus in Plutarke, as in himself, I would rather make choice to know
certainly, what talk he had in his Tent with some of his familiar friends, the
night foregoing the battle, then the speech he made the morrow after to his
Army: and what he did in his chamber or closet, then what in the Senate or
market place. As for Cicero, I am of the common judgment, that besides
learning, there was no exquisite excellency in him: He was a good Citizen, of
an honest-gentle nature, as are commonly fat and burly men; for so was he: But
to speak truly of him, full of ambitious vanity and remiss niceness. And I
know not well how to excuse him, in that he deemed his Poesy worthy to be
published. It is no great imperfection, to make bad verses, but it is an
imperfection in him, that he never perceived how unworthy they were of the
glory of his name. Concerning his eloquence, it is beyond all comparison, and
I verily believe, that none shall ever equal it. Cicero the yoonger, who
resembled his father in nothing, but in name, commanding in Asia, chanced one
day to have many strangers at his board, and amongst others, one Castius
sitting at the lower end, as the manner is to thrust-in at great men's tables:
Cicero inquired of one of his men what he was, who told him his name, but he
dreaming on other matters, and having forgotten what answer his man made him,
asked him his name twice or thrice more: the servant, because he would not be
troubled to tell him one thing so often, and by some circumstance make him to
know him better. It is, said he, the same Castius, to whom some have told you,
that in respect of his own, makes no account of your fathers eloquence:
Cicero being suddenly, moved, commanded the said poor Castius, to be
presently taken from the table, and well whipped in his presence: Lo-heere an
uncivil and barbarous host. Even amongst those, which (all things considered)
have deemed his eloquence matchless and incomparable others there have been,
who have not spared to note some faults in it: As great Brutus said, that it
was an eloquence, broken, halting, and disjoynted, fractam and elumbem:
Incoherent and sinnowlesse. Those Orators that lived about his age, reprooved
also in him the curious care he had of a certain long cadence, at the end of
his clauses, and noted these words, Esse videatur, which he so often uses. As
for me, I rather like a cadence that falls shorter, cut like I am bikes: yet
does he sometimes confound his numbers; but it is seldom: I have especially
observed this one place. Ego vero me minus diu senem esse mallem, quam esse
seuem, Ci^. d^ Senect.
antequam essem. But I had rather, not be an old man so long as I might be,
than to be old before I should be. Historians are my right hand; for they are
pleasant and easy: and therewithal, the man with whom I desire generally to
be acquainted, may more lively and perfectly be discovered in them, than in any
other composition: the variety and truth of his inward conditions, in gross
and by retale: the diversity of the means of his collection and composing,
and of the accidents that threaten him. Now, those that write of men's lives,
forasmuch as they ammuse and busy themselves more about counsels than events,
more about that which comes from within, than that which appears outward;
they are fittest for me: And that is the reason why Plutarke above all in that
kind, does best please me. Indeed I am not a little grieved that we have not a
dozen of Laer^ij, or that he is not more known, or better understood: for, I
am no less curious to know the fortunes and lives of these great masters of
the world, than to understand the diversity of their decrees and conceits. In
this kind of study of History, a man must, without distinction, toss and
turn over all sorts of Authors, both old and new, both French and others, if
he will learn the things they so diversely treat-of. But me thinks that Caesar
above all does singularly deserve to be studied, not only for the
understanding of the History, as of himself; so much perfection and
excellency is there in him more than in others, although Salust be reckoned
one of the number. Verily I read that Author with a little more reverence and
respect, than commonly men read profane and humane Works: sometimes
considering him by his actions, and wonders of his greatness, and other times
waighing the purity and inimitable polishing and elegancie of his tongue,
which (as Cicero says) has not only exceeded all Historians, but happly
Cicero himself: with such sincerity in his judgment. Speaking of his
enemies, that except the false colors, wherewith he goes about to cloak his
bad cause, and the corruption and filthiness of his pestilent ambition. I am
persuaded there is nothing in him to be found fault-with: and that he has been
over-sparing to speak of himself: for, so many notable and great things could
never be executed by him, unless he had put more of his own unto them, than
he sets down. I love those Historians that are either very simple, or most
excellent. The simple who have nothing of their own to add unto the story,
and have but the care and diligence to collect whatsoever come unto their
knowledge, and sincerely and faithfully to register all things, without choice
or culling, by the naked truth leave our judgment more entire, and better
satisfied.

Such amongst others (for example sake) plain and well-meaning Froisard, who
in his enter prize, has marched with so free and genuine a purity, that
having committed some oversight; he is neither ashamed to acknowledge, nor
afraid to correct the same, wheresoever he has either notice or warning of
it: and who represents unto us the diversity of the news then current, and
the different reports, that were made unto him. The subject of an history
should be naked, bare, and formelesse; each man according to his capacity or
understanding may reap commodity out of it. The curious and most excellent
have the sufficiency to cull and choose that, which is worthy to be known,
and may select of two relations, that which is most likely: of the condition of
Princes, and of their humors, thereby they conclude their counsels, and
attribute convenient words unto them: they have reason to assume authority
unto them, to direct and shapen our belief unto theirs. But truly that
belongs not to many. Such as are between both (which is the most common
fashion) it is they that spoil all; they will needs chew our meat for us, and
take upon them a law to judge, and by consequence to square and incline the
story according to their fantasy; for, where the judgment bends one way, a
man cannot choose but wrest and turn his narration that way. They undertake to
choose things worthy to be known, and now and then conceal either a word, or a
secret action from us, which would much better instruct us: omitting such
things as they understand not, as incredible: and happily such matters, as they
know not how to declare, either in good Latin, or tolerable French. Let them
boldly enstall their eloquence, and discourse: Let them censure at their
pleasure, but let them also give us leave to judge after them: And let them
neither alter nor dispense by their abridgements and choice, any thing
belonging to the substance of the matter; but let them rather send it pure and
entire with all her dimensions unto us. Most commonly (as chiefly in our age)
this charge of writing histories is committed unto base, ignorant, and
mechanical kind of people, only for this consideration that they can speak
well; as if we sought to learn the Grammar of them; and they have some reason,
being only hired to that end, and publishing nothing but their tittle-tattle to
aim at nothing else so much. Thus with store of choice and quaint words, and
wyre-drawne phrases they huddle up, and make a hodge-pot of a labored
contexture of the reports, which they gather in the marketplaces, or such
other assemblies. The only good histories are those that are written by such as
commanded, or were imploid themselves in weighty affairs, or that were
partners in the conduct of them, or that at least have had the fortune to
manage others of like quality. Such in a manner are all the Graecians and
Romans. For, many eyewitnesses having written of one same subject (as it
happened in those times, when Greatness and Knowledge did commonly meet) if any
fault or oversight have past them, it must be deemed exceeding light, and upon
some doubtful accident. What may a man expect at a Physicians hand, that
discourses of war, or of a bare Scholar, treating of Princes secret
designs? If we shall but note the religion, which the Romans had in that, we
need no other example: Asinius Polio found some mistaking or oversight in
Caesar's Commentaries, whereinto he was fallen, only because he could not
possibly oversee all things with his own eyes, that happened in his Army, but
was feign to rely on the reports of particular men, who often related untruths
unto him; or else because he had not been curiously advertised, and distinctly
informed by his Lieutenants and Captains, of such matters as they in his
absence had managed or effected. Whereby may be seen, that nothing is so hard,
or so uncertain to be found-out, as the certainty of a Truth, sithence no man
can put any assured confidence concerning the truth of a battle, neither in the
knowledge of him, that was General, or commanded over it, nor in the soldiers
that fought, of any thing, that has happened amongst them; except after the
manner of a strict point of law, the several witnesses are brought and examined
face to face, and that all matters be nicely and thoroughly sifted by the objects
and trials of the success of every accident. Verily the knowledge we have of
our own affairs is much more barren and feeble. But this has sufficiently
been handled by Bodine, and agreeing with my conception. Somewhat to aid the
weakness of my memory, and to assist her great defects; for it has often
been my chance to light upon books, which I supposed to be new, and never to
have read, which I had not understanding diligently read and run-over many
years before, and all bescribled with my notes: I have a while since
accustomed my self, to note at the end of my book (I mean such as I purpose
to read but once) the time I made an end to read it, and to set down what
censure or judgment I gave of it; that so, it may at least, at another time
represent unto my mind, the air and general Idea, I had conceived of the
Author in reading him. I will here set down the Coppie of some of mine
annotations, and especially what I noted upon my Guicciardine about ten years
since: (For what language soever my books speak unto me, I speak unto them
in mine own.) He is a diligent Historiographer, and from whom in my conceit, a
man may as exactly learn the truth of such affairs as passed in his time, as
of any other writer whatsoever: and the rather because himself has been an
Actor of most part of them, and in very honorable place. There is no sign or
appearance, that ever he disguised or colored any matter, either through
hatred, malice, favor, or vanity; whereof the free and imparciall judgments
he gives of great men, and namely of those by whom he had been advanced or
employed in his important charges, as of Pope Clement the seventh, bears
undoubted testimony. Concerning the parts wherewith he most goes about to
prevail, which are his digressions and discourses, many of them are very
excellent, and enriched with fair ornaments, but he has too much pleased
himself in them: for, endeavoring to omit nothing that might be spoken, having
so full and large a subject, and almost infinite, he proves somewhat
languishing, and gives a taste of a kind of scholasticall tedious babbling.
Moreover, I have noted this, that of so several and diverse arms, successes,
and effects he judges of; of so many and variable motives, alterations, and
counsels, that he relates, he never refers any one unto virtue, religion,
or conscience: as if they were all extinguished and banished the world: and of
all actions, how glorious soever in appearance they be of themselves, he does
ever impute the cause of them, to some vicious and blame-worthie occasion, or
to some commodity and profit. It is impossible to imagine, that amongst so
infinite a number of actions, whereof he judges, some one have not been
produced and compassed by way of reason. No corruption could ever possess men
so universally, but that some one must of necessity escape the contagion; which
makes me to fear, he has had some distaste or blame in his passion, and it
has happily fortuned, that he has judged or esteemed of others according to
himself. In my Philip de Comines, there is this: In him you shall find a
pleasing-sweet, and gently-gliding speech, fraught with a purely-sincere
simplicity, his narration pure and unaffected, and wherein the Authors
vnspotted-good meaning does evidently appear, void of all manner of vanity or
ostentation speaking of himself, and free from all affection or envy speaking
of others: his discourses and persuasions, accompanied more with a wellmeaning
zeal, and mere verity, then with any labored and exquisit sufficiency, and
allthrough, with gravitie and authority, representing a man well-borne, and
brought up in high negotiations. Upon the memories and history of Monsieur du
Bellay: It is ever a well-pleasing thing, to see matters written by those, that
have assaide how, and in what manner they ought to be directed and managed: yet
can it not be denied, but that in both these Lords, there will manifestly
appear a great declination from a free liberty of writing, which clearly
shines in ancient writers of their kind: as in the Lord of Ionuille, familiar
unto Saint Lewis, Eginard, Chancellor unto Charlemaine; and of more fresh
memory in Philip de Comines. This is rather a declamation or pleading for king
Francis against the Emperor Charles the fifth, then an History. I will not
believe, they have altered or changed any thing concerning the generality of
matters, but rather to wrest and turn the judgment of the events, many times
against reason, to our advantage, and to omit whatsoever they supposed, to be
doubtful or ticklish in their masters life: they have made profession of it
witness the recoylings of the Lords of Momorancy and Byron, which therein are
forgotten; and which is more, you shall not so much as find the name of the
Lady of Estampes mentioned at all. A man may sometimes color, and happily
hide secret actions, but absolutely to conceal that, which all the world
knows, and especially such things as have drawne-on public effects, and of
such consequence, it is an inexcusable defect, or as I may say unpardonable
oversight. To conclude, whosoever desires to have perfect information and
knowledge of King Fraucis the first, and of the things happened in his time, let
him address himself elsewhere, if he will give any credit unto me. The
profit he may reap here, is by the particular destruction of the battles and
exploits of war, wherein these Gentlemen were present; some privy
conferences, speeches, or secret actions of some Princes, that then lived, and
the practices managed, or negotiations directed by the Lord of Langeay, in whom
doubtless are very many things, well-worthie to be known, and diverse
discourses not vulgar.

The eleaventh Chapter.
Of Cruelty.

ME thinks virtue is another manner of thing, and much more noble than the
inclinations unto goodness, which in us are ingendered. Minds well borne, and
directed by themselves, follow one same path, and in their actions represent
the same visage, that the virtuous do. But virtue imports, and sounds
somewhat I wot not what greater and more active, then by an happy complexion,
gently and peaceably, to suffer it self to be led or drawn, to follow reason.
He that through a natural facility, and genuine mildness, should neglect or
contemn injuries received, should no doubt perform a rare action, and worthy
commendation: But he who being touched and stung to the quick, with any wrong
or offense received, should arm himself with reason against this
furiously-blind desire of revenge, and in the end after a great conflict, yield
himself master over-it, should doubtless do much more. The first should do
well, the other virtuously: the one action might be termed goodness, the other
virtue. For, It seems, that the very name of virtue presupposes
difficulty, and infers resistance, and cannot well exercise it self
without an enemy. It is peradventure the reason why we call God good, mighty,
liberal, and just, but we term him not virtuous. His works are all
voluntary, unforced, and without compulsion. Of Philosophers, not only
Stoics, but also Epicurians (which endearing I borrow of the common received
opinion, which is false) whatsoever the nimble saying or witty quipping of
Arsesilaus implies, who answered the man that vpbraided him, how diverse men
went from his school to the Epicurian, but none came from thence to him: I
easily beleeve-it (said he) for, Of cocks are many capons made, but no man
could ever yet make a cock of a capon. For truly, in constancy, and rigor of
opinions, and strictness of precepts, the Epicurian Sect does in no sort yield
to the Stoicke. And a Stoicke acknowledging a better faith, then those
disputers, who to contend with Epicurus, and make sport with him, make him to
infer and say what he never meant, wresting and wyre drawing his words to a
contrary sense, arguing and silogizing by the Grammarians privilege, another
meaning, by the manner of his speech, and another opinion, then that they know
he had, either in his mind, or manners, says, that he left to be an Epicurian,
for this one consideration amongst others, that he finds their pitch to be
overhigh and inaccessible: Et ij qui (...) vocantur, sunt (...) and (...)
omnesque virtutes Sen. epist. 13.
and colunt and retinent. And those that are called lovers of pleasure, are
lovers of honesty and justice, and do both reverence and retain all sorts of
virtue. Of Stoicke and Epicurian Philosophers, I say, there are diverse, who
have judged, that it was not sufficient to have the mind well placed, well
ordered, and well disposed unto virtue; it was not enough to have our
resolutions and discourse beyond all the affronts and checks of fortune; but
that moreover, it was very requisite, to seek for occasions, whereby a man
might come to the trial of it: They will diligently quest and seek out for
pain, smart, necessity, want, and contempt, that so they may combat them,
and keep their mind in breath: Multum sibi adijcit virtus lacessita. Virtue
provoked adds much to it self. It is one of the reasons why Epaminondas (who
was of a third sect) by a very lawful way refuses some riches, fortune had
put into his hands, to the end (as he says) he might have cause to strive and
resist poverty, in which want and extremity he ever continued after.

Socrates did in my mind more vndantedly enure himself to this humor,
maintaining for his exercise the peevish frowardness of his wife, then which
no essay can be more vex-full, and is a continual fighting at the sharp.
Metellus of all the Roman Senators (he only having undertaken with the power
of virtue, to endure the violence of Saturninus Tribune of the people in Rome,
who by maine force went about, to have a most unjust law pass in favor of the
Communaltie: by which opposition, having incurred all the capital pains, that
Saturninus had imposed on such as should refuse it) entertained those that led
him to the place of execution, with such speeches: That to do evil was a
thing very easy, and too demissely base: and to do well where was no danger,
was a common thing; but to do well, where was both peril and opposition, was
the peculiar office of a man of virtue. These words of Metellus do clearly
represent unto us, what I would have verified; which is, that virtue rejects
facility to be her companion: And that an easefull, pleasant, and declining
way, by which the regular steps of a good inclination of nature, are directed,
is not the way of true virtue. She requires a craggie, rough, and thornie way;
She would either have strange difficulties to wrestle withal (as that of
Metellus) by whose means fortune her self is pleased to break the roughness
of his course; or inward encombrances, as the disordinate appetites and
imperfections of our condition bring unto her. Hitherto I have come at good
ease; but at the end of this discourse, one thing comes into my mind, which
is, that the soul of Socrates, which is absolute the perfectest that ever came
to my knowledge, would, according to my account, prove a soul deserving but
little commendation: For, I can perceive no manner of violence or vicious
concupisence in him: I can imagine no manner of difficulty or compulsion in the
whole course of his virtue. I know his reason so powerful, and so absolute
mistress over him, that she can never give him way to any vicious desire, and
will not suffer it so much as to breed in him. To a virtue so exquisit, and so
high-raised as his is, I can persuade nothing. Me thinks I see it march with a
victorious and triumphant pace, in pomp, and at ease, without let or
disturbance. If virtue cannot shine but by resisting contrary appetites, shall
we then say, it cannot pass without the assistance of vice, and owes him
this, that by his means it attaineth to honor and credit? What should also
betide of that glorious and generous Epicurian voluptuousness, that makes
account, effeminately to pamper virtue in her lap, and there wantonly to
entertain it, allowing it for her recreation, shame, reproach, agues, poverty,
death, and tortures? If I presuppose, that perfect virtue is known by
combating sorrow, and patiently vnder-going pain, by tollerating the fits and
agonies of the gout, without stirring out of his place; if for a necessary
object, I appoint her sharpness and difficulty; what shall become of that
virtue, which has attained so high a degree, as it does not only despise all
manner of pain, but rather rejoices at-it, and when a strong fit of the
collike shall assaile-it, to cause it self to be tickled; as that is, which
the Epicurians have established, and whereof diverse amongst them, have by their
actions left most certain proofs vnto-vs? As also others have, whom in effect
I find to have exceeded the very rules of their discipline; witness Cato the
younger; when I see him die, tearing and mangling his entrails; I cannot simply
content my self to believe, that at that time, he had his soul wholly exempted
from all trouble, or free from vexation: I cannot imagine, he did only
maintain himself in this march or course, which the rules of the Stoike sect
had ordained unto him, settled, without some alteration or motion, and
impassibilitie. There was, in my conceit, in this man's virtue overmuch
cheerfulness, and youthfulness to stay there. I verily believe, he felt a
kind of pleasure and sensuality in so noble an action, and that therein he
more pleased himself, then in any other, he ever performed in his life. Sic
abijt e vita, vt causam moriendi Cic. Tuse. q^. lib. 1.
nactum se esse gauderet. So departed he his life, that he rejoiced to have
found an occasion of death. I do so constantly beleeve-it, that I make a
doubt, whether he would have had the occasion of so noble an exploit taken from
him. And if the goodness which induced him to embrace public commodities more
then his own, did not bridle me, I should easily fall into this opinion, that
he thought himself greatly beholding unto fortune, to have put his virtue unto
so noble a trial, and to have favored that robber, to tread the ancient
liberty of his Country under foot. In which action me thinks I read a kind
of unspeakable joy in his mind, and a motion of extraordinary pleasure,
joined to a manlike voluptuousness, at what time it beheld the worthiness,
and considered the generositie and haughtiness of his enterprise,

Deliberat a morte feroci^r. Hor. li. 1. od. 27. 29. Cleopatra.
Then most in fierceness did he pass,
When he of death resolved was.
not urged or set-on by any hope of glory, as the popular and effeminate
judgments have judged: For, that consideration is over base, to touch so
generous, so haughty, and so constant a heart; but for the beauty of the
thing it self in it self, which he, who managed all the springs, and directed
all the wards thereof, saw much more clearer, and in it is perfection, then we
can do. Philosophy has done me a pleasure to judge, that so honorable an
action, had been indecently placed in any other life, then in Catoes, and that
only unto his it appertained to make such an end. Therefore did he with reason
persuade both his son, and the Senators that accompanied him, to provide
otherwise for themselves. Catoni quum incredibilem natura tribuisset
gravitatem, eamque ipse perpetua constantia roboravisset, semperque in
proposito consilio permansisset: moriendum potius quam tyranni vultus
aspiciendus erat. Whereas nature had affoorded Cato an incredible gravitie, and
he had strengthened it by continual constancy, and ever had stood firm in his
purposed desseignes, rather to die then behold the Tyrants face. Each death
should be such as the life has been. By dying we become no other then we were.
I ever interpret a man's death by his life. And if a man shall tell me of any
one undaunted in appearance, joined unto a weak life; I imagine it to proceed of
some weak cause, and suitable to his life. The ease therefore of his death, and
the facility he had acquired by the vigor of his mind, shall we say, it ought
to abate something of the luster of his virtue? And which of those, that have
their spirits touched, be it-never so little, with the true tincture of
Philosophy, can content himself to imagine Socrates, only, free from fear
and passion, in the accident of his imprisonment, of his fetters, and of his
condemnation? And who does not perceive in him, not only constancy and
resolution (which were ever his ordinary qualities) but also a kind of I wot
not what new contentment, and careless rejoicing in his last behavior, and
discourses? By the startling at the pleasure, which he feels in clawing of
his legs, after his fetters were taken-off; does he not manifestly declare an
equal glee and joy in his soul, for being rid of his former incommodities,
and entering into the knowledge of things to come? Cato shall pardon me (if he
please) his death is more tragical, and further extended, whereas this in a
certain manner is more fair and glorious. Aristippus answered those, that
bewailed the same; when I die, I pray the Gods send me such a death. A man
shall plainly perceive in the minds of these two men, and of such as imitate
them (for I make a question whether ever they could be matched) so perfect an
habitude unto virtue, that it was even converted into their complexion. It is
no longer a painful virtue, nor by the ordinances of reason, for the
maintaining of which, their mind must be strengthened: It is the very essence
of their soul; it is her natural and ordinary habit. They have made it
such, by a long exercise and observing the rules and precepts of Philosophy,
having lighted upon a fa^^e and rich nature. Those vicious passions, which
breed in us, find no entrance in them. The vigor and constancy of their
souls, does suppress and extinguish all manner of concupisences, so soon as
they but begin to move. Now that it be not more glorious, by an undaunted and
divine resolution, to hinder the growth of temptations, and for a man to frame
himself to virtue, so that the very seeds of vice be clean rooted out; then
by maine force to hinder their progress; and having suffered himself to be
surprised by the first assaults of passions, to arm and bandie himself, to
stay their course and to suppress them: And that this second effect be not
also much fairer, then to be simply stored with a facile and gentle nature, and
of it self distasted and in dislike with licenciousnesse and vice, I am
persuaded there is no doubt. For, this third and last manner, seems in some
sort, to make a man innocent, but not virtuous: free from doing ill, but not
sufficiently apt to do well. Seeing this condition is so near unto
imperfection and weakness, that I know not well how to clear their confines
and distinctions. The very names of goodness and innocence, are for this
respect in some sort names of contempt. I see that many virtues, as chastity,
sobriety, and temperance, may come unto us by means of corporal defects and
imbecilitie. Constancy in dangers (if it may be termed constancy) contempt of
death, patiencie in misfortunes, may happen, and are often seen in men, for
want of good judgment in such accidents, and that they are not apprehended for
such as they are indeed. Lack of apprehension and stupiditie, do sometimes
counterfeit virtuous effects. As I have often seen come to pass, that some men
are commended, for things they rather deserve to be blamed. An Italian
gentleman did once hold this position in my presence, to the prejudice and
disadvantage of his nation; That the subtlety of the Italians, and the
vivacitie of their conceptions was so great, that they foresaw such dangers and
accidents as might betide them so faroff, that it was not to be deemed strange,
if in times of war, they were often seen to provide for their safety, yea,
before they had perceived the danger: That we and the Spaniards, who were not
so wary and subtle, went further; and that before we could be frighted with
any peril, we must be induced to see it with our eyes, and feel it with our
hands, and that even then we had no more hold: But that the Germans and
Switzers, more shallow and leaden-headed, had scarce the sense and wit to
re-advise themselves, at what time they were even overwhelmed with misery, and
the axe ready to fall on their heads. It was peradventure but in jest, that
he spake-it, yet is it most true, that in the art of warre-fare, new trained
Soldiers, and such as are but novices in the trade, do often headlong, and
hand over head cast themselves into dangers, with more inconsideration, then
afterward when they have seen and endured the first shocke, and are better
trained in the school of perils.

-- haud ignarus, quantum nova gloria in armis, Et praedulce decus primo
certamine possit. Not ignorant, how much in arms new praise,
And sweetest honor, in first conflict weighes.
Lo here the reason why when we judge of a particular action, we must first
consider many circumstances, and thoroughly observe the man, that has produced
the same before we name and censure it. But to speak a word of my self: I
have sometimes noted my friends to term that wisdom in me, which was but
mere fortune; and to deem that advantage of courage and patience, that was
advantage of judgment and opinion: and to attribute one title for another unto
me, sometimes to my profit, and now and then to my loss. As for the rest, I am
so far from attaining unto that chief and most perfect degree of excellency,
where a habitude is made of virtue, that even of the second, I have made no
great trial. I have not greatly strived to bridle the desires, wherewith I
have found my self urged and pressed. My virtue, is a virtue, or to say better
innocence, accidental and casual. Had I been borne with a less regular
complexion, I imagine my state had been very pittyfull, and it would have gone
hard with me: for, I could never perceive any great constancy in my soul, to
resist and undergo passions, had they been any thing violent. I cannot foster
quarrels, or endure contentions in my house. So am I not greatly beholding unto
my self, in that I am exempted from many vices:

-- si vitijs mediocribus, and mea paucis Hor. li. 8. sat. 6. 65.

Mendosa est natura, alioquirecta velut si
Egregio inspersos reprehendas corpore naeuos.
If in a few more fault's my nature fail,
Right otherwise: as if that you would rail
On pretty moles well placed,
On body seemly graced.
I am more endebted to my fortune, then to my reason for it: She has made me
to be borne of a race famous for integrity and honesty, and of a very good
father. I wot not well whether any part of his humors have descended into me,
or whether the domestike examples, and good institution of my infancy have
insensibly set their helping hand unto it; or whether I were otherwise so borne:

Seu Libra, seu me Scorpius aspicit Hor. li. 2. od. 17. 17.

Formidolosus, pars violentior
Natalis horae, seu tyrannus
Hesperiae Capricornus vndae.
Whither the chief part of my birth-houre were
Ascendent Libra, or Scorpius full of fear,
Or in my Horoscope were Capricorn,
Whose tyranny near western Seas is borne.
But so it is, that naturally of my self, I abhor and detest all manner of
vices. The answer of Antisthenes to one, that demanded of him, which was the
best thing to be learned: To unlearn evil, seemed to be fixed on this image,
or to have an aim at this. I abhor them (I say) with so natural, and so
innated an opinion, that the very same instinct and impression, which I sucked
from my nurse, I have so kept, that no occasions could ever make me alter the
same: No, not mine own discourses, which because they have been somewhat
lavish in noting or taxing something of the common course, could easily induce
me to some actions, which this my natural inclination makes me to hate. I will
tell you a wonder, I will tell it you indeed: I thereby find in many things,
more stay and order in my manners, then in my opinion: and my concupiscence
less debauched, then my reason. Aristippus established certain opinions so
bold, in favor of voluptuousness and riches, that he made all Philosophy to
mutiny against him. But concerning his manners, Dionysius the tyrant, having
presented him with three fair young Wenches, that he might choose the fairest;
he answered he would choose them all three, and that Paris had very ill
success, for so much as he had preferred one above her fellows. But they being
brought to his own house, he sent them back again, without tasting them. His
servant one day carrying store of money after him, and being so overcharged
with the weight of it, that he complained, his Master commanded him, to cast so
much thereof away, as troubled him. And Epicurus, whose positions are
irreligious and delicate, demeaned himself in his life very laboriously, and
devoutly. He wrote to a friend of his, that he lived but with brown bread and
water, and entreated him to send him a piece of chief, against the time he was
to make a solemn feast. May it be true, that to be perfectly good, we must be
so by an hidden, natural, and universal propriety, without law, reason, and
example? The disorders and excesses, wherein I have found my self engaged, are
not (God be thanked) of the worst. I have rejected and condemned them in my
self, according to their worth; for, my judgment was never found to be
infected by them. And on the other side, I accuse them more rigorously in my
self, then in an other. But that is all: as for the rest, I apply but little
resistance unto them, and suffer my self over-easily to incline to the other
side of the Balance, except it be to order and empeach them from being commixt
with others, which (if a man take not good heed unto himself) for the most
part entertain and enterchaine themselves the one with the other. As for mine,
I have as much as it has lain in my power, abridged them, and kept them as
single, and as alone as I could:

-- nec vltra Iuv. sat. ^. 164.
Errorom foveo. -- Nor do I cherish any more,
The error which I bred before.
For, as touching the Stoickes opinion, who say, that when the wise man
works, he works with all his virtues together; howbeit, according to the
nature of the action, there be one more apparent than others (to which purpose
the similitude of man's body might, in some sort, serve their turn; for, the
action of choler cannot exercise it self, except all the humors set-to their
helping-hand, although choler be praedominant) if thence they will draw alike
consequence, that when the offender trespasseth, he does it with all the vices
together. I do not so easily believe them, or else I understand them not; for,
in effect, I feel the contrary. They are sharpe-wittie subtilties, and without
substance, about which Philosophy does often busy it self. Some vices I
shun; but othersome I eschew as much as any Saint can do. The Peripatetikes
do also disavow this connexitie, and indissoluble knitting together. And
Aristotle is of opinion, That a wise and just man may be both intemperate and
incontinent. Socrates avowed unto them, who in his Phisiognomie perceived some
inclination unto vice, that indeed it was his natural propension, but that by
discipline he had corrected the same. And the familiar friends of the
Philosopher Stilpo were wont to say, that being borne subject unto wine and
women, he had, by study, brought himself to abstain from both. On the
otherside, what good I have, I have it by the lot of my birth: I have it
neither by law nor prescription, nor by any apprentiship. The innocence that
is in me, is a kind of simple-plaine innocence, without vigor or art.
Amongst all other vices, there is none I hate more, then cruelty, both by
nature and judgment, as the extremest of all vices. But it is with such an
yearning and faint-hartednesse, that if I see but a chickins neck pulled off, or
a pigge stickt, I cannot choose but grieve, and I cannot well endure a seely
dew-bedabled hare to groan, when she is seized upon by the bounds; although
hunting be a violent sport. Those that are to withstand voluptuousness, do
willingly use this argument, to show, it is altogether vicious and
unreasonable: That where she is in her greatest prime and chief strength, she
does so over-sway us, that reason can have no access unto us, and for a
further trial, allege the experience we feel and have of it, in our
acquaintance or copulation with women.

-- cum iam praesagit gaudia corpus L^^r. lib. 4. 1097.
Atque in eo est Venus, vt muliebria conserat arva. When now the body does
light-joyes foreknow,
And Venus set the woman's fields to sow.
Where they think pleasure does so far transport us beyond our selves, that
our Discourse, then altogether overwhelmed, and our reason wholly ravished in
the gulf of sensuality, cannot by any means discharge her function. I know
it may be otherwise: And if a man but please, he may sometimes, even upon the
very instant, cast his mind on other conceits. But she must be strained to a
higher key, and heedfully pursued: I know a man may gourmandize the earnest and
thought-confounding violence of that pleasure: for I may with some experience
speak of it; and I have not found Venus to be so imperious a goddess, as
many, and more reformed than my self witness her to be, I think it not a
wonder, as does the Queen of Navarre, in one of the Tales of her Heptameron
(which respecting the subject it treateth-of, is a very pretty book) nor do
I deem it a matter of extreme difficulty, for a man to weare-out a whole
night, in all opportunity and liberty, in company of a fair Mistress, long
time before sued-vnto, and by him desired; religiously keeping his word, if he
have engaged himself, to be contented with simple kisses and plain touching.
I am of opinion, that the example of the sport in hunting would more fit the
same: wherein as there is less pleasure, so there is more distraction and
surprising, whereby our reason being amazed, loses the leisure to prepare her
self against it: when as after a long questing and beating for some game, the
beast does suddenly start, or rowze up before us, and happily in such a place,
where we least expected the same. That sudden motion, and riding, and the
earnestness of showting, jubeting and hallowing, still ringing in our ears,
would make it very hard for those, who love that kind of close or
chamber-hunting, at that very instant, to withdraw their thoughts elsewhere.
And Poets make Diana victoriously to triumph both over the firebrand and
arrows of Cupid.

Quis non malarum quas amor curas habet Hor. epod. 2. 37.

Haec inter obliviscitur?
While this is doing, who does not forget
The wicked cares wherewith Loves heart does fret?
But to return to my former discourse, I have a very feeling and tender
compassion of other men's afflictions, and should more easily weep for company
sake, if possibly for any occasion whatsoever, I could shed tears. There is
nothing sooner mooveth tears in me, then to see others weep, not only
fainedly, but howsoever, whether truly or forcedly. I do not greatly wail for
the dead, but rather envy them. Yet do I much wail and moan the dying. The
Canibales and savage people do not so much offend me with roasting and eating
of dead bodies, as those, which torment and persecute the living. Let any man
be executed by law, how deservedly soever, I cannot endure to behold the
execution with an unrelenting eye. Some one going about to witness the
clemency of Julius Caesar; He was (says he) tractable and mild in matters of
revenge. Having compelled the Pirates to yield themselves unto him, who had
before taken him prisoner, and put him to ransom, forasmuch as he had
threatened to have them all crucified, he condemned them to that kind of death,
but it was after he had caused them to be strangled. Philomon his secretary,
who would have poisoned him, had no sharper punishment of him, then an
ordinary death. Without mencioning the Latin Author, who for a testimony of
clemency dares to allege, the only killing of those, by whom a man has
been offended, it may easily be ghessed, that he is tainted with vile and
horrible examples of cruelty, such as Roman Tyrants brought into fashion. As
for me, even in matters of justice, Whatsoever is beyond a simple death, I
deem it to be mere cruelty: And especially amongst us, who ought to have a
regardfull respect, that their souls should be sent to heaven, which cannot
be, having first by intolerable tortures agitated, and as it were brought them
to despair. A Soldier, not long since, being a prisoner, and perceiving from
a loft a Tower, where he was kept, that store of people flocked together on a
green, and Carpenters were busy at work to erect a skaffold, supposing the
same to be for him, as one desperate, resolved to kill himself, and searching
up and down for some thing to make himself away, found nothing but an old
rustie cart-naile, which fortune presented him with; he took it, and
therewithal, with all the strength he had, struck and wounded himself twice
in the throat, but seeing it would not rid him of life, he then thrust it into
his belly up to the head, where he left it fast-sticking. Shortly after, one
of his keepers comming-in unto him, and yet living, finding him in that
miserable plight, but weltring in his goare-blood, and ready to gasp his
last, told the Magistrates of it, which, to prevent time before he should die,
hastened to pronounce sentence against him: which when he heard, and that he was
only condemned to have his head cut off, he seemed to take heart of grace
again, and to be sorry for what he had done, and took some comfortable
drinks, which before he had refused, greatly thanking the Judges for his
unhoped gentle condemnation: And told them, that for fear of a more
sharply-cruell, and intolerable death by law, he had resolved to prevent-it by
some violent manner of death, having by the preparations he had seen the
Carpenters make, and by gathering of people together, conceived an opinion,
that they would torture him with some horrible torment, and seemed to be
delivered from death, only by the change of it. Were I worthy to give
counsel, I would have these examples of rigor, by which superior powers go
about to keep the common people in awe, to be only exercised on the bodies of
criminal malefactors: For, to see them deprived of christian burial, to see
them haled, disbowelled, parboyled, and quartered, might happly touch the
common sort as much, as the pains, they make the living to endure: howbeit in
effect it be little or nothing, as says God, Qui corpus occidunt, and postea
non habent quod faciant. Luke 12. 4.
Those that kill the body, but have afterward no more to do: And Poets make
the horror of this picture greatly to prevail, yea, and above death, Ci^.
Tusc. qu. lib. 1.


Hen reliquias semiassi Regis, denudatis ossibus,
Per terram sanie delibutas foede divexarier.
O that the relics of an halfe-burn't King, bones bared,
On earth besmeared with filth, should be so foully marred.
It was my fortune to be at Rome, upon a day that one Catena, a notorious
highway these, was executed: at his strangling no man of the company seemed
to be moved to any ruth; but when he came to be quartered, the Executioner
gave no blow that was not accompanied with a pitteous voice, and hearty
exclamation, as if every man had had a feeling sympathy, or lent his senses to
the poor mangled wretch. Such inhumane outrages and barbarous excesses should
be exercised against the rind, and not practiced against the quick. In a case
somewhat like unto this, did Artaxerces assuage and mittigate the sharpness of
the ancient laws of Persia, appointing that the Lords, which had trespassed in
their estate, whereas they were wont to be whipped, they should be stripped
naked, and their clothes whipped for them: and where they were accustomed to
have their hair pulled-off, they should only have their hat taken off. The
Egyptians so devout and religious, thought they did sufficiently satisfy
divine Justice, in sacrificing painted and counterfeit hogs unto it: An
over-hardy invention, to go about with pictures and shadows to appease God, a
substance so essential and divine. I live in an age, wherein we abound with
incredible examples of this vice, through the licentiousness of our civil and
intestine wars: And read all ancient stories, be they never so tragical, you
shall find none to equal those, we daily see practiced. But that has nothing
made me acquainted with it. I could hardly be persuaded, before I had seen it,
that the world could have afforded so marble-hearted and savage-minded men,
that for the only pleasure of murder would commit-it; then cut, mangle, and
hacke other members in pieces: to rouse and sharpen their wits, to invent
unused tortures and unheard of torments; to devise new and unknown deaths,
and that in cold blood, without any former enmity or quarrel, or without any
gain or profit; and only to this end, that they may enjoy the pleasing
spectacle of the languishing gestures, pitiful motions, horror-moving
yellings, deep*fetcht groans, and lamentable voices of a dying and drooping
man. For, that is the extremest point whereunto the cruelty of man may
attain. Vt homo hominem, non iratus, non timens, tantum spectaturus Sen. cl^^.
lib. ^. c. 4.
occidat. That one man should kill another, neither being angry, nor afeard,
but only to look on. As for me, I could never so much as endure, without
remorse and grief, to see a poor, silly, and innocent beast pursued and
killed, which is harmless and void of defense, and of whom we receive no
offense at all. And as it commonly happens, that when the Stag begins to be
embost, and finds his strength to faile-him, having no other remedy left him,
does yield and bequeath himself unto us that pursue him, with tears suing to
us for mercy.

-- questuque cruentus Virg. Ae^. li. 7. 521.
Atque imploranti similis* With blood from throat, and tears from eyes,
It seems that he for pity cries.
was ever a grievous spectacle unto me. I seldom take any beast alive, but I
give him his liberty. Pythagoras was wont to buy fishes of fishers, and birds
of fowlers to set them free again.

-- primoque a cade ferarum Ovid. Metam. lib. 15. 106.
Incaluisse puto maculatum sanguine ferrum. And first our blades in blood
embrude I deem
With slaughter of poor beasts did reeking steeme.
Such as by nature show themselves bloodie-minded toward harmless beasts,
witness a natural propension unto cruelty. After the ancient Romans had
once enured themselves without horror to behold the slaughter of wild beasts
in their shows, they came to the murder of men and Gladiators. Nature (I
fear me) has of her own self added unto man a certain instinct to
humanity. No man takes delight to see wild beasts sport and wantonly to make
much one of another: Yet all are pleased to see them tugge, mangle, and
enterteare one an other. And least any body should jest at this simphathie,
which I have with them. Divinity it self wills us to show them some favor:
And considering, that one selfsame master (I mean that incomprehensible
worlds-framer) has placed all creatures in this his woondrous palace for his
service, and that they, as well as we, are of his household: I say, it has some
reason to injoyne us, to show some respect and affection toward them.
Pythagoras borrowed Metempsychosis of the Egyptians, but since, it has been
received of diverse Nations, and especially of our Druides:

Morte carent animae, semperque priore relicta 158.

Sede, novis domibus vi^^nt, habitanque receptae.
Our death-lesse souls, their former seats refrained,
In harbors new live and lodge entertained.
The Religion of our ancient Gauls, inferred, that souls being eternal,
ceased not to remove and change place, from one body to another: to which
fantasy was also entermixed some consideration of divine justice. For,
according to the souls behaviors, during the time she had been with Alexander,
they said, that God appointed-it another body to dwell-in, either more or
less painful, and suitable to her condition.

-- muta ferarum Clau^. in Ruff. lib. 1 482.

Cogit vincla pat^, truculentos ingerit vrsis,
Praedonesque lupis, fallaces vulpibus addit.
Atque vbi per varios annos per mill figuras
Egit let^e^ purgatos flumine tandem
Rursus ad humanae revocat primordia formae.
Dumb bands of beasts he makes men's souls endure, 491.

Blood-thirstie souls he does to Bears enure,
Crafty to Foxes, to Woolves bent to rapes;
Thus when for many years, through many shapes,
He has them driven in Lethe lake at last,
Them purged he turn's to man's form whence they past.
If the soul had been valiant, they placed-it in the body of a Lion; if
voluptuous, in a Swine; if faint-harted, in a Stagge, or a Hare; if malicious
in a Fox, and so of the rest, until that being purified by this punishment,
it reassumed and took the body of some other man again.

Ipse ego, nam memini, Troiani tempore belli Ovid. M^ta^. lib. 15. 160.

Panthoides Euphorbus eram.
When Troy was won, I, as I call to mind,
Euphorbus was, and Panthus son by kind.
As touching that alliance between us and beasts, I make no great account
of-it, nor do I greatly admit it; neither of that which diverse Nations, and
namely of the most ancient and noble, who have not only received beasts into
their society, and company, but allowed them a place far above themselves;
sometimes deeming them to be familiars and favored of their Gods, and holding
them in a certain awful respect and reverence, more then humane, and others
acknowledging no other God, nor no other Divinity, then they. Beluae Cic. Not.
Deor. lib. 1.
a barbaris propter beneficium consecratae. Beasts by the Barbarians were made
sacred for some benefit.

-- crocodilon adorat
Pars haec, illa pavet saturam serpentibus Ibin, Iuven. sat. 15 ^

Effigies sacri hic nitet aurea Cercopitheci.
This country does the Crocodile adore,
That fears the Storke glutted with serpents goare,
The sacred Babion here*
In gold shape does appear.
-- hic piscem fluminis, illic Oppida tota canem venerantur. 7.
A fish here, whole Towns reverence most
A Dog they honor in that coast.
And the very same interpretation, that Plutarke gives unto this error, which
is very well taken, is also honorable for them. For, he says, that (for
example-sake,) it was neither the Cat nor the ox, that the Egyptians adored;
but that in those beasts, they worshipped some image of divine faculties. In
this patience and vtility, and in that, vivacity, or (as our neighbors the
Borgonians with all Germany) the impatience to see themselves shut-vp: Whereby
they represented the liberty, which they loved and adored, beyond all other
divine faculty, and so of others. But when amongst the most moderate opinions,
I meet with some discourses, that go about and labor to show, the near
resemblance between us and beasts, and what share they have in our greatest
Privileges, and with how much likelihood they are compared unto us, truly I
abate much of our presumption, and am easily removed from that imaginary
Soveraigntie, that some give and ascribe unto us above all other creatures. If
all that were to be contradicted, yet is there a kind of respect, and a general
duty of humanity, which tieth us, not only unto brute beasts that have life
and sense, but even unto trees and plants. Unto men we owe Justice, and to all
other creatures, that are capable of it, grace and benignity. There is a kind
of enter-changeable commerce and mutual bond between them and us. I am not
ashamed nor affraide to declare the tenderness of my childish Nature, which is
such, that I cannot well reject my Dog, if he chance (although out of season)
to fawn upon me, or beg of me to play with him. The Turks have alms, and
certain Hospitalls appointed for brute beasts. The Romans had a public care
to breed and nourish Geese, by whose vigilance their Capitol had been saved.
The Athenians did precizely ordain, that all manner of Mules, which had served
or been employed about the building of their Temple, called Hecatompedon,
should be free, and suffered to feed wheresoever they pleased, without any let
or empeachment. The Agrigentines had an ordinary custom, seriously and
solemnly to bury all such beasts, as they had held dear; as horses of rare
worth and merit, special dogs, choice or profitable birds, or such as had but
served to make their children sport. And the sumptuous magnificence, which in
all other things was ordinary and peculiar unto them, appeared also almost
notably in the stately sumptuousness, and costly number of monuments erected
to that end, which many ages after have endured and been maintained in pride
and state. The Egyptians were wont to bury their Woolues, their Dogs, their
Cats, their Bears, and Crocodiles in holy places, embalming their carcasses,
and at their deaths to were mourning weeds for them. Cymon caused a
stately-honourable toombe to be errected for the Mares, wherewith he had three
times gained the prize at running in the Olimpike games. Ancient Xantippus
caused his Dog to be enterred upon a hill by the sea shore, which ever since
has been named by him. And Plutarke (as himself says) made it a matter of
conscience, in hope of a small gain, to sell or send an Ox to the shambles,
that had served him a long time.

The twelfth Chapter.
An Apology of Raymond Sebond.

KNowledge is withoutall contradiction, a most profitable and chief ornament:
Those who despise it declare evidently their sottishness: Yet do not Ivalue
it at so excessive a rate, as some have done; namely Herillus the Philosopher,
who grounded his chief felicity upon it, and held that it lay in her power to
make us content and wise: which I cannot believe, nor that which others have
said, that Knowledge is the mother of all virtue, and that all vice proceeds
of ignorance. Which if it be, it is subject to a large interpretation. My house
has long since ever stood open to men of understanding, and is very well
known to many of them: for, my father, who commanded the same fifty years and
upward, set on fire by that new kind of earnestness, wherewith King Francis
the first embraced Letters, and raised them unto credit, did with great
diligence, and much cost, endeavor to purchase the acquaintance of learned men:
receiving and entertaining them as holy persons, and who had some particular
inspiration of divine wisdom; collecting their sentences and discourses, as
if they had been Oracles; and with so much more reverence and religious
regard, by how much less authority he had to judge of them: for, he had no
knowledge of Letters, no more than his predecessors before him. As for me, I
love them indeed, but yet I worship them not. Amongst others, Peter Bunel (a
man in his time, by reason of his learning, of high esteem) having so journed
a few days at Montagne with my father, and others of his coat, being ready to
depart thence, presented him with a book entitled Theologia naturalis; five
liber creatur arum magistri Raimondi de Scbonda. And for so much as the Italian
and Spanish tongues were very familiar unto him, and that the book was written
in a kind of latinized Spanish, whereof diverse words had Latin terminations;
he hoped, that with little aid, he might reap no small profit by it, and
commended the same very much unto him, as a book most profitable, and fitting
the days in which he gave it him. It was even at what time the new-fangles of
Luther began to creep in favor, and in many places to shake the foundation of
our ancient belief. Wherein he seemed to be well advised, as he who by
discourse of reason foresaw, that this budding disease would easily turn to
an execrable Atheism: For, the vulgar wanting the faculty to judge of things
by themselves, suffering it self to be carried away by fortune, and led-on by
outward apparances, if once it be possessed with the boldness to despise, and
malapertnesse to impugn the opinions, which to fore it held in awefull
reverence (as are those wherein consists their salvation) and that some
articles of their religion be made doubtful and questionable, they will soon
and easily admit an equal uncertainty in all other parts of their belief, as
they that had no other grounded authority or foundation, but such as are now
shaken and weakened, and immediately reject (as a tyrannical yoke) all
impressions, they had in former times received by the authority of Laws, or
reverence of ancient custom,

Nam cupide conculcatur nimis ante metutum Lutr. l. 5. 1150
That which we feared before too much,
We gladly scorn when it is not such.
undertaking thence-forward to allow of nothing, except they have first given
their voice and particular consent to the same. My father, a few-daies before
his death, lighting by chance upon this book, which before he had neglected,
amongst other writings commanded me to translate the same into French. It is
easy to translate such authors, where nothing but the matter is to be
represented; but hard and dangerous, to undertake such as have added much to
the grace and elegancy of the language, namely to reduce them into a weaker and
poorer tongue. It was a strange task, and new occupation for me: but by
fortune being then at leisure, and unable to gainesay the commandment of the
best father that ever was; I came ere long (as well as I could) to an end of
it: wherein he took singular delight, and commanded the same to be printed,
which accordingly was after his decease performed. I found the conceits of the
author to be excellent, the contexture of his work well followed, and his
project full of piety. Now forasmuh as diverse ammuse themselves to reade-it,
and especially Ladies, to whom we owe most service, it has often been my hap
to help them, when they were reading it, to discharge the book of two
principal objections, which are brought against the same. His drift is bold,
and his scope adventurous; for he undertakes by humane and natural reasons,
to establish and verify all the articles of Christian religion against
Atheists. Wherein (to say truth) I find him so resolute and so happy, as I
deem it a thing impossible to do better in that argument, and think that
none equalleth him. Which book seeming to me both over-rich and exquisite,
being written by an aucthor, whose name is so little known, and of whom. all
we know, is, that he was a Spaniard, who about two hundred years since
professed Physic in Thoulouse. I demanded once of Adrianus Turnebue (a man
who knew all things) what such a book might be, who answered, that he deemed
the same to be some Quintessence extracted from out Saint Thomas Aquinas: For,
in good truth, only such a spirit fraught with so infinite erudition, and so
full of admirable subtilitie, was capable of such and so rare imaginations. So
it is, that whosoever be the author or deviser of it (the title whereof ought
not without further reason to be taken from Sebond) he was a very
sufficient-worthie man, and endowed with sundry other excellent qualities. The
first thing he is reproved for in his Book, is, that Christians wrong
themselves much, in that The first Objection.
they ground their belief upon humane reasons, which is conceived but by
faith, and by a particular inspiration of God. Which objection seems to
contain some zeal of piety; by reason whereof we ought with so much more
mildnes and regard, endeavor to satisfy them that propose it. It were a
charge, more befitting a man conversant, and suitable to one acquainted with the
holy Scriptures, than me, who am altogether ignorant in them. Nevertheless I
think, that even as to a matter so divine and high and so much exceeding al
humane understanding, as is this Verity, wherewith it has pleased the
goodness of God to enlighten us, it is most requisite, that he afford and
lend us his help. And that, with an extraordinary and privileged favor, that
so we may the better conceive and entertain the same: For, I suppose that
means merely humane can no way be capable of it; which if they were; so many
rare and excellent minds, and so plenteously stored with natural faculties,
as have been in times past, would never by their discourse, have mist the
attayning of this knowledge. It is faith only, which lively and assiuredly
embraces the high mysteries of our Religion. And no man can doubt, but that it
is a most excellent and commendable enterprise, properly to accommodate and fit
to the service of our faith, the natural helps and humane implements which God
has bestowed upon us. And no question is to be made, but that it is the most
honorable employment we can put them unto; and that there is no occupation or
intent more worthy a good Christian, than by all means, studies and
imaginations, carefully to endeavor, how to embellish, amplify and extend the
truth of his belief and religion. It is not enough for us to serve God in
spirit and soul, we owe him besides, and we yield unto him a corporal
worshipping; we apply our limbs, our motions, and all external things, to
honor him. The like ought to be done, and we should accompany our faith with
all the reason we possess: Yet always with this proviso, that we think it
does not depend of-vs, and that all our strength and arguments can never
attain to so supernatural and divine a knowledge: Except it seize upon us,
and as it were enter into us by an extraordinary infusion: And unless it also
enter into us, not only by discourse, but also by humane means, she is not in
her dignity, nor in her glory. And verily I fear therefore, that except this
way, we should not enjoy-it. Had we fast-holde on God, by the enterposition of
a lively faith; had we hold-fast on God by himself, and not by us; had we a
divine foundation, then should not humane and worldly occasions have the power
so to shake and totter-vs, as they have. Our hold would not then yield to so
weak a battery: The love of noveltie; the constraint of Princes; the good
success of one party; the rash and casual changing of our opinions, should
not then have the power to shake and alter our belief. We should not suffer
the same to be trouble at the will and pleasure of a new argument, and at the
persuasion, no, not of all the rhetorike that ever was: we should withstand
these boistrous billows with an inflexible and immovable constancy:

Illisos fluctus rupes, vt vasta refundit, Virg. Aen. l. 7. 587.

Et varias circumlatrantes dissipat vndas
-- Mosesua.
As huge rocks do regorgeth invective waves,
And dissipate the billows brawling braves,
Which these against those still bellow out,
Those being big and standing stout.
If this raie of Divinity did in any sort touch us, it would every where
appear: Not only our words, but our actions, would bear some show and luster
of it. Whatsoever should proceed from us, might be seen enlightened with this
noble and matchles brightness. We should blush for shame, that in humane sects,
there was never any so factions, what difficulty or strangeness soever his
doctrine maintained, but would in some sort conform his behaviors and square
his life unto it: Whereas so divine and heavenly an instution never marks
christians but by the tongue. And will you see whether it be so? Compare but
our manners unto a Turk, or a Pagan, and we must needs yield unto them:
Whereas in respect of our religions superiority, we ought by much, yea by an
incomparable distance, outshine them in excellency: And well might a man say,
Are they so just, so charitable, and so good? Then must they be Christians. All
other outward shows and exterior apparences are common to all religions: As
hope, affiance, events, ceremonies, penitence and martyrdom. The peculiar
badge of our truth should be vertiue; As it is the heavenliest and most
difficult mark, and worthiest production of Verity it self. And therefore was
our good Saint Lewis in the right, when that Tartarian king, who was become a
Christian, intended to come to Lions, to kiss the Popes feet, and there to
view the sanctity he hoped to find in our lives and manners, instantly to
divert him from it, fearing lest our dissolure manners, and licentious kind of
life, might scandalize him, and so alter his opinion fore-conceived of so
sacred a religion. How beit the contrary happened to another, who for the same
effect being come to Rome and there viewing the disolutenesse of the prelates
and people of those days, was so much the more confirmed in our religion;
considering with himself what force and divinity it must of consequence have,
since it was able, amidst so many corruptions, and so viciosly-poluted hands,
to maintain her dignity and splendour. Had we but one only grain of faith,
we should then be able to remoove mountains from out their place. says the
holy Writ. Our actions being guided, and accompanied with divinity, should not
then be merely humane, but even as our belief, contain some wonder-causing
thing. Brevis est institutio vitae honestae beataeque, si credas. The
institution of an honest and blessed life is but short, if a man believe. Some
make the world believe, that they believe things they never do. Others (and
they are the greater number) persuade themselves they do so, as unable to
conceive what it is to believe. We think it strange if in wars, which at
this time do so oppress our state, we see the events to floate so strangly,
and with so common and ordinary a manner to change and alter: The reason is,
we add nothing unto it but our own. Justice, which is on the one side, is
used but for a cloak and ornament; she is indeed alleged, but nor received,
nor harbored, nor wedded. She is as in the mouth of a Lawyer, and not as she
ought in the heart and affection of the party. God owes his extraordinary
assistance unto faith and religion, and not to our passions. Men are but
directors vnto-it and use religion for a show: It ought to be clean contrary.
Do but mark if we do not handle it as it were a piece of wax, from our so
right and so firm a rule, to draw so many contrary shapes. When was this
better seen than now-adaies in France? Those which have taken it on the left,
and those who have taken it on the right hand; Such as speak the false, and
such who speak the truth of it, do so alike employ and fit the same to their
violent and ambitious enterprises, proceed unto it with so conformable a
proceeding in riotousnes and injustice, they make the diversity they pretend
in their opinions doubtful, and hard to be believed, in a thing from which
depends the conduct and law of our life. Can a man see from one same School
and Discipline, more united and like customs and fasnions to proceed? View but
the horrible impudency wherewith we toss divine reasons to and fro, and how
irreligiously we have both rejected and taken them again, according as
fortune has in these public storms transported us from place to place. This
solemn proposition; Whether it be lawful for a subject, for the defense of
religion, to rebel and take arms against his Prince: Call but to mind, in
what mouths but a twelve-moneth ago the affirmative of the same was the
chief pillar of the one part; the negative was the maine-vnderproppe of the
other: And listen now from whence comes the voice and instruction of one and
other: and whether arms clatter and clang less for this, than for that cause.
And we burn those men, which say, that truth must be made to abide the yoke of
our need: And how much worse does France, than speak it? Let us confess the
truth? he that from out this lawful army should cull out, first those who
follow it for mere zeal of a religious affection, then such as only regard
the defense and protection of their countries laws, or service of their
Prince; whether he could ever erect a complete company of armed men. How
comes it to pass, that so few are found, who have still held one same will and
progress in our public revolutions, and that we see them now and then but
faintly, and sometimes, as fast as they can headlong to run into the action?
And the same men, now by their violence and rashness, and now through their
slownes, demissnes, and heavines to spoil, and as it were overthrow our
affairs, but that they are thrust into them by casual motives, and particular
consideration, according to the diversities wherewith they are moved? I
plainly perceive, we lend nothing unto devotion but the offices that flatter
our passions. There is no hostility so excellent, as that which is absolutely
Christian. Our zeal works wonders, when ever it secondeth our inclination
toward hatred, cruelty, ambition, avarice, detraction, or rebellion. Toward
goodness, benignity, or temperance, it goes but slowly, and against the hair,
except miraculously, some rare complexion lead him unto it, it neither runs
nor flies to it. Our religion was ordained to root out vices, but it
shrowdeth, fostreth and provokes them. As commonly we say, We must not make a
fool of God. Did we believe in him, I say not through faith, but with a
simple belief, yea (I speak it to our confusion) did we but believe and know
him, as we do another story, or as one of our companions, we should then
love him above all other things, by reason of the infinite goodness, and
unspeakable beauty that is, and shines in him: Had he but the same place in our
affections, that riches, pleasures, glory and our friends have: The best of us
does not so much fear to wrong him, as he does to injury his neighbor, his
kinsman, or his master. Is there so simple a mind, who on the one side having
before him the object of one of our vicious pleasures, and on the other to his
full view, perfect knowledge and assured persuasion, the state of an immortal
glory, that would enter into contention of one for the other? And if we often
refuse it through mere contempt: for what draws vsto blaspheming, unless it
be at all adventures, the desire itself of the offense? The Philosopher
Antisthenes, when he was initiated in the mysteries of Orpheus, the priest;
saying, unto him, that such as vowed themselves to that religion, should after
death receive eternal and perfect felicities, replied, if thou believe-it, why
do thou not die thy self? Diogenes more roughly (as his manner was) and
further from our purpose, answered the priest, who persuaded him to be one of
his order, that so he might come unto, and attain the happiness of the other
world: Will thou have me believe, that those famous men Agesilaus and
Epaminondas, shall be miserable, and that thou, who art but an ass, and do
nothing of any worth, shall be happy, because thou art a Priest? Did we but
receive these large promises of everlasting blessedness with like authority, as
we do a philosophical discourse, we should not then have death in that horror
as we have:

Non iamse moriens dissolvi conquereretur, Luer. l. 3. 630.

Sed magis ire for as, vestemque relinquere vt an^uis
Gauderet, praelonga senex aut cornua cervus.
He would not now complain to be dissolved dying,
But rather more rejoice, that now he is forth-flying,
Or as a Snake his coat out-worne,
Or as old Hearts, does cast his horn.
I will be dissolved should we say, and be with Jesus Christ. The forcible
power of Platoes discourse, of the immortality of the soul, provoked diverse
of his Scholars unto death, that so they might more speedily enjoy the hopes
he told them of. All which is a most evident token, that we receive our
religion, but according to our fashion, and by our own hands, and no otherwise
than other religions are received. We are placed in the country, where it was
in use; where we regard her antiquity, or the authority of those who have
maintained her; where we fear the menaces wherewith she threatens all
mis-beleevers, or follow her promises. The considerations ought to be applied
and employed to our belief, but as Subsidiaries: they be humane bonds.
Another Country, other Testimonies, equal promises: alike menaces, mighe
semblably imprint a clean contrary religion in us: wear christians by the
same title, as we are either Perigordins or Germans. And as Plato says, There
are ^ew so confirmed in Atheism, but some great danger will bring unto the
knowledge of Gods divine power. The part does not touch or concernea good
Christian: It is for mortal and worldly religions, to be received by a humane
convoy. What faith is that like to be, which cowardice of heart does plant, and
weakness establish in us! A goodly faith, that believes that which it
believes, only because it wants the courage not to believe the same. A
vicious passion, as that of inconstancy and astonishment is, can it possibly
ground any regular production in our minds or souls? They establish (says
he) by the reason of their judgment, that whatsoever is reported of hell, or
of after-comming pains, is but a fiction; but the occasions to make trial of
it, offering it self, at what time age or sickness does sommon them to death:
the error of the same, through the horror of their future condition, does
then replenish them with an other kind of belief. And because such
impressions make men's hearts fearful, he by his laws, inhibiteth all
instruction of such threats, and the persuasion, that any evil may come unto
man from the Gods, except for his greater good, and for a medicinable effect,
whenever he falls into-it. The report of Bion, that being infected with the
Athiesmes of Theodorus, he had for along time made but a mockery of religious
men; but when death did once seize upon him, he yielded unto the extremest
superstions: As if the Gods would either be remooved, or come again, according
to Bions business. Plato and these examples conclude, that we are brought to
believe in God, either by reason, or by compulsion. Atheism being a
proposition, as unnatural and monstrous as it is hard and uneasy to be
established in any man's mind, how insolent and unruly soever he may be. Many
have been seen, to have conceived, either through vanity or fierceness,
strange and seld-knowne opinions, as if they would become reformers of the
world, by affecting a profession only in countenance: who though they be
sufficiently foolish, yet are they not powerful enough, to ground or settle it
in their consciences. Yet will not such leave to list-vp their joined hands to
heaven, give them but a s^occado on their breast: and when fear shall have
suppressed, or sickness vanquished this licentious fervor of a wavering mind,
then will they suffer themselves gently to be reclaimed, and discreetly to be
persuaded, to give credit unto true belief and public examples. A decree
seriously digested is one thing, and these shallow and superficial impressions
another, which bred by the dissolutnesse of a loose spirit, do rashly and
uncertainly floate up and down the fantasy of a man. Oh men most
braine-sicke and miserable, that endeavor to be worse than they can! The error
of Paganism, and the ignorance of our sacred truth, was the cause of this
great soules-fall; but only great in worldly greatness; also in this next
abuse, which is, that children and old men, are found to be more susceptible
or capable of religion, as if it were bredde and had her credit from our
imbecilitie. The bond which should bind our judgment, tie our will, enforce
and join our souls to cur Creator, should be a bond taking his doubling and
forces, not from our considerations, reasons and passions, but from a divine
and supernatural compulsion, having but one form, one countenance, and one
grace; which is the authority and grace of God. Now our heart being ruled, and
our soul commanded by says, reason wills, that she draws all our other
parts to the service of her intent, according to their power and faculty. Nor
is it likely, but that this vast worldesframe must bear the impression of some
marks, therein imprinted by the hand of this great-wondrous Architect, and
that even in all things therein created, there must be some image, somewhat
resembling, and having coherencie with the workman that wrought and framed
them. He has left imprinted in these high and misterious works, the
characters of his divinity: and only our imbecilitie is the cause, we can
nor discover, nor read them. It is that which himself tells us, That by his
visible operations, he does manifest th^se, that are invisible to us. Sebond
has much traveled about this worthy study, and shows us, That there is
no parcel of this world, that either beiyeth or shameth his Maker. It were a
manifest wronging of Gods goodness, if all this universe did not consent and
simpathize with our belief. Heaven, earth, the elements, our bodies, our
soul; yea all things-else, conspire and agree vnto-it: only the means how to
make use of them must be found out: They will instruct us sufficiently, be we
but capable to learn and apt to understand. For, this world is a most holy
Temple, into which man is brought there to behold Statues and Images, not
wrought by mortal hand, but such as the secret thought of God has made
sensible, as the Sun, the Stars, the Waters and the Earth, thereby to
represent the intelligible unto us. The invisible things of God (says Saint
Paul) do evidently appear by the creation o^ the world, iudgeing of his
eternal Wisdom and Divinity by his works.

Atque adeo faciem coeli non invidet orbi, Manil. l. 4. 840

Ipse deus, vultusque suos corpusque recludit,
Semper voluend^: seque ipsum inculcat and offert
Vt been cognosci possit, doc^a^que videndo
Qualis ent, docea^que suas attendere leges.
God to the world does not heavens face envy,
But by still mooving it does notify
His face and essence, does himself apply,
That he may well be known, and teach by seeing,
How he goes, how we should mark his decreeing.
Now our reason and humane discourse, is as the lumpish and barren matter; and
the grace of God is the form thereof. It Is that, which gives both fashion and
worth unto it. Even as the virtuous actions of Socrates and Cato, are but
frivolous and profitable, because they had not their end, and regarded not the
love and obedience of the true creator of all things; and namely, because they
were ignorant of the true knowledge of God: So is it of our imaginations and
discourse; they have a kind of body, but a shapelesse mass, without light or
fashion, unless faith and the grace of God be joined thereunto. Faith, giving
as it were a tincture and luster unto Sebonds arguments, make them the more
firm and solid: They may well serve for a direction and guide to a young
learner, to lead and set him in the right way of this knowledge. They in some
sort fashion and make him capable of the grace of God, by means whereof our
belief is afterward achieved and made perfect. I know a man of authority,
brought up in letters, who confessed unto me, that he was reclaimed from out
the errors of mis-beleeving by the Arguments of Sebond. And if it happen, they
be dispoyled of this ornament, and of the help and approbation of faith, and
taken but for mere humane fantazies, yet to combat those, that headlong are
fallen into the dreadful error, and horrible darkness of irreligion, even
then, shall they be found as firm and forcible, as any other of that
condition, that may be opposed against them. So that we shall stand upon terms
to say unto our parties,

Si melius quid habes, accerse, vel imperiumfer. Hor. l. 1. epi. 5. 6.
If you have any better, send for me,
Or else that I bid you, contented be.
Let them either abide the force of our proofs, of show us some others, upon
some other subject, better compact and more full. I have in a manner unawares
half engaged my self in the second objection, to which I had purposed to
frame an answer for Sebond. Some say his Arguments are weak, and simple to
verify what he would, and undertake to front him easily. The second obiectiou.
Such fellows must somewhat more roughly be handled: for they are more
dangerous, and more malicious then the first. Man does willingly apply other
men's sayings to the advantage of the opinions he has fore-judged in himself.
To an Atheist all writings make for Atheism. He with his own Venom infecteth
the innocent matter. These have some preoccupation of judgment that makes
their taste wallowish and tastelesse, to conceive the reasons of Sebond. As for
the rest, they think to have fair play offered them, if they have free
liberty to combat our religion with mere worldly weapons; which they durst
not charge, did they behold her in her Majesty, full of authority and
commandment. The means I use to suppress this frenzy, and which seems the
fittest for my purpose, is to crush* and trample this humane pride and
fierceness vnder-foote-to make them feel the emptiness, vacuitie, and no
worth of man: and violently to pull out of their hands, the silly weapons of
their reason; to make them stoop, and bite and snarle at the ground, under the
authority and reverence of Gods Majesty. Only to her belongs science and
wisdom, it is she alone can judge of her self, and from her we steal:
whatsoever we repute, value, and count our selves to be.

(...) Of greater, better, wiser mind than he,
God can abide no mortal man should be.
Let us suppress this overweening, the first foundation of the tyranny of
the wicked spirit: Deus superbis resistit: humilibus autem dat gratiam. God
resists the proud, but gives grace Pro. 3. 14. 4. 6. 1. Pet. 5. 5.
to the humble. Plato says, That intelligence is in all the Gods, but little
or nothing at all in men. Meane-while it is a great comfort unto a Christian
man, to see our mortal implements, and fading tools, so fitly sorted to our
holy and divine faith; that when they are employed to the mortal and fading
subjects of their Nature, they are never more forcibly, nor more joyntlie
appropriated unto them. Let us then see whether man has any other stronger
reasons in his power, then Sebondes, and whether it lie in him, by argument or
discourse, to come to any certainty. For, Saint Augustine, pleading against
these kind of men, because he would vpbraide them with their injustice, in that
they hold the parts of our belief to be false, and that our reason fails in
establishing them. And to show, that many things may be, and have been,
whereof our discourse can never ground the nature and the causes; He proposes
and sets down before them certain known and undoubted experiments,
wherein man confesses to see nothing; which he does as all things else, with a
curious and ingenious search. More must be done, and they must be taught, that
to convince the weakness of their reason; we need not go far to cull out
rare examples: And that it is so defective and blind, as there is no facility
so clear, that is clear enough unto her; that easy and uneasy is all one to
her; that all subjects equally, and Nature in General disavoweth her
jurisdiction, and inter position. What preaches truth unto us, when it bids
us fly and shun worldly Philosophy; when it so often tells us, that all our
wisdom is but folly before God; that of all vanities, man is the greatest;
that man, who presumes of his knowledge, does not yet know what knowledge is:
and that man, who is nothing, if he but think to be something, seduceth and
deceives himself? These sentences of the Holy Ghost, do so lively and
manifestly express, what I would maintain, as I should need no other proof
against such as with all submission and obeisance would yield to his authority.
But these will needs be whipped to their own Cost, and cannot abide their
reason to be combated, but by it self. Let us now but consider man alone
without other help, armed but with his own weapons, and unprovided of the
grace and knowledge of God, which is all his honor, all his strength, and all
the ground of his being. Let us see what hold-fast, or freehold he has in
this gorgeous, and goodly equipage. Let him with the utmost power of his
discourse make me understand, upon what foundation, he has built those great
advantages and ods, he supposes to have over other creatures. Who has
persuaded him, that this admirable mooving of heavens-vaults; that the eternal
light of these lamps so fiercely rolling over his head; that the horror-moving
and continual motion of this infinite vaste Ocean, were established, and
continue so many ages for his commodity and service? Is it possible to imagine
any thing so ridiculous, as this miserable and wretched creature, which is not
so much as master of himself, exposed and subject to ^ffences of all things,
and yet dares call himself Master and Emperor of this Universe? In whose
power it is not to know the least part of it much less to command the same.
And the privilege, which he so fondly challenges, to be the only absolute
creature in this huge worlds-frame, perfectly able to know the absolute
beauty, and several parts thereof, and that he is only of power to yield the
great Architect thereof, due thanks for it, and to keep account both of the
receipts and layings out of the world. Who has sealed him this patent? Let him
show us his letters of privilege, for so noble and so great a charge. Have
they been granted only in favor of the wise? Then concern they but a few.
Are the foolish and wicked worthy of so extraordinary a favor? Who being the
worst part of the world, should they be preferred before the rest? Shall we
believe him; Quorum igitur causa quis dixeri^ effectum Cic. not. Deo. l. 2
esse mundum? Eorum scilicet animantium, quaeratione ^tuntur. Hisunt dij and
homines, quibus profecto nihil est melius. For whose cause then shall a man
say, that the world was made? In sooth, for those creatures sake, which have
the use of reason: Those are Gods and men, then whom assuredly nothing is
better. We shall never sufficiently baffle the impudency of this conjoyning.
But silly wretch, what has he in him worthy such an advantage? To consider the
incorruptible life of the celestial bodies, their beauty, greatness, and
agitation, continued with so just and regular a course:

-- cum suspicimus magni coelestia mundi Lucr. l. 5. 1214.

Templa super, stellisque micantibus Aethera fixum,
Et venit in mentem Lune Solisque viarum.
When we of this great world the heavenly-temples see
Above us, and the skies with shine-starres fixed to be,
And mark in our discourse,
Of Sun and Moon the course.
To consider the power and domination, these bodies have, not only upon our
lives, and condition of our fortune;

Facta et^nim and vitas hominum suspendit ab astris. Manil. astron. lib. 3 58.
For on the stars he does suspend
Of men, the deeds, the lives, and end.
But also over our dispositions and inclinations, our discourses and wills,
which they rule, provoke, and moove at the pleasure of their influences, as our
reason finds and teaches us.

-- speculat ^que long Manil. astron. lib. 1. 62.

^^prendi: tacit is dominantia legibus astra.
Et totum alterna mundum ratione m^veri.
Fatorumque vices cersis discern^re signis.
By speculation it from far discern's,
How star's by secret laws do guide our sterns,
And this whole world is moov'd by intercourse
And by sure signs of fates to know the course.
Seeing that not a man alone, nor a King only. But Monarchies and Empires, yea,
and all this world below is moved at the shaking of one of the least heavenly
motions.

Quantaque quam par vifaciant discrimina motus: Manil. astron. lib. 4. 93.

Tantum est hoc regnum quod regibus imper at ipsis.
How little motions make, how different affection:
So great this kingdom is, that has Kings in subjection.
If our virtue, vices, sufficiency and knowledge; and the same discourse we
make of the power of the stars, and the comparison between them and us,
comes as our reason judges by their mean and through their favor.

-- furit alter amore, Manil. astron. lib. 4. 178.

Et pontu^s tranare potest and vertere Troiam,
Alteriussors est scribendis legibus apta:
Ecce patrem nati perimunt, not os^ parents,
Mutuaque armati coeunt in vulner a fratres,
Non nostrum hoc bellum est, coguntur tanta mov^re,
Inque suas f^rri poenas, lacer and aque membra: 118.

Hoc quoque fatale est sic ipsum expendere fatum.
One with love madded, his love to enjoy,
Can cross the seas, and over-turne all Troy:
Another lot is to set laws severe.
Loesonnes kill fathers, fathers sons destroy,
Brothers for mutual wounds their arms do bear,
Such war is not our own, forced are we to it,
Drawn to our own pains, our own limbs to tear;
Fates so t'observe it is fatal, we must do it,
If we hold that portion of reason, which we have, from the distribution of
heaven, how can she make us equal unto it? How can she submit his essence and
conditions unto our knowledge? Whatsoever we behold in those huge bodies, does
affright us: Quae molitio, Cie. Not. Deo. lib. 1.
quae ferrament^, qui victes, quae machinae, qui ministri tant i operis
fuerunt? What workmanship? What yron-braces? What maine beams, what engines?
What Masons and Carpenters, were to so great a work? Why do we then deprive
them of soul, of life, and of discourse? Have we discovered or known any
immovable or insensible stupidity in them? We, who have no commerce but of
obedience with them? Shall we say we have seen the use of a reasonable soul,
in no other creature, but in man? What? Have we seen any thing comparable to
the Sun? Leaves he to be, because we have seen nothing semblable unto it?
And does he leav his moving, because his equal is no where to be found? If
that which we have not seen, is not, our knowledge is wonderful abridged?
Quae sunt tanta animi angustia? What narrownes of my heart is such? Be they not
dreams of humane vanity, to make a celestial earth, or world of the Moon? As
Anaxagoras did? And therein to plant worldly habitations, and as Plato and
Plutarch do, erect their colonies for our use. And to make of our known earth
a bright shining planet? Inter caetera mortalitatis incommoda, and hoc est
caligo Sen ir^. lib. 2. cap. 9.
mentium: nec tantum necessitas errandi, sed errorum amor. Among other
discommodities of our mortality this is one, there is darkness in our minds,
and in us not only necessity of erring, but a love of errors. Corruptibile
corpus aggrauat animam, and deprimit terrena inhabitatio sensum Sen. epist. 95.
multa cogitantem. Our corruptible body does over lode our soul, and our
dwelling on earth weighet down our sense, that is set to think of many
matters. Presumption is our natural and original infirmity. Of all creatures
man is the most miserable and frail, and therewithal the proudest and
disdainfullest. Who perceives and sees himself placed here, amidst their
filth and mire of the world, fast tied and nailed to the worst, most senceles,
and drooping part of the world, in the vilest corner of the house, and farthest
from heavens-coape, with those creatures, that are the worst of the three
conditions; and yet dares imaginarily place himself above the circle of the
Moon, and reduce heaven under his feet. It is through the vanity of the same
imagination, that he dare equal himself to God, that he ascribes divine
conditions unto himself, that he selecteth and separateth himself from out
the rank of other creatures; to which his fellow-brethren and compeers, he
cuts out and shareth their parts, and allotteth them what portions of means or
forces he thinks good. How knows he by the virtue of his understanding the
inward and secret motions of beasts? By what comparison from them to us does he
conclude the brutishness, he ascribes unto them? When I am playing with my
Cat, who knows whether she have more sport in dallying with me, then I have in
gaming with her? We entertain one another with mutual apish tricks, If I
have my hour to begin or to refuse, so has she hirs. Plato in setting forth
the golden age under Saturn, amongst the chief advantages that man had then,
reports the communication he had with beasts, of whom enquiring and taking
instruction, he knew the true qualities, and differences of every one of them:
by, and from whom he got an absolute understanding and perfect wisdom,
whereby he led a happier life, then we can do. Can we have a better proof to
judge of man's impudency, touching beasts? This notable Author was of opinion,
that in the greatest part of the corporal form, which nature has bestowed on
them, ^he has only respected the use of the Prognostications, which in his
days were thereby gathered. That defect which hinders the communication
between them and us, why may it not as well be in us, as in them? It is a
matter of divination to guess in whom the fault is, that we understand not one
another. For, we understand them no more then they us. By the same reason, may
they as well esteem us beasts, as we them. It is no great marvel if we
understand them not: no more do we the cornish, the Welsh, or Irish. Yet have
some boasted that they understood them, as Apollonius Thyaneus, Melampus,
Tiresias, Thales and others. And if it be (as Cosmographers report) that there
are Nations, who receive and admit a Dog to be their King, it must
necessarily follow, that they give a certain interpretation to his voice and
moving. We must note the parity that is between us. We have some mean
understanding of their senses, so have beasts of ours, about the same measure.
They flatter and faune upon us, they threat, and entreat us, so do we them.
Touching other matters, we manifestly perceive, that there is a full and
perfect communication amongst them, and that not only those of one same kind
understand one another, but even such as are of different kinds

Et mutae pecudes, and denique secla ferarum Lucr. l. 5. 1069.

Dissimiles suerunt voces variasque cluere
Cum metus aut dolor est, aut cum iam gaudia gliscunt.
Whole heard's (though dombe) of beasts, both wild and tame
Use diverse voices, diffrent sounds to frame,
As joy, or grief, or fear,
Vpspringing passions bear.
By one kind of barking of a Dog, the Horse knows he his angry; by
another voice of his, he is nothing dismaide. Even in beasts, that have no
voice at all, by the reciprocal kindenes, which we see in them, we easily
infer, there is some other mean of entercommunication: their jestures
treat, and their motions discourse.

Non alia long ratione atque ipsa videtur Ib. 1040.

Protrahere ad gestum* pu^ros infantia linguae.
No otherwise, then, for they cannot speak,
Children are drawn by signs their minds to break.
And why not, as well as our dombe-men dispute, argue, and tell histories by
signs? I have seen some so ready, and so excellent in it, that (in good
sooth) they wanted nothing to have their meaning perfectly understood. Do we
not daily see lovers with the looks and rolling of their eyes, plainly show
when they are angry or pleased, and how they entreat, and thank one another,
assign meetings, and express any passion?

E'l silentio ancor suole
Hauer prieghi and parole.
Silence also has a way,
Words and prayers to convay.
What do we with our hands? Do we not sue and entreat, promise and perform,
call men unto us, and discharge them, bid them farewell, and be gone, threaten,
pray, beseech, deny, refuse, demand, admire, number, confess, repent, fear,
be ashamed, doubt, instruct, command, encite, encourage, swear, witness,
accuse, condemn, absolve, injury, despise, defy, despite, flatter,
applaude, bless, humble, mock, reconcile, recommend, exalt, shewgladnes,
rejoice, complain, wail, sorrow, discomfort, despair, cry-out, forbid,
declare silence and astonishment? And what not? With so great variation, and
amplifying, as if they would contend with the tongue. And with our head, do we
not envite and call to-vs, discharge and send away, avowe, disavowe, be-lie,
welcome, honor, worship, disdain, demand, direct, rejoice, affirm, deny,
complain, cherish, blandish, chide, yield, submit, brag, boast, threaten,
exhort, warrant, assure, and enquire? What do we with our eyelids? And with
our shoulders? To conclude, there is no motion, nor jesture, that does nor
speak, and speaks in a language, very easy, and without any teaching to be
understood: nay, which is more, it is a language common and public to all:
whereby it follows (seeing the variety, and several use it has from
others) that this must rather be deemed the proper and peculiar speech of
humane nature. I omit that, which necessity in time of need; does
particularly instruct and suddenly teach such as need it; and the alphabets
upon fingers, and grammars by jestures; and the sciences, which are only
exercised and expressed by them: and the nations Pliny reports to have no
other speech. An Ambassador of the City of Abdera, after he had talked a long
time unto Agis King of Sparta, said thus unto him: O King, what answer will thou that I bear back unto our citizens? Thus (answered he) that I have
suffered thee to speak all thou would, and as long as thou pleasedst,
without ever speaking one word. Is not this a kind of speaking silence, and
easy to be understood? And as for other matters; what sufficiency is there
in us, that we must not acknowledge from the industry and labors of beasts?
Can there be a more formal, and better ordered policy, divided into so
several charges and offices, more constantly entertained, and better
maintained, then that of Bees? Shall we imagine, their so orderly disposing of
their actions, and mannaging of their vacations, have so proporcioned and
formal a conduct without discourse, reason and forecast?

His quidam signis atque haec exempla sequuti, Virg. Georg. lib. 4. 219.

Esse apibus partem divinae mentis, and haustus
Aethereos dixere.
Some by these signs, by these examples moved,
Said that in Bees there is and may be proved
Some taste of heavenly kind,
Part of celestial mind.
The Swallows, which at the approach of springtime, we see to pry, to search,
and ferret all the corners of our houses; is it without judgment they seek,
or without discretion they choose from out a thousand places, that which is
fittest for them, to build their nests and lodgeing? And in that pretie-cunning
contexture, and admirable framing of their houses, would birds rather fit
themselves with a round, then a square figure with an obtuse, then a right
angle, except they knew both the commodities and effects of them? Would they
(suppose you) first take water, and then clay, unless they guessed that the
hardness of the one is softened by the moistnes of the other; Would they floor
their palace with moss or down, except they foresaw, that the tender parts
of their yong-ons, shall thereby lie more soft and easy? Would they shroud and
shelter themselves from stormy weather, and build their cabbins toward the
East, unless they knew the different conditions of winds, and considered that
some are more healthful and safe for them, then some others? Why does the
Spider spin her artificial web thick in one place, and thin in another? And
now uses one, and then another knot, except she had an imaginary kind of
deliberation, forethought and conclusion? We perceive by the greater part of
their works, what excellency beasts have overvs, and how weak our-arte and
short our cunning-is, if we go about to imitate them. We see notwithstanding,
even in our grosest works, what faculties we employ in them, and how our mind
employeth the uttermost of her skill and forces in them: why should we not
think as much of them? Wherefore do we attribute the works, which excel
what ever we can perform, either by nature or by art, unto a kind of
unknown, natural and servill inclination? Wherein unawares, we give them a
great advantage over-vs, to infer, that nature, led by a certain loving
kindness, leads and accompanies them (as it were by the hand) unto all the
actions and commodities of their life; and that she forsakes and leaves us to
the hazard of fortune; And by art to quest, and finde-out those things, that
are beho^uefull and necessary for our preservation: and therewithal denies
us the means, to attain by any institution and contention of spirit, to the
natural sufficiency of brute beasts: So that their brutish stupiditie, does
in all commodities exceed, whatsoever our divine intelligence can effect.
Verily, by this accoumpt, we might have just cause and great reason, to term
her a most injust and partial stepdame: But there is no such thing, our policy
is not so deformed and disordered. Nature has generally embraced all her
creatures: And there is not any, but she has amply stored with all necessary
means for the preservation of their being. For, the daily plaints, which I
often hear men make (when the license of their conceits, does sometimes raise
them above the clouds, and then headlong tumbling them down even to the
Antipodes) exclayming, that man is the only forsaken, and out cast creature,
naked on the bare earth, fast bound and swathed, having nothing to cover and
arm himself withal, but the spoil of others; whereas Nature has clad and
mantled all other creatures, some with shells, some with husks, with ^^ndes,
with hair, with wool, with stings, with bristles, with hides, with moss,
with feathers, with skales, with fle^ces, and with ^^ke, according as their
quality might need, or their condition require: And has fenced and a^^ed
them, with claws, with nails, with talents, with hoofes, with teeth, with
stings, and with horns, both to assail others, and to defend themselves: And
has more-over instructed them in every thing fit and requisite for them, as to
swim, to run, to creep, to fly, to roar, to bellow, and to sing: where as
man only (Oh silly-wretched man) can neither go, nor speak, nor shift, nor
feed himselefe, unless it be to whine and weep only, except he be taught.

Tum porro, puer vt saevis proiectus ab vndis Lucr. li. 5. 222

Navita, nudus humi iacet infans, indigus omni
Vitali auxilio, cum primum in luminis oras
Nexibus ex alvo matris natura profudit,
Vagituque locum lugubri complet, vt aequum est
Cui tantum in vita restet transire malorum:
At variae crescunt pecudes, armenta, feraeque,
Nec crepitacula eis opus est, nec cuiquam adhibenda est
Alma nutricis blanda atque infracta loquela:
Nec varias quaerunt vestes pro tempore caeli:
Denique non armis opus est, non moenibus altis
Queis sua tutentur, quando omnibus omnia large
Tellus ipsaparit, nature aque daedalarerum.
An infant, like a shipwreck ship-boy cast from seas,
Lies naked on the ground, and speechless, wanting all
The helps of vital spirit, when nature with small ease
Of throw's, to see first light, from her womb lets him fall,
Then, as is meet, with morn'full cries he fills the place,
For whom so many ils remain in his lives race.
But diverse herds of tame and wild beasts foreward spring,
Nor need they rattles, nor of Nurces cockring-kinde
The flattering broken speech their lulluby need sing.
Nor seek they diverse coats, as diverse seasons bind.
Lastly no armor need they, nor high-reared wall
Whereby to guard their own, since all things unto all
Worke-mastres nature does produce,
And the earth largely to their use.
Such complaints are false: There is a greater equality, and more uniform
relation in the policy of the world. Our skin is as sufficiently provided with
hardness against the injuries of the wether, as theirs: Witness diverse
Nations, which yet never knew the use of clothes. Our ancient Gauls were but
slightly apparelled, no more are the Irish-men, our neighbors, in so cold a
climate: Which we may better judge by our selves; for, all those parts of our
body, we are pleased to leave bare to wind and wether, are by experience
found able to endure it: If there be any weak part in us, which in likelihood
should seem to fear cold, it ought to be the stomach, where disgestion is
made: Our forefathers used to have it bare, and our Ladies (as dainty-nice as
they be) are many times seen to go open-breasted, as low as their navill. The
bandles and swathes about our children are no more necessary: And the mothers
of Lacedemonia, brought up theirs in all liberty and looseness of moving their
limbs without swathing or binding. Our whining, our puling and our weeping is
common to most creatures, and diverse of them are often seen to wail and groan
along time after their birth, for so much as it is a countenance fitting the
weakness wherein they feel themselves, As for the use of eating, and feeding,
it is in us, as in them, natural and without teaching.

Sentit enim vim quisque suam quam possit abuti. Ibid. 104.
For every one soone-vnderstanding is
Of his own strength, which he may use amiss.
Who will make question, that a child having attained the strength to feed
himself, could not quest for his meat, and shift for his drink? The earth
without labor or tilling does sufficiently produce and offer him as much as he
shall need. And if not at all times, no more does she unto beasts; witness
the provision, we see the Antes and other silly creatures to make against the
cold and barren seasons of the year. The nations, that have lately bin
discovered, so plenteously stored with all manner of natural meat and drink,
without care or labor, teach us, that bread is not our only food: And that
without toyling, our common mother nature, has with great plenty stored us
with whatsoever should be needful for us, yea, as it is most likely, more
ritchly and amply, then now adays she does, that we have added so much art
unto it:

Et tellus nitidas fruges vinetaque ^eta Lucr. l. 2. 1166.

Sponte sua primum mortalibus ipsa creauit,
Ipsa dedit dulces foetus, and pabula laeta,
Quae nunc vix nostro grandescunt aucta labor,
Conterimusque boves and vires agricolarum:
The earth it self at first of th'owne accord
Did men rich Vineyards, and clean fruit afford.
It gave sweet of springs food from sweeter soil
Which yet scarce greater grow for all our toil,
Yet tire therein we do,
Both Plough-mens strength and Oxen too.
The gluttonous excess, and intemperate lavishnesse of our appetite exceeding
all the inventions, we endeavor to find out, wherewith to glut and cloy the
same. As for arms and weapons, we have more, that be natural unto us, then
the greatest part of other beasts: We have more several motions of limbs, and
naturally, without teaching: We reap more serviceable use of them, then they
do: Those which are trained up to fight naked, are seen head long to cast
themselves into the same hazards and dangers, as we do. If some beasts excel
us in this advantage, we exceed many others: And the industry to enable, the
skill to fortify, and the wit to shelter and cover our body by artificial
means, we have it by a kind of natural instinct and teaching. Which to prove;
the Elephant does whet and sharpen histeeth, he uses in war (for he has
some he only uses for that purpose) which he heed fully spares, and never
puts them to other service: When Bulls prepare themselves to fight, they raise,
scatter, and with their feet, cast the dust about them: The wild Boar whets
his tuskes; when the Ichneumon is to grapple with the Crocodile, he walloweth
his body in the mire, then lets the same dry and harden upon him, which he
does so often, that at last the same becomes as hard and tough as any well
compact crust, which serves him in stead of a Cuirace. Why shall we not say,
that it is as natural for us to arm our selves with wood and iron? As for
speech, sure it is, that if it be not natural it is not necessary. I believe
nevertheless, that if a child, bred in some uncouth solitariness, far from
haunt of people (though it were a hard matter to make trial of it) would no
doubt have some kind of words to express, and speech to utter his conceits:
And it is not to be imagined, that nature has refused us that mean, and
barred us that help, which she has bestowed upon many and diverse other
creatures: For, what is that faculty, we see in them, when they seem to
complain, to rejoice, to call one unto another for help, and bid one another
to loving copulation (as commonly they do) by the use of their voice, but a
kind of speech? And shall not they speak among themselves, that speak and
utter their mind unto us, and we to them? How many ways speak we unto our
Dogs, and they seem to understand and answer us? With another language, and
with other names speak we unto, and call them, then we do our Birds, our
Hogs, our Oxen, our Horses, and such like; and according to their different
kinds we change our Idiome.

Cosi per entro loro schiera bruna
S'ammusa i'vna con l'altra formica,
Forse a spiar lor via, and lor fortuna.
So Ants amidst their sable-colored band
One with another mouth to mouth confer,
Hap'ly their way, or state to understand.
Me seems that Lactantius does not only attribute speech unto beasts, but
also laughing. And the same difference of tongues, which according to the
diversity of Countries is found amongst us, is also found amongst beasts of one
same kind. Aristotle to that purpose alleges the diverse calls or purres of
Partriges, according to the situation of their place of breeding:

-- variaeque volucres Lucr. l. 5. 10^^.

Long alias alio iaciunt in tempore voces,
Et partim mutant cum tempestatibus vna
Raucisones cantus.
And diverse birds, send-forth much diverse sounds
At diverse times, and partly change the grounds,
Of their hoarce-sounding song,
As seasons change along.
But it would be known, what language such a child should speak: and what*
some report by divination, has no great likelihood. And if against this
opinion, a man would allege unto me, that such as are naturally deaf, speak
not at all: I answer, that it is not only because they could not receive the
instruction of the world by their ears, but rather in as much as the sense of
hearing, whereof they are deprived, has some affinity with that of speaking,
both which with a natural kind of ligament or seame, hold and are fastened
together: In such sort, as what we speak, we must first speak it unto our
selves, and before we utter and send the same forth to strangers, we make it
inwardly to sound unto our ears. I have said all this, to maintain the
coherency and resemblance, that is in all humane things, and to bring us unto
the general throng. We are neither above nor under the rest: what ever is
under the coape of heaven (says the wise man) runs one law and follows
one fortune.

Indupedita suis fatalibus omnia vinclis. Ibid. 885.
All things enfolded are,
In fatal bonds as fits their share.
Some difference there is, there are orders and degrees; but all is under the
visage of one same nature.

-- res quaeque suo rit^ procedit, and omnes Ibid 932.
Foedere naturae cert^ discrimina servant. All things proceed in their course,
natures all
Keep difference, as in their league does fall.
Man must be forced, and marshalled within the listes of this policy.
Miserable man with all his wit cannot in effect go beyond it: he is embraced,
and engaged, and as other creatures of his rank are, he is subjected in like
bonds, and without any prerogative or essential pre-excellencie, what ever
Privilege he assume unto himself, he is of very mean condition. That which
is given by opinion or fantasy has neither body nor taste. And if it be so,
that he alone, above all other Creatures, has this liberty of imagination, and
this license of thoughts, which represent unto him, both what is and what is
not and what him pleases, false-hood and truth; it is an advantage bought at a
very high rate, and whereof he has little reason to glory: For thence springs
the chiefest source of all the mischiefs that oppressehim, as sin, sickness,
irresolution, trouble and despair. But to come to my purpose, I say therefore,
there is no likelihood, we should imagine, the beasts do the very same things
by a natural inclination and forced genuitie, which we do of our own
free will and industry. Of the very same effects we must conclude alike
faculties; and by the richest effects infer the noblest faculties, and
consequently acknowledge, that the same discourse and way, we hold in working,
the very same, or perhapps some other better, do beasts hold. Wherefore shall
we imagine that natural compulsion in them, that prove no such effect our
selves? Since it is more honorable to be addressed to act, and tied to work
orderly, by and through a natural and vnavoideable condition, and most
approaching to Divinity, then regularly to work and act, by, and through a
casual and rash liberty, and it is safer to leave the reigns of our conduct
unto nature, then unto our selves. The vanity of our presumption makes us
rather to be beholding, and as it were endebted unto our own strength, for our
sufficiency, then unto her liberality; and enrich other creatures with natural
gifts, and yield those unto them, that so we may en-noble and honor our
selves with gifts purchased: as me thinks, by a very simple humor: For, I
would prize graces, and value gifts, that were altogether mine own, and
natural unto me, as much as I would those, I had begged, and with a long
prentishippe, shifted. For, It lies not in our power to obtain a greater
commendation, then to be favored both of God and Nature. By that reason, the
Fox, which the inhabitants of Thrace use when they will attempt to march upon
the ice of some frozen river, and to that end let her go loose before them,
should we see her running along the river side, approach her ear close to the
ice, to listen whether by any far or near distance, she may hear the noise
or roaring of the water, running under the same, and according as she
perceives the ice thereby to be thick or thin, to go either forward or
backward; might not we lawfully judge, that the same discourse possesses her
head, as in like case it would ours? And that it is a kind of debating-reason
and consequence, drawn from natural sense* Whatsoever makes a noise moves*
whatsoever mooveth, is not frozen, whatsoever is not frozen, is liquide;
whatsoever is liquide, yields under any weight? For to impute that only to a
quicknes of the sense of hearing, without discourse or consequence, is but a
fond conceit, and cannot enter into my imagination. The like must be judged of
so many wiles, and inventions, wherewith beasts save themselves from the
snares, and escape the ba^ts we lay to entrap them. And if we will take hold of
any advantage tending to that purpose, that it is in our power to seize upon
them, to employ them to our service, and to use them at our pleasure; it is but
the same odds we have one upon another. To which purpose we have our slaves
or bondmen; and were not the Climacides, certain women in Syria, which
creeping on al four, upon the ground, served the Ladies in steed of footstoles
or ladders to get up into their coches? Where the greater part of free men for
very slight causes, abandon both their life and being, to the power of others.
The wives and Concubines of the Thracians strive and contend, which of them
shall be chosen, to be slain over her husbands or lovers tomb. Have tyrants
ever failed to find many men vowed to their devotion? Where some for an
over-plusse, or superergation have added this necessity, that they must
necessarily accompany them, as well in death, as in life. Whole hosts of men
have thus tied themselves unto their Captains. The tenor of the oath ministered
unto the scholars, that entered and were admitted the rude school of Roman
Gladiators, emplied these promises: which was this. We vow and swear, to
suffer our selves, to be enchained, beaten, burned and killed with the sword,
and endure whatsoever any lawful fenser ought to endure for his master: most
religiously engaging both our body and soul to the use of his service:

Ure meum si vis flamma caput, and pete ferr^ Tibul. l. 1. el 9. 21.

Corpus, and intorto verbere ^ergaseca.
Burnetyrant (if thou will) my head with fire, with sword*
My body strike, my back cut with hard-twisted cord
Was not this a very strict covenant? Yet were there some years ten thousand
found, that entered and lost themselves in those schools. When the Scithians
buried their King, they, strangled over his dead body, first, the chiefest and
best beloved of his Concubines, then his Cup Bearer, the Master of his horse,
his Chamberlain, the Usher of his Chamber, and his master Cook. And in his
anniversary killed fifty horse, mounted with fifty Pages, whom before, they
had slain with thrusting sharp stakes into their fondament, which going up
along their chine-bone, came out at their throat. Whom thus mounted; they set
in orderly ranckes about the tomb. The men that serve-vs, do it better
cheap, and for a less curious, and favorable entreating, then we use unto
birds, unto horses, and unto dogs. What carke and toil, apply we not our
selves unto for their sakes? Me thinks, the vilest and basest servants, will
never do that so willingly for their Masters, which Princes are glad to do
for their beasts. Diogenes seeing his kinsfolks, to take care how they might
redeem him out of thraldom; they are fools (said he) for, it is my Master,
that governs, keeps feeds and serves me: And such as keep or
entertain beasts, may rather say they serve them, than that they are served of
them. And if they have that natural greater magnanimity, that never Lion was
seen to subject himself unto another Lion, nor one Horse unto another Horse,
for want of heart. As we hunt after beasts, so Tigers and Lions hunt after
men, and have a like exercise one upon another: Hounds over the Hare; the Pike
or Luce over the Tench; the Swallows over the Grasse-hoppers, and the
Sparrow-hawkes over Blacke-birds and Larkes.

serpente ciconia pullos I^^e* sat. 14. 74

Nutrit, and inventa per devia rura lacerta,
Et leporem aut capream famulae Iovis, and generosae
In saltu venantur aves.
The storke her yong-ones feeds with serpents pray,
And lyzerts found some where out of the way.
Jove's servants-Eagles, hawks of nobler kind,
In forests hunt, a hare or kidde to find.
We share the fruits of our prey with our dogs and hawks, as a meede of
their pain and reward of their industry. As about Amphipolis in Thrace,
faulkners, and wild hawks divide their game equally: And as about the
Maeotide-fennes, if fishers do not very honestly leave behind them an even
share of their fishings for the Woolves that range about those coasts, they
presently run and tear their nets. And, as we have a kind of fishing,
rather managed by sleight, then strength, as that of hook and line about our
Angling-rods, so have beasts amongst themselves. Aristotle reports, that the
Cuttle-Fish, casts along got out of her throat, which like a line she sends
forth, and at her pleasure pulls it in again, according as she perceives
some little fish come near her, who being close-hidden in the gravel or
stronde, lets him nibble or bite the end of it, and then by little and
little draws it in unto her, until the Fish be so near, that with a sudden
leap she may catch-it. Touching strength, there is no Creature in the world,
open to so many wrongs and injuries as man: He need not a Whale, an Elephant,
nor a Crocodile, nor any such other wild beast, of which one alone is of power
to defeat a great number of men: seely lice are able to make Silla give over
his Dictatorship: The heart and life of a mighty and triumphant Emperor, is but
the breakfast of a seely little Worm. Why say we, that skill to discern, and
knowledge to make choice (gotten by art, and acquired by discourse) of things
good for this life, and availfull against sickness, and so distinguish of
those which are hurtful, and to know the virtue of Reubarbe, quality of Oak
fern, and operation of Polipodie, is only peculiar unto man* When we see the
Goats of Candia, being shot with an arrow, to choose from out a million of
simples, the herb Dittamy or Garden-ginger, and therewith cure themselves;
and the Tortoise having eaten of a Viper, immediately to seek for Origan or wild
Marjoram, to purge hirselfe: the Dragon to run and clear his eyes with fenel:
the Cranes with their bills to minister glisters of seawater unto themselves;
the Elephants to pull out, not only from themselves and their fellows, but also
from their masters (witness that of King Porus, whom Alexander defeated) such
j^v^lines or darts, as in fight have been thirled or shot at them* so nimbly
and so cunningly, as our selves could never do it so easily, and with so little
pain: Why say we not likewise that that is science, and prudence in them?
For, if to de pres^e them, some would allege, it is by the only instruction
and instinct of Nature, they know-it; that will not take the name of science,
and title of prudence from them; it is rather to ascribe it unto them, then to
us, for the honor of so assured a schoole-mistris. Chrysippus, albeit in other
things as disdainful a judge of the condition of beasts, as any other
Philosopher, considering the earnest movings of the dog, who coming into a
path, that led three several ways, in search or quest of his Master, whom he
had lost, or in pursuit of some prey, that has escaped him, goes senting
first one way, and then another, and having assured himself of two, because he
finds not the tracke of what he hunteth-for, without more ado, furiously
betakes himself to the third; he is enforced to confess, that such a dog
must necessarily discourse thus with himself. I have followed my Masters
footing hit her to, he must of necessity pass by one of these three ways; it
is neither this nor that, then consequently he is gone this other. And by this
conclusion or discourse assuring himself, coming to the third path, he
vsetli his sense no more, nor soundes-it any longer, but by the power of reason
suffers himself violently to be carried through-it. This mere logical trick,
and this use of divided and conjoined propositions, and of the sufficient
numbering of parts: Is it not as good, that the dog know it by himself, as by
Trapezuntius his logic? Yet are not beasts altogether unapt to be instructed
after our manner. We teach Blacke-birds, Starlines, Ravens, Plots, and Pasots to
chat; and that facility we perceive in them, to lend us their voice so supple,
and th^^^ wind so tractable, that so we may frame and bring-it to a certain
number of letters and silables, witnesses, they have a kind of inward reason,
which makes them so docile, and willing to learn. I think every man is cloid
and wearied^, with seeing so many apish and mimmike tricks, that juglers teach
their Dogs, as the dances, where they miss not one eadence of the sounds or
notes they hear: Mark but the diverse turnings, and several kinds of motions,
which by the commandment of their bare words they make them perform: But I
wonder not a little at the effect, which is ordinary amongst us; and that is,
the dogs which blind men use, both in City and Country: I have observed how
suddenly they will stop when they come before some doors, where they are wont
to receive alms; how carefully they will avoyde the shocke of Carts and
Coaches, even when they have room enough to pass by them selves. I have seen
some, going along a Towne-ditch, leave a plain and even path, and take a
worse, that so they might draw-their Master from the ditch. How could a man
make the dog conceive, his charge was only to look to his masters safety, and
for his service ^o despise his own commodity and good? And how should he have
the knowledge, that such a path would be broad enough for him, but not for a
blind man? Can all this be conceived without reason? We must not forget what
Plutarke affirms to have seen a dog in Rome do, before the Emperor
Vespasian the father, in the Theater of Marcellus. This Dog served a jugler,
who was to play a fiction of many faces, and sundry countenances, there he also
was to act a part. Amongst other things, he was for a long while to counterfeit
and feign himself dead, because he had eaten of a certain drugge: having
swallowed a piece of bread, which was supposed to be the drug, he began
suddenly to stagger and shake, as if he had been giddie, then stretching and
laying himself along, as stiff as if he were starke-dead, suffered himself
to be dragged and haled from one place to another, according to the subject and
plot of the play, and when he knew his time, first he began fair and softly to
stir, as if he were rouzed out of a dead slumber, then lifting up his head,
he looked and stared so ghastly, that all the bystanders were amazed. The
Oxen, which in the Kings gardens of Susa were taught to water them, and to draw
water out of deep Wells, turned certain great wheels, to which were fastened
great buckets (as in many places of Languedoke is commonly seen) and being
every one appointed to draw just a hundred turns a day, they were so
accustomed to that number, as it was impossible by any compulsion to make them
draw one more, which task ended they would suddenly stop. We are grown
striplings before we can tell a hundred; and many Nations have lately been
discovered, that never knew what numbers meant. More discourse is required to
teach others, then to be taught. And omitting what Democritus judged and
prooved, which is, that beasts have instructed us in most of our Arts: As the
Spider to weave and sew, the Swollow to build, the Swan, and the Nightingale
music, and diverse beasts, by imitating them, the Art of Physic: Aristotle
is of opinion, that Nightingales teach their yoong-ons to sing, wherein they
employ both long time and much care: whence it follows, that those which we
keep tame in Cages and have not had leisure to go to their Parents school,
lose much grace in their singing. Whereby we may conclude, they are much
amended by discipline and study. And amongst those that run wild, their song
is not all one, nor alike. Each one has learnt either better or worse,
according to his capacity. And so jealous are they in their prentise-ship, that
to excel one another, they will so stoutly contend for the mastery, that many
times, such as are vanquished die; their wind and strength sooner failing then
their voice. The yoong-ones will very sadly sit recording their lesson, and are
often seen laboring how to imitate certain songnotes: The Scholar listneth
attentively to his Masters Lesson, and carefully yields account of it; now
one and then another shall hold his peace: Mark but how they endeavor to amend
their faults, and how the elder striveth to reproove the yoongest. Arrius
protests to have seen an Elephant, who on every thigh having a Cimball
hanging, and one fastened to his truncke, at the found of which, all other
Elephants danced in a round, now rising aloft, then lowting full low at
certain cadences, even as the instrument directed them, and was much delighted
with the harmony. In the great shows of Rome, Elephants were ordinarily seen,
taught to moove and dance at the sound of a voice, certain dances, wherein
were many strange shifts, enter-changes, caprings, and cadences, very hard to
be learned. Some have been noted to konne and practice their lessons, using
much study and care, as being loath to be chidden and beaten of their masters.
But the tale of the Piot is very strange, which Plutarke confidently witnesses
to have seen: This Iay was in a Barbers shop of Rome, and was admirable in
counterfaiting with her voice whatsoever she heard: It fortuned one day, that
certain Trumpeters stayed before this shop, and there sounded a good while;
and being gone, all that day, and the next after, the Piot began to be very
sad, silent, and melancholy, whereat all men marvelled, and surmized that the
noise or clang of the Trumpets had thus affrighted and dizzied her, and that
with her hearing she had also lost her voice. But at last they found, she was
but in a deep study, and dumpish retracting into her self, exercising her
mind, and preparing her voice, to represent the sound, and express the noise
of the Trumpets she had heard: And the first voice she uttered was that,
wherein she perfectly expressed their strains, their closes, and their
changes: having by her new Prentiship altogether quit, and as it were, scorned
what ever she could prattle before. I will not omit to allege another
example of a Dog, which Plutarke also says to have seen (as for any order
or method, I know very well I do but confound it, which I observe no more in
ranging these examples, than I do in all the rest of my business) who being
in a ship, noted that this Dog was in great perplexity how to get some Oil
out of a deep Pitcher, which by reason of it is narrow mouth, he could not
reach with his tongue, got him presently some Pibble-stones, and put so many
into the Jar, that he made the Oil come up so near the brimme, as he could
easily reach and lick some. And what is that but the effect of a very subtle
spirit? It is reported, that the Ravens of Barbary will do the like, when the
water they would drink is too low. This action does somewhat resemble that,
which Iuba a King of that Nation relates of their Elephants; that when through
the wiles of those who chase them, any one chances to fall into certain deep
pittes, which they prepare for them, and to deceive them, they cover over with
reeds, shrubs, and boughs, his fellows will speedily with all diligence
bring great store of stones and pieces of timber, that so they may help to
recover him out again. But this beast has in many other effects, such
affinity with man's sufficiency, that would I particularly trace out what
experience has taught, I should easily get an affirmation of what I so
ordinarily maintain, which is, that there is more difference found between
such and such a man, than between such a beast and such a man. An Elephants
keeper in a private house of Syria, was wont every meal to steal away half
of the allowance which was allotted him; it fortuned on a day, his master would
needs feed him himself, and having poured that just measure of barley, which
for his allowance he had prescribed him, into his manger: the Elephant
sternely eying his master, with his truncke divided the provender in two equal
parts, and laid the one a side, by which he declared the wrong his keeper did
him. An other having a keeper, who to increase the measure of his provender,
was wont to mingle stones with it, came one day to the pot which with meat in
it for his keepers dinner was seething over the fire, and filled it up with
asnes. These are but particular effects: But that which all the world has
seen, and all men know, which is, that in all the armies that came out of the
East, their chiefest strength consisted in their Elephants by whom they reaped,
without comparison, far greater effects, than now adays we do by our great
Ordonance, which in a manner holds their place in a ranged battle (such as have
any knowledge in ancient Histories may easily guess it to be true)

-- si quidem Tyrio servire solebant ^^^. sat. 12. 107

Anibalt, and nostris ducibus, regique Molosso
Horum maiores, and dorso far cohortes,
Partem aliquam belli, and euntem in praelia turmam.
Their elders used great Hannibal to steed
Our Leaders, and Molossian Kings at need,
And on their back to bear strong-guarding Knights,
Part of the war, and troops addressed to fights.
A man must needs rest assured of the confidence they had in these beasts, and
of their discourse, yielding the front of a battle unto them; where the least
stay they could have made, by reason of the hugeness and weight of their
bodies, and the least amazement that might have made them turn head upon their
own men, had bin sufficient to lose all. And few examples have been noted,
that ever it fortuned they turned upon their own troops, whereas we headlong
throng one upon another, and so are put to rowt: They had charge given them,
not only of one simple mooving, but of many and several parts in the combat:
As the Spaniards did to their dogs in their new conquest of the Iudias; to
whom they gave wages, and imparted their booties; which beasts showed as much
dexterity in pursuing, and judgment in staying their victory, in charging,
or retreating, and as occasion served in distinguishing their friends from
their enemies, as they did earnestness and eagernes: we rather admire and
consider strange than common things: without which I should never so long have
ammused my self about this tedious catalogue. For, in my judgment he that
shall nearly check, what we ordinarily see in those beasts that live amongst
us, shall in them find as wonderful effects, as those, which with so much
toil are collected in far countries and passed ages. It is one same nature,
which still does keep her course. He that thoroughly should judge her present
estate, might safely conclude, both what shall happen, and what is past. I have
seen amongst us, men brought by sea from distant countries, whose language,
because we could in no wise understand, and that their fashions, their
countenance, and their clothes did altogether differ from ours; who of us did
not deem them brutish and savage? who did not impute their mutenesse unto
stupiditie or beastlines, and to see them ignorant of the French tongue, of our
kissing the hands, of our low-lowting courtesies, of our behavior and
carriage, by which, without contradiction, humane nature ought to take her
pattern? Whatsoever seems strange unto us, and we understand not, we blame
and condemn. The like befalls us in our judging of beasts. They have diverse
qualities, which somewhat simbolize with ours: from which, we may comparatively
draw some conjecture, but of such as are peculiar unto them, what know we what
they are? Horses, Dogs, Oxen, Sheep, Birds, and the greater number of
sensitive cratures that live amongst us, know our voice, and by it suffer
themselves to be directed. So did the Lamprey which Crassus had, and came to
him when he called it; so do the Eeles that breed in Arethusaes fountain. And
my self have seen some fish-pondes, where, at a certain cry of those that
kept them, the fish would presently come to shore, where they were wont to be
fed.

-- nomen habent, and ad magistri Mart. ^. 4. epig. 30. 6.
Vocem quisque sui venit citatus. They have their proper names, and every one
Comes at his masters voice, as called upon
By which we may judge, and conclude, that Elephants have some apprehension of
religion, for so much as after diverse washings and purifications, they are seen
to lift up their truncke, as we do our arms, and at certain hours of the
day, without any instruction, of their own accord, holding their eyes fixed
toward the Sunne-rising, fall into a long meditating contemplation: yet,
because we see no such appearance in other beasts, may we righly conclude,
that they are altogether void of religion, and may not take that in payment,
which is hidden from us. As we perceive something in that action, which the
Philosopher Cleanthes well observed, because it somewhat draws near unto
ours. He saw (as himself reports) a company of Emmets go from their nest,
bearing amongst them the body of a dead Ant, toward another Emmets nest, from
which many other Ants came, as it were to meet them by the way to parley with
them, who after they had continued together a while, they which came last,
returned back, to consult (as you may imagine) with their fellow-citizens, and
because they could hardly come to any capitulation; they made two or three
voyages to and fro: In the end, the last come, brought unto the other a worm
from their habitation, as for a ransom of the dead, which worm the first
company took upon their backs, and carried it home, leaving the dead body
unto the other. Lo here the interpretation that Cleanthes gave it: Witnessing
thereby, that those creatures which have no voice at all, have nevertheless
mutual commerce, and enterchangeable communication, whereof if we be not
partakers, it is only our fault; and therefore do we fondly to censure it. And
they yet produce diverse other effects, far surpassing our capacity, and so
far out of the reach of our imitation, that even our thoughts are unable to
conceive them. Many hold opinion, that in the last and famous sea fight, which
Antonie lost against Augustus, his Admirall-gally was in her course stayed by
that little fish, the Latins call Remora, and the English a Sucke-stone, whose
property is, to stay any ship he can fasten himself unto. And the Emperor
Caligula, sailing with a great fleet along the coast of Romania, his own
Gally was suddenly stayed by such a fish, which he caused to be taken sticking
fast to the keele moodily raging, that so little a creature had the power to
force both sea and wind, and the violence of all his oars, only with her
bill sticking to his Gally (for it is a kind of shellfish) and was much more
amazed when he perceived the fish, being brought aboard his ship, to have no
longer that powerful virtue, which it had, being in the Sea. A certain
Citizen of Cyzicum, whilom purchased unto himself the reputation to be an
excellent Mathematitian, because he had learned the quality of the Hedge-hogge,
whose property is to build his hole or den, open diverse ways, and toward
several winds, and foreseeing rising storms, he presently stops the
holes that way; which thing the foresaid Citizen heedfully observing, would in
the City foretell any future storm, and what wind should blow. The Cameleon
takes the color of the place wherein he is. The fish called a Pourcontrell,
or Manie-feete, changes himself into what color he lists, as occasion
offers it self; that so he may hide himself from what he fears, and catch
what he seeks for. In the Camelion it is a change proceeding of passion, but
in the Pourcontrell a change in action; we our selves do often change our
color, and altar our countenance, through sudden fear, choler, shame, and
such like violent passions, which are wont to alter the hew of our faces: but
it is by the effect of sufferance, as in the Cameleon. The jaundise has power
to make us yelow, but it is not in the disposition of our wills. The effects we
perceive in other creatures, greater than ours, witness some more excellent
faculty in them, which is concealed from us; as it is to be supposed, diverse
others of their conditions and forces are, whereof no apperance or knowledge
comes to us. Of all former praedictions, the ancientest and most certain
were such as were drawn from the flight of birds: we have nothing equal unto
it, nor so admirable. The rule of fluttering, and order of shaking their wings,
by which they conjecture the consequences of things to ensue, must necessarily
be directed to so noble an operation by some excellent and supernatural mean:
For, it is a wresting of the letter, to attribute so wondrous effects, to any
natural decree, without the knowledge, consent, or discourse of him, that
causes and produces them, and is a most false opinion: Which to prove, the
Torpedo or Cramp-fish has the property to benumme and astonish, not only the
limbs of those that touch it, but also theirs, that with any long pole or
fishing line touch any part thereof, she does transmit and convey a kind of
heavy numming into the hands of those that stir or handle the same:
Moreover, it is averred, that if any matter be cast upon them, the astonishment
is sensibly felt to gain upward until it come to the hands, and even through
the water it astonisheth the feeling-sence. Is not this a wonderful power? Yet
is it not altogether unprofitable for the Cramp-fish, she both knows and makes
use of it: for to catch prey she pursues, she is seen to hide hirselfe under
the mudde, that, other fishes swimming over her, stricken and benumbed with her
exceeding coldness, may fall into her claws. The Cranes, Swallows, and other
wandering birds, changing their abode, according to the seasons of the year,
show evidently the knowledge they have of their fore divining faculty, and
often put the same in use. Hunters assure us, that to choose the best dog, and
which they purpose to keep from our a litter of other young whelps, there is
no better mean than the damme hirselfe: for, if they be remooved from out
their kennell, him that she first brings th^ther again, shall always prove
the best; or if one but encompasse her kennell with fire, look which of her
whelps she first seeks to save, is undoubtedly the best: whereby it
appears, they have a certain use of Prognosticating, that we have not; or
else some hidden virtue, to judge of their young ones, different and more
lively then ours. The manner of all beasts breeding, engendering, nourishing,
working, mooving, living and dying, being so near to ours, what ever we
abridge from their mooving causes, and add to our condition above theirs, can
no way depart from our reasons discourse. For a regiment of our health,
Phisitious propose the example of beasts manner of life and proceeding unto us:
for this common saying is always in the peoples mouth:

Tenez chauds les pieds. and la test, Ioub. err. p^p. pur. 2. page 140

Au demeurant vivez en best.
Keep warm (it is meet) thy head and feet:
In all the rest, live like a beast.
Generation is the chiefest natural action: we have a certain disposition of
some members, fittest for that purpose; nevertheless, they bid us range our
selves unto a brutish situation and disposition, as most effectual:

-- more ferarum, Lucr. l. 4. 1256

Quadrupedumque magis ritu, plerumque putantur
Concipere vxores: quia sic loca sumere possunt,
Pectoribus positis, sublatis semina lumbis.
And reject those indiscreete and insolent motions, which women have so
luxuriously found out, as hurtful: conforming them to the example and use of
beasts of their sex, as more modest and considerate.

Nam mulier prohibet se concipere, at que repugnat, Ibed. 1260.

Clunib^s ipsa viri Venerem si laet a retractet,
Atque exessat^ ciet omni pectore fluctus,
Eij^it enim sulci recta regione viaque
Vomerem, atque locis avert it ^eminis ictum.
If it be justice to give every one his due, beasts which serve, love, and
defend their benefactors, pursue and outrage strangers, and such as offend
them, by so doing they represent some show of our justice, as also in reserving
a high kind of equality in dispensing of what they have to their yoong-ones.
Touching friendship, without all comparison, they profess it more lively and
show it more constantly, then men. Hircanus a dog of Lysimachus the king, his
master being dead, without eating or drinking would never come from off his
bed, and when the dead corpse was remooved thence, he followed it, and lastly
flung himself into the fire, where his master was burned. As did also the
dog of one called Pyrrhus, who after he was dead, would never budge from his
masters couch, and when he was remooved, suffered himself to be carried away
with him, and at last flung himself into the fire wherein his master was
consumed. There are certain inclinations of affection, which without counsel
of reason arise sometimes in us, proceeding of a casual temerity, which some
call Sympathic: beasts as well as men are capable of it. We see horses take a
kind of acquaintance one of another, so that often, traveling by the
highway, or feeding together, we have much ado to keep them asunder, we see
them bend and apply their affections to some of their fellows colors, as if
it were upon a certain visage; and when they meet with any such, with signs
of joy, and demonstration of good will, to join and accost them, and to hate
and shun some other forms and colors. Beasts, as well as we, have choice
in their loves, and are very nice in choosing of their mates. They are not
altogether void of our extreme and vnappesable jealousies. Lustful desires
are either natural, and necessary, as eating and drinking; or else natural and
not necessary, as the acquaintance of males and females: or else neither
necessary nor natural: Of this last kind are almost all men's: For, they are
all superfluous and artificial. It is wonderful to see with how little,
nature will be satisfied, and how little she has left for us to be desired.
The preparations in our Kitchins, do nothing at all concern her laws. The
Stoikes say, that a man might very well sustain himself with one Olivea day.
The delicacy of our wines, is no part of her lesson, no more is the surcharge
and relishing, which we add unto our letcherous appetites.

-- neque illa Hor. ser. li 1. sar. 2 30.
Magno prognatum deposcit consule cunnum. These strange lustful longings,
which the ignorance of good, and a false opinion have possessed us with, are in
number so infinite, that in a manner they expel all those which are natural:
even as if there were so many strangers in a City, that should either banisn
and expel all the natural inhabitants thereof, or utterly suppress their
ancient power and authority, and absolutely usurping the same, take possession
of it. Brute beasts are much more regulate then we; and with more moderation
contain themselves within the compass, which nature has prescribed them: yet
not so exactly, but that they have some coherency with our riotous
licenciousnesse. And even as there have been found certain furious longings
and unnatural desires, which have provoked men unto the love of beasts, so
have diverse times some of them been drawn to love us, and are possessed with
monstrous affections from one kind to another: witness the Elephant, that in
the love of an hearb-wife, in the city of Alexandria, was corivall with
Aristophanes, the Grammarian; who in all offices pertaining to an earnest woer
and passionate suter, yielded nothing unto him: For, walking through the
Fruite-market, he would here and there snatch up some with his truncke, and
carry them unto her: as near as might be he would never loose the sight of
her: and now and then over her band put his truncke into her bosom, and feel
her breasts. They also report of a Dragon, that was exceedingly in love with a
young maiden; and of a Goose in the City of Asope, which dearly loved a young
child: also of a Ram that belonged to the Musician Glausia. Do we not daily
see Munkies ragingly in love with women, and furiously to pursue them? And
certain other beasts given to love the males of their own sex? Oppianus and
others report some examples, to show the reverence and manifest the awe, some
beasts in their marriages, bear unto their kindred: but experience makes us
often see the contrary:

-- -- nec habetur turpe iuvencae Orid. Metam. lib. 10. 325.

Far patrem tergo: fit equo sua filia coniux:
Quasque creavit, init pecudes caper: ipsaque cuius
Semine concepta est, ex illo concipit ales
To bear her Sire the Heifer shameth not:
The Horse takes his own Fillies maidenhead:
The Goat gets them with young, whom he begot:
Birds breed by them, by whom themselves were bred,
Touching a subtle pranke and witty trick, is there any so famous as that of
Thales the Philosophers Mule, which, laden with salt, passing through a River
chanced to stumble, so that the sacks she carried were all wet, and perceiving
the salt (because the water had melted it) to grow lighter, ceased not, as soon
as she came near any water, together with her load to plunge hirselfe
therein, until her master, being aware of her craft, commanded her to be laden
with wool, which being wet became heavier; the Mule finding hirselfe deceived,
used her former policy no more. There are many of them, that lively represent
the visage of our avarice, who with a greedy kind of desire endeavor to
surprise whatsoever comes within their reach, and though they reap no
commodity, nor have any use of it, to hide the same very curiously. As for
husbandry, they exceed us, not only in foresight to spare, and gather
together for times to come, but have also many parts of the skill belonging
there unto. As the Ants, when they perceive their corn to grow mustie, and
grain to be sour, for fear it should rot and putrify, spread the same
abroad before their neastes, that so it may air and dry. But the caution they
use in gnawing, and prevention they employ in paring their grains of wheat,
is beyond all imagination of man's wit: Because wheat does not always keep
dry nor wholesome, but moisten, melt and dissolve into a kind of whey, namely
when it begins to bud, fearing it should turn to seed, and loose the
nature of a storehouse, for their sustenance, they part and gnawe-off the end
whereat it wonts to bud. As for war, which is the greatest and most glorious
of all humane actions, I would feign know, if we will use it for an argument of
some prerogative, or otherwise for a testimony of our imbecilitie and
imperfection, as in truth, the science we use to defeat and kill one another,
to spoil and utterly to overthrow our own kind, it seems, it has not much
to make it self to be wished-for in beasts, that have it not.

-- quando leoni Iuven. sat. 1^. 160.

Fortioreripuit vitam leo, quo nemore vnquam
Expiravit aper maioris dentibus apri?
When has a greater Lion damnifide
A lions life? in what wood ever di'de,
A bore by tusks and gore,
Of any greater bore?
Yet are not they altogether exempted from it: witness the furious encounters
of Bees, and the hostile enterprises of the Princes and Leaders of the two
contrary Armies.

-- saepe duobus Virg. Georg. l. 4. 67.

Regibus incessit magno discordia motu,
Continuoque animos vulgi and trepidantia bello
Corda licet long praesciscere. --
Oft-times twixt two no great Kings great dissension
With much ado does set them at contention;
The vulgar minds strait may you see from far,
And hearts that tremble at the thought of war.
I nevr mark this divine description, but me thinks I read humane
foolishness and wordly vanity painted in it. For, these motions of war,
which out of their horror and astonishent breed this tempest of cries, and
clang of sounds in us:

Fulgur vbi ad caelumse tollit, totaque circum Iuer. l. 2. 326.

Aere renidescit tellus, subterque virum vi
Excitur pedibus sonitus, clamoreque montes
Icti reiectant voces ad sider a mundi:
Where lightning raises it self to the skies,
The earth shines round with armor, soundes do rise
By men's force under feere, wounded with noise
The hills to heaven reverberate their voice.
This horror-causing array of so many thousands of armed men, so great fury,
earnest fervor, and undaunted courage, it would make one laugh to see by how
many vain occasions it is raised and set on fire, and by what light means it
is again suppressed and extinct.

-- Paridis propter narratur amorem Hor. l. 1. epi. 2. ^.
Grae^ta Barbariediro collisa duello. For Paris lustful love (as Stories tell)
All Greece to direful war with Asia fell:
The hatred of one man, a spite, a pleasure, a familiar suspect, or a
jealousy; causes, which ought not to moove two scolding fish-wives to scratch
one another, is the soul and motive of all this hurly-burly. Shall we believe
them that are the principal authors and causes thereof? Let us but hearken unto
the greatest and most victitorious Emperor, and the mightiest that ever was,
how pleasantly he laughs, and wittily he plays, at so many battles and bloody
fights, hazarded both by sea and land, at the blood and lives of five hundred
thousand souls which followed his fortune, and the strength and riches of two
parts of the world consumed and drawn dry for the service of his enterprise:

Quod futuit Glaphyran Antonius, hanc mihi poenam Mart. l. 11. epig. 21.

Fulvia constituit, se quoqe vtifutuam:
Fulviam ego vtfutuam? quid si me Manius oret
Paedicem, faciam? non puto, si sapiam.
Aut futue, aut pugnemu^ait: quid si mihivita
Charior est ipsa mentula? Signa canant.
(I use my Latin somewhat boldly, but it is with that leave which yon have
given me,) This vaste huge body has so many faces and several motion, which
seem to threat both heaven and earth.

Quam multi Lybico volvuntur marmore fluctus Virg Ae^. l. 7. 717.

Saevus vbi Orion hyberu^s conditur vndis:
Velcum sole novo densae torrentur arist^,
Aut Hermi campo, aut Lyciae flaventibus arvis,
Scuta sonant, pulsuque pedum tremit excita tellus.
As many waves, as roll in Affricke marble-soundes,
When fierce Oryon hides in Winter waves his head:
Or when thicke-eares of Corn are parch't by Sun new-spredde.
In Hermus fruitful fields, or Lycaees yellow grounds,
With noise of shields and feet, the trembling earth so sounds.
This many-headed, divers-armed, and furiously-raging-monster, is man; wretched
weak and miserable man: whom if you consider well, what is he, but a crawling,
and ever-moving Antes-neast^

It nigrum campis agmen: -- Virg. Aen. l. 4. 404.
The sable-coloured band,
Marches along the Land.
A gust of contrary winds, the croking of a flight of Ravens, the false pase
of a Horse, the casual flight of an Eagle, a dream, a sudden voice, a false
sign, a mornings mist, an evening fogge, are enough to overthrow, sufficient
to overwhelme and able to pull him to the ground. Let the Sun but shine hot
upon his face, he faintes and swelters with heat: Cast but a little dust in
his eyes, as to the Bees mentioned by our Poet, all our ensigns, all our
legions, yea great Pompey himself in the forefront of them is overthrown and
put to route (For as I remember it was he whom Sertorius vanquished in Spain,
with all those goodly arms.) This also served Eumenes against Antigonus, and
Surena against Crassus:

Hi motus animorum, atque haec certamina tanta, Virg. Georg. li. 4 36.

Pulveris exigui tactu compressaquiescent.
These stomake-motions, these contentions great,
Clam'd with a little dust, strait loose their heat,
Let-vs but uncouple some of our ordinary flies, and let loose a few gnats
amongst them, they shall have both the force to scatter, and courage to consume
him. The Portugalls not long since beleagring the City of Tamly, in the
territory of Xiatine, the inhabitants thereof, brought great store of
Hives,)whereof they have plenty) upon their walls: And with fire drove them so
forcible upon their enemies, who as unable to abide their assaults, and endure
their stingings, left their enterprise. Thus by this new kind of help was the
liberty of the Town gained, and victory purchased; with so happy success,
that in their retreating, there was not one townes-man found wanting. The
souls of Emperors and Cobblers are all cast in one same mould. Considering the
importance of Princes actions, and their weight, we persuade our selves, they
are brought forth by some as weighty and important causes; we are deceived:
They are moved, stirred and remooved in their motions, by the same springs and
wards, that we are in ours. The same reason that makes us chide and braule,
and fall out with any of our neighbors, causes a war to follow between
Princes; The same reason that makes us whip or beat a lackey, makes a Prince
(if he apprehend it) to spoil and waste a whole Province. They have as easy
a will as we, but they can do much more. Alike desires perturbe both a
skinne-worme, and an Elephant. Thouching trust and faithfulness there is no
creature in the world so treacherous as man. Our histories report the earnest
pursuit and sharp chase, that some Dogs have made for the death of their
masters. King Pirrhus finding a Dog, that watched a dead man, and understanding
he had done so three days and nights together, commanded the corpse to be
enterred, and took the Dog along with him. It fortuned one day (as Pirrhus was
survaying the General Musters of his Army) the Dog perceiving in that
multitude, the man who had murdered his master, loud-barking, and with great
rage ran furiously upon him; by which signs he furthered and procured his
masters revenge, which by way of justice, was shortly executed. Even so did
the Dog belonging to Hesiodus, surnamed the wise, having convicted the
children of Canister of Naupactus, of the murder committed on his Masters
person. Another Dog being appointed to watch a Temple in Athens, having
perceived a sacrelegious thief, to carry away the fairest jewels therein,
barked at him so long as he was able, and seeing he could not awaken the
Sextons or Temple-keepers, followed the thief, whither-soever he went;
daie-light being come, he kept himself a loof-off, but never lost the sight of
him: if he offered him meat, he utterly refused it; but if any passenger
chanced to come by, on them he fawned, with waging his tail, and took
whatever they offered him; If the thief stayed to rest himself, he also
stayed in the same place: The news of this Dog being come to the
Temple-keepers, they as they went along, enquiring of the Dogs hair and
color, pursued his tracke so long, that at last they found both the Dog and
the thief in the City of Cromyon, whom they brought back to Athens, where
for his offense he was severely punished. And the judges in acknowledgement of
the Dogs good office, at the Cities charge appointed him for his sustenance a
certain daily measure of Corn, and enjoined the Priests of the Temple,
carefully to look unto him. Plutarke affirms this story to be most true,
and to have happened in his time. Touching gratitude and thankfulness, (for me
thinks we have need to further this word greatly) this only example shall
suffice, of which Appion reports to have been aspectator himself. One day
(says he) that the Senate of Rome, (to please and recreate the common people)
caused a great number of wild beasts to be baited, namely huge great Lions, it
so fortuned, that there was one amongst the rest, who by reason of his furious
and stately carriage, of his unmatched strength, of his great limbs, and of
his loud, and terror-causing roaring, drew all bystanders eyes to gaze upon
him. Amongst other slaves, that in sight of all the people were presented to
encounter with these beasts, there chanced to be one Androdus of Dacia, who
belonged unto a Roman Lord, who had been Consul. This huge Lion, having eyed
him a far off, first made a sudden stop, as stricken into a kind of
admiration, then with a mild and gentle countenance, as if he would willingly
have taken acquaintance of him, fair and softly approached unto him: Which
done, and resting, assured he was the man he took him for, begun fawningly to
wagge his tail, as dogs do that fawn upon their new-sound masters, and
lick the poor and miserable slaves hands and thighs, who through fear was
almost out of his wits and half dead. Androdus at last taking heart of grace;
and by reason of the Lions mildness having rouzed up his spirits, and wishly
fixing his eyes upon him, to see whether he could call him to remembrance; it
was to all beholders a singular pleasure to observe the love, the joy, and
blandishments, each endeavored to enter-shew one another. Whereat the people
raising a loud cry, and by their shouting and clapping of hands seeming to be
much pleased; the Emperor willed the slave to be brought before him, as
desirous to understand of him the cause of so strange and seld-seene an
accident: Who related this new, and wonderful story unto him.

My master (said he) being Proconsull in Africa, for so much as he caused me
every day to be most cruelly beaten, and held me in so rigorous bondage, I was
constrained, as being weary of my life, to run away: And safely to escape from
so eminent a person, and who had so great authority in the Country, I thought
it best to get me into the desert, and most unfrequented wildernesses of that
region, with a full resolution, if I could not compass the means to sustain
my self, to find one way or other, with violence to make my self away. One
day, the Sun about noone-tide being extremely hot, and the scorching heat
thereof intolerable, I fortuned to come unto a wild vnhanted cave, hidden
amongst crags, and almost inaccessible, and where I imagined no footing had
ever been; therein I hid my self: I had not long been there, but in comes this
Lion, with one of his paws sore hurt, and bloody-goared, wailing for the
smart, and groaning for the pain he felt; at whose arrival, I was much
dismaide, but he seeing me lie close-cowring in a corner of his den, gently
made his approaches unto me, holding forth his goared paw toward me, and seemed
with showing the same humbly to sue, and suppliantly to beg for help at my
hands. I, moved with ruth, taking it into my hand, pulled out a great splint,
which was gotten into-it, and shakingoff all fear, first I wrung and crushed
his sore, and caused the filth and matter, which therein was gathered, to come
forth; then, as gently as for my heart I could, I cleansed, wiped, and dried the
same. He feeling some ease in his grief, and his pain to cease, still holding
his foot between my hands, began to sleep and take some rest. Thence forward
he and I lived together, the full space of three years in his den, with such
meat as he shifted-for: For, what beasts he killed, or what prey soever he
took, he ever brought home the better part, and shared-it with me, which for
want of fire, I roasted in the Sun, and therewith nourished my self all that
while. But at last wearied with this kind of brutish life, the Lion being one
day gone to purchase his wonted pray, I left the place, hoping to mend my
fortunes, and having wandered up and down three days, I was at last taken by
certain Soldiers, which from Africa brought me into this City to my Master
again, who immediately condemned me to death, and to be devoured by wild
beasts. And as I now perceive, the same Lion was also shortly after taken, who
as you see has now required me of the good turn I did him, and the health
which by my means he recoved. Behold here the history, Androdus reported unto
the Emperor, which after he caused to be declared unto all the people, at
whose general request, he was forthwith set at liberty, and quit of his
punishment, and by the common consent of all, had the Lion bestowed upon him.
Appion says further, that Androdus was daily seen to lead the Lion up and
down the streets of Rome, tied only with a little twine, and walking from
tavern to tavern, received such money as was given him, who would gently
suffer himself to be handled, touched, decked, and strowed with flowers, all
over and over, many saying when they met him: yonder is the Lion that is the
man's host, and yonder is the man that is the Lions Physician. We often mourn
and weep, for the loss of those beasts we love, so do they many times for
the loss of us.

Post bellator equus positis insignibus Aethon. Virg. Aen. li. 11. 89.

It lacrimans, guttisque humectat grandibus ora.
Next Aethon horse of war, all ornaments laid down,
Goes weeping, with great drops bedewe's his cheeks a down.
As some of our nations have wives in common, and some in several, each man
keeping himself to his own; so have some beasts; yet some there are, that
observe their marriages, with as great respect as we do ours. Touching the
mutual society, and reciprocal confederation, which they devise amongst
themselves, that so they may be fast combined together, and in times of need
help one another, it is apparent, that if Oxen, Hogs, and other beasts being
hurt by us, chance to cry, all the heard runs to aid him, and in his
defense will join all together. The fish, called of the Latins Scarus, having
swallowed the fishers hook, his fellows will presently flock about him, and
nibble the line in sunder; and if any of them happen to be taken in a bow-net,
some of his fellows turning his head away, will put his tail in at the neck
of the net, who with his teeth fast-holding the same, never leave him, until
they have pulled him out. The Barble fishes, if one of them chance to be
engaged, will set the line against their backs, and with a fin they have,
toothed like a sharp saw, presently saw and fret the same asunder. Concerning
particular offices, which we for the benefit of our life, draw one from an
other, many like examples are found amongst them. It is assuredly believed,
that the Whale never swimmeth, unless she have a little fish going before her,
as her vantgard, it is in shape like a Gudgeon, and both the Latins and we,
call it the Whales-guide; for, she does ever follow him, suffering her self,
as easily to be led and turned by him, as a ship is directed and turned by a
stern: for requital of which good turn, whereas all things else, be it,
beast, fish, or vessel, that comes within the horrible Chaes of this monstrous
mouth, is presently lost and devoured, this little fish, does safely retire
himself therein, and there sleeps very quietly, and as long as he sleeps,
the Whale never stirs; but as soon as he awaketh and goes his way, wherever
he takes his course she always follows him, and if she fortune to loose him,
she wanders here and there, and often strikes upon the rocks, as a ship that
has nor mast nor rudder. This, Plutarke witnesses to have seen in the Island
of Anticyra. There is such a like society between the little bird called a
Wren, and the Crocodill: For, the Wren serves as a sentinel to so great a
monster: And if the Ichneumon, which is his mortal enemy approach to fight
with him, the little bird let, lest he might surprise him whilst he sleeps,
with his singing, and pecking him with his bill, awakens him, and gives him
warning of the danger he is in. The bird lives by the scraps, and feeds upon
the leavings of that monster, who gently receives him into his mouth, and
suffers him to pecke his jaws and teeth for such mammockes of flesh as stick
between them: and if he purpose to close his mouth, he does first warn him to
be gone, fair and easy closing it by little and little, without any whit
crushing or hurting him. The shellfish called a Nacre, lives even so with the
Pinnotere, which is a little creature like unto a Crabfish, and as his porter
or usher waits upon him, attending the opening of the Nacre, which he
continually keeps gaping, until he see some little fish enter in, fit for
their turn, then he creepes into the Nacre, and leaves not pinching his quick
flesh, until he makes him close his shell, and so they both together fast in
their hold, devour their prey. In the manner of the Tunnies life, may be
discovered a singular knowledge of the three parts of the Mathematikes. First
for Astrology, it may well be said that man does learn it of them: For,
wheresoever the winter Solstitium does take them, there do they stay
themselves, and never stir till the next Aequinoctium, and that is the reason
why Aristotle does so willingly ascribe that art unto them: Then for Geometry
and Arithmetike, they always frame their shole of a Cubike figure, every way
square: and so form a solid, close and wel-ranged battailon, encompassed
round about of six equal sides. Thus orderly marshaled, they take their
course and swim whither their journey tends, as broad and wide behind as
before: So that he that sees and tells but one rank, may easily number all
the troop, for so much as the number of the depth is equal unto the breadth, and
the breadth unto the length. Touching magnanimity and haughty courage, it is
hard to set it forth more lively, and to produce a rarer pattern, then that of
the Dog, which from India was sent unto Alexander: to whom was first presented
a Stag, then a wild Boar, and then a Bear, with each of which he should have
foughten, but he seemed to make no account of them, and would not so much as
remoove out of his place for them, but when he saw a Lion, he presently rouzed
himself, showing evidently he meant only so noble a beast worthy to enter
combat with him. Concerning repentance and acknowledging of faults committed,
it is reported, that an Elephant having through rage of choler slain his
governor, conceived such an extreme inward grief, that he would never
afterward touch any food, and suffered himself to pine to death. Touching
clemency, it is reported of a Tiger, (the fiercest and most inhumane beast of
all) who having a Kid given her to feed upon, endured the force of gnawing
hunger, two days together, rather then she would hurt him; the third day with
maine strength she brake the cage, wherein she was kept-pent, and went
elsewhere to shift for feeding; as one unwilling to seize upon the seely Kid
her familiar and guest. And concerning privileges of familiarity and
sympathy caused by conversation, is it not often seen, how some make Cats, Dogs,
and Hares so tame, so gentle, and so mild, that without harming one another
they shall live and continue together? But that which experience teaches
seafaring men, especially those that come into the seas of S^^ilie, of the
quality and condition of the Halcyon bird, or as some call it Alcedo or
kings-fisher, exceeds all men's conceit. In what kind of creature did ever
nature so much prefer both their hatching, sitting, brooding, and birth? Poets
feign, that the Island of Delos, being before wandering and fleeting up and
down, was for the delivery of Latona made firm and settled. But Gods decree
has been, that all the watrie wilderness should be quiet and made calm,
without rain, wind, or tempest, during the time the Halcyon sits and
brings forth her yoong-ones, which is much about the Winter Solstitium, and
shortest day in the year: By whose privilege even in the heart and deadest
time of Winter we have seven calm days, and as many nights to sail without
any danger. Their Hens know no other Cock but their own: They never forsake
him all the days of their life; and if the Cock chance to be weak and
crazed, the Hen will take him upon her neck, and carry him with her,
wheresoever she goes, and serve him even until death. Man's wit could never
yet attain to the full knowledge of that admirable kind of building or
structure, which the Halcion uses in contriving of her neast, no, nor devise
what it is-of.

Plutarke, who has seen and handled many of them, thinks it to be made of
certain fish-bones, which she so compacts, and conjoyneth together,
enterlasing some long, and some crosse-waies, adding some foldings and
roundings to it, that in the end she frames a round kind of vessel, ready to
floate and swim upon the water: which done, she carries the same where the
Sea-waves beat most; there the Sea gently beating upon it, snewes her how to
daube and patch up the parts not well closed, and how to strengthen those
places, and fashion those ribs, that are not fast, but stir with the Sea-waves:
And on the other side, that which is closely wrought, the Sea beating on it,
does so fasten and conjoyne together, that nothing, no, not stone or iron, can
any way loosen, divide, or break the same, except with great violence; and what
is most to be wondered at, is the proportion and figure of the concavitie
within; for, it is so composed and proportioned, that it can receive or admit
no manner of thing, but the Bird that built-it; for, to all things else, it is
so impenetrable, close and hard, that nothing can possibly enter in: no, not
so much as the Seawater. Loe-heer a most plain description of this building,
or construction taken from a very good Author: yet me thinks, it does not
fully and sufficiently resolve us of the difficulty in this kind of
Architecture. Now from what vanity can it proceed, we should so wilfully
contemn, and disdaeinfully interpret those effects, which we can neither
imitate nor conceive? But to follow this equality or correspondencie between
us and beasts somewhat further; the privilege whereof our soul vants to bring
to her condition whatsoever it conceives, and to dispoile what of mortal and
corporal qualities belongs unto it, to marshall those things, which she deemed
worthy her acquaintance, to disroabe and deprive their corruptible conditions,
and to make them leave as superfluous and base garments, thickness, length,
deapth, weight, color, smell, roughness, smoothness, hardness, softness,
and all sensible accidents else, to fit and appropriate them to her immortal
and spiritual condition: so that Rome and Paris, which I have in my soul;
Paris which I imagine; yea, I imagine and conceive the same without greatness
and place, without stone and mortar, and without wood: Then say I unto my
self, the same privilege seems likewise to be in beasts: for, a Horse
accustomed to hear the sound of trumpets, the noise of shot, and the
clattering of arms, whom we see to snort, to startle, and to neigh in his
sleep, as he lies a long upon his litter, even as he were in the hurly-burly;
it is most certain, that in his mind he apprehends the sound of a Drum
without any noise, and an army without arms or body.

Quippe videbis equos fortes, cum membra iacebunt Luer. li. 4. 982.

In somnis, sudare tamen, spirareque saepe,
Et quasi de palma summas contendere vires.
You shall see warlike Horses, when in sleep
Their lims lie, yet sweat, and a snorting keep,
And stretch their utmost strength,
As for a goal at length.
That Hare, which a greyhound imagines in his dream, after whom as he
sleeps we see him bay, quest, yelp, and snort, stretch out his tail, shake
his legs, and perfectly represent the motions of his course; the same is a Hare
without bones, without hair.

Venantumque canes in molli sepae quiet. Ibid. 986.

Iactant crura tamen subite, vocesque repent
Mittunt, and crebras redducunt naribus auras,
Vt vestigia si teneant inventa ferarum:
Expergefactique, sequuntur inania sepae
Cervorum simulacra, fugae quasi dedita cernant:
Donee discussis redeant erroribus ad se.
Often times the hunters dogs in easy rest
Stir their legs, suddenly, open, and quest,
And send from nostrels thicke-thicke snuffing sent,
As if on traile they were of game full-bent:
And wakened so, they follow shadows vain
Of Dear in chase, as if they fled amain:
Till, their fault left, they turn to sense again.
Those watching-Dogs, which in their sleep we sometimes see to grumble, and
then barking to startle suddenly out of their slumber, as if they perceived
some stranger to arive: that stranger which their mind seems to see, is but
an imaginary man, and not perceived; without any dimension, color, or being:

-- Consueta domi catulorum blanda propago Ibid. 993.

Degere, saepe levem ex oculis volucremque soporem
Discutere, and corpus de terra corripere instant,
Proinde quasi ignotas facies atque ora tuantur.
The fawning kind of whelps, at home that liv's,
From eyes to shake light-swift sleep often striv's,
And from the ground their starting bodies hie,
As if some unknown stranger they did spy.
Touching corporal beauty, before I go any further, it were necessary I
knew whether we are yet agreed about her description. It is very likely that we
know not well, what beauty either in nature, or in general, since we give so
many, and attribute so diverse forms to humane beauty, yea, and to our
beauty: Of which if there were any natural or lively description, we should
generally know it, as we do the heat of fire. We imagine and feign her forms,
as our fantasies lead us. Proper li. 2. el. 18. 26.


Turpis Roman Belgieus ore color. A Dutch-froes color has no grace,
Seen in a Roman Ladies face.
The Indians describe it black and swarthy, with blabberd-thicke lips, with a
broad and flat nose, the inward gristle whereof they load with great
gold-rings, hanging down to their mouth, and their nether lips with great
circlets beset with precious stones, which cover all their chins, deeming it an
especial grace to show their teeth to the roots. In Peru, the greatest ears
are ever esteemed the fairest, which with all art and industry, they are
continually stretching out; and a man (who yet lives) swears to have seen in
a province of the East-Indias the people so careful to make them great, and so
to load them with heavy jewels, that at ease he could have thrust his arm
through one of their eare-holes. There are other Nations, who endeavor to make
their teeth as black as Iet, and skorne to have them white; and in other
places they die them red. Not only in the province of Baske, but in other
places, women are accounted fairest when their heads are shaven; and which is
strange, in some of the Northerly frozen-countries, as Pliny affirms. Those
of Mexico, esteem the littleness of their foreheads, as one of the chiefest
beauties, and whereas they shave their hair over all their body besides, by
artificial means they labor to nourish and make it grow only in their
foreheads; and so love to have great dugs, that they strive to have their
children suck over their shoulders. So would we set forth ilfavordnesse. The
Italians proportion-it big and plum; The Spaniards spynie and lanke, and
amongst us one would have her white, another brown, one soft and delicate,
another strong and lusty: some desire wantonness and blithnesse, and other
some sturdinesse and majesty to be joined with it. Even as the pre-eminence in
beauty, which Plato ascribes unto the Sphericall figure, the Epicurians refer
the same unto the Piramidall or Square; and say they cannot swallow a God made
round like a bowl. But howsoever it is, nature has no more privileged us in
that, then in other things, concerning her common laws. And if we imparcially
enter into judgment with our selves, we shall find, that if there be any
creature or beast less favored in that, then we, there are others (and that
in great numbers) to whom nature has been more favorable then to us. A multis
animalibus decore vincimur. We are excelled in comel^nesse, by many living
creatures: Yea, of terrestrial creatures, that live with us. For, concerning
those of the Sea, omitting their figure, which no proportion can contain, so
much does it differ, both in color, in neatness, in smoothness, and in
disposition, we must give place unto them: which in all qualities we must
likewise do to the ayrie ones. And that prerogative, which Poets yield unto
our upright stature, looking toward heaven whence her beginning is,

Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram, Ovid. Metam. lib. 1. 84.

Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre
Iussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
Where other creatures on earth look and lie,
A lofty look God gave man, bad him pry
On heaven, raised his high countenance to the sky.
is merely poetical, for, there are many little beasts, that have their sight
directly fixed toward heaven: I find the Camels and the Estridges neck much
more raised and upright, then ours. What beasts have not their face a loft and
before, and look not directly opposite, as we; and in their natural posture
descrie not as much of heaven and earth, as man does? And what qualities of our
corporal constitution, both in Plato and Cicero cannot fit and serve a
thousand beasts? Such as most resemble man are the vilest and filthiest of all
the rout: As for outward appearance and true shape of the visage, it is the
Munkie or Ape: Cic. Not. deo. lib. 1. Enmi.


Simia quam similis, turpissima bestia, nobis! An Ape, a most il-favored beast,
How like to us in all the rest?
as for inward and vital parts, it is the Hog. Truly, when I consider man all
naked (yea, be it in that sex, which seems to have and challenge the greatest
share of eye-pleasing beauty, and view his defects, his natural subjection,
and manifold imperfections; I find we have had much more reason to hide and
cover our nakedness, then any creature else. We may be excused for borrowing
those which nature had therein favored more then us, with their beauties to
adorn us, and under their spoils of wool, of hair, of feathers, and ofsilke
to shroude us. Let us moreover observe, that man is the only creature, whose
wants offends his own follows, and he alone that in natural actions must
withdraw and sequester himself from those of his own kind. Verily it is an
effect worthy consideration, that the skilfullest masters of amorous
dalliances appoint for a remedy of venerian passions, a free and full survay
of the body, which one longs and seeks-after: and that to cool the longing
and aswage the heat of friendship, one need but perfectly view and thoroughly
consider what he loves.

Ille quod obscoenas in aperto corpore parts O^id. rem. Am. lib. 2. 33.

-- Viderat, in cursu qui fuit, haesit amor.
The love stood still, that ran in full carieere,
When bare it saw parts that should not appear
And although this remedy may happily proceed from a squeamish and cold humor:
yet is it a wonderful sign of our imbecilitie, that the use and knowledge
should so make us to be cloyd one of an other. It is not bashfulnesse so much,
as art and foresight makes our Ladies so circumspect and unwilling to let us
come into their closets before they are fully ready, and thoroughly painted, to
come abroad, and show themselves:

Nec veneres nostras hoc fallit quo magis ipse Luer. l. 4. 1176.

Omnia summopere hos vitae postscenia celant,
Quos retinere volunt adstrictoque esse in amore.
Our Mistresses know this, which mak's them not disclose
Parts to be played within, especially from those
Whom they would servants hold, and in their love-bands close.
Whereas in other creatures, there is nothing but we love, and pleases our
senses: so that even from their excrements and ordure, we draw not only
dainties to eat, but our richest ornaments and perfumes. This discourse of
beauty touches only our common order, and is not so sac^ilegious as it
intends or dares to comprehend those divine, supernatural, and
extraordinary beauties, which sometimes are seen to shine amongst-vs, even as
stars under a corporal and terrestrial veil. Moreover, that part of
natures favors, which we impart unto beasts, is by our own confession much
more advantageous unto them. We assume unto our selves imaginary and
fantastical goods, future and absent goods, which humane capacity can no way
warrant unto her self; or some other, which by the overweening of our own
opinion, we falsely ascribe unto our selves; as reason, honor, and knowledge;
and to them as their proper share we leave the essential, the maneagable, and
palpable goods, as peace, rest, security, innocence, and health: Health I
say, which is the goodliest and richest present, nature can impart unto us. So
that even Stoike Philosophy dares to affirm, that if Heracletus and
Pherecydes could have changed their wisdom with health, and by that means,
the one to have rid himself of the dropsy, and the other of the lowsieevill,
which so sore tormented them, they would surely have done-it: whereby they also
yield so much more honor unto wisdom, by comparing and counterpeizing the
same unto health, then they do in this other proposition of theirs, where they
say, that if Circes had presented Vhsses with two kinds of drink, the one to
turn a wiseman into a fool, the other to change a fool into a wiseman, he
would rather have accepted that of folly, then have been pleased, that Circes
should transform his humane shape into a beasts. And they say, that wisdom
her self would thus have spoken unto him: Meddle not with me, but leave me
rather then thou should place me under the shape and body of an Ass. What?
This great and heavenly wisdom? Are Philosophers contented then, to quit-it
for a corporal and earthly veil? Why then it is not for reasons sake, nor by
discourse, and for the soul, we so much excel beasts: it is for the love we
bear unto our beauty, unto our fair hew, and goodly disposition of limbs,
that we reject, and set our understanding at naught, our wisdom, and what
else we have. Well, I allow of this ingenious and voluntary confession: surely
they knew those parts, we so much labor to pamper, to be mere fantazies.
Suppose, beasts had all the virtue, the knowledge, the wisdom and
sufficiency of the Stoikes, they should still be beasts; nor might they ever
be compared unto a miserable, wretched, and senseless man. For, when all is
done, whatsoever is not as we are, is not of any worth. And God to be esteemed
of us, must (as we will show anon) draw somewhat neere-it. Whereby it
appears, that it is not long of a true discourse, but of a
foolish-hardinesse, and selfe-presuming obstinacy, we prefer our selves before
other creatures, and sequester our selves from their condition and society.
But to return to our purpose, we have for our part inconstancy, irresolution,
uncertainty, sorrow, superstition, carfulness for future things (yea after
our life) ambition, covetousness, jelousie, envy, inordiante, mad and untamed
appetites, war, falsehood, disloyalty, detraction, and curiosity. Surely we
have strangely overpaid this worthy discourse, whereof we so much glory, and
this readiness to judge, or capacity to know, if we have purchased the same
with the price of so infinite passions, to which we are incessantly enthralled.
If we be not pleased (as Socrates is) to make this noble prerogative over
beasts, to be of force, that whereas nature has prescribed them certain
seasons, and bounds for their natural lust and voluptuousness, she has
given-vs at all hours and occasions the full reins of them. Vt vinum Cic.
Not. d^^^. lib. 3.
egrotis, quia prodest raro, nocet saepissime, melius est non adhibere omnino,
quam, ^pe dubiaesalutis in apertam perniciem incurrere: Sic, haud scio, an
melius fuerit humano generi motum istum celerem, cogitationis a^umen,
solertiam, quem rationem vocamus, quoniam pestifera sint multis, admodum paucis
salutaria, non dari omnino, quam tam munifice and tam large dari. As it is
better not to use wine at all in sick persons, because it seldom does them
good, but many times much hurt, then in hope of doubtful health, to run into
undoubted danger; so do I not know, whether it were better that this swift
motion of the thought, this sharpness, this conceitednesse, which we call
reason, should not at all be given to mankind (because it is pernicious unto
many, and healthful to very few) then that it should be given so plentifully
and so largely. What good or commodity may we imagine this far-vnderstanding
of so many things brought ever unto Varro, and to Aristotle? Did it ever
exempt, or could it at any time free them from humane inconveniences? Were they
ever discharged of those accidents that incidently follow a seely laboring
man? Could they ever draw any ease for the gout from Logike? And howbeit they
knew the humor engendring the same to lodge in the joints, have they felt-it
the less? Did they at any time make a covenant with death, although they knew
full well that some nations rejoice at her coming? as also of Cuckoldship,
because they knew women to be common in some Countries? But contrariwise having
both held the first rank in knowledge, the one amongst the Romans, the other
among the Graecians, yea, and at such times wherein sciences flourished most,
we could never learn, they had any special excellency in their life. We see
the Grecian has been put to his plunges in seeking to discharge himself from
some notable imputations in his life. Was it ever found that sensuality, and
health, are more pleasing unto him that understands Astrology and Grammar?

(^lliterati number minus nervi rigent? Hor. ^pod. 8. 17.
As stiff unlearned sinnewes stand,
As theirs that much more understand.)
or shame and poverty less importunate and vexing?

Scilicet and morbis, and debilitate carebis, Iu^em. sat. 14. 156.

Et luctum, and curam effugies, and tempora vita
Longatibi posthaec fatomeliore dabuntur.
Thou shall be from disease and weakness free,
From moan, from care, long time of life to thee
Shall by more friendly fate affoorded be.
I have in my days seen a hundred Artificers, and as many laborers, more wise
and more happy, then some Rectors in the University, and whom I would rather
resemble. Me thinks Learning has a place amongst things necessary for man's
life, as glory, nobleness, dignity, or at most as riches, and such other
qualities, which indeed stead the same; but a far-off, and more in conceit,
than by Nature. We have not much more need of offices, of rules, and laws how
to live in our commonwealth, than the Cranes and Antes have in theirs. Which
notwithstanding, we see how orderly, and without instruction they maintain
themselves. If man were wise he would value every thing according to it is
worth, and as it is either more profitable, or more necessary for life. He
that shall number us by our actions and proceedings, shall doubt. less find
many more excellent-ones amongst the ignorant, then among the wiser sort: I
mean in all kind of Virtues. My opinion is, that ancient Rome brought forth
many men of much more valor and sufficiency, both for peace and war, then
this late learned Rome, which with all her wisdom has overthrown her
erst-flourishing estate. If all the rest were alike, then should honesty and
innocence at least belong to the ancient; for she was exceedingly well placed
with simplicity. But I will shorten this discourse, which happily would draw
me further then I would willingly follow: yet this much I will say more, that
only humility and submission is able to make a perfect honest man. Every one
must not have the knowledge of his duty referred to his own judgment, but
ought rather to have it prescribed unto him, and not be allowed to choose it at
his pleasure and free will: otherwise according to the imbecilitie of our
reasons, and infinite variety of our opinions, we might peradventure forge and
devise such duties unto our selves, as would induce us (as Epicurus says) to
endeavor to destroy and devour one another. The first law that ever God gave
unto man, was a Law of pure obedience. It was a bare and simple commandment,
whereof man should enquire and know no further: forasmuch, as to obey is the
proper duty of a reasonable soul, acknowledging a heavenly and superior
benefactor. From obeying and yielding unto him proceed all other virtues; even
as all sins derive from selfe-over-weening. Contrariwise, the first
temptation that ever seized on humane Nature was disobedience, by the Devils
instigation, whose first poison, so far insinuated it self into us, by reason
of the promises he made us of wisdom and knowledge, Eritis sicut Dij scientes
bonum and malum. You shall be like Gods, knowing both good and evil. And
Genesis. ca. 3. 5.
the Sirens, to deceive Ulysses and alluring him to fall into their dangerous
and confounding snares, offer to give him the full fruition of Knowledge. The
opinion of Wisdom is the plague of man. That is the occasion why ignorance is
by our Religion recommended unto us, as an instrument fitting belief, and
obedience. Cavete, ne quis vos decipiat per Philosophiam and inanes Colloss.
ca. 2. 8.
seductiones, secundum elementa mundi. Take heed, lest any man deceive you by
Philosophy and vain seducements, according to the rudiments of the world. All
the Philosophers of all the sects that everwere, do generally agree in this
point, that the chiefest felicity, or summum bonum, consists in the peace
and tranquillity of the soul and body: but where shall we finde-it?

Ad summum sapiens vno minor est love, dives, Her. li. 1. epist. 1. Antepen.

Liber, honoratus, pulcher, Rex denique Regum:
Praecipue sanus, nisi cum pituita molesta est.
In sum, who wise is known,
Is less then Jove alone,
Rich, honorable, free, fair, King of Kings,
Chiefly in health, but when fleagme trouble brings.
It seems verily, that Nature for the comfort of our miserable and wretched
condition, has allotted us no other portion, but presumption. It is therefore
(as Epictetus says) that man has nothing that is properly his own, but the
use of his opinions. Our hereditarie portion is nothing but smoke and wind.
The Gods (as says Philosophy) have health in true essence, and sickness in
conceit. Man clean contrary, possesses goods in imagination, and evils
essentially. We have had reason to make the powers of our imagination to be of
force: For, all our felicities are but in conceit, and as it were in a dream.
Hear but this poor and miserable creature vaunt himself. There is nothing
(says Cicero) so delightful and pleasant as the knowledge of Letters; of
Letters I say, by whose means the infinity of things, the incomprehensible
greatness of nature, the heavens, the earth, and all the Seas of this vast
universe, are made known unto us. They have taught us Religion, moderation,
stowtnesse of courage, and redeemed our soul out of darkness, to make her
see, and distinguish of all things, the high as well as the low, the first as
the last, and those between both. It is they that store and supply us with
all such things as may make us live happily and well, and instruct us how to
pass our time without sorrow or offense. Seems not this goodly Orator to
speak of the Almighties and everliving Gods condition? And touching effects, a
thousand poor seely women in a country town have lived, and live a life
much more reposed, more peaceable, and more constant, then ever he did.

-- Deus ille fuit Deus, inclyte Memmi,
Qui princeps vitae rationem invenit eam, qua
Nunc appellatur sapientia, quique per artem,
Fluctibus e tantis vitam tantisque tenebris,
In tam tranquillo and tam clara luce locavit.
Good sir, it was God, God it was, first found,
That course of man's life, which now is renowned
By name of wisdom; who by art reposde,
Our life in so clear light, calm so composde,
From so great darkness, so great waves opposde.
Observe what glorious and noble words these be: yet but a slight accident
brought this wisemans understanding to a far worse condition, than that of a
simple shepherd: notwithstanding this divine Teacher, and this heavenly
wisdom. Of like impudence is the promise of Democritus his Book. I will now
speak of all things: And that fond title which Aristotle gives us of mortal
gods, and that rash judgment of Chrysippus, that Dion was as virtuous as God:
And my Seneca says, he acknowledges that God has given him life, but how to
live well, that he has of himself. Like unto this other: In virtute vere
gloramur, Cic. Not. de. lib. 3.
quod non contingeret, si ia donum a Deo, non a nobis haberemus. We rightly
vaunt us of virtue, which we should not do, if we had it of God, not of our
selves. This also is Senec^es, that the wise man has a fortitude like unto
Gods; but inhumane weakness, wherein he excels him. There is nothing more
common, than to meet with such passages of temeritie: There is not any of us
that will be so much offended to see himself compared to God, as he will deem
himself wronged to be depressed in the rank of other creatures. So much are
we more jealous of our own interest, than of our Creators. But we must tread
this foolish vanity under foot, and boldly shake off, and lively reject those
fond-ridiculous foundations, whereon these false opinions are built. So long as
man shall be persuaded to have means or power of himself, so long will he
deny, and never acknowledge what he owes unto his Master: he shall always
(as the common saying is) make shift with his own: He must be stripped into
his shirt. Let us consider some notable example of the effect of Philosophy.
Possiaonius having long time been grieved with a painfull-lingring disease,
which with the smartingpaine made him to wring his hands, and gnash his teeth,
thought to scorn grief, with exclayming and crying out against-it: Do what
thou list, yet will I never say that thou art evil or pain. He feels the
same passions that my lackey does, but he boasts himself, that at least he
contains his tongue under the laws of his sect. Re succumbere non oportebat
verbis gloriantem: It was not for him to yield in deeds, who had so braved it
in words. Arcesilas lying sick of the gowt, Carneades coming to visit him,
and seeing him to frown, supposing he had been angry, was going away again,
but he called him back, and showing him his feet and breast, said unto him,
there is nothing come from thence hither. This has somewhat a better garb;
for he feels himself grieved with sickness, and would feign be rid of it,
yet is not his heart vanquished or weakened thereby, the other stands upon his
stiffness (as I fear) more verbal then essential. And Dionysius Heracleotes
being tormented with a violent smarting in his eyes, was at last persuaded to
quit these Stoicke resolutions.

Be it supposed that Learning and Knowledge should work those effects they
speak of, that is, to blunt and abate the sharpness of those accidents or
mischances, that follow and attend us; does she any more than what ignorance
effects much more evidently and simply? The Philosopher Pyrrho being at Sea,
and by reason of a violent storm in great danger to be cast away, presented
nothing unto those that were with him in the ship, to unitate but the security
of an Hog which was aboard, who nothing at all dismaide, seemed to behold and
out-stare the tempest. Philosophy after all her precepts gives us over to the
examples of a Wrestler, or of a Muletier, in whom we ordinarily perceive much
less feeling of death, of pain, of grief, and other inconveniences, and more
undaunted constancy, then ever Learning or Knowledge could store a man withal,
unless he were borne, and of himself through some natural habitude, prepared
unto it. What is the cause, the tender members of a child, or limbs of a
horse are much more easy, and with less pain cut and incised then ours, if
it be not ignorance? How many, only through the power of imagination, have
fallen into dangerous diseases? We ordinarily see diverse that will cause
themselves to be let blood, purged, and dieted, because they would be cured of
diseases, they never felt but in conceit; when essential and true maladies
fail us, then Science and knowledge lends-vs hirs: This color or complexion
(said she) presageth some rheumatike defluxion will ensue you: This
soultring-hote season menaceth you with some febricant commotion; this cutting
of the vital line of your left hand warns you of some notable and
approaching indispolition. And at last she will roundly address her self unto
perfect health; saying, this youthly vigor and sudden joy can not possibly
stay in one place, her blood and strength must be abated, for fear it turn
you to some mischief. Compare but the life of a man subject to these-like
imaginations, unto that of a day-labouring swain, who follows his natural
appetites, who measures all things only by the present sense, and has
neither learning nor prognostications, who feels no disease but when he has
it: whereas the other has often the stone imaginarily, before he have it in
his reins: As if it were not time enough to endure the sickness when it shall
come, he does in his fancy prevent the same, and headlong runs to meet with
it. What I speak of Physic, the same may generally be applied and drawn to
all manner of learning. Thence came this ancient opinion of those Philosophers,
who placed chief felicity in the acknowledging of our judgments weakness.
My ignorance affoords me as much cause of hope as of fear: and having no other
regiment for my health, then that of other men's examples, and of the events, I
see elsewhere in like occasions, whereof I find some of all sorts: And rely
upon the comparisons, that are most favorable unto me. I embrace health with
open arms, free, plain, and full; and prepare my appetite to enjoy-it, by how
much more, it is now less ordinary and more rare unto me: so far is it from
me, that I with the bitterness of some new and forced kind of life, trouble
her rest, and molest her ease. Beasts do manifestly declare unto us, how many
infirmities our minds agitation brings us. That which is told us of those that
inhabit Bresill, who die only through age, which some impute to the
clearenesse and calmness of their air* I rather ascribe to the calmness
and clearenesse of their minds, void and free from all passions, cares,
toiling, and unpleasant labors, as a people that pass their life in a
wonderful kind of simplicity and ignorance, without letters, or laws, and
without Kings, or any Religion. Whence comes it (as we daily see by experience)
that the rudest and grossest clownes, are more tough-strong, and more desired
in amorous executions: And that the love of a Muletier is often more accepted,
then that of a perfumed* quaint courtier? But because in the latter, the
agitation of his mind does so distract, trouble, and weary the force of his
body; as it also troubles and wearieth it self, who does belie, or more
commonly cast the same down even into madness, but her own promptitude, her
point, her agilitie, and to conclude her proper force? Whence proceeds the
subtilest folly, but from the subtilest wisdom? As from the extremest
friendships proceed the extremest enmities, and from the soundest healths, the
mortallest diseases; so from the rarest and quickest agitations of our minds
ensue the most distempered and outrageous frenzies. There wants but half a
pegs turn to pass from the one to the other. In mad men's actions, we see how
fitly folly suteth and meets with the strongest operations, of our mind. Who
knows not how vnperceivable the neighborhood between folly with the
liveliest elevations of a free mind is; and the effects of a supreme and
extraordinary virtue? Plato affirms, that melancholy minds are more
excellent and disciplinable; So are there none more inclinable unto folly.
Diverse spirits are seen to be overthrown by their own force, and proper
nimblenesse. What a start has one of the most judicious, ingenious, and most
fitted unto the air of true ancient Torquato Tasso.
poesy, lately gotten by his own agitation and selfe*gladnesse, above all
other Italian Poets that have been of a long time? Has not he wherewith to be
beholding unto this his killing vivacitie? unto this clearenesse, that has so
blinded him? unto his exact and far-reaching apprehension of reason, which has
made him void of reason? unto the curious and laborious pursuit of Sciences,
that have brought him unto sottishness? unto this rare aptitude to the
exercises of the mind, which has made him without mind or exercise? I rather
spited then pitied him, when I saw him at Ferrara, in so pitteous a plight,
that he survived himself; misacknowledging both himself and his labors,
which unwitting to him, and even to his face, have been published both
uncorrected and maimed. Will you have a man healthy, will you have him regular,
and in constant and safe condition? overwhelme him in the dark pit of
idleness, and dullness. We must be besotted ere we can become wise, and dazzled
before we can be led. And if a man shall tell me, that the commodity to have
the appetite cold to griefs, and wallowish to evils, draws this incommoditie
after-it, it is also consequently the same, that makes us less sharp and
greedy to the enjoying of good, and of pleasures: It is true, but the misery
of our condition bears, that we have not so much to enjoy, as to shun, and
that extreme voluptuousness does not so much pinch us, as a light smart:
Segnius homines bona quam mala sentiunt. Men have a duller feeling of a good
turn, then of an ill, we have not so sensible a feeling of perfect health, as
we have of the least sickness.

-- pungit
In cute vix summa violatum plagula corpus,
Quando valere nihil quemquam movet. Hoc invat vnum
Quod me non torquet latus aut pes; caetera quisquam
Vix queat aut sanum sese, aut sentire valentem.
A light stroke that does scarce the top-skin wound,
Greeves the galled body, when in health to be,
Does scarce move any: only ease is found,
That neither side nor foot tormenteth me:
Scarce any in the rest can feel he is sound.
Our being in health, is but the privation of being ill. See wherefore the sect
of Philosophy, that has most preferred sensuality, has also placed the same
but to indolencie or unfeeling of pain. To have no infirmity at all is the
chiefest possession of health, that man can hopefor (as Ennius said:) Ennius.


Nimium boni est, cui nihil est mali. He has but too much good,
Whom no ill has withstood.
For* the same tickling and pricking, which a man does feel in some pleasures,
and seems beyond simple health, and indolencie, this active and moving
sensuality, or as I may term it, itching and tickling pleasure aims but to
be free from pain, as her chiefest scope. The lust-full longing which allures
us to the acquaintance of women, seeks but to expel that pain, which an
earnest and burning desire does possesse-vs-with, and desires but to allay-it,
thereby to come to rest, and be exempted from this fever; And so of others. I
say therefore, that if simplicity directeth-vs to have no evil, it also
addresseth us, according to our condition to a most happy estate. Yet ought it
not to be imagined so dull and heavy, that it be altogether senseless. And
Crantor had great reason to withstand the insensibleness of Epicurus, if it
were so deeply rooted, that the approaching and birth of evils might gainsay-it.
I commend not that insensibleness, which is neither possible nor to be
desired. I am well pleased not to be sick, but if I be, I will know that I am
so; and if I be cautherized or cut, I will feel-it. Verily, he that should
root out the knowledge of evil, should there with all extirp the Ci^. Tusc.
qu. ^. 3
knowledge of voluptuousness, and at last bring man to nothing. Istud nihil
dolere, non sine magna mercede contingitt immanit at is in animo, stuporis in
corpore. This very point, not to be offended or grieved with any thing, befalls
not freely to a man, without either inhumanitie in his mind, or senselessness
in his body. Sickness is not amiss unto man, coming in her turn: Nor is he
always to shun pain, nor ever to follow sensuality. It is a great advantage
for the honor of ignorance, that Science it self throwes-vs into her arms,
when she finds her self busy to make us strong against the assaults of
evils: she is forced to come to this composition; to yeeld-vs the bridle, and
give-vs leave to shroud our selves in her lap, and submit our selves unto her
favor, to shelter us against the assaults and injuries of fortune. For, what
means she else, when she persuades us to withdraw our thoughts from the evils
that possesse-vs, and entertain them with fore-gon pleasures, and stead-vs as
a comfort of present evils with the remembrance of fore-past felicities, and
call a vanished content to our help, for to oppose it against that which vexes
us? Levationes aegritudinum in avocatione a cogitanda molestia, and revocatione
ad contemplandas voluptates ponit. Eases of griefs he reposeth either in
calling from the thought of offense, or calling to the contemplations of some
pleasures. Unless it be, that where force fails her, she will use policy,
and show a trick of nimblenesse and turn away, where the vigor both of her
body and arms shall fail her. For, not only to a strict Philosopher, but
simply to any settled man, when he by experience feels the burning alteration
of a hot fever, what current payment is it to pay him with the remembrance of
the sweetness of Greek wine? It would rather empaire his bargain.

Che ricordarsi il ben doppia la noia. For to think of our joy,
Redoubles our annoy.
Of that condition is this other counsel, which Philosophy gives, only to
keep forepast selicities in memory, and thence blot out such griefs as we
have felt; as if the skill to forget were in our power: and counsel, of which
we have much less.

Suavis est laborum praeteritorum memoria. Ci^. Fin. li 2. ^urip.
Of labors overpast,
Remembrance has sweet taste.
What? shall Philosophy, which ought to put the weapons into my hands, to
fight against fortune; which should harden my courage, to suppress and lay at
my feet all humane adversities; will she so faint, as to make me like a
fearful cunnie creep into some lurking-hole, and like a craven to tremble and
yield? For, memory represents unto us, not what we choose, but what pleases
her. Nay, there is nothing so deeply imprinteth any thing in our remembrance,
as the desire to forget the same: It is a good way to commend to the keeping,
and imprint any thing in our mind, to solicit her to loose the same. And that
is false. Est Ci^. fin. bon. li. 1.
situm in nobis, vt and adversa, quasi perpetua oblivione obruamus, and secunda
iucunde and suaviter meminerimus. This is ingraffed in us, or at least in our
power, that we both bury in perpetual oblivion things past against us, and
record with pleasure and delight whatsoever was for us.

And this is true, Memini etiam quae nolo; oblivisci non possum quae volo. I
remember even those Plu. in vita Them.
things I would not; and can not forget what I would. And whose counsel is
this? his, Qui se vnus sapientem profiteri sit ausus. Who only durst profess
himself a wise man.

Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, and omnes Lucr. li. 3. 1086. Epicur.

Praestrinxit stellas, exortus vti aetherius Sol.
Who from all mankind bare for wit the prize,
And dimmed the stars as when skies Sun does rise.
To empty and diminish the memory, is it not the ready and only way to
ignorance?

Iuers malorum remedium ignorantia est. Sen. Oed. act. 3. s^e. 1.
Of ills a remedy by chance,
And very dull is ignorance.
We see diverse like precepts, by which we are permitted to borrow frivolous
apparances from the vulgar sort, where lively and strong reason is not of force
sufficient: always provided, they bring us content and comfort. Where they can
not cure a sore, they are pleased to stupifie and hide the same. I am persuaded
they will not deny me this, that if they could possibly add any order or
constancy to a man's life, that it might thereby be still maintained in
pleasure and tranquillity, by, or through any weakness or infirmity of
judgment, but they would accept-it.

-- potare, and spargere flores Hor. li. 1. epist. 5. 14.
Incipiam, patiarque vel inconsultus haberi. I will begin to strew flowers, and
drink free,
And suffer witless, thriftlesse, held to be.
There should many Philosophers be found of Lycas his opinion: This man in all
other things being very temperate, and orderly in his demeanors, living
quietly and contentedly with his family, wanting of no duty or office both
toward his own household and strangers, very carefully preserving himself
from all hurtful things: notwithstanding through some alteration of his senses
or spirits, he was so possessed with this fantastical conceit or obstinate
humor, that he ever and continually thought to be amongst the Theaters, where
he still saw all manner of spectacles, pastimes, sports, and the best Comedies
of the world. But being at last by the skill of Physicians cured of this
malady, and his offending humor purged, he could hardly be held from putting
them in suit, to the end they might restore him to the former pleasures and
contents of his imagination.

-- polme occidistis amici, Hor. li. 1. epist. 2. 138.

Non servastis, ait, cui fic extorta voluptas,
Et demptus per vim menti gratissimus error*
You have not saved me, friends, but slain me quite,
(Quoth he) from whom so reft is my delight,
And error purged, which best did please my spright.
Of a raving like unto that of Thr^sylaus, son unto Pythodorus, who verily
believed, that all the ships that went out from the haven of Pyraeum, yea and
all such as came into it, did only travel about his business, rejoicing when
any of them had made a fortunate voyage, and welcomed them with great
gladness: His brother Crito, having caused him to be cured, and restored to
his better senses, he much bewailed and grieved the condition wherein he had
formerly lived in such joy, and so void of all care and grief. It is that,
which that ancient Greek verse says, That not to be so advised brings many
commodities with it:

(...) Soph. Ala. flag.
The sweetest life I wis,
In knowing nothing is.
And as Ecclesiastes witnesses: In much wisdom, much sorrow: And who gets
knowledge, purchases sorrow and grief. Even that, to which Philosophy does in
general Ecclesiast^^.
terms allow this last remedy, which she ordains for all manner of
necessities; that is, to make an end of that life, which we can not endure.
Placet? pare: Non placet? quacunque vis exi. Pungit dolor? velfodiat sane: si
nudus es, da iugulum: sint ectus armis vulcanijs, id est fortitudine, Cic.
Tusc. que lib. 2.
resist. Does it like you? obey: does it not like you? get out as you will:
does grief prick you? and let it perce you to: if you be naked, yield your
throat: but if you be covered with the armor of Vulcan, that is, with
fortitude, resist. And that saying used of the Graecians in their banquets,
which they apply unto it, Aut bibat, aut abeat: Either let him carouse, or
carry him out of the Ci^. ib. lib. 5.
house: which rather fitteth the mouth of a Gascoine, then that of Cicero, who
very easily does change the letter B into V,

Vivere si recte nescis, decede peritis: Hor. lib. 2. pist. 2. vl^.

Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti:
Tempus abire tibi est, ne potum largius aequo
Rideat, and pulset lasciva decentius aetas.
Live well you cannot, them that can give place;
Well have you sported, eaten well, drunk well:
It Is time you part; least wanton youth with grace
Laugh at, and knock you that with swilling swell.
what is it but a confession of his insufficiency, and a sending one back not
only to ignorance, there to be shrouded, but unto stupidity it self, unto
insensibleness and not being?

-- Democritum post quam matura vetustas Lucr. lib. 3. 1083.

Admonuit memorem, motus languescere mentis:
Sponte sua let ho caput obvius obtulit ipse.
When ripe age put Democritus in mind,
That his minds motions fainted, he to find
His death went willing, and his life resigned.
It is that which Anthistenes said, that a man must provide himself either of
wit to understand, or of a halter to hang himself: And that which Chrysippus
alleged upon the speech of the Poet Tyrtaeus,

De lavertu, ou de mort approcher. Plut. in Solo^s l. f^.
Or virtue to approach,
Or else let death incroch.
And Crates said, that love was cured with hunger, i^ not by time; and in him
that liked not these two means, by the halter. That Sextius, to whom Seneca
and Plutarke give so much commendation, having given over all things else and
betaken himself to the study of Philosophy, seeing the progress of his
studies so tedious and slow, purposed to cast himself into the Sea; Ran unto
death for want of knowledge: Read here what the law, says upon this subject.
If peradventure any great inconvenience happen, which cannot be remedied, the
haven is not farre-off, and by swimming may a man save himself out of his
body, as out of a leaking boat: for, it is fear to die, and not desire to
live, which keeps a fool joined to his body. As life through simplicity
becomes more pleasant, So (as I erewhile began to say (becommeth-it more
innocent and better. The simple and the ignorant (says S. Paul) raise
themselves up to heaven, and take possession of it; whereas we, withal the
knowledge we have, plunge our selves down to the pit of hell. I rely neither
upon Valentinianus (a professed enemy to knowledge and learning) nor upon
Licinius (both Roman Emperors) who named them the venime and plague of all
politic estates: Nor on Mahomet, who (as I have heard) does utterly interdict
all manner of learning to his subjects. But the example of that great Lycurgus,
and his authority ought to bear chief sway, and thereverence of that divine
Lacedemonian policy so great, so admirable, and so long time flourishing in all
virtue and felicity without any institution or exercise at all of letters.
Those who return from that new world, which of late has been discovered by
the Spaniards, can witness unto us, how those nations being without
Magistrates or law, live much more regularly and formally then we, who have
amongst us more Officers and laws, then men of other professions, or actions.

Di cit atorie piene and di libelli,
D'essamine, di carte, and diprocure Aristo. can. 14. stanz. 84.

Hanno le mani e'lseno, and granfastelli
Di chiose, di consigli and di letture,
Per cui le faculi a de'poverelli
Non sono may ne le citt a sicure,
Hanno dietre and dinanzi and d'ambo i lati,
Notai, procuratori, and advocati.
Their hands and bosoms with writs and citations,
With papers, libels, proxjes, full they bear,
And bundels great of strict examinations,
Of glosses, counsels, readings here and there.
Whereby in towns poor men of occupations
Possess not their small goods secure from fear,
Before, behind, on each sides Advocates,
Proctors, and Notaries hold up debates.
It was that, which a Roman Senator said, that their predecessors had their
breath stinking of garlike, and their stomach perfumed with a good conscience:
and contrary, the men of his times, outwardly smelt of nothing but sweet
odours, but inwardly they stunke of all vices: Which in mine opinion, is as
much to say, they had much Knowledge and Sufficiency, but great want of
honesty. In civility, ignorance, simplicity, and rudnesse, are commonly joined
with innocence: Curiosity, subtilty, and knowledge, are ever followed with
malice: Humility, fear, obedience, and honesty (which are the principal
instruments for the preservation of humane society) require a single docile
soul and which presumes little of her self: Christians have a peculiar
knowledge, how curiosity is in a man a natural, and original infirmity. The
care to increase in wisdom and knowledge was the first overthrow of
mankind: It is the way whereby man has headlong cast himself down into
eternal damnation. Pride is his loss and corruption: It is pride, that
misleadeth him from common ways; that makes him to embrace all newfangles, and
rather choose to be chief of a straggling troop and in the path of perdition,
and be regent of some erroneous sect, and a teacher of falsehood, then a
disciple in the school of truth, and suffer himself to be led and directed by
the hand of others in the ready beaten high way. It is happily that, which the
ancient Greek proverb implies; (...). Superstion obaieth pride as a father.
Oh overweening, how much do thou hinder us? Socrates being advertised, that
the God of wisdom, had attributed the name of wise unto him, was thereat much
astonished, and diligently searching and rouzing up himself, and ransaking the
very secrets of his heart found no foundation or ground for this divine
sentence. He knew some that were as just, as temperate, as valiant and as wise
as he and more eloquent, more fair and more profitable to their country. In
fine he resolved, that he was distinguished from others, and reputed wise, only
because he did not so esteem himself: And that his God deemed the opinion of
science and wisdom a singular sottishnes in man; and that his best doctrine
was the doctrine of ignorance, and simplicity his greatest wisdom. The
sacred writ pronounces them to be miserable in this world, that esteem
themselves. Dust and ashes (says he) what is there in thee, thou should so
much glory of? And in an other place. God has made man like unto a shadow, of
which who shall judge, when the light being gone, it shall vanish away? Man is
a thing of nothing. So far are our faculties from conceiving that high Deity,
that of our Creators works, those bear his mark best, and are most his own,
which we understand least. It is an occasion to induce Christians to believe,
when they chance to meet with any incredible thing, that it is so much the more
according unto reason, by how much more it is against humane reason. If it were
according unto reason, it were no more a wonder; and were it to be matched, it
were no more singular. Melius scitur Deus nesoiendo. God is better known by
our not knowing him. Sa. Augustine.
Says S. Augustine: And Tacitus, Sanctius est ac reverentius de actis deorum
credere quam scire: It is a course of more holiness and neverence, to hold
belief, then to have knowledge of Gods actions. And Plato deemes it to be a
vice of impiety, over-curiously to enquire after God, after Tacitus mor. German.
the world, and after the first causes of things. Atque illum quidem parentem
huius vniversit atis invenire, difficile: and quum iam inveneris, indicare in
vulgus, nesas. Both it is difficult to find out the father of this universe,
and when you have found him, it is unlawful to reveal him to the vulgar, says
Cicero. We easily pronounce puissance, truth and justice; they be words
importing Cic. vnive^
some great matter, but that thing we neither see nor conceive. We say that God
fears, that God will be angry, and that God loves.

Immortalia mortali sermon notante^, Luer. li 5. 122.


Who with terms of mortality
Note things of immortality.
They be all agitations and motions, which according to our form can have no
place in God, nor we imagine them according to his. It only belongs to God to
know himself, and interpret his own works; and in our tongues he does it
improperly, to descend and come down to us, that are, and lie grovelling on the
ground. How can wisdom (which is the choice between good and evil) beseem
him, seeing no evil does touch him? How reason and intelligence, which we use
to come from obscure to apparent things, seeing there is no obscure thing in
God? Justice which distributeth unto every man, what belongs unto him, created
for the society and conversation of man, how is she in God? How temperance,
which is the moderation of corporal sensualities, which have no place at all
in his Godhead? Fortitude patiently to endure sorrows, and labors and
dangers, appertains a little unto him; these three things no way approaching
him, having no access unto him. And therefore Aristotle Cic. Not. Deor. lib. 1.
holds him to be equally exempted from virtue and from vice. Neque gratia,
neque ira teneri potest, quod quae talia essent, imbecilla essent omnia. Nor
can he be possessed with favor and anger; for all that is so, is but weak. The
participation which we have of the knowledge of truth, whatsoever she is, it is
not by our own strength we have gotten it; God has sufficiently taught it us
in that he has made choice of the simple, common and ignorant, to teach us his
wonderful secrets. Our faith has not been purchased by us: it is a gift
proceeding from the liberality of others. It is not by our discourse or
understanding, that we have received our religion, it is by a foreign
authority, and commandment. The weakness of our judgment, helps us more
than our strength to compass the same and our blindness more then our
cleare-sighted eyes. It is more by the means of our ignorance, then of our
skill, that we are wise in heavenly knowledge. It is no marvel if our natural
and terrestrial means cannot conceive the supernatural, or apprehend the
celestial knowledge: Let us add nothing of our own unto it, but obedience and
subjection: For (as it is written) I will confound the wisdom of the wise and
destroy 1. Cor. 1. 19. 20. 21.
the understanding of the prudent, where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe?
Where is the disputer of this world. Has not God made the wisdom of this
world foolishness? For seeing the world by wisdom knew not God in the
wisdom of God, it has pleased him, by the vanity of preaching, to save them
that believe. Yet must I see at last, whether it be in man's power to find what
he seeks for: and if this long search, wherein he has continued so many ages,
has enriched him with any new strength or solid truth: I am persuaded, if he
speak in conscience, he will confess, that all the benefit he has gotten by
so tedious a pursuit, has been, that he has learned to know his own
weakness. That ignorance which in us was natural, we have with long study
confirmed and averred. It has happened unto those that are truly learned, as
it happens unto ears of Corn, which as long as they are empty, grow and raise
their head aloft, upright and stout; but if they once become full and big,
with ripe Corn, they begin to humble and droope downward. So men having
tried, and ^ounded all, and in all this Chaos, and huge heap of learning and
provision of so infinite different things, and found nothing that is
substanciall firm and steadie, but all vanity, have renounced their
presumption, and too late known their natural condition. It is that, which
Velleius vpbraides Cotta and Cicero withal, that they have learnt of Philo, to
have learned nothing. Pherecydes, one of the seven wise, writing to Thales
even as he was yielding up the Ghost; I have (says he) appointed my friends,
as soon as I shall be laid in my grave, to bring thee all my writings. If they
please thee and the other Sages publish them; If not, conceal them. They
contain no certainty, nor do they any whit satisfy me. My profession is
not to know the truth nor to attain it. I rather open, then discover things.
The wisest that ever was being demanded what he knew, answered, he knew that he
knew nothing. He verified what some say, that the greatest part of what we
know, is the least part of what we know not: that is, that that which we think
to know, is but a parcel, yea and a small particle of our ignorance. We know
things in a dream (says Plato) and we are ignorant of them in truth. Omnes
pene veteres nihil cognosci, Cic. Acad. q. l. 1
nihil percipi, nihil sciri posse dixerunt: angustos sensus, imbecilles animos,
brevia curricula vitae. Almost all the ancients affirmed nothing may be known,
nothing perceived, nothing understood: that our senses are narrow, our minds
are weak, and the race of our life is short. Cicero himself, who ought all he
had unto learning, Valerius says, that in his age he began to disesteeme
letters: And whilst he practiced them, it was without bond to any special
body, following what seemed probable unto him, now in the one, and now in the
other Sect; ever holding himself under the Academies doubtfulnesse. Dicendum
est, sed it a vt nihil affirmem: quaeram omnia, dubitans Cic. divin. l. 1.
plerumque, and mihi diffide^s. Speak I must, but so as I avouch nothing,
question all things, for the most part in doubt and distrust of my self. I
should have too much ado, if I would consider man after his own fashion, and
in gross: which I might do by his own rule, who is wont to judge of truth not
by the weight or value of voices but by the number. But leave we the common
people,

Qui vigilans stertit,
Who snoare while they are awake.
Mortua cui vita est, prope iam vivo atque videnti: Lucr. 3. 1091.

Whose life is dead while yet they see,
And in a manner living be. Lucr. l. 3. 108^

Who feels not himself, who judges not himself, who leaves the greatest
part of his natural parts idle. I will take man even in his highest estate.
Let us consider him in this small number of excellent and choice men, who
having naturally been endowed with a peculiar and exquisite wit, have also
fostred and sharpened the same with care, with study and with art, and have
brought and strained unto the highest pitch of wisdom, it may possibly reach
unto. They have fitted their soul unto all senses, and squared the same to all
byases; they have strengthened and vnder-propped it with all foreign helps,
that might any way fit or stead her, and have enriched and adorned her with
whatsoever they have been able to borrow, either within or without the world
for her avail: It is in them, that the extreme height of humane Nature does
lodge. They have reformed the world with policies and laws. They have
instructed the same with arts and sciences, as also by example of their
wonderful manners and life. I will but make account of such people, of their
witness and of their experience. Let us see how far they have gone, and what
holdfast they have held by. The maladies and defects, which we shall find in
that College, the world may boldly allow them to be his. Whosoever seeks for
any thing, comes at last to this conclusion and says, that either he has
found it, or that it cannot be found, or that he is still in pursuit after it.
All Philosophy is divided into these three kinds. Her purpose is to seek out
the, truth the knowledge and the certainty. The Peripatetike, the Epicurians,
the Stoickes and others have thought they had found it. These have established
the Sciences that we have, and as of certain knowledges have treated of them;
Clitomochus, Carneades and the Academikes, have dispaired the finding of it,
and judged that truth could not be conceived by our means. The end of these,
is weakness and ignorance. The former had more followers, and the wortheist
Sectaries. Pyrrho and other Sceptikes, or Epochistes, whose doctrine or manner
of teaching, many ancient learned men have thought to have been drawn, from
Homer, from the seven wise men, from Archilochus and Euripides, to whom they
join Zeno, Democritus and Xenophanes, say, that they are still seeking after
truth. These judge that those are infinitely deceived, who imagine they have
found-it, and that the second degree is over boldly vain in affirming that
man's power is altogether unable to attain unto it. for to stablish the measure
of our strength to know and distinguish of the difficulty of things is a great,
a notable and extreme science, which they doubt whether man be capable thereof
or no.

Nil sciri quisquis put at, id quoque nescit, Lucr. l. 4. 471.

An sciri possit, quo se nil scire fatetur.
Who think's nothing is known, knows not that, whereby he
Grauntes he knows nothing, if it known may be.
That ignorance, which knows judges and condemns it self, is not an
absolute ignorance: For, to be so, she must altogether be ignorant of her
self. So that the profession of the Phyrronians is ever to waver, to doubt and
to enquire; never to be assured of any thing, nor to take any warrant of
himself. Of the three actions or faculties of the soul, that is to say, he
imaginative, the concupisciple, and the consenting, they allow and conceive the
two former; the last, they hold and defend to be ambiguous, without inclination
or approbation, either of one or other side, be it never so light, Zeno in
jesture painted forth his imagination upon this division of the souls
faculties: the open and outstretched hand was appearance; the hand
halfe-shutte, and fingers somewhat bending, consent: the fist close,
comprehension: if the fist of the left hand were closely clinched together, it
signified Science. Now this situation of their judgment, straight and
inflexible, receiving all objects with application or consent, leads them unto
their Ataraxie; which is the condition of a quiet and settled life, exempted
from the agitations, which we receive by the impression of the opinion and
knowledge, we imagine to have of things; whence proceed, fear, avarice, envy,
immoderate desires, ambition, pride, superstition, love of novelties,
rebellion, disobedience, obstinacy, and the greatest number of corporal
evils: yea by that mean they are exempted from the jealousy of their own
discipline, for they contend but faintly: They fear nor revenge, nor
contradiction in the disputations. When they say, that heavy things descend
downward, they would be loath to be believed, but desire to be contradicted,
thereby to engender doubt, and suspense of judgment, which is their end and
drift. They put forth their propositions, but to contend with those, they
imagine we hold in out conceit. If you take theirs, then will they undertake
to maintain the contrary: all is one to them, nor will they give a penny to
choose. If you propose that snow is black, they will argue on the other side,
that it is white. If you say it is neither one nor other, they will maintain
it to be both. If by a certain judgment, you say that you can not tell, they
will maintain that you can tell. Nay, if by an affirmative axiom, you swear
that you stand in some doubt, they will dispute, that you doubt not of it, or
that you cannot judge or maintain, that you are in doubt. And by this
extreamitie of doubt, which staggreth it-selfe, they seperat and devide
themselves from many opinions, yea from those, which diverse ways have
maintained both the doubt and the ignorance. Why shall it not be granted then
(say they) as to Dogmatists or Doctrine-teachers, for one to say green, and
another yellow, so for them to doubt? Is there any thing can be proposed unto
you, either to allow or refuse, which may not lawfully be considered as
ambiguous and doubtful? And whereas others be carried either by the custom of
their Country, or by the institution of their Parents, or by chance, as by a
Tempest, without choice or judgment, yea sometimes before the age of
descretion, to such or such another opinion, to the Stoike or Epicurian Sect,
to which they find themselves more engaged, subjected or fast tied, as to a
prize they cannot let go: Ad quamcumque disciplinam, velut Tempestate, delat^,
ad eam tanquam Cic. academ. qu. lib. 10.
ad saxum, adhaerescunt. Being carried as it were by a Tempest, to any kind of
doctrine, they stick close to it, as it were to a rock. Why shall not these
likewise be permitted, to maintain Ibid.
their liberty, and consider of things without duty or compulsion? Hoc
liberiores, and solutiores, quod integra illis est iudicandi potestas. They are
so much the freer and at liberty, for that their power of judgment is kept
entire. Is it not some advantage for one to find himself disingaged from
necessity, which brideleth others? Is it not better to remain in suspense,
then to entangle himself in so many errors, that humane fantasy has brought
forth? Is it not better for a man to suspend his own persuasion, than to
meddle with these sedicious and quarellous devisions? What shall I choose? Mary,
what you list, so you choose. A very foolish answer: to which it seems
nevertheless, that all Dogmatisme arriveth; by which it is not lawful for you
to be ignorant of that we know not. Take the best and strongest side, it shall
never be so sure, but you shall have occasion to defend the same, to close and
combat a hundred and a hundred sides? Is it not better to keep out of this
confusion? You are suffered to embrace as your honor and life Aristotle's
opinion, upon the eternity of the soul, and to belie and contradict
whatsoever Plato says concerning that; and shall they be interdicted to doubt
of it? If it be lawful for Panaeci^s to maintain his judgment about
Aruspices, Dreams, Oracles and Prophecies, whereof the Stoickes makes no doubt
at all: Wherefore shall not a wiseman dare that in all things, which this man
dares in such as he has learned of his Masters? Confirmed and established by
the general consent of the School whereof he is a Sectary and a Professor? If
it be a Child that judges, he wo^s not what it is; if a learned man, he is
fore-stalled. They have reserved a great advantage for themselves in the
combat, having discharged themselves of the care how to shroud themselves. They
care not to be beaten, so they may strike again: And all is fish that comes to
net with them: If they overcome, your proposition halteth; if you, theirs is
lame; if they fail they verify ignorance, if you, she is verified by you; if
they prove that nothing is known, it is very well: If they cannot prove it,
it is good alike: Vt quum in eadem re paria contrarijs in partibus momenta Cic.
ibid.
inveniuntur, facilius ab vtraque part asser^^o sustineatur. So as when the
same matter the like weight and moment is found on diverse parts, we may the
more e^s^^y with hold avouching on both parts. And they suppose to find out
more easily, why a thing is false, then true and that which is not, than that
which is: and what they believe not, than what they believe. Their manner of
speech is, I confirm nothing: It is no more so than thus, or neither: I
conceive it not; Apparances are every where alike: The law of speaking pro or
contra is all one. Nothing seems true, that may not seem false. Their
Sacramental word is, (...), which is as much to say, as I hold and stir not.
Behold the burdons of their songs and other such like. Their effects is, a
pure, entire and absolute surceasing and suspense of judgment. They use their
reason, to enquire and to debate; and not to stay and choose. Whosoever shall
imagine a perpetual confession of ignorance, and a judgment upright and
without staggering, to what occasion soever may chance; That man conceives the
true Phyrrhonisme. I expound this fanrazy as plain as I can, because many
deem it hard to be conceived: And the Authors themselves represent it somewhat
obscurely and diversely. Touching the actions of life, in that they are after
the common sort. They are lent and applied to natural inclinations, to the
impulsion and constraint of passions, to the constitutions of laws, and
customs and to the tradition of arts: Non enim nos Deus Cic. divine. l. 1.
ista scire, sed tantumodo v^i voluit. For God would not have us know these
things, but only use them. By such means they suffer their common actions to
be directed, without any conceit or judgment, which is the reason that I
cannot well sort unto this discourse, what is said of Pyrro. They feign him to
be stup^de and vnmoovable, leading a kind of wild and unsociable life, not
shunning to be ^^t with Car^es, presenting himself unto downefales, refusing
to conform himself to the laws. It is an endearing of his discipline. He
would not make himself a stone or a block, but a living, discoursing and
reasoning man, enjoying all pleasures and natural commodities, busying
himself with, and using all his corporal and spiritual parts, in rule and
right. The fantastical and imaginary, and false privileges, which man has
usurped unto himself, to sway, to appoint, and to establish, he has
absolutely renounced and quit them. Yet is there no Sect, but is enforced to
allow her wise Sectary, in chief to follow diverse things nor comprised nor
perceived, nor allowed, if he will live. And if he take shipping, he follows
his purpose, not knowing whether it shall be profitable or no; and yeeldes to
this, that the ship is good, that the pilote is skillful, and that the season
is fit; circumstances only probable; After which he is bound to go, and suffer
himself to be removed by apparances always provided they have no express
contrariety in them. He has a body, he has a soul, his senses urge him
forward, his mind mooveth him. Although he find not this proper and singular
mark of judging in himself, and that he perceive he should not engage his
consent, seeing some falsehood may be like unto this truth: He cease not to
detect the offices of his life fully and commodiously. How many arts are there,
which profess to consist more in conjecture, than in the science; That
distinguish not between truth and falsehood, but only follow seeming? There is
both true and false (say they) and there are means in us to seek it out, but
not to stay it when we touch it. It is better for us to suffer the order of the
world to manage us without further inquisition. A mind warranted from
prejudice; has a mavelous preferment to tranquillity. Men that sensure and
control their judges, do never duly submit themselves unto them. How much
more docile and tractable are simple and vncurious minds found both toward
the laws of religion and politic decrees, then these over-vigilant and
nice-wits, teachers of divine and humane causes? There is nothing in man's
invention, wherein is so much likelihood, possibility and profit. This
represents man bare and naked, acknowledging his natural weakness, apt to
receive from above some strange power, disfurnished of all humane knowledge,
and so much the more fit to harbor divine understanding, disannulling his
judgment, that so he may give more place unto faith: Neither misbeleeving nor
establishing any doctrine or opinion repugnant unto common laws and
observances, humble, obedient, disciplinable and studious; a sworn enemy to
Heresy, and by consequence exempting himself from all vain and and
irreligious opinions, invented and brought up by false Sects. It is a white
sheet prepared to take from the finger of God, what form soever it shall please
him to imprint therein. The more we address and commit our selves to God, and
reject our selves, the better it is for us, Accept (says Ecclesiastes) in good
part things both in show and taste, as from day to day they are presented unto
thee, the rest is beyond thy knowledge. Dominus novit cogitationes hominum,
Psalm. 93. ^1.
quoniam vanae sunt. The Lord knows the thoughts of men, that they are vain.
See how of three general Sects of Philosophy, two make express profession of
doubt and ignorance; and in the third, which is the Dogmatists, it is easy to
be discerned, that the greatest number have taken the face of assurance; only
because they could set a better countenance on the matter. They have not so
much gone about to establish any certainty in us, as to show how far they had
waded in seeking out the truth, Quam docti fingunt magis quam norunt. Which the
learned do rather conceit, than know.

Tymaeus, being to instruct Socrates, of what he knows of the Gods, of the
world and of men, purposes to speak of it, as one man to another; and that it
suffices, if his reasons be as probable as another man's: For, exact reasons
are neither in his hands, nor in any mortal man; which one of his Sectaries
has thus imitated: Vt potero, explicabo: nec tamen, vt Pythius Cic. Tusc. qu.
l. 1.
Apollo, certa vt sint and fixa, quae dixero: sed, vt homunculus, probabilia
coniectur a sequens. As I can, I will explain them; yet not as Apollo giving
oracles, that all should be certain and set donwe, that I say, but as a
mean man, who follows likelihoode by his conjecture. And that upon the
discourse of the contempt of death; a natural and popular discourse. Elsewhere
he has translated*it, upon Platoes very words. Si forte, de Deorum natura
ortuque mundi disserentes, Cic. Universe.
minus quod habemus in animo consequimur, haud erit mirum. Aequum est enim
meminisse, and me, qui disseram, hominem esse. and vos qui iudicetis: vt, si
probabilia dicentur, nihil vltra requiratis. It will be no marvel, if arguing
of the nature of Gods and original of the world, we scarsely reach to that
which in our mind we comprehend; for it is meet we remember, that both I am a
man, who am to argue, and you who are to judge, so as you seek no further, if
I speak but things likely. Aristotle ordinarily hoardeth us up a number of
other opinions, and other beliefes, that so he may compare his unto it, and
make us see how far he has gone further, and how near he comes unto
true-likelyhood; For truth is not judged by authority, nor by others
testimony. And therefore did Epicurus religiously avoyde to aleadge any in his
compositions. He is the Prince of Dogmatists, and yet we learn of him, that,
to know much, breeds an occasion to doubt more. He is often seen, seriously
to shelter himself under so inextricable obscurity that his meaning cannot be
perceived. In effect, it is a Pyrrhonisme under a resolving form. Listen to
Ciceroes protestation, who does declare us others fantasies by his own. Qui
requirunt, Cic. Not. deo. l. 1.
quid de quaque re ipsi sentiamus; curiosius id faciunt, quam necesse est. Haec
in philosophia ratio, contra omnia disserendi, nullamque rem aperte iudicandi,
profecta a Socrate, repetita ab Arcesila, confirmata a Carneade vsque ad
nostram viget aetatem. Hi sumus, qui omnibus veris falsa quaedam adiuncta esse
dicamus, tanta similitudine, vt in ijs nulla insit certe iudicandi and
assentiendi nota. They that would know what we conceit of every thing, use more
curiosity than needs. This course in Philosophy to dispute against all things,
to judge expressly of nothing, derived from Socrates, renewed by Arcesilas,
confirmed by Carneades, is in force till our time: we are those that aver some
falsehood entermixt with every truth, and that with such likeness, as there is
no set note in those things for any assuredly to give judgment or assent. Why
has not Aristotle alone, but the greatest number of Philosophers affected
difficulty, unless it be to make the vanity of the subject to prevail, and to
ammuse the curiosity of our mind, seeking to feed it, by gnawing so raw and
bare a bone? Clytomachus affirmed, that he could never understand by the
writings of Carneades, what opinion he was of. Why has Epicurus interdicted
facility unto his Sectaries? And wherefore has Heraclitus been surnamed
(...), a dark misty clowded fellow? Difficulty is a coin, that wisemen make
use of, as juglers do with pass and repasse, because they will not display
the vanity of their art, and wherewith humane foolishness is easily apaide.

Clarus ob obscurum linguam, magis interinanes. Lucr. l. 1. 656.

Omnia enim stolidi magis admirantur amantque,
Inversis quae sub verbis latitantia cernunt.
For his dark speech much praised, but of th'vnwise;
For fools do all still more admire and prize,
That under words turned topsie-turvie lies.
Cicero reproves some of his friends, because they were wont to bestow more
time about Astrology, Law, Logike, and Geometry, then such Arts could deserve;
and diverted them from the devoirs of their life, more profitable and more
honest. The Cyrenaike Philosophers equally contemned natural Philosophy and
Logic. Zeno in the beginning of his books of the Commonwealth, declared all
the liberal Sciences to be unprofitable. Chrysippus said that which Plato and
Aristotle had written of Logike, they had written the same in jest and for
exercise sake; and could not believe that ever they spoke in good earnest of so
vain and idle a subject. Plutarke says the same of the Metaphysikes; Epicurus
would have said it of Rethorike, of Gramar, of Poesy, of the Mathematikes, and
(except natural Philosophy) of all other sciences: And Socrates of all; but of
the Art of civil manners and life. Whatsoever he was demanded of any man, he
would ever first enquire of him, to give an account of his life, both present
and past: which he would seriously examine and judge of: Deeming all other
apprentiships as subsequents and of supererogation in regard of that. Parum
mihi placeant eae literaequae advirtutem doctoribus nihil profuerunt. That
learning pleases me but a little, which nothing profits the teachers of it
unto virtue. Most of the Arts have thus been contemned by knowledge it self:
For they thought it not amiss to exercise their minds in matters, wherein was
no profitable solidity. As for the rest, some have judged Plato a Dogmatist,
others a Doubter, some a Dogmatist in one thing and some a Doubter, in another.
Socrates, the foreman of his Dialogues does ever ask and propose his
disputation; yet never concluding, nor ever satisfying: and says, he has no
other Science, but that of opposing. Their author Homer has equally grounded
the foundations of all Sects of Philosophy, there by to show, how indifferent
he was which way we went. Some say, that of Plato arose ten diverse Sects. And
as I think, never was instruction wavering and nothing avouching, if his be
not. Socrates was wont to say, that when Midwives begin once to put in practice
the trade to make other women bring forth children, themselves become barren.
That he by the title of wise, which the gods had conferred upon him, had also
in his man-like and mental love shaken off the faculty of begetting: Being
well pleased to afford all help and savor to such as were engendrers; to open
their nature, to suple their passages, to ease the issue of their
childbearing, to judge thereof, to baptize the same, to foster it, to
strengthen it, to swath it, and to circumcise it; exercising and handling his
instrument at the perrill and fortune of others So i^ it with most Authors of
this third kind, as the ancients have well noted by the writings of
Anaxagoras, Democritus, Parmenides, Xenophanes, and others. They have a manner
of writing doubtful both in substance and intent, rather enquiring then
instructing: albeit here and there, they enterlace their style with
dogmaticall cadences. And is not that as well seen in Seneca, and in Plutarke?
How much do they speak sometimes of one face, and sometimes of another, for
such as look near unto it? Those who reconcile Lawyers, ought first to have
reconciled them every one unto himself. Plato has (in my seeming) loved this
manner of Philosophying, Dialogue wise in good earnest, that thereby he might
more decently place in sundry mout^es the diversity and variation of his own
conceits. Diversely to treat of matters is as good and better as to treat them
conformably; that is to say, more copiously, and more profitably. Let us take
example by our selves. Definite sentences make the last period of dogmaticall
and resolving speech: yet see we, that those which our Parlaments present unto
our people, as the most exemplare and fittest to nourish in them the reverence
they owe unto this dignity, especialy by reason of the sufficiency of those
persons, which exercise the same, taking their glory, not by the conclusion,
which to them is daily, and is common to al judges as much as the debating of
diverse, and agitations of contrary reasonings of law causes will admit. And
the largest scope for reprehensions of some Philosophers against others,
draws contradictions and diversities with it, wherein every one of them
finds himself so entangled, either by intent to show the wavering of man's
mind above all matters, or ignorantly forced by the volubilitie and
incomprehensiblenesse of all matters: What means this burdon? In a slippery
and gliding place let us suspend our belief, For as Euripides says,

Les oeuures de Dieu en diverses Euripides.

Facons, nous donnent des traverses.
Gods works do travers our imaginations,
And cross our works in diverse different fashions.
Like unto that, which Empedocles was wont often to scatter amongst his books,
as moved by a divine fury and forced by truth. No no, we feel nothing, we see
nothing; all things are hid from us: There is not one, that we may establish,
how and what it is: But returning to this holy word. Cogitationes mortalium
timidae and incertae adinventiones nostrae, and providentiae. Wisd. c. 9. 14.
The thoughts of mortal men are fearful, our devices and foresights are
uncertain. It must not be thought strange if men disparing of the goal have
yet taken pleasure in the chase of it; study being in it self a pleasing
occupation, yea so pleasing, that amid sensualities, the Stoikes forbid also
that, which comes from the exercise of the mind, and require a bridle to it,
and find intemperance in over much knowledge. Democritus having at his table
eaten some figs, that tasted of honny, began presently in his mind, to seek
out whence this unusual sweetness in them might proceed; and to be resolved,
rose from the board, to view the place where those figs had been gathered.
His maid servant noting this alteration in her master, smilingly said unto
him, that he should no more busy himself about it; the reason was, she had
laid them in a vessel, where honny had been, whereat he seemed to be wroth
in that she had deprived him of the occasion of his intended search, and
robbed his curiosity of matter to work upon. Away (quoth he) unto her, thou
have much offended me; yet will I not omit to find out the cause, as if it
were naturally so. Who perhaps would not have missed to find some likely or
true reason, for a false and supposed effect. This story of a famous and great
Philosopher does evidently represent unto us this studious passion, which so
does ammuse us in pursuit of things, of whose obtaining we despair.
Plutarke reports a like example of one, who would not be resolved of what
he doubted, because he would not loose the pleasure he had in seeking it: As
another, that would not have his Physician remove the thirst he felt in his
ague, because he would not loose the pleasure he took in quenching the same
with drinking. S^tius est supervacua Sen. epi. 89 f.
discere, quam nihil. It is better to learn more then we need, then nothing
at all, Even as in all feeding, pleasure is always alone and single; and all
we take that is pleasant, is not ever nourishing and wholesome: So likewise,
what our mind draws from learning leaves not to be voluptuous, although it
neither nourish nor be wholesome. Note what their saying is: The consideration
of nature is a food proper for our minds, it raises and puffs us up, it
makes us by the comparison of heavenly and high things to disdain base and low
matters: the search of hidden and great causes is very pleasant, yea unto him
that attaines naught but thereverence and fear to judge of them, These are the
very words of their profession. The vain image of this crazed curiosity, is
more manifestly seen in this other example, which they for honour-sake have so
often in their mouths. Eudoxus wished, and praid to the Gods, that he might
once view the Sun near at hand, to comprehend his form, his greatness and
his beauty; on condition he might immediately be burnt and consumed by it.
Thus with the price of his own life would he attain a Science, whereof both
use and possession shall therewith be taken from him; and for so sudden and
fleeting knowledge, loose and forgo all the knowledges he either now has, or
ever hereafter may have. I can not easily be persuaded, that Epicurus, Plato,
or Pithagoras have sold us their Atoms, their Ideas, and their Numbers for
ready payment. They were overwise to establish their articles of faith upon
things so uncertain and disputable. But in this obscurity and ignorance of
the world, each of these notable men has endeavored to bring some kind of
show or image of light; and have busied their minds about inventions, that
might at least have a pleasing and wil^e appearance, provided (notwithstanding
it were false) it might be maintained against contrary oppositions: Vnicuiquae
ista pro ingento finguntur, non ex Scientiae v^. These things are conceited by
every man as his wit serves, not as his knowledge stretches and reaches. An
ancient Philosopher being blamed for professing that Philosophy, whereof, in
his judgment he made no esteem; answered, that that was true Philosophizing.
They have gone about to consider all, to balance all, and have found that it
was an occupation fitting the natural curiosity which is in us. Some things
they have written for the behoof of common society, as their religions: And
for this consideration was it reasonable, that they would not thoroughly unfold
common opinions, that so they might not breed trouble in the obedience of
laws and customs of their countries. Plato treats this mystery in a very
manifest kind of sport. For, where he writes according to himself, he
prescribes nothing for certainty: When he institutes a Law giver, he
borrows a very swaying and avouching kind of style: Wherein he boldly
entermingleth his most fantastical opinions; as profitable to persuade the
common sort, as ridiculous to persuade himself: Knowing how apt we are to
receive all impressions, and chiefly the most wicked and enormous. And
therefore is he very careful in his laws that nothing be sung in public but
Poesies; the fabulous fictions of which tend to some profitable end: being so
apt to imprint all manner of illusion in man's mind, that it is injustice not
to feed them rather with commodious lies, then with lies either unprofitable
or damageable, He flatly says in his Commonwealth, that for the benefit of
men, it is often necessary to deceive them. It is easy to distinguish, how
some Sects have rather followed truth, and some profit; by which the latter
have gained credit. It is the misery of our condition, that often, what offers
it self unto onr imagination for the likely est: presents not it self unto it
for the most beneficial unto our life. The boldest sects, both Epicurian,
Pirrhonian and new Academike, when they have cast their acoumpt, are compelled
to stoop to the civil law. There are other subjects, which they have tossed,
some on the left and some on the right hand, each one laboring and striving to
give it some semblance, were it right or wrong: For, having found nothing so
secret, whereof they have not attempted to speak, they are many times forced
to forge diverse feeble and fond conjectures: Not that themselves took them for
a groundwork, nor to establish a truth, but for an exercise of their study.
Non tam id sensisse, quod dicerent, quam exercere ingenia materiae difficultate
videntur voluisse. They seem not so much to have thought as they said, as
rather willing to exercise their wits in the difficulty of the matter. And if
it were not so taken, how should we cloak so great an inconstancy, variety
and vanity of opinions, which we see to have been produced by these excellent
and admirable spirits? As for example, What greater vanity can there be, then
to go about by our proportions and conjectures to guess at God? And to
govern both him and the world according to our capacity and laws? And to use
this small scantlin of sufficiency, which he has pleased to impart unto our
natural condition, at the cost and charges of divinity? And because we cannot
extend our sight so far as his glorious throne, to have removed him down to
our corruption and miseries? Of all-humane and ancient opinions concerning
religion, I think that to have had more likelihood and excuse, which
knowledged and confessed God to be an incomprehensible power, chief beginning
and preserver of all things; all goodness, all perfection; accepting in good
part the honor and reverence which mortal men did yield him, under what
usage, name and manner soever it was.

Jupiter omnipotens rerum, regumque, Deumque,
Progenitor, genitrixque.
Almighty Jove, is parent said to be
Of things, of Kings, of Gods, both he and sne.
This zeal has universally been regarded of heaven with a gentle and
gracious eye. All Policies have reaped some fruit by their devotion: Men, and
impious actions have every where had correspondent events. Heathen histories
acknowledge dignity, order, justice, prodigies, and oracles, employed for
their benefit and instruction, in their fabulous religion: God of his mercy
daining peradventure, to foster by his temporal blessings the budding and
tender beginnings of such a brute knowledge, as natural reason gave them of
him, athwart the false images of their deluding dreams: Not only false, but
impious and injurious are those, which man has forged and divised by his own
invention. And of al religions Saint Paul found in credit at Athens, that
which they had consecrated unto a certain hidden and unknown divinity,
seemed to be most excusable, Pithagoras shadowed the truth somewhat nearer,
judgeing that the knowledge of this first cause and Ens entium must be
undefined, without any prescription or declaration. That it was nothing else
but the extreme endeavor of our imagination, toward perfection, every one
amplifying the Idea thereof according to his capacity. But if Numa undertook
to conform the devotion of his people to this project, to join the same to a
religion merely mental, without any prefixed object, or material mixture; he
undertook a matter to no use. Man's mind could never be maintained, if it were
still floting up and down in this infinite deep of shapeles conceits. They
must be framed unto her to some image, according to her model. The majesty of
God has in some sort suffered it self to be circumscribed to corporal
limits: His supernatural and celestial Sacraments, bear signs of our
terrestrial condition. His adoration is expressed by offices and sensible words;
for, it is man that believes and prays. I omit other arguments, that are
emplyed about this subject. But I could hardly be made believe, that the sight
of our Crucifixes, and pictures of that pitiful torment, that the ornaments
and ceremonious motions in our Churches, that the voices accomodated and suited
to our thoughts-devotions, and this stirring of our senses, does not greatly
inflame the peoples souls, with a religious passion, of wondrous beneficial
good. Of those, to which they have given bodies, as necessity required amid
this general blindness; as for me, I should rather have taken part with those
who worshipped the Sun.

-- la lumiere commune,
L'oeil du monde: and si Dieu au chef port des yeux,
Les rayons du Solil sont ses yeux radieux
Qui donnent vie a tous, nous maintiennent and gardent,
Et les faicts des humains en ce monde regardent:
Ce beau, ce grand Soleil, qui nons fait les saysons,
Selon qui'il enter ou sort de ses douze maysos:
Qui remplit l'vnivers de ses vertus cognues,
Qui d'vntraict de ses yeux nous dissipe les nues:
L'sprit, l'ame du monde, ardant and flamboyant,
En la couree d'un iour tout le Ciel tour noyand,
Plein d'immense geandeur, rond, vagabond and ferme:
Lequel tient dessoubs luy tout le monde pour term,
Enrepos sans repos, oysif, and sans seiour,
Fills aisne de nature, and le pere du iour.
The common light,
The worlds eye: and if God bear eyes in his chief head,
His most resplendent eyes, the Sunne-beames may be said,
Which unto all give life, which us maintain and guarde,
And in this world of men, the works of men regard,
This great, this beauteous Sun, which us our seasons makes,
As in twelve houses he, ingresse or egresse takes;
Who with his Virtues known, does fill this universe
With one cast of his eyes does us all clouds disperse,
The spirit, and the soul of this world, flaming, burning,
Round about heaven in course of one days journey turning.
Of endless greatness full, round, mooveable and fast:
Who all the world for bounds beneath himself has pla'st:
In rest, without rest, and still more staide, without stay,
Of Nature th'eldest Child, and father of the day.
Forasmuch as besides this greatness and matchless beauty of his, it is the
only glorious piece of this vaste-worldes-frame, which we perceive to be
furthest from us: And by that mean so little known, as they are pardonable,
that entered into admiration, and reverence of it. Thale^, who was the first to
enquire and find out this matter, esteemed God to be a spirit, who made all
things of water. Anaximander thought, the Gods did die, and were newborn at
diverse seasons: and that the worlds were infinite in number. Anaximenes deemed
the air to be a God, which was created immense, and always mooving.
Anaxagoras was the first that held the description and manner of all things, to
be directed by the power and reason of a spirit infinite. Alcmaeon has ascribed
Divinity unto the Sun, unto the Moon, unto Stars, and unto the Soul.
Pithagoras has made God, a spirit dispersed through the Nature of all things,
whence our souls are derived. Parmenides, a Circle circumpassing the heavens,
and by the heat of light maintaining the world. Empedocles said, the four
Natures, whereof all things are made, to be Gods. Protagords, that he had
nothing to say, whether they were or were not, or what they were. Democritus
would sometimes say, that the images and their circuitions were Gods, and
othertimes this Nature, which disperseth these images; and then our knowledge
and intelligence. Plato scatters his belief after diverse semblances. In his
Tymeus, he says, that the worlds-father could not be named. In his Laws, that
his being must not be enquired-after. And elsewhere in the said books, he
makes the world, the heaven, the stars, the earth and our souls, to be
Gods; and besides, admiteth those that by ancient institutions have been
received in every Commonwealth. Xenophon reports a like difference of
Socrates his discipline. Sometimes that Gods form ought not to be inquired
after; then he makes him infer, that the Sun is a God, and the Soul a God:
othertimes, that there is but one, and then more. Speusippus Nephew unto Plato,
makes God to be a certain power, governing all things, and having a soul.
Aristotle says sometimes that it is the spirit, and sometimes the world;
othertimes he appoynteth another ruler over this world, and sometimes he makes
God to be the heat of heaven. Xenocrates makes eight; five named amongst the
planets, the sixth composed of all the fixed stars, as of his own members;
the seventh and eight, the Sun and the Moon. Heraclides Ponticus does but
roame among his opinions, and in fine depriveth God of sense, and maks him
remoove and transchange himself from one form to another; and then says,
that it is both heaven and earth. Theophrastus in all his fantazies wandereth
still in like irresolutions, attributing the worlds superintendency now to the
intelligence, now to the heaven, and now to the stars. Straio, that it is
Nature having power to engender, to augment and to diminish, without form or
sense. Zeno, the natural Law, commanding the good, and prohibiting the evil;
which Law is a breathing creature; and remooveth the accustomed Gods, Jupiter,
Juno and Vesta. Diogenes Appolloniates, that it is Age. Xenophanes makes God,
round, seeing, hearing not breathing, and having nothing common with humane
Nature. Aristo deemeth the form of God to be incomprehensible, and depriveth
him of senses, and wotteth not certainly whether he be a breathing soul or
something else. Cleanthes, sometimes reason, othertimes the World, now the
soul of Nature, and other-while the supreme heat, enfoulding and containing
all. Persaeus Zenoes disciple has been of opinion, that they were surnamed
Gods, who had brought some notable good or benefit unto humane life, or had
invented profitable things. Chrysippus, made a confused huddle of all the
foresaid sentences, and amongst a thousand forms of the Gods, which he
faineth, he also accompteth those men, that are immortalized. Diagoras and
Theodorus, flatly denied, that there were any Gods: Epicurus makes the Gods,
bright-shining, transparent and perflable, placed as it were between two
Forts, between two Worlds, safely sheltered from all blows; invested with a
humane shape, and with our members, which unto them are of no use.

Ego Deum genus esse semper duxi, and dicam c^litum, E^^. Cice. diu. l. 2.

Sed eos non curare opinor, quid agat humanum genus.
I still thought and will say, of Gods there is a kind;
But what our mankind does, I think they nothing mind.
Trust to your Phylosophie, boast to have hit the nail on the head; or to have
found out the bean of this Cake, to see this coile and hurly-burly of so many
Phylosophical wits. The trouble or confusion of worldly shapes and forms, has
gotten this of me, that customs and conceits differing from mine, do not so
much dislike me, as instruct me; and at what time I confer or compare them
together, they do not so much puff me up with pride, as humble me with
lowliness. And each other choice, except that, which comes from the express
hand of God, seems to me a choice of small prerogative or consequence. The
worlds policies are no less contrary one to another in this subject, than the
schools: Whereby we may learn, that Fortune hirself is no more diverse,
changing and variable, than our reason, nor more blind and inconsiderat.
Things most unknown are fittest to be deified. Wherefore, to make gods of our
selves (as antiquity has done,) it exceed the extreme weakensse of
discourse. I would rather have followed those that worshipped the Serpent, the
Dog and the Ox, for so much as their Nature and being is least known to us;
and we may more lawfully imagine what we list of those beasts and ascribe
extraordinary faculties unto them. But to have made Gods of our condition,
whose imperfections we should know, and to have attributed desire, choler,
revenge, marriages, generation, alliances, love and jealousy, our limbs and
our bones, our infirmities, our pleasures, our deaths and our Sepulchers unto
them, has of necessity proceeded from a mere and egregious sottishness, or
drunkenness of man's wit.

Quae procul vsque adeo divino ab numine distant Lucr. l. 5. 123.

Inque Deum numero quae sint indigna videri.
Which from Divinity so distant are,
To stand in rank of Gods unworthy far.
Forma, aetates, vestitus, ornatus noti sunt: genera, coniugia, cognationes,
omniaque traducta ad similitudinem imbecillitatis humanae: nam and perturbatis
animis inducuntur, accipimus enim Deorum cupiditates, agritudines, iracundias.
Their shapes, their ages, their apparel, their furnitures are known; their
kinds, their marriages, their kindered, and all translated to the likeness of
man's weakness: For they are also brought in with minds much troubled: for we
read of the lust fullness, the grievings, the angrinesse of the Gods. As to
have ascribed Divinity, not only unto faith, virtue, honor, concord, liberty,
victory and piety; but also unto voluptuousness, fraud; death envy, age and
misery; yea unto fear, unto ague and unto evil fortune and such other
injuries and wrongs to our frail and transitory life.

Quid invat hoc, templ^s nostros inducere mores? Pers. sat. 2. 62. 61.

O curvae in terris animae and calestium inanes!
What boots it, into Temples to bring manners of our kinds?
O crooked souls on earth, and void of heavenly minds.
The Egyptians with an impudent wisdom forbad upon pain of hanging, that no
man should dare to say; that Serapis and Isis their Gods, had whilom been but
men, when all knew they had been so. And their images or pictures drawn with
a finger a cross their mouths imported (as Varro says) this misterious rule
unto their priests, to conceal their mortal offspring, which by a necessary
reason disanulled all their veneration. Since man desired so much to equal
himself to God, it had been better for him (says Cicero) to draw those
divine conditions unto himself, and bring them down to earth, then to send
his corruption, and place his misery above in heaven: but to take him aright,
he has diverse ways and with like vanity of opinion, done both the one and
other. When Philosophers blazon and display the Hierarchy of their gods and to
the utmost of their skill endeavor to distinguish their aliances, their charges,
and their powers. I cannot believe they speak in good earnest when Plato
decifreth unto us the orchard of Pluto, and the commodities or corporal pains
which even after the ruin and consumption of our body, wait for us, and
applies them to the apprehension or feeling we have in this life.

Secreti celant colles, and myrtia circum Virg. Aen. l. 6. 443.

Sylva tegit, curae non ipsa in morte relinquunt.
Them paths aside conceal, a myrtle grove
Shades them round; cares in death do not remove.
When Mahomet promises unto his followers aparadise all tapistred, adorned
with gold and precious stones, peopled with exceeding beauteous damsels, stored
with wines and singular cates. I well perceive they are but sooffers, which
suit and apply themselves unto our foolishness, thereby to enhonme and allure
us to these opinions and hopes fitting our mortal appetite. Even so are some
of our men fallen into like errors by promising unto themselves after their
resurection a terrestrial and temporal life, accompanied with all sorts of
pleasures and worldly commodities. Shall we think that Plato, who had so
heavenly conceptions, and was so well acquainted with Divinity, as of most he
purchased the surname of Divine, was ever of opinion, that man (this seely and
wretched creature man) had any one thing in him, which might in any sort be
applied, and suited to this incomprehensible and unspeakable power? or ever
imagined, that our languishing hold fasts were capable, or the virtue of our
understanding of force, to participate or be partakers, either of the
blessedness, or eternal punishment? He ought in the behalf of humane reason
be answered: If the pleasures, thou promisest us in the other life, are such as
I have felt here below, they have nothing in them common with infinity. If all
my five natural senses were even surcharged with joy and gladness, and my
soul possessed with all the contents and, delights, it could possibly desire
or hope for (and we know what it either can wish or hope for) yet were it
nothing. If there be any thing that is mine, then is there nothing that is
Divine; if it be nothing else, but what may appertain unto this our present
condition, it may not be accounted-of, All mortal men's contentment is mortal.
The acknowledging of our parents, of our children and of our friends, if it can
not touch, move or tickle us in the other world, if we still take hold of such
a pleasure, we continue in Terrestrial and transitory commodities. We can not
worthily conceive of these high, mysterious, and divine promises; if we can
but in any sort conceive them, and so imagine them aright; they must be
thought to be inimaginable, unspeakable and incomprehensible, and absolutely
and perfectly other then those of our miserable experience. No eye can behold,
(says Saint Paul) The hap that God prepares 1. Cor. 2. 9.
for his elect, nor can it possibly enter the heart of man. And if to make us
capable of it (as thou says Plato by thy purifications) our being is reformed
and essence changed, it must be by so extreme and universal a change, that
according to Philosophical doctrine, we shall be no more our selves:

Hector erat tunc cum bello certabat, at ille Orid. Trist l. 3. el. 11. 27.

Tr^ctus ab Aemonio non er at Hector equo.
Hector he was, when he in fight used force;
Hector he was not, drawn by the enemies horse.
it shall be some other thing, that shall receive these recompenses.

-- quod mutatur, dissolvitur, interit ergo: Lucr. l. 3. 781.

Traijciuntur enim parts at que ordine migrant.
What is changed, is dissolved, therefore dies:
Translated parts in order fall and rise.
For, in the Metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls of Pithagoras, and the
change of habitation, which he imagined the souls to make; shall we think
that the Lion in whom abides the soul of Caesar, does wed the passions which
concerned Caesar, or that it is he? And if it were he, those had some reason,
who debating this opinion against Plato, object that the son might one day
be found committing with his mother under the shape of a Mules body, and such
like absurdities. And shall we imagine, that in the transmigrations which are
made from the bodies of some creatures into others of the same kind, the new
succeeding-ones are not other, then their predecessors were? Of a Phenixes
cinders, first (as they say) is engendered a worm and then another Phoenix: who
can imagine that this second Phoenix be no other and different from the first?
Our Silk-wormes are seen to die and then to wither dry, and of that body
breeds a Butter-flie, and of that a worm, were it not ridiculous to think,
the same to be the first Silkeworm? what has once lost his being, is no more.

Nec si materiam nostram collegerit aetas Ib. 890.

Post obitum, rursumque redegerit, vt sita nunc est
Atque iterum nobis fuerint data lumina vitae,
Pertineat quidquam tamen ad nos id quoque factum,
Interrupta semel cum sit repet entia nostra.
If time should recollect, when life is past,
Our stuff, and it replace, as now it is placed,
And light of life were granted us again,
Yet nothing would that deed to us pertain,
When interrupted were our turn again.
And Plato, when in another place thou say, that it shall be the spiritual
part of man that shall enjoy the recompenses of the other life, thou tellest of
things of as small likelihood.

Scilicet avulsis radicibus vt nequit vllam Ib. 580.

Dispicere ipse oculus rem seorsum corpore toto.
Even as no eye, by th'root's pull'd-out can see
Ought in whole body several to be.
For, by this reckoning, it shall no longer be man, nor consequently us, to
whom this enjoying shall appertain; for we are builte of two principal
essential parts, the separation of which, is the death and consummation of our
being.

Inter enim iacta est vitai causa vageque Ib. 903.

D^^rrarunt passim motus ab sensibus omnes.
A pause of life is interposed; from sense
All motions straied are, far wandering thence.
we do not say, that man suffers, when the worms gnaw his body and limbs
whereby he lived, and that the earth consumes them.

Et nihil hoc ad nos, qui coitu coniugioque Ibid. 888.

Corporis atque animae consistimus uniter apti.
This naught concern's us, who consist of union,
Of mind and body joined in meet communion,
Moreover, upon what ground of their justice, can the Gods reward man and be
thankful unto him after his death, for his good and virtuous actions, since
themselves addressed and bred them in him? And wherefore are they offended, and
revenge his vicious deeds, when themselves have created him with so defective
a condition, and that but with one twinkling of their will, they may hinder him
from sinning? Might not Epicurus with some show of humane reason object that
unto Plato, if he did not often shroud himself under this sentence; That it is
impossible by mortal nature to establish any certainty of the immortal? She
is ever straying, but especially when she medleth with divine matters. Who
feels it more evidently then we? For, although we have ascribed unto her,
assured and infallible principles, albeit we enlighten her steps with the holy
lamp of that truth, which God has been pleased to impart unto us, we
notwithstanding see daily, how little soever she stray from the ordinary path,
and that she start or stragle out of the way, traced and measured out by the
Church, how soon she loses, entangleth and confounds her self; turning,
tossing and floating up and down, in this vast, troublesome and tempestious
sea of man's opinions, without restraint or scope. So soon as she loses this
high and common way, she devideth and scatters her self a thousand diverse
ways. Man can be no other then he is, nor imagine but according to his
capacity: It is greater presumption (sath Plutarke) in them that are but men,
to attempt to reason and discourse of Gods, and of demie-Gods, then in a man
merely ignorant of music, to judge of those that sing; or for a man, that was
never in wars, to dispute of Arms and war, presuming by some light
conjecture, to comprehend the effects of an art altogether beyond his skill-
As I think, Antiquity imagined it did something for divine Majesty, when she
compared the same unto man, attiring her with his faculties, and enriching her
with his strange humors, and most shameful necessities: offering her some of
our cates to feed upon, and some of our dances, mummeries, and enterludes to
make her merry, with our clothes to apparel her; and our houses to lodge her,
cherishing her with the sweet odors of incense, and sounds of music, adorning
her with garlands and flowers, and to draw her to our vicious passion, to
flatter her justice with an in humane revenge, gladding her with the ruin and
dissipation of things created and preserved by her. As Tiberius Sempronius, who
for a sacrifice to Vulcane, caused the rich spoils and arms, which he had
gotten of his enemies in Sardinia, to be burned: And Paulus Emilius, those he
had obtained in Macedonia, to Mars and Minerva. And Alexander coming to the
Ocean of India, cast in favor of Thetis many great rich vessels of gold into
the Sea, replenishing moreover her Alters with a butcherly slaughter, not only
of innocent beasts, but of men, as diverse Nations, and amongst the rest, ours
were wont to do. And I think none has been exempted from showing the like*
Essays.

-- Su^mone creatos Virg. Aen. l. 10 517.

Quatuor hic iuuenes, totidem, quos educat Vfens,
Viventes rapit, inferias quos immolet vmbris.
Four yong-men borne of Sulmo, and four more
Whom Vfens bred, he living over-bore,
Whom he to his dead friend
A sacrifice might send.
The Getes deem themselves immortal, and their death but the beginning of a
jorney to their God Zamolxis. From five to five years, they dispatch some one
among themselves toward him, to require him of necessary things. This deputy
of theirs is chosen by lottes; And the manner to dispatch him, after they have
by word of mouth instructed him of his charge, is that amongst those which
assist his election, three hold so many javelins upright, upon which the
others by mere strength of arms, throw him, if he chance to stick upon them
in any mortal place, and that he die suddenly, it is to them an assured
argument of divine favor; but if he escape, they deem him a wicked and
execrable man, and then choose another. Amestris mother unto Xerxes, being
become aged, caused at one time 14. young striplings of the noblest houses of
Persia (following the religion of her country) to be buried all alive, thereby
to gratify some God of vnder-earth. Even at this day the Idols of Temixitan
are cimented with the blood of young children, and love no sacrifice but of such
infant and pure souls: Oh justice greedy of the blood of innocence.

Tantum religio potuit su^dere malorum. L^c. l. 1. 102.

Religion so much mischief could
Persuade, where it much better should.
The Carthaginians were wont to sacrifice their own children unto Saturn, and
who had none, was feign to buy some: and their fathers and mothers were
enforced in their proper persons, with cheerful and pleasant countenance to
assist that office. It was a strange conceit, with our own affliction to go
about to please and appay divine goodness. As the Lacedemomans, who flattered
and wantonized their Diana, by torturing of young boys, whom often in favor of
her they caused to be whipped to death. It was a savage kind of humor, to
think do gratify the Architect with the subversion of his architecture: and
to cancel the punishment due unto the guilty, by punishing the guiltles, and
to imagine that poor Iphigenia, in the port of Aulis, should by her death and
sacrifice discharge and expiate, toward God, the Grecians army of the
offenses, which they had committed.

Et casta inceste nubendi tempore in ipso Ibid. 99.

Hostia concider et mactatu moest a parentis.
She, a chaste offering, grieved incestuously
By fathers stroke, when she should wed, to die.
And those two noble and generous souls of the Decij, father and son, to
reconcile, and appease the favor of the Gods, toward the Romans affairs,
should head long cast their bodies athwart the thickest throng of their
enemies. Quae fuit tanta Deorum iniquitas, vt placari populo Romano non
possint, nisi tales viri occidissent? What injustice of the Gods was so great,
as they could not be appeased, unless such men perished? Considering that it
lies not in the offender to cause himself to be whipped, how and when he list,
but in the judge, who accoumpteth nothing a right punishment, except the
torture he appoints; and cannot impute that unto punishment, which is in the
free choice of him that suffers. The divine vengeance presupposes our full
dissent, for his justice and our pain. And ridiculous was that humor of
Polycrates, the Tyrant of Samos, who to interrupt the course of his continual
happiness, and to recompence-it, cast the richest and most precious jewel he
had into the Sea, deeming that by this purposed mishappe he should satisfy the
revolution and vicissitude of fortune; which to deride his folly, caused the
very same jewel, being found in a fishes-belly, to return to his hands again.
And to what purpose are the manglings and dismembrings of the Corybantes, of
the Maenades, and now a days of the Mahumetans, who skarre, and gash their
faces, their stomach and their limbs, to gratify their prophet: seeing the
offense consists in the will, not in the breast, nor eyes, nor in the
genitories, health, shoulders, or throat? Tantus est perturbatae mentis and
sedibus suis pulsae furror, vt sic dij placentur, quemadmodum ne Aug. Civi. Dei
l. 6. c. 10.
homines quidem saeuiunt. So great is the fury of a troubled mind put from
the state it should be in, as the Gods must be so pacified, as even men would
not be so outrageous. This natural contexture does by her use not only respect
us, but also the service of God, and other men's: it is injustice to make it
miscarie at our pleasure, as under what pretense soever it be to kill our
selves. It seems to be a great cowardice and manifest treason, to abuse the
stupide and corrupt the servile functions of the body, to spare the diligence
unto the soul how to direct them according unto reason. Vbi iratos deos
timent, qui sic propitios habere merentur. In regiae libidinis Ibid. e. Senec.
voluptatem castrati sunt quidam; sed nemo ^ibi, ne vir esset, in bente domino,
manus intulit. Where are they afeard of Gods anger, who in such sort deserve to
have his favor; some have been guelded for Princes lustful pleasure: but no
man at the Lords command, has laid hands on himself, to be less then a man.
Thus did they replenish their religion and stuff it with diverse bad effects.

-- saepius olim Lucr. l. 1. 82.

Religio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta.
Religion has often times in former times.
Bred execrable facts, ungodly crimes.
Now can nothing of ours, in what manner soever, be either compared or referred
unto divine nature, that does not blemish or defile the same with as much
imperfection. How can this infinite beauty, power and goodness admit any
correspondency or similitude with a thing so base and abject as we are, without
extreme interest and manifest derogation from his divine greatness? Infirmum
Dei fortius est hominibus; and stultum Dei sapientius est hominibus, 1. Cor. 1.
25.
The weakness of God is stronger then men: and the foolishness of God is
wiser then men. Stilpo the Philosopher, being demanded, whether the Gods
rejoice at our honors and sacrifices; you are indiscreet (said he) let us
withdraw our selves a part, if you speak of such matters. Notwithstanding we
prescribe him limits, we lay continual siege unto his power by our reasons. (I
call our dreams and our vanities reason, with the dispensation of Philosophy,
which says, that both the fool and the wicked do rave and dote by reason;
but that it is a reason of several and particular form) we will subject him
to the vain and weak apparances of our understanding; him who has made both
us and our knowledge. Because nothing i^ ^ade of nothing: God was not able to
frame the world without matter. What? Has God delivered into our hands the
keys, and the strongest wards of his infinite puissance? Has he obliged
himself not to exceed the bounds of our knowledge? Suppose, oh man, that
herein thou have been able to mark some signs of his effects: Think thou,
he has therein employed all he was able to do, and that he has placed all
his forms and Ideas, in this piece of work? Thou see but the order and
policy of this little little Cell wherein thou art placed: The question is,
whither thou see it: His divinity has an infinite jurisdiction far beyond
that: This piece is nothing in respect of the whole.

-- omnia cum caelo terraque marique, Lucr. l. 6. 675.

Nil sunt ad summam summai totius omnem.
All things that are, with heaven, with Sea, and land,
To the whole sum of the whole sum, as nothing stand.
This law thou a leagest is but a municipall law, and thou know not what the
universal is. Tie thy self unto that, whereto thou are subject, but tie not
him; he is neither thy companion, nor thy brother, nor thy fellow Citizen, nor
thy compesmate. If he in any sort have communicated himself unto thee, it is
not to debase himself, or stoop to thy smalnesse, nor to give thee the
controulment of his power. Man's body cannot soar up unto the clouds, this is
for thee. The Sun incessantly goes his ordinary course: The bounds of the
Seas and of the earth can not be confounded: The water is ever fleeting,
wavering, and without firmness: A wall without breach or flaw, inpenetrable
unto a solid body: Man cannot preserve his life amidst the flames, he cannot
corporally be both in heaven and on earth, and in a thousand places together
and at once. It is for thee that he has made these rules; it is thou they take
hold off. He has testified unto Christians, that when ever it pleased him he
has out gone them all. And in truth, omnipotent as he is, wherefore should he
have restrained his forces unto a limited measure? In favor of whom should he
have renounced his privilege? Thy reason has in no one other thing more
likelihood and foundation, then in that which persuades thee a plurality of
worlds.

Terramque and solemn, lunam, mare, caetera quae sunt, Ib. 2. 1094.

Non esse vnica, sed numero magis innumerali.
The earth, the Sun, the Moon, the Sea and all
In number numberless, not one they call.
The famousest wits of former ages have believed it, yea and some of our
modern, as forced thereunto by the appearance of humane reason. For as much as
whatsoever we see in this vast worlds frame, there is no one thing alone,
single and one:

-- cum in summa res nulla sit vna, Ib. 1086.

Vnica quae gignatur, and vnica sol^que crescat:
Whereas in general sum, nothing is one,
To be bred only one, grow only one.
and that all several kinds are multiplied in some number: Whereby it seems
unlikely, that God has framed this piece of work alone without a fellow; and
that the matter of this form has wholly been spent in this only Individuum;

Quare etiam atque etiam tales fateare necesse est, Ib. 1^73.

Esse alios alibi congressus materiaij,
Qualis hic est avido complexu quem tenet Ether.
Wherefore you must confess, again again,
Of matter such like meetings else where reign
As this, these skies in greedy gripe contain.
Namely if it be a breathing creature, as it is motions make it so likely, that
Plato assures it, and diverse of ours either affirm it, or dare not impugn
it; no more then this old opinion, that the Heaven, the Stars and other
members of the World, are Creatures composed both of body and soul; mortal in
respect of their composition, but immortal by the creators decree. Now, if
there be diverse Worlds, as Democritus, Epicurus and well-neere all Phylosophie
has thought; what know we, whether the principles and the rules of this one
concern or touch likewise the others? Happily they have another semblance and
another policy. Epicurus imagines them either like or unlike. We see an
infinite difference and variety in this world, only by the distance of places.
There is neither Corn, nor Wine; no nor any of our beasts seen in that new
Corner of the World, which our fathers have lately discovered: All things
differ from ours. And in the old time, mark but in how many parts of the
world, they had never knowledge nor of Bacchus nor of Ceres. If any credit may
be given unto Pliny or to Herodotus, there is in some places a kind of men
that have very little or no resemblance at all with ours. And there be mungrell
and ambiguous shapes, between a humane and brutish Nature. Some Cuntries there
are, where men are borne headless, with eyes and mouths in their breasts;
where al are Hermaphrodites; where they creep on all four; Where they have but
one eye in their forehead, and heads more like unto a dog than ours; Where from
the Navill downwards they are half fish, and live in the water; Where women
are brought a bed at five years of age, and live but eight; Where their heads
and the skin of their brows are so hard, that no iron can pierce them, but
will rather turn edge; Where men never have beardes. Other Nations there are,
that never have use of fire? Others whose sperme is of a black color. What
shall we speak of them, who naturally change themselves into Woolves, into
Coults, and then into Men again? And if it be (as Plutark says) that in some
part of the Indiaes, there are men without mouths, and who live only by the
smell of certain sweet odours; how many of our descriptions be then false?
He is no more ri^ible; nor perhaps capable of reason and society: The
direction and cause of our inward frame, should for the most part be to no
purpose. Moreover, how many things are there in our knowledge, that oppugn
these goodly rules, which we have allotted and prescribed unto Nature? And we
undertake to join GOD himself unto her. How many things do we name
miraculous and against Nature? Each man and every Nation does it according to
the measure of his ignorance. How many hidden proprieties and quintessences do
we daily discover? For us to go according to Nature, is but to follow
according to our understanding, as far as it can follow, and as much as we can
perceive in it. Whatsoever is beyond it, is monstrous and disordred. By this
accoumpt all shall then be monstrous, to the wisest and most sufficient; for
even to such, humane reason has persuaded, that she had neither ground nor
footing, no not so much as to warrant snow to be white: And Anaxagoras said, it
was black; Whether there be any thing or nothing; Whether there be knowledge
or ignorance; Which Metrodorus Chius denied, that any man might say. Or whether
we live as Euripides seems to doubt, and call in question, whether the life
we live be a life or no, or whether that which we call death be a life:

(...), Pla^. Gerg ^x Eurip.

(...);
Who knows if thus to live, be called death,
And if it be to die, thus to draw breath?
And not without appearance. For, wherefore do we from that instant take a
title of being, which is but a twinkling in the infinite course of an eternal
night, and so short an interruption of our perpetual and natural condition?
Death possessing whatever is before and behind this moment, and also a good
part of this moment. Some others affirm, there is no motion, and that nothing
stirs; namely those which follow Melissus. For if there be but (...) this
sphericall motion serve him, nor the mooving from one place to another, as
Plato prooveth, that there is neither generation nor corruption in nature.
Protagoras says, there is nothing in Nature, but doubt: That a man may equally
dispute of all things: and of that also, whether all things may equally be
disputed of: Mansiphanes said, that of things which seem to be, no one thing,
is no more, then it is not. That nothing is certain, but uncertainty.
Parmenides, that of that which seems, there is no one thing in General. That
there is but one Zeno, that one self same is not: And that there is nothing.
If one were he should either be in another, or in himself: if he be in
another, then are they two: If he be in himself, they are also two, the
comprizing and the comprised. According to these rules or doctrines, the Nature
of things is but a false or vain shadow. I have ever thought, this manner of
speech in a Christian, is full of indiscretion and irreverence; God cannot die,
God cannot gainsay himself, God cannot do this or that. I cannot allow, a
man should so bound Gods heavenly power under the Laws of our word. And that
appearance, which in these propositions offers it self unto us, ought to be
represented more reverently and more religiously. Our speech has his
infirmities and defects, as all things else have. Most of the occasions of this
worlds troubles are Grammatical. Our suits and processes proceed but from the
canvasing and debating the interpretation of the Laws, and most of our wars
from the want of knowledge in State-counsellors, that could not clearly
distinguish and fully express the Covenants, and Conditions of accords,
between Prince and Prince. How many weighty strifes, and important quarrels,
bath the doubt of this one silable, Hoc, brought forth in the world? examine
the plainest sentence, that Logike it self can present unto us. If you say, it
is fair Weather, and in so saying, say true; it is fair Weather then. Is not
thie a certain form of speech? Yet will it deceive us: That it is so; Let us
follow the example: If you say, I lie, and that you should say true, you lie
then. The Art, the reason, the force of the conclusion of this last, are like
unto the other; notwithstanding we are entangled. I see the Pyrhonian
Philosophers, who can by no manner of speech express their General conceit:
for, they had need of a new language. Ours is altogether composed of
affirmative propositions, which are directly against them. So that, when they
say, I doubt, you have them fast by the throat to make them a vow, that at
least you are assured and know, that they doubt. So have they been compelled to
save themselves by this comparison of Physic, without which their conceit
would be inexplicable and intricate. When they pronounce, I know not, or I
doubt, they say, that this proposition transportes it self together with the
rest, even as the Rewbarbe does, which scowred ill humors away, and therewith
is carried away himself. This conceit is more certainly conceived by an
interrogation: What can I tell? As I bear it in an Imprese of a pair of
balances. Note how some prevail with this kind of vnreverent and unhallowed
speech. In the disputation, that are now-adayes in our religion, if you
overmuch urge the adversaries, they will roundly tell you, that it lies not in
the power of God to make his body at once to be in Paradise and on earth, and
in many other places together. And how that ancient skoffer made profitable use
of it. Atleast (says he) it is no small comfort unto man, to see that God
cannot do all things; for he cannot kill himself if he would, which is the
greatest benefit we have in our condition; he cannot make mortal men
immortal, nor raise the dead to life again, nor make him that has lived,
never to have lived, and him, who has had honors, not to have had them,
having no other right over what is past, but of sorgetfulnesse. And that this
society between God and Man; may also be combined with some pleasant examples,
he cannot make twice ten not to be twenty. See what he says and which a
Christian ought to abhor, that ever such and so profane words should pass his
mouth: Whereas on the contrary part, it seems that fond men endeavor to find
out this foolish-boldnesse of speech, that so they may turn and wind God
almighty according to their measure.

-- cras vel atra Hor. car. l. 3. od. 29. 43.

Nube polum pater occupato,
Vel sole puro, non tamen irritum
Quodeumque retro est efficiet, neque
Diffinget infectumque reddet
Quod fugiens semel hora vexit.
To morrow let our father fill the sky,
With dark cloud, or with clear Sun, he thereby
Shall not'make void what once is overpast:
Nor shall he undo, or in new molde cast,
What time has once caught; that flies hence so fast.
When we say, that the infinity of ages, as well past as to come, is but one
instant with God; that his wisdom, goodness and power, are one selfsame
thing with his essence; our tongue speakes-it, but our understanding can no
whit apprehend it. Yet will our selfe-overweening sift his divinity through
our searce: whence are engendered all the vanities and errors wherewith the
world is so full-fraught, reducing and weighing with his uncertain balance, a
thing so far from his reach, and so distant from his weight. Mirum Pli^. not.
hist. l. 2. c. 23.
quo procedat improbitas cordis humani, parvulo aliquo invitata successu. It is
a wonder, whether the perverse wickedness of man's heart will proceed, if it
be but called-on with any little success. How insolently do the Stoikes
charge Epicurus, because he holds, that to be perfectly good and absolutely
happy, belongs but only unto God; and that the wiseman has but a shadow and
similitude thereof? How rashly have they joined God unto destiny? (Which at my
request, let none that bears the surname of a Christian, do at this day) And
Thales, Plato, and Pithagoras have subjected him unto necessity. This
over-boldnesse, or rather bold-fiercensse, to seek to discover God, by and
with our eyes, has been the cause, that a notable man of our times has
attributed a corporal form unto divinity and is the cause of that which
daily happens unto us, which is, by a particular assignation, to impute all
important events to God: which because they touch us, it seems they also
touch him, and that he regards them with more care and attention, then those
that are but slight and ordinary unto us. Magna dij curant, parva negligunt.
The Gods take some care for great things, but none Cic. Not. D^^r. lib. 2. Cic.
ib. lib. 3.
for little. Note his example; he will enlighten you with his reason. Nec
inregnis quidem reges omnia minima curant. Nor do Kings in their Kingdoms
much care for the least matters. As if it were all one to that King, either to
remove an Empire, or a leaf of a tree: and if his providence were otherwise
exercised, inclining or regarding no more the success of a battle, then the
skip of a flea. The hand of his government affords it self to all things after
a like tenure, fashion and order; our interest adds nothing unto it: our
motions and our measures concern him nothing and move him no whit. Deus it a
artifex magnus in magnis, vt minor non sit in parvis. God is so great a
workman in great things, as he is no less in small things. Our arrogancy,
sets ever before us this blasphemous equality; because our occupations
charge-vs. State has presented the Gods with all immunitie of offices, as are
their Priests. He makes nature to produce and preserve all things, and by her
weights and motions to compact all parts of the world, discharging humane
nature from the fear of divine judgments. Cic. ib. lib. 1.
Quod beatum aeternumque sit, id nec habere, negotij quicquam, ne^ exhibere
alteri. That which is blessed and eternal, nor is troubled it self, nor
troubles others. Nature wills that in all things alike, there be also like
relation. Then the infinite number of mortal men, concludes a like number of
immortal.: The infinite things that kill and destroy, presuppose as many that
preserve and profit. As the souls of the Gods, sanse tongues, sanse eyes and
sanse ears, have each one in themselves a feeling of that which the other
feel, and judge of our thoughts; so men's souls, when they are free and
severed from the body, either by sleep or any distraction; divine,
prognosticate and see things, which being conjoined to their bodies, they could
not see. Men (says Saint Paul) when they professed themselves to be Run. 1.
22. 23.
wise, they became fools, for they turned the glory of the incorruptible God
to the similitude of the image of a corruptible man. Mark I pray you a little
the juggling of ancient Deifications. After the great, solemn and proud pomp
of funerals, when the fire began to burn the top of the Pyramid: and to take
hold of the bed or hearce wherein the dead, corpse lay, even at that instant,
they let fly an Eagle, which taking her flight aloft upward, signified that
the soul went directly to Paradise. We have yet a thousand medailes and
monuments, namely of that honest woman Faustina, wherein that Eagle is
represented, carrying a cocke-horse up toward heaven those Deified souls. It
is pity we should so deceive our selves with our own foolish devises and apish
inventions,

Quod finxere timent -- Lucan. l. 1. 484

Of that they stand in fear,
Which they in fancy bear.
as children will be afeard of their fellows visage, which them selves have
besmeared and blackt. Quasi quicquam infoelicius sit homine, cui sua figment a
dominantur. As though any thing were more wretched then man over whom his own
imaginations bear sway and domineere. To honor him whom we have made, is
far from honoring him that has made us. Augustus had as many Temples as
Jupiter, and served with as much religion and opinion of miracles. The
Thrasians, in requital of the benefits they had received of Agesilaus, came to
tell him how they had canonized him. Has your Nation (said he) the power to
make those whom it pleases, Gods: Then first (for example sake) make one of
your selves, and when I shall have seen what good he shall have thereby, I
will then thank you for your offer. Oh senseless man, who can not possibly
make a worm, and yet will make Gods by dozens. Listen to Trismegistus when he
praises our sufficiency: For man to find out divine nature, and to make it,
has surmounted the admiration of all admirable things. Lo here arguments out
of Philosophies schools it self,

Noscere cui Divos and coelinumina soli, Lucan. lib. 1. 452.

Aut solinescire datum.
Only to whom heavens Deities to know,
Only to whom is given, them not to know.
If God be, he is a living creature; if he be a living creature, he has sense;
and if he have sense, he is subject to corruption. If he be without a body, he
is without a soul, and consequently without action: and if he have a body, he
is corruptible. Is not this brave? we are incapable to have made the world,
then is there some more excellent nature, that has set her helping hand unto
it. Were it not a sottish arrogance, that we should think our selves to be
the perfectest thing of this Universe? Then sure there is some better thing,
And that is God. When you see a rich and stately Mansion house, although you
know not who is owner of it, yet will you not say, that it was built for Rats.
And this more then humane frame, and divine composition, which we see, of
heavens palace, must we not deem it to be the mansion of some Lord, greater
then our selves? Is not the highest ever the most worthy? And we are seated in
the lowest place. Nothing that is without a soul and void of reason, is able
to bring forth a living soul capable of reason. The world does bring us forth,
then the world has both soul and reason. Each part of us, is less then our
selves, we are part of the world, then the world is stored with wisdom and
with reason, and that more plenteously, then we are. It is a goodly thing to
have a great government. Then the worlds government belongs to some blessed
and happy nature. The stars annoy us not, then the stars are full of
goodness. We have need of nourishment, then so have the Gods, and feed
themselves with the vapors arising here below. Worldly goods, are not goods
unto God. Then are not they goods unto us. To offend and to be offended, are
equal witnesses of imbecilitie; Then it is folly to fear God. God is good by
his own nature, man by his industry: which is more? Divine wisdom and man's
wisdom, have no other distinction, but that the first is eternal. Now
lastingnesse it not an accession unto wisdom. Therefore are we fellows. We
have life, reason and liberty, we esteem goodness, charity and justice;
these qualities are then in him. In conclusion the building and destroying the
conditions of divinity, are forged by man according to the relation to
himself. Oh what a pattern, and what a model! Let us raise, and let us
amplify humane qualities as much as we please. Puffe-vp thy self poor man,
yea swell and swell again.

-- non si te ruperis, inquit. Hor. sermon. lib. 2. sat. 3. 324.

Swell till you break, you shall not be,
Equal to that great one, quoth he.
Profecto non Deum, quem cogitare non possunt, sed semetipsos pro illo
cogitantes, nonillum; sed seipsos, non ills, sed sibi comparant. Of a truth,
they conceiting, not God, whom they cannot conceive, but themselves instead of
God, do not compare him, but themselves, not to him, but themselves. In
natural things the effects do but half refer their causes. What this? It
is above natures order it is condition is to high, to far out of reach, and
overswaying to endure, that our conclusions should seize upon, or fetter the
same. It is not by our means we reach unto it, this train is too low. We are
no nerer heaven on the top of Sina mount, then in the bottom of the deepest
Sea: Consider of it, that you may see with your Astrolabe. They bring God even
to the carnal acquaintance of women, to a prefixed number of times, and to how
many generations. Paulina, wife unto Saturninus, a matron of great reputation
in Rome, supposing to lie with the God Serapis, by the maquerelage of the
Priests of that Temple, found hi^ self in the arms of a wanton lover of hirs.
Varro the most subtle, and wisest Latin Author, in his books of divinity
writes, that Hercules his Sextaine, with one hand casting lottes for himself,
and with the other for Hercules, gaged a supper and a wench against him: if he
won, at the charge of his offerings, but if he lost, at his own cost. He lost
and paid for a supper and a wench: Her name was Laurentina: Who by night saw
that God in her arms, saying moreover unto her, that the next day, the first
man she met withal, should heavenly pay her her wages. It fortuned to be one
Taruncius, a very rich yong-man, who took her home with him, and in time left
her absolute heir of all he had. And she, when it came to her turn, hoping to
do that God some acceptable service, left the Roman people heir general of
all her wealth: And therefore had she divine honors attributed unto her. As if
it were not sufficient for Plato to descend originally from the Gods; by a
twofold line, and to have Neptune for the common Author of his race. It was
certainly believed at Athens, that Ariston desiring to enjoy fair Perictyone,
he could not, and that in his dream he was warned by God Apollo, to leave her
untouched and unpolluted, until such time as she were brought a bed. And these
were the father and mother of Plato. How many suchlike cuckoldries are there
in histories, procure be the Gods against seely mortal men? And husbands most
injuriously blazoned in favor of their children? In Mah^mets religion, by the
easy belief of that people are many Merlins found; That is to say fatherles
children: Spiritual children, conceived and borne divinely in the wombs of
virgins, and that in their language bear names, importing as much* We must
note, that nothing is more dear and precious to any thing, then it is own
being (the Lion, the Eagle and the Dolphin esteem nothing above their kind)
each thing refers the qualities of all other things unto her own
conditions, which we may either amplify or shorten; but that is all: for
besides this principle, and out of this reference, our imagination cannot go,
and guess further: and it is impossible it should exceed that, or go beyond
it: Whence arise these ancient conclusions. Of all forms, that of man is the
fairest: Then God is of this form. No man can be happy without virtue, nor
can virtue be without reason; And no reason can lodge but in a humane shape:
God is then invested with a humane figure. Ita est informatum anticipatum
mentibus nostris, vt homini, quum de Deo Cit. not. Deo. lib. 1.
cogitet, forma occurrat humana. The prejudice forestaled in our minds is so
framed, as the form of man comes to man's mind, when he is thinking of God.
Therefore Xenophanes said pleasantly, that if beasts frame any Gods unto
themselves, (as likely it is they do) they surely frame them like unto
themseves, and glorify themselves as we do. For, why may not a Goose say
thus? All parts of the world behold me, the earth serves me to tread upon, the
Sun to give me light, the stars to inspire we with influence: this
commodity I have of the winds, and this benefit of the waters; there is
nothing that this worlds-vaulte does so favorably look upon, as me self; I am
the favorite of nature: Is it not man that cares for me, that keeps me,
lodges me, and serves me? For me it is he sows, reapeth and grindeth: If he
eat me, so does man feed on his fellow, and so do I on the worms, that
consume and eat him. As much might a Crane say, yea and more boldly, by reason
of her flights-libertie, and the possession of this goodly and high-bownding
region. Tam blanda conciliatrix, and tam sui est Cit. not. Deo. ib
lena ipsa natura. So flattring a broker, and bawd (as it were) is nature to it
self, Now by the same consequence, the destinies are for us, the world is for
us; it shines, and thundreth for us: Both the creator and the creatures are
for us: It is the mark and point whereat the university of things aymeth.
Survay but the register, which Philosophy has kept these two thousand years
and more, of heavenly affairs. The Gods never acted, and never spoke, but for
man: She ascribes no other consultation, nor imputes other vacation unto
them. Lo how they are up in arms against us.

-- domitosque Herculea manu Her. ^^r. l. 2. ^d. 12. 6.

Telluris iuvenes, vnde periculum
Fulgens contremuit domus
Saturni veteris.
And young earth-gallants tamed by the hand
Of Hercules, whereby the habitation
Of old Saturnus did in peril stand,
And, shyn'd it never so bright, yet feared invasion.
See how they are partakers* of our troubles, that so they may be even with us,
for so much as so many times we are partakers of theirs.

Neptunus muros magnoque ^mota trident^ Virg. Ae^. lib. 2. 610.

Fundamenta quatit totamque a sedibus vrbem
Eruit: hic Juno Scaeas saevissima portas
Prima tenet. --
Neptunus with his great thre^-forked ma^^
Shak's the weak wall, and t^ttering foundation,
And from the site the City does displace,
Fierce Juno first holds-ope the gates t'invasion.
The Caunians, for the jelousie of their own Gods domination, upon their
devotion-day arm themselves, and running up and down, brandi^hing and
striking the air with their glaives, and in this ernest manner they expel all
foraine, and banish all strange Gods from out their territory. Their powers
are limited according to our necessity. Some heal Horses, some cure men, some
the plague, some the scalde, some the cough, some one kind of scabbe, and some
another: Adeo m^^imis ^t^am rebus prava religio inserit Deos: This corrup^
religion engages and inferteth Gods even in the least matters: Some make
grapes to grow, and some garlike; Some have the charge of bawdrie and
uncleanness, and Some of merchandise: To every kind of tradesman a God. Some
one has his province and credit in the East, and some in the West:

-- hic illius arma Virg. Ae^. li^* 1. 10.

Hic currus fuit --
His armor here
His char^orts there apeare.
O sancte Apollo* qui vmbilicum certum terrarum obtines. Cic. diu. lib. 2.

Sacred Apollo, who enfoldest,
The earths set n^vell, and it hold.
Pallada Cecropidae, Minoya Creta Dianam, O^id. Fas^. lib. 3. 81.

Vulcanum tellus Hipsipil^a colit.
Iunonem Sparte, Pelopeiadesque Mycenae,
Pinigerum Fauni M^nalis ora caput:
Mars Latio venerandus. --
Besmeared with blood and goare.
Th'Athenians Pallas; Minos-Candy cost
Diana; Lemnos Vulcan honor's most*
Mycene and Sparta, Juno think divine;
The coast of Maenalus Faune crowned with pine;
Latium does Mars adore.
Some has but one borough or family in his possession: Some lodges alone,
and some in company, either voluntarily or necessarily.

Iunctaque sunt magno templa nepotis avo. lib. 1. 294.

To the great grand-sires shrine,
The nephews temples do combine.
Some there are so seely and popular (for their number amounts to six and
thirty thousand) that five or six of them must be shufled up to gether to
produce an ear of corn, and thereof they take their several names. Three to a
door; one to be the boardes, one to be the hinges, and the third to the
threshold. Four to a child, as protectors of his bandels, of his drink, of
his meat and of his sucking. Some are certain, others vncertane, some
doubtful; and some that come not yet into paradise.

Quos, quoniam caeli nondum dignamur honor, Ovid. M^tam. ^^b. 1. 194.

Quas dedimus certe terras, habitare sinamus.
Whom for as yet with heaven we have not graced,
Let them on earth by our good grant be placed.
There are some Philosophical, some poetical, and some civil, some of a
mean condition, between divine and humane nature, mediators, and spokes*men
between us and God: worshipped in a kind of second or diminutive order of
adoration: infinite in titles and offices: some good, some bad; some old and
crazed, and some mortal. For Chrysippus thought, that in the last
conflagration or burning of the world, all the Gods should have an end, except
Jupiter. Man faineth a thousand pleasant societies between God and him. Nay is
he not his countrieman?

-- lovis incunabul^ Creten. Ovid Met. l. 8. 99.

The I Will of famous Creet,
For love a cradle meet.
Behold the excuse, that Scaevola chief Bishop, and Varro, a great Divine in
their days, give us upon the consideration of this subject. It is necessary
(say they) that man be altogether ignorant of true things, and believe many
false. Quum veritatem qua liberetur, inquirat: credatur ei exp^dire, quod
fallitur. Since they seek the truth, whereby they may be free, let us believe
it is expedient for them, to be deceived. Man's eye cannot perceive things, but
by the forms of his knowledge. And we remember not the downfall of miserable
Phaeton, for so much as he undertook to guide the reins of his fathers steedes,
with a mortal hand. Ou^ mind does still relaps into the same depth, and by
her own temeritie does dissipate and bruise it self. If you enquire of
Philosophy, what matter the Sun is composed-of? What will it answer, but of iron
and stone, or other stuff for his use? Demand of Zeno, what Nature is? A fire
(says he) an Artist, fit to engender, and proceeding orderly. Archimedes
master of this Science, and who in truth and certainty assumeth unto
himself a precedencie above all others, says, the Sun is a God of
enflamed-yron. Is not this a quaint imagination, produced by the inevitable
necessity of Geometrical demonstrations? Yet not so unavoidable and
beneficial, but Socrates has been of opinion, that it sufficed to know so
much of it as that a man might measure out the land, he either dem^sed or took
to rent: and that Polyaenus, who therein had been a famous and principal
Docter, after he had tasted the sweet fruits of the lazy, idle and delicious
gardens of Epicurus, did not contemn them, as full of falsehood and apparent
vanity. Socrates in Xenophon, upon this point of Anaxagoras, allowed and
esteemed of antiquity, well seen and expert above all others in heavenly and
divine matters, says, that he weakened his brains much, as all men do, who
over nicely and greedily will search out those knowledges, which hang not for
their mowing, nor pertain unto them. When he would needs have the Sun to be
a burning stone, he remembered not, that a stone does not shine in the fire;
and which is more, that it consumes therein. And when he made the Sun and
fire to be all one, he forgot, that fire does not tanne and black those he
looks upon; that we fixly look upon the fire, and that fire consumes and
kills all plants and herbs. According to the advice of Socrates and mine,
The wisest judging of heaven, is not to judge of it at all. Plato in his
Timeus, being to speak of Doemons and spirits, says, it is an enterprise far
exceeding my skill and ability: we must believe what those ancient forefathers
have said of them, who have said to have been engendered by them. It is against
reason not to give credit unto the children of the Gods although their sayings
be neither grounded upon necessary, nor likely reasons, since they tell us,
that they speak of familiar and household matters. Let us see, whether we have
a little more insight in the knowledge of humane and natural things. Is it not
a fond enterprise, to those unto which, by our own confession, our learning
cannot possible attain, to divise and forge them another body, and of our own
invention to give them a false form? as is seen in the planetary motions,
unto which because our mind cannot reach, nor imagine their natural conduct,
we lend them something of ours, that is to say, material, gross and corporal
springs and wards:

-- temo aureus, aurea summ^ Orid. Met. l. 2. 107.

Curvatura rotae, radiorum argenteus ordo.
The Axe-tree gold, the wheels whole circle gold,
The rank of rays did all of silver hold.
you would say, we have had Coach-makers, Carpenters, and Painters, who have
gone up thither, and there have placed engines with diverse motions, and ranged
the wheelings, the windings, and enterlacements of the celestial bodies
d^apred in colors, according to Plato, about the spindle of necessity.

Mundus domus est maxi^a rerum,
Quam quinque altitonae fragmine zon^
Cingunt, per quam li^bus pictus bis sex signis,
Stellimicantibus, alius in obliquo aethere, Lunae
Bigas acceptat.
The world, of things the greatest habitation,
Which five high-thundring Zones by separation
Engirde, through which a scarf depainted fair
With twice six signs star-shining in the air.
Obliquely raisde, the waine
O'th'Moone does entertain.
They are all dreams, and mad follies. Why will not nature one day be pleased
to open her bosom to us, and make us perfectly see the means and conduct of
her motions, and enable our eyes to judge of them? Oh good God, what abuses,
and what distractions should we find in our poor understanding, and weak
knowledge* I am deceived, if she hold one thing directly in it is point; and I
shall part hence more ignorant of all other things, then mine ignorance. Have I
not seen this divine saying in Plato, that Nature is nothing but an
aenigmaticall poesy? As a man might say, an overshadowed and dark picture,
enter-shining with an infinite variety of false lights, to exercise our
conjectures. Latent ista omnia Ci^. Acad. q. lib. 4.
crassi^ occultata and circumfusa tenebris vt nulla acies humani ingenij tanta
sit, quae penetrare in coelum, terram intrare possit. All these things lie hid
so veiled and environed with mistie darkness, as no edge of man is so
piersant, as it can pass into heaven, or dive into the earth. And truly,
Philosophy is nothing else but a sophisticated poesy: whence have these
ancient Authors all their authorities, but from Poets? And the first were Poets
themselves, and in their Art treated the same. Plato is but a loose Poet. All
high and more then humane Sciences are decked and enrobed with a Poetical
style. Even as women, when their natural teeth fail them, use some of yuorie,
and in stead of a true beauty, or lively color, lay-on some artificial hew;
and as they make trunk-sleeves of wyre and whale-bone bodies, backs of lathes,
and stiff bumbast^d verdugals, and to the open-view of all men paint and
embellish themselves with counterfeit and borrowed beauties; so does learning
(and our law has, as some say, certain lawful fictions, on which it
groundeth the truth of justice) which in liew of current payment and
presupposition, delivers us those things, which she her self teaches us to
be mere inventions: For, these Epicycles, Excentriques, and Concentriques,
which Astrology uses to direct the state and motions of her stars, she
gives them unto us, as the best she could ever invent, to fit and suit unto
this subject: as in all things else, Philosophy presents unto us, not that
which is, or she believes, but what she inventeth, as having most appearance,
likely hood, or comeliness. Plato upon the discourse of our bodies-estate, and
of that of beasts: That what we have said, is true, we would be assured of it,
had we but the confirmation of some oracle, to confirme-it. This only we
warrant, that it is the likeliest we could say. It is not to heaven alone, that
she sends her cordages, her engines, and her wheels: Let us but somewhat
consider, what she says of our selves, and of our contexture. There is no more
retorgradation, trepidation, augmentation, recoyling, and violence in the
stars and celestial bodies, then they have fained and devised in this poor
seely little body of man. Verily they have thence had reason to name it
Microcosmos, or little world, so many several parts and visages have they
imploide to fashion and frame the same. To accommodate the motions which they
see in man, the diverse functions and faculties, that we feel in our selves;
Into how many several parts have they divided our soul? Into how many seats
have they placed her? Into how many orders, stages, and stations have they
divided this wretched man, beside the natural and perceptible? and to how many
distinct offices and vacation? They make a public imaginary thing of it. It
is a subject, which they hold and handle: they have all power granted them, to
rip him, to sever him, to range him, to join and reunite him together again,
and to stuff him, every one according to his fantasy, and yet they neither
have not possess him. They cannot so order or rule him, not in truth only,
but in imagination, but still some cadence or sound is discovered, which
escapes their architecture, bad as it is, and bot^ht together with a thousand
false patches, and fantastical pieces. And they have no reason to be excused:
For, to Painters, when they pourtray the heaven, the earth, the seas, the
hills, the scattered Islands, we pardon them, if they but represent us with some
slight appearance of them; and as of things unknown we are contented with such
fained shadows: But when they draw us, or any other subject that is familiarly
known unto us, to the life, then seek we to draw from them a perfect and
exact representation of theirs or our true lineaments, or colors; and scorn
if they miss never so little. I commend the Milesian wench, who seeing Thales
the Philosopher continually ammusing himself in the contemplation of
heavens-wide-bounding vault, and ever holding his eyes aloft, laid something in
his way to make him stumble, thereby to warn and put him in mind, that he
should not ammuse his thoughts about matters above the clouds, before he had
provided for, and well considered those at his feet. Verily she advised him
well, and it better became him, rather to look to himself then to gaze on
heaven; For, as Democritus by the mouth of Cicero says,

Quod est ante pedes, nemo spectat: coeli scrutantur plagas, Cic. div. lib. 2.

No man looks, what before his feet does lie,
They seek and search the climates of the sky.
But our condition bears, that the knowledge of what we touch with our hands,
and have amongst us, is as far from us and above the clouds, as that of the
stars: As says Socrates in Plato, That one may justly say to him who medleth
with Philosophy, as the woman said to Thales, which is, he sees nothing of
that which is before him. For, every Philosopher is ignorant of what his
neighbor does, yea, he knows not what himself does, and wots not what both
are, whether beasts or men. These people who think Sebondes reasons to be
weak and lame, who know nothing themselves, and yet will take upon them to
govern the world and know all:

Quae mare compescant causae, quid temperet annum, Hor. li. 1. epist. 12. 16.

Stellae sponte sua, iussaeve vagentur and errent:
Quid praemat obscurum Lunae, quid proferat orbem,
Quid velit and possit rerum concordia discors.
What cause does calm the Sea, what cleares the year,
Whether Stars forced, or of self-will appear:
What makes the Moons dark Orb towax or wane,
What friendly fewd of things both will and can.
Did they never sound amid their books, the difficulties that present
themselves to them, to know their own being? We see very well, that our
finger stirs, and our foot moves, that some parts of our body, move of
themselves without our leave, and other some that stir but at our pleasure: and
we see that certain apprehensions engender a blushing-red color, others a
palenesse; that some imagination does only work in the milt, another in the
brain; some one enduceth us to laugh, another causes us to weep; some
astonished and stupifieth all our senses, and staieth the motion of all our
limbs: at some object the stomach rises, and at some other the lower parts.
But how a spiritual impression causes or works such a dent or flaw in a
massy and solid body or subject, and the nature of the conjoyning, and
compacting of these admirable springs and wards, man yet never knew: Omnia
incerta Plin.
ratione, and in nature maiestate abdita. All uncertain in reason, and hid in
the majesty of nature, Says Pliny and Saint Augustine, Modus, quo corporibus
adbaerent spiritus, omnino mirus est, nec comprehendi Aug. de spir and anim.
ab homine potest, and hoc ipse homo est. The mean is clearly wonderful,
whereby spirits cleave to our bodies, nor can it be comprehended by man, and
that is very man. Yet is there no doubt made of him: For men's opinions are
received after ancient beliefes, by authority and upon credit; as if it were a
religion and a law. What is commonly held of it, is received as a gibrish or
fustian tongue. This truth with all her framing of arguments, and
proporcioning of proofs, is received as a firm and solid body, which is no
more shaken, which is no more judged. On the other side, every one, the best he
can, patcheth-vp and comfort this received belief, with all the means his
reason can afford him, which is an instrument very supple, pliable, and
yielding to all shapes. Thus is the world filled with toys, and overwhelmed in
lies and leafings- The reason that men doubt not much of things, is that common
impressions are never thoroughly tried and sifted, their ground is not sounded,
nor where the fault and weakness lies: Men only debate and question of the
branch, not of the tree: They ask not whether a thing be true, but whether it
was understood or meant thus and thus. They enquire not whether Galen has
spoken any thing of worth, but whether thus, or so, or otherwise. Truly there
was some reason, this bridle or restraint of our judgments liberty, and this
tyranny over our beliefes should extend it self even to schools and arts.
The God of scholasticall learning, is Aristotle: It is religion to debate of
his ordinances, as of those of Lycurgus in Sparta. His doctrine is to us as a
canon Law, which peradventure is as false as another. I know not why I should
or might not, as soon, and as easy accept, either Platoes Ideas, or Epicurus
his Atoms and indivisible things, or the fullness and emptiness of Leucippus
and Democritus, or the water of Thales, or of Anaximanders infinite of nature,
or the air of Diogenes, or the numbers or proportion of Pythagoras, or the
infinite of Parmenides, or the single-one of Musaeus, or the water and fire of
Apollodorus, or the similarie and resembling parts of Anaxagoras, or the
discord and concord of Empedocles, or the fire of Heraclitus, or any other
opinion (of this infinite confusion of opinions and sentences, which this goodly
humane reason, by her certainty and cleare-sighted vigilancie brings forth in
whatsoever it medleth withal) as I should of Aristotle's conceit, touching this
subject of the principles of natural things; which he frames of three parts,
that is to say, Matter, Form, and Privation. And what greater vanity can
there be, then to make inanitie it self the cause of the production of things?
Privation is a negative: With what humovr could he make it the cause and
beginning of things that are? Yet durst no man move that but for an exercise of
Logike: Wherein nothing is disputed to put it in doubt, but to desend the
Author of the School from strange objections: His authority is the mark,
beyond which it is not lawful to enquire. It is easy to frame what one list
upon allowed foundations: For, according to the law and ordinance of this
positive beginning, the other parts of the frame are easily directed without
crack or danger. By which way we find our reason well grounded, and we
discourse without rub or let in the way: For our masters preoccupate and gain
aforehand as much place in our belief, as they need to conclude afterward
what they please, as Geometricians do by their granted questions: The consent
and approbation which we lend them, giving them wherewith to draw us, either on
the right or left hand, and at their pleasure to wind and turn us. Whosoever
is believed in his presuppositions, he is our master, and our god: He will lay
the plot of his foundations so ample and easy, that, if he list, he will
carry us up, even unto the clouds. In this practice or negotiation of
learning, we have taken the saying of Pythagoras for current payment; which is,
that every expert man ought to be believed in his own trade. The Logitian
refers himself to the Grammarian for the signification of words: The
Rethoritian borrows the places of arguments from the Logitian: The Poet his
measures from the Musician: The Geometrician his proportions from the
Arithmetician: The Metaphisikes take the conjectures of the Phisikes for a
ground. For, every art has her presupposed principles, by which man's judgment
is bridled on all parts. If you come to the shocke or front of this bar, in
which consists the principal error, they immediately pronounce this sentence;
That there is no disputing against such as deny principles. There can be no
principles in men, except divinity has revealed them unto them: All the rest,
both beginning, middle, and end, is but a dream and a vapor. Those that argue
by presupposition, we must presuppose against them, the very same axiom,
which is disputed of. For, each humane presupposition, and every invention,
unless reason make a difference of it, has as much authority as another. So
must they all be equally balanced, and first the general and those that
tyrannize us. A persuasion of certainty, is a manifest testimony of
foolishness, and of extreme uncertainty. And no people are less
Philosophers and more foolish, then Platoes Phylodoxes, or lovers of their own
opinions. We must know whether fire be hot, whether snow be white, whether in
our knowledge there be any thing hard or soft. And touching the answers,
whereof they tell old tales, as to him who made a doubt of heat, to whom one
replied, that to try he should cast himself into the fire; to him that denied
the ice to be cold, that he should put some in his bosom; they are most
unworthy the profession of a Philosopher. If they had left us in our own
natural estate, admitting of strange apparances, as they present themselves
unto us by our senses, and had suffered us to follow our natural appetites,
directed by the condition of our birth, they should then have reason to speak
so. But from them it is that we have learned to become judges of the world; it
is from them we hold this conceit, that man's reason is the general controuller
of all that is, both without and within heavens-vault; which imbraceth all, and
can do all, by means whereof, all things are known and discerned. This
answer were good among the Canibals, who without any of Aristotle's precepts,
or so much as knowing the name of natural Philosophy, enjoy most happily, a
long, a quiet, and a peaceable life. This answer might happily avail more,
and be of more force, then all those they can borrow from their reason and
invention. All living creatures, yea, beasts and all, where the commandment
of the natural law is yet pure and simple, might with us be capable of this
answer; but they have renounced it. They shall not need to tell me, it is
true, for you both hear and see, that it is so: They must tell me, if what I
think I feel, I feel the same in effect; and if I feel it, then let them tell
me, wherefore I feel it, and how and what: Let them tell me the name, the
beginning, the tennons, and the abuttings of heat and of cold, with the
qualities of him that is agent, or of the patient; or let them quit me their
profession, which is neither to admit, nor approve any thing, but by the way of
reason: It is their touch stone, to try all kinds of Essays. But surely it is
a touchstone full of falsehood, errors, imperfection and weakness: which way
can we better make trial of it, then by it self? If she may not be credited
speaking of her self, hardly can she be fit to judge of strange matters: If
she know any thing, it can be but her being and domicile. She is in the soul,
and either a part or effect of the same. For, the true and essential reason
(whose name we steal by false signs) lodges in Gods bosom: There is her
home, and there is her retreat, thence she takes her flght, when Gods pleasure
is that we shall see some glimps of it: Even as Pallas issued out of her
fathers head, to communicate and empart her self unto the world. Now let us
see what man's reason has taught us of her self and of the soul: Not of the
soul in general, whereof well nigh all Philosophy makes both the celestial
and first bodies partakers; nor of that which Thales attributed even unto
things, that are reputed without soul or life, drawn thereunto by the
consideration of the Adamant stone: But of that which appertains to us, and
which we should know best.

Ignoratur enim quae sit natura animai, Lucr. li. 1. 113.

Nata sit, an contra nascentibus insinuetur,
Et simul inter eat nobiscum morte dirempta,
An tenebr as orci visat, vastasque lacunas,
An pecudes alias divinitus insinuet se.
What the souls nature is, we do not know;
If it be bred, or put in those are bred,
Whether by death divorst with us it go,
Or see the dark vast lakes of hell be low,
Or into other creatures turn the head.
To Crates and Dicaearchus it seemed that there was none at all; but that the
body stirred thus with and by a natural motion: To Plato, that it was a
substance moving of it self: To Thales, a Nature without rest; To Asclepiades,
an exercitation of the senses: To Hesiodus and Anaximander, a thing composed of
earth and water: To Parmenides, of earth and fire: To Empedocles of blood:

Sanguineam vomit ille animam -- Vir. Aen. li. 9. 349.

His soul of purple-bloud he vomits out.
To Possidonius, Cleanthes, and Galen, a heat, or hot complexion:

Igneus est ollis vigor, and coelestis origo: Lib. 6. 730.

A fiery vigor and celestial spring,
In their original they strangely bring.
To Hyppocrates, a spirit dispersed through the body: To Varro, an air
received-in at the mouth, heated in the lunges, tempered in the heart, and
dispersed through all parts of the body: To Zeno, the quintessence of the
four Elements: To Heraclides Ponticus, the light: To Xenocrates, and to the
Egyptians, a mooving number: To the Chaldeans, a virtue without any
determinate form. -- Habitum quendam vitalem corporis esse,

Harmoniam Graeci quam dicunt -- Lucr. li. 3. 100.

There of the body is a vital frame,
The which the Greeks a harmony do name.
And not forgetting Aristotle, that which naturally causes the body to move,
who calls it Entelechy, or perfection mooving of it self (as cold an
invention as any other) for he neither speaks of the essence, nor of the
beginning, nor of the souls nature; but only notes the effects of it:
Lactantius, Seneca, and the better part amongst the Dogmatists, have confessed,
they never understood what it was: And after all this rabble of opinions: Harum
Cic. Tus. qu. l. 1.
sententiarum quae vera sit, Deus aliquis viderit* Which of these opinions is
true, let some God look unto. it, (says Cicero.) I know by my self (quoth
Saint Bernard) how God is incomprehensible, Saint Bernard.
since I am not able to comprehend the parts of mine own being: Heraclitus,
who held that every place was full of Souls and Demons, maintained
nevertheless, that a man could never go so far toward the knowledge of the
soul, as that he could come unto it; so deep and mysterious was her essence.
There is no less dissension nor disputing about the place, where she should be
seated. Hypocrates and Herophilus place it in the ventricle of the brain:
Democritus and Aristotle, through all the body: Lucr. li. 3. 103.


Vt bonasaepe valetudo cum dicitur esse
Corporis, and non est tamen haec pars vlla valentis.
As health is of the body said to be,
Yet is no part of him, in health we see.
Epicurus in the stomach.

Haec exultat enim pavor ac met us, haec loca circum 142.

Laetitiae mulcent --
For in these places fear does domineere,
And near these places joy keeps merry cheer.
The Stoickes, within and about the heart: Erasistratus, joining the membrane
of the Epicranium: Empedocles, in the blood: as also Mois^s, which was the
cause he forbad the eating of beasts blood, unto which their soul is commixed:
Galen thought that every part of the body had his soul: S^rato has placed it
between the two upper eyelids: Qua facie Cic. Tuse. qu. lib. 1.
quidem sit animus aut vbi habitet, nec quaerendum quidem est. We must not so
much as enquire, what face the min^e bears, or where it dwells: Says Cicero. I
am well pleased to let this man use his own words: For, why should I alter the
speech of eloquence it self? since there is small gain in stealing matter
from his inventions: They are both little used, not very forcible, and little
unknown. But the reason why Chrysippus, and those of his Sect, will prove the
soul to be about the heart, is not to be forgotten. It is (says he) because
when we will affirm or swear any thing, we lay our hand upon the stomach;
And when we will pronounce, (...) which signifies, my self, we put down our
chin toward the stomach. This passage ought not to be past-over without noting
the vanity of so great a personage: For, besides that his considerations are
of themselves very slight, the latter prooveth but to the Graecians, that they
have their soul in that place. No humane judgment is so vigilant or
Argos-eied, but sometimes shall fall a sleep or s^umber. What shall we fear to
say? Behold the Stoickes, fathers of humane wisdom, who devise that the soul
of man, overwhelmed with any ruin, labors and pants a long time to get
out, unable to free hirselfe from that charge, even as a Mouse taken in a trap.
Some are of opinion, that the world was made, to give a body in lieu of
punishment, unto the spirits, which through their fault were fallen from the
purity, wherein they were created: The first creation having been incorporeall.
And that according as they have more or less remooved themselves from their
spirituality, so are they more or less merrily and Giovially, or rudely and
Saturnally incorporated: Whence proceeds the infinite variety of so much
matter created. But the spirit, who for his chastizement was invested with the
body of the Sun, must of necessity have a very rare and particular measure
of alteration. The extreamities of our curious search turn to a glimmering and
all to a dazeling. As Plutarke says, of the offspring of Histories, that
after the manner of Cards or Maps, the utmost limits of known Countries, are
set down to be full of thick marrish grounds, stadie forests, desert and
uncouth places. See here wherefore the grosest and most Childish dotings, are
more commonly found in these which treat of highest and furthest matters; even
confounding and overwhelming themselves in their own curiosity and
presumption. The end and beginning of learning are equally accounted foolish.
Mark but how Plato takethand raises his flight aloft in his Poetical clouds,
or cloudie Poesies. Behold and read in him the gibbrish of the Gods. But what
dreamed or doted he on, when he defined man, to be a creature with two feet,
and without feathers; giving them that were disposed to mock at him, a
pleasant and scopefull occasion to doe-it? For, having plucked-off the feathers
of a live capon, they named him the man of Plato. And by what simplicity did
the Epicureans first imagine, that the Atoms or Motes, which they termed to be
bodies, having some weight and a natural mooving downward, had framed the
world; until such time as they were advised by their adversaries, that by this
description, it was not possible, they should join and take hold one of
another; their fall being so downright and perpendicular, and every way
engendring Parallel lines? And therefore was it necessary, they should
afterward add a casual moving, sideling unto them: And moreover to give their
Atoms crooked and forked tails, that so they might take hold of any thing and
claspe themselves. And even then, those that pursue them with this other
consideration, do they not much trouble them? If Atoms have by chance formed
so many sorts of figures, why did they never meet together to frame a house, or
make a shoe? Why should we not likewise believe that an infinite number of
greek Letters confusedly scattred in some open place, might one day meet and
join together to the contexture of th'Iliads? That which is capable of reason
(says Zeno) is better than that which is not. There is nothing better then the
world: then the world is capable of reason. By the same arguing Cotta makes
the world a Mathematician, and by this other arguing of Zeno, he makes him a
Musition, and an Organist. The whole is more than the part: We are capable of
Wisdom, and we are part of the World: Then the World is wise. There are
infinite like examples seen, not only of false, but foolish arguments, which
cannot hold, and which accuse their authors not so much of ignorance, as of
folly, in the reproaches that Philosophers charge one another with, about the
disagreeings in their opinions and Sects. He that should fardle-vp a bundle or
huddle of the fooleries of man's wisdom, might recount wonders. I willingly
assemble some (as a show or pattern) by some means or byase, no less
profitable then the most moderate instructions. Let us by that judge, what we
are to esteem of man, of his sense, and of his reason; since in these great
men, and who have raised man's sufficiency so high, there are found so gross
errors, and so apparent defects. As for me, I would rather believe, that they
have thus casually treated learning, even as a sporting child's babie, and have
sported themselves with reason, as of a vain and frivolous instrument, setting
forth all sorts of inventions, devises, and fantasies, sometimes more
outstretched, and sometimes more loose. The same Plato, who defines man like
unto a Capon, says elsewhere after Socrates, that in good sooth, he knows
not what man is; and that of all parts of the world, there is none so hard to
be known. By this varictie of conceits and instabilitie of opinions, they (as
it were) lead us closely by the hand to this resolution of their irresolution.
They make a profession not always to present their advise manifest and
unmasked: they have often concealed the same under the fabulous shadows of
Poesy, and sometimes under other vizards. For our imperfection admits this
also, that raw meats are not always good for our stomachs: but they must be
dried, altered and corrupted, and so do they, who sometimes shadow their simple
opinions and judgments; And that they may the better suit themselves unto
common use, they many times falsi^^e them. They will not make open profession
of ignorance, and of the imbecilitie of man's reason, because they will not make
children afraid: But they manifestly declare the same unto us under the show of
a troubled Science and unconstant learning. I persuade some body in Italy, who
labored very much to speak Italian, that always provided, he desired but to
be understood, and not to seek to excel others therein, he should only employ
and use such words as came first to his mouth, whether they were Latin,
French, Spanish, or Gascoine, and that adding the Italian terminations unto
them, he should never miss to fall upon some idiome of the Country, either
Tuscan, Roman, Venetian, Piemontoise, or Neapolitan; and amongst so many
several forms of speech to take hold of one. The very same I say of
Philosophy. She has so many faces, and so much variety, and has said so
much, that all our dreams and devises are found in her. The fantasy of man
can conceive or imagine nothing, be it good or evil, that is not to be found
in her: Nihil tam absurd dici potest, quod non dicatur Cic. di^. lib. 2.
ab aliquo Phylosophorum. Nothing may be spoken so absurdlie, but that it is
spoken by some of the Philosophers. And therefore do I suffer my humors or
caprices more freely to pass in public; Forasmuch as though they are borne
with, and of me, and without any pattern; well I wot, they will be found to
have relation to some ancient humor, and some shall be found, that will both
know and tell whence, and of whom I have borrowed them. My customs are
natural; when I contrived them, I called not for the help of any discipline:
And weak and faint as they were, when I have had a desire to express them,
and to make them appear to the World a little more comely and decent, I have
somewhat indevored to aid them with discourse, and assist them with examples.
I have wondered at my self, that by mere chance I have met with them, agreeing
and suitable to so many ancient examples and Philosophical discourses. What
regiment my life was-of, I never knew nor learned but after it was much worn
and spent. A new figure: An vnpremeditated Philosopher and a casual. But to
return unto our soul, where Plato has seated reason in the brain; anger in
the heart; lust in the liver; it is very likely, that it was rather an
interpretation of the souls motions, then any division or separation he meant
to make of it, as of a body into many members. And the likeliest of their
opinion is, that it is always a soul, which by her rational faculty,
remembers her self, comprehends, judges, desires, and exercises all her
other functions, by diverse instruments of the body, as the Pilote rules and
directs his ship according to the experience he has of it; now stretching,
haling, or loosing a cable, sometimes ho^sing the Main-yard, removing an Oar,
or stirring the Rudder, causing several effects with one only power: And that
she abides in the brain, appears by this, that the hurts and accidens,
which touch that part, do presently offend the faculties of the soul, whence
she may without inconvenience descend and glide through other parts of the
body:

-- medium non deserit vnquam Claud. 6. Hon. cons. pan. 411.

Coeli Phoebus iter: radijs tamen omnia lustrat.
Never the Sun forsakes heavens middle ways,
Yet with his rays he light's all, all survaies.
as the Sun spreads his light, and infuseth his power from heaven, and
therewith fills the whole World.

Caetera pars animae per totum dissita corpus Lucr. lib 3. 144.

Paret, and ad numen mentis nomenque movetur.
The Other part of the soul through all the body sent
Obayes, and moved is, by the minds government.
Some have said, that there was a general soul, like unto a great body, from
which all particular souls were extracted, and returned thither, always
reconjoyning and entermingling themselves unto that Universal matter:

-- Deumnamque ire per omnes Virg. Georg. lib. 4. Ge. 222.

Terrasque tractu^que maris coelumque profundum:
Hinc pecudes; armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum,
Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere vitas,
Scilicet huc red^i deinde, ac resoluta referri
Omnia: nec morti esse locum --
For God through all the earth to pass is found,
Through all Sea currents, through the heaven profound,
Here hence men, herds, and all wild beasts that are,
Short life in birth each to themselves do share.
All things resolved to this point restored
Return, nor any place to death afford.
others, that they did but reconjoyne and fasten themselves to it again:
others, that they were produced by the divine substance: others, by the Angels,
of fire and air: some from the beginning of the world; and some, even at the
time of need: others, make them to descend from the round of the Moon, and
that they return to it again. The common sort of antiquity, that they are
begotten from Father to Son, after the same manner and production, that all
other natural things are; arguing so by the resemblances, which are between
Fathers and Children.

Instillata patris virtus tibi, --
Thy Fathers virtues be,
Instilled into thee.
Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis, Hor. car. lib. 4. ^d. 4. 29.

Of valiant Sires and good,
There comes a valiant brood.
and that from fathers we see descend unto children, not only the marks of
their bodies, but also a resemblance of humors, of complexions, and
inclinations of the soul.

Denique cur acrum violentia triste Leonum Luer. ^i. 3. 766.

Seminium sequitur, dolus Vulpibus, and fuga Cervis
A patribus datur, and patrius pavor incitat Artus
Si non certa suo quia semine seminioque 77^

Vis animi pariter crescit cum corpore toto?
Why follows violence the savage Lions race?
Why craft the Foxes? Why to Dear to fly a pace?
By parents is it given, when parents fear incites,
Unless because a certain force of inward spirits
With all the body grows,
As seed and seed-spring goes?
That divine justice is grounded thereupon, punishing the fathers offenses upon
the children; for so much as the contagion of the fathers vices, is in some sort
printed, in childrens souls, and that the misgovernment of their will touches
them. Moreover, that if the souls came from any other place, then by a
natural consequence, and that out of the body they should have been some
other thing, they should have some remembrance of their first being:
Considering the natural faculties, which are proper unto him, to discourse, to
reason, and to remember.

-- si in corpus nascentibus insinuatur, Luer. li. 3. 692.

Cur super anteactam aetatem meminisse nequimus,
Nec vestigia gestarum rerum vlla tenemus?
If our soul at our birth be in our body cast,
Why can we not remember ages over-past,
Nor any marks retain of things done first or last?
For, to make our souls condition, to be of that worth we would, they must all
be presupposed wise, even when they are in their natural simplicity and
genuine purity. So should they have been such, being freed from the corporal
prison, as well before they entered the same, as we hope they shall be, when they
shall be out of it. And it were necessary they should (being yet in the body)
remember the said knowledge (as Plato said) that what we learned, was but a new
remembering of that, which we had known before: A thing that any man may by
experience maintain to be false and erroneous. First, because we do not
precisely remember what we are taught, and that if memory did merely execute
her function, she would at least suggest us with something besides our
learning. Secondly, what she knew being in her purity, was a true
understanding, knowing things as they are, by her divine intelligence: Whereas
here, if she be instructed, she is made to receive lies and apprehend vice,
wherein she cannot employ her memory; this image and conception, having never
had place in her. To say, that the corporal prison, does so suppress her
natural faculties, that they are altogether extinct in her: first, is clean
contrary to this other belief, to knowledge her forces so great, and the
operations which men in this transitory life feel of it, so wonderful, as to
have thereby concluded this divinity, and fore-past eternity, and the
immortality to come:

Nam si tantopere est animi mutata pot est as,
Omnis vt actarum exciderit retinentia rerum, 695.

Non vt opinor ea ab let ho iam longior errat.
If of our mind the power be so much altered,
As of things done all hold, all memory is fled,
Then (as I guess) it is not far from being dead.
Moreover, it is here with us, and no where else, that the souls powers and
effects, are to be considered; all the rest of her perfections, are vain and
unprofitable unto her: it is by her present condition, that all her
immortality must be rewarded and paid, and she is only accomptable for the
life of man: It were injustice to have abridged her of her means and
faculties, and to have disarmed her against the time of her captivity and
prison, of her weakness and sickness, of the time and season where she had
been forced and compelled to draw the judgment and condemnation of infinite
and endless continuance, and to rely upon the consideration of so short a
time, which is peradventure of one or two hours, or if the worst happen, of an
age, (which have no more proportion with infinite, then a moment) definitively
to appoint and establish of all her being, by that instant of space. It were an
impious disproportion to wrest an eternal reward in consequence of so short a
life. Plato, to save himself from this inconvenience, would have future
payments limited to a hundred years continuance, relatively unto a humane
continuance: and many of ours have given them temporal limits. By this they
judged, that her generation followed the common condition of humane things: As
also her life, by the opinion of Epicurus and Democritus, which has most been
received, following these goodly apparances. That her birth was seen, when the
body was capable of her; her virtue and strength was perceived as the
corporal increased; in her infancy might her weakness be discerned, and in
time her vigor and ripeness, then her decay and age, and in the end her
decrepitude:

-- gigni pariter cum corpore, and vna* Ib. 450.

Crescere seutimus, pariterque senescere mentem.
The mind is with the body bred, we do behold,
It jointly grows with it, with it it waxes old.
They perceived her to be capable of diverse passions, and agitated by many
languishing and painful motions, where through she fell into weariness and
grief, capable of alteration and change, of joy, stupefaction and
languishment, subject to her infirmities, diseases, and offenses, even as the
stomach or the foot,

-- mentem sanari, corpus vt aegrum Ib. 517.

Cernimus, and flecti medicina posse videmus:
We see as bodies sick are cured, so is the mind,
We see, how Physic can it each way turn and wind.
dazzled and troubled by the force of wine; removed from her seat by the vapors
of a burning fever; drowzie and sleepie by the application of some
medicaments, and rouzed up again by the virtue of some others.

-- corpeream naturam animi esse necesse est* Ib. 176.

Corporeis quoniam telis ictuque laborat.
The nature of the mind must needs corporeal be,
For with corporeal darts and stroks it is grieved we see.
She was seen to dismay and confound all her faculties by the only biting of a
sicke-dogge, and to contain no great constancy of discourse, no sufficiency,
no virtue, no philosophical resolution, no contention of her forces, that
might exempt her from the subjection of these accidents: The spittle or
slavering of a mastive dog shed upon Socrater his hands, to trouble all his
wisdom, to distemper his great and regular immaginations, and so to vanquish
and annull them, that no sign or show of his former knowledge was left in him:

-- vis animai Ib. 501.

Conturbatur, -- and divisa seorsum
Disiectatur eodem illo distracta veneno*
The souls force is disturbed, separated,
Distraught by that same poison, alienated.
And the said venom to find no more resistance in his soul, then in that of
a child of four years old, a venom able to make all Philosophy (were she
incarnate) become furious and mad: So that Cato, who scorned both death and
fortune, could not abide the sight of a looking glass, or of water; overcome
with horror, and quelled with amazement, if by the contagion of a mad dog, he
had fallen into that sickness, which Physicians call Hydrophobia, or fear of
waters.

-- vis morbi distracta per artus Ib. 495.

Turbat agens animam, spumantes aequore salso
Ventorum vt validis ferveseunt viribus vndae.
The force of the disease dispersed through joints offends,
Driving the soul, as in salt Seas the wave ascends,
Foming by furious force which the wind raging lends.
Now concerning this point, Philosophy has indeed armed man for the enduring
of all other accidents, whether of patience, or if it be overcostly to be
found, of an infallible defeat, in convaying her self, altogether from the
sense: but they are means, which serve a soul, that is her own, and in her
proper force, capable of discourse and deliberation: not to this inconvenience,
where with a Philosopher, a soul becomes the soul of a soole troubled,
vanquished and lost, which diverse occasions may produce, as in an overviolent
agitation, which by some vehement passion, the soul may beget in her self: or
a hurt in some part of the body; or an exhalation from the stomach, casting us
into some astonishment, dazleing, or giddiness of the head:

-- morbis in corporis avius errat Ib. 467.

Saepe animus, dementit enim, deliraque fatur,
Interdumque gravi Let hargo fertur in altum
Aeternumque soporem, oculus nutuque cadenti.
The mind in bodies sickness often wandering strayes:
For it enraged rave's, and idle talk outbrayes:
Brought by sharp Lethargy sometime to more then deep,
While eyes and eyelids fall into eternal sleep.
Philosophers have in mine opinion but slightly harp't upon this string, no
more then an other of like consequence. They have ever this Dilemma in their
mouth, to comfort our mortal condition. The soul is either mortal or
immortal: if mortal, she shall be without pain: if immortal, she shall
mend. They never touch the other branch: What, if she empaire and be worse? And
leave the menaces of future pains to Poets. But thereby they deal themselves a
good game. They are two omissions, which in their discourses do often offer
themselves unto me. I come to the first again: the soul loses the use of
that Stoicall chief felicity, so constant and so firm. Our goodly wisdom
must necessarily in this place yield her self, and quit her weapons. As for
other matters, they also considered by the vanity of man's reason, that the
mixture and society of two so different parts, as is the mortal and the
immortal is inimaginable:

Quippe etenim mortale aeterno iungere, and vna Ib. 831.

Consentire putare, and fungi mutua posse,
Desipere est. Quid enim diversius esse putandum est,
Aut magis inter se disiunctum discrepit ansque,
Quam mortale quod est, immortali atque perenni
Iunctum in concilio saevas tolerare procellas?
For what immortal is, mortal to join unto,
And think they can agree, and mutual duties do,
Is to be foolish: For what think we stranger is,
More disagreeable, or more disjoined, then this,
That mortal with immortal endless joined in union,
Can most outrageous storms endure in their communion?
Moreover they felt their soul to be engaged in death, as well as the body;

-- simul aevo fessa fatiscit, Ib. 463.

It jointly faint's in one,
Wearied as age is gone.
Which thing (according to Zeno) the image of sleep does manifestly show unto
us. For he esteems, that it is a fainting and declination of the soul,
as well as of the body. Contrabi Cic. di^. lib. 2.
animum, and quasi labi putat atque decidere. He thinks the mind is
contracted, and does as it were slide and fall down. And that (which is
perceived in some) it is force and vigor maintains it self even in the end of
life, they referred and imputed the same to the diversity of diseases, as men
are seen in that extremity, to maintain, some one sense, and some another,
some their hearing, and some their smelling, without any alteration; and there
is no weakness or decay seen so universal, but some entire and vigorous parts
will remain.

Non alio pacto quam si pes cum dolet aegri, Lucr. lib. 111.

In nullo caput interea sit forte dolor.
No otherwise, then if, when sick-mans foot does ache,
Mean time perhaps his head no fellow-feeling take.
Our judgments sight refers it self unto truth, as does the Owls eyes
unto the shining of the Sun, as says Aristotle. How should we better
convince him, then by so gross blindness, in so apparent a light? For, the
contrary opinion of the souls immortality, which Cicero says, to have first
been brought in (at least by the testimony of books) by Pherecydes Syrius, in
the time of King Tullus (others ascribe the invention thereof to Thales, and
other to others) it is the part of humane knowledge treated most sparingly and
with more doubt. The most constant Dogmatists (namely in this point) are
enforced to cast themselves under the shelter of the Academikes wings. No man
knows what Aristotle has established upon this subject, no more then all the
ancients in General, who handle the same with a very wavering belief: Rem
gratissimam promittentium magis quam probantium. Who rather promise then
approve a thing most acceptable. He has hidden himself under the clouds of
intricare and ambiguous words, and unintelligible senses, and has left his
Sectaries as much cause to dispute upon his judgment, as upon the matter. Two
things made this his opinion plausible to them: the one, that without the
immortality of souls, there should no means be left to ground or settle the
vain hopes of glory; a consideration of wonderful credit in the world: the
other (as Plato says) that it is a most profitable impression, that views,
when they steal away from out the sight and knowledge of humane justice,
remain ever as a blancke before divine justice, which even after the death of
the guilty, will severely pursue them. Man is ever possessed with an extreme
destre to prolong his being, and has to the uttermost of his skill provided
for it, Toombs and Monuments are for the preservation of his body, and glory
for the continuance of his name. He has employed all his wit to frame him
self anew, (as impacient of his fortune) and to underprop or uphold himself
by his inventions. The soul by reason of her trouble and imbecilitie, as
unable to subsist of her self, is ever, and in all places questing and
searching comforts, hopes, foundations; and foreign circumstances, on which
she may take hold and settle hir-selfe. And how light and fantastical soever
his invention does frame them unto him, he notwithstanding relieth more surely
upon them, and more willingly, than upon himself: But it is a wonder to see
how the most obstinat in this so just and manifest persuasion of our spirits
immortality, have found themselves short and unable to establish the same by
their humane forces. Somnia sunt non docentis, sed optantis. These are dreams
not of one that teaches, but wishes what he would have: said an ancient
writer. Man may by his own testimony know, that the truth he alone
discovers, the same he owes unto fortune and chance; since even when she is
fallen into his hands, he wants wherewith to lay hold on her, and keep her;
and that this reason has not the power to prevail with it. All things
produced by our own discourse and sufficiency, as well true as false, are
subject to uncertainty and disputation. It is for the punishment of our
temeritie, and instruction of our misery and incapacitie, that God caused the
trouble, downfall and confusion of Babels Tower. Whatsoever we attempt without
his assistance, whatever we see without the lamp of his grace, is but vanity
and folly: With our weakness we corrupt and adulterate the very essence of
truth (which is uniform and constant) when fortune gives us the possession of
it. What course soever man takes of himself, it is Gods permission that he
ever comes to that confusion, whose image he so lively represents unto us,
by the just punishment, wherewith he framed the presumptuous overweening of
Nembroth, and brought to nothing the frivolous enterprises of the building of
his high-towring Pyramid, or Heaven-menacing tower. Perdam sapientiam
sapientium, and prudentiam prudentium 1. Cor. 1. 19.
reprobabo. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and reprove the providence
of them that are most prudent. The diversity of tongues and languages,
wherewith he disturbed that work, and overthrew that proudly-raisd Pile; what
else is it, but this infinite altercation, and perpetual discordance of
opinions and reasons, which accompanies and entangleth the frivolous frame of
man's learning, or vain building of humane science? Which he does most
profitably. Who might contain us, had we but one grain of knowledge? This
Saint has done me much pleasure: Ipsa vtilitatis occultatio, aut humilitatis
exercitatio est, aut elationis attritio. The very concealing of the profit, is
either an exercise of humility, or a beating down of arrogancy. Unto what
point of presumption and insolency, do we not carry our blindness and
foolishness? But to return to my purpose: Verily there was great reason, that
we should be beholding to God alone, and to the benefit of his grace, for the
truth of so noble a belief, since from his liberality alone we receive the
fruit of immortality, which consists in enjoying of eternal blessedness.
Let us ingenuously confess, that only God and Faith, has told it us: For, it
is no lesson of Nature, nor coming from our reason. And he that shall both
within and without narrowly sift, and curiously sound his being and his forces
without this divine privilege; he that shall view and consider man, without
flattering him, shall nor find nor see either efficacy or faculty in him,
that tastes of any other thing but death and earth. The more we give, the more
we owe; and the more we yield unto God, the more Christian-like do we. That
which the Stoike Philosopher said, he held by the casual consent of the
peoples voice; had it not been better he had held it of God? Cum de animorum
Sen epist. 117.
aeternitate disserimus, non leave momentum apud nos habet consensus hominum,
aut timentium inferos, aut coleutium. Vtor hac publica persuasione. When we
discourse of the immortality of souls, in my conceit the consent of those men
is of no small authority, who either fear or adore the infernal powers. This
public persuasion I make vse-of. Now the weakness of humane Arguments upon
this subject, is very manifestly known by the fabulous circumstances they
have added unto the train of this opinion, to find out what condition this
our immortality was of. Let us omit the Stoickes. Vsuram nobis largiuntur,
tanquam cornicibus; di^ mansures aiunt animos, Cic. Tusc. qu. l. 1.
semper, negant. They grant us use of life, as it unto Ravens: they say, our
souls shall long continue, but they deny, they shall last ever. Who gives unto
souls a life beyond this, but finite. The most universal, and received
fantasy, and which endures to this day, has been that, whereof Pythagoras is
made Author; not that he was the first inventor of it, but because it received
much force and credit, by the authority of his approbation; Which is, that
souls at their departure from us, did but pass and roll from one to an other
body, from a Lion to a Horse, from a Horse to a King, incessantly wandering up
and down, from House to Mansion. And himself said, that he remembered to have
been Aethaledes, then Euphorbus, afterward Hermotimus, at last from Pyrrhus to
have passed into Pythagoras: having memory of himself, the space of two
hundred and six years: some added more, that the same souls do sometimes
ascend up to haven, and come down again:

O Pater anne aliquas ad coelum hinc ire putandum est Virg. Ae^. lib. 6. 739.

Sublimes animas, iterumque ad tarda reverti
Corpora? Quae lucis miseris tam dira cupido?
Must we think (Father) some souls hence do go,
Raized to heaven, thence turn to bodies slow?
Whence does so dyre desire of light on wretches grow?
Origin makes them eternally to go and come from a good, to a bad estate. The
opinion that Varro reports is, that in the revolution of four hundred and
forty years, they reconjoine themselves unto their first bodies. Chrysippus,
that that must come to pass after a certain space of time unknown, and not
limited. Plato (who says that he holds this opinion from Pindarus, and from
ancient Poesy,) of infinite Vicissitudes of alteration, to which the soul is
prepared, having no pains nor rewards in the other World, but temporal, as
her life in this is but temporal, concludes in her a singular knowledge of
the affairs of Heaven, of Hell, and here below, where she has passed,
repassed, and sojourned in many voyages; a matter in his remembrance. Behold
her progress elsewhere: He that has lived well, reconjoineth himself unto
that Star or Planet, to which he is assigned: Who evil, passes into a Woman:
And if then he amend not himself, he transchangeth himself into a beast, of
condition agreeing to his vicious customs, and shall never see an end of his
Punishments, until he return to his natural condition, and by virtue of
reason, he have deprived himself of those gross, stupide, and elementarie
qualities, that were in him. But I will not forget the objection, which the
Epicureans make unto this transmigration from one body to another: Which is
very pleasant. They demand, what order there should be, if the throng of the
dying, should be greater then that of such as be borne. For, the souls removed
from their abode would throng and strive together, who should get the best seat
in this new case: And demand besides, what they would pass their time about,
whilst they should stay, until any other mansion were made ready for them: Or
contrary-wise, if more creatures were borne, then should die; they say, bodies
should be in an ill taking, expecting the infusion of their soul, and it would
come to pass, that some of them should die, before they had ever bin living.

Denique connubia ad veneris, partusque ferarum, L^cr. li. 3. 802.

Esse animas praesto deridiculum esse videtur,
Et spectare immortales mortalia membra
Innumero numero, certareque praeproperanter
Inter se, quae prima potissimaque infinuetur.
Lastly, ridiculous it is, souls should be pressed
To Venus meetings, and begetting of a beast:
That they to mortal lims immortal be addressed
In number numberless, and over-hastie strive,
Which of them first and chief should get in there to live.
Others have staid the soul in the deceased bodies, therewith to animate
serpents, worms and other beasts, which are said to engender from the
corrupttion of our members, yea and from our ashes: Others, devide it in two
parts one mortal, another immortal: Others make it corporeal, and yet
notwithstanding immortal: Others, make it immortal, without any science or
knowledge. Nay there are some of ours, who have deemed that of condemned men's
souls devils were made: As Plutarke thinks, that Gods are made of those souls
which are saved: For, there be few things that this author does more
resolutely aver, then this; holding every where else an ambiguous and
doubtful kind of speech. It is to be imagined and firmlie believed (says he)
that the souls of men, virtuous both according unto nature and divine Justice,
become of Men, Saints, and of Saints, Demigods and after they are once
perfectly, as in sacrifices of purgation, cleanged and purified, being
delivered from all passibility and mortality, they become of Demy-Gods (not by
any civil ordinance, but in good truth, and according to manifest reason)
perfect and very-very Gods; receiving a most blessed and thrice glorious end.
But whosoever shall see him, who is notwithstanding, one of the most sparing
and moderate of that faction, so vndantedly to skirmish, and will hear him
relate his wonders upon this subject, him I refer to his discourse of the
Moon, and of Socrates his Demon; where as evidently as in any other place,
may be averred, that the mysteries of Philosophy have many strange conceits,
common with those of Poesy; man's understanding loosing it self once go about
to sound and control all things to the utmost end; as tired and troubled by
a long and wearisome course of our life, we return to a kind of doting
childhood. Note here the goodly and certain instructions, which concerning
our soulessubject we draw from humane knowledge. There is no less rashness
in that which she teaches us touching our corporal parts. Let us make choice
but of one or two examples, else should we loose our selves in this troublesome
and vaste Ocean of Physical errors. Let us know whether they agree but in
this one, that is to say, of what matter men are derived and produced one from
another. For, touching their first production, it is no marvel if in a thing so
high and so ancient, man's wit is troubled and confounded. Archelaus the
Physician, to whom (as Aristoxenus affirms) Socrates was Disciple and Minion,
assevered that both men and beasts had been made of milkie slyme or mudde,
expressed by the heat of the earth. Pythagoras says, that our seed is the
scumme or froth of our best blood. Plato the distilling of the marrow in the
backe-bone, which he argues thus, because that place feels first the
weariness which follows the sweet general business.

Alcmaeon, a part of the braines-substance, which to prove, he says, their
eyes are ever most troubled, that over-intemperately addict themselvse to that
exercise. Democritus, a substance extracted from all parts of this corporal
Mass. Epicurus extracted from the last soul and the body: Aristotle an
excrement drawn from the nourishment of the blood, the last scatters it
self in our several members; others, blood, concocted and disgested by the
heat of the genitories, which they judge, because in the extreme, earnest and
forced labors many shed drops of pure blood; wherein some appearance seems to
be, if from so infinite a confusion any likelihood may be drawn. But to bring
this seed to effect, how many contrary opinions make they of it? Aristotle and
Democritus hold, that women have no sperme, that it is but a sweat, which by
reason of the pleasure, and frication they cast forth, and avails nothing in
generation.

Galen, and his adherents, contrariwise affirm, that there can be no
generation, except two seeds meet together. Behold the Physicians, the
Philosophers, the Lawyers, and the Divines pell-mell together by the ears with
our women about the question and disputation how long women bear their fruit
in their womb. And as for me, by mine own example I take their part, that
maintain, a woman may go eleven months with child. The world is framed of
this experience; there is no mean woman so simple, that cannot give her
censure upon all these contestations, although we could not agree. This is
sufficient to verify, that in the corporal part, man is no more instructed
of himself, then in the spiritual. We have proposed himself to himself, and
his reason to his reason, to see what she can tell us of it. Me thinks I have
sufficiently declared, how little understanding she has of herself. And he
Plin. Not. hist. lib. 2. cap. 1.
who has no understanding of himself, what can he have understanding of?
Quasi vero mensuram vllius rei possit agere, qui sui nesciat. As though he
could take measure of any thing that knows not his own measure. Truly
Protagoras told us pretty tales, when he makes man the measure of all things,
who never knew so much as his own. If it be not he, his dignity will never
suffer any other creature to have this advantage over him. Now he being so
contrary in himself, and one judgment so incessantly subverting another, this
favorable proposition was but a jest, which induced us necessarily to conclude
the nullity of the Compass and the Compasser. When Thales judges the
knowledge of man very hard unto man, he teaches him the knowledge of all other
things to be impossible unto him. You for whom I have taken the pains to
enlarge so long a work (against my custom) will not shun to maintain your
Sebond, with the ordinary form of arguing, whereof you are daily instructed,
and will therein exercise both your mind and study: For this last trick of
fence, must not be employed but as an extreme remedy. It is a desperate
thrust, against which you must forsake your weapons, to force your adversary to
renounce his; and a secret slight, which must seldom and very sparingly be put
in practice. It is great fond-hardinesse to loose our self for the loss of
another. A man must not be willing to die to revenge himself, as Gobrias was:
who being close by the ears with a Lord of Persia, Darius chanced to come in
with his sword in his Justin. l. 1.
hand, and fearing to strike, for fear he should hurt Gobrias, he called unto
him, and bade him smite boldly although he should smite through both. I have
heard, arms, and conditions of single combats being desperate and in which he
that offered them, put both himself and his enemy in danger of an end
inevitable to both, reproved as unjust, and condemned as unlawful. The
Portugals took once certain Turks prisoners in the Indian seas, who
impatient of their captivity, resolved with themselves (and their resolution
succeeded) by rubbing of Ship-nailes one against another, and causing sparkles
of fire to fall amongst the barrels of powder (which lay not far from them)
with intent to consume both themselves, their masters, and the ship. We but
touch the skirts, and glance at the last closings of Sciences, wherein
extremity, as well as in virtue, is vicious. Keep your selves in the common
path, it is not good to be so subtle, and so curious. Remember what the
Italian proverb says,

Chitroppos' assottiglia, siscavezza. Petr. p. 1. canz. 13. 48.

Who makes himself too fine,
Does break himself in fine.
I persuade you in your opinions and discourses, as much as in your customs,
and in every other thing, to use moderation and temperance, and avoid all
newfangled inventions and strangeness. All extravagant ways displease me. You
who by the authority and pre-eminence, which your greatness has laid upon
you, and more by the advantages, which the qualities that are most your own,
bestow on you, may with anod command whom you please, should have laid this
charge upon some one, that had made profession of learning, who might otherwise
have disposed and enriched this fantasy. Notwithstanding here have you enough
to supply your wants of it. Epicurus said of the laws, that the worst were so
necessary unto us, that without them, men would enter-devoure one another. And
Plato verifieth, that without laws we should live like beasts. Our spirit is
a vagabond, a dangerous, and fond-hardy implement; It is very hard to join
order and measure to it. In my time, such as have any rare excellency above
others, or extraordinary vivacity, we see them almost all so lavish and
unbridled in license of opinions and manners, as it may be counted a wonder to
find any one settled and sociable. There is great reason why the spirit of man
should be so strictly embarred. In his study, as in all things else he must
have his steps numbered and ordered. The limits of his pursuit must be cut
out by Art. He is brideled and fettered with, and by religions, laws,
customs, knowledge, precepts, pains and recompenses, both mortal and
immortal; yet we see him, by means of his volubility and dissolution, escape
all these bonds. It is a vain body, that has no way about him to be seized
on, or cut off: a diverse and deformed body, on which neither knot nor hold may
be fastened. Verily thereare few souls, so orderly, so constant, and so well
borne, as may be trusted with their own conduct, and may with moderation, and
without rashness, sail in the liberty of their judgments beyond common
opinions. It is more expedient to give some body the charge and tuition of
them. The spirit is an outrageous glaive, yea even to his own possessor,
except he have the grace, very orderly and discreetely to arm himself
therewith. And there is no beast, to whom one may more justly apply a blinding
board, to keep her sight in, and force her look to her footing and keep from
straying here and there, without the tracke which use and laws trace her out.
Therefore shall it be better for you to close and bound your selves in the
accustomed path* howsoever it be, then to take your flight to this unbridled
license. But if any one of these new Doctors shall undertake, to play the wise
or ingenious before you, at the charge of his and your health: to rid you of
this dangerous plague, which daily more and more spreds it selle in your
Courts, this preservative will in any extreme necessity be a let, that the
contagion of this venom, shall neither offend you nor your assistance. The
liberty then, and the joll^ty of their ancient spirits brought forth many
different Sects of opinions, in Philosophy and humane Sciences: every one
undertaking to judge and choose, so he might raise a faction. But now that men
walk all one way: Qui certis quibusdam destinatisque sententijs addict^ Cic.
T^sc. q^. l. 2
and consecrati sunt, vt etiam, quae non probant, cogantur defendere: Who are
addicted and consecrated to certain set and fore-decreed opinions, so as they
are enforced to maintain those things which they prove or approve not: And
that we receive Arts by civil authority and appointment: So that schools
have but one pattern, alike circumscribed discipline and institution; no man
regards more what coins weigh and are worth; but every man in his turn
receives them according to the value, that common approbation and succession
allotteth them: Men dispute no longer of the alloy, but of the use. So are all
things spent and vented alike. Physic is received as Geometry: and juggling
tricks, enchantments, bonds, the commerce of deceased spirits,
prognostications, domifications, yea even this ridiculous, wit and
wealthconsuming pursuit of the Philosophers stone, all is emploid and uttered
without contradiction. It suffices to know, that Mars his place lodges in the
middle of the hands triangle; that of Venus in the Thumme and Mercuries in the
little finger: and when the table-line cutteth the teachers rising, it is a
sign of cruelty: When it fails under the middle finger, and that the
natural Median-line makes an angle with the vital, under the same side, it is
a sign of a miserable death: And when a woman's natural line is open, and
closes not it angle with the vital, it evidently denotes that she will not be
very chaste. I call your self to witness if with this Science only, a man may
not pass with reputation and favor among all companies. Theophrastus was wont
to say, that man's knowledge, directed by the sense, might judge of the causes
of things, unto a certain measure, but being come to the extreme and first
causes, it must necessarily stay, and be blunted or abated; either by reason of
it is weakness, or of the things difficulty. It is an indifferent and pleasing
kind of opinion, to think, that our sufficiency may bring us to the knowledge
of some things, and has certain measures of power, beyond which it is
temerity to employ it. This opinion is plausible and brought in by way of
composition: but it is hard to give our spirit any limits, being very curious
and greedy, and not tied to stay rather at a thousand, then fifty paces. Having
found by experience, that if one had mist to attain unto some one thing,
another has come unto it; and that which one age never knew, the age
succeeding has found out: and that Sciences and Arts are not cast in a mould,
but rather by little and little formed and shaped by often handling and
pollishing them over: even as bears fashion their young whelps by often licking
them: what my strength cannot discover, I cease not to sound and try: and in
handling and kneading this new matter and with removing and chafing it, I open
some faculty for him that shall follow me, that with more ease he may enjoy the
same, and so make it more facile, more supple and more pliable:

-- vt hymettia sole Ovid. Metam. lib. 10. 284.

Vertitur infacies, ipsoque fit vtilis vsu.
As the best Bees wax melts by the Sun,
And handled into many forms does ^^n,
And is made aptly fit,
For use by using it.
As much will the second do for the third, which is a cause that difficulty
does not make me despair, much less my inability: for it is but mine own.
Man is as well capable of all things, as of some. And if (as Theophrastus
says) he avow the ignorance of the first causes and beginnings, let him hardly
quit all the rest of his knowledge. If his foundation fail him, his discourse
is overthrown. The dispute has no other scope, and to enquire no other end
but the principles: If this end stay not his course, he casts himself into
an infinite irresolution. Non potest aliud alio magis minusque comprehendi,
quoniam omnium rerum vna est definitio comprehendendi. One thing can neither
more nor less be comprehended then another, since of all things there is one
definition of comprehending. Now is it likely, that if the soul knew any
thing, she first knew her self: and if she knew any without and besides her
self, it must be her veil and body before any thing else. If even at this day
the Gods of Physic are seen to wrangle about our Anatomy,

Mulciber in Troiam, pro Troia stabat Apollo, Ovid. Trist. li 1. ^^. 2. 5.

Apollo stood for Troy,
Vulcan Troy to destroy.
When shall we expect that they will be agreed? We are nearer unto our selves,
then is whiteness unto snow, or weight unto a stone. If man know not himself,
how can he know his functions and forces? It is not by fortune that some true
notice does not lodge with us, but by hazard. And forasmuch as by the same way,
fashion and conduct, errors are received into our soul, she has not
wherewithal to distinguish them, nor whereby to choose the truth from falsehood.
The Academikes received some inclination of judgment, and found it over raw,
to say, it was no more likely, snow should be white then black, and that we
should be no more assured of the moving of a stone, which goes from our hand,
then of that of the eight Sphere. And to avoid this difficulty and
strangeness, which in truth can not but hardly lodge in our imagination, how
beit they establish, that we were no way capable of knowledge, and that truth
is engulfed in the deepest Abysses, where man's sight can no way enter; yet
avowed they somethings to be more likely and possible then others, and received
this faculty in their judgment, that they might rather incline to one
appearance then to an other. They allowed her this propension, interdicting her
all resolution. The Pyrrhonians advise is more hardy, and therewithal more
likely. For this Academicall inclination, and this propension rather to one
then another proposition, what else is it, then a reacknowledging of some
apparent truth, in this than in that? If our understanding be capable of the
form, of the lineaments, of the behavior and face of truth; it might as well
see it all complete, as but half, growing and imperfect. For this appearance
of verisimilitude, which makes them rather take the left then the right hand,
do you augment it; this one ounce of likelihood, which turns the balance,
do you multiply it, by a hundred, nay by a thousand ounces; it will in the end
come to pass, that the balance will absolutely resolve and conclude one
choice and perfect truth. But how do they suffer themselves to be made
tractable by likelihood if they know not truth? How know they the semblance of
that, whereof they understand not the essence? Either we are able to judge
absolutely, or absolutely we cannot. If our intellectual and sensible faculties
are without ground or footing, if they but hull up and down and drive with the
wind, for nothing suffer we our judgment to be carried away to any part of
their operation, what appearance soever it seems to present us with. And the
surest and most happy situation of our understanding should be that, where
without any tottering or agitation it might maintain it self settled, upright
and inflexible. Inter visa, vera, aut falsa, ad animi Cic. Acad. q. l. 4.
assensum* ^hil^nterest. There is no difference betwixt true and false visions,
concerning the minds assent. That things lodge not in us in their proper form
and essence, and make not their entrance into us, of their own power and
authority, we see it most evidently. For if it were so, we should receive them
all alike: wine would be such in a sick man's mouth, as in a healthy man's. He
whose fingers are chopped through cold, and stiff or benumbed with frost, should
find the same hardness in the wood or iron he might handle, which another
does. Then strange subjects yield unto our mercy, and lodge with us according
to our pleasure. Now if on our part we receive any thing without alteration; if
man's hold-fasts were capable and suficiently powerful, by our proper means to
seize on truth, those means being common to all; this truth would successively
remove it self from one to an other. And of so many things as are in the
world, at least one should be found, that by an universal consent should be
believed of all. But that no proposition is feene, which is not controversied
and debated amongst us or that may not be, declares plainly, that our judgment
does not absolutely and clearly seize on that which it seizes: for my
judgment cannot make my fellows judgment to receive the same: which is a
sign, that I have seized upon it by some other mean then by a natural power
in me or other men. Leave we aparte this infinite confusion of opinions, which
is seen amongst Philosophers themselves, and this universal and perpetual
disputation, in and concerning the knowledge of things.

For it is most truly presupposed, that men (I mean the wisest, the best
borne, yea and the most sufficient) do never agree, no not so much that heaven
is over our heads: For they who doubt of all, do also doubt of this: and such
as affirm, that we cannot conceive any thing, say we have not conceived
whether heaven be over our heads: which two opinions are in number (without any
comparison) the most forcible. Besides this diversity and infinite division, by
reason of the trouble, which our own judgment lays upon our selves and the
uncertainty which every man finds in himself, it may manifestly be perceived,
that this situation is very uncertain and unstaid. How diversely judge we of
things? How often change we our fantasies? What I hold and believe this day, I
believe and hold with all my belief: all my implements, springs and motions,
embrace and claspe this opinion, and to the utmost of their power warrant the
same: I could not possibly embrace any verity, nor with more assurance keep
it, then I do this. I am wholly and absolutely given to it: but has it not
been my fortune, not once, but a hundred, nay a thousand times, nay daily, to
have embraced some other thing, with the very same instruments and condition,
which upon better advise I have, afterward judged false? A man should at least
become wise, at his own cost, and learn by others harms. If under this
color I have often found my self deceived, if my Touchstone be commonly
found false and my balance vn-even and unjust; What assurance may I more take
of it at this time, then at others? Is it not folly in me, to suffer my self
so often to be beguiled and couzened by one guide? Nevertheless, let fortune
remoove us five hundred times from our place, let her do nothing but
incessantly empty and fill, as in a vessel, other and other opinions in our
mind, the present and last is always supposed certain and infallible. For
this must a man leave goods, honor, life, state, health and all:

-- posterior res illa reperta
Perdit; and immutat sensus ad pristina quaeque. ^uer. l. 5. 1424.

The later thing destroies all found before
And altars sense at all things liked of yore.
Whatsoever is told us, and what ever we learn, we should ever remember, it
is man, who delivers, and man that receives: It is a mortal hand, that
presents it, and a mortal hand, that receives it. Only things which come to
us from heaven, have right and authority of persuasion and marks of truth:
Which we neither see with our eyes, nor receive by our means: this scred and
great image would be of no force in so wretched a Mansion, except God prepare
it to that use and purpose, unless God by his particular grace and
supernatural favor, reform and strengthen the same. Our fraile-defective
condition ought at least make us demaene our selves more moderately, and more
circumspectly in our changes. We should remember, that whatsoever we receive in
our understanding, we often receive false things, and that it is by the same
instruments, which many times contradict and deceive themselves. And no marvel
if they contradict themselves, being so easy to incline, and upon very slight
occasions subject to waver and turn. Certain it is, that our apprehension,
our judgment, and our souls faculties in general, do suffer according to
the bodies motions and alterations, which are continual. Have we not our
spirits more vigilant, our memory more ready, and our discourses more lively
in time of health, then in sickness? Does not joy and blithnesse make us
receive the subjects, that present themselves unto our soul, with another kind
of countenance, then lowering vexation, and drooping melancholy does? Do you
imagine, that Catullus or Saphoes verses, delight and please an old covetous
Chuff-penny wretch, as they do a lusty and vigorous yong-man? Cleomenes the
son of Anaxandridas being sick, his friends reproved him, saying he had new
strange humors, and unusual fantasies: It is not unlikely (answered he) for, I
am not the man I was wont to be in time of health: But being other, so are my
fantasies and my humors. In the rabble case-canvasing of our plea-cours, this
byword. Gaudeat de bonafortuna, Let him joy in his good fortune, Is much in
use, and is spoken of criminal offenders, who happen to meet with judges in
some mild temper, or well-pleased mood. For it is most certain that in times
of condemnation, the judges doom or sentence is some times perceived to be
more sharp, merciless and forward, and at other times more tractable, facile,
and inclined to shadow or excuse an offense, according as he is well or ill
pleased in mind. A man that comes out of his house troubled with the pain
of the gout, vexed with jelousie, or angry that his servant has robbed him
and whose mind is overcome with grief, and plunged with vexation, and
distracted with anger, there is not question to be made but his judgment is at
that instant much distempred, and much transported that way. That venerable
Senate of the Areopagites, was wont to judge and sentence by night, for fear
the sight of the suitors ^ight corrupt justice. The air it'selfe, and the
clearenes of the firmament, does forebode us some change and alteration of
weather, as says that Greek verse in Cicero,

Tales sunt hominum mentes, quali pater ipse Cic. exi^tert.

Jupiter, auctifer a lustravit lampade terras.
Such are men's minds, as with increasefull light.
Our father Jove survayes the world in sight.
It is not only fevers, drinks and great accidents, that over-whelme our
judgment: The least things in the world will turn it topsiturvie. And although
we feel it not, it is not to be doubted, if a continual ague may in the end
suppress our mind, a tertiani will also (according to her measure and
proportion) breed some alteration in it. If an Apoplexy does altogether
stupifie, and extinguish the sight of our understanding, it is not to be
doubted but a cold and rhume will likewise dazzle the same. And by consequence,
hardly shall a man in all his life find one hour, wherein our judgment may
always be found in his right byase, our body being subject to so many
continual alterations, and stuffed with so diverse sorts of ginnes and motions,
that, giving credit to Physicians, it is very hard to find one in perfect
plight, and that does not always mistake his mark and shute wide. As for the
rest, this disease is not so easily discovered, except, it be altogether
extreme and remediless; forasmuch as reason marches ever crooked, halting
and broken-hipt; and with falsehood as with truth; And therefore it is very
hard to discover her mistaking, and disorder. I always call reason, that
appearance or show of discourses, which every man devises or forgeth in
himself: That reason, of whose condition, there may be a hundred, one contrary
to another, about one self same subject: It is an instrument of Lead and Wax,
stretching, pliable, and that may be fitted to all byases, and squared to all
measures: There remains nothing but the skill and sufficiency to know how to
turn and wind the same. How well soever a judge means and what good mind
so ever he bears, if diligent ear be not given unto him (to which few ammuse
themselves) his inclination unto friendship, unto kindred, unto beauty, and
unto revenge, and not only matters of so weighty consequence, but this innated
and casual instinct* which makes us to favor one thing more then another, and
incline to one man more then to another, and which without any leave of reason,
gives us the choice, in two like subjects, or some shadow of like vanity, may
insensibly insinuate in his judgment the commendation and applause, or
disfavour and disallowance of a cause, and give the balance a twitch. I that
nearest pry into my self and who have mine eyes incessantly fixed upon me, as
one that has much else to do else where,

-- quis sub arct^
Rex gelidae metuatur orae, H^^. ^ar. l. 1. od 26. 3.

Quid Tyridatem terreat, vnice
Securus,
Only secure, who in cold coast
Under the North Pole rules the roast,
And there is feared; or what would fright,
And Tyridates put to flight.
dare very hardly report the vanity and weakness I feel in my self. My foot
is so staggering and unstable, and I find it so ready to trip, and so easy to
stumble; and my sight is so dim and uncertain, that fasting I find my self
other then full fed: If my health applaud me, or but the calmness of one
fair day smile upon me, then am I a lusly gallant; but if a corn wring my
toe, then am I pouting, unpleasant and hard to be pleased. One same pace of a
horse is sometimes hard, and sometimes easy unto me; and one same way,
onetime short, another time long and wearisome; and one same form, now more,
now less agreeable and pleasing to me: Sometimes I am apt to do any thing,
and other times fit to do nothing: What now is pleasing to me, within a while
after will be painful. There are a thousand indiscreet and casual agitations
in me. Either a melancholy humor possesses me, or a chollericke passion
swaieth me, which having shaken off, sometimes forwardness and peevishnes has
predominancy, and other times gladness and blithnes over rule me. If I chance to
take a book in hand, I shall in some passages perceive some excellent graces,
and which ever wound me to the soul with delight; but let me lay it by, and
read him another time; let me turn and toss him as I list, let me apply and
manage him as I will, I shall find it an unknown and shapeles mass. Even in
my writings, I shall not at all times find the tracke, or air of my first
imaginations; I wot not my self what I would have said, and shall vex and
fret my self in correcting and giving a new sense to them, because I have
peradventure forgotten or lost the former, which happily was better. I do but
come and go; my judgment does not always go forward, but is ever floting,
and wandering,

-- velut minut a magno Cd^^l. lyr. epig. 22. 12.

Deprensa navis in mari vesan^ente vento.
Much like a petty skiffe, that is taken short
In a grand Sea, when winds do make mad sport.
Many times (as commonly it is my hap to do) having for exercise and
sport-sake undertaken to maintain an opinion contrary to mine, my mind
applying and turning it self that way, does so tie me unto it, as I find no
more the reason of my former conceit* and so I leave it. Where I incline, there
I entertain my self, howsoever it be, and am carried away by mine own weight.
Every man could neere-hand say as much of himself, would he but look into
himself as I do. Preachers know, that the emotion, which surpriseth them,
whilst they are in their earnest speech, does animate them toward belief, and
that being angry we more violently give our selves to defend our proposition,
emprint it in our selves, and embrace the same with more vohemencie and
approbation, then we did, being in our temperate and reposed sense. You relate
simply your case unto a Lawyer, he answers faltring and doubtfully unto it,
whereby you perceive it is indifferent unto him to defend either this, or that
side, all is one to him: Have you paid him well, have you given him a good
bait or fee, to make him earnestly apprehend it, begins he to be interessed
in the matter, is his will moved, or his mind enflamed? Then will his reason
be moved, and his knowledge enflamed withal. See then an apparent and
undoubted truth presents it self to his understanding; wherein he discouers a
new light, and believes it in good sooth, and so persuades himself. Shall I
tell you? I wot not whether the heat of proceeding of spite and obstinacy,
against the impression and violence of a magistrate, and of danger; or the
interest of reputation, have induced some man, to maintain, even in the fiery
flames the opinion, for which amongst his friends, and at liberty, he would
never have been moved, nor have ventred his fingers end. The motions and
fittes which our soul receives by corporal passions, do greatly prevail in
her, but more her own; with which it is so fully possess, as happily it may be
maintained, she has no other way, or motion, then by the blast of her winds,
and that without their agitation, she should remain without action, as a ship
at Sea, which the winds have utterly forsaken. And he who should maintain that,
following the Peripatetike faction, should offer us no great wrong, since it is
known, that the greatest number of the soules-actions, proceed and have need
of this impulsion of passion; valor (say they) cannot be perfected without the
assistance of choler,

Semper Ajax fortis, fortissimus tamen in furore. Cic. Tus. qu. l. 4.

Ajax ever valor had,
Most then, when he was most mad.
Nor does any man run violently enough upon the wicked, or his enemies,
except he be thoroughly angry; and they are of opinion, that an Advocate or
counselor at the bar, to have the cause go one his side, and to have
justice at the judges hands does first endevor to provoke him to anger.
Longing-desires moved Them^stoc^es, and urged Demost henes, and have provoked
Philosophers, to long travels, to tedious watchings, and to Img^ing
peregrinations: And lead us to honors, to doctrine, and to health; all
profitable respects. And this demisnes of the soul, in suffering molestation
and tediousnes, serves to no other purpose, but to breed repentance, and
cause penitence in our consciences; and for our punishment to feel the scourge
of God, and the rod of politic correction. Compassion serves as a sting unto
clemency, and wisdom to preserve and govern our selves, is by our own
fear rouzed up; and how many noble actions, by ambition, how many by
presumption? To conclude, no eminent or gloriou^ (...) can be without some
immoderate and ^^regular agitation. May not this be one of the reasons, which
moved the Epicurians, to discharge God of all care and thought of our affairs:
For so much as the verv effects of his goodness, cannot exercise themselves
toward us, without disturbing his rest, by means of the passions, which are
as motives and solicitations, directing the soul to virtuous actions? Or have
they thought otherwise and taken them as tempests, which shamfully lead astray
the soul from her rest and tranquillity? Vt maris tranquillit as tutelligitur,
nulla, ne minim a quidem, aur a fluctus commovente: Sic animi quietus and
placatus status cernitur, quum perturbati^ nulla est, qua moveri Cic. ib. lib.
5.
queat. As we concesve the Seas calmness, when not so much as the least
pirling wind does stir the waves, so is a peaceable reposed state of the
mind then seen, when there is no per turbation, where by it may be moved. What
differences ofsense and reason, what contrariety of imaginations, does the
diverfitie of our passions present unto us? What assurance may we then take of
so unconstant and wavering a thing, subject by it is own condition to the power
of trouble, never marching but a forced and borrowed pace? If our judgment be
in the hands of sickness it self, and of perturbation; if by rashness and folly
it be retained to receive the impression of things, what assurance may we
expect at his hands? Dares nos Philosophy think that men produce their
greatest effects, and nearest approaching to divinity, when they are besides
themselves, furious, and mad? We amend our selves by the privation of reason,
and by her drooping. The two natural ways, to enter the cabinet of the Gods,
and there to foresee the course of the destinies, are fury and sleep. This
is very pleasing to be considered. By the dislocation, that passions bring unto
our reason, we become virtuous; by the extirpation, which either fury or the
image of death brings us, we become Prophets and Divines. I never believed it
more willingly. It is a mere divine inspiration, that sacred truth has
inspired in a Philosophical spirit, which against his proposition exacteth
from him; that the quiet state of our soul, the best-settled estate, yea the
healthfullest that Philosophy can acquire unto it, is not the best estate. Our
vigilancie is more drouzie, then sleep it self: Our wisdom less wise, then
folly; our dreams of more worth then our discourses. The worst place we can
take, is in our selves. But thinks it not, that we have the foresight to
mark, that the voice, which the spirit utters, when he is gone from man, so
clear sighted, so great, and so perfect, and whilst he is in man, so earthly,
so ignorant, and so overclouded, is a voice proceeding from the spirit, which
is in earthly, ignorant, and over clouded man; and therefore a trustles and not
to be-beleeved voice? I have no great experience in these violent agitations,
being of a soft and dull complex on; the greatest part of which, without giving
it leisure to acknowledge her self, do suddenly surprise our soul. But that
passion, which in yoongmens hearts is said, to be produced by idleness, although
it march but leasurly, and with a measured progress, does evidently present to
those, that have assaid to oppose themselves against her endevor, the power of
the conversion and alteration, which our judgment suffers. I have some times
enterprised to arm my self with a resolution to abide, resist, and sup press
the same. For, I am so far from being in their rank, that call and allure
vices, that unless they entertain me, I scarcely follow them. I felt it,
mauger my resistance, to breed, to grow, and to augment; and in the end being
in perfect health, and cleare-sighted, to seize-vpon and possess me; in such
sort, that, as in dronkennes, the image of things, began to appear unto me,
otherwise then it was wont: I saw the advantages of the subject, I sought
after, evidently to swell and grow greater, and much to increase by the wind
of my imagination; and the difficulties of my enterprise to become more easy
and plain; and my discourse and conscience to shrink and draw-backe. But that
fire being evaporated all on a sudden, as by the flashing of a lightning my
soul to reassume an other sight, another state, and other judgment. The
difficulty in my retreat seemed great and invincible, and the very same
things of another taste and show than the fervencie of desire had presented
them unto me. And which more truly, Pyrrho cannot tell. We are never without
some infirmity. Fevers have their heat, and their cold: From the effects of a
burning passion, we fall into the effects of a chilling passion. So much as I
had cast my self foreward, so much do I draw my self back.

Qualis vbi alterno procurrens gurgite pontus,
Nunc ruit ad terr as scopulisque superiacit vndam, Virg. Aen. l. 11. 508.

Spumeus, extremamque ^inu perfundit arenam,
Nunc rapidus retro atque aestu revoluta resorbens
Saxa fugit, littusque vado labente relinquit.
As the ocean flowing, ebbing in due course,
To land now rushes, foming throw's his sourse,
On rocks, there with bedew's the utmost sand,
Now swift return's, the stones rould back from strand
By tide resuck's, foord failing leaves the land.
Now by the knowledge of my volubilitie, I have by accidence engendered some
constancy of opinions in my self; yet have not so much altered my first and
natural ones. For, what appearance soever there be in noveltie, I do not
easily change, for fear I should loose by the bargain: And since I am not
capable to choose, I take the choice from others; and keep my self in the
seat, that God has placed me in. Else could I hardly keep my self from
continual rolling. Thus have I by the grace of God preserved my self whole
(without agitation or trouble of conscience) in the ancient belief of our
religion, in the midst of so many sects and divisions, which our age has
brought forth. The writings of the ancient fathers (I mean the good, the
solid, and the serious) do tempt, and in a manner remove me which way they
list. Him that I hear seems ever the most forcible. I find them everieone
in his turn to have reason, although they contrary one another. That
facility, which good wits have to prove any thing they please, likely; and
that there is nothing so strange, but they will undertake to set so good a
gloss on it, as it shall easily deceive a simplicity like unto mine, does
manifestly show the weakness of their proof. The heavens and the planets have
moved these three thousand years, and all the world believed as much, until
Cleanthes the Samian, or else (according to Thcophrastus) Nicetas the
Syracusian took upon him to maintain, it was the earth that moved, by the
oblique circle of the Zodiake, turning about her axell tree. And in our days
C^pernicus has so well grounded this doctrine, that he does very orderly fit
it to all Astrologicall consequences. What shall we reap by it, but only that
we need not care, which of the two it be? And who knows whether a thousand
years hence a third opinion will rise, which happily shall overthrow these two
praecedent.

Sic volvenda aetas commut at tempora rerum, Lucr. l. 5. 1^86.

Quodque fuit pretio, sit nullo denique honor,
Porro aliud succedit, and e contemptibus exit,
Inque dies magis appetitur, floretque repertum
Laudibus, and miro est mortales inter honor.
So age to be past-over alter's times of things:
What erst was most esteemed,
At last nought-worth is deemed:
An other then succed's, and from contempt vpsprings,
Is daily more desired, flowreth as found but then
With praise and wondrous honor amongst mortal men
So when any new Doctrine is represented unto us, we have great cause to
suspect it, and to consider, how before it was invented, the contrary unto it
was in credit; and as that has been reversed by this latter, a third
invension may paradventure sueceede in after-ages, which in like sort shall
front the second. Before the principles, which Aristotle found out, were in
credit, other principles contented man's reason, as his do now content us.
What learning have these men, what particular privilege, that the course of
our invention should rely only upon them, and that the possession of our
belief, shall for ever hereafter belong to them? They are no more exempted from
being rejected, then were their forefathers. If any man urge me with a new
Argument, it is in me to imagine, that if I cannot answer it, another can.
For, to believ^ all apparances, which we cannot resolve, is mere simplicity.
It would then follow, that all the common sort (whereof we are all part) should
have his belief turning and winding like a weather-cocke: For, his soul being
soft, and without resistance, should incessantly be enforced to receive new and
admit other impressions: the latter ever defacing the precedents trace. He that
perceives himself weak, ought to answer, according to law terms, that he
will confer with his learned counsel, or else refer himself to the wisest,
from whom he has had his prentiseship. How long is it since Physic came
first into the World? It is reported that a new start-vp fellow, whom they call
Paracelius, changes and subverteth all the order of ancient, and so long
time-received rules, and maintains that until this day it has only served
to kill people. I think he will easily verify it. But I suppose it were no
great wisdom to hazard my life upon the trial of his newfangled experience.
We must not believe al men, says the precept, since every man may say all
things. It is not long since, that one of these professors of novelties, and
Physical reformations told me, that all our forefathers had notoriously abuzed
themselves in the nature and motions of the winds, which, if I would listen
unto him, he would manifestly make me perceve. After I had with some patience
given attendance to his Arguments, which were indeed full of likelihood, I
demanded of him, whether they that failed according to Theophrastus his Laws,
went westward, when they bent their course eastward? Or whether they failed
sideling, or backward? It is fortune, answered he, but so it is they took
their mark amiss: To whom I then replied, that I had rather follow the
effects, then his reason. They are things that often shocke together: and it
has been told me, that in Geometry (which supposes to have gained the high
point of certainty amongst al sciences) there are found unavoidable
Demonstrations, and which subvert the truth of all experience: As James
Peletier told me in mine own house, that he had found out two lines, bending
their course one toward another, as if they would meet and join together;
nevertheless he affirmed, that even unto infinity, they could never come to
touch one another. And the Pyrrhonians use their Arguments, and Reason, but to
destroy the appearance of experience: And it is a wonder to see how far the
supplenesse of our reason, has in this design followed them, to resist the
evidence of effects: For, they affirm, that we moove not, that we speak not,
that there is no weight, nor heat, with the same force of arguing, that we
aver the most likelyest things. Ptolomey, who was an excellent man, had
established the bounds of the world; All ancient Philosophers have thought
they had a perfect measure thereof, except it were certain scattered Islands,
which might escape their knowledge: It had bin to Pyrrhonize a thousand years
ago, had any man gone abut to make a question of the art of Cosmography: and
the opinions that have been received thereof, of all men in General: It had
been flat heresy to avouch, that there were Antipodes. See how in our age an
infinite greatness of firm land has been discovered, not an Island only,
nor one particular country, but a part in greatness very near equal unto
that which we knew. Our modern Geographers cease not to affirm, that now
all is found, and all is discovered;

Nam quod adest praesto, placet, and pollere videtur, ^b. 1422.

For, what is present here
Seems strong, is held most dear.
The question is now, if Ptolomey was heretofore deceived in the grounds of his
reason, whether it were not folly in me, to trust what these late follows say
of it, and whether it be not more likely, that this huge body, which we term
the World, is another manner of thing, than we judge it. Plato says, that it
often changes his countenance, that the Heaven, the Stars, and the Sun do
sometimes re-enverse the motion we perceive in them, changing the East into
West. The Egyptian Priests, told Heredotus, that since their first King, which
was eleaven thousand and odd years (when they made him see the pictures of
all their former Kings, drawn to the life in statues) the Sun had changed
his course four times: That the sea and the earth do enterchangeably change
one into another; that the worlds birth is undetermined: The like said,
Aristotle and Cicero. And some one amongst us averreth, that it is altogether
eternal, mortal, and new reviving again, by many Vicissitudes, calling
Solomon and Esaias to witness: avoyde these oppositions, that God has sometimes
been a Creator without a creature: that he has been idle; that he has
vnsaide his idleness, by setting his hand to this work, and that by
consequence he is subject unto change. In the most famous Schools of Greece,
the World is reputed a God, framed by another greater and mightier God, and is
composed of a body and a soul, which abides in his center, spreading it self
by Musical numbers unto his circumference, divine, thrise-happy, very great,
most wise and eternal. In it are other Gods, as the Sea, the earth, and
plants, which mutually entertain one another, with an harmonious and perpetual
agitation and celestial dance; sometimes meeting, othertimes farre-sundering
themselves; now hiding then showing themselves; and changing place, now
forward, now backward. Heraclitus firmly maintained, that the World was
composed of fire, and by the destinies order, it should one day burst forth
into flames, and be so consumed into cinders, and another day it should be newborn again. And Apulcius of men says; sigillatim mortales, cunctim perpetui:
severally mortal, altogether everlasting. L. Apul. de deo Socrat.
Alexanderwrit unto his mother the narration of an Egyptian Priest, drawn
from out their monuments, witnessing the antiquity of that Nation, infinite;
and comprehending the birth and progress of their countries to the life.
Cicero and Diodorus, said in their days, that the Chaldeans kept a register of
four hundred thousand and odd years. Aristotle, Pliny, and others, that
Zoroastes lived six thousand years before Plato. And Plato says, that those
of the city of Sa^s, have memories in writing of eight thousand years, and
that the town of Athens, was built a thousand years before the city of Sa^s.
Epicurus, that at one same time, all things that are, look how we see them,
they are all alike, and in the same fashion, indivers other Worlds, which he
would have spoken more confidently, had he seen the similitudes and
correspondencies, of this newfound world of the West-Indiaes, with ours, both
present and past, by so many strange examples. Truly, when I consider what has
followed our learning by the course of this terrestrial policy, I have
diverse times wondered at my self, to see in so great a distance of times and
places, the simpathy or jumping of so great a number of popular and wild
opinions, and of extravagant customs and beliefes, and which by no means
seem to hold with our natural discourse. Man's spirit is a wonderful worker of
miracles. But this relation has yet a kind of I wot not what more Heteroclite:
which is found both in names, and in a thousand other things. For, there were
found Nations, which (as far as we know) had never heard of us, where
circumcision was held in request; where great states and common wealths were
maintained only by Women, and no men: Where our fasts and Lent was
represented, adding thereunto the abstinence from women; where our crosies were
several ways in great esteem; In some places they adorned and honored their
sepulchers with them, and elsewhere, especially that of Saint Andrew, they
employed to shield themselves from nightly visions, and to lay them upon
childrens couches, as good against enchantments and witch-crafts: In another
place, they found one made of Wood, of an exceeding height, worshipped for the
God of rain: which was thrust very deep into the ground: There was found a
very express and lively image of our Penitentiaries: the use of Myters-the
Priests single life; the Art of Divination by the entrails of sacrificed
beasts; the abstinence from all sorts of flesh and fish, for their food; the
order amongst Priests in saying of their divine service, to use, a not vulgar,
but a particular tongue; and this erroneous and fond conceit, that the first
God was expelled his throne by a yoonger brother of his: That they were at ^^^^
created with all commodities, which afterward by reason of their sins were
abridged them: That their territory has been changed; that their natural
condition has been much impaired: That they have heretofore been drowned by
the inundation of Waters come from heaven; that none were saved but a few
families, which cast themselves into the crackes or hollow of high Mountains,
which crackes they stopped very close, so that the Waters could not enter in,
having before shut therein many kinds of beasts: That when they perceived the
Rain to cease, and Waters to sal, they first sent out certain dogs which
returning clean-was^t, and wet, they judged that the waters were not yet much
fallen; and that afterward sending out some other, which seeing to return all
muddy and foul, they issued forth of the mountains, to repeople the world
again, which they found replenished only with Serpents. There were places
found, where they used the persuasion of the day of judgment, so that they
grew wondrous wroth and offended with the Spaniards, who in digging and
searching of riches in their graves, scattered here and there the bones of
their deceased friends; saying that those dispersed bones could very hardly be
reconjoyned together again. They also found where they used traffike by
exchange, and no otherwise; and had Faires and Markets for that purpose: They
found dwarfes, and such other deformed creatures, used for the ornament of
Princes tables: They found the use of hawking and fowling according to the
Nature of their birds: tyrannical subsides, and grievances upon subjects;
delicate in pleasant gardens; dancing, tumbling; leaping and juggling, music of
instruments, armories, dicing-houses, tennisse-courtes, and casting lottes, or
mumne-chaunce, wherein they are often so earnest and moody, that they will play
themselves and their liberty: using no other physic but by charms: the
manner of writing by figures: believing in one first man, universal father of
all people: The adoration of one God, who heretofore lived man, in perfect
Virginity, fasting, and penance, preaching the law of Nature, and the
ceremonies of religion; and who vanished out of the world, without any natural
death: The opinion of Giants; the use of drunkenness, with their manner of
drinks, and drinking and pledging of healths: religious ornaments, painted over
with bones and dead-mens sculs; surplices, Holy Water, and Holy Water
sprinckles: Women and Servaunts, which strivingly present themselves, to be
burned or enterred with their deceased husbands, or masters* a law that the
eldest or first borne child shall succeed and inherit all; where nothing is
reserved for Punies, but obedience: a custom to the promotion of certain
officers of great authority, and where he that is promoted takes upon him a new
name, and quiteth his own: Where they use to cast lime upon the knees of newborn children, saying unto him; from dust thou came and to dust thou shall
return again: the Arts of Augures or prediction. These vain shadows of our
religion, which are seen in some of these examples, witness the dignity and
divinity thereof. It has not only in some sort insinuated it self among all
the infidel Nations, on this side by some imitations, but amongst those
barbarous Nations beyond, as it were by a common and supernatural inspiration:
For amongst them was also found the belief of Purgatory, but after a new
form: For, what we ascribe unto fire, they impute unto cold, and imagine that
souls are both purged and punished by the vigor of an extreme coldness. This
example puts me in mind of another pleasant diversity: For, as there were
some people found, who took pleasure to vnhood the end of their yard, and to
cut off the fore-skinne, after the manner of the Mahometans and Jews, some
there were found, that made so great a conscience to vnhood it, that with
little strings, they carried their foreskin very carefully outstretched and
fastened above, for fear that end should see the air. And of this other
diversity also, that as we honor our Kings, and celebrate our Holy Days with
decking and trimming our selves with the best habilliements we have; in some
regions there, to show all disparity and submission to their King, their
subjects present themselves unto him in their basest and meanest apparel; and
entering into his palace, they take some old torn garment and put it over
their other attire, to the end all the glory and ornament may shine in their
Sovereign and Master.

But let us go on: If Nature enclose within the limits of her ordinary
progress, as all other things, so the beliefes, the judgments and the
opinions of men; if they have their revolutions, their seasons, their birth,
and their death, even as Cabiches: If heaven does moove, agitate and roll them
at his pleasure, what powerful and permanent authority do we ascribe unto
them? If by uncontrolled experience we palpably touch, that the form of our
being depends of the air, of the climate, and of the soil wherein we are
borne, and not only the hew, the stature, the complexion and the countenance,
but also the souls faculties: Et plaga coeli non solum ad rebur corporum, sed
eiam animorum facit. The climate helps not only for strength of body, but of
minds, says Vegetius: And that the Goddess foundresse of the City of
Athens, chose a temperature of a country to situate it in, that mightmake the
men wise, as the Egyptian Priests taught Solon: Athen^s tenue coelum: ex quo
etiam acutiores putantur ^ic. de ^^to.
A^tici: crassum Thebis: itaque pingues Thebani, and valentes: About Athens is
a thin air, whereby those Countrymen are esteemed the sharper-^itted: About
Thebes the air is gross, and therefore the Thebans were gross and strong of
constitution. In such manner that as fruits and beasts do spring up diverse
and different; So men are borne, either more or less warlike, martial, just,
temperate and docile: here subject to wine, there to theft, and whoredom;
here inclined to superstition, addicted to mis-believing; here given to
liberty, there to servitude; capable of some one Art or Science; grose-witted
or ingenious: either obedient or rebellious; good or bad, according as the
inclination of the place bears, where they are seated; and being remooved
from one soil to another (as plants are) they take a new complexion: which was
the cause, that Cirus would never permit the Persians to leave their barren,
rough and craggie Country, for to transport themselves into another, more
gentle, more fertile, and more plain,: saying that fat and delicious
countries, make men wanton and effeminat; and fertile soiles yield infertile
spirits. If sometimes we see one art to flourish, or a belief, and sometimes
another, by some heavenly influence; some ages to produce this or that nature,
and so to incline mankind to this or that biase: men's spirits one while
flourishing, another while barren, even as fields are seen to be? what become
of all those goodly prerogatives, wherewith we still flatter our selves? Since a
wise man may mistake himself; yea many men, and whole nations; and as we say,
means nature either in one thing or other, has for many ages together mistaken
hirselfe. What assurance have we that at any time she leaves her mistaking*
and that she continues not even at this day, in her error? Me thinks amongst
other testimonies of our imbecilities, this one ought not to be forgotten, that
by wishing it self, man cannot yet find out what he wants; that not by
enjoying our possessing, but by imagination and full wishing, we can not all
agree in one, that we most stand in need-of, and would best content us. Let our
imagination have free liberty to cut out and sew at her pleasure, she cannot
so much as desire what is fittest to please and content her.

-- quid enim ratione timemus Iuven. sat. 10. 4

Aut cupimus? quid tam dextro pede concipis, vt te
Conatus non poeniteat, votique peracti?
By reason what do we fear, or desire?
With such dexterity what do aspire,
But thou eftsoons repentest it,
Though thy attempt and vow do hit?
That is the reason why Socrates, never requested the gods to give him any
thing, but what they knew to be good for him. And the public and private
prayer of the Lacedaemonians, did merely implie, that good and fair things
might be granted them, remitting the election and choice of them to the
discretion of the highest power.

Coniugium petimus partumque vxoris, at illi Ibid. 352.

Notum qui pueri, qualisque futura sit vxor.
We wish a wife, wifes breeding: we would know,
What children; shall our wife be sheep or shrow?
And the Christian beseeches God, that his will may be done, least he should
fall into that inconvenience, which Poets feign of King Midas: who requested of
the Gods, that whatsoever he touched, might be converted into gold: his prayers
were heard, his wine was gold, his bread gold, the feathers of his bed, his
shirt, and his garments were turned into gold, so that he found himself
overwhelmed in the enjoying of his desire, and being enrich't with an
intolerable commodity, he must now vnpray his prayers:

Attonitus novitate mali, divesque miserque, Ovid Met. lib. 11. 128.

Effugere optat opes, and quae modo voverat, odit.
Wretched and rich, amazed at so strange ill,
His riches he would fly, hates his own will.
Let me speak of my self; being yet very young. I besought fortune above all
things, that she would make me a knight of the order of Saint Michaell, which
in those days was very rare, and the highest tipe of honor the French
Nobility aimed at. She very kindly granted my request; I had it. In liew of
raising and advancing me from my place, for the attaining of it, she has much
more graciously entreated me, she has abased and depressed it, even unto my
shoulders and under. Cleobis and Biton, Trophonius and Agamedes, the two first
having besought the Goddess, the two latter their God, of some recompense
worthy their piety, received death for a reward: So much are heavenly
opinions different from ours, concerning what we have need-of. God might grant
us riches, honors, long life and health, but many times to our own hurt: For,
whatsoever is pleasing to us, is not always healthful for us; If in liew of
former health, he send us death, or some worse sickness: Virga Psalm. 23. 4.
tua and baculus tuus ipsa me consolata sunt: Thy rod and thy staff has
comforted me. He does it by the reasons of his providence, which more certainly
considers and regards what is meet for us, then we our selves can do, and
we ought to take it in good part, as from a most wise and thrice-friendy-hand.

-- si concilium vis Iuven. sat. 10. 346.

Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit vtile nostris:
Charior est illis homo quam sibi --
If you will counsel have, give the Gods leave
To weigh, what is most meet we should receive,
And what for our estate most profit were:
To them, then to himself man is more dear.
For, to crave honors and charges of them, is to request them to cast you in
some battle, or play at hazard, or some such thing, whereof the event is
unknown to you, and the fruit uncertain. There is no combat amongst
Philosophers so violent and sharp, as that which arises upon the question of
man's chief felicity: from which (according to Varroes calculation) arose two
hundred and four score Sects. Qui autem de summo bono dissentit, de tota
Philosophiae ratione disputat. But he that disagrees about the chiefest
felicity, calls in question the whole course of Philosophy.

Tres mihi convivae prope dissentire videntur, Hor. lib. 2. epist. 2. 61.

Poscentes vario multum divers^palato.
Quid them? quid non them? renuis tu quod iubet alter:
Quod petis, id sane est invisum acidumque duobus.
Three guests of mine do seem almost at ods to fall,
Whilst they with diverse taste for diverse things do call:
What should I give? What not? You will not, what he will:
What you would, to them twain is hateful, sour and ill.
Nature should thus answer their contestations, and debates. Some say, our
felicity consists, and is in Virtue: Others in voluptuousness: Others in
yielding unto Nature: Some others in learning: others in feeling no manner of
pain or sorrow: Others for a man never to suffer himself to be carried away
by apparances: and to this opinion seems this other of ancient Pithagoras to
incline,

Niladmir ar^ prope res es^ vna, Numici, Lib. 1 epist. 6. 1.

Solaque quae possit facere and seruare beatum.
Sir, nothing to admire is the only thing,
That may keep happy, and to happy bring.
which is the end and scope of the Pyrrhonian Sect. Aristotle ascribes unto
magnanimity, to admire and wonder at nothing. And Arcesila^s said, that
sufferance, and an upright and inflexible state of judgment, were true
felicities; whereas consents and applications, were vices and evils. True it
is, that where he establishes it for a certain Axiom, he stared from
Pyrrhonisme. When the Pirrhonians say, that Ataraxy is the chief felicity,
which is the immobilitie of judgment, their meaning is not to speak it
affirmatively, but the very wavering of their mind, which makes them to shun
downefalls, and to shroud themselves under the shelter of calmness, presents
this fantasy unto them, and makes them refuse another. Oh how much do I
desire, that whilst I live, either some other learned men, or Ins^^s Lipsius,
the most sufficient and learned man now living; of a most polished and
judicious wit, true Cosin-germane to my Turnebus, had both will, health and
leisure enough, sincerely and exactly, according to their divisions and forms,
to collect into on volume or register, as much as by us might be seen, the
opinions of ancient Philosophy, concerning the subject of our being and
customs, their controversies, the credit, and pertaking of factions and sides,
the application of the Authors and Sectators lives, to their precepts, in
memorable and exemplarie accidents. O what a worthy and profitable labor would
it be! Besides, if it be from our selves that we draw the regiment of our
customs, into what a bottomless confusion do we cast our selves? For, what
our reason persuades us to be most likely for it, is generally for every man to
obey the laws of his country, as is the advice of Socrates, enspired (says
he) by a divine persuasion. And what else means she thereby, but only that
our devoire or duty has no other rule, but casual? Truth ought to have a
like and universal visage throughout the world. Law and justice, if man knew
any, that had a body and true essence, he would not fasten it to the condition
of this or that countries customs. It is not according to the Persians or
Indians fantazie, that virtue should take her form. Nothing is more subject
unto a continual agitation, then the laws. I have since I was borne, seen
those of our neighbors the Englishmen changed and rechanged three or four
times, not only in politic subjects, which is, that some will dispense of
constancy, but in the most important subject, that possibly can be, that is to
say in religion, whereof I am so much the more both grieved and ashamed,
because it is a nation, with which my count^iemen have heretofore had so inward
and familiar acquaintance, that even to this day, there remain in my house
some ancient monuments of our former aliance. Nay I have seen amongst our
selves some things become lawful, which erst were deemed capital: and we that
hold some others, are likewise in possibility, according to the uncertainty
of warring fortune, one day or other, to be offenders against the Majesty both
of God and man, if our justice chance to fall under the mercy of injustice; and
in the space of few years possession, taking a contrary essence. How could
that ancient God more evidently accuse, in humane knowledge, the ignorance of
divine essence, and teach men that their religion was but a piece of their own
invention, fit to combine their society, then in declaring (as he did) to
those which sought the instruction of it, by his sacred Tripos, that the true
worshipping of God, was that, which he found to be observed by the custom of
the place, where he lived? Oh God, what bond, or duty is it, that we owe not
unto our Sovereign Creators benignity, in that he has been pleased to
clear and enfranchize our belief from those vagabonding and arbitrary
devotions, and fixed it upon the eternal Base of his holy word? What will
Philosophy then say to us in this necessity? that we follow the laws of our
country, that is to say, this waving sea of a peoples or of a Princes opinions,
which shall paint me forth justice with as many colors, and reform the same
into as many visages as there are changes and alterations of passions in them.
I cannot have my judgment so flexible. What goodness is that, which but
yesterday I saw in credit and esteem, and to morrow, to have lost all
reputation, and that the crossing of a River, is made a crime? What truth is
that, which these Mountains bound, and is a lie in the World beyond them? But
they are pleasant, when to allow the Laws some certainetie, they say, that
there be some firm, perpetual and immovable, which they call natural, and
by the condition of their proper essence, are imprinted in mankind: of which
some make three in number, some, four some more, some less: an evident token,
that it is a mark as doubtful as the rest. Now are they so unfortunate (for,
how can I term that but misfortune, that of so infinite a number of laws,
there is not so much as one to be found, which the fortune or temeritie of
chance has granted to be universally received, and by the consent and
unanimity of all Nations to be admitted?) They are (I say) so miserable, that
of these three or four choise-selected laws, there is not one alone, that is
not impugned or disallowed, not by one nation, but by many. Now is the
generality of approbation, the only likely ensign, by which they may argue
some laws to be natural: For, what nature had indeed ordained us, that
should we doubtless follow with one common consent; and not one only nation,
but every man in particular, should have a feeling of the force and violence,
which he should urge him with, that would incite him to contrary and resist
that Law. Let them all (for examples sake) show me but one of this condition.
Protagoras and Ariston gave the justice of the laws no other essence, but the
authority and opinion of the Lawgiver, and that excepted, both Good and
Honest lost their qualities, and remained but vain and idle names, of
indifferent things. Thrasymachus in Plato, thinks there is no other right, but
the commodity of the superior. There is nothing wherein the world differs so
much, as in customs and laws. Somethings are here accounted abominable,
which in another place are esteemed commendable: as in Lacedemonia, the slight
and subt^ltie in stealing. Marriages in proximitie of blood are amongst us
forbidden as capital, elsewhere they are allowed and esteemed;

-- gentes esse ferunt^r, O^id. Metam. lib* 10. 331.

In quibus and nato genitrix, and nata parenti
Iungitur, and p^etas geminato crescit amore.
There are some people, where the mother weddeth
Her son, the daughter her own father beddeth,
And so by doubled love, their kindness spreddeth.
the murdering of children and of parents; the communication with women;
traffike of robbing and stealing; free license to all manner of sensuality: to
conclude, there is nothing so extreme and horrible, but is found to be
received and allowed by the custom of some nation. It is credible that there
be natural laws; as may be seen in other creatures, but in us they are lost:
this goodly humane reason engrafting it self among all men, to sway and
command, confounding and topsie-turving the visage of all things, according to
her inconstant vanity and vain inconstancy. Nihil it aque amplius nostrum
est, quod nostrum dico, art^s est. Therefore nothing more is ours: all that I
call ours, belongs to Art. Subjects have diverse lustres, and several
considerations, whence the diversity of opinions is chiefly engendered. One
nation vieweth a subject with one visage, and thereon it stays; an other with
an other. Nothing can be imagined so horrible, as for one to eat and devour
his own father. Those people, which anciently kept this custom, hold it
nevertheless for a testimony of piety and good affection: seeking by that
mean to give their fathers the worthiest and most honorable sepulcher,
harboring their fathers bodies and relics in themselves and in their marrow;
in some sort reviving and regenerating them by the transmutation made in their
quick flesh, by digestion and nourishment. It is easy to be considered what
abomination and cruelty it had been, in men accustomed and trained in this
inhumane superstition, to cast the carcasses of their parents into the
corruption of the earth, as food for beasts and worms. Lycurgus wisely
considered in theft, the vivacitie, diligence, courage, and nimblenesse, that
is required in surprising or taking any thing from ones neighbor, and the
commodity which thereby redoundeth to the commonwealth, that every man
heedeth more curiously the keeping of that which is his own: and judged, that
by this two fold institution to assail and to defend, much good was drawn for
military discipline (which was the principal Science and chief virtue,
wherein he would enable that nation) of greater respect and more consideration,
then was the disorder and injustice of prevailing and taking other men's goods.
* Dionysius the tyrant offered Plato a robe made after the Persian fashion,
long, damasked and perfumed: But he refused the same, saying, that being borne
a man, he would not willingly put-on a woman's garment: But Aristippus took it,
with this answer, that no garment could corrupt a chaste mind. His Friends
reproved his demissenesse, in being so little offended, that Dionysius had
spitten in his face. Tut (said he) Fishers suffer themselves to be washed over
head and ears, to get a gudgion. Diogenes washing of coleworts for his dinner,
seeing him pass by, said unto him, If thou could live with coleworts, thou
would not cour^ and faune upon a tyrant; to whom Aristippus replied; If thou
could live among men, thou would not wash coleworts. See here how reason
yields appearance to diverse effects. It is a pitcher with two ears, which a
man may take hold-on, either by the right or left hand.

-- bellum o terra hospita portas, Virg. Ae^* lib 3. 559.

Bello armantur equi, bellum haec arment a minantur:
Sed tamen ijdem molim curru succedere sueti
Quadrupedes, and franaiugo concordia serre.*
Spes est pacis --
O stranger-harb'ring land, thou bringst us war;
Steed's serve for war;
These heard's do threaten jarre.
Yet horses erst were wont to draw our waines,
And harnest matches bear agreeing raines;
Hope is hereby that we,
In peace shall well agree.
Solon being import^ned not to shed vain and bottles tears for the death of
his son; That Is the reason (answered he) I may more justly shed them,
because they are bootelesse and vain. Socrates his wife, exasperated her
grief by this circumstance; Good Lord (said she) how unjustly do these bad
judges put him to death! What? Would thou rather they should execute me
justly? replide he to her. It is a fashion amongst us to have holes bored in
our ^ares: the Greeks held it for a badge of bondage. We hide our selves when
we will enjoy our wives: The Indians do it in open view of all men. The
Scithians were wont to sacrifice strangers in their Temples, whereas in other
places Churches are Sanctuaries for them.

Inde furor vulgi, quod numina vicinorum ^^ue. sat. 15. 36

Odit quisque locus, cum solos credat habendos
Esse Deos quos ipse colit --
The vulgar hereupon does rage, because
Each place does hate their neighbors sovereign laws,
And only Gods does deem,
Those Gods themselves esteem.
I have heard it reported of a Judge, who when he met with any sharp conflict
between Bartolus and Baldus, or with any case admitting contrariety, was wont
to write in the margin of his book, A question for a friend, which is to say,
that the truth was so entangled, and disputable, that in such a case he might
favor which party he should think good. There was no want but of spirit and
sufficiency, if he set not every where through his books, A Question for a
friend. The Advocates and Judges of our time find in all cases by ases
too-too-many, to fit them where they think good. To so infinite a science,
depending on the authority of so many opinions, and of so arbitrary a subject,
it cannot be, but that an exceeding confusion of judgments must arise. There
are very few processes so clear, but the Lawiers advises upon them will be
found to differ: What one company has judged, another will adjudge the
contrary, and the very same will another time change opinion. Whereof we see
ordinary examples by this license, which wonderfully blemisheth the authority
and luster of our Law, never to stay upon one sentence, but to run from one to
another Judge, to decide one same case. Touching the liberty of Philosophical
opinions, concerning vice and virtue, it is a thing needing no great extension,
and wherein are found many advises, which were better unspoken, then published
to weak capacities. Arcesilaus was wont to say, that in pailliardize, it was
not worthy consideration, where, on what side, and how it was done. Et
obs^oenas volupt at es, si not ura requirit, non genere, aut loco, aut ordine,
sed forma, aetate, figura metiendas Epicurus putat. Ne amores quidem sanctos a
sapiente alienos esse arbitrantur. Quaeramus ad quam vsque aet ^tem i^ven^s
amandi sint. Obscene pleasures, if nature require them, the Epicure esteems
not to be measured by kind, place, or order* but by form, age, and fashion.
Nor does he think that holy loves should be strange from a wiseman. Let us
then question to what years young folk may be beloved. These two last Stoicke
places, and upon this purpose, the reproach of Diogarchus to Plato himself,
show how many excessive licenses, and out of common use, soundest Philosophy
does tolerate. Laws take their authority from p^ss^ssion and custom: It is
dangerous to reduce them to their beginning: In rolling on, they swell, and
grow greater and greater, as do our rivers: follow them upward, unto their
sourse, and you shall find them but a bubble of water, scarce to be discerned,
which in gliding on swells so proud, and gathers so much strength. Behold the
ancient considerations, which have given the first motion to this famous
torrent, so full of dignity, of honor and reverence, you shall find them so
light and weak, that these men which will weigh all, and complain of reason,
and who receive nothing upon trust and authority, it is no wonder if their
judgments are often far distant from common judgment. Men that take Natures
first image for a pattern, it is no marvel, if in most of their opinions,
they miss the common-beaten path. As for example; few amongst them would have
approved the forced conditions of our marriages, and most of them would have had
women in community, and without any private respect. They refused our
ceremonies: Chrysippus said, that some Philosophers would in open view of all
men show a dozen of tumbling-tricks, yea, without any slops or breeches, for a
dozen of olives. He would hardly have persuaded Calisthenes to refuse his
fair daughter Agarista to Hippoclides, because he had seen him graffe the
forked tree in her upon a table. Metrocles somewhat indiscreetly, as he was
disputing in his School, in presence of his Auditorie let a fart, for shame
whereof he afterward kept his house, and could not be drawn abroad, until
such time as Crates went to visit him, who to his persuasions and reasons,
adding the example of his liberty, began to fart a vie with him, and to remove
this scruple from off his conscience; and moreover, won him to his Stoicall
(the more free) Sect, from the Peripateticall (and more civil) one, which
thetherunto he had followed. That which we call civility, not to dare to do that
openly, which amongst us is both lawful and honest, being done in secret, they
termed folly: And to play the wily Fox, in concealing and discla^ming what
nature, custom, and our desire publish and proclaim of our actions, they
deemed to be a vice. And thought it a suppressing of Venus her mysteries, to
remove them from out the private vestrie of her Temple, and expose them to the
open view of the people. And that to draw his sports from out the Curtines, was
to loose them* Shame is matter of some consequence. Concealing, reservation,
and circumspection, are parts of estimation. That, sensuality under the mask
of Virtue did very ingeniously procure not to be prostituted in the midst of
highways, not trodden upon, and seen by the common sort; alleging the
dignity and commodity of her wonted Cabinets. Whereupon some say, that to
forbid and remove the common brothel-houses, is not only to spread whoredom
every where, which only was allotted to those places, but also to incite idle
and vagabond men to that vice, by reason of the difficulty. Mart. ^^* 3. ep^^*
70.


Moechus es A^^idiae qui vir Corvine fuisti,
Rival^^ fuerat qui ^uus, ill^ vir ^st.
Cur aliena placet tibi, quae tua non placet vxor?
Nunquid securus non potes arrig^re?
This experience is diversified by a thousand examples. Lib. 1. epig. 74.


Nullus in Vrbefuit tota, qui tangere vellet
Vxorem gratis Caeciliane tuam,
Dum licuit: sed nunc positis custodibus, ^^gens
Turba fututorum est. Ingeniosus homo es.
A Philosopher being taken with the deed, was demanded, what he did: answered
very mildely, I plant man, blushing no more being found so napping, then if he
had bin taken setting of Garlike. It is (as I suppose) of a tender and
respective opinion, that a notable and religious Author, holds this action so
necessarily-bound to secrecy and shame, that in Cynike embracements and
dalliances, he could not be persuaded that the work should come to her end;
but rather, that it lingered and staid, only to represent wanton gestures, and
lascivious motions, to maintain the impudency of their schooles-profession:
and that to power forth what shame had forced and bashfulnesse restrained, they
had also afterward need to seek some secret place. He had not seen
farre-enough into their licenciousnesse: For, Diogenes in sight of all,
exercising his Masturbation, bred a longing-desire, in the bystanders, that in
such sort they might fill their bellies by rubbing or clawing the same. To
those that asked him, why he sought for no fitter place to feed in, then in
the open frequented high way, he made answer, It is because I am hungry in the
open frequented highway. The Philosophers Women, which meddled with their
Sects, did likewise in all places, and without any discretion meddle with their
bodies: And Crates had never received Hipparchia into his fellowship, but upon
condition, to follow all the customs and fashions of his order. These
Philosophers set an extreme rate on virtue; and rejected all other
disciplines, except the moral; yet is it, that in all actions, they ascribed
the Sovereign authority to the election of their wise, yea, and above all
laws: and appointed no other restraint unto voluptuousness, but
themoderation, and preservation of others liberty* Heraclitus and Protagoras,
for so much as wine seems bitter unto the sick, and pleasing to the healthy;
and an Oar crooked in the water, and straight to those that see it above
water, and suchlike contrary apparances, which are sound in some subjects;
argued that all subjects had the causes of these apparances in them; and that,
there was some kind of bitterness in the wine, which had a reference unto the
sickmans taste; in the Oar a certain crooked quality, having relation to him
that sees it in the water. And so of all things else. Which implies, that all
is in all things, and by consequence nothing in any: for either nothing is, or
all is. This opinion put me in mind of the experience we have, that there is
not any one sense or visage, either straight or crooked, bitter or sweet, but
man's wit shall find in the writings, which he undertakes to runne-over. In the
purest, most unspotted, and most absolutely-perfectworde, that possibly can be,
how many errors, falsehoods, and lies have been made to proceed from-it? What
heresy has not found testimonies and ground sufficient, both to undertake and
to maintain it ^e^e? It is therefore, that the Authors of such errors will
never go from this proof of the Testimony of words interpretation. A man of
worth, going about by authority to approve the search of the Philosophers
stone, (wherein he was overwhelmd) aleaged at least five or six several
passages out of the holy bible unto me, upon which (he said) he had at first
grounded himself, for the discharge of his conscience (for he is a man of the
Ecclesiastical profession) and truly, the invention of them, was not only
pleasant, but also very fitly applied to the defense of this goodly and
mind-inchanting science. This way is the credit of divining fables attained to.
There is no prognosticator, if he have but this authority, that any one will but
voutsafe to read him over, and curiously to search all the infoldings and
lustres of his words, but a man shall make him say what he pleases, as the
Sibilles. There are so many means of interpretation, that it is hard, be it
flat-long, side-long, or edge-long, but an ingenious and pregnant wit, shall in
all subjects meet with some air that will fit his turn. Therefore is a
clowdy, dark, and ambiguous style found in so frequent and ancient custom.
That the Author may gain, to draw, allure, and busy posterity to himself,
which not only the sufficiency, but the casual favor of the matter, may gain
as much or more. As for other matters, let him, be it either through
foolishness or subtlety, show himself somewhat obscure and diverse, it is no
matter, care not he for that. A number of spirits sifting, and tossing
him-over, will find and express sundry forms, either according, or
collaterally, or contrary to his own* al which shall do him credit He shall see
himself enriched by the means of his Disciples, as the Grammar School
Masters. It is that, which has made many things of nothing, to pass very
current, that has brought diverse books in credit, and charged with all sorts
of matter, that any has but desired: one self same thing admitting a thousand
and a thousand, and as many several images, and diverse considerations, as it
best pleases us. Is it possible, that ever Homer meant all that, which some
make him to have meant. And that he prostrated himself to so many, and so
several shapes, as, Divines, Lawyers, Captains, Philosophers and all sort of
people else, which, how diversely and contrary soever it be, they treat of
sciences, do notwithstanding wholly rely upon him, and refer them-selves unto
him; as a General Master for all offices, works, sciences, and tradesmen and
an universal counselor in all enterprises? whosoever has had need of Oracles
or Predictions, and would apply them to himself, has found them in him for
his purpose. A notable man, and a good friend of mine, would make one marvel to
hear what strange far-fetcht conceits, and admirable affinities, in favor of
our religion, he makes to derive from him; And can hardly be drawn from this
opinion, but that such was Homers intent and meaning (yet is Homer so familiar
unto him, as I think no man of our age is better acquainted with him.) And
what he finds in favor of religion, many ancient learned men, have found in
favor of theirs. See how Plato is tossed and turned over, every man endevoring
to apply him to his purpose, gives him what construction he list. He is
wrested and inserted to all newfangled opinions, that the world receives or
allows of, and according to the different course of subjects is made to be
repugnant unto himself. Every one according to his sense makes him to d^^avowe
the customs that were lawful in his days, in as much as they are unlawful in
these times. All which is very lively and strongly maintained, according as the
wit and learning of the interpreter is strong and quick. Upon the ground which
Heraclitus had, and that sentence of his; that all things had those shapes in
them, which men found in them. And Democritus out of the very same drew a
clean contrary conclusion, id est, that subjects had nothing at all in them
of that which we found in them; And forasmuch as honny was sweet to one man,
and bitter to another, he argued that honny was neither sweet nor bitter. The
Pyrrhonians would say, they know not whether it be sweet or bitter, or both,
or neither: For, they ever gain the highest point of doubting. The Cyrenaicks
held, that nothing was perceptible outwardly, and only that was perceivable,
which by the inward touch or feeling, touched or concerned us, as grief and
sensuality, distinguishing neither tune, nor colors, but only certain
affections, that came to us of them; and that man had no other seat of his
judgment. Protagoras deemed, that to be true to all men, which to all men
seems so. The Epicurians, place all judgment in the senses, and in the
notice of things, and in voluptuousnes. Platoes mind was, that the judgment
of truth, and truth it self drawn from opinions and senses, belonged to the
spirit, and to cogitation. This discourse has drawn me to the consideration
of the senses, wherein consists the greatest foundation and trial of our
ignorance. Whatsoever is known, is without all peradventure known by the
faculty of the knower: For, since the judgment comes from the operation of
him that judges, reason requires, that he perform and act this operation by
his means and will, and not by others compulsion: As it would follow if we
knew things by the force, and according to the law of their essence. Now all
knowledge is addressed into us by the senses, they are our masters:

-- via qua munit a fidei Lu^r. l. 5. 10^.

Proxima fert humanum in pectus, templaque mentis:
Whereby a way for credit lead's well-linde
Into man's breast and temple of his mind.
Science begins by them and in them is resolved. After all, we should know no
more than a stone, unless we know, that there is, sound, smell, light, savor,
measure, weight, softnes, hardness, sharpnes, color, smoothnes, breadth and
depth. Behold here the platform of all the frame, and principles of the
building of all our knowledge. And according to some, science is nothing else,
but what is known by the senses. Whosoever can force me to contradict my
senses, has me fast by the throat, and can not make me recoyle one foot
backward. The senses are the beginning and end of humane knowledge.

Invenies primis ab sensibus esse creatam lib 4. 480.

Notitiam very, neque sensus posse refelli.
Quid maiore fide porro quam sensus haberi 484.

Debet? --
You shall find knowledge of the truth at first was bred
From our first senses, nor can senses be misse-led.
What, then our senses, should
With us more credit hold?
Attribute as little as may be unto them, yet must this ever be granted them,
that all our instruction is addressed by their means and intermission. Cicero
says, that Chrysippus having assaid to abate the power of his senses, and of
their virtue, presented contrary arguments unto him self, and so vehement
oppositions, that he could not satisfy himself. Whereupon Car^eades (who
defended the contrary part) boasted, that he used the very same weapons and
words of Chrysippus to combat against him; and therefore cried out upon him.
Oh miserable man! thine own strength has foiled thee. There is no greater
absurdity in our judgment, then to maintain, that fire heateth not, that
light shines not, that in iron there is neither weight nor firmness, which
are notices our senses bring unto us: Nor belief or science in man, that may
be compared unto that, in certainty. The first consideration I have upon the
senses subject, is, that I make a question, whether man be provided of all
natural senses, or no. I see diverse creatures, that live an entire and perfect
life, some without sight, and some without hearing; who knows whether we also
want either one, two, three, or many senses more: For, if we want any one, our
discourse cannot discover the want or defect thereof. It is the senses
privilege, to be the extreme bounds of our perceiving. There is nothing
beyond them, that may stead us to discover them: No one sense can discover
another.

An poterunt oculos aures reprehendere, an aures 488.

Tactus, an hunc porro tactum sapor arguet oris,
An confutabunt nares, oculive revincent?
Can ears the eyes, or can touch reprehend
The ears, or shall mouths-taste that touch amend?
Shall our nose it confute,
Or eyes against it dispute?
They all make the extremest line of our faculty.

-- scorsum cuique potestas 491.

Divisa est, sua vis cuique est --
To each distinctly might
Is shar'de, each has it is right.
It is impossible to make a man naturally blind, to conceive that he sees not;
impossible to make him desire to see, and sorrow his defect. Therefore ought we
not to take assurance, that our mind is contented and satisfied with those we
have, seeing it has not wherewith to feel her own malady, and perceive her
imperfection, if it be in any. It is impossible to tell that blind man any
thing, either by discourse, argument, or similitude, that lodges any
apprehension of light, color, or sight in his imagination. There is nothing
more backward, that may push the senses to any evidence. The blind-borne, which
we perceive desire to see, it is not to understand what they require; they have
learned of us, that something they want, and something they desire, that is in
us, with the effect and consequences thereof, which they call good: Yet w^t not
they what it is, nor apprehend they it near or far. I have seen a Gentleman
of a good house, borne blind, at least blind in such an age, that he knows
not what sight is; he understands so little what he wants, that as we do,
he uses words fitting sight, and applies them after a manner only proper and
peculiar to himself. A child being brought before him, to whom he was
godfather, taking him in his arms, he said, good Lord what a fine child this
is ^it is a goodly thing to see him: What a cheerful countenance he has, how
prettily he looks. He will say as one of us. This hall has a fair
prospect: It is very fair weather: The Sun shines clear. Nay, which is
more; because hunting, hawking, tennis-play, and shuting at buts are our common
sportes and exercises (for so he has heard) his mind will be so affected unto
them, and he will so busy himself about them, that he will think to have as
great an interest in them, as any of us, and show himself as earnestly
passionate, both in liking and disliking them as any else; yet does he conceive
and receive them but by hearing. If he be in a fair champian ground, where he
may ride, they will tell him, yonder is a Hare started, or the Hare is killed,
he is as busily earnest of his game, as he hears others to be, that have
perfect sight. Give him a ball, he takes it in the left hand, and with the
right streekes it away with his racket; In a piece he shutes at random; and is
well pleased with what his men tell him, be it high or wide. Who knows whether
mankind commit as great a folly, for want of some sense, and that by this
default, the greater part of the visage of things be concealed from us? Who
knows whether the difficulties we find in sundry of Natures works, proceed
thence? And whether diverse effects of beasts, which exceed our capacity, are
produced by the faculty of some sense, that we want? And whether some of them,
have by that mean a fuller and more perfect life then ours? We seize on an
apple wel-nigh with all our senses? We find rednes, smoothnes, odor and
sweetness in it; besides which, it may have other virtues, either drying or
binding, to which we have no sense to be referred. The proprieties which in
many things we call secret, as in the Adamant to draw iron, it is not likely
there should be sensitive faculties in nature able to judge and perceive them,
the want whereof breeds in us the ignorance of the true essence of such
things? It is happily some particular sense that unto Cocks or Chanticleares
discovers the morning and midnight hour, and mooveth them to crow: That
teaches a Hen, before any use or experience, to fear a Hawke, and not a Goose
or a Peacocke, far greater birds: That warns young chickins of the hostile
quality which the Cat has against them, and not to distrust a Dog; to strut
and arm themselves against the mewing of the one (in some sort a flattering
and mild voice) and not against the barking of the other (a snarling and
quarrelous voice:) that instructs Rats, Wasps, and Emmets, ever to choose the
best cheese and fruit, having never tasted them before: And that addresseth the
Stag, the Elephant, and the Serpent, to the knowledge of certain herbs and
simples, which, being either wounded or sick, have the virtue to cure them.
There is no sense but has some great domination, and which by his mean
affords not an infinite number of knowledges. If we were to report the
intelligence of soundes, of harmony and of the voice, it would bring an
imaginable confusion to all the rest of our learning and science. For, besides
what is tied to the proper effect of every sense, how many arguments,
consequences and conclusions draw we unto other things, by comparing one sense
to another? Let a skillful wise man but imagine humane nature to be originally
produced without sight and discourse, how much ignorance and trouble such a
defect would bring unto him, and what obscurity and blindness in our mind: By
that shall we perceive, how much the privation of one, or two, or three such
senses, (if there be any in us) does import us about the knowledge of truth. We
have by the consultation and concurrence of our five senses formed one Verity,
whereas peradventure there was required the accord and consent of eight or ten
senses, and their contribution, to attain a perspicuous insight of her, and
see her in her true essence. Those Sects which combat man's science, do
principally combat the same by the vncetainety and feebleness of our senses:
For, since by their mean and intermission al knowledge comes unto us, if they
chance to miss in the report they make unto us, if either they corrupt or
alter that, which from abroad they bring unto us, if the light which by them
is transported into our soul be obscured in the passage, we have nothing
else to hold by. From this extreme difficulty are sprung all these
fantazies, which every Subject contains, whatsoever we find in it: That it
has not what we suppose to find in it: And that of the Epicurians, which is,
that the Sun is no greater than our sight does judge it,

Quicquid id est, nihilo fortur maiore figura,
Quam nostris oculis quam cernimus esse videtur. Lucr. li. 5. 576.

What ere it be, it in no greater form does pass,
Then to our eyes, which it behold, it seeming was.
that the apparances, which represent a great body, to him that is near unto
them, and a much lesser to him that is further from them, are both true;

Nec tamen hic oculis falli concedimus hilum: Lib. 4. 380. 387.

Proinde animi vitium hoc oculis adfingere noli.
Yet grant we not in this our eyes deceived or blind,
Impute not then to eyes this error of the mind.
and resolutely, that there is no deceit in the senses: That a man must stand
to their mercy, and elsewhere seek reasons to excuse the difference and
contradiction we find in them; yea invent all other untruths, and raving
conceits (so far come they) rather then accuse the causes. Timagoras swore,
that howsoever he winked or turned his eyes, he could never perceive the light
of the candle to double: And that this seeming proceeded from the vice of
opinion, and not from the instrument. Of all absurdities, the most absurd
amongst the Epicurians, is, to disavowe the force and effect of the senses.

Proinde quod in quoque est bis visum tempore, verum est. 502.

Et si non potuit ratio dissolvere causam,
Cur ea qu^ fuerint iuxtim quadrata, procul sint
Visa rotunda: tamen praestat rationis egent ^m
Reddere mendose causas vtriusque figurae,
Quam manibus manifesta suis emittere quoquam,
Et violare fidem primam, and convellere tota
Fundamenta, quibus nixatur vita salusque.
Non modo enim ratio ruat omnis, vita quoque ipsa
Concidat extemplo, nisi creder^s^nsibus ausis,
Praecipitesque locos vitare, and caetera quaesint
In genere hoc fugienda. --
Whatby the eyes is seen at any time, is true,
Though the cause Reason could not render of the view,
Why what was square at hand, a farre-off seemed round,
Yet it much better were, that wanting reasons ground
The causes of both forms we harp-on, but not hit,
Then let slip from our hands things clear, and them omit,
And violate our first belief, and rashly rend
All those ground-works, whereon both life and health depend,
For not alone all reasons falls, life likewise must
Fail out of hand, unless your senses you dare trust,
And break-necke places, and all other errors shun,
From which we in this kind most carefully should run.
This desperate and so little-philosophicall counsel, represents no other
thing, but that humane science cannot be maintained but by unreasonable, fond
and mad reason; yet is it better, that man use it to prevail, yea and of all
other remedies else how fantastical soever they be, rather then avow his
necessary foolishnes: So prejudicial and disadvantageous a verity he cannot
avoid, but senses must necessarily be the sovereign masters of his
knowledge: But they are uncertain and falsifiable to all circumstances: There
must a man strike to the utmost of his power, and if his just forces fail him
(as they are wont) to use and employ obstinac^e, temeritie and impudency. If
that which the Epicurians affirm, be true, that is to say, we have no science,
if the apparances of the senses be false: and that which the Stoics say, if it
is also true that the senses apparances are so false, as they can produce us no
science: We will conclude at the charges of these two great Dogmatist Sects,
that there is no science. Touching the error and uncertainty of the senses
operation, a man may store himself with as many examples as he pleases, so
ordinary are the faults and deceits they use toward us. And the ecchoing or
reporting of a valley, the sound of a Trumpet seems to sound before us, which
comes a mile behind us.

Extantesque procul medio de gurgite montes Lucr. l. 4. 398.

Iidem apparent long diver si licet. --
Et fugere ad puppim colles camp^que videntur 390.

Quos agimus propter navim. --
-- vbi in medio nobis equus acer obhaesit 423.

Flumine, equi corpus transversum far videtur
Vis, and in adversum flumen contrudere raptim.
And hills, which from the maine far-off to kenning stand,
Appear all one, though they far distant be at hand.
And hills and fields do seem unto our bote to fly,
Which we drive by our bote as we do pass thereby.
When in midst of a stream a stately Horse does stay,
The stream's orethwarting seems his body cross to sway,
And swiftly against the stream to thrust him the other way.
To roll a bullet under the forefinger, the midlemost being put over-it, a
man must very much enforce himself, to affirm there is but one, so assuredly
does ou^ sense present us two. That the senses do often master our discourse,
and force it to receive impressions, which he knows and judges to be false,
it is daily seen. I leave the sense of feeling, which has his functions
nearer, more quick and substantial, and which by the effect of the grief or
pain it brings to the body does so often confound and re-enverse all these
goodly Stoicall resolutions, and enforces to cry out of the belly-ache him,
who has with all resolution established in his mind this Doctrine, that the
chol^ke, as every other sicknesle or pain, is a thing indifferent, wanting
power to abate any thing of Sovereign good or chief felicity, wherein the
wise man is placed by his own virtue: there is no heart so demisse, but the
ra^^ing sound of a drum* or the clang of a Trumpet, will rowze and inflame;
nor mind so harsh and stern, but the sweetness and harmony of music, will
moove and tickle; nor any soul so skittish and stubborn, that has not a
feeling of some reverence, in considering the clowdy vastitie and gloomi^
canapies of our churches, the ^ye-pleasing diversity of ornaments, and orderly
order of our ceremonies, and hearing the devout and religious sound of our
Organs, the moderate, simphoniall, and heaevenly harmony of our voices: Even
those that enter into them with an obstinate will and contemning mind, have in
their heart ^ feeling of remorse, of chillness, and horror, that puts them
into a certain diffidence of their former opinions. As for me, I distrust mine
own strength, to hear with a settled mind some of Horace or Catullus
versessung with a sufficiently well tuned voice, uttered by, and proceeding
from a fair, young, and hart-alluring mouth* And Zeno had reason to say, that
the voice was the flower of beauty. Some have gone about to make me believe,
that a man, who most of us French men know, in repeating certain verses he had
made, had imposed upon me, that they were not such in writing, as in the air,
and that mine eyes would judge of them otherwise then mine ears: so much
credit has pronunciation to give prise and fashion to those works that pass
her mercy: Whereupon Philoxenus was not to be blamed, when hearing one to give
an ill accent to some composition of his, he took in a rage some of his
pottes or brickes, and breaking them, trod and trampled them under his feet,
saying unto him, I break and trample what is thine, even as thou manglest and
marrest what is mine. Wherefore did they (who with an undaunted resolve have
procured their own death, because they would not see the blow or stroke
coming) turn their face away? And those who for their healths sake cause
themselves to be cut and cauterized, cannot endure the sight of the
preparations, tools, instruments and works of the Surgeon, but because the
sight should have no part of the pain or smart? Are not these fit examples to
verify the authority, which senses have over discourse? We may long-enough
know that such a ones locks or flaring-tresses are borrowed of a Page, or
taken from some Lacky, that this fair ruby-red came from Spain, and this
whiteness or smoothnes from the Ocean sea: yet must sight force us to find,
and deem the subject more lovely and more pleasing, against all reason. For,
in that there is nothing of it is own,

Auferimur cultu; gemmis, aur oque teg^sntur Ovid. r^^ a^. lib. 1. 343.

Crimina, pars minima est ipsa puella sui.
Saepe vbi sit quod ames inter tam multa requiras:
Decipit hac oculos Aegide dives amor.
We are misse-led by ornaments: what is a miss
Gold and gemmes cover, least part of her self the maiden is.
Among things so many you may ask, where your love lies,
Rich love by this Gorgonian sh^eld deceives thine eyes.
How much do Poets ascribe unto the virtue of the senses, which make Narcissu^
to have even fondly lost himself for the love of his shadow?

Cunctaque miratur, quibus est mirabilis ipse, Ovid. M^^am. lib. 3. 424.

Se cupit imprudens, and qui probat, ipse probatur,
Dumque petit, petitur: pariter que accendit and ardet.
He all admires, whereby himself is admirable,
Fond he, fond of himself, to himself amiable,
He, that does like, is liked, and while he does desire;
He is desired, at once he burns and sets on fire.
and Pigmal^o^s wits so troubled by the impression of the sight of his ivory
statue that he loves and serves it, as if it had life:

Oscula dat, redd^que put at, sequitu^ que tenetque Orid. ib. l^. 10: 256.

Et credit tactis digitos insidere membris,
Et metuit pressos veniat ne livor in artus.
He kisses, and thinks kisses come again,
He sues, pursues, and holds, believes in vain
His fingers sink where he does touch the place,
And fears lest blacke-and-blew toucht-lims deface.
Let a Philosopher be put in a Cage made of small and thin-set yron-wyre, and
hanged on the top of our Ladies Church steeple in Paris; he shall, by evident
reason, perceive that it is impossible he should fall down out of it; yet can
he not choose (except he have been brought up in the trade of T^lers or
Tha^chers) but the sight of that exceeding height must needs dazzle his sight,
and amaze or turn his senses. For, we have much ado^ to warrant our selves in
the walks or battlements of an high tower or s^eeple, if they be battlemented
and wrought with pillars, and somewhat wide one from another, although of
stone, and never so strong. Nay, some there are, that can scarcely think or
hear of such heights. Let a beam or planke be laid acrosse from one of those
two Steeples to the other, as big, as thick, as strong, and as broad, as
would suffice any man to walk safely upon it, there is no Philosophical
wisdom of so great resolution and constancy, that is able to encourage and
persuade us to march upon it, as we would, were it below on the ground. I have
sometimes made trial of it upon our mountains on this side of Italy, yet am
I one of those that will not easily be affrighted with such things, and I could
not without horror to my mind, and trembling of legs and thighs endure to
look on those infinite precipises and steepie down-fals, though I were not
near the brim, nor any danger within my length, and more; and unless I had
willingly gone to the peril, I could not possibly have fallen. Where I also
noted, that how deep soever the bottom were, if but a tree, a shrub, or any
out-butting crag of a Rock presented it self unto our eyes, upon those
steepie and high Alps, somewhat to uphold the sight, and divide the same, it
does somewhat ease and as^ure us from fear, as if it were a thing, which in
our fall might either help or uphold us: And that we cannot without some dread
and giddiness in the head, so much as abide to look upon one of those even
and downright precipises: V^ despici sine vertigine simul oculorum animique
non possit. So as they can not look down without giddiness both of eyes and
minds: Which is an evident deception of the sight. Therefore was it, that a
worthy Philosopher pulled out his eyes, that so he might discharge his soul of
the seducing and diverting he received by them, and the better and more freely
apply himself unto Philosophy. But by this account, he should also have
stopped his ears, which (as Theophrastus said) are the most dangerous
instruments we have to receive violent and sudden impressions to trouble and
alter us, and should, in the end, have deprived himself of all his other
senses, that is to say, both of his being, and life. For, they have the power
to command our discourses and sway our mind: Fit etiam saepe spec^e quadam,
saepe Ci^. d^vin. lib. 1.
vocum gravitate and cantibus, vt pellantur animi vehementius: saepe etiam cura
and timore. It comes to pass, that many times our minds are much moved with
some shadow, many times with deepsounding, or singing of voices, many times
with care and fear. Physicians hold, that there are certain complexions,
which by some sounds and instruments are agitated even unto fury. I have seen
some, who without infringing their patience, could not well hear a bone gnawne
under their table: and we see few men, but are much troubled at that sharp,
harsh, and teethedging noise that Smiths make in fi^ing of brass, or scraping
of iron and steel together: others will be offended, if they but hear one
chew his meat somewhat a loud; nay, some will be angry with, or hate a man,
that either speaks in the nose, or rattles in the throat. That pyping prompter
of Graccus, who mollified* raised, and wound his masters voice, whilst he was
making Orations at Rome; what good did he, ^^ the motion and quality of the
sound, had not the force to move, and efficacy to alter the auditories
judgment? Verily, there is great cause to make so much ado, and keep such a
coil about the constancy and firmness of this goodly piece, which suffers
it self to be handled, changed, and turned by the motion and accident of so
light a wind. The very same cheating and cozening, that senses bring to our
understanding, themselves receive it in their turns. Our mind does likewise
take revenge of it, they lie, they cog, and deceive one another a vie. What we
see and hear, being passionately transported by anger, we neither see or hear
it as it is.

Et solemn geminum, and duplices s^ ostendere Thebas. Virg. Aen. l. ^ 470.

That two Suns do appear
And double Thebes are there.
The object which we love, seems much more fairer unto us, then it is;

Multimodis igitur pravas turpesqve videmus
Esse in delitijs, summoque in honor vigere. L^^r. l. 4. 1147

We therefore see that those, who many ways are bad,
And foul, are yet beloved, and in chief honor had.
and that much fowler which we loath. To a pensive and hart-grieved man, a
clear day seems gloomie and duskie. Our senses are not only altered, but many
times dulled, by the passions of the mind. How many things see we, which we
perceive not, if our mind be either busied or distracted else where?

-- in rebus quoque apertis noscere possis, Ibid. 80^.

Si non advertas animum proinde esse, quas^ omni
Tempore semotae fuerint, longeque remotae.
Even in things manifest it may be seen,
If you mark not, they are, as they had been
At all times severed far, remooved clean.
The soul seems to retire her self into the inmost parts, and ammuseth the
senses faculties: So that both the inward and outward parts of man are full of
weakness and falsehood. Those which have compared our life unto a dream, have
happily had more reason so to do, then they were aware. When we dream, our
soul lives, works and exercises all hi^ faculties even, and as much, as
when it waketh; and if more softly, and obscurely; yet verily not so, as that
it may admit so great a difference, as there is between a dark night, and a
clear day: Yea as between a night and a shadow: There it sleeps, here it
slumbreth: More or less, they are ever darkenesses, yea Cimmerian darkenesses.
We wake sleeping, and sleep waking. In my sleep I see not so clear; yet can
I never find my waking clear enough, or without dimnesse. Sleep also in his
deepest rest, does sometimes bring dreams asleep: But our waking is never so
vigilant, as it may clearly purge and dissipate the ravings or ^^le fantazies,
which are the dreams of the waking, and worse then dreams. Our reason and
soul, receiving the fantasies and opinions, which sleeping seize on them, and
authorizing our dreams actions, with like approbation, as it does the days.
Why make we not a doubt, whether our thinking, and our working be another
dreaming, and our waking some kind of sleeping? If the senses be our first
judges, it is not ours that must only be called to counsel: For, in this
faculty beasts have as much (or more) right, as we. It is most certain, that
some have their hearing more sharp then man; others their sight; others their
smelling; others their feeling, or taste. D^mocritus said, that Gods and beasts
had the sensitive faculties much more perfect then man. Now between the effects
of their senses and ours, the difference is extreme. Our spettle cleanses and
dries our sores, and kills Serpents.

Tantaque in his rebus distantia differitasque est, L^^r. l. 4. 640.

Vt quod alijs cibus est, alijs ^uat acre venenum.
Saepe ^t enim s^rpens, hominis contacta saliva,
Disperit, acsese mandendo conficit ipsa.
There is such distance, and such difference in these things,
As what to one is meat, t'another poison brings.
For often a Serpent touched with spittle of a man
Does die, and gnaw it self with fretting all he can.
What quality shall we give unto spettle, either according to us, or according
to the Serpent? By which two senses shall we verify it is true ^ssence, which
we seek for? Pliny says, that there are certain Sea-hares in India, that to
us are poison, and we bane to them* so that we die, if we but touch them; now
whether is man or the Hare poison? Whom shall we believe, either the fish of
man, or the man of fish? Some quality of the air infecteth man, which nothing
at all hurts the Ox: Some other the Ox, and not man: Which of the two is
either in truth, or nature the pestilent quality? Such as are troubled with the
yellow jandise, deem all things they look upon to be yellowish, which seem
more pale and wan to them then to us.

Lurida praeterea fiunt quaecunque tuentur Ibid. 333.

Arquati.
And all that jaundis'd men behold,
They yellow strait or palish hold.
Those which are sick of the disease which Physicians call Hyposphagma, which
is a suffusion of blood under the skin, imagine that all things they see are
bloody and red. Those humors that so change the sightes operation, what know
we whether they are predominant and ordinary in beasts? For, we see some,
whose eyes are as yellow as theirs that have the jandise, others, that have
them all blood-shotten with rednes. It is likely that the objectscollour they
look upon, seems otherwise to them then to us. Which of the two judgments
shall be true? For, it is not said, that the essence of things, has reference
to man alone. Hardness, whitenes, depth and sharpness, touch the service and
concern the knowledge of beasts as well as ours: Nature has given the use of
them to them, as well as to us. When we wink a little with our eye, we
perceive the bodies we look upon to seem longer and outstretched. Many beasts
have their eye as winking as we. This length is then happily the true form of
that body, and not that which our eyes give it, being in their ordinary seat.
If we close our eye above, things seem double unto us.

Bina lucernarum florentia lumina flammis, Ibid. 452. 454.

Et duplices hominum facies, and corpora bina.
The lights of candels double flaming then;
And faces twain, and bodies twain of men.
If our ears chance to be hindered by any thing, or that the passage of our
hearing be stopped, we receive the sound otherwise, then we were ordinarily
wont. Such beasts as have hearie ears, or that in liew of an ear have but a
little hole, do not by consequence hear that we hear, and receive the sound
other then it is. We see at solemn shows or in Theaters, that opposing any
collourd glass between out eyes and the torcher light, whatsoever is in the
room seems or green, or yellow, or red unto us, according to the color of
the glass.

Et vulgo faciunt id lutea russaque vela, Ibid. 73.

Et ferrugine cum magnis, intenta theatris
Per malos volgata trabesque trementia pendent:
Namque ibi concessum caveai subter, and omnem
Scenai speciem, patrum matrumque deorumque
Inficiunt coguntque suo volitare,
And yellow, russet, rustie curtains work this feate
In common sights abroad, where over skaffolds great
Stretched on masts, spread over beams, they hang still waving.
All the seats circuit there, and all the stages braving,
Of fathers, mothers, Gods, and all the circled show
They double-die and in their colors make to flow.
It is likely, that those beasts eyes, which we see to be of diverse colors,
produce the apparances of those bodies they look upon, to be like their eyes.
To judge the senses-operation, it were then necessary we were first agreede
with beasts, and then between our selves; which we are not, but ever-and-anon
disputing about that one sees, hears or tastes, something to be other, then
indeed it is; and contend as much as about any thing else of the diversity of
those images, onr senses report unto us. A young child hears, sees, and
tastes otherwise by natures ordinary rule, then a man of thirty years; and
he otherwise then another of threescore. The senses are to some more obscure
and dim, and to some more open and quick. We receive things differently,
according as they are, and seem unto us. Things being then so uncertain, and
full of controversy, it is no longer a wonder if it be told us, that we may
avouch snow to seem white unto us; but to affirm that it is such in essence
and in truth, we cannot warrant our selves: which foundation being so shaken,
all the Science in the world must necessarily go to wrack. What? do our
senses themselves hinder one another? To the sight a picture seems to be
raised aloft, and in the handling flat: Shall we say that musk is pleasing or
no, which comfort our smelling and offends out taste? There are Herbs and
Ointments, which to some parts of the body are good, and to othersome hurtful.
Honey is pleasing to the taste, but unpleasing to the sight. Those jewels
wrought and fashioned like feathers or sprigs, which in impreses are called,
feathers without ends, no eye can discern the breadth of them, and no man
warrant himself from this deception, that on the one end or side it grows
not brother and brother, sharper and sharper, and on the other more and more
narrow, especially being rouled about ones finger, when notwithstanning in
handling it seems equal in breadth, and every where alike. Those who to
increase and aid their luxury were anciently wont to use perspective or
looking glasses, fite to make the object they represented, appear very big and
great, that so the members they were to use, might by that oculare increase
please them the more: to whether of the two senses yielded they, either to the
sight presenting those members as big and great as they wished them, or to the
feeling, that presented them little and to be disdained? It is our senses that
lend these diverse conditions unto subjects, when for all that, the subjects
have but one? as we see in the Bread we eat: it is but Bread, but one v^ing
it, it makes bones, blood, flesh, hair, and nails thereof:

Vt cibus in membra atque artus cum diditur omnes Ibid. l. 3. 72^.

Disperit, atque aliam naturam sufficit ex se.
As meat distributed into the member dies.
Another nature yet it perrishing supplies.
The moistness which the root of a tree suckes, becomes a trunk, a leaf and
fruit: And the air being but one; applied unto a trumpet, becomes diverse
in a thousand sorts of sounds. Is it our senses (say I) who likewise fashion
of diverse qualities those subjects, or whether they have them so and such? And
upon this doubt, what may we conclude of their true essence? Moreover, since
the accidents of sickness, of madness, or of sleep, make things appear
other unto us, then they seem unto the healthie, unto the wise, and to the
waking. Is it not likely, that our right seat and natural humors, have also
wherewith to give a being unto things, having reference unto their condition,
and to appropriate them to it self, as do inordinate humors; and our health,
as capable to give them his visage, as sickness? Why has not the temperate
man some form of the objects relative unto himself, as the intemperate: and
shall not he likewise imprint his Character in them? The distasted impute
wallowishnesse unto Wine: the healthie, good taste; and the thirsty
brisknesse, relish and delicacie. Now our condition appropriating things unto
it self, and transforming them to it is own humor: we know no more how things
are in sooth and truth; For, nothing comes unto us but falsified and altered by
our senses. Either the compass, the quadrant or the ruler are crooked: All
proportions drawn by them, and all the buildings erected by their measure, are
also necessarily defective and imperfect. The uncertainty of our senses yields
what ever they produce, also uncertain.

Denique vt in fabrica, si prava est regula prima, Ibid. l. 4. 514.

Normaque si fallax rectis regionibus exit,
Et libella aliqaa si ex part claudicat hilum,
Omnia mendose fieri, atque obstipa necessum est,
Prava, cubantia, prona, supina, atque obsona tecta,
I am ruere vt quaedam videantur velle, ruantque
Prodita iudicijs fallacibus omnia premis.
Hic igitur ratio tibi rerum prava necesse est,
Falsaque sit falsis quaecunque a sencibus orta est.
As in building if the first rule be to blame,
And the deceitful squire err from right form and frame,
If any instrument want any jot of weight,
All must needs faulty be, and stooping in their height,
The building naught, absurd, upward and downward bended,
As if they meant to fall, and fall as they intended;
And all this as betrayde
By judgments foremost laid.
Of things the reason therefore needs must faulty be
And false, which from false senses draws it is pedigree;
As for the rest, who shall be a competent judge in these differences? As we
said in controversies of religion, that we must have a judge inclined to
neither party, and free from part^alitie, or affection, which is hardly to be
had among Christians; so happens it in this: For if he be old, he cannot judge
of ages sense; himself being a party in this controversy: and so if he be
young, healthy, sick sleeping or waking, it is all one: We had need of some
body void and exempted from all these qualities, that without any preoccupation
of judgment might judge of these propositions as indifferent unto him: By
which accoumpt we should have a Judge, that were no man. To judge of the
apparances that we receive of subjects, we had need have a judicatorie
instrumentito verify this instrument, we should have demonstration; and to
approove demonstration, an instrument: thus are we ever turning round. Since
the senses cannot determine our disputation, themselves being so full of
uncertainty, it must then be reason: And no reason can be established without
another reason: then are we ever going back unto infinity. Our fantasy does
not apply it self to strange things, but is rather conceived by the
interposition of senses; and senses cannot comprehend a strange subject; Nay
not so much as their own passions; and so, nor the fantasy, nor the appearance
is the subjects, but rather the passions only, and sufferance of the sense:
which passion and subject are diverse things: Therefore who judges by
apparances, judges by a thing, different from the subject. And to say, that
the senses passions refer the quality of strange subjects by resemblance
unto the soul: How can the soul and the understanding rest assured of that
resemblance, having of itself no commerce with foreign subjects? Even as he
that knows not Socrates, seeing his picture cannot say that it resembles him.
And would a man judge by apparances, be it by all it is impossible; for by
their contraries and differences they hinder one another, as we see by
experience. May it be that some choice apparances rule and direct the others?
This choice must be verified by an other choice, the second by a third: and so
shall we never make an end. In few, there is no constant existence, neither of
our being, nor of the objects. And we, and our judgment, and al mortal things
else do incessantly roll turn and pass away. Thus can nothing be certainly
established, nor of the one, nor of the other; both the judging and the judged
being in continual alteration and motion. We have no communication with
being; for every humane nature is ever in the middle between being borne and
dying; giving nothing of it self but an obscure appearance and shadow, and an
uncertain and weak opinion. And if perhaps you fix your thought to take
it is being; it would be even, as if one should go about to graspe the water:
for, how much the more he shall close and press that, which by its own nature
is ever gliding, so much the more he shall loose what he would hold and fasten.
Thus, seeing all things are subject to pass from one change to another;
reason, which therein seeks a real subsistence, finds her self deceived as
unable to apprehend any thing subsistant and permanent: for so much as each thing
either comes to a being, and is not yet altogether; or begins to die before
it be borne. Plato said, that bodies had never an existence but in deed a
birth, supposing that Homer made the Ocean Father, and Thet is Mother of the
Gods, thereby to shew-vs, that all things are in continual motion, change and
variation. As he says, a common opinion amongst all the Philosophers before
his time; Only Parmenides, excepted, who denied any motion to be in things; of
whose power he makes no small accoumpt. Pythagoras that each thing or matter
was ever gliding, and labile. The Stoickes affirm, there is no present time,
and that which we call present, is but conjoyning and assembling of future time
and past. Heraclitus averreth that no man ever entered twice one same river.
Epicarmus avowcheth, that who erewhile borrowed any money, does not now owe it:
and that he who yesternight was bidden to dinner this day, comes to day
unbidden; since they are no more themselves, but are become others: and that
one mortal substance could not twice be found in one self state: for by the
sodainesse and lightness of change, sometimes it wastes, and othertimes it
re-assembleth; now it comes and now it goes; in such sort, that he who
begins to be borne, never comes to the perfection of being. For, this being
borne comes never to an end, nor ever stays as being at an end; but after
the seed proceeds continually in change and alteration from one to another.
As of man's seed, there is first made a shapelesse fruit in the Mothers Womb,
than a shapen Child, then being out of the Womb, a sucking babe, afterward he
becomes a ladde, then consequently a striplin, then a full-growne man, then
an old man, and in the end an aged decrepite man. So that age and subsequent
generation goes ever undoing and wasting the precedent.

Mut at enim mundi naturam totius aetas, Ibid. l. 5. 937.

Ex alioque alius status excipere omnia debet,
Nec manet vlla sui similis res, omnia migrant,
Omnia commut at natura and vertere cogit.
Of th'vniversall world, age does the nature change,
And all things from one state must to another range,
No one thing like it self remains, all things do pass,
Nature does change, and drive to change, each thing that was.
And when we do foolishile fear a kind of death, when as we have already
past, and daily pass so many others. For, not only (as Heraclitus said) the
death of fire is a generation of air; and the death of air, a generation of
Water. But also we may most evidently see it in our selves. The flower of age
dies, fades and fleeteth, when age comes upon us, and youth ends in the
flower of a full grown man's age: Childhood in youth, and the first age, dies
in infancy: and yester-day ends in this day, and to day shall die in to
morrow. And nothing remains or ever continues in one state. For to prove
it, if we should ever continue one and the same, how is it then, that now we
rejoice at one thing, and now at another? How comes it to pass, we love things
contrary, or we hate them, or we love them, or we blame them? How is it, that
we have different affections, holding no more the same sense in the same
thought? For it is not likely, that without alteration we should take other
passions, and What admits alterations, continues not the same: and if it be
not one self same, than is it not: but rather with being all one, the simple
being does also change, ever becoming other from other. And by consequence
Natures senses are deceived and lie falsely; taking what appears for what is;
for want of truly knowing what it is that is. But then what is it, that is
indeed? That which is eternal, that is to say, that which never had birth, nor
ever shall have end; and to which no time can bring change or cause alteration.
For time is a fleeting thing, and which appears as in a shadow, with the
matter ever gliding, always fluent, without ever being stable or permanent; to
whom rightly belong these terms, Before and After: and it Has been, or Shall
be. Which at first sight does manifestly show, that it is not a thing, which
is; for, it were great sottishness, and apparent false-hood, to say, that that
is which is not yet in being, or that already has ceased from being. And
concerning these words, Present, Instant, Even-now, by which it seems, that
especially we uphold and principally ground the intelligence of time; reason
discovering the same, does forth with destroy it: for presently it severeth it
asunder and divides it into future and past-time, as willing to see it
necessarily parted in two. As much happens unto nature, which is measured
according unto time, which measures her: for no more is there any thing in
her, that remains or is subsistent: rather all things in her are either borne
or ready to be borne, or dying. By means whereof, it were a sin to say of
God, who is the only that is, that he was or shall be: for these words are
declinations, passages, or Vicissitudes of that, which cannot last, nor
continue in being. Wherefore we must conclude; that only God is, not according
to any measure of time, but according to an immoovable and immutable eternity,
not measured by time, nor subject to any declination, before whom nothing is,
nor nothing shall be after, nor more now nor more recent, but one really being:
which by one only Now or Present, fills the Ever, and there is nothing that
truly is, but the alone: Without saying, he has been, or he shall be, without
beginning, and sans ending. To this so religious conclusion of a heathen man, I
will only add this word, taken from a testimony of the same condition, for an
end of this long and period of this tedious discourse which might well furnish
me with endless matter. Oh what a vile and abject thing is man (says he)
unless he raise himself above humanity! Observe here a notable speech, and a
profitable desire; but likewise absurd. For to make the handful greater than
the hand and the embraced greater then the arm; and to hope to straddle more
than our legs length; is impossible and monstious: nor that man should mount
over and above himself or humanity; for, he cannot see but with his own eyes,
nor take hold but with his own arms. He shall raise himself up, if it please
God extraordinarily to lend him his helping hand. He may elevate himself by
forsaking and renouncing his own means, and suffering himself to be elevated
and raised by mere heavenly means. It is for our Christian faith, not for his
Stoicke virtue to pretend or aspire to this divine Metamorphosis, or miraculous
transmutation.

The thirteenth Chapter.
Of judging of others death.

WHen we judge of others assurance or boldness in death, which without all
peradventure, is the most remarkable action of humane life, great heed is to
be taken of one thing, which is, that a man will hardly believe he is come to
that point. Few men die with a resolution, that it is their last hour: And no
where does hopes deceit ammuse us more. She never cease to ring in our ears,
that others have been sicker, and yet have not died; the cause is not so
desperate as it is taken; and if the worst happen, God has done greater
wonders. The reason is, that we make to much account of our selves. It seems,
that the generality of things does in some sort suffer for our annullation, and
takes compassion of our state. For So Much as our sight being altered, represents
unto it self things alike; and we imagine, that things fail it, as it does to
them: As they who travel by Sea, to whom mountains, fields, towns, heaven
and earth, seen to go the same motion, and keep the same course, they do:

Provehimur portu, terraeque vrbesque recedunt. Vir. Aen^ l. 3. 72

We sailing launch from harbor, and
Behind our backee leave towns, leave land.
Who ever saw old age, that commended not times past, and blamed not the
present, charging the world and men's customs with her misery, and lowering
discontent?

Iamque caput quassans grandis suspirat arator, L^ced. l. 2. 113.

Et cum tempor a temporibus praesentia confert
Praeteritis, laudat fortunas saepe parentis
Et crepat antiquum genus vt pietate repletum.
The gray-beard Plowman sighs, shaking his hoary head,
Compares times that are now, with times past heretofore,
Praises the fortunes of his father long since dead,
And crakes of ancient men, whose honesty was more.
We entertain and carry all with us: Whence it follows, that we deem our
death to be some great matter, and which passes not so easily, nor without a
solemn consultation of the Stars; Tot circa v^um caput tumultuantes Deos. So
many Gods keeping a stir about one man's life. And so much the more we think
it, by how much more we praise our selves. What? Should so much learning and
knowledge be lost with so great dommage, without the Destinies particular care?
A soul so rare and exemplar, costs it no more to be killed, then a popular and
unprofitable soul? This life, that covers so many others, of whom so many
other lives depend, that, for his use possesses so great a part of the world
and fills so many places, is it displaced as that which holds by it is own
simple string? No one of us thinks it sufficient, to be but one. Thence came
those words of Caesar to his pilot, more proudly swollen, then the Sea that
threatened him:

-- Italiam si caelo authore recusas, Lucan. li. 3. 579.

Mepete: sola tibi causa haec est iusta timoris,
Vectorem non nosse tuum perrumpe procellas
Tutela secure may: --
If Italy thou do refuse with heaven thy guide,
Turn thee to me: to thee only just cause of fear
Is that thy passinger thou know not: stormy tide
Break through, secure by guard of me, whom thou do bear.
And these.

-- credit iam digna pericula Caesar
Fatis esse suis: tantusque evertere (dixit Ibid. 653.

Mesuperis labor est, parva q^em puppe sedentem.
Tam magno petiere mari.
Caesar does now believe, those dangers worthy are
Of his set fate; and says, do Gods, take so much pain
Me to undo, whom they thus to assault prepare
Set in so small a skiffe, in such a surging maine?
And this common foppery, that Phoebus for one whole year, bare mourning
weeds on his forehead for the death of him: Virg. Georg. li. 1. 466.


Ille etiam extincto miseratus Caesare Romam,
Cum caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit.
The Snnne did pity take of Rome when Caesar did,
When he his radiant head in obscure rust did hide.
And a thousand such, wherewith the world suffers it self to be so easily
conicatcht, deeming that our own interests disturb heaven, and his infinity
is moved at our least actions. Non tanta caelo societas nobiscum est, vt nostro
fato mortalis sit ille quoque siderum fulgor. There is Plin. not. ^ist. l 2. ^.
8.
no such society between heaven and us, that by our destiny the shining of
the stars should be mort all as we are. And to judge a resolution and
constancy in him, who though he be in manifest danger, does not yet believe
it, it is no reason: And it suffices not, that he die in that ward, unless he
have directly, and for that purpose put himself into it: It happens, that most
men set a stern countenance on the matter, look big, and speak stoutly,
thereby to acquire reputation, which if they chance to live, they hope to
enjoy. Of all I have seen die, fortune has disposed their countenances, but
not their desseignes. And of those which in ancient times have put themselves
to death, the choice is great, whether it were a sudden death, or a death
having time and leisure. That cruel Roman Emperor, said of his prisoners,
that he would make them feel death: And if any fortuned to kill himself in
prison, That fellow has escaped me (would he say.) He would extend and linger
death, and cause it, be felt by torments.

Vidimus and toto quamuis in corpore caese, Lucan. l. 2. 179

Nil animae let hale datum, moremque nefandae
Durum saevitiae, pereuntis parcere morti.
And we have seeene, when all the body tortured lay,
Yet no stroke deadly given, and that in humane way
Of tyranny, to spare his death that sought to die.
Verily, it is not so great a matter, being in perfect health, and well settled
in mind, for one to resolve to kill himself: It is an easy thing to show
stoutnes and play the wag before one come to the pinch. So that Heliogabalus
the most dissoluteman of the world, amidst his most riotous sensualities,
intended, whenever occasion should force him to it, to have a dainty death.
Which, that it might not degenerate from the rest of his life, he had
purposely caused a stately tewre to be built, the nether part and fore-court
whereof was floored with boardes richly set and enchased with gold and precious
stones, from-off which he might headlong throw himself down: He had also
caused cords to be made of gold and crimson silk, therewith to strangle
himself: And a rich golden rapier, to thrust himself through: And kept poison
in boxes of Emeraldes and Topases, to poison himself with, according to the
humor he might have, to choose which of these deaths should please him.

Impiger and fortis virtute coacta. ^ib. 4. 797. Gurie.

A ready minded gallant,
And in forced valor valiant.
Notwithstanding, touching this man, the wantonness of his preparation makes
it more likely, that he would have fainted, had he been put to his trial. But
even of those, who most vndantedly have resolved themselves to the execution,
we must consider (I say) whether it were with a life ending stroke, and that
took away any leisure to feel the effect thereof. For, it is hard to guess,
seeing life droope away by little and little, the bodies-feeling entermingling
it self with the souls, means of repentance being offered, whether in so
dangerous an intent, constancy or obstinacy were found in him. In Caesar's
civil wars, Lucius domitius taken in prussia, having empoisoned himself,
did afterward rue and repent* his deed. It has happened in our days, that some
having resolved to die, and at first not stricken deep enough, the smarting of
his flesh, thrusting his arm back, twice or thrice more wounded himself a
new, and yet could never strike sufficiently deep. Whilst the arraignement of
Plantius Silvanus was preparing, Vrgulaniae his grandmother, sent him, a
poignard, wherewith not able to kill himself thoroughly, he caused his own
servants to cut his veins. Albucilla in Tiberius time, purposing to kill
hirselfe, but striking over faintly, gave her enemies leisure to apprehend and
imprison her, and appoint her what death they pleased. So did Captain
Demosthenes after his discomfiture in Sicilie. And C. Fimbria having over
feeblie wounded himself, became a suitor to his boy, to make an end of him. On
the other side, Ostorius, who for so much as he could not use his own arm,
disdained to employ his servants in any other thing but to hold his dagger
stiff and strongly; and taking his running, himself carried his throat to
it is point, and so was thrust through. To say truth, it is a meat a man must
swallow without chewing, unless his throat be frostshod. And therefore
Adrianus the Emperor made his Phi^^tian to mark and take the just compass of
the mortal place about his pap, that so his aim might not fail him, to whom
he had given charge to kill him. Lo why Caesar being demanded; which was the
death he most allowed, answered, the least premeditated, and the shortest. If
Caesar said it, it is no faintness in me to believe it. A short death ( says
Pliny) is the chief hap of humane life. It grie veth them to acknowledge
it. No man can be said, to be resolved to die, that fears to purchase it,
and that cannot abide to look upon, and out-stare it with open eyes. Those,
which in times of execution are seen to run to their end, and hasten the
execution, do it not with resolution, but because they will take away time to
consider the same; it grieves them not to be dead, but to die.

Emori nolo, sed me esse mortuum, nihil aestimo. Cie. Tusc. qut l. 1. Epicha.

I would not die too soon,
But care not, when it is done.
It is a degree of constancy, unto which I have experienced to arrive, as
those that cast themselves into danger, or into the Sea, with closed eyes. In
mine opinion, there is nothing more worthy the noting in Socrates life, then to
have had thirty whole days to ruminate his deaths-decree, to have digested it
all that while, with an assured hope, without dismay or alteration, and with a
course of actions and words, rather suppressed; and loose-hanging, then
outstretched and raised by the weight of such a cogitation. That Pomponius
Atticus, to whom Cicero writes, being sick, caused Agrippa his son in
law, and two or three of his other friends to be called* for, to whom he said;
that having assaied, how he got nothing in going about to be cured, and what he
did to prolong his life did also lengthen and augment his grief, he was now
determined to make an end of one and other; entreating them to allow of his
determination, and that by no means, they would loose their labor to dissuade
him from it. And having chosen to end his life by abstinence, his sickness was
cured by accident; The remedy he had employed to make himself away, brought
him to health again. The Physicians, and his friends, glad of so happy a
success, and rejoicing thereof with him, were in the end greatly deceived;
for, with all they could do, they were never able to make him alter his former
opinion, saying, that as he must one day pass that cariere, and being now so
forward, he would remoove the care, another time to begin again. This man
having with great leisure apprehended death, is not only no whit discouraged,
when he comes to front it, but resolutely falls upon it: for, being satisfied
of that, for which he was entered the combat, in a braverie he thrust himself
into it, to see the end of it. It is far from fearing death, to go about to
taste and savor the same. The history of Cleanthes the philosopher, is much
like to this. His gummes being swollen, his Physicians persuaded him to use
great abstinence; having fasted two days, he was so well amended, as they told
him he was well, and might return to his wonted course of life. He contrarily,
having already tasted some sweetenes in this fainting, resolves not to draw
back, but finish what he had so well begun, and was so far waded into.
Tullius Marcellinus, a young Roman Gentleman, willing to prevent the hour of
his destiny, to rid himself of a disease, which tormented him more than he
would endure, although Physicians promised certainly to cure him, howbeit not
suddenly; called his friends unto him to determine about it: some (says
Seneca) gave him that counsel, which for weakness of heart, themselves would
have taken others for flattery that, which they imagined would be most
pleasing unto him: but a certain Stoike standing by, said thus unto him.
Toil not thy self Marcellinus, as if thou determinedst some weighty matter,
to live is no such great thing, thy base grooms and bruit beasts live also,
but it is a matter of consequence to die honestly, wisely and constantly.
Remember how long it is, thou do est one same thing, to eat, to drink, and
sleep, to drink, to sleep, to eat. We are ever incessantly wheeling in this
endless circle. Not only bad and intolerable accidents, but the very saciety
to live, brings a desire of death. Marcellinus had no need of a man to
counsel, but of one to help him: his servants were afraid to meddle with him;
but this Philosopher made them to understand, that familiars are suspected,
only when the question is, whether the masters death have been voluntary:
otherwise it would be as bad an example to hinder him, as to kill him,
for so much as,

Invitum qui servat, idem facit occidenti. Hor. art. Po^^. 467.

Who saves a man against his will,
Does even as much as he should kill.
Then he advertized Marcellinus, that it would not be unseemly, as fruit or
comfets at our tables, when our bellies be full, are given unto bystanders, so
the life ended, to distribute something to such as have been the ministers of
it. Marcellinus being of a frank and liberal disposition, caused certain
sums of money to be divided amongst his servants, and comforted them. And for
the rest, there needed neither iron nor blood, he undertook to depart from
this life, not by running from it: Not to escape from death, but to taste it.
And to have leisure to condition or bargain with death, having quit all manner
of nourishment, the third day ensuing, after he had caused himself to be
sprinkled over with lukewarm water, by little and little he consumed away;
and (as he said) not without some voluptuousness and pleasure. Verily, such as
have had these faintings and swownings of the heart; which proceed from
weakness, say, that they feel no pain at all in them, but rather some
pleasure, as of a passage to sleep and rest. These are premeditated, and
digested deaths. But that Caeto alone, may serve to all examples of virtue, it
seems, his good destiny, caused that hand wherewith he gave himself the
fatal blow, to be sick and sore: that so he might have leisure to affront
death and to embrace it, reen forcing his courage in that danger, in liew of
mollifying the same. And should I have represented him in his prowdest state,
it should have been all bloody-gored, tearing his entrails, and rending his
guts, rather then with a sword in his hand, as did the Statuaries of his
time. For this second murder, was much more furious, then the first.

The fourteenth Chapter.
How that our spirit hinders it self.

IT is a pleasant imagination, to conceive a spirit justly balanced between two
equal desires. For, it is not to be doubted, that he shall never be resolved
upon any match: For So Much as the application and choice brings an inequality of
prise: And who should place us between a Bottle of wine, and a Gammon of Bacon,
with an equal appetite to eat and drink, doubtless there were no remedy, but
to die of thurst and of hunger. To provide against this inconvenient, when the
Stoikes were demanded, whence the election of two indifferent things comes
into our soul (and which causes, that from out a great number of Crowns or
Angels we rather take one then another, when there is no reason to induce us to
prefer any one before others) the answer, that this motion of the soul is
extraordinary and irregular coming into us by a strange, accidental and
casual impulsion. In my opinion, it might rather be said, that nothing is
presented unto us, wherein there is not some difference, how light so ever it
be: And that either to the sights, or to the feeling, there is ever some
choice, which tempts and draws us to it, though imperceptible and not to be
distinguished. In like manner, he that shall presuppose a twine-third equally
strong all-through, it is impossible by all impossibility that it break, for,
where would you have the flaw or breaking to begin? And at once to break in
all places together, it is not in nature. Who should also add to this, the
Geometrical propositions, which by the certainty of their demonstrations,
conclude, the contained greater then the containing, and the center as great as
his circumference: And that find two lines incessantly approaching one unto
another, and yet can never meet and join together: And the Philosophers
stone, and quadrature of the circle, where the reason and the effects are so
opposite: might peradventure draw thence some argument to salve and help this
bold speech of Pliny. Solum certum nihil esse certi, and homine nihil miserius
aut superbius. This only is sure, that there is nothing sure; and nothing more
miserable, Plin. not. hist. lib. 2. c. 7.
and yet more arrogant then man.

The fifteenth Chapter.
That our desires are increased by difficulty.

THere is no reason but has another contrary unto it, says the wisest party
of Philosophers. I did erewhile ruminate upon this notable saying, which an
ancient writer aleadgeth for the contempt of life. No good can bring us any
pleasure, except that, against whose loss we are prepared: In aequo est dolor
amissaerei, and timor amittendae, Sorrow for a thing lost, and fear of Sen.
epist 98.
loosing it, are on an even ground. Meaning to gain thereby, that the fruition
of life, cannot perfectly be pleasing unto us, if we stand in any fear to
loose it. A man might nevertheless say on the contrary part, that we embrace
and claspe this good so much the harder, and with more affection, as we
perceive it to be less sure, and fear it should be taken from us. For, it is
manifestly found, that as fire is rouzed up by the assistance of cold, even so
our will is whetted on by that which does resist it.

Si nunquam Danaen habuisset ahenea turris, Orid. Am. li. 2. ^l. 19. 27.

Non esset Danae de love facta parens.
If Danae had not been closed in brazen Tower,
Jove had not closed with Danae in golden shower.
And that there is nothing so naturally opposite to our taste, as satiety,
which comes from ease and facility, nor nothing that so much sharpneth it, as
rareness and difficulty. Omnium rerum voluptas ipso quo debet fugare periculo
crescit. The delight of all things increases by the danger, whereby it rather
should terrify them that affect it.

Galla nega; satiatur amor, nisi gaudia torquent. Mart. l. 4. epig. 38. 1.

Good wench, deny, my love is cloied,
Unless joys grieve, before enjoyed.
To keep love in breath and longing, Lycurgus ordained, that the married men of
Lacedemonia might never converse with their wives, but by stealth, and that it
should be as great an imputation and shame to find them laid together, as if
they were found lying with others. The difficulty of assignations or matches
appointed, the danger of being surprised, and the shame of ensuing to morrow,

-- and languor, and silentium, Hor. epod. 11. 13

Et latere petitus imo spiritus.
And whispering voice, and languishment,
And breath in sighs from deep sides sent,
are the things that give relish and tartness to the sauce. How many most
lasciviously-pleasant sports, proceed from modest and shamefast manner of
speech, of the daliances and works of love? Even voluptuousness seeks to
provoke and stir it self up by smarting. It is much sweeter when it itcheth,
and endeared when it gauleth. The curtezen Flora was wont to say, that she
never lay with Pompey, but she made him carry away the marks of her teeth.

Quod petiere, premunt arcte, faciuntque dolorem Lucr. l. 4. 1070

Corporis, and dentes inlidunt saepe labellis:
Et stimuli subsunt, qui instigant laedere idipsum
Quodcumque est, rabies vnde isti germina surgunt,
So goes it every where: Rarenes and difficulty gives esteem unto things.
Those of Marca d' Ancona in Italy, make their vows, and go on pilgrimage
rather unto Saint James in Galicia, and those of Galicia rather unto our Lady
of Loreto. In the Country of Liege, they make more account of the Bathes of
Luca; and they of Tus^any esteem the Baths of Spawe more then their own: In
Rome the Fence-schooles are ever full of Frenchmen, when few Romans come unto
them. Great Cato, as well as any else, was even clo^ed and distasted with his
wife, so long as she was his own, but when another man's, then wished he for
her, and would feign have lickt his fingers at her. I have heretofore put forth
an old stalion to soil, who before did no sooner see or smell a Mare, but was
so lusty, that no man could rule him, nor no ground hold him; ease and
facility, to come to his own when he list, has presently quailed his stomach,
and so cloyed him, that he is weary of them: But toward strange Mar^s, and the
first that passes by his pasture, there is no hoe with him; but suddenly he
returns to his old wonted neighings, and furious heat. Our appetite does
contemn and pass over what he has in his free choice and own possession, to
run after, and pursue what he has not. Hor. Ser. l. 1. Sat. 2 107.


Transuolat in medio posita, and f^gienti^ captat.
It over-flies what open lies,
Pursuing only that which flies.
To forbid us any thing, is the ready way to make us long for it. Orid. Am.
lib. 2. ^l. 19. 47.


-- nisi tu servare puellam
Incipis, incipiet desinere esse mea,
If you begin not your wench to enshrine,
She will begin to leave off to be mine.
And to leave it altogether to our will, is but to breed dislike and contempt
in us; So that to want, and to have store, breeds one self same
inconvenience.

Tibi quod super est, mihi quod defit, dolet. Ter. Phor. act. 1. s^^. 3.

You grieve because you have to much;
It griev's me that I have none such.
Wishing and enjoying trouble us both a like. The rigor of a mistress is
yrkesome, but ease and facility (to say true) much more; forasmuch as
discontent and vexation proceed of the estimation we have of the thing desired,
which sharpen love, and set it afire: Whereas Satiety begets distaste: It is a
dull, blunt, weary, and drouzy passion.

Siqua volet regnare diu, com^emnat amantem. Opid. ^m. lib. 2. ^l. 19. 33.

If any list long to bear sway,
Scorn she her lover, ere she play.
-- contemnite amantes, Prop* lib. 2. ^l. 14. 19.

Sic hodie veniet, ^^qua negauit heri,
Lovers, your lovers scorn, contemn, delude, deride;
So will she come to day, that yesterday denide.
Why did Poppea devise to mask the beauties of her face, but to endeare them
to her lovers? Why are those beauties veiled down to the heels, which all
desire to show, which all wish to see? Why do they cover with so many lets,
one over another, those parts, where chiefly consists our pleasure and
theirs? And to what purpose serve those baricadoes, and verdugalles, wherewith
our women arm their flanks, but to allure our appetite, and enveagle us to
them by puttingvs off?

Et ^ugit ad salices, and se cupit ante videri Virg. ^uc^. ^cl. 3. 65.

She to the willow's runs to hide,
Yet gladly would she first be spide.
Interdum tunica duxit operatamoram, Pro. ibid. el^g. 15* 6.

She covered with her cote in play.
Did sometime make a short delay.
Whereto serves this mayden-like bashfullnesse, this wilful quaintness, this
severe conntenaunce, this seeming ignorance of those things, which they know
better than our selves, that go about to instruct them, but to increase a
desire, and endeare a longing in us, to vanquish, to gourmandize, and at our
pleasure, to dispose all this sqeamish ceremony, and all these peevish
obstacles? For, it is not only a delight, but a glory to besot and debauch
this dainty and nice sweetness, and this infantine bashfulnesse, and to
subject amarble and stern gravitie to the mercy of our flame. It is a glory
(say they) to triumph over modesty, chastity and temperance: and who disswadeth
Ladies from these parts, betraieth both them and himself. It is to be
supposed, that their heart yerneth with fear, that the sound of our words,
wounds the purity of their ears, for which they hate us, and with a forced
constraint, agree to withstand our importunity. Beauty with all her might,
has not wherewith to give a taste of her self without these interpositions.
See in Italy, where most, and of the finest beauty is to be sold, how it is
forced to seek other strange means and subtle devises, arts and tricks, to
yield her self pleasing and acceptable: and yet in good sooth, do what it can,
being venall and common, it remaineh ^eeble, and is even languishing. Even as
in virtue, of two equal effects, we hold that the fairest, and worthiest,
wherein are proposed more lets, and which affoordeth greater hazards. It is an
effect of Gods providence, to suffer his holy Church, to be vexed and
turmoyled, as we see, with so many troubles and storms, to rouse, and awaken
by this opposition and strife the godly and religious souls, and raise them
from out a lethall security, and stupefied slumber, wherein so long tranquillity
had plunged them. If we shall counterpoize the los^e we have had, by the
number of those, that have strayed out of the right way, and the profit that
accrueth unto us, by having taken heart of grace, and by reason of combat
raised our zeal, and forces; I wot not whether the profit does surmount the
loss. We thought to tie the bond of our marriages the faster, by remooving all
means to dissolve them, but by how much faster, that of constraint has bin
tied, so much more has that of our will and affection been slacked and
loosed: Whereas on the contrary side, that, which so long time held marriages
in honor and safety in Rome, was the liberty to break them who list. They
kept their wives the better, for so much as they might leave them; and when
divorces might freely be had, there past five hundred years and more, before
any would ever make use of them.

Quod licet, ingratum est, quod non licet, acrius vrit, Orid* Am* lib. 2. ^l.
19. 3.

What we may do, does little please:
It woormes us more, that has less ease.
To this purpose might the opinion of an ancient Writer be adjoined that
torments do rather encourage vices, than suppress them; that they beget not a
care of well-doing, which is the work of reason and discipline, but only a care
not to be surprised in doing evil.

Latius excis^ pestis contagia serpunt.
The Infection of the plague nigh-spent,
And rooted out, yet further went.
I wot not whether it be true, but this I know by experience, that policy was
never found to be reformed that way. The order and regiment of manners
depends of some other mean. The Greek stories, make mention of the
Agrippians, neighboring upon Scithia, who live without any rod or staff of
offense, where not only, no man undertakes to buckle with any other man, but
whosoever can but save himself there (by reason of they virtue and sanctity of
life) is as it were in a Sanctuary: And no man dares so much as touch him.
Many have recourse to them, to atone and take up quarrels and differences,
which arise amongst men else where. There is a Nation, where the enclosures of
Gardens and Fields, they intend to keep several, are made with a seely twine
of cotton, which amongst them is found to be more safe and fast, then are our
ditches and hedges. Furem signata sollicitant, Aperta effractarius Sen* ^pist.
69.
praeterit. Things sealed up solicit a thief to break them open: Whereas a
common burglayer will pass by quietly things that lie open. Amongst other
means, ease and facility does happily cover and sense my house from the
violence of civil wars: Enclosure and fencing draws on the interprise; and
distrust the offense. I have abated and weakened the soldiers design, by
taking hazard and al means of military glory from their exploite* which is
wont to serve them for a title, and stead them for an excuse. What is
performed courageously, at what time justice lies dead, and law has not her
due course, is ever done honorably. I yield them the conqest of my house
dastardly and tretcherous. It is never shut to any that know^keth. It has no
other guardian or provision but a Porter, as an ancient custom, and used
ceremony who serves not so much to defend my gate, as to offer it more
decently and courteously to all comers. I have nor watch nor sentinel, but
what the Stars keep for me. That Gentleman is much to blame, who makes a
show to stand upon his guarde, except he be very strong indeed. Who so is open
on one side; is so every where. Our Forefathers never dreamed on building of
frontire Towns or Castles.

The means to assail (I mean without battery, and troops of armed men) and
to surprise our houses, increase daily beyond the means of garding or
defending. Men's wits are generally exasperated and whetted one that way. An
invasion concerns all, the defense none but the rich. Mine was sufficiently
strong, according to the times when it was made. I have since added nothing
unto it that way; and I would fear; the strength of it should turn against my
self. Seeing a peaceable time will require we shall vnfortifie them. It is
dangerous not to be able to recover them again, and it is hard for one to be
assured of them. For, concerning intestine broiles, your own servant may be of
that faction you stand in fear of. And where religion serves for a pretense,
even alliances and consanguinitie become mistrustfull under color of justice.
Common rents cannot entertain our private garrisons. They should all be
consumed. We have not wherewith, nor are we able to do it, without our apparent
ruin, or more incommodiously, and therewithal injuriously, without the common
peoples destruction. The state of my loss should not be much worse. And if you
chance to be a looser, your own friends are readier to accuse your
improvidence and vnhedinesse, then to moan you, and excuse your ignorance and
carelessness, concerning the offices belonging to your profession. That so many
strongly-garded houses have been lost, whereas mine continues still, makes
me suspect they were overthrown, only because they were so diligently
guarded. It is that which affoordeth a desire, and ministers a pretense to the
assailant. All gards bear a show of war; which if God be so pleased may
light upon me. But so it is, I will never call for it. It is my sanctuary or
retreat to rest my self from wars. I endeavor to free this corner from the
public storm, as I do another corner in my soul. Our war may change
form, and multiply and diversifie how and as long as it list; but for my self
I never stir. Amongst so many baricaded and armed houses, none but my self
(as far as I know) of my quality, has merely trusted the protection of his
unto the heavens: for I never remooved neither plate, nor hangings, nor my
evidences. I will neither fear, nor save my self by halfes. If a full
acknowledgement purchases the favor of God, it shall last me for ever unto
the end: if not, I have continued long enough, to make my continuance
remarkable, and worthy the registring. What? Is not thirty years a goodly
time?

The sixteenth Chapter.
Of Glory.

THere is both name, and the thing: the name, is a voice which notes, and
signifies the thing: the name, is neither part of thing nor of substance: it
is a stranger-piece joined to the thing, and from it. God who in and by
himself is all fullness, and the tipe of all perfection, cannot inwardly be
augmented or increased: yet may his name be increased and augmented, by the
blessing and praise, which we give unto his exterior works; which praise and
blessing since we cannot incorporate into him, for so much as no accession of
good can be had unto him, we ascribe it unto his name, which is a part without
him, and the nearest unto him. And that is the reason why glory and honor
appertains to God only. And there is nothing so repugnant unto reason, as
for us to go about to purchase any for our selves: For, being inwardly needy
and defective, and our essence imperfect, and ever wanting amendment, we ought
only labor about that. We are all hollow and empty, and it is not with
breath and words we should fill our selves. We have need of a more solid
substance to repair our selves* An huuger-starved man might be thought most
simple, rather to provide himself of a fair garment, then of a good
meales-meate: We must run to that, which most Luke 2. 14.
concerns us. Gloria in excelsis Deo, and interrapax hominibus. Glory be to
God on high, and peace in earth amongst men; As say our ordinary prayers. We
are in great want of beauty, health, wisdom, virtue and such like essential
parts. Exterior ornaments may be sought-for when we are once provided, of
necessary things. Divinity does very amply and pertinently treat of this
subject, but I am not very conversant with it. Chrysippus and Diogenes have
been the first, and most constant authors of the contempt of glory. And
amongst all sensualities, they said, there was none so dangerous, nor so much
to be avoided, as that which comes unto us by the approbation of others.
Verily experience makes us thereby feel, and undergo many domageable
treasons. Nothing so much empoisoneth Princes as flattery: Nor nothing whereby
the wicked-minded gain so easy credit about them; nor any enticement so fit,
nor pandership so ordinary to corrupt the chastity of women, then to feed and
entertain them with their praises. The first enchantment the Sirens employed
to deceive V^^sses, is of this nature.

Deca verse nous, deca, o treslevable Vlisse,
Et le plus grand honneur don't sa Greece fleurisse.
Turn to us, to us turn, Ulysses thrice-renowned.
The principal renown wherewith all Greece is crowned.
Philosophers said, that all the worlds glory deserved not, that a man of
wisdom should so much as stretch forth his finger to acquire it.

Gloria quantalibet quid erit, si gloria tantum est? Iuven. Sat. 7. ^1.

Never so glorious name,
What is it, be it but fame?
I say for it alone: for, it draws many commodities after it, by which it may
yield it self desirable: It purchases us good will: It makes us less exposed
to others injuries and offenses, and such like things. It was also one of the
principal decrees of Epicurus: for, that precept of his Sect, HIDE THY LIFE,
which forbids men to meddle with public charges and negotiations, does also
necessarily presuppose that a man should despise glory: which is an approbation
the world makes of those actions we give evidence of. He that bids us to hide
our life, and care but for our selves, and would not have us know of others,
would also have us not to be honored and glorified thereby. So does he
counsel Idomeneus, by no means to order his actions, by the vulgar opinion
and public reputation: unless it be to avoid other accidental
incommodities, which the contempt of men might bring unto him. Those discourses
(are in mine advise) very true and reasonable: But, I wot not how, we are
double in our selves, which is the cause, that what we believe, we believe it
not, and cannot rid our selves of that, which we condemn. Let us consider the
last words of Epicurus and which he speaks as he is dying: they are notable
and worthy such a Philosopher: but yet they have some badge of his names
commendations, and of the humor which by his precepts he had disauowed. Behold
here a letter, which he endited a little before he yielded up his ghost..
Epicurus to Hermachus health and greeting: Whilst I passed the happy, and even
the last day of my life I writ this, accompanied nevertheless with such pain
in my bladder and anguish in my entrails, that nothing can be added to the
greatness of it; yet was it recompensed with the pleasure, which the
remembrance of my inventions and discourses brought unto my soul. Now as
requires the affection, which even from the infancy thou have borne me and
Philosophy, embrace the protection of Metrodorus his children: Lo here his
letter. And which makes me interpret, that the pleasure which in his soul he
says to feel of his inventions, does in some sort respect the reputation,
which after his death he thereby hoped to attain, is the ordinance of his last
will and testament* by which he wills, that Aminomachus and Timocretes his
heirs, should for the celebration of his birthday every month of January
supply all such charges as Hermachus should appoint: And also for the expense
he might be at upon the twentieth of every Moon for the feasting and
entertainment of the Philosophers his familiar friends, who in the honor of
his memory and of Metrodorus should meet together. Carneades has been
chief of the contrary opinion, and has maintained, that glory was in it self
to be desired, even as we embrace our posthumes for themselves, having neither
knowledge nor jovissance of them. This opinion has not missed to be more
commonly followed, as are ordinarily those, that fit most and come nearest our
inclinations. Aristotle amongst external goods yields the first rank unto
it: And avoideth, as two extreme vices, the immoderation, either in seeking,
or avoiding it. I believe, that had we the books which Cicero writ upon this
subject, we should hear strange matters of him: for he was so fond in this
passion, as had he dared, he would (as I think) have easily fallen into the
excess, that others fell in; which is, that even virtue was not to be desired,
but for the honor, which ever waited on it: Hor. car. l. 4. od. 9. 29.


Paulum sepultae distat inertiae
Celata virtus. --
There is but little difference between,
Virtue conceald, unskillfulness unseen.
Which is so false an opinion, as I am vexed it could ever enter a man's
understanding that had the honor to bear the name of a Philosopher. If that
were true, a man needed not to be virtuous but in public: and we should never
need to keep the soules-operations in order and rule, which is the true feate
of virtue, but only so much as they might come to the knowledge of others.
Does then nothing else belong unto it, but craftily to fail, and subtly to
cozen? If thou know a Serpent to be hidden in any place (says Carneades) to
which, he by whose death thou hopest to reap commodity, goes unawares to sit
upon, thou committest a wicked act if thou warn him not of it: and so much the
more, because thy action should be known but to thy self. If we take not the
law of well-doing from our selves: If impunity be justice in us; to how many
kinds of trecheries are we daily to abandon our selves? That which Sp.
Peduceus did, faithfully to restore the riches which C. Plotius had committed
to his only trust and secrecy, and as my self have done often? I think not
so commendable, as I would deem it execrable, if we had not done it. And I
think it beneficial we should in our days be mindful of Publius Sextilius
Rufus his example, whom Cicero accuses that he had received a great
inheritance against his conscience: Not only repugnant* but agreeing with the
laws. And M. Crassus, and Q. Hortensius, who by reason of their authority and
might, having for certain Quidities been called by a stranger to the
succession of a forged will, that so he might make his share good: they were
pleased not to be partakers of his forgery, yet refused not to take some
profit of it: Very closely had they kept themselves under the countenance of
the accusations, witnesses and laws. Meminerint Deum se habere testem, id est
(vt Ego arbitror) mentem suam. Let them remember they have God to witnsse, that
is, (as I construe it) their own mind. Virtue is a vain and frivolous thing,
if it draw her commendation from glory. In vain should we attempt to make her
keep her rank apart, and so should we disjoyne it from fortune: for, What is
more casual than reputation? Profecto fortuna in omni re dominatur: Ea res
cunctas ex libidine magis quam ex vero celebrat obscuratque. Fortune governs
in all things, and either advancethor abaseth them rather by froward
disposition, then upright judgment. To make actions to be known and seen, is
the mere work of fortune, It is chance that applies glory unto us, according
to her temeritie. I have often seen it to go before desert; yea and many
times to out-goe merit by very much. He that first bethought himself of the
resemblance between shadow and glory, did better than he thought of. They are
exceeding vain things. It also often goes before her body, and sometimes
exceeds by much in length. Those who teach Nobility to seek in valor nothing
but honor: Quasi non sit honestum quod nobilitatum non sit; As though it were
not honest, except it were ennobled. What gain they by it? But to instruct
them never to hazard themselves, unless they be seen of others; and to be
very heedy, whether such witnesses are by, that may report news of their
valor, whereas a thousand occasions, to do well are daily offered, and no man
by to mark them? How many notable particular actions, are buried in the throng
of a Battle? Whosoever ammuseth himself to control others, in so confused a
hurly-burly, is not greatly busied about it: and produces the testimony which
he gives of his fellows proceedings or exploits against himself. Vera and
sapiens animi magnitudo, honestum illud quod maxim naturam sequitur, in factis
positum, non in gloria iudicat. A true and wise magnanimity esteems that
honesty, which especially follows Nature, to consist in good actions, and not
in glory, All the glory I pretend in my life, is, that I have lived quietly.
Quietly not accord to Metrodorius, Arcesilas, or Aristippus, but according to
my self. Since Philosophy could never find any way for tranquillity, that
might be generally good, let every man in his particular seek for it. To whom
are Caesar and Alexander beholding for that infinite greatness of their renown,
but to fortune? How many men has she suppressed in the beginning of their
progress, of whom we have no knowledge at all, who bare the same courage that
others did, if the il fortune of their chance had not staid them even in the
budding of their enterprises? Amongst so many and so extreme dangers (to my
remembrance) I never read, that Caesar received any hurt. A thousand have dyed
in less danger, than the least of those he escaped. Many worthy exploits and
excellent deeds must be lost, before one can come to any good. A man is not
always upon the top of a breach, nor in the front of an army, in the sight
of his General, as upon a stage. A man may be surprised between a hedge and a
ditch. A man is sometimes put to his sudden shifts, as to try his fortune
against a Hens-roost, to ferret out four seely shot out of some barn, yea
and sometimes straggle alone from his troops; and enterprise, according as
necessity and occasion offers it self. And if it be well noted (in mine
advise) it will be found, and experience does teach it, that the least blazoned
occasions, are the most dangerous, and that in our late home-warres, more good
men have perished in slight and little-importing occasions, and incontention
about a small cottage, than in worthy achievements, and honorable places. Who
so thinks his death il employed, except it be in some glorious exploite, or
famous attempt, in liew of dignifying his death, he happily obscureth his life:
Suffering in the mean time many just and honor affoording oportunties to
escape, wherein he might and ought adventure himself. And all just occasions
are glorious enough; his own conscience publishing them sufficiently to all 2.
Car. 1. 12. Aug. bo^. 35.
men. Gloria nostra est, testimonium conscienti^ nostra. Our glory is the
testimony of our conscience. He that is not an honest man, but by that which
other men know by him, and because he shall the better be esteemed, being
known to be so, that will not do well but upon condition his virtue may come
to the knowledge of men; such a one is no man from whom any great service may
be drawn, or good expected.

Credo ch'il rest di quel verne, cose Ariest. Orl. can 11. stan 81.

Facesse degne di tenerne conto.
Ma fur fin'a quel tempo si n^scose,
Che non e colpa mia s'hor'non le conto,
Perch Orlando a far'^pre virtuose
Piu ch'a narrarle poisempre era pronto;
Ne may fu alcun'de li suoi fatti espresso,
Senen quando hebbe i testimonij appresso.
I guess, he of that winter all the rest
Achieved exploites, whereof to keep account,
But they until that time were so suppressed,
As now my fault it is not, them not to count,
Because Orlando ever was more pressed
To do, than tell deeds that might all surmount.
Nor was there any of his deeds related
Unless some witness were associated.
A man must go to wars for his devoirs sake and expect this recompense of it,
which cannot fail all worthy actions, how secret soever* no not to virtuous
thoughts: It is the contenment that a well disposed conscience receives in it
self, by well doing. A man must be valiant for himself and for the advantage
he has to have his courage placed in a constant and assured seat, to
withstand all assaults of fortune.

Virtus repulsae nesci^ sordide, Hor car. li 3. od. 2. 17.

Iutaminatis fulget honoribus:
Nec sumit aut ponit secures
Arbitrio popularis a^rae.
Virtue vnskill'd to take repulse that is base,
In undefiled honors clearly shines,
At the dispose of peoples airy grace
She signs of honor tak's not, nor resignes.
It is not only for an exterior show or ostentaion, that our soul must play
her part, but inwardly within our selves, where no eyes shine but ours: There
it does shroud us from the fear of death, of sorrows and of shame: There it
assures us, from the loss of our children, friends and fortunes; and when
opportunity is offered it also leads us to the dangers of war. Non emolumento
aliquo, sed ipsius honestatis decore. Not for any advantage, but for Cie. fin.
l. 1.
the greacefulnes of honesty it self. This benefit is much greater, and more
worthy to be wished and hoped, then honor and glory, which is naught but a
favorable judgment that is made of us. We are often driven to empanell and
select a jury of twelve men out of a whole country to determine of an acre of
land: And the judgment of our inclinations and actions (the waightiest and
hardest matter that is) we refer it to the idle breath of the vain voice of
the common sort and base raskalitie, which is the mother of ignorance, of
injustice, and inconstancy. Is it reason to make the life of a wise man depend
on the judgment of fools? An quidquam stultius, quam quos singulos contemnas,
eos aliquid putare esse vniverses? Aelian var. hist. l. 2. c. 1.
Is there any thing more foolish, then to think that altogether they are
oughts, whom every one single you would set at noughts? Whosoever aims to
please them, has never done: It is a But, that has neither form nor
holdfast. Nil tam inaestimabile est, quam animi multitudinis. Nothing is so
incomprehensible to be just waied as the minds of the multitude. Demetrius
said merely of the common peoples voice, that he made no more reckoning of that
which issued from out his mouth above, then of that which came from a homely
place below, and says moreover: Ego hoc iudico, si quando turpe non sit, tamen
non esse non turpe, quum id a multi^udins laudetur: cic. fin. bon. l. 2.
Thus I esteem of it, if of it self it be not dishonest, yet can it not but
be dishonest, when it is applauded by the meny. No art, no mildness of
spirit might direct our steps to follow so straggling and disordred a guide. In
this breathie confusion of bruites, and frothie Chaos of reports and of vulgar
opinions, which still push-vs on, no good course can be established. Let us not
propose so fleeing and so wavering an end unto our selves. Let us constantly
follow reason: And let the vulgar approbation follow us that way. If it please:
And as it depends all on fortune, we have no law to hope for it, rather by any
other way then by that. Should I not follow a strait path for it is
straightnes, yet would I do it because experience has taught me, that in the
end, it is the happiest and most profitable. Dedit hoc providentia hominibus
munus, vt honest a magis iuvarent. Man's providence has given him this gift
that honest things should more delight and avail him. The ancient Sailer said
thus to Neptune in a great storm, Oh God, thou shall save me if thou please,
if not, thou shall loose me; yet will I ke^p^ my helm still fast. I have, in
my days, seen a thousand mild, mungrell and ambiguous men, and whom no man
thought to be more worldly-wise than my self, loose themselves, where I have
saved my self.

Risi successu posse carere dolos. Orid. epist. Penel. v. 18.

I smild to see that wily plots.
Might want success (and leave men sots.)
Paulus Aemilius going to the glorious expedition of Macedon, advertized the
people of Rome during his absence, not to speak of his actions: For The
license of Judgments is an especial let in great affairs. Forasmuch as all
men have not the constancy of Fabius against common, contrary and detracting
voices: who loved better to have his authority dismembered by men's vain
fantasies, then not to perform his charge so well, with favorable and popular
applause. There is a kind of I know not what natural delight, that man has to
hear himself commended, but we yield too too-much unto it.

Laudari haud metuam, neque enim mihi cornea fibra est, Pers. sat. 1. 47

Sed recti finemque extremumque esse recuso
Euge tuum and belle --
Nor fear I to be praised, for my guts are not horn,
But that the utmost end of good should be, I scorn,
Thy O well said, well done, well played.
I care not so muh what I am with others, as I respect what I am in my self. I
will be rich by my self, and not by borrowing. Strangers see but external
apparances and events a every man can set a good face upon the matter, when
within he is full of care, grief and infirmities. They see not my heart, when
they look upon my outward countenance. There is great reason the hypocrisy
that is found in war should be discovered: For, what is more easy in a man
of practice, then to flinch in dangers and to counterfeit a gallant and a
boaster, when his heart is full of faintness, and ready to droope for fear?
There are so many ways to shun occasions for a man to hazard himself in
particular, that we shall have deceived the world a thousand times, before we
need engage our selves into any perilous attempt; and even when we find our
selves entangled in it, we shall not want skill how to cloak our sport with
a good face, stearne countenance, and bold speeches; although our heart do
quake within us. And he that had the use of the Platonical Ring, whose
virtue was to make him invisible that wore it upon his finger, if it were
turned toward the flat of the hand; many would hide themselves, when they
should most make show of their worth, and would be sorry to be placed in so
honorable a place, where necessity may be their warrant of safety.

Falsus honor invat, and mendax infamia terret Her. lib. 1. epi. 16. 39.

Quem nisi mendosum and mendacem? --
False honor tickles; false defame affright's,
Whom, but the faulty, and false-fierd sprights?
See how all those judgments, that men make of outward apparances, are
wonderfully uncertain and doubtful, and there is no man so sure a testimony,
as every man is to himself: How many horse-boyes have we in them as partners
and companions of our glory? He that keeps his stand in an open trench, what
does he more, but diverse poor pioners do as much before him, who open the way
for him, and with their bodies shelter him, for poor sixpence a day, and
happily for less?

-- non quicquid turbida Roma Pers. sat. 1. 5.

Elevet, accedas, examenque improbum in illa
Castiges trutina, nec te quasiver is extra.
If troublous Rome set ought at naught, make you not one,
Nor chastise you unjust examination
In balance of their lode:
Nor seek your self abroad.
We call that a magnifying of our name, to extend and disperse the same in many
mouths, we will have it to be received in good part, and that it is increase
redound to his benefit: This is all that is most excusable in it is desseigne:
But the infirmity of it is excess proceeds so far, that many labor to have
the world speak of them, howsoever it be. Trogus Pompeius says of
Herostratus, and Titus Livius of Manlius Capitolinus, that they were more
desirous of great, then good reputation. It is an ordinary fault; we endeavor
more that men should speak of us, then how and what they speak, and
^^sufficeth us, that our name run in men's mouths, in what manner soever. It
seems that to be known, is in some sort, to have life and continuance in
other men's keeping. As for me* I hold that I am but in my self; and of this
other life of mine, which consists in the knowledge of my friends, being
simply and barely considered in my self, well I wot, I neither feel fruit or
jovislance of it, but by the vanity of fantastical opinion. And when I shall
be dead, I shall much less have a feeling of it: And shall absolutely loose
the use of true vtilities, which sometimes accidentally follow it: I shall have
no more fastness to take hold on reputation, nor whereby it may either
concern or come unto me. For, to expect my name should receive it: First I
have no name that is sufficiently mine: Of two I have, the one is common to all
my race, yea and also to others. There is a family at Paris, and another at
Montpellier, called Montaigne, another in Brittany, and one in Xa^togne,
surnamed dela-Montaigne. The removing of one only syllable may so confound our
web, as I shall have a share in their glory, and they perhaps a part of my
shame. And my Ancestors have heere-to-fore been surnamed Higham, or Eyquem, a
surname which also belongs to a house well known in England. As for my other
name, it is any bodies that shall have a mind to it. So shall I happily honor
a Porter in my stead. And suppose I had a particular mark or badge for my
self, what can it mark when I am no more extant? May it desseigne or favor
inanity?

-- nunc levior cippus non imprimit essa? ^bid. 37.

Laudat poster it as, nunc non e manibus illis,
Nunc non e tumulo fortunataque favilla
Nascuntur violae?
Does not the gravestone on such bones sit light?
Posterity applaudes: from such a spright,
From such a tomb, from ashes blessed so,
Shall there nor violets (in Cart-lodes) grow?
But of this I have spoken elsewhere. As for the rest, in a whole battle,
where ten thousand are either maimed or slain, there are not peradventure
fifteen that shall be much spoken off. It must be some eminent greatness, or
important consequence, that fortune has joined unto it, to make a private
action prevail, not of a mean shot alone, but of a chieftaine: For, to kill a
man, or two, or ten; for one to present himself vndantedly to death, is
indeed something to every one of us in particular; for, a man's freehold goes
on it: But in regard of the world, they are such ordinary things, so many are
daily seen, and so sundry alike must concur together to produce a notable
effect, that we can look for no particular commendation by them. I^rem sat.
13. 9


-- casus multis hic cognitus, aciam
Tritus, and e medio fortunae ductus acervo.
This case is known of many, worn with nothing,
Drawn from the middle heap of fortunes doting.
Of so many thousands of worthie-valiant men, which fifteen hundred years
since have died in France, with their weapons in hand, not one hundred have
come to our knowledge: The memory not only of the Generals and Leaders, but
also of the battles and victories lies now low-buried in oblivion. The
fortunes of more then half the world, for want of a register, stir not from
their place, and vanish away without continuance. Had I all the unknown events
in my possession, I am persuaded I might easily supplant those that are known
in all kinds of examples. What? Of the Romans themselves, and of the
Grecians, amongst so many writers and testimonies, and so infinite rare
exploites and matchles examples: How are so few of them come to our notice?

Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur aura. Virg. Aen li. 7. 646.

Scarsely to us does pass
Fames thin breath, how it was.
It shall be much, if a hundred years hence, the civil wars which lately we
have had in France, be but remembered in gross. The Lacedaemonians as they were
going to their battles, were wont to sacrifice unto the Muses, to the end their
deeds might be well written, and worthily registered; deeming it a divine
favor, and unusual grace, that noble actions might find testimonies able to
give them life and memory. Think we that at every shot that hits us, or at
every dangerous attempt we run into, to have a Clarke present to enrole it:
And besides, it may be, that a hundred Clerks shall write them, whose
Commentaries shall not continue three days, and shall never come to any bodies
sight. We have but the thousanth part of ancient writings: It is Fortune, which
according to her favor gives them either shorter or longer life; and what we
have, we may lawfully doubt-of, whether it be the worse, since we never saw the
rest. Histories are not written upon every small trifle: It is requisite that a
man have been conqueror of an Empire, or of a Kingdom; a man must have
obtained two and fifty set battles, and ever with a lesser number, as Caesar
was and did. Ten thousand good-fellowes, and many great Captains have died
most valiantly and courageously in pursuit of her, whose names have continued
no longer then their wives and children lived:

-- quos fama obscura recondit. Verg. Aen. l. 5. 292.

Whom fame obscure before
Lays up in unknown store.
Even of those, whom we see to do excellently well, if they h^ve but once
continued so three months, or so many years, there is no more speech of them,
then if they had never bin. Whosoever shall in due measure proportion, and
impartially consider, of what kind of people, and of what deeds the glory is
kept in the memory of books, he shall find, there are few actions, and very
few persons, that may justly pretend any right in them. How many virtuous men
have we seen to surviue their own reputation, who even in their presence have
seen the honor and glory, which in their young days, they had right-justly
purchased, to be clean extinguished? And do we for three years of this
fantastical and imaginary life, loose and foregoe our right and essential
life, and engage our selves in a perpetual death? The wiser sort propose
aright-fairer, and much more just end unto themselves, to so urgent and
weighty an enterprise. Recte facti, fecisse merces est: Officijfructus, ipsum
^ssicium est. The reward Senec. epist. 81.
of well doing, is the doing, and the fruit of our duty, is our duty. It might
peradventure be excusable in a Painter, or other artificer, or also in a
Rethoritian, or Gramarian, by his labors to endevor to purchase a name: But
the a^tions of virtue are of themselves too-too-noble, to seek any other
reward, then by their own worth and merit, and especially to seek it in the
vanity of man's judgment. If this false-fond opinion do notwithstanding serve
and stead a common wealth to hold men in their duty: If the people be thereby
stirred up to virtue: If Princes be any way touched, to see the world bless
and commend the memory of Trai^n, and detest the remembrance of Nero: If that
does moove them, to see the name of that arch-villa ne, heretofore so dreadful
and so much redoubted of all, so boldly cursed, and so freely outraged, by the
^^rst scholar that undertakes him. Let it hardly be increased, and let us (as
much as in us li^th) still foster the same amongst our selves. And Plato
employing all means to make his Citizens virtuous, does also persuade them,
not to contemn the peoples good estimation. And says, that through some
divine inspiration it comes to pass, that even the wicked know often, as
well by word, as by opinion, how to distinguish justly the good from the bad.
This man, together with his master, are wonderful and bold workmen, to
join divine operations and revelations, wheresoever humane force fails And
therefore did peradventure Timon (deeming thereby to wrong him) surname him the
great forget of miracles. Vt tragici poetae confugiunt ad Deum, cum explicare
argumenti exitum Cic^. Not D^^r. lib. 1.
non p^ssunt. As Poets that write Tragedies have recourse to some God, when
they cannot unfold the end of their argument. Since men by reason of their
insufficiency cannot well pay themselves with good lawful coin, let them
also employ false money. This mean has been practiced by all the lawgivers:
And there is no commonwealth where there is not some mixture either of
ceremonious vanity or of false opinion, which as a restraint serves to keep
the people in awe and duty. It is therefore, that most of them have such
fabulous grounds and trifling beginnings, and enriched with supernatural
mysteries, It is that which has given credit unto adulterate and unlawful
religions, and has induced men of understanding to favor and countenance
them. And therefore did Numa and Sertorius, to make their men have a beter
belief, feed them with this foppery; the one, that the Nymph Egeria, the
other that his white Hind, brought him all the counsel she took from the
Gods. And the same authority, which Numa gave his Laws under the title of
this Goddesses patronage, Zoroastres Law giver to the Bactrians and Persians,
gave it to his, under the name of the God Orom^zis: Trismegistus of the
Egyptians, of Mercury: Zamolzis of the Scithians, of Vesta: Charondas of the
Chalcid onians, of Saturn: Minos of the Candiots, of Jupiter: Lycurgus of the
Lacedaemonians, of Apollo: Dracon and Solon of the Athenians, of Minerva. And
every common wealth has a God to her chief: all others falsely, but that truly,
which Moses instituted for the people of Iewry desceded from Egypt. The
Bedoins religion (as says the Lord of Iovinuile) held among other things that
his soul which among them al died for his Prince went directly into another
more happy body, much fairer and stronger than the first: by means whereof, they
much more willingly hazarded their live for his sake.

In ferrum men's pronavir^^, animaque capaces Luca. l. 1. 461.

Mortis: and ignavum est rediturae parcerevitae.
Those men sword* minded, can death entertain,
Think base to spare the life that turns again.
Loe-heere, although very vain, a most needful doctrine, and profitable
belief. Every Nation has store of such examples in itself. But this subject
would require a several discourse. Yet to say a word more concerning my former
purpose: I do not counsel Ladies any longer to call their duty, honor: vt
enim consuetudo loquitur, id solum dicitur honestum, quod Cit. fin. l. 2.
est populari fama gloriosum: For as custom speaks, that only is called
honest which is glorious by popular report. Their duty is the mark; their
honor but the bark of it. Nor do I persuade them to give us this excuse of
their refusal, in payment; for I suppose, their intentions, their desire, and
their will, which are parts wherein honor can see nothing forasmuch as nothing
appears outwardly there, are vet more ordered then the effects.

Quae, quia non liceat, non facit, illa facit. Ovid. Am. l. 3. el. 4. 4.

She does it, though she do it not,
Because she may not do it (God wot.)
The offense both toward God, and in conscience, would be as great to desire
it, as to effect the same. Besides, they are in themselves actions secret and
hid; it might easily be, they would steal some one from others knowledge,
whence honor depends, had they no other respect to their duty, and affection,
which they bear unto chastity, in regard of it self. Each honorable person
chooses rather to loose his honor, then to forgo his conscience.

The seventeenth Chapter.
Of Presumption.

THere is another kind of glory, which is an over-good opinion we conceive of
our worth. It is an inconsiderate affection, wherewith we cherish our selves,
which presents-vs unto our selves other then we are. As an amorous passion
adds beauties, and lends graces to the subject it embraces, and makes
such as are therewith possessed, with a troubled conceit, and distracted
Judgment, to deem what they love, and find what they affect, to be other,
and seem more perfect, then in truth it is. Yet would I not have a man, for
fear of offending in that point, to misacknowledge himself, nor think to be
less then he is: A true Judgment should wholly and in every respect maintain
his right. It is reason, that as in other things, so in this subject he see
what truth presenteh unto him. If he be Caesar, let him hardly deem himself
the greatest Captain of the world. We are naught but ceremony; ceremony does
transport* us, and we leave the substance of things; we hold-fast by the
boughs, and leave the trunk or body. We have taught Ladies to blush, only by
hearing that named, which they nothing fear to do. We dare not call our
members by their proper names, and fear not to employ them in all kind of
dissoluteness. Ceremony forbids us by words to express lawful and natural
things; and we believe it. Reason wills us to do no bad or unlawful things,
and no man gives credit unto it. Hear I find my self entangled in the laws
of Ceremony, for it neither allows a man to speak ill or good of himself.
Therefore will we leave her at this time. Those whom Fortune (whether we
shall name her good or bad) has made to pass their life in some eminent or
conspicuous degree, may by their public actions witness what they are; but
those whom she never employed, but in base things, and of whom no man shall
ever speak, except themselves do it, they are excusable, if they dare speak
of themselves to such as have interest in their acquaintance, after the example
of Lucilius:

Ille velut fidis arcana sodalibus olim Hor. s^r. l. 2. sat. 1. 30.

Credebat libris, neque si male: cesser at vsquam
Decurre^s ali^, neque si been: quo fit, vt omnis
Votiva pateat veluti descripta tabella
Vita s^nis. --
He trusted to his book, as to his trusty friend
His secrets, nor did he to other refuge bend,
How ever well, or ill, with him his fortune went.
Hence is it, all the life is seen the old man spent,
As it were in a Table noted,
Which were unto some God devoted.
This man committed his actions and imaginations to his paper and as he felt,
so he pourtraied C^r^. Tacit. vi^ I^l. Agri^.
himself. Nec id Rutili^ and Scauro citra fidem, aut ob^rectationifuit. Nor
was that without credit, or any imputation to Rutilius or Scaurus. I remember
then, that even from my tenderest infancy, some noted in me a kind of I know
not what fashion in carrying of my body, and gestures, witnessing a certain
vain and foolish fierceness. This I will first say of it, that it is not
inconvenient to have conditions so peculiar, and propensions so incorporated in
us, that we have no mean to feel, or way to know them. And of such natural
inclinations, unknown to us, and without our consent, the body does easily
retain some sign or impression. It was an affectation witting of his beauty,
which made Alexander to bend his head a little on one side, and Alcibiades, his
speech somewhat effeminate and lisping: Julius Caesar was wont to scrath his
head with one finger, which is the countenance of a man surcharged with
painful imaginations: And Cicero (as I remember) had gotten a custom to
wrythe his Nose* which signifies a natural scoffer. Such motions may unawares
and imperceptibly possesse-vs. Others there be which are artificial, whereof I
will not speak. As salutations, reverences, or conges, by which some do often
purchase the honor, (but wrongfully) to be humble, lowly, and courteous: A man
may be humble through glory. I am very prodigal of cappings, namely in Summer,
and I never receive any from what quality of men soever, but I give them as
good and as many as they bring, except he be some servant of mine. I wish that
some Princes whom I know, would be more sparing, and impartial dispencers of
them; for, being so indiscreetly employed, they have no force at all: If they
be without regard, then are they without effect. Amongst disordered
countenaunces, let us not forget the stern look of Constantius the Emperor,
who in public held ever his head bolt-vpright, without turning or bending the
same on any side, no not so much as to look on them that saluted him sideling,
holding his body so fixed and vnmooveable, that let his Coche shake never so
much, he kept still vp-right: he durst never spit nor wipe his Nose, nor dry
his face before the people. I wot not whether those gestures, which were noted
in me were of this first condition, and whether in truth I had any secret
propension to this fault, as it may well be: and I cannot answer for the
motions of my body. But concerning those of the soul, I will here ingeniously
confess what I think of them. There are two parts in this glory: Which is to
say, for a man to esteem himself overmuch, the other, not sufficiently to
esteem of others. For the one, first me thinks, these considerations ought
somewhat to be accounted of. I feel my self surcharged with one error of the
mind, which both as bad, and much more as importunate, I utterly dislike. I
endeavor to correct it; but I cannot displace it. It is, because I abate the
just value of those things, which I possess; and enhance the worth of things,
by how much they are more strange, absent and not mine own. This humor
extends it self very far, as does the prerogative of the authority,
wherewith husbands look upon their own wives with a vicious disdame, and many
fathers upon their children: So do I, and between two like works would I
ever weigh against mine. Not so much that the jealousy of my preferment, and
amendment troubles my judgment, and hinders me from pleasing my self, as
that mastery hirselfe begets a contempt of that which a man possesses and
owes. Policies, far customs and tongues flatter me; and I perceive the Latin
tongue by the favor of her dignity to deceive me, beyond what belongs unto
her, as children and the vulgar sort. My neighbors oeconomie; his house, and
his horse, though but of equal value, is more worth then mine, by how much
more it is not mine own. Besides, because I am most ignorant in mine own
matters: I admire the assurance, and wonder at the promise, that every man has
of himself: whereas there is almost nothing, that I wot I know, nor that I
dare warrant my self to be able to do. I have not my faculties in
proposition, or by estate, and am not instructed in them but after the effect:
As doubtful of mine own strength, as uncertain of another force. Whence it
follows, if commendably I chance upon any one piece of work, I rather impute
it to my fortune, then ascribe it to mine industry; forasmuch as I desseigne
them all to hazard, and in fear. Likewise I have this in general, that of all
the opinions, which Antiquity has had of man in gross, those which I most
willingly embrace, and whereon I take most hold, are such as most vilify,
contemn, and annihilate us. Me thinks Philosophy has never better cards to
Show, then when she checketh our presumption, and crosses our vanity; when in
good sooth she acknowledges her irresolution, her weakness and her
ignorance. Me seems the over good conceit, and selfe-weening opinion man has
of himself, is the Nurce-mother of the falsest opinions, both public and
particular. Those which a cocke-horse will perch themselves upon the Epicicle
of Mercury, and see so far into heaven, they even pull out my teeth. For in
the study which I profess, the subject whereof is Man, finding so extreme a
variety of judgments, so inextricable a laberinth of difficulties one upon the
neck of another, so great diversity, and so much uncertainty, yea even in the
school of wisdom it self: you may imagine since those men could never be
resolved of the knowledge of themselves and of their own condition, which is
continually before their eyes, which is ever within them; since they know not
how that mooveth, which themselves cause to moove, nor how to set forth the
springs, and descipher the wards, which themselves hold and handle, how should
I think of the true cause of the flux and reflux of the river Nilus? The
curiosity to know things has been given to men (as says the holy Scripture)
for a scourge. But to come to my particular, it is very hard (me seems) that
some other regards himself less, yea and some other esteems me less then
I esteem my self. I account my self of the common sort except in that I deem
myself guilty of the basest, and culpable of the most popular defects: but
not disavowed nor excused. And I only prise my self, wherein I know my worth.
If any glory be in me, it is but superficially infused into me; by the treason
of my complexion: and has no solid body appearing to the sight of my
judgment. I am but sprinkled over, but not thoroughly dyed. For in truth,
touching the effects of the spirit, in what manner soever, there never came
any thing from me, that contented me. And others approbation is no current
payment for me. My judgment is tender and hard especially in mine own
behalf. I feel my self to waver and bend through weakness: I have nothing
of mine own to satisfy my judgment. My sight is indifferently clear and
regular; but if I take any serious work in hand, it is trobled, and dimmed: as
I perceive most evidenly in Poesy: I love it exceedingly: I have some insight
or knowledge in other men's Labors, but in truth I play the Novice when I set
my hand unto it: Then can I not abide my self. A man may play the fool every
where else, but not in Poesy.

-- mediocribus esse poetis Hor. art. Poet. 372.

Non dij, non homines, non concessere columnae.
Nor Gods, nor men, nor pillars gave the grant,
That Poets in a mean, should meanly chaunt.
I would to God this sentence were found in the front of our Printers or
Stacioners shops, to hinder the entrance of so many bald-rimers.

-- verum Mart. lib. 12. epig. 64.

Nil securius est malo Poeta.
Nothing securer may be had,
Then is a Poet bold and bad.
Why have we no such people? Dionisius the father esteemed nothing in himself
so much as his poesy. In the times of the Olimpike games, with chariots
exceeding all other in magnificence, he also sent Poets and Musicians to
present his verses, with tents and pavilions gilt and most sumtuously
tapistred. When they first began to rehearse them, the favor and excellency
of the pronuntiation did greatly allure the peoples attention: but when they
began to consider the fondness of the composition, they fell as soon to
contemn them: and being more and more exasperated fell furiously into an
uproar, and headlong ran in most spiteful manner to tear and cast down all
his pavillions. And forasmuch as his rich chariets did no good at all in their
course, and the ship which carried his men, returning homeward missed the shore
of Sicilie, and was by violent storms driven and spilt upon the coast of
Tarentum, they certainly believed, the wrath of the Gods to have been the
cause of it, as being greatly offended, both against him, and his vile and
wicked Poem: yea and the Mariners themselves that escaped the shipwreck did
much second the peoples opinion: to which the Oracle that foretold his death
seemed in some sort to subscribe: which implied, that Dionisius should be
near his end, at what time he had vanquished those that should be of more
worth than himself: Which he interpreted to be the Carthaginians, who exceeded
him in might. And having at any time occasion to fight or grapple with them,
that he might not incur the meaning of this prediction, he would often temper
and avoyde the victory. But he mis-vnderstoode the matter, for the God observed
the time of advantage, when as through partial favor and injustice he
obtained the victory over the tragical Poets at Athens, who were much better
than he was, where he caused in contention of them, his Tragedy, entitled the
Lenetens, to be publicly acted. After which usurped victory, he presently
deceased: And partly through the excessive joy, he thereby conceived. What I
find excusable in mine, is not of itself, and according to truth: but in
comparison of other compositions, worse than mine, to which I see some credit
given. I envy the good hap of those, which can applaude and gratify
themselves by their own labors; for it is an easy matter for one to please
himself, since he draws his pleasure from him self: Especially if one be
somewhat constant in his own wilfulness. I know a Poetaster, against whom
both weak and strong, in company and at home, both heaven and earth, affirm
and say, he has no skill or judgment in Poesy, who for all that is nothing
dismayed, nor will not abate one jote of that mesure whereunto he has fitted
himself; but is ever beginning again, ever consulting anew, and always
persisting; by so much the more fixed in his opinion, by how much the more it
concerns him alone, and he only is to maintain it. My compositions are so
far from applauding me, that as many times as I look them over, so often am
I vexed at them.

Cum relego, scripfisse pudet, quia plurima cerno, Ovid. Pont. lib. 1. ^. 6. 15.

Me quoque qui feci, iudice digna lini.
When I re-reade, I shame I write for much I see,
My self, who made them, being judge, blotted to be.
I have ever an Idea in my mind, which presents me with a better form, then
that I have already framed, but I can neither lay hold on it, nor effect it.
Yet is that Idea but of the meaner stamp. I thereby conclude, that the
productions of those rich and great minds of former ages, are far beyond the
extreme extention of my wish and imagination. Their compositions do not only
satisfy and fill me, but they astonish and wrap me into admiration. I judge of
their beauty, I see it, if not to the end, at least so far as it is imposible
for me to aspire unto it. Whatsoever I undertake (as Plutarke says of one) I
owe a sacrifice to the Graces, hoping thereby to gain their favor.

-- si quid enim placet,
Siquid dulce hominum, sensibus influit,
Debentur lepidis omnia gratijs.
If ought do please, if any sweet
The sense of men with pleasures greet,
To thank the Graces it is meet.
They altogether forsake me: What I do, it is but bunglingly, and wants both
polishing and beauty. I can rate them at no higher value, then they are worth.
My work manship adds no grace unto the matter. And that is the reason I must
have it strong, with good holdfast, and shining of it self. If I chance to
seize on any popular and more gay, it is to follow me, who love not a
ceremonious prudence and gloomy wisdom, as does the world; and to glad my
self, not my style, who would rather have it grave and severe: If at least I
may call that a ^^ile, which is a formelesse and abrupt speech. A popular
gibrish, and a proceeding without definition, without partition, and sanse
conclusion, troubled as that of Amafanius, and Rabirius. I can neither please,
nor glad, nor tickle. The best tale in the world coming into my hands, becomes
withered and tarnished. I cannot speak but in good earnest, and am altogether
barren of that facility which I see in many of my companions, to entertain
first comers, to keep a whole troop in talk, to ammuse a Princes ears with all manner of discourses and never to be weary, and never to want matter, by
reason of the graces they have in applying their first approches, and fitting
them to the humor and capacity of those they have to do withal. Princes love
not greatly serious and long discourses, nor I to tell tales. The first and
easiest reasons (which are commonly the best taken) I can neither employ nor
make use of them. I am an ill Orator to the common sort. I speak the utmost I
know of all matters. Cicero thinks, in discourses of Philosophy, the exordium
to be the hardest part: If it be so, I wisely lay hold on the conclusion. Yet
should a man know how to tune his strings to all aires: And the sharpest comes
ever last in play. There is at last as much perfection in raising up an empty,
as to uphold a weighty thing: A man must sometimes handle matters but
superficially, and at other times dive into them. I wot well that most men
keep themselves on this low stage, because they conceive not of things but by
the outward show. I also know, that the greatest Clerks, yea Xenophon and
Plato, are often seen to yield to this low and popular fashion, in speaking
of matters, upholding it with those graces, which they never want. As for the
rest, my language has neither facility nor fluency in it, but is harsh and
sharp, having free and vnsinnowy dispositions. And so it likes me, if not by
my judgment, yet by my inclination. But yet I perceive that sometimes I wade
to far into it, and that forcing my self to avoid art and affectation, I
fall into it another way.

-- breuis esse laboro, Hor. art. P^^s. 25.

Obscurus fio. --
To be short labor I?
I darker grow thereby.
Plato says, that either long or short, are not properties, that either
diminish or give price unto speech. If I should undertake to follow this other
smoothe, even and regular style, I should never attain unto it. And although
the cadences, and breakings of Salust do best agree with my humor, yet do I
find Caesar both greater, and less easy to be represented. And if my
inclination does rather carry me to the imitation of Senecaes style, I omit
not to esteem Plutarke much more. As well in silence as in speech, I am simply
my natural form, whence happily ensues, that I am more in speaking than in
writing. The motions and actions of the body, give life unto words, namely in
them that move roundly and without affectation, as I do, and that will be
earnest. Behavior, the face, the voice, the gown, and the place, may somewhat
endeare those things, which in themselves are but mean, as prating. Messala
complains in Tacitus of certain strait garments used in his time, and
discommendeth the fashion of the benches whereon the Orators were to speak,
saying, they weakened their eloquence. My French tongue is corrupted both in
the pronuntiation, and elsewhere by the barbarism of my country. I never saw
man of these hither-countries, that did not evidently taste of his home-speech,
and who often did not wound those ears, that are purely French. Yet is it not
because I am so cunning in my Perigordin: For I have no more use of it, than of
the Dutch, nor do I greatly care. It is a language (as are many others round
about me) like to that of Poitou, Xaintogne, Angoulesme, Limosin, and Auergne,
squattering, dragling, and filthy. There is about us, toward the mountains a
Gascoine tongue, which I much commend and like, sinnowie, pithie, short,
significant, and in truth man-like and military, more than any other I
understand. As compendious powerful, and pertinent as the French is gracious,
delicate, and copious. As for the Latin, which was given me for my
mother tongue, by reason of discontinuance, I have so lost the promptitude of
it, as I cannot well make use of it in speech, and scarsely in writing, in
which I have heerctofore been so ready, that I was called a master in it. Lo
here my little sufficiency in that behalf. Beauty is a part of great
commendation in the commerce and society of men. It is the chief mean of
reconciliation between one and other. Nor is there any man so barbarous, and
so hardhearted, that in some sort feels not himself stricken with her
sweetness. The body has a great part in our being, and therein keeps a
special rank: For, his structure and composition are worthy due
consideration. Such as go about to sunder our two principal parts, and
separate them one from another, are much to blame: They ought rather to be
coupled and joined fast together. The soul must be enjoined not to retire her
self to her quarter, nor to entertain her self apart, nor to despise and
leave the body (which she cannot well do, except it beby some counterfaited
apish trick) but ought to combine and cling fast unto him, to embrace, to
cherish, assist, correct, persuade and advise him, and if he chance to swarve
or stray, then to lead and direct him: In fine, she should wed and serve him
in stead of a husband, that so their effects may not seem contrary and diverse,
but agreeing and uniform. Christians have a particular instruction concerning
this bond, for they know that Gods justice allows this society, and
embraces this conjunction of the body and soul, yea so far as to make the
body capable of everlasting rewards. And that God beholds the whole man to
work, and will have him entirely to receive either the punishment, or the
recompense, according to his demerits. The Peripatetike Sect (of all Sects the
most sociable) attributes this only care unto wisdom, in common to procure
and provide, the good of these two associated parts: And declares other Sects
to have partialized overmuch, because they had given themselves to the full
consideration of this commixture; this one for the body, this other for the
soul, with one like error and oversight, and had mistaken their subject, which
is Man; and their guide, which in general they avouched to be Nature. The
first distinction, that has been amongst men, and the first consideration,
that gave preheminences to some over others, it is very likely it was the
advantage of beauty.

-- agros divisere atque dedere Lucr. l. 5. 11. 20.

Pro facie cuiusque and viribus ingenioque:
Nam facies multum valuit, viresque vigebant.
They lands divided and to each man shared
As was his face, his strength, his wit compared.
For face and strength were then
Much prized amongst men.
I am of a stature somewhat under the mean. This default has not only
uncomeliness in it, but also incommoditie: Yea even in those which have charge
and commandment over others; For, the authority which a fair presence and
corporal majesty endoweth a man withal is wanting. Caius Marius did not
willingly admit any Soldiers in his bands, that were not six foot high. The
Courtier has reason to require an ordinary stature in the Gentleman he
frames, rather, than any other; and to avoid all strangeness that may make
him to be pointed-at; But if he miss of this mediocritie, to choose that he
rather offend in lownes, then in tallnes. I would not do it in a military
man. Little men (says Aristotle) are indeed pretty, but not beauteous, nor
goodly: and in greatness, is a great soul known as is beauty in a great and
high body. The Ethiopians and Indians (says he) in choosing of their Kings and
Magistrates, had an especial regard to the beauty and tallnes of the persons.
They had reason, for it breeds an awful respect in those that follow him,
and a kind of fear in his enimes, to see a goodly, tall and handsome man march
as Chief and General in the head of an army, or front of a troup:

Ipse inter primos praestanti corpore Turnus Virg. Aen li. 7. 725.

Vertitur, armatenens, and toto vertice supra est.
Turnus, a goodly man, among them that led,
Stood armed, then all they higher by the head.
Our great, divine and heavenly King, all whose circumstances ought with much
care, religion and reverence to be noted and observed, has not refused the
bodies commendation. Speciosus forma prae filigs hominum. In favor beautiful
above the sons of men. And Plato wishes Psalm. 45. 3.
beauty to be joined unto temperance and fortitude in the preservers of his
Commonwealth. Is it not a great spite, if being amongst your own servants, a
stranger comes to your self to ask you where your Lord or Master is? And
that you have nothing but the remainder of a capping, which is as well put off
to your Barber, or to your Secritarie? As it happened to poor Philopaemen, who
having left his company behind, and coming alone into a house where he was
expressly looked-for, his hostess who knew him not, and saw him to be so
il-favored a fellow, employed him to help her maids to draw water, and to
mend the fire for the service of Philopaemen. The Gentlemen of his train being
come and finding him so busily at work (for he failed not to fulfill his
hostesses commandment) enquired of him what he did, who answered, I pay the
penalty of my vnhandsomnesse. Other beauties are for women. The beauty of a
handsome comely tallnesse is the only beauty of men. Where lowness and
littleness is, neither the largeness or rouudnesse of a forehead, nor the
whiteness or loveliness of the eyes, nor the pretty fashion of a nose, nor
the slenderness of the ear, littleness of the mouth, order and whiteness of
teeth, smooth thickness of a beard, brown like a chesse-nut, well-curled and
vpstanding hair, just proportion of the head, freshness of color, the
cheerful aspect of a pleasing face, the sweet smelling of a body, nor the well
decorated composition of all limbs, can make a handsome beauteous man. As for
me, I am of a strong and well compacted stature, my face is not fat, but full,
my complexion between joviall and melancholy, indifferently sanguine and hot.

Vnde rigens setis mihi crura, and pector a villis: ^^a^t. li. 6. epig. 56. 1.

Where by my legs and breast,
With rough hair are oppressed.
My health is blithe and lusty, though well-strooken in age, seldom troubled
with diseases: Such I was, for I am now engaged in the aproches of age, having
long since past-over forty years.

-- minutatim vires and robur adultum Luer. l. 2. I 140.

Frangit, and in partem peiorem liquitur aetas.
By little and a little age break's strength,
To worse and worse declining melt's at length.
What hereafter I shall be, will be but half a being. I shall be no more my
self. I daily escape, and still steal my self from my self:

Singula de nobis anni praedantur cuntes. Hor. li. 2. epist. 2. 55.

Years as they pass away,
Of all our things make pray.
Of addressing, dexterity, and disposition, I never had any, yet am I the
son of a well disposed father, and of so blithe and merry a disposition, that
it continued with him even to his extremest age. He seldom found any man of
his condition, and that could match him in all exercises of the body; As I have
found few, that have not out-gon me, except it were in running, wherein I was
of the middle sort. As for music, were it either in voice, which I have most
harsh, and very unapt, or in instruments, I could never be taught any part of
it. As for dancing, playing at tennis, or wrestling; I could never attain to
any indifferent sufficiency; but none at all in swimming, in fencing in
vauting, or in leaping. My hands are so stiff and nummie, that I can hardly
write for my self, so that what I have once scribled, I had rather frame it a
new, than take the pains to correct it; and I read but little better. I
perceive how the auditorie censureth me: Otherwise I am no bad clarke. I cannot
very well close up a letter; nor could I ever make a pen. I was never good
carver at the table. I could never make ready nor arm a Horse: Nor handsomely
arry a Hawke upon my fist, nor cast her off or let her fly, nor could I ever
speak to Dogs, to Birds, or to Horses. The conditions of my body are in
fine, very well agreeing with those of my mind, wherein is nothing lively; but
only a complete and constant vigor. I endure labor and pain, yet not very
well, unless I carry my self unto it, and no longer than my desire leads
and directs me.

Molliter austerum studio fallente laborem. Ser. lib. 2. sa. 2. 12.

While earnestness for sport or gain,
Sweetly deceiv's the sowrest pain.
Otherwise, if by any pleasure I be not allured, and if I have other direction,
than my genuine and free will, I am nothing worth, and I can never fadgewell:
For I am at such a stay, that except for health and life, there is nothing I
will take the pains to fret my self about, or will purchase at so high a
rate, as to trouble my wits for it, or be constrained thereunto.

-- Tanti mihi non sit opaci Iurem sat. 3. 54^

Omnis arena Tagi, quodque in mare voluitur aurum:
So much I weigh not shadowed Tagui sand,
Nor gold that roules into the Sea from land,
I am extremely lazy and idle, and exceedingly free, both by nature and art.
I would as willingly lend my blood as my care. I have a mind free and
altogether her own; accustomed to follow her own humor. And to this day never
had nor commanding nor forced master. I have gone as far, and kept what pace
pleased me best. Which has enfeobled and made me unprofitable to serve others,
and made me fit and apt but only for my self. And as for me, no man ever
needed to force this heavy, lither, and idle nature of mine: For, having even
from my birth found my self in such a degree of fortune, I have found occasion
to stay there: (An occasion notwithstanding, that a thousand others of mine
acquaintance would have taken as a plancke to pass over to search, to
agitation, and to unquietness. (And as I have sought for nothing, so have I
taken nothing.

Non agimur tumidis ventis Aquilone secundo, Her. lib. 2. epist. 2. 201

Non tamen adversis aetatem ducimus austris:
Viribus, ingenio, specie, virtute, loco, re,
Extremi primorum, extremis vsque priores.
With full sails, prosperous wind, we do not drive,
Nor yet with wind full in our teeth do live.
In strength, in wit, in virtue, shape, goods, place,
Last of the first, before the last we pace.
I have had no need but of sufficiency to content my self: Which being well
taken is ever a regiment for the mind, equally difficult in all sorts of
condition; and which by use, we see more easily found in want, than in plenty;
peradventure, because that according to the course of our other passions, the
greediness of riches is more sharpened by their uses than by their need: and
the virtue of moderation more rare, than that of patience. And I have had no
need, but to enjoy those goods quietly, which God of his bounty had bestowed
upon me. I have tasted no kind of tedious trouble. I have seldom managed
other than mine own business: Or if I have, it has been upon condition, I
might do it at my leisure, and according to my will; committed unto me, by such
as trusted me, and knew me well, and would not importune me; For, the skillful
rider, will reap some service of a restie and windbroken jade. My very
Childe-hood has been directed by a soft, mild, gentle and free fashion and
ever exempted from rigorous subjection. All which has endowed me with a
delicate kind of complexion, and made me incapable of any care: So that I
love, men should conceal my lostes from me, and the disorders which concern
me. In the Chapter of my charges and expenses, I have set down what my
negligence or carelessness costs me, both to feed and entertain my self.

-- bec nempe super suut, ^or. lib. 1. epist. 6. 45.

Quae dominum fallunt, quae prosint furibus.
This remnant of accoumpts I have,
Which may deceive Lords, help a Knave.
I love not to know an account of what I have, that I may less exactly feel
my losses: I desire those that live with me, where they want affection, or
good effects, to cozen and pay me with good apparances. For want of sufficient
constancy to endure the importunity of contrary or cross accidents, whereunto
we are subject; and because I cannot always keep my self prepared to govern
and order my affairs, as much as I am able, I ^oster this opinion in me,
relying wholly upon fortune, and ready to take every thing at the worst, and
resolve to bear that worst, mildely and patiently. About that only do I
busy my self, and to that end do I direct all my discourses. In any
dangerous matter, I care not so much how I may avoid it, and how little it
imports whether I avoid it or no; And what were it if I would continue in
it? Being unable to direct events, I govern my self; and if they apply not
themselves to me, I apply my self to them: I have no great art to shun
fortune, and how to escape or force it, and with wisdom to address matters to
my liking: I have also less sufferance to endure the sharp and painful
care, which belongs to that. And the most toilesome state for me, is to be
doubtful in matters of weight, and agitated between fear and hope. To
deliberate, be it but in slight matters, does importune me. And I feel my
spirit more perplexed to suffer the motions of doubt, and shakings of
consultation, than to be settled and resolved about any accident whatsoever,
after the chance is once cast. Few passions have troubled my sleep; but of
deliberations the least does trouble it. Even as of highways, I willingly
seek to avoyde the downe-hanging, and slipperi^, and take the beaten-path,
though myrie, and deep, so I may go no lower, and there seek I safety: So
love I pure mishapes, and which exercise and turmoile me no more, after the
uncertainty of their mending: And which even at the first cast, drive me
directly into sufferance.

-- dubia plus torquent mala. S^n. Agam. act. 3. sc. 1. 29.

Evils yet in suspense,
Do give us more offense.
In events; I carry my self man-like; in the conduct childishly. The horror of
a fall does more hurt me, than the blow. The play is not worth the candle. The
covetous man has a worse reckoning of his passion, than the poor; and the
jealous man, than the cuckold. And it is often less harm for one to loose his
farm, than plead and wrangle for it: The slowest march, is the safest. It is
the seat of constancy. Therein you have no need but of your self. There she
takes her footing and wholly rests upon her self. This example of a
Gentleman, whom many have known, has it not some Philosophical show? This
man having passed all his youth like a good fellow, a jollie companion, a great
talker, and a merry ladde, being now well in years, would needs be married.
Remembering himself how much the subject of cuckoldry had given him cause to
speak, and scoff at others; to put himself under covert-baron, he took him
a wife from out that place, where all men may have them for money, and with her
made his aliance: Good morrow Whore, Good morrow Cuckold. And there is nothing
wherewith he oftener and more openly entertained such as came unto him, than
with this tale; Whereby he brideled the secret pratlings of mockers, and
blunted the point of this reproach. Concerning ambition, which is next neighbor
or rather daughter to presumption, it had been needful (to advance me) that
fortune had come to take me by the hand: For to put my self into any care for
an uncertain hope, and to submit my self to all difficulties, waiting on such
as seek to thrust themselves into credit and reputation, in the beginning of
their progress, I could never have done it.

-- Spem pretio non emo, Ter. Adel. act. 2 se. 2.

Expense of present pay
For hope, I do not lay.
I fasten my self on that which I see and hold and go not far from the shore:

Alter remi^s aquas, alter tibi radat arenas. Throp. lib. 3. ele 2. 23.

Keep water with one Oar,
With the other grate the shore.
Besides, a man seldom comes to these preferments, but in hazarding first his
own: And I am of opinion, if that which a man has, suffizeth to maintain the
condition, wherein he was borne and brought up, it is folly to let it go, upon
the uncertainty of increasing the same. He to whom fortune refuses means to
settle his estate, and establish a quiet and reposed being, is excusable if he
cast what he has at hazard, since thus as well as thus, necessity sends him
to shift and search out.

Capienda rebus in malis preceps via est. Sen. Agam. act. 2. Sc. 1. 47.

A headlong course is best,
When mischiefs are addressed.
And I rather excuse a younger brother, to make sale of his inheritance, than
him, who has the honor of his house in charge, who cannot fall into wants but
through his default: I have by the counsel of my good friends of former
times, found the way shorter and easier to rid my self of this desire and
keep my self hushed:

Cut sit conditio dulcis, sine pulvere palmae. Hor. lib. 1. Epist 1. 51.

Who like it wel^ to bear the prise.
But take no toil in any wise.
Judging also rightly of my forces `that they were not capable of great
matters: And remembering the saying of Lord Oliver whilome-Chaunceler of France,
who said, that Frenchmen might be compared to Apes, who climbing up a tree,
never cease skipping from bough to bough, till they come to the highest, where
they show their bare tails.

Turpe est quod nequeat capiti committere pondui, Prop. lib. 3. cle. 8. 5.

Et pressum in^^^xo mox daret erga genu.
TO is shame, more than it can well bear, on head to pack,
And thereby soon oppresst with bended knee fly back.
Such qualities as are now in me void of reproach, in that age I deemed
unprofitable. The facility of my manners had been named faintnes and
weakness; faith and conscience would have been thought scrupulous and
superstitious: liberty and freedom, importunate, inconsiderate and rath.
Misfortune serves to some purpose. It is not amiss to be borne in a much
depraved age: for in comparison of others, you are judged virtuous, very
cheap. In our days, he that is but a partcide, or a sacrilegious person, is a
man of ^onesty and honor.

Nunc si depositum non inficiatur amicus,
Sireddat veterem cum tot^aerugine follem,
Prodigiosafides, and Thuscis digna libellis, Inven. Sat. 13. 60.

Quaeque coronata lustrari debeat agna.
If now a friend deny not what was laid in trust,
If wholly he restore the old bellows with their rust:
A wondrous trust, to be in Chronicles related,
And should with sacrifice, as strange, be expiated.
And never was there time or place, wherein more assured and great reward was
proposed unto Princes for goodness and justice. The first that shall be
advised, by these means to thrust himself into favor and credit, I am much
deceived if in part of payment, he get not the start of his fellows. Force and
violence can do very much; but never all. Weesee Merchants, countrey-Iustices,
and Artificers to march cheek by joll with our Nobility, in valor, and
military discipline. They perform honorable combats, both public and
private. They batter and defend Towns and Cities in our present wars. A
Prince smoothereth his commendation amid this throng. Let him shine over others
with humanity, with truth, loyalty, temperance, and above all with justice;
marks now adays rare, unknown and exiled. It is only the peoples will,
wherewith he may effect what he pleases: And no other qualities can allure
their will so much as they, as being the profitablest for them. Nihil est tam
populare quam bonitas. Nothing is so popular as goodness is. By this
proportion I had been a rare great man: As by that of certain ages past, I am
now a pigmey and popular man; In which it was common, if stronger qualities did
not concur withal, To see a man temperate in his revenges, mild in
revenging of offenses, religious in keeping of his word; neither double, nor
over tractable, nor applying his faith to others will, or to every occasion. I
would rather let all affairs go to wrake, than break my word for their
avail. For, touching this newfound virtue of faining and dissimulation, which
now is so much in credit, I hate it to the death: and of all vices, I find
none that so much witnesses demissenesse and baseness of heart. It is a
coward and servile humor, for a man to disguise and hide himself under a
mask, and not dare to show himself as he is. Thereby our men address
themselves to treachery: Being trained to utter false words, they make no
conscience to break them. A generous mind ought not to belie his thoughts,
but make show of his in most parts: There all is good, or at least all is
humane. Aristotle thinks it an office of magnanimity to hate and love openly,
to judge and speak with all liberty; and never (though the prise of truth go
on it) to make esteem either of the approbation ot reprobation of others.
Apollonius said, it was for servants to lie, and for freemen to speak truth.
It is the chief and fundamental part of virtue. She must be loved for her
own sake. He that speaks truth, because he is bound to do so, and for that
he serves: and that fears not to tell a lie, when it little imports
another man, is not sufficiently true. My mind of her own complexion detesteth
falsehood, and hates to think on it. I feel an inward bashfulnesse, and a
stinging remorce, if at any time it escape me; as sometimes it does, if
vnpremeditated occasions surprise me. A man must not always say all he knows,
for that were folly: But what a man speaks ought to be agreeing to his
thoughts, otherwise it is impiety. I know not what benefit they expect, that
ever feign, and so incessantly dissemble; except it be not to be believed,
even when they speak truly. That may deceive men once or twice, but to make a
profession to carry it away smoothly, and as some of our Princes have done, to
boast, that if their shirt were privy to their secret and true cogitations,
they would burn it: which was the saying of ancient Metellus Macedonicus; And
that he who cannot dissemble, cannot reign, serves but only to warn those who
have to deal with them, that what they say is but untruth and dissimulation.
Quo quis versutior and callidior est, hoc invisior and suspectior, detract a
opinione probitatis. Cic. Off. lib. 1.
The finer-headed, and more subtle-brained a man is, the more is he hated and
suspected, if once the opinion of honestly be taken from him. It were great
simplicity for a man to suffer himself to be misled either by the looks or
words of him, that outwardly professes what he is not inwardly, as did
Tiberius. And I know not what share such people may challenge in the commerce
of men, never producing any thing, that may be taken for good payment. He who
is disloyal to truth, is likewise false against lying. Such as in our days,
in the establishing of a Princes duty, have only considered the good and
felicity of his affairs, and preferred the same before the respect of his
faith and conscience, would say something to a Prince, whose affairs fortune
has so disposed, that with once breaking and falsifying of his word, he might
for ever confirm and establish them. But it goes otherwise. A man may more
than once come to such a bargain. A man during his life concludes more than
one peace or treaty. The commodity or profit that enviteth them to the first
disloyalty (and daily some offer themselves, as to all other trecheries)
sacrileges, murders, rebellions, treasons, are undertaken for some kind of
profit. But this first gain brings ever infinite losses and dangers with it:
casting this Prince from-out all commerce and means of negotiation, by the
example of this ^^fidelitie. Solomon of the Ottomans race (a race little
regarding the keeping of promises or performance of covenants) at what time he
caused his Army to land at Otranto (I being then but a child) having known
that Mercurin of Gratinara, and the inhabitants of Castro, were detained
prisoners, after the Town was yielded, contrary to that which by his Captains
had been capitulated with them, he sent word they should be released, and
that having other weighty enterprises in hand in that country, such
disloyalty, although it had appearance of great and present benefit, yet in
time to come it would bring a distrust and reproach of infinite prejudice. As
for me, I had rather be importunate and indiscreet, than a flatterer and a
dissembler. I allow, a man may entermingle some point of fierceness and
wilfulness, to keep himself so entire and open as I am, without
consideration of others. And me seems I become a little more free, where I
should be less, and that by the opposition of respect I grow earnest. It may
also be, that for want of Art I follow mine own nature. Presenting to the
greater sort the very same license of speech and boldness of countenance, that
I bring from my house: I perceive how much it inclines toward indiscretion
and incivilitie. But although I be so fashioned, my spirit is not sufficiently
yielding to avoid a sudden question, or to escape it by some winding, nor to
dissemble a truth, nor have I memory able to continue it so fained, nor
assurance sufficient to maintain it; and I play the Braggard through
feebleness. And therefore I apply my self to ingenuitie, and ever to speak
truth and what I think, both by complexion and by intention; leaving the
success thereof unto fortune. Aristippus said, that the chiefest commodity
her reaped by Philosophy, was, that he spoke freely and sincerely to all men:
Memory is an instrument of great service, and without which, judgment will
hardly discharge his duty, whereof I have great want. What a man will propose
unto me, he must do it by peece-meales: For, to answer to a discourse that
has many heads, lies not in my power. I cannot receive a charge, except I
have my writing tables about me: and if I must remember a discourse of any
consequence, be it of any length, I am driven to this vile and miserable
necessity, to learn every word I must speak, by rote; otherwise I should
never do it well or assuredly, for fear my memory should in my greatest need
fail me; which is very hard unto me, for I must have three hours to learn
three verses. Moreover in any long discourse, the liberty or authority to
remoove the order, to change a word, incessantly altering the matter, makes it
more difficult to be confirmed in the authors memory. And the more I distrust
it, the more it troubles me. It serves me better by chance, and I must
carelessly solicit her, for if I urge her, she is astonished; and if it once
begin to waver, the more I sound her, the more entangled and intricate she
proves. She will wait upon me when she list, not when I please. And what I
feel in my memory, I feel in many other parts of mine. I eschew
commandment, duty, and compulsion. What I do easily and naturally, if I
resolve to do it by express and prescribed appointment, I can then do it no
more. Even in my body, those parts, that have some liberty, and more particular
jurisdiction, do sometimes refuse to obey me, if at any time I appoint and
enjoine them to do me some necessary services. This forced and tyrannical
preordinance does reject them, and they either for spite or fear shrink and
are quailed. Being once in a place, where it is reputed a barbarous
discourtesie not to pledge those that drink to you, where although I were used
with all liberty, in favor of certain Ladies that were in company, according
to the fashion of the country, I would needs play the good fellow. But it made
us all merry; for the threats and preparation, that I should force my self
beyond my natural custom, did in such sort stop, and stuff my throat, that I
was not able to swallow one drop, and was barred of drinking all the repast. I
found my self glutted and full of drink by the overmuch swilling that my
imagination had fore-conceived. This effect is more apparent in those, whose
imagination is more vehement and strong: yet it is natural: and there is no
man, but shall sometimes have a feeling of it. An excellent Archer being
condemned to death, was offered to have his life saved, if he would but show
any notable trial of his profession, refused to make proof of it; fearing
lest the contention of his will should make him to misse-direct his hand, and
that in lieu of saving his life, he might also lose the reputation he had
gotten in shooting in a bow. A man whose thoughts are busy about other
matters, shall very near within an inch keep and always hit one self same
number and measure of paces, in a place where he walks; but if heedily he
endeavor to measure and count them, he shall find that what he did by nature
and chance, he cannot do it so exactly by desseigne. My Library (which for a
country Library, may pass for a very fair one) is seated in a corner of my
house: if any thing come into my mind, that either I must go seek or write
in it, for fear I should forget it in crossing of my Court, I must desire some
other body to remember the same for me. If speaking, I embolden my self never
so little to digress from my Discourse, I do ever loose it; which makes me
to keep my self in my speech, forced, near and close. Those that serve me, I
must ever call them, either by their office or country: for I find it very
hard to remember names. Well may I say, it has three sillables, that it is
sound is harsh, or that it begins or ends with such a letter. And should I
live long, I doubt not but I might forget mine own name, as some others have
done heretofore. Messala Corvinus lived two years without any memory at all,
which is also reported of George Trapezoncius. And for mine own interest, I
do often ruminate what manner of life theirs was, and whether wanting that
part, I shall have sufficient to maintain myself in any good sort: which
looking near unto, I fear that this defect, if it be perfect, shall loose all
the functions of my soul.

Plenus rimarum sum, hac atque illac perfluo. Ter. Eun. act. 1. scen. 2.

I am so full of holes, I can not hold,
I run out every way, when tales are told.
It has often befallen me, to forget the word, which but three hours before I
had either given or received of another, and to forget where I had laid my
purse; let Cicero say what he list. I help my self to loose, what I
perticularly lock up. Memoria certe non mode Philosophiam, sed omnis vitae
vsum, omnesque arts vna maxim continet. Assuredly memory alone, of all other
things compriseth not only Philosophy, but the use of our whole life, and all
the sciences. Memory is the receptacle and case of knowledge. Mine being so
weak, I have no great cause to complain if I know but little. I know the
names of Arts in General and what they treat of, but nothing further. I
turn and toss over books, but do not study them; what of them remains in
me, is a thing which I no longer acknowledge to be any bodies else. Only by
that has my judgment profited: and the discourses and imaginations, wherewith
it is instructed and trained up. The Authors, the place, the words, and other
circumstances, I suddenly forget: and am so excellent in forgetting, that as
much as any thing else I forget mine own writings and compositions. Yea, mine
own sayings are every hand-while alleged against my self, when God wot I
perceive it not. He that would know of me, whence or from whom the verses or
examples, which here I have hudled up are taken, should greatly put me to my
shifts, and I could hardly tell it him. Yet have I not begged them, but at
famous and very well known gates: which though they were rich in themselves,
did never please me, unless they also came from rich and honorable hands, and
that authority concur with reason. It is no great marvel, if my book follow
the fortune of other books; and my memory forgo or forget as well what I
write, as what I read: and what I give, as well as what I receive. Besides the
defect of memory, I have others, which much further my ignorance. My wit is
dull and slow, the least cloud dimmeth it, so that (for example sake) I never
proposed riddle unto it (were it never so easy) that it was able to expound.
There is no subtility so vain, but confounds me. In games, wherein wit may
bear a part, as of chesse, of cards, of tables and others, I could never
conceive but the common and plainest draughts. My apprehension is very sluggish
and gloomy; but what it once holds, the same it keeps fast: and for the
time it keeps it, the same it embraces generally, strictly and deeply. My
sight is quick, sound, perfect and farre-seeing, but easily wearied, if much
charged or employed. By which occasion I can have no great commerce with books,
but by others service which read unto me. Plime the yoonger can instruct those
that have tried it, how much this fore slowing imports those that give
themselves to this occupation. There is no spirit so wretched or so brutish,
wherein some particular faculty is not seen to shine; and none so low buried,
but at one hole or other it will sally out sometimes. And how it comes to
pass, that a mind blind and slumbering in all other things, is in some
particular effects, lively, clear and excellent, a man must inquire of cunning
masters. But those are the fair spirits, which are universal, open, and ready
to all, if not instructed, at least to be instructed. Which I allege to accuse
mine: For, be it either through weakness, or retchlessenesse (and to be
careless of that which lies at our feet, which we have in our hands, which
nearest concerns the use of life, is a thing far from my Dogma or Doctrine)
there is none so simple or so ignorant as mine, in diverse such common matters,
and of which without imputation or shame a man should never be ignorant;
whereof I must needs tell some examples. I was borne and brought up in the
Country, and amidst husbandry: I have since my predecessors quit me the place
and possession of the goods I enjoy, both business and husbandry in hand. I
cannot yet cast account either with pen or Counters. There are diverse of our
French Coins, I know not: nor can I distinguish of one grain from another, be
it in the field or in the barn, unless it be very apparent: nor do I scarcely
know the difference between the Cabidge or Lettice in my Garden. I understand
not the names of the most usual tools about husbandry, nor of the meanest
principles of tillage, which most children know. I was never skillful in
Mechanical arts, nor in Traffike or knowledge of Merchandise, nor in the
diversity and nature of fruits, wines, or cates, nor can I make a Hawke,
physic a Horse, or teach a Dog. And since I must make full show of my shame
or ignorance, it is not yet a month since, that I was found to be ignorant,
whereto Leven served to make bread withal; or what it was to cunne Wine. The
Athenians were anciently wont to think him very apt for the Mathematikes, that
could cunningly order or make up a faggot of brusn-wood? Verily a man might
draw a much contrary conclusion from me: For let me have all that may belong
to a Kitchen, yet shall I be ready to starve for hunger. By these parts of my
confession, one may imagine diverse others, to my cost and detriment. But
howsoever I make my self known, always provided it be as I am indeed, I
have my purpose. And I excuse not my self, that I dare set down in writing,
so base and frivolous matters as these. The baseness of the subject forces me
thereunto. Let who so list accuse my project, but not my progress. So it is,
that without being warned of others, I see very well, how little this weighs
or is worth, and I perceive the fondness of my purpose. It is sufficient that
my judgment is not dismayed or distracted, whereof these be the Essays.

Nasutus sis vsque licet, sis denique nasut, Mart. l. 13. epig. 2. 1.

Quantum noluerit far rogatus Atlas:
Et possis ipsum tu deridere Latinum,
Non potes, in nugas dicere plura meas,
Ipse ego quam dixi: quid dentem dente iuvabit
Rodere? carne opus est, si satur esse velis.
Ne perdas operam, qui se mirantur, in illos
Virus habe, nos haec novimus esse nihil.
Suppose you were long nosed, suppose such nose you wear
As Ailas, if you should entreat him, would not bear,
That you in flouting old Latinus can be fine.
Yet can you say no more against these toys of mine,
Then I have said; what boot, tooth with a tooth to whet?
You must have flesh, if you to glut your self be set.
Loose not your pains; against them who on themselves are doting
Keep you your sting: we know these thing of ours are nothing.
I am not bound to utter no follies, so I be not deceived to know them: And
wittingly to err, is so ordinary in me, that I err not much otherwise; and
seldom err casually. It is a small matter to yield the fond actions unto the
rashness of my humors, since I cannot warrant my self ordinarily to yield
them the vicious. Being at Barleduc, I saw, for the commendation of Renate the
King of Sicilies memory a picture which with his own hands he had made of
himself, presented unto our King Francis the second: why is it not as lawful
for every man else to pourtray himself with his pen, as it was for him to do
it with a pensell? I will not then forget this other blemish, unfit to be seen
of all. That is irresolution: a most incommodious defect in the negotiation of
worldly affairs: I cannot resolve in matters admitting doubtfulnesse:

Ne si, ne no, nel cuor misuona intiero. Petr Pa. 1. son. 138. 8.

Nor yea, nor nay sounds clearly in my heart.
I can maintain an opinion, but not make choice of it: For, in humane things,
what side soever a man leaneth-on, many apparances present themselves unto us,
which confirm us in them: and Chrysippus the Philosopher was wont to say, that
he would learn nothing else of his masters Zeno and Cleanthes, but their
doctrines simply: For, proofs and reasons he would find enough of himself.
Let me turn to what side I will, I ever find sufficient matter, and
likely-hoode to keep my self unto it. Thus keep I doubt and liberty to my
self, to choose, until occasion urge me, and then (to confess the truth) as
the common saying is, I cast my fether to the wind, and yield to fortunes
mercy. A very light inclination, and a slender circumstance caries me away.

Dum in dubio est animus paulo momento huc atque illuc impellitur. Ter. And.
act. 1 scen. 3.

While mind is in suspense, with small a do,
T'ts hither, thither, driven fro and to.
The uncertainty of my judgment, is in many occurrences so equally balanced,
as I would willingly compromise it to the deciding of chance and of the dice.
And I note with great consideration of our human imbecilitie, the examples,
which the history of God it self has left us of this use, to remit the
determination of elections in doubtful matters, unto fortune and hazard: Sors
cecidit super Matthiam. The lot fell upon Mathias. Humane reason Act. 1. 26
is a two-edged dangerous sword; Even in Socrates his hand, her most inward
and familiar friend, mark what a many-ended staff it is. So am I only fit to
follow, and am easily carried away by the throng. I do not greatly trust mine
own strength, to undertake to command, or to lead. I rejoice to see my steps
traced by others. If I must run the hazard of an uncertain choice, I would
rather have it be under such a one, who is more assured of his opinions, and
more wedded to them, than I am of mine; the foundation and platform of which I
find to be very slippery; yet am I not very easy to change, for so much as I
perceive a like weakness in contrary opinions. Ipsa consuetudo assentiendi
periculosa esse videtur, and lubrica. Ci^. Acad. qu. lib. 4.
The very custom of assenting seems hazerdous and slipperie: Namely in
politic affairs, wherein is a large field open to all motions, and to
contestation.

Iusta pari premitur velut cum pondere libra, Til ^^^. lib 4. h^ro. v. 41.

Prona nec hac plus part sedet, nec surgit ab illa.
As when an even skale with equal weight is peized,
Nor falls it down this way, or is it that way raised.
As for example, Machiavels discourses, were very solid for the subject; yet
has it been very easy to impugn them, and those that have done it, have
left no less facility to impugn theirs. A man might ever find answers
enough to such an argument, both rejoynders, double, treble, quadruple, with
this infinite contexture of debates, that our pettie-foggers have wyre-drawne,
and wrested as much as ever they could in favor of their pleas and processes:

Caedimur, and totidem plagis consumimus hostem. Hor. lib. 2. epist. 2 97.

We by our foes are beaten, if not slain,
We with as many strokes waste them again.
Reasons having no other good ground than experience, and the diversity of
humane events, presenting us with infinite examples for all manner of forms. A
wise man of our times, says, that where our Almanakes say warm, should a man
say cold, and in liew of dry, moist; And ever set down the contrary of what
they foretell; were he to lay a wager of one or others success, he would not
care what side he took, except in such things as admit no uncertainty; as to
promise extreme heat at Christmas, and exceeding cold at Midsomer. The like I
think of these politic discourses. What part soever you are put unto, you
have as good a game as your fellow: Provided you affront not the apparent and
plain principles. And therefore (according to my humor) in public affairs,
there is no course so bad (so age and constancy be joined unto it) that is not
better then change and alteration. Our manners are exceedingly corrupted, and
with a merveilous inclination bend toward worse and worse; Of our laws and
customs many are barbarous, and diverse monstrous; notwithstanding, by reason
of the difficulty to reduce us to better estate, and of the danger of this
subversion, if I could fix a pegge into our wheel, and stay it where it now
is, I would willingly do it.

-- nunquam adeo foedis adeoque pudendis Iuve. sat. 8. 183

Vtimur exemplis, vi non peiora super sint.
Examples of so filthy shameful kind
We never use, but worse remains behind.
Instabilitie is the worst I find in our state, and that our laws, no more
than our garments, can take no settled form. It is an easy matter to accuse a
state of imperfection, since all mortal things are full of it. As easy is it
to beget in a people a contempt of his ancient observances: No man ever
undertook it, but came to an end: But to establish a better state in place of
that which is condemned and raced out, diverse who have attempted it, have
shronke under the burden. Touching my conduct, my wisdom has small share
therein. I am very easily to be directed by the worlds public order. Oh happy
people, that does what is commanded, better then they which command, without
vexing themselves about causes; which suffer themselves gently to be rolled on,
according to the heavens rolling. Obedience is never pure and quiet in him, who
talks, pleads and contendeth. In some, (to return to my self) the only
matter, for which I make some account of my self, is that, wherein never man
did think himself defective. My commendation is vulgar, common and popular;
For, who ever thought he wanted wit? It were a proposition, which in itself
would imply contradiction. It is an infirmity, that is never where it is seen,
it is very strong and fastholding, but yet pierced and dissipated by the first
beam of the pacients sight, as does the Suns rays scatter and dispearce a
gloomie mist. For a man to accuse himself, were to excuse himself of that
subject; and to condemn himself, an absolving of himself. There was never so
base a porter, nor so silly a woman, but thought he had sufficient wit for his
provision. We easily know in others, the advantage of courage, of bodily
strength, of experience, of disposition and of beauty, but we never yield the
advantage of judgment to any body: And the reasons, which part from the simple
natural discourse in others, we think, that had we but looked that way, we
had surely found them. The skill, the knowledge, the style and such like
parts, which we see in strange works, we easily perceive whether they exceed
ours; but the mere productions of wit and understanding, every man deemeth it
lies in him to meet with the very like, and does hardly perceive the weight
and difficulty of it, except (and that very scarsely) in an extreme and
incomparable distance. And he that should clearly see the height of a
strangers judgment, would come and bring his unto it. Thus, is it a kind of
exercising, whereof a man may hope but for mean commendation and small praise,
and a manner of composition, of little or no harm at all. And then, for whom
do you write? The wiser sort, unto whom belongs bookish jurisdiction, know
no other price but of doctrine, and avow no other proceeding in our wits, but
that of erudition and art. If you have mistaken one Scipio for an other, what
of any worth have you left to speake-of? He that is ignorant of Aristotle
(according to them) he is there withal ignorant of himself. Popular and
shallow-headed minds, cannot perceive the grace or comeliness, nor judge of a
smooth and quaint discourse. Now these two kinds possess the world. The
third, unto whose share you fall, of regular wits, and that are strong of
themselves, is so rare, that justly it has neither name or rank amongst us;
he loses half his time, that does aspire or endeavor to please it. It is
commonly said, that the justest portion, nature has given us of the graces, is
that of sense and understanding: for there is no man, but is contented with the
share she has allotted him: I i^ not reason? He who should see beyond that,
should see further then his sight. I persuade my self to have good and sound
opinions; but who is not so persuaded of his own? One of the best trials I
have of it, is the small esteem I make of my self: for, had they not been
well assured, they would easily have suffered themselves to be deceived, by the
affection I bear unto my self, singular, as he who brings it almost all unto
my self, and that spill but a little besides. All that, which others
distribute thereof unto an infinite number of friends and acquaintances, to
their glory and greatness, I refer to the repose of my spirit and to my
self. What elsewhere escapes of it, is not properly by the appointment of my
discourse:

-- mihi nempe valere and vivere doctus.
Well learned in what concerns me,
To live, and how in health to be.
As for my opinions, I find them infinitely bold aend constant to condemn
mine insufficiency. And to say truth, it is a subject, where about I exercise
my judgment, as much as about any other. The world looks ever for eright, I
turn my sight inward, there I fix it, there I ammuse it. Every man looks
before him self, I look within my self; I have no business but with my
self. I incessantly consider, control and taste my self: other men go ever
elsewhere, if they think well on it: they go ever foreward,

-- nemo in sese tentat descendere. -- Pers. sat. 4. 23

No man attempteth this Essay,
Into himself to find the way.
as for me I roll me into my self. This capacity of sifting out the truth,
what, and howsoever it be in me, and this free humor I have, not very easily
to subject my belief, Iowe especially unto my self; for the most constant,
and general imaginations I have are those; which (as one would say) were borne
with me: They are natural unto me, and wholly mine. I produced them raw and
simple, of a hardy and strong production, but somewhat troubled and imperfect:
which I have since established and fortified by the authority of others, and
by the sound examples of ancients, with whom I have found my self conformable
in judgment: Those have assured me of my hold-fast of them, and have given me
both the enjoying and possession thereof more absolute and more clear. The
commendation which every man seeks after, for a vivacitie and promptitude of
wit, I challenge the same by the order of a notable and far sounding action,
or of some particular sufficiency; I pretend it by the order, correspondency,
and tranquillity of opinions and customs. Omnlno si quidquam est Cic. Off.
lib. ^.
decorum, nihil est profecto magis quam aequabilitas vniversae vitae, tum
singularum actionum: quam conservare non possis, si aliorum naturam imitans,
omittas tuam. Clearly if any thing be decent for a man* nothing is more than
an even carriage and equabilitie of his whole life, and every action therein:
which you cannot uphold, if following the nature of others, you let pass your
own. Behold here then how far forth I find my self guilty of that first
part, I said to be in the vice of presumption- Concerning the second, which
consists in not esteeming sufficiently of others, I wot not whether I can so
well excuse my self; for, whatsoever it cost me, I intend to speak what is
of it. It may be, the continual commerce I have with ancient humors, and the
Idea of those rich minds of former ages does bring me out of liking and
distaste both of others and of my self, or that in truth we live in an age,
which produces things but mean and indifferent. So it is, that I know nothing
worthy any great admiration. Also I know not many men so familiarly as I
should, to be able to judge of them: and those with whom the quality of my
condition does ordinarily make me conversant, are for the most part, such as
have little care for the manuring of the soul, and to whom nothing is proposed
for chief felicity, but honor; and for absolute perfection, but valor.
Whatsoever I see or beauteous or worthy in any other man, I willingly commend
and regard; yea and I often endeare my self with what I think of it, and
allow my self to lie so far forth: For, I cannot invent a false subject. I
willingly witness with my friends what I find praiseworthy in them. And of
an inch of valor, I willingly make an inch and a half; but to lend them
qualities they have not, I cannot; and openly to defend their imperfections, I
may not: yea be they mine enemies, I shall sincerely give them their due, in
witnessing their worth or honor. My affection may change; my judgment never.
And I confound not my quarrel with other circumstances, that are impertinent
and belong not unto it. And I am so jealous of the liberty of my judgment,
that for what passion so ever I can hardly quit it. I wrong my self more in
lying, than him of whom I lie. This commendable and generous custom of the
Persian nation, is much noted; They spoke very honorably and justly of their
mortal enemies, and with those with whom they were at deadly fude and war,
so far forth as the merit of their virtue deserved. I know diverse men who
have sundry noble and worthy parts; some wit, some courage, some dexterity,
some conscience, some a readiness in speech, some one Science, and some
another; but of a great man in general, and that has so many excellent parts
together, or but one, in such a degree of excellency, as he may thereby be
admired, or but compared to those of former ages whom we honor, my fortune
has not permitted me to see one. And the greatest I ever knew living (I mean
of natural parts of the mind, and the best borne) was Stephanus de la Boitie:
Verily it was a complete mind, and who set a good face, and showed a fair
countenance upon all matters: A mind after the old stamp, and which, had
fortune therewith been pleased, would no doubt have brought forth wondrous
effects; having by skill and study added very much to his rich natural gifts.
But I know not how it comes to pass, and surely it does so, there is as much
vanity and weakness of understanding found in those, that profess to have
most sufficiency, that will entermeddle with learned vacations, and with the
charges that depend of books, than in any sort of people; whether it be
because there is more required, and expected at their hands, and common faults
cannot be excused in them, or that the selfe-opinion of knowledge emboldeneth
them the more to produce and discover themselves over-forward, whereby they
loose and betray themselves. As an Artificer does more manifest his
sottishness in a rich piece of work, which he has in hand, if foolishly and
against the rules of his trade he seek to apply it and entermeddle, than in a
vile and base one; and men are more offended at a fault or oversight in a
statue of gold, than in one of clay. These do as much, when they set forth
things, which in themselves and in their place, would be good; for, they
employ them without discretion, honoring their memory at the cost and charge
of their understanding: and doing honor to Cicero, to Galen, to Vlpian, and to
Saint Jerome, to make themselves ridiculous. I willingly return to this
discourse of the fondness of our institution: whose aim has been to make us
not good and witty, but wise and learned; She has attained her purpose. It
has not taught us to follow virtue and embrace wisdom; but made an
impression in us of it is Etymology and derivation. We can decline virtue, yet
can we not love it. If we know not what wisdom is by effect and experience,
we know it by prattling and by rote. We are not satisfied to know the race,
the aliances, and the pedegrees of our neighbors, but we will have them to be
our friends, and contract both conversation and intelligence with them: It has
taught us the definitions, the divisions, and distinctions of virtue, as of the
surnames and branches of a genalogie, without having other care to contract
practice of familiarity or private acquaintance between us and it. She has
appointed us for our learning, not books that have sounder and truer opinions,
but volumes that speak the best Greek or Latin: and amongst her choice
words, has made the vainest humors of antiquity to glide into our conceits.
A good institution changes judgment and manners, as it happened to Polemon. This
dissolute young Grecian, going one day by chance to hear a Lecture of
Xenocrates, where he not only marked the eloquence and sufficiency of the
Reader, and brought not home the knowledge of some notable thing, but a more
apparent and solid fruit, which was the sudden change and amendment of his
former life. Who ever heard such an effect of our discipline?

-- faciasne quod olim Hor. ser. lib. 2. sa^. 3. 253.

Mutatus Polemon, ponas insignia morbi,
Fasciolus, cubital, focalia, potus vt ille
Dicitur ex collo furtim carpsisse coronas,
Postquam est impransi correptus voce magistri.
Can you do as did Polemon reformed,
Cast-off your sickness signs, which you deformed,
Your bolsters mufflers, swathes? As he drink-lin'de,
His dronken garlands covertly declinde,
By speech of fasting reader disciplinde?
The least disdainefull condition of men, me thinks, is that, which through
simplicity holds the last rank, and offreth us more regular commerce. The
customs and discourses of Countrie-clownish-men, I find them commonly to be
more conformable and better disposed, according to the true prescription of
Philosophy, then are those of our Philosophers. Plus sapit vulgus, quia
tantum, quantum opus est, sapit. The vulgar is the wiser, because it is but as
wise as it must needs. The worthiest men, I have judged by external
apparances (for, to judge them after my fashion, they should be sifted nearer)
concerning war, and military sufficiency, have been, the Duke of Guise,
that died before Orleans, and the whilom Marshall Strozzi: For men
extraordinarily sufficient, and endowed with no vulgar virtue, Oliver, and
L'Hospitall, both great Chancelors of France. Poesy has likewise in mine
opinion, had her vogue and credit in our age. We have store of cunning and able
men in that profession, Aurate, Beza, Buchanan, L'Hospitall, Mont-dore, and
Turnebus. As for Frenchmen, I think they have attained the highest degree of
perfection that can or ever shall be, and in those parts wherein Ronsart, and
excellent Bellay have written, I think they are not far short of the ancient
perfection. Adrianus Turnebus knew more and better, what he knew, then any man
in his age or of many ages past. The lives of the late Duke of Alva, and of our
Constable Mommorancie have been very noble, and have had sundry rare
ressemblances of fortune. But the worthily-faire and glorious death of the
last, in the full sight of Paris, and of his King, for their service, against
his nearest friends and alliance, in the front of an army, victorious through
his conduct of it, and with an hand-stroke, in that old age of his, deserves
in mine opinion, to be placed and registered amongst the most renoumed and
famous accidents of my times. As also the constant goodness, the mildnes in
behavior, and conscionable facility of Monsieur la Noue, in such an injustice
of armed factions (a very school of treason, of inhumanitie and brigandage)
wherein he was ever brought up, a worthy, and famous man of war, and most
experienced in his profession. I have greatly pleased my self in publishing in
sundry places, the good hope I have of Marie Gournay le ^ars my daughter in
alliance, and truly of me beloved with more then a fatherly love, and as one
of the best parts of my being, enfeoffed in my home and solitarines. There is
nothing in the world I esteem more then her. If childehoode may presage any
future success, her mind shall one day be capable of many notable things, and
amongst other of the perfection of this thrice-sacred amity, whereunto we
read not, her sex could yet attain; the sincerity and soliditie of her
demeanors are therein already sufficient; her kind affection toward me is
more then superabounding and such in deed as nothing more can be wished unto
it, so that the apprehension, which she has of my aproching end, by reason of
the fifty five years, wherein her hap has been to know me, would somewhat
less cruelly trouble her. The judgment she made of my first Essays, being a
woman, of this age, so young, alone where she dwells, and the exceeding
vehemency wherewith she loved me, and long time, by the only esteem, which
before ever she saw me, she had by them conceived of me, she desired me; is an
accident most worthy consideration. Other virtues have had little or no
currantnesse at all in this age: But valor is become popular by reason of our
civil wars, and in this part, there are minds found amongst us very
constant, even to perfection, and in great number, so that the choice is
impossible to be made. Lo here what hitherto I have known of any
extraordinary, and not common greatness.

The eighteenth Chapter.
Of giving the lie.

YEa but, will some tell me, this desseigne in a man to make himself a subject
to write of, might be excused in rare and famous men, and who by their
reputation, had bred some desire in others of their acquaintance. It is true, I
confess it, and I know, that a handy-craftsman will scarcely look off his
work, to gaze upon an ordinary man: Whereas to see a notable great person come
into a town, he will leave both work and shop. It ill beseems any man to
make himself known, only he excepted, that has somewhat in him worthy
imitation, and whose life and opinions may stand as a pattern to all. Caesar
and Xenophon have had wherewithal to ground and establish their narration, in
the greatness of their deeds, as on a just and solid groundwork. So are the
Iornall books of Alexander the great, the Commentaries which Augustus, Cato,
Brutus, Silla and diverse others had left of their gests, greatly to be desired.
Such men's Images are both beloved and studied, be they either in Brass or
Stone. This admonition is most true, but it concerns me very little.

Non recit^ cuiquam: nisi amicis, idque rogatus. Hor. ser. l. 1. sa^. 4. 73.

Non vbivis, cora^ve quibuslibet. In medio qui
Scripta fore recitant sunt multi, quique lauantes.
My writings I read not, but to my friends, to any,
Nor each-where, nor to all, nor but desired: yet many
In Marketplace read theirs,
In Bathes, in Barbers-chaires.
I erect not here a statue to be set up in the Marketplace of a town, or in a
Church, or in any other public place:

Non equidem hoc studeo bullatis vt mihi nugis Per^ sat. 5. 19.

Pagina turgescat: --
I study not, my written leaves should grow
Big-swolne with bubled toys, which vain breth's blow.
Secreti loquimur -- 21.

We speak alone,
Or one to one.
It is for the corner of a Library, or to ammuse a neighbor, a kinsman, or a
friend of mine withal, who by this image may happily take pleasure to renew
acquaintance, and to reconverse with me. Others have been emboldned to speak
of themselves, because they have found worthy and rich subject in themselves.
I, contrariwise, because I have found mine so barren, and so shallow, that it
cannot admit suspicion of ostentation. I willingly judge of other men's actions;
of mine by reason of their nullity, I give small cause to judge. I find not so
much good in my self, but I may speak of it without blushing. Oh what
contentment were it* unto me, to hear some body that would relate the
custom, the visage, the countenance, the most usual words, and the fortunes
of my ancestors! Oh how attentively would I listen unto it! Verily it were an
argument of a bad nature, to seem to despise the very pictures of our friends
and predecessors, the fashion of their garments and arms. I keep the writing,
the manual seal, and a peculiar sword: And I reserve still in my cabinet
certain long switches or wands, which my father was wont to carry in his hand.
Paterna vestis and annulus, tanto charior est posteris, quanto erga parents
mayor affectus. The fathers garment and his ring is so much more esteemed of
his successors, as their affection is greater toward their progenitors.
Notwithstanding if my posterity be of another mind, I shall have wherewith to
be avenged; for they cannot make so little accoumpt of me, as then I shall do
of them. All the commerce I have in this with the world, is, that I borrow the
instruments of their writing, as more speedy, and more easy: in requital
whereof I may peradventure hinder the melting of some piece of butter in the
market, or a Grocer from selling an ounce of pepper.

Ne toga cordyllis, ne penula desit olivis, Mart. li. 13. epig. 1. 1.

Least Fish-fry should a fit gown want,
Least cloakes should be for Olives scant. Catul. epig. eleg. ^7. 8.

Et laxas scombris saepe dabo tunicas.
To long-tail'd Mackrels often I,
Will side-wide (paper) cotes apply.
And if it happen no man read me, have I lost my time, to have entertained my
self so many idle hours, about so pleasing and profitable thoughts? In
framing this pourtraite by my self, I have so often been feign to frizle and
trim me, that so I might the better extract my self, that the pattern is
thereby confirmed, and in some sort formed. Drawing my self for others, I have
drawn my self with purer and better colors, then were my first. I have no
more made my book, then my book has made me. A book consubstantiall to his
Author: Of a peculiar and fit occupation. A member of my life. Not of an
occupation and end, strange and foreign; as all other books. Have I misspent
my time, to have taken an account of my self so continually and so curiously?
For those who only run themselves over by fantazy, and by speech for some
hour, examine not themselves so primely and exactly, nor enter they into
themselves, as he does, who makes his study, his work, and occupation of it:
Who with all his might, and with all his credit engages himself to a register
of continuance. The most delicious pleasures, though inwardly disgested, shun
to leave any trace of themselves; and avoid the sight, not only of the
people, but of any other. How often has this business diverted me from
tedious and yrksome cogitations? (And all frivolous ones must be deemed tedious
and yrkesome.) Nature has endowed us with a large faculty to entertain our
selves a part, and often calls us unto it: To teach us, that partly we owe
our selves unto society, but in the better part unto our selves. To the end I
may in some order and project marshall my fantasy, even to dote, and keep it
from loosing, and straggling in the air, there is nothing so good, as to give
it a body, and register so many idle imaginations as present themselves unto
it. I listen to my humors, and harken to my conceits, because I must enroule
them. How often, being grieved at some action, which civility and reason forbad
me to withstand openly, have I disgorged my self upon them here, not without
an intent of public instruction? And yet these Poetical rods,

Zon dessus l'oeil, zon sur le groin,
Zon sur le dos du Sagoin.
are also better imprinted upon paper, than upon the quick flesh; What if I
lend mine ears, somewhat more attentively unto books, since I but watch if I
can filch something from them, wherewith to enammell and uphold mine? I never
studied to make a book; Yet have I somewhat studied, because I had already
made it (if to* nibble or pinch, by the head or feet, now one Author, and then
another be in any sort to study) but nothing at all to form my opinions: Yea
being long since formed, to assist, to second and to serve them. But whom shall
we believe speaking of himself, in this corrupted age? since there are few or
none, whom we may believe speaking of others, where there is less interest to
lie. The first part of cumstoms corruption, is; the banishment of truth: For as
Pindarus said, to be sincerely true, is the beginning of a great virtue; and
the first article Plato requires in the Governor of his Commonwealth:
Now-adaies, that is not the truth which is true, but that which is persuaded to
others. As we call money not only that which is true and good, but also the
false; so it be current. Our Nation is long since taxed with this vice. For
Salvianus Massiliensis who lived in the time of Valentinian the Emperor,
says, that amongst Frenchmen, to lie and forswear is no vice, but a manner
of speech. He that would endeare this Testimony, might say, it is now rather
deemed a virtue among them. Men frame and fashion themselves unto it, as to an
exercise of honor; for, dissimulation is one of the not ablest qualities of
this age. Thus have I often considred, whence this custom might arise, which
we observe so religiously, that we are more sharply offended with the
reproach of this vice, so ordinary in us, than with any other; and that it is
the extremest injury, may be done us in words, to vpbraid and reproach us with
a lie. Therein I find, that it is natural, for a man to defend himself most
from such defects as we are most tainted with. It seems that if we but show a
motion of revenge, or are but moved at the accusation, we in some sort
discharge our selves of the blame or imputation; if we have it in effect, at
least we condemn it in appearance. May it not also be, that this reproach seems
to enfold cowardice and faintness of heart? Is there any more manifest, than
for a man to eat and deny his own Word? What? To deny his Word wittingly? To
lie is a horrible-filthy vice; and which an ancient writer sets forth very
shamefully, when he says, that whosoever lies, witnesses that he co^^mneth
God and there withal fears men It is impossible more richly to represent the
horror, the vileness and the disorder of it: For, What can be imagined so
vile, and base, as to be a coward toward men, and a boaster toward God? Our
intelligence being only conducted by the way of the Word: Who so falsifieth
the same, betraieth public society. It is the only instrument, by means
whereof our wills and thoughts are communicated: it is the interpretour of our
souls: If that fail us we hold our selves no more, we enter-know one another
no longer. If it deceive us, it breaks all our commerce, and dissolveth all
bonds of our policy. Certain Nations of the new Indiaes (whose names we need
not declare, because they are no more; for the desolation of this conquest has
extended it self to the absolute abolishing of names and ancient knowledge of
Places, with a mavelous and never the like heard example) offered humane blood
unto their Gods, but no other than that which was drawn from their tongues and
ears, for an expiation of the sin of lying, as well heard as pronounced.
That good-fellow-Graecian said, children were dandled with toies, but men with
words. Concerning the sundry fashions of our giving the lie, and the laws of
our honor in that and the changes they have received, I will refer to another
time, to speak what I think and know of it, and if I can, I will in the mean
time learn, at what time this custom took his beginning, so exactly to weigh
and precizely to measure words, and tie our honor to them: for it is easy to
judge, that it was not anciently amongst the Romans and Graecians. And I have
often thought it strange, to see them wrong and give one another the lie, and
yet never enter into quarrel. The laws of their duty, took some other course
than ours. Caesar is often called a thief, and sometimes a drunkard to his
face. We see the liberty of their invectives, which they write one against
another: I mean the greatest Chieftaines and Generals in war; of one and other
Nation, where words are only retorted and revenged with words, and never
wrested to further consequence.

The nineteenth Chapter.
Of the liberty of Conscience.

IT is ordinarily seen, how good intentions being managed without moderation,
thrust men into most vicious effects. In this controversy, by which France is
at this instant molested with civil wars, the best and safest side, is no
doubt, that which maintains both the ancient religion and policy of the
Country. Nevertheless amongst the honest men that follow it (for my meaning is
not to speak of those, who use them as a color, either to exercise their
particular revenges, or to supply their greedy avarice, or to follow the favor
of Princes: But of such as do it with a true zeal toward their Religion, and
an unfeigned holy affection, to maintain the peace and uphold the state of
their Country) of those I say, diverse are seen, whom passion thrusts out of
the bounds of reason, and often forces them to take and follow unjust, violent
and rash counsels. Certain it is, that when first our religion began to
gain authority with the Laws, it is zeal armed many against all sorts of
Pagane books, whereof the learned sort have a great loss. My opinion is, that
this disorder has done more hurt to learning, than all the Barbarian flames.
Cornelius Tacitus is a sufficient testimony of it: for, howbeit the Emperor
Tacitus his kinsman had by express appointment stored all the libraries in the
World with it, notwithstanding one only entire copy could not escape the
curions search of those, who sought to abolish it, by reason of five or six
vain clauses, contrary to our belief. They have also had this easily to
afford false commendations to all the Emperors, that made for us, and
universally to condemn all the actions of those, which were our adversaries,
as may plainly be seen in Julian the Emperor, surnamed the Apostata; who in
truth was a notable-rare-man, as he whose mind was lively endowed with the
discourses of Philosophy, unto which he professed to conform all his
actions; and truly there is no kind of virtue, whereof he has not left most
notable examples. In chastity (whereof the whole course of his life gives
apparent testimony) a like example, unto that of Alexander and S^^oio is read
of him, which is, that of many wonderful fair captive Ladies, brought before
him, being even in the very prime of his age (for he was slain by the
Parthians about the age of one and thirty years) he would not see one of them.
Touching justice, himself would take the pains to hear all parties: And
although for curiosity sake, he would enquire of such as came before him, what
religion they were of, nevertheless the enmity he bare to ours, did no whit
weigh down the balance. Himself made sundry good Laws, and revoked diverse
subsidies and impositions, his Predecessors before him had received. We have
two good Historians, as eyewitnesses of his actions. One of which, (who is
Marcellinus) in sundry places of his History bitterly reprooveth this
ordinance of his, by which he forbade schools, and interdicted all Christian
Rhethoricians, and Gramarians to teach: Saying, he wished this his action might
be buried under silence. It is very likely, if he had done any thing else more
sharp or severe against us, he would not have forgot it, as he that was well
affected to our side. He was indeed very severe against us, yet not a cruel
enemy. For, our people themselves report this History of him, that walking
one day about the City of Calcedon, Maris Bishop thereof, durst call him
wicked and traitor to Christ, to whom he did no other thing, but answered thus:
Go wretched man, weep and deplore the loss of thine eyes; to whom the Bishop
replied, I thank Jesus Christ, that he has deprived me of my sight, that so I
might not view thy impudent face, affecting thereby (as they say) a kind of
Philosophical patience. So it is, this part cannot be referred to the
cruelties, which he is said to have exercised against us. He was (says
Eutropius my other testimony) an enemy unto Christianity, but without shedding
of blood. But to return to his justice, he can be accused of nothing but of
the rigors he used in the beginning of his Empire, against such as had followed
the faction of Constantius his Predecessor. Concerning sobriety, he ever
lived a Soldiers kind of life, and in time of peace, would feed no
otherwise, than one who prepared and enured himself to the austeritie of
war. Such was his vigilancie, that he divided the night into three or four
parts, the least of which he allotted unto sleep; the rest he employed in
visiting the state of his army, and his guardes, or in study; for, amongst
other his rare qualities, he was most excellent in all sorts of learning. It is
reported of Alexander the Great, that being laid down to rest, fearing lest
sleep should divert him from his thoughts and studies, he caused a basen to be
set near his bed side, and holding one of his hands out, with a brazen ball
in it, that if sleep should surprise him, loosing his fingers ends, the ball
falling into the basen, might with the noise rouse him from out his sleep.
This man had a mind so bent to what he undertook, and by reason of his singular
abstinence so little troubled with vapors, that he might well have past this
devise. Touching military sufficiency, he was admirable in all parts
belonging to a great Captain. So was he almost all his life time in continual
exercise of War, and the greater part with us in France against the Alemans and
French. We have no great memory of any man, that either has seen more
dangers, nor that more often has made trial of his person. His death has
some affinity with that of Epaminoudas, for being stricken with an arrow, and
attempting to pull it out, he had surely done it, but that being
sharpe-cutting, it hurt and weakened his hand. In that plight he earnestly
requested to be carried forth in the midst of his army, that so he might
encourage his soldiers, who without him courageously maintained the battle,
until such time as dark night severed the Armies. He was beholding to
Philosophy for a singular centempt, both of himself and of all humane things.
He assuredly believed the eternity of souls. In matters of religion, he was
vicious everywhere. He was surnamed Apostata, because he had forsaken ours;
notwithstanding this opinion seems to me more likely, that never took it to
heart, but that for the obedience which he bare to the laws, he dissembled til
he had gotten the Empire into his hands. He was so superstitious in his, that
even such as lived in his time, and were of his own religion, mocked him for
it; and it was said, that if he had gained the Victory of the Parthians, he
would have consumed the race or breed of Oxen, to satisfy his sacrifices. He
was also besetted with the Art of sooth saying, and gave authority to all
manner of prognostikes. Amongst other things he spoke at his death, he said,
he was much beholding to the Gods, and greatly thanked them, that they had not
suffered him to be slain suddenly or by surprise, as having long before warned
him both of the place and hour of his end; nor to die of a base and easy
death, more beseeming idle and effeminate Persons, nor of a lingering,
languishing, and dolorous death; and that they had deemed him worthy to end his
life so nobly in the course of his victories and in the flower of his glory.
There had before appeared a vision unto him, like unto that of Marcus Brutus,
which first threatened him in Gaul, and afterward even at the point of his
death, presented it self to him in Persia. The speech he is made to speak
when he felt himself hurt, Thou have vanquished o Nazaraean; or as some will
have it; Content thy self oh Nazaraean, would scarce have been forgotten, had
it been believed of my testimonies, who being present in the army, have noted
even the least motions, and words at his death, no more than certain other
wonders, which they annex unto it. But to return to my theme, he had long
before (as says Marcellinus) hatched Paganism in his heart, but for so much as
he saw all those of his army to be Christians, he durst not discover him
self. In the end, when he found himself to be sufficiently strong, and durst
publish his mind, he caused the Temples of his Gods to be opened, and by all
means endeavored to advance idolatry. And to attain his purpose, having
found in Constantinople the people very loose, and at ods with the Prelates of
the christian church, and caused them to appear before him in his palace, he
instantly admonished them to appease all their civil dissentions, and every
one without hinderance or fear apply themselves to follow and serve religion.
Which he very carefully solicited, hoping this license might increase the
factions, and controversies of the division, and hinder the people, from
growing to any unity, and by consequence from fortifying themselves against
him, by reason of their concord and in one mind-agreeing intelligence: having
by the cruelty of some Christians found, that There is no beast in the world,
so much of man to be feared, as man. Loeheere his very words, or very near:
Wherein this is worthy consideration, that the Emperor Julian, uses the same
receipt of liberty of conscience, to enkindle the trouble of civil
dissension, which our Kings employ to extinguish. It may be said on one side,
that, To give factions the bridle to entertain their opinion, is to scater
contention and sew division, and as it were to lend it a hand to augment and
increase the same: There being no Bar or Obstacle of Laws to bridle or
hinder her course. But on the other side, it might also bevrged, that to give
factions the bridle to uphold their opinion, is, by that facility and ease,
the ready way to mollify and release them; and to blunt the edge, which is
sharpened by rareness, noveltie, and difficulty. And if for the honor of our
Kings devotion, I believe better; it is, that since they could not do as they
would, they have fained to will what they could not.

The twentieth Chapter.
We taste nothing purely.

THe weakness of our condition, causes, that things in their natural
simplicity and purity cannot fall into our use. The elements we enjoy are
altered: Metals likewise, yea gold must be empaired with some other stuff to
make it fit for our service. Nor virtue so simple, which Ariston, Pirrho, and
the Stoikes, made the end of their life, has been able to do no good without
composition: Nor the Cirenaike sensuality or Aristippian voluptuousnes. Of the
pleasures and goods we have, there is none exempted from some mixture of evil,
and incommoditie. -- medio de font leporum Lucr. l. 4. 12. 24


Surgit amori aliquid, quod in ipsis floribus angat.
From middle spring of sweetes some bitter spings,
Which in the very flower smartly stings.
Our exceeding voluptuousness has some air of groaning and wailing: Would you
not say, it dies with anguish? Yea when we forge it is image in her excellency,
we deck it with Epithers of sickish and dolorous qualities: languor,
effeminacy, weakness, fainting and Morbidezza, a great testimony of their
consanguinity and consubstantiality: Excessive joy has more severity, then
jolity: Extreme and full content, more settlednesse then cheerfulness. Ipsa
faelicitas, se nisi temperat, premit. Felicity it self, unless it temper it
self, distempers us. Sent. quare etc.
Ease consumes us. It is that, which on old Greek verse says of such a
sense. The Gods sell us all the goods they give us; that is to say, they give
us not one pure and perfect, and which we buy not with the price of some evil.
Travel and pleasure, most unlike in nature, are notwithstanding followed toget
her by a kind of I wot not what natural conjunction of Socrates says, that
some God attempted to huddle up together, and confound sorrow and
voluptuousness: but being unable to effect it, he bethought himself to couple
them together, at least by the tail. Metrodorus said, that in sadness there
is some aloy of pleasure. I know not whether he meant any thing else, but I
imagine, that for one to enure himself to melancholy, there is some kind of
purpose, of consent and mutual delight: I mean besides ambition, which may
also be joined unto it. There is some shadow of delicacy, and quaintness,
which smileth and fawneth upon us, even in the lap of melancholy. Are there not
some complexions, that of it make their nourishment?

-- est quaedam flere voluptas. Ori. Trist. l. 4. el. 3. 37.

It is some pleasure yet,
With tears our cheeks to wet.
And one Attalus in Seneca says, the remembrance of our last friends is as
pleasing to us, as bitterness in wine that is over old;

Minister veteris puer falerni Cat. lyr. epig. 24. 1.

Ingere m^ calices amariores:
Sir boy, my servitor of good old wine,
Bring me my cup thereof bitter, but fine.
and as of sweetly-sower apples. Nature discovers this confusion unto us:
Painters are of opinion, that the motions and wrinkles in the face, which serve
to weep, serve also to laugh. Verily, before one or other be determined to
express which; behold the pictures success, you are in doubt toward which one
enclineth. And the extremity of laughing entermingles it self with tears.
Nullum sine auctor amento malum est. There is no evil without some obligation.
Sen. epist. 69. ^^
When I imagine man fraught with all the commodities may be wished, let us
suppose, all his several members were for ever possessed with a pleasure like
unto that of generation, even in the highest point that may be: I find him to
sink under the burden of his ease, and perceive him altogether unable to
bear so pure, so constant, and so universal a sensuality. Truly he flies
when he is even upon the nicke, and naturally hastneth to escape it, as from a
step, whereon he cannot stay or contain himself, and fears to sink into
it. When I religiously confess my self unto my self, I find, the best good
I have, has some vicioustaint. And I fear that Plato in his purest virtue (I
that am as sincere and loyal an esteemer thereof, and of the virtues of such a
stamp, as any other can possibly be) if he had nearly listened unto it (and
sure he listened very near) he would therein have heard some harsh tune, of
humane mixture, but an obscure tune, and only sensible unto himself. Man all
in all, is but a botching and party-colored work. The very Laws of Justice,
cannot subsist without seem commixture of Injustice: And Plato says, They
undertake to out off Hidraes heads, that pretend to remoove all incommodities
and inconveniences from the Laws. Omne magnum Tacitus A^^. l. 14. Cass^.
exemplum habet aliquid eximquo, quod contrasingulos vtilitate
publicarependitur. Every great example hoth some touch of injustice, which is
requited by the common good against particulars, says Tacitus. It is likewise
true, that for the use of life and service of public society, there may be
excess in the purity and perspicuity of our spirits. This piercing brightness
has overmuch subtility and curiosity. They should be made heavy and dull, to
make them the more obedient to example and practice; and they must be thickened
and obscured, to proportion them to this shady and terrestrial life. Therefore
are vulgar and lesse-wire-drawnewits found to be more fit and happy in the
conduct of affairs. And the exquisite and highraised opinions of Philosophy
unapt and unfit to exercise. This sharp vivacity of the spirit and this supple
and restless volubility, troubles our negotiations. Humane enterprises should
be managed more grosely and superficially, and have a good and great part of
them left for the rights of fortune. Affairs need not be sifted so nicely and
so profoundly. A man loses himself about the considerations of so many
contrary lusters and diverse forms. Volntantibus res inter se pugnantes,
obtorpuerant animi. Their minds were ^st o^ished, while they revolved ^^^.
d^^. 4. l. 2.
things so different. It is that which our elders report of Simonides; because
his imagination, concerning the question Hyeron the King had made unto him
(which the better to answer he had diverse dates allowed him to think of it)
presented sundry subtle and sharp considerations unto him; doubting which
might be the likeliest; he altogether dispaired of the truth. Whosoever
searches all the circumstances and embraces all the consequences thereof,
hinders his election. A mean engine does equally conduct, and suffices for
the executions of great and little weights. It is commonly seen, that the best
husbands and the thristiest, are those who cannot tell how they are so; and
that these cunning Arethmeticians do seldom thrive by it. I know a notable
pratler, and an excellent blazoner of all sorts of husbandry and thrift, who
has most pitteously let ten thousand pound sterline a year pass from him. I
know another, who says, he consulteth better then any man of his counsel, and
there cannot be a properer man to see unto or of more sufficiency;
notwithstanding when he comes to any execution; his own servants find he is
far otherwise: This I say without mentioning or accounting his ill luck.

The one and twentieth Chapter.
Against idleness, or doing nothing.

THe Emperor Vespasian, lying sick of the disease whereof he died, omitted
not to endeavor to understand the state of the Empire; and lying in his bed,
vnce^^antly dispatched many affairs of great consequence; and his Physicians
chiding him, as of a thing hurtful to his health; he answered, That an
Emperor should die standing upright. Lo here a notable saying, fitting my
humor, and worthy a great Prince. Adrian the Emperor used the same afterward
to like purpose. And Kings ought often to be put in mind of it, to make them
feel, that this great charge, which is given them of the commandment over so
many men, is no idle charge; and that there is nothing may so justly distaste a
subject from purting himself in pain and danger for the service of his
Prince, then therewhilst to see him given to laziness, to base and vain
occupations, and to have care of his conservation, seeing him so careless of
ours. If any shall go about to maintain, that it is better for a Prince to
manage his wars by others, then by himself; Fortune will store him with
sufficient examples of those, whose Lieutenants have achieved great
enterprises; and also of some whose presence would have been more hurtful,
then profitable. But no virtuous and coragious Prince will endure to be
entertained with so shameful instructions. Under color of preserving his head
(as the statue of a saint) for the good fortune of his estate, they degrade him
of his office, which is altogether in military actions, and declare him
incapable of it. I know one, would rather choose to be beaten, then sleep
whilst others fight for him; and who without jelousie never saw his men
perform any notable act in his absence. And Selim the first had reason to say,
that he thought victories gotten in the masters absence, not to be complete.
So much more willingly would he have said, that such a master ought to blush
for shame, who only by his name should pretend any share in it, having
thereunto employed nothing but his thought and verbal direction: Nor that,
since in such a business, the advises and commandments, which bring honor, are
only those given in the field and even in the action. No Pilote exercises his
office standing still. The princes of Otomans race (the chefest race in the
world in warlike fortune) have earnestly embraced this opinion. And Baiazeth
the second with his son, who ammusing themselves about Sciences, and other
private home-matters, neglected the same, gave diverse prejudicial blows unto
their Empire. And Amurath the third of that name, who now reigns following
their example, begins very well to feel their fortune. Was it not the King
of England, Edward the third, who spoke these words of our King Charles the
fifth? There was never King that less armed himself; and yet was never King,
that gave me so much to do, and put me to so many plunges. He had reason to
think it strange, as an effect of fortune, rather then of reason. And let such
as will number the Kings of Castile and Portugal amongst the warlike and
magnanimous conquerors, seek for some other adherent then my self; for so much
as twelve hundred leagues from their idle residence they have made themselves
masters of both Indias, only by the conduct and direction of their factors; of
whom it would be known, whether they durst but go and enjoy them in person.
The Emperor Iuhan said moreover, that a Philosopher and gallant minded man
ought not so much as breath; that is to say, not to give corporal necessities,
but what may not be refused them; ever holding both mind and body busied about
notable, great and virtuous matters. He was ashamed, any man should see him
spitte or sweat before people (which is also said of the Lacedemonian youths,
and Xenphon reporeth it of the Persian) forasmuch as he thought that continual
travel, exercise and sobriety should have concocted and dried up all such
superfluities. What Seneca says shall not impertinently be alleged here; That
the ancient Romans kept their youth upright, and taught their children
nothing, that was to be learned sitting. It is a generous desire, to endevor to
die both profitable and manlike: But the effect consists not so much in our
good resolution, as in our good fortune. A thousand have resolved to vanquish
or to die fighting, which have missed both the one and other: Hurts or
emprisonment, crossing their desseigne and yielding them a forced kind of
life. There are diseases which vanquish our desires and knowledge. Fortune
should not have seconded the vanity of the Roman Legions, who by oath bound
themselves, either to die or conquer. Victor, Marce Fabi, revertar ex acie: Si
fallo, lovem patrem Li^. d^^. (...) ^. 2
Gradiuumque Martem al^osque iratos inveco Deos. I will, O Marcus Fabius,
return conqueror from the army. If in this I deceive you, I wish both great
Jupiter and Mars, and the other Gods offended with me. The Portugalles report,
that in certain places of their Indian conquests, they found some Soldiers,
who with horrible execrations had damned themselves, never to enter into any
composition, but either they would be killed or remain victorious; and in
sign of their vowe^ore their heads and beards shaven. We may hazard and
obstinate our selves long enough. It seems that blows shun them, who
over-joyfully present themselves unto them; and unwillingly reach those that
overwillingly go to meet them and corrupt their end. Some unable to loose his
life by his adversaries force, having assaied all possible means, has been
enforced to accomplish his resolution, either to bear away the honor; or not
to carry away his life and even in the fury of the fight to put himself to
death. There are sundry examples of it; but nete this one. Philistus, chief
General of young Dionisius his navy against the Siracusans, presented them the
battle, which was very sharply withstood, their forces being alike; wherein, by
reason of his prowess he had the better in the beginning. But the Siracusans
flocking thick and threefold about his gally, to grapple and board him, having
performed many worthy exploytes with his own person, to ridd^ himself from
them, disparing of all escape, with his own hand deprived himself of that
life, which so lavishly and in vain he had abandoned to his enemies hands.
Mole^ Moluch, King of Fez, who not long since obtained that famous victory
against Sebastian King of Portugal; a notable victory, by reason of the death
of three Kings, and transmission of so great a Kingdom to the crown of
Castile, chansed to be grievously sick, at what time the Portugales with armed
hand entered his dominions, and afterward, though he foresaw it, approaching
nearer unto death, empaired worse and worse. Never did man more stoutly, or
more vigorously make use of an undaunted courage, than he. He found himself
very weak to endure the ceremonious pomp which the Kings of that Country at
their entrance into he Camp, are presented withal, which according to their
fashion is full of all magnificence and state, and charged with all manner of
action; and therefore he resigned that honor to his brother, yet resigned he
nothing but the office of the chief Captain. Himself most gloriously
executed, and most exactly performed all other necessary duties and
profitable Offices. Holding his body laid along his cowch, but his mind
upright and courage constant, even to his last gasp; and in some sort after.
He might have undermined his enemies, who were fond-hardily advanced in his
dominions: And was exceedingly grieved, that for want of a little longer life,
and a substitute to manage the War, and affairs or so troubled a state, he
was enforced to seek a bloody and hazardous battle, having another pure and
undoubted victory in hand. He notwithstanding managed the continuance of his
sickness so miraculously, that he consumed his enemy, diverted him from his
Sea-Fleete, and Maritime places, he held along the Coaste of Affricke, even
until the last day of his life, which by design he reserved and employed for
so great and renowned a fight.

He ranged his battle in a round, on every side besieging the Portugals army,
which bending round, and coming to close, did not only hinder them in the
conflict) which through the valor of that yong-assailant King was very
furious) since they were to turn their faces on all sides, but also hindered
them from running away after the rowte. And finding all issewes seized, and all
passages closed, they were constrained to turn upon themselves:
coacervanturque non solum caede, sed etiam fug^. They fall on heaps, not only
by slaughter, but by flight. And so pel-mell to heap one on another neck,
preparing a most murthrous and complete victory to the Conquerours. When he was
even dying, he caused himself to be carried and haled, wherever need
called for him; and passing along the files, he exhorted the Captains, and
animated the Soldiers one after another. And seeing one wing of the fight to
have the worst, and in some danger, no man could hold him, but he would needs
with his naked-sword in hand get on hors-backe, striving by all possible
means, to enter the throng; his men holding him, some by the Bridle, some by
the Gown, and some by the Stirrops. This toil and straining of himself, made
an end of that little remainder of his life: Then was he laid on his bed: But
coming to himself again, starting up, as out of a swowne, each other faculty
failing him he gave them warning to conceal his death (which was the
necessariest commandment he could give his servaunts, lest the soldiers
hearing of his death, might fall into despair) and so yielded the Ghost,
holding his fore-fingers upon his mouth; an ordinary signal to impose silence.
What man ever lived so long and so near death; Who ever died so upright and
undaunted? The extremest degree, and most natural, courageously to manage
death, is to see or front the same, not only without amazement, but without
care; the course of life continuing free, even in death. As Cato, who ammuzed
himself to study and sleep, having a violent and bloody death, present in
his heart, and as it were holding it in his hand.

The two and twentieth Chapter.
Of running Posts, or Curriers.

I Have been none of the weakest in this exercise, which is proper unto men of
my stature, well-trust, short and tough, but now I have given it over: It
toils us overmuch, to hold out long. I was even-now reading, how King Cyrus,
that he might more speedily receave news from all parts of his Empire, (which
was of exceeding great length) would needs have it tried, how far a horse
could in a day go outright, without baiting, at which distance he caused
Stations to be set and men to have fresh horses ready, for all such as came to
him. And some report, this swift kind of running, answers the flight of
Cranes. Caesar says, that Lu^ius Vibulus Rufus, making haste to bring Pompey
an advertisement, rode day and night, and to make more speed shifted many
horses. And himself (as Suetonius writes) would upon an hired coache run a
hundred miles a day. And sure he was a rancke-runner: for where any river
hindered his way, he swam it over, and never went out of his way to seek for a
bridge or foarde. Tib erius Nero going to visit his brother Drusus, who lay
sick in Germany, having three coaches in his company, ran two hundred
miles in four and twenty hours. In the Roman wars against King Antiochus,
Titus Sempronius Gracchus (says Titus Livius) Livius.
per dispositos equos prope incredibili celeritae ab Amphisa tertio dic Pellam
pervenit: By horse laid post, with incredible speed within three days he
past from Amphisa to Pella. And viewing the place, it seems, they were set
Stations for Posts, and not newly appointed for that race. The invention of
Cecinna in sending news to those of his house had much more speed; he carried
certain swallows with him, and having occasion to send news home, he let
them fly toward their nests, first marking them with some color, proper to
signify what he meant, as before he had agreed upon with his friends. In the
Theaters of Rome, the household Masters, carried Pigeons in their bosoms, under
whose wings they fastened letters, when they would send any word home, which
were also taught to bring back an answer. D. Brutus, used some being besieged
in Mutina, and otherselfe-where. In Peru they went post upon men's backs, who
took their Masters upon their shoulders, sitting upon certain bears or
chaires, with such agilitie, that in full running speed the first porters
without any stay, cast their load upon others who upon the way waited for
them, and so they to others. I understand that the Valachians, which are
messengers unto the great Turk, use extreme diligence in their business,
forasmuch as they have authority to dis-mount the first passenger they meet
upon the highway, and give him their tired Horse. And because they shall not
be weary, they are wont to swathe themselves hard about the body with a broad
Swathe or Sear cloth, as diverse others do with us: I could never find ease
or good by it.

The three and twentieth Chapter.
Of bad means employed to a good end

THere is a wonderful relation and correspondencie found in this universal
policy of Natures works, which manifestly shows, it is neither casual,
nor directed by diverse masters. The infirmities and conditions of our bodies,
are likewise seen in states and goverments: Kingdoms and Commowealths as well
as we, are borne, flourish, and fade through age. We are subject unto a
repleatnesse of humors, hurtful and unprofitable, yea be it of good humors
(for even Physicians fear that, and because there is nothing constant in us,
they say, that perfection of health over joyful and strong, must by art be
abated and diminished, lest our nature unable to settle it self in any
certain place, and for her amendment to ascend higher, should over-violently
recoile back into disorder; and therefore they prescrib unto Wrestlers purging
and phlebotomie, to substract that superabundance of health from them) or of
bad, which is the ordinary cause of sickness. Of such like repletion are
States often seen to be sick, and diverse purgations are wont to be used to
purge them. As we have seen some to dismiss a great number of families
(chiefly to disburthen the Country) which else where go to seek where they
may at others charge sear themselves. In this sort our ancient French leaving
the high Countries of Germany, came to possess Gaul, whence they displaced
the first Inhabitants. Thus grew that infinite confluence of people, which
afterward under Brennus and others, over-ranne Italy. Thus the Goths and
Vandalles, as also the Nations which possess Greece, left their natural
countries, to go where they might have more elbow-roome: And hardly shall we
see two or three corners in the world, that have not felt the effect of such a
remooving alteration. The Romans, by such means, erected their Colonies; for
perceiving their City to grow over-populous, they were wont to discharge it
of unnecessary people, which they sent to inhabit and manure the Countries
they had subdued. They have also sometimes maintained war wi^h some of their
enemies, not only thereby to keep their men in breath, lest Idleness, the
mother of Corruption, should cause them some worse inconvenience.

Et patimur longae pacis mala, saevior armis Juven. sa^. 6. 192.

Luxuria incumbit.
We suffer of long peace the soking harms,
On us lies luxury more fierce then arms.
But also to let the Commonwealth blood, and somewhat to allay the over
vehement heat of their youth, to lop the sprigs, and thin the branches of this
over-spreading tree, too much abounding in rankness and gaillardise. To this
purpose they maintained a good while war with the Carthaginians. In the treaty
of Bretigny, Edward the third, King of England, would by no means comprehend
in that general peace the controversy of the Duchy of Britany to the end he
might have some way to disburthen himself of his men of war, and that the
multitude of Englishmen, which he had employed about the wars of France,
should not return into England. It was one of the reasons, induced Philip our
King to consent, that his son John should be sent to war beyond the seas,
that so he might carry with him a great number of young hot-blouds, which were
amongst his trained military men. There are diverse now adays, which will
speak thus, wishing this violent and burning emotion we see and feel amongst
us, might be derived to some neighbor war, fearing lest those offending
humors, which at this instant are predominant in our body, if they be not
diverted elsewhere, will still maintain our fever in force, and in the end
cause our utter destruction: And in truth a foreign war is nothing so
dangerous a dis^ase as a civil: But I will not believe that God would favor
so unjust an enterprise, to offend and quarrel with others for our commodity.

Nil mihi tam valde placeat Rhammusia virgo, Cat. epig. el^g. 6. 77.

Quod temere invitis suscipiatur heris.
That fortune likes me not, which is constrained,
By Lords unwilling rashly entertained.
Notwithstanding the weakness of our condition, does often urge us to this
necessity, to use bad means to a good end. Lycurgus the most virtuous and
perfect Lawgiver that ever was, devised this most unjust fashion, to instruct
his people unto temperance, by force to make the Helotes, which were their
servants, to be drunk, that seeing them so lost and buried in wine, the
Spartanes might abhor the excess of that vice. Those were also more to be
blamed, who anciently allowed that criminal offenders, what death soever they
were condemned unto, should by Physicians all alive be torn in pieces, that so
they might naturally see our inward parts, and thereby establish a more assured
certainty in their art: For if a man must needs err or debauch himself, it
is more excusable, if he do it for his souls health, then for his bodies
good. As the Romans trained up, and instructed their people to valor, and
contempt of dangers and death, by the outrageous spectacles of Gladiators, and
deadly fighting Fencers, who in presence of them all combated, mangled, sliced
and killed one another;

Quid vesani aliud sibi vult ars impia luds,
Quid mortes iuvenum, quid sanguine pasta voluptas?
What else means that mad art of impious fense,
Those yong-mens deaths, that blood-fed pleasing sense?
which custom continued even until the time of Theodosius the Emperor. P^ud
^^st. Sym. l. 2. f.


Arripe delatam tua dux in tempora famam,
Quodque patris superest successor laudis habeto:
Nullus in vrbe cadat, cuius sit poena voluptas,
Iam solis contenta feris infamis arena,
Nulla cruentatis homicidia ludat in armis.
The fame deferred to your times entertain,
Enherite praise which does from Sire remain,
Let none die to give pleasure by his pain:
Be shameful Theaters with beasts content,
Not in goar'd arms man's slaughter represent.
Surely it was a wonderful, example and of exceeding benefit for the peoples
institution, to see daily one or two hundred, yea sometimes a thousand brace of
men armed one against another, in their presence to cut and hacke one another
in pieces with so great constancy of courage, that they were never seen to
utter one word of faintness or commiseration, never to turn their back, nor
so much as to show a motion of demissenesse, to avoid their adversaries
blows: but rather to extend their necks to their swords, and present
themselves unto their strokes. It has happened to diverse of them, who through
many hurts being wounded to death, have sent to ask the people, whether they
were satisfied with their duty, before they would lie down in the place. They
must, not only fight and die constantly, but jocondly: in such sort as they
were cursed and bitterly scolded at, if in receiving their death they were any
way seen to strive, yea maidnes encited them to it.

-- consurgit adictus,
Et quoties victor ferrum iugulo inserit, illa Prud. cont. Sym. lib. 2.

Delicias ait esse suas, pectusque iacentis
Virgo modesta iubet converso pollice rumpi.
The modest maid, when wounds are given; vpriseth;
When victors sword the vanquished throat surpriseth,
She says, it is her sport, and does command,
T'embrue the conquered breast, by sign of hand.
The first Romans disposed thus of their criminals: But afterward they did so
with their innocent servants; yea of their freemen, which were sold to that
purpose: yea of Senators, and Roman Knights, and women also.

Nunc caput in mortem vendunt, and fumus arenae, Ma^il. astr. l. 4 224.

Atque hostem sibi quisque parat cum bella quiescunt.
They sell men's lives to death and Stages sight,
When wars do cease, they find with whom to fight.
Hos inter fremitus novosque lusus,
Stat sexus rudis insciusque ferri,
Et pugnas capit improbus viriles.
Amidst these tumults, these strange sporting sights.
That Sex does sit, which knows not how sword bites,
And entertaines vnmov'd, those manly fights.
Which I should deem very strange and incredible; if we were not daily
accustomed to see in our wars many thousands of foreign nations, for a very
small some of money to engage both their blood and life in quarrels wherein they
are nothing interessed.

The four and twentieth Chapter.
Of the Roman greatness.

I Will but speak a word of this infinite argument, and slightly glance at it,
to show the simplicity of those, who compare the seely greatness of these
times unto that. In the seventh book of Ciceroes familiar Epistles (and let
Gramarians remove this title of Familiar, if they please, for to say truth it
makes but little to the purpose: and they who in liew of familiar, have placed
ad familiares, may wrest some argument for themselves, from that which
Suetonius says in Caesar's life, that there was a volume of his Epistles ad
familiares) there is one directed unto Caesar then being in Gaul, in which
Cicero repeats these very words, which were in the end of a former letter that
Caesar had written to him: Touching Marcus Furius, whom thou have commended
unto me, I will make him King of Gaul, and if thou will have me prefer any
other of thy friends, send them to me. It was not new in a simple Roman Citizen
(as Caesar then was) to dispose of Kingdoms, for as well deprived he King
Deiotarus of his, to give it to a Gentleman of the City of Pergamo, called
Mithridates. And those who writ his life, mention many Kingdoms sold by him.
And Suetonius reports, that he at one time wrested three millions and six
hundred thousand crowns of gold from King Ptolomeus, which amounted very near
unto the price of his Kingdom. Claud. in E^trop. li. 1. 20


Tot Galatae, tot Pontus eat, tot lidia n^mmis:
For So Much let Galatia go,
For So Much Lidia, Pontus so.
Marcus Antonius said, the greatness of the Roman people, was not so much
discerned by what it took, as by what it gave. Yet some ages before Antonius,
was there one amongst others, of so wonderful authority, as through all his
history I know no mark, carries the name of his credit higher. Antiochus
possessed all Egypt, and was very near to conquer Cipres, and others
depending of that Empire. Upon the progress of his victories, C. Popilius came
unto him in the behalf of the Senate, and at first arrival, refused to take
him by the hand, before he had read the letters he brought him. The King having
read them, said, he would deliberate of them. Popilius with a wand encircled
the place about, where he stood, and thus bespake him; Give me an answer to
carry back unto the Senate, before thou go out of this circle. Antiochus
amazed at the rudeness of so urging a commandment, after he had pawsed a
while, replied thus, I will do what the Senate commands me. Then Popilius
saluted him as a friend unto the Roman people. To have renounced so great a
Monarchy, and forgon the course of so successful prosperity, by the only
impression of three written lines. He had good reason, as afterward he did, by
his Ambassadors to send the Senate word, that he had received their ordinances
with the same respect, as if they had come from the immortal Gods. All the
Kingdoms Augustus subdued by right of war, he restored to those who had lost
them, or presented strangers with them: And concerning this purpose, Tacitus
speaking of Cogidunus King of England, by a wonderful tract makes us perceive
this infinite greatness Cor. Tac. vit. Jul. Agric.
and might. The Romans (says he) were from all antiquity accustomed, to leave
those Kings whom they had vanquished, in the possession of their kingdoms,
under their authority: Vt haberent instrument a servitutis and reges. That they
might have even Kings also for instruments of their bondage. It is very likely
that Soliman the great Turk, whom we have seen to use such a liberality, and
give away the kingdom of Hungary, and other dominions, did more respect this
consideration, then that he was wont to allege; which is, that he was over
wearied with the many Monarchies and surcharged with the several dominions,
which either his own or his ancestors virtue had gotten him.

The five and twentieth Chapter.
How a men should not counterfeit to be sick.

THere is an epigram in Martial, that may pass for a good one (for there are
of all sorts in him) wherein he pleasantly relates the story of Caelius, who
to avoid the courting of certain great men in Rome, to give attendance at
their rising, and to wait, assist and follow them, fained to be troubled with
the gout; and to make his excuse more likely, he caused his legs to be
ointed and swathed, and lively counteirfeted the behavior and countenance of a
goutie man. In the end fortune did him the favor to make him goutie indeed.

Tantum cura potest and ars doloris, Mart. lib. 7. epig. 38. 8.

Desiit fingere Caelius podagram.
So much the care and cunning can of pain:
Caelius (grown gowty) leaves the gowt to feign.
As far as I remember I have read a like History in some place of Appian, of
one who purposing to escape the proscriptions of the Triumutrat of Rome, and to
conceal himself from the knowledge of those who pursued him, kept himself
close and disguised, adding this other invention to it, which was to counter
feit blindness in one eye, who when he came somewhat to recover his liberty,
and would have left off the plaster he had long time worn over his eye, he
found that under that mask he had altogether lost the sight of it. It may be
the action of his sight was weakened, having so long continued without exercise
and the visual virtue was wholly converted into the other eye: For, we may
plainly perceive, that holding one eye shut, it convaieth some part of it is
effect into his follow; in such sort as it will swell and grow bigger. As also
the idleness, together with the warmth of the medicaments and swathing, might
very well draw some goutie humor into the leg of Martials goutie sellow.
Reading in Freisart, the vow which a gallant troop of young Englishmen had
made, to wear their left eyes hoodwink's, until such time as they should
pass into France, and there perform some notable exploite of arms upon us, I
have often laughed with my self to think what they would have imagined if as
to the fore aleaged, it had happened to them, and had all been blind of the
left eye, at what time they returned to look upon their mistresses, for whose
sake they had made their vow and undertaken such an enterprise. Mothers have
great reason to chide their children when they counterset to be blind with one
eye, crompt backed, squint'-eyed, or lame, and such other deformities of the
body; for besides that the body thus tender may easily receive some ill
custom, I know not how, it seems that fortune is glad to take us at our
word; And I have heard diverse examples of some, who have fallen sick in very
deed, because they had purposed to saine sickness. I have at all times enured
my self, whether I be on horseback or a foot, to carry a good heavy wand
or cudgel in my hand; yea I have endeavored to do it handsomely, and with an
effected kind of countenance to continue so. Many have threatened me, that
fortune will one time or other turn this my wantonness into necessity. I
presume upon this, that I should be the first of my race, that ever was
troubled with the gowt. But let us somewhat amplify this chapter, and patch it
up with another piece concerning blindness. Pliny reports of one, who dreaming
in his sleep, that he was blind, awaking the next morning, was found to be
stark blind, having never had any precedent sickness. The power of
imagination may very well further such things, as elsewhere I have showed; And
Pliny seems to be of this opinion; but it is more likely, that the motions,
which the body selt inwardly (whereof Physicians, may if they please, find out
the cause) and which took away his sight, and were the occasion of his dream.
Let us also add another story, concerning this purpose, which Seneca
reports in his Epistles. thou know (says he writing unto Lucilius) that
Harpaste my wives fool, is left upon me as an hereditarie charge; for by mine
own nature, I am an enemy unto such monsters, and if I have a desire to laugh
at a fool, I need not seek one far; I laugh at my self. This foolish
woman has suddenly lost her sight. I report a sirange thing, but yet very
true: She will not believe she is blind; and urges her keeper incessantly to
lead her, saying still, my house is very dark. What we laugh at in her, I
entreat thee to belieeve, that the same h^pneth to each for us. No man knows
himself to be covetous, or niggardly. Even the blind require a guide, but we
stray from our selves. I am not ambui^us, say we, but no man can live otherwise
at Rome: I am not sumptuous, but the City requires great charges: It is not
my fault, if I be collerike; If I have not yet set down a sure course of my
life, the fault is in youth. Let us not seek our evil out of us; it is within
us it is rooted in our entrails. And only because we perceive not that we are
sick, makes our recoverie to prove more difficult. If we begin not betimes to
cure our selves, when shall we provide for so many sores, for so many evils?
Yet have we a most-sweete and gentle medicine of Philosophy; for of others, no
man feels the pleasure of them, but after his recoverie, where as she
pleases, eases, and cures all at once. Lo here what Seneca says, who has
somewhat diverted me from my purpose: But there is profit in the exchange.

The six and twentieth Chapter.
Of Thumbs.

TAcitus reports, that amongst certain barbarous Kings, for the confermation
of an inviolable bond, or covenant, their manner was, to join their right
hands close and hard together, with enterlacing their thumbs: And when by hard
wringing them the blood appeared at their ends, they pricked them with some
sharp point, and then mutually entersuck't each one the others. Phisicions
say, thumbs are the master-fingers of the hand and that their Latin eEtymologie
is derived of Pollere. The Graecians call it (...) as a man would say another
hand. And it seems, the Latins likewise take them sometimes in this sense, id
est, for a whole hand:

Sed nec vocibus excitata blandis, Mart. lib. 12. epigram. 99. 8

Molli pollice nec rogata surgit.
It will not rise, though with sweet words excited,
Nor with the touch of softest thumb invited.
In Rome it was heretofore a sign of favor, to wring and kiss the thumbs,

Fautor vtroque tuum laudabit pollice ludum: Hor. lib. 1. epist. 18. 66.

He that applaudes will praise,
With both his thumbs thy plays.
and of disfavour or disgrace to lift them up, and turn them outward:

-- converso pollice vulgi Iuven. sat. 3. 36.

Quemlibet occidunt populariter. --
When people turn their thumbs away,
The popularly any slay.
Such as were hurt or maimed in their thumbs, were by the Romans dispensed
from going to war, as they who had lost their weapons hold-fast. Augustus did
confiscate all the goods of a Roman Knight, who through malice had cut off the
thumbes of two young children of his thereby to excuse them from going to war:
And before him, the Senate in the time of the Italian wars, had condemned
Caius Vatienus to perpetual prison, and confiscated all his goods, for so much
as he had willingly cut off the thumb of his left hand, so to exempt himself
from that voyage. Some one, whose name I remember not, having gained a great
victory by Sea, caused all the enemies whom he had vanquished and taken
prisoners to have their thumbes cut off, thinking thereby to deprive them of
all means of fighting, of rowing, or handling their oars. The Athenians
likewise caused them to be cut off from them of Aegina, to take from them the
pre-eminence in the art of navigation. In Lacedaemon, masters punished their
Scholars by biting their thumbs.

The seven and twentieth Chapter.
Cowardice, the Mother of Cruelty.

I Have often heard it reported, that Cowardice is the Mother of Cruelty: And
have perceived by experience, that this malicious sharpnes, and inhumane
severitie of courage, is commonly accompanied with feminine remissness: I have
seen some of the cruelest subject to weep easily, and for frivolous causes.
Alexander the tyrant of Pheres, could not endure to see tragedies acted in the
Theaters, for fear his subjects should see him sob and weep at the
misfortunes of Hecuba and Andromaca; he who without remorce or pity caused
daily so many poor people to be most cruelly massacred and barbarously
murdered. May it be weakness of spirit, makes them so pliable to all
extremities? valor (whose effect is only to exercise it self against
resistance.

Nec nisi bellantis gaudet cervice iuvenci. Claud. epist. ad Hadr. v. 39.

Nor takes he joy to domineere,
But on the neck of sturdie steer)
refraines it self in seeing her enemy prostrate to her mercy: But
pusillanimitie, to say that she also is of the feast, since it cannot be
joined to the first part, takes for her share the second, which is massacre and
blood. Murders after victories, are commonly effected by the baser kind of
people, and officers that wait upon the baggage and carriage. And the reason we
see so many unheard of cruelties in popular wars, is, that this vulgar
rascalitie does martially flesh and enure it self to dive in blood up to the
elbowes, and mangle a body, or hacke a carcass lying and grovelling at their
feet, having no manner of feeling of other valor.

Et Lupus and turpes instant morientibus Vrsi. Ovid. Trist. li. 3. ^l. 5. 35.

-- Et quaecumque minor nobilitate fera est.
A Wolf or filthy Bear the dying man oppress,
Or some such beast as in nobility is less.
As the Craven Curres, which at home or in their Kennels will tugge and bite
the skins of those wild beasts, which in the fields they durst not so much
as barke-at. What is it that now adays makes all our qaurrels mortal? And
whereas our forefathers had some degree of revenge, we now begin by the last;
and at first brunt nothing is spoken of but killing? What is it, if it be not
Cowardice? Every man sees, it is more bravery and disdain for one to bear
his enemy, than make an end of him; and to keep him at a bay, than make him
die. Moreover, that the desire of revenge is thereby alayed, and better
contented; for, it aymeth at nothing so much as to give or show a motion or
feeling of revenge only of her self. And that is thereason reason we do not
challenge a beast or fall upon a stone, when it hurts us, because they are
incapable to feel our ren^nge. And to kill a man, is to shelter him from our
offense. And even as Bias, exclaimed upon a wicked man; I know that soon or
late thou shall be punished for thy lewdnes, but I fear me I shall not see it:
And moaned the Orchomenians, because the penance which Liciscus had for his
treason committed against them, came at such a time, as none of them were
living, whom it had concerned, and whom the pleasure of that punishment might
most delight: So ought revenge to be moaned, when he on whom it is inflicted,
loses the means to endure or feel it. For, even as the revenger, will see
the action of the revenge, that so he may feel the pleasure of it, so must he
on whom he is revenged both see and feel that he may hereby receive both
repentance and grief. He shall rue it, say we, And though he receive a stabbe
or a blow with a pistol on his head, shall we think he will repent?
Contrariwise, if we mark him well, we shall perceive that in falling, he makes
a more or bob at us, He is far from repenting, when he rather seems to be
beholding to us: In as much as we afford him the favourablest office of life,
which is to make him dye speedily, and as it were insensibly. We are left to
shift up and down, run and trot, and squat here and there, and all to avoy
de the Officers, or escape the Magistrates that pursue us; and he is at rest.
To kill a man, is good to escape a future offonce, and not revenge the wrougs
past. It is rather an action of fear, than of bravery; Of precaution, than of
courage; Of defense, than of an enterprise. It is apparent, that by it, we quit
both the true end of revenge, and the respect of our reputation: If he live we
fear he will or may charge us with the like. It is not against him, it is for
thee, thou riddest thy self of him. In the Kingdom of Narsinga, this
expedient would be bootlesse: There, not only Soldiers, and such as profess
arms, but every mean Artificer, decide their quarrels with the Swords point.
The King never refuses any man the combat, that is disposed to fight; And if
they be men of quality, he will be by in person, and reward the Victor with a
chain of Gold: Which, whosoever has a mind unto, and will obtain it, may
freely challenge him that wears the same, and enter combat with him. And
having overcome one combat has many following the same, If we thought by
virtue to be ever superiors unto our enemy, and at our pleasure gourmandize
him, it would much grieve us he should escape us, as he does in dying. We
rather endevor to vanquish surely, than honorably. And in our quarrels we
rather seek for the end, than for the glory. Asinius Pollio for an honest man,
less excusable, committed a like fault; Who having written certain invectives
against Plancus, staide until he were dead to publish them. It was rather to
flurt at a blind man, and rail in a dead-mans ear, and to offend a senseless
man, than incur the danger of his revenge. And men answered in this behalf,
that it only belonged to Hobgoblins to wrestle with the dead. He who staieth
till the Author be dead, whose writings he will combat, what says he, but
that he is weak and quarrellous? It was told Aristotle, that some body had
spoken ill of him, to whom he answered, Let him also whippe me, so my self be
not by. Our forefathers were contented to revenge an injury with a lie; a lie
with a blow, a blow with blood; and so in order. They were sufficiently
valiant not to fear their adversary though he lived and were wronged: Whereas
we quake for fear, so long as we see him a foot. And that it is so, does not
our modern practice, pursue to death, as well him who has wronged us, as him
whom we have offended? It is also a kind of dastardlinesse, which has brought
this fashion into onr single combats, to accompany us into the field with
seconds, thirdes, and fourths. They were aunciently single combats, but now
they are skirmishes and battles. To be alone, feared the first that invented
it: Quum in se cuique minimum fiduciae esset. When every man had least
confidence in himself. For, what company soever it be, it does naturally bring
some comfort and ease in danger, In ancient time they were wont to employ third
persons as sticklers, to see no treachery or disorder were used, and to bear
witness of the combats success. But now this fashion is come up, let any man
be engaged whosoever is envited, cannot well contain himself to be a
spectator, lest it be imputed unto him, it is either for want of affection, or
lack of courage. Besides the injustice of such an action and villainy, for your
honors protection, to engage other valor and force then your own, I find it
a disadvantage in an honest and worthy man, and who wholly trusts unto
himself, to entermingle his fortune with a second man: every one runs
sufficient hazard for himself, and need not also run it for another: And
has enough to do to assure himself of his own virtue for the defense of his
life, without committing so precious a thing into third menshandes. For, if the
contrary has not expressly been covenanted of all four, it is a combined
party. If your fellow chance to fail, you have two upon you, and not without
reason: And to say, it is a Superchiery, as it is indeed: as being well armed,
to charge a man who has but a piece of a sword, or being sound and strong, to
set upon a man fore hurt. But if they be advantages you have gotten fighting,
you may use them without imputation. Disparitie is not considered, and
inequality is not balanced, but by the state wherein the fight is begun. As
for the rest you must rely on fortune: and if alone or single, you chance to
have three upon you, your other two companions being slain, you have no more
wrong done you, than I should offer in Wars in striking an enemy, whom at such
an advantage I should find grapled with one of my Fellow Soldiers. The nature
of society bears, where troop is against troop (as where our Duke of
Orleans challenged Henry King of England, one hundred against another hundred;
three hundred against as many, as did the Argians against the Lacedaemonians;
three to three, as were the Horatij against the Curatij) the plurality of
either side is never respected for more than a single man. Whersoever there is
company, the hazard is confused and disordered. I have a private interest in
this discourse. For, my brother, the Lord of Matecoulom, being desired in Rome,
to second and accompany a Gentleman, with whom he had no great acquaintance,
who was defendant and challenged by another; The fight begun, my brother by
chance found himself confronted with one nearer and better known to him (I
would feign be resolved of these Laws of honor, which so often shocke and
trouble those of reason) whom after he had vanquished and dispatched, seeing
the two principalls of the quarrel yet standing and unhurt, he went to reskew
his fellow. What could he do less? should he have stood still, and (if chance
would so have had it) see him defeated, for whose defense he was entered the
quarrel? What until then he had done was nothing to the purpose, and the
quarrel was still undecided. All the courtesy you can, you ought surely use to
your enemy, especially when you have brought him under, and to some great
disadvantage; I know not how a man may use it, when another interest depends
on it, where you are but accessory, and where the quarrel is not yours. He
could never be just nor courteous, in hazard of him unto whom he had lent
himself. So was he presently delivered out of the Italian prisons by a speedy
and solemn letter of commendations from our King. Oh indiscreete Nation! We
are not contented to manifest our follies, and bewray our vices to the world by
reputation: but we go into foreign Nations and there in person show them.
Place three Frenchmen in the deserts of Libia, and they will never live one
month together without brawling, falling out and scratching one another: you
would say this peregrination, is a party erected to please strangers with our
tragedies; and those most commonly, who rejoice and scoff at our evils. We
travel into Italy to learn the Art of fencing, and practice it at the cost
of our lives, before we know it; it were requisite according to the order of
true Discipline, we should prefer the Theorike before the practike. We betray
our apprentisage.

Primitiae iuvenum miserae, bellique futuri S^^t. ^^lv. lib. 5.

Dura rudimenta. --
The miserable first essays of youth,
And hard beginnings of war that ^nsu'th.
I know it is an Art profitable to her end (in the single combat between the
two Princes, cosin-Germanes, in Spain, the eldest of which (says T. Livius)
by the skill of his weapons, and by craft, over came easily the dismayed forces
of the younger) and as by experience I have known, the knowledge and skill
whereof, has puffed up the heart of some, beyond their natural proportion. But
it is not properly a virtue, since she draws her stay from dexterity, and
takes her foundation from other than from her self. The honor of combatet
consists in the iealosie of the heart, not of the science. And therefore have
I seen some of my friends, renowned for great Masters in this exercise, in
their quarrels to make choice of weapons, that might well take the mean of this
advantage or odds from them; and which wholly depended on fortune, and
assurance that their victory might not rather be imputed to their fencing, than
ascribed to their valor And in my infancy, our nobility scorned the reputation
of a fencer, though never so cunning, as injurious; and if any learnt it, they
would sequester themselves from company, deeming the same as a mystery of craft
and subtilty, derogating from true and perfect virtue.

Non schivar, non parar, non ritirarsi Tass^ ^i^r. can. 12. ^^^^. 55.

Voglion costor, ne qui destrezzaha part;
Non danno i colpi finti hor pie^i, hor scarsi;
Toglie lirae il furor ^ vso deilarte,
Odi le spade horribilmente vrtarsi
A mozzo il ferro, il pie d`orma non part,
Sempre e il pie fermo, e la man sempre in moto,
Ne scende taglio in van, ne punta a voto.
T`avoyde, toward retiring to give ground
They reke not, nor has nimblenes here part:
Nor give false blows, nor full, nor scarce, nor sound,
Rage and revenge bereave all use of Art.
Their Swords at half Sword horribly resound
You might hear met: No foot from step does part:
Their foot still fast, their hand still faster mooveth:
No stroke in vain, no thrust in vain, but prooveth.
Shooting at Buts, Tiltings, Torneyes, Barriers, the true images of martial
combats, were the exercises of our forefathers. This other exercise is so much
the less noble, by how much it respects but a private end; which against the
laws of justice, teaches us to destroy one another, and every way produces
ever mischievous effects. It is much more worthy, and beeter beseeming, for a
man to exercise himself in things that assure and offend not our Commonwealth;
and which respect public security and general glory. Publius Consus, was the
first that ever instituted the Soldier to manage his arms by dexterity and
skill, and joined art unto virtue, not for the use of private contentions, but
for the wars and Roman peoples quarrels. A popular and civil manner of
fencing. And besides the example of Caesar, who appointed his Soldier, above
all things, to aim and strike at the face of Pompeyes men in the battle of
Pharsalia: A thousand other Chiestaines and Generals have devised new fashions
of weapons, and new kinds of striking, and covering of themselves, according
as the present affairs required. But even as Philopoemen condemned wrestling,
wherein he excelled others, for so much as the preparations appertaining to this
exercise differed from those that belong to military discipline, to which he
supposed, men of honor should ammuse and addict themselves. Me thinks also,
that this nimblenesse or agilitie, to which men fashion and enure themselves,
their limbs, their turnings, windings, and timble-quicke motions, wherein
youth is instructed and trained in this new school, are not only
unprofitable, but rather contrary and domageable for the use of military
combat: And we see our men do commonly employ particular weapons, in their
fence schools, and peculiarly appointed for that purpose. And I have seen it
disallowed, that a gentleman challenged to fight with Rapier and Dagger, should
present himself in the equipage of a man at arms; or that another should
offer to come with his cloak insteade of a Dagger. It is worthy the noting,
that Lachaz in Plato, speaking of an apprentislage, how to manage arms,
conformable to ours, says, he could never see any notable warrior come of a
school of fence, and especially from among the masters. As for them our own
experience confirms as much. And for the rest we may at least say, they are
sufficiencies of no relation or correspondencie. And in the institution of the
children of his Common wealth, Plato interdicts the arts of striking or
playing with fists, devised by Amycus and Epeius, and to wrestle, invented by
Anthoeus and Cecyo: because they aim at another end, then to adapt youth to
warlike service, and have no affinity with it. But I digress much from my
theme. The Emperor Mauricius, being forewarned by dreams* and sundry
prognostications, that one Phocas a Soldier at that time yet unknown, should
kill him, demanded of Philip his son in law, who that Phocas was, his nature,
his conditions, and customs, and how amongst other things Philip told him, he
was a fainte, cowardly, and timorousfellow: The Emperor thereby presently
concluded, that he was both cruel and a murderer. What makes tyrants so
bloud-thirstie? it is the care of their security, and that their faint-hart
yields them no other means to assure themselves, then by rooting out those
which may in any sort offend them; yea silly women for fear they should or
bite or scrach them?

Cuncta ferit dum cuncta timet. -- Claud in Eutrop. lib. 1. 182.

Of all things he afraid,
At all things fiercely laid.
The first cruelties are exercised by themselves, thence proceeds the fear
of a just revenge, which afterward produces a swarm of new cruelties; by the
one to stis^le the other. Philip, the King of Macedon, who had so many crows
to pull with the Romans, agitated by the horror of so many murders committed
by his appointment, and unable to make his party good, or to take any save
resolution against so many families, by him at several times injuried,
resolved at last to seize upon all their children whom he had caused to be
murdered, that so he might day by day one after another rid the world of them,
and so establish his safety. Matters of worth are not impertinent wheresoever
they be placed. I, who rather respect the weight and benefit of discourses,
then their order and placing, need not fear to place here at randone a
notable story. When they are so rich of their own beauty, and may very well
uphold themselves alone, I am content with a hairs end, to fit or join
them to my purpose. Amongst others who had been condemned by Philip, was one
Herodicus, Prince of the Thessalians: After whom he caused his two sons in
law to be put to death; each of them leaving a young son behind him.
Theoxena and Arco were the two widows. Theoxena although she were instantly
urged thereunto, could never be induced to marry again. Arco took to
husband Poris a chief man amongst the Aenians, and by him had diverse
children, all which she left very young. Theoxena moved by a motherly charity
toward her young nephews, and so to have them in her protection and bringing
up wedded Poris. Upon this came out the proclamation of the Kings Edict. This
noble-minded mother, distrusting the kings cruelty, and fearing the
mercilesnes of his Satelities or officers toward these noble, hopeful and
tender youths, feared not to say, that she would rather kill them with her own
hands, then deliver them. Poris amazed at her protestations, promises her
secretly to convey them to Athens, there by some of his faithful friends to be
kept safely. They take occasion of an yearly feast, which to the honor of
Aeneas was solemnized at Aenia, and thither they go, where having all day-long
assisted to the ceremonies* and public banquet: night being come, they convay
themselves iuto a ship, appointed for that purpose, in hope to save
themselves by Sea. But the wind fell out so contrary, that the next morning
they found themselves in view of the town, whence the night before they had
hoised sails, where they were pursued by the guarders and Soldiers of the
Port. Which Poris perceiving, labored to hasten and encourage the Mariners to
shift away: But Theoxena, enraged through love and revenge, remembering her
first resolution, prepared both weapons and poison, and presenting them to
their sight, thus she bespake them: Oh my dear children, take a good heart,
death is now the only mean of your defense and liberty, and shall be a just
cause unto the Gods for their holy justice. These bright-keene blades, these
full cups shall free you the passage unto it. Courage therefore, and thou my
eldest child, take this sword to die the strongest death. Who on the one side
having so undaunted a perswader, and on the other their enemies ready to cut
their throats, in furious manner ran all to that which came next to his
hand. And so all goared and panting were thrown into the Sea. Theoxena, proud
she had so gloriously provided for her childrens safety, lovingly embracing
her husband, said thus unto him; Oh my dear heart, let us follow these boys,
and together with them enjoy one self same grave, And so
close-claspt-together, they flung themselves in to the maine: So that the ship
was brought to shore again, but empty of her Masters. Tyrants to act two
things together, that is, to kill and cause their rage to be felt, have
employed the utmost of their skill, to devise lingering deaths. They will have
their enemies die, yet not so soon, but that they may have leisure to feel
their vengeance. Wherein they are in great perplexity: for if the torments be
over-violent, they are short; if lingering, not grievous enough. In this they
employ their wits and devises. Many examples whereof we see in antiquity; and
I wot not, whether wittingly we retain some spice of that barbari^me.
Whatsoever is beyond a simple death, seems to me mere cruelty. Our justice
cannot hope, that he whom the terror of death cannot dismay, be he to be hanged
or beheaded, can in any sort be troubled with the imagination of a languishing
fire, of a wheel, or of burning pincers. And I wot not, whether in that mean
time we bring him to despair: For, what plight can the soul of a man be in,
that is broken upon wheel, or after the old fashion, nailed upon a Cross,
and xxiiij. hours together expects his death? Josephus reports, that whilst
the Roman wars continued in Jury, passing by a place where certain Jews
had been crucified three days before, he knew three of his friends amongst
them, and having gotten leave to remoove then, two of them died, but the third
lived long after. Chalcondylas a man of credit, in the memories he left off
matters happened in his time and thereabouts, makes report of an extreme
torment, the Emperor Mechmed was often wont to put in practice, which was by
one only blow of a Cimitary or broad Persian Sword, to have men cut in two
parts, by the waste of the body, about the Diaphragma, which is a membrane
lying overthwart the lower part of the breast, separating the heart and lights
from the stomach, which caused them to die two deaths at once: and affirms
that both parts were seen full of life, to moove and stir long time after,
as if they had been in lingering torment. I do not think, they felt any great
torture in that mooving. The gastliest torments to look upon, are not alwai^s
the greatest to be endured: And I find that much more fiercely-horrible, which
other Historians write and which he used against certain Lords of Epirus, whom
fair and leasurely he caused to be fleade all over, disposed by so malicious a
dispensation, that their lives continued fifteen days in that languor and
anguish. And these two others; Croesus having caused a Gentleman to be
apprehended, greatly favored by Pantaleon his brother; led him into a fullers
or cloth-workers shop, where with Cards and Teazles belonging to that trade,
he made him to be carded, scraped, and teazled so long until he died of it.
George Sechell Ringleader of the Countrymen of Polina, who under the title of
a Croysada, wrought so many mischiefs, having been defeated in a battle by
the Vayvoda of Transylvania, and taken Prisoner, was for three days together
tied naked to a woden-horse, exposed to all manner of tottures, any man might
devise against him; during which time diverse other prisoners were kept fasting.
At last, he yet living, saw Lueat his dear brother, and for whose safety he
saved and entreated, forced to drink his blood, drawing all the envy and
hatred of his misdeedes upon himself. And twenty of his most favored
Captains were compelled to feed upon his flesh, which with their teeth they
must tear off, and swallow their morsels. The rest of his body and entrails,
he being dead, were boiled in a pan, and given for food to other of his
followers.

The eight and twentieth Chapter.
All things have their season.

THose who compare Cato the Censor, to C^^o the younger that killed himself,
compare two notable natures, and in form near one unto another. The first
exploited his, sundry ways, and excels in military exploites, and
utility of his public vacations. But the yongers virtue (besides that it were
blasphemy, in vigor to compare any unto him) was much more sincere and
unspotted. For, who will discharge the Censores of envy and ambition, that
durst counter-checke the honor of Scipio, in goodness and all other parts of
excellency, far greater and better than him or any other man living in his
age? Amongst other things reported of him, this is one, that in his eldest
years he gave himself, with so ernest a longing to learn the Greek tongue, as
if it had been to quench a long burning thirst: A thing in mine opinion not
very honorable in him. It is properly that which we call doting or to become a
child again. All things have their season, yea the good and all. And I may say
my Pator noster out of season. As T. Quintius Flaminius was accused, forasmuch
as being General of an Army, even in the hour of the conflict, he was seen
to withdraw himself apart, ammusing himself to pray God, although he gained
the battle.

Imponit finem sapiens and rebus honestis. Iuve. sat. 6. 344

A wiseman will use moderation,
Even in things of commendation.
Eudemonidas seeing Xenocrates very old, laboriously apply himself in his
Schoole-lectures said, when will this man know something, since he is yet
learning? And Philopoemen, to those who highly extolled King Ptolomey, because
he daily hardened his body to the exercise of arms: It is not (said he) a
matter commendable in a King of his age, in them to exercise himself, he
should now really and substancially employ them. Wise men say, that yoong-men
should make their preparations, and old men enjoy them. And the greatest vice
they note in us, is, that our desires do incessantly grow younger and younger.
We are ever beginning a new to live. Our studies and our desires should
sometimes have a feeling of age. We have a foot in the grave, and our
appetites and pursuites are but newborn.

Tusecanda marmora Hor car. lib. 2 od. 18. 17.

Locas sub ipsum funus, and sepulcri
Immemor, struis domos.
You, when you should be going to your grave,
Put Marble out to work, build houses brave,
Unmindful of the burial you must have.
The longest of my desseignes does not extend to a whole year; now I only
apply my self to make an end: I shake off all my new hopes and enterprises: I
bid my last farewell to all the places I leave, and daily dispossess my self
of what I have. Olim iam nec peris quicquam mihi, nec acquiritur: Plus superest
viatici quam viae. It is a good while since I neither loose Sen. epist. 77. p.
nor get any thing; I have more to bear my charges then way to go.

Vixi, and quem dederat cursum fortuna peregi. Virg. Aen. l. 4. 653.

I have lived, and the race have past,
Wherein my fortune had me plast.
To conclude, it is all the ease I find in my age, and that it suppresseth
many cares and desires in me, wherewith life is much disquieted. The care of
the worlds course, the care of riches, of greatness, of knowledge, of health
and of my self. This man learneth to speak, when he should rather learn to
hold his peace for ever. A man may always continue his study, but not
schooling. O fond-foolish for an old man to be ever an Abcedarian.

Diversos diversa iuuant, non omnibus annis. Catul. eleg. 1. 103.

Omnia convenient. --
Diverse delights to diverse, nor to all
Do all things at all years convenient fall.
If we must needs study let us study something sorteable to our condition,
that we may answer, as he did, who being demanded what his studies would stead
him in his decrepity, answered; that he might the better, and with more ease
leave this world. Such a study was young Catoes, in ^ore feeling his
approaching end, who lighting upon Platoes discourse of the souls immortality.
Not, as it may be supposed, that long before he had not stored himself with
all sorts of munition for such a dislodging. Of assurance, of constancy and
instruction, he had more then Plato has in all his writings: His Science, and
his courage, were in this respect above all Philosophy. He undertook this
occupation, not for the service of his death, but as one, who did not so much
as interrupt his sleep, in a deliberation of such consequence, whoever without
choice or change continued his wonted studies, and all other accustomed actions
of his life. The same night, wherein the Pretorship was refused him, he passed
over in play. That wherein he must die, he spent in reading. The loss of life
or office was all one to him.

The nine and twentieth Chapter.
Of Virtue.

I Find by experience, that there is great difference between the sudden
fits and fantasies of the soul, and a resolute disposition and constant
habitude: And I see, there is nothing but we may attain unto, yea, as some
say, to exceed Divinity it self; for so much as it is more to become
impassible of himself, then to be so by his original condition: And that one
may join a resolution and assurance of God to man's imbecilitie. But it is by
fits. And in the lives of those Heroes or noble worthies of former ages, are
often found wonderful parts, and which seem greatly to exceed our natural
forces: but they are prankes or parts consonant to truth: and it may hardly be
believed, man's soul may so be tainted and fed with those so high-raised
conditions, that unto it they may become as ordinary and natural. It happens
unto our selves, who are but abortiue broodes of men, sometimes to rowze our
soul far beyond her ordinary pitch, as stirred up by the discourses, or
provoked by the examples of others. But it is a kind of passion, which urges,
mooveth, agitateth and in some sort ravisheth her from out her self: for,
that gust overblowne, and storm past, we see, it will unawares unbend and
loose it self, if not to the lowest pitch, at least to be no more the same she
was, so that upon every slight occasion, for a bird lost, or for a glass
broken, we suffer our selves to be moved and distempered very near as one of
the vulgar sort. Fxcept order, moderation and constancy, I imagine all things
may be done by an indifferent and defective man. Therefore say wisemen, that
directly to judge of a man, his common actions must specially be controuled,
and he must every day be surprised in his worky-day clothes. Pyrrho, who framed
so pleasant a Science of ignorance, assaide (as all other true Philosophers) to
fashion his life answerable to his doctrine. And forasmuch as he maintained
the weakness of man's judgment, to be so extreme, as it could take nor
resolution, nor inclination: and would perpetually suspend it, ballancing,
beholding and receiving all things, as indifferent: It is reported of him, that
he ever keept himself after one fashion, look and countenance: If he had
begun a discourse, he would end it, though the party to whom he spoke, were
gone: And if he went any where, he would not go an inche out of his path, what
let or obstacle somever came in his way; being kept from falls, from carts or
other accidents by his friends. For, to fear or shun any thing, had been to
shocke his propositions, which remooved all election and certainty from his
very senses. He sometimes suffered himself to be cut and cautherized, with
such constancy, as he was never seen so much as to shrug, twitch, move or
wink with his eyes. It is something to bring the mind to these imaginations,
but more to join the effects unto it, yet is it not impossible. But to join
them with such preseverance and constancy, as to establish it for an ordinary
course; verily in these enterprises so far from common use, it is almost
incredible to be done. The reason is this, that he was sometimes found in his
house, bitterly scolding with his sister, for which being reproved, as he that
wronged his indifferency: What? said he, must this seely woman also serve as
a witness to my rules? Another time, being found to defend himself from a
dog: It is (replied he) very hard, altogether to dispoyle and shake off man:
And man must endeavor and enforce himself to resist and confront all things,
first by effects, but if the worst befall, by reason and by discourse. It is
now about seven or eight years since, that a country man, yet living, not
above two leagues from this place, having long before been much vexed and
troubled in mind, for his wives jealousy; one day coming home from his
work, and she after her accustomed manner welcomming and entertaining him with
brawling and scowlding, as one unable to endure her any longer, fell into such
a moodie rage, that suddenly with a Sickle, which he held in his hand, he
clean cut off those parts, that were the cause of her jealousy, and flung
them in her f^ce. And it is reported, that a young gentleman of France, amorous
and lusty, having by his perseverance at last mollified the heart of his fair
mistress, desperate, because coming to the point of his so long sued-for
business, he found himself unable and unprepared, and that

-- non viriliter T^b. l, ad Pri ap. v 4.

Iners senil^ penis extulerat caput.
as soon as he came home, he deprived himself of it: and sent it as a cruel
and bloody sacrifice for the expiation of his offense. Had he done it by
discourse or for religions sake, as the priests of Cybele were wont to do,
what might we not say of so haughty an enterprise? Not long since at Bragerac,
five leagues-distance from my house, up the river of Dordaigne, a woman, having
the evening before been grievously tormented, and sore beaten by her husband;
froward and skittish by complexion, determined, though it should cost her the
price of her life, by one mean or other, to escape his rudeness, and rising
the next morning, went as she was accustomed to visit her neighbors to whom
in some sort the recommended the state of her affairs, than taking a sister of
hirs by the hand, led her along until she came upon the bridge that
crosses the River, and having bid her heartily farewell; as in the way of sport
without showing any manner of change or alteration, headlong threw hirselfe
down into the River, where she perished. And which is more to be noted in her,
is, that this her determination ripened a whole night in her head. But the
Indian Wives, may not here be forgotten as worthy the noting: Whose custom is,
that Husbands have many Wives and for her that is dearest unto her Husband, to
kill hirselfe after him: Every one in the whole course of her life, endevoreth
to obtain this privilege and advantage over al her fellow-wives: And in the
good offices and duties they show their hubands, respect no other recompense,
than to be preferred to accompany them in death.

Vbi mortifero iacta est fax vltima laecto, Propert. lib. 3. el. 12. 17.

-- Vxorum fusis, stat pia turba comis:
Et certamen habent Laethi, quae viva sequatur
-- Coniugium, pudor est non licuisse mori:
Ardent victrices, and flammae pectora praebent,
-- Imponunt que suis or a perust a viris.
When for his deathbed last flame is appli'de
With loose hairs many kind wives stand be side,
And strive for death, which alive may be next
Her wedlock, who may not is shamed and vex't
They that overcome, are burned, to flames give way,
Their bodies burnt on their burnt husbands lay.
A late Writer affirms, that himself has seen this custom highly reputed
in the new discovered East Indiaes, where not only the wives are buried with
their husbands, but also such slaves as he has enjoyed; which is done after
this manner. The husband being deceased, the widow may, if she will (but few
do it) request two or three Months space to dispose of her business. The day
come, adorned as a sumptuous bride, she mounteth on horseback, and with a
cheerful countenance, tell eth every body, she is going to lie with her bride
groom, holding in her left hand a looking-glass, and an arrow in the right.
Thus having a while rid up and down in great pomp and magnificence,
accompanied with her friends and kins-men, and much concourse of people, in
feast and jolitie, she is brought unto a public place, purposely appointed for
such spectacles. Which is a large open place, in the midst whereof is a pit
or grave full of Wood, and near unto it an vpraised scaffold, with four or
five steps to ascend, upon which she is brought, and served with a stately
and sumptuous banquet, Which ended, she begins to dance and sing, and when
she thinks good commands the fire to be kindled. That done, she comes down
again, and taking the nearest of her Husbands kindred by the hand, they go
together to the nex River, where she strippes her self all naked, and
distributeth her jewels and clothes among her friends, then plungeth herself
in the Water, as if she meant to wash away her sins; then coming out she
enwrappeth herself in a yellow piece of linen cloth, about the length of
fourteen yards; And giving her hand again unto her Husbands Kins-man, they
return unto the Mount, where she speaks unto the people, to whom (if she have
any) she recommendeth her Children. Between the Pit and Mount, there is
commonly a Curtain drawn, lest the sight of that burning furnace might dismay
them: Which many, to show the greater courage, will not have it drawn. Her
speech ended, a Woman presents her with a Vessel full of Oil, therewith to
anoint her head and body, which done, she casts the rest into the fire, and
there withal suddenly flings herself into it: Which is no sooner done, but
the people cast great store of Faggo^s and Billets upon her, lest she should
languish overlong: and all their joy is converted into grief and sorrow. If
they be persons of mean quality, the dead man's body is carried to the place
where they intend to bury him, and there he is placed sitting; his Widow
kneeling before him with her arms close about his middle, and so keeps
hirselfe, whilst a Wall is erected up about them both, which raised to the
height of her shoulders, some of her kindred taking her by the head behind,
wrings her neck about; and having given the last gasp, the wall is immediately
made up close over their heads, wherein they remain buried. In the same
Country, there was something like to this in their Gymnosophists, or wisemen,
who not by meanaces-or compulsions of others, nor by the violence of a sudden
humor but by the express and voluntary profession of their rule, their manner
was according as they attained unto a certain age, or saw themselves threatened
by some sickness, to cause a pile of Wood to be erected, and upon it*a rich
bed; and having cheerfully feasted their friends and acquaintance, with such
a resolution laid themselves down in that bed, that fire set unto it, they
were never seen to stir nor hand nor foot? and thus died one of them, named
Calanus, in the presence of all the army of Alexander the Great. And who had
not so made himself away, was neither esteemed holy nor absolutely happy
amongst them? sending his soul purged and purified by fire, after it had
consumed whatsoever was mortal and iterrestriall in it. This constant
premeditation of all the life, is that which makes the wonder. Amongst our
other disputation, that of Fatum, has much entermedled it self: and to join
future things, and our will it self unto a certain unavoidable necessity, we
yet stand upon that argument of former times: since God foreseeth all things
must thus happen as undoubtedly he does: They must then necessarily happen so.
To which our Clarks and Masters answer, that to see any thing come to pass,
as we do, and likewise God (for he being present in full essence, rather
feeth than foreseeth) is not to force the same to happen: yea we see, because
things come to pass, but things happen not because we see. The happening makes
the science or knowledge, and not knowledge the happening. What we see come to
pass, happens; but it might come to pass otherwise. And God in the eternal
register of the causes of happenings, which he has in his prescience, has
also those, which are called casual; and the voluntary, which depend of the
liberty, he has given unto our free will, and knows we shall fail, because
our will shall have been to fail. I have seen diverse encourage their
troops with this fatal necessity: For, if our hour be tied unto a certain
point neither the musket-shottes of our enemies, nor our courage, nor our
flight and cowardice, can either advance or recoyle the same.

This may well be said, but seek you who shall effect it: And if it be so,
that a strong and lively faith, does likewise draw action after it: truly this
faith (wherewith we so much fill our mouths) is marvelous light in our times:
except the contempt it has of works, make her disdain their company. So it
is, that to the same purpose, the Lord of Ioinville, as credible a witness as
any other, tells us of the Bedoins, a nation entermingled with the Saracine,
with whom our King Saint Jews had to deal in the holy land, who so
confidently believed in their religion, the days of every one to be prefixed
and numbered from all eternity, by an inevitable preordinance, that they went
all bare and naked to the wars, except a Turkish Glaive in their hand, and
their body covered but with a white linen cloth: And for the the bitterest
curse, if they chanced to fall out one with another, they had ever in their
mouth: Cursed be thou, as he that armeth himself for fear of death. Here is
another manner of trial or a belief or faith, then ours, In this rank may
likewise be placed that which those two religious men of Florence, not long
since gave unto their countrymen. Being in some controversy between
themselves about certain points of learning; they accorded to go both into
the fire, in the presence of all the people, and in the open market place, each
one for the verifying of his opinion; and all preparations were ready made, an
execution to be performed, but that by an unexpected accident it was
interrupted. A young Turkish Lord, having achieved a notable piece of service
in arms, and with his own person, in full view of the two battles between
Ammurath and Huniades ready to be joined together, being demanded by Ammurath
his Prince, who (being so young and unexperienced, for is was the first war o^
service he had seen before) had replenished him with so generous and undaunted
vigor of courage? answered, that a Hare had been his sovereign master and
only teacher of valor; and thus began his speech. Being one day a hunting, I
found a Hare sitting in her form, and although I had a brace of excellent good
gray-houndes with me in a slip or leash, I thought it good, because I would be
sure of my game to use my bow; for she was a very fair mark I began to
shoot^ my arrows at her, which I did to the number of forty (for in my quiver
were just so many) yet could I never hurt her, no not so much as start her:
After all this, I let slip my gray-hounds, who could do no more then I had
done: by which I learnt, that she had been sheltred and defended by her
destiny; and that no glaives nor arrows never hit, but by the permission of
our fatalitie, which it lies not in us to avoid or advance. This story may
serve to make us perceive by the way, how flexible our reason is to all sorts
of Objects. A notable man, great in years, in name, in dignity and in
learning, vaunted himself unto me, that he was induced to a certain most
important change of his religion, by a strange and fantastical incitation: and
in all things so il-concluding that I deemed the same stronger and more
forcible, being taken contrary. He termed it a miracle, and so did I, but in a
different sense. Their historians say, that persuasion having popularly been
scattered amongst the Turks, of the fatal and inflexible prescription of
their days, does apparently aid to warrant and emboulden them in dangers. And
I know a great Prince, who happily thrives by it, be it he believe it, or take
it for an excuse to hazard himself extraordinarily; provided fortune be not
soon weary to favor and back him. There has not happened in our memory a
more admirable effect of resolution, than of those two villains that conspired
the death of the Prince of Orange: It is strange how, the last, who performed
the same could be induced or encouraged to undergo such an enterprise, wherein
his fellow (though he had resolutely attempted it, and had all might be
required for such an action) had so ill success, and miscarried. And in these
steps, and with the same weapons, to go and undertake a Lord, armed with so
late an instruction of distrust; mighty in friends and followers; puissant of
bodily strength; in his own hall; amiddest his servants and guarde; and in a
City wholly at his devotion. It must of force be said, that in perfourming it,
he employed a well-directed and resolute hand, and a dreadlesse courage moved
by a vigorous passion. A Poynard is more sure to wound a man, which for so much
as it requires more motion and vigor of the arm, than a pistole, it is stroke
is more subject to be hindered or avoided. That the first ran not to an
assured death, I make no great doubt, for the hopes wherewith he might be
entertained could not harbor in a well settled and resolute mind; and the
conduct of his exploit, shows, he wanted no more that, then courage. The
motions of so forcible a persuasion may be diverse; for, our fantasy disposes
of her self and of us as she pleases. The execution committed near Orleans
had no coherence with this, wherein was more hazard, then vigor; the blow was
not mortal, had not fortune made it so: and the enterprise to shoot on
horseback and farre-off, and to one who moved still according to the motion
of his horse was the attempt of a man, that rather loved to miss of his
effect, then fail to save himself. What followed did manifestly show it. For,
he was so amazed and drunken with the thought of so haughty an execution, as he
lost all his senses, both to work his escape, and direct his tongue in his
answers. What needed he have done more, then recover his friends by crossing
of a river; It is a mean, wherein I have cast my self in far less dangers,
and which I think of small hazard, how broad soever, always provided your
horse find an easy entrance, and on the further side you foresee an easy and
shallow landing, according to the course of the stream of the water. The
second, when the horrible sentence was pronounced against him, answered
stowtly, I was prepared for it, and I shall amaze you with my patience. The
Assassines, a nation depending of Phaenicia, are esteemed among the Mahometists
of a sovereign devotion and purity of manners; they hold, that the readiest
and shortest way to gain Paradise, is to kill some one of a contrary religion:
therefore has it often been seen, that one or two in their bare doublets
have undertaken to assault mighty enemies, with the price of an assured death,
and without any care of their own danger. And thus was our Earl Raymond of
Tripoli murdered or assassinated (this word is borrowed from their name) in
the midst of his City, during the time of our wars in the holy land: And
likewise Conrade Marquis of Montferrato, his murderers being brought to their
torture, were seen to swel with pride, that they had performed so worthy an
exploit.

The thirtieth Chapter.
Of a monstrous Child,

THis discourse shall pass single, for I leave it to Physicians to treat of.
I saw two days since a child, whom two men and a nurce (which named
themselves to be his father, his Uncle, and his Aunt) carried about with
intent to get some money with the sight of him, by reason of his strangenes. In
all the rest, he was as other children are, He stood upon his feet, went and
pratled in a manner as all others of his age: He would never take nourishment,
but by his nurces breast; and what in my presence was offered to be put in his
mouth, he chewed a little, and put it all out again. His puling differed
somewhat from others: He was just fourteen months old. Under his paps he was
fastened and joined to an other child, but had no head, and who had the
conduite of his back stopped, the rest whole. One of his arms was shorter
then the other, and was by accident broken at their birth. They were joined
face to face, and as if a h^^e child would embrace another somewhat bigger.
The joining and space whereat they were closed together, was but four inches
b^oade, or thereabouts; insuch sort that if you thrust up the imperfect child,
you might see under the others navill: And the seame was between the paps and
his navill. The navill of the imperfect one could not be seen but all the rest
of his belly ^^ght, Thus, what of the imperfect one was not joined, as arms
buttocks, thighs and legs did hang and shake upon the other, whose length
reached to the middle-leg of the other perfect. His Nurce told me, he made
water by both privities. The members of the little one were nourished, living*
and in the same state as the others, except only, they were less and thinner.
This double body, and these different members, having reference to one only
head, might serve for a favorable prognostieation to our King, to maintain the
factions and differing parties of this our kingdom under an unity of the
laws. But, least the success should prove it contrary, it is not amiss Cic.
divin. lib. 2.
to let him run his course: For in things already past their need no
divination. Vt quum factasunt, tum ad coniecturam aliqua inter pretatione
revocantur: So as when they are done, they then by some construction should be
revoked to conjecture: As it is reported of Epimenides, who ever divined
backward, I come now from seeing of a shepherd at Medoc, of thirty years of
age, or thereabouts, who had no sign at all of genitorie parts: But where they
should be, are three little holes, by which his water does continually trill
from him. This poor man has a beard, and desires still to be fumbling of
women. Those which we call monsters are not so with God, who ^^ the immensitie
of his work fecth the infinity of form therein contained. And it may be
thought, that any figure does amaze us, has relation unto some other figure of
the same kind, although unknown unto man. From out his all-seeing wisdom
proceeds nothing but good, common regular and orderly; but we neither see the
sorting, nor conceive the relation. Quod crebro videt, non miratur, etiam si,
our fiat nescit. Quod ante non videt, id, si evenerit, ostentum Cic. divin.
lib. 2.
esse censet. That which he often sees, he does not wonder at, though he know
not why it is done; But if that happen, which he never saw before, he thinks
it some portentuous wonder. We call that against nature, which comes against
custom: There is nothing, whatsoever it be, that is not according to her. Let
therefore this universal and natural reason, chase from us the error, and
expel the astonishment, which noveltie breeds, and strangenes causes in us.

The one and thirtieth Chapter.
Of anger and choler.

PLutarke is every where admirable, but especially where he judges of humane
actions. The notable things he reports, may be perceived in the comparison of
Lycurgus and Numa, speaking of the great simplicity we commit, in leaving young
children under the government and charge of their fathers and parents. Most of
our policies, or Commonwealths, says Aristotle (as the Cyclopes were wont)
commit the conduct of their wives, and charge of their children, to all men,
according to their foolish humor or indiscreete fantazies. And wel-nigh, none
but the Lacedemonian and Cretensian, have resigned the discipline of children
to the laws. Who sees not, that in an estate all things depend of nurture and
education? And all the while, without discretion, it is wholly left to the
parents mercy, how foolish and wicked soever they be. Amongst other things,
how often (walking through our streets) have I desired to have a play or
comedy made in revenge of young boys, which I saw thumpt, misused* and well
nigh murdered by some hare-brained, moodie, and through choller-raging Fathers
and Mothers, from out whose eyes a man might see sparkles of rage to startle,

-- rabie iecur incendente feruntur I^^ sat. 6. 548

Praecipites, vt saxa iugis abrupta, quibus mons
Subtrahitur, cli^oque latus pendente recedit:
They headlong run with rage, which does inflame their livers
Like stones that broken fall from mountain tops in shivers,
The hill withdrawes, and they are rould
From hanging cliffe which leaves their hold.
(And according to Hypocrates, the most dangerous infirmities, are those which
disfigure the face) and with a loud thundering voice often to follow children
that came but lately from nurce; Which after prove lame, maimed, blockish and
dull-pated with blows: And yet our laws make no accoumpt of it, as if these
spraines, and vnjoyntings of lims, or these maimes were no members of our
Commonwealth.

Gratum est quod patriae civem populoque dedisti,
Si facis vt patriae sit, idoneus vtilis agris, I^^. sat. 14. 70.

Vtilis and bellorum and pacis rebus agendis.
That you to th'countrie give a man, it is acceptable,
If for the country fit you make him, for field's able,
Of peace and war for all achievements profitable.
There is no passion so much transports the sincerity of judgment, as does
anger. No man would make conscience to punish that Judge by death; who in rage
or choler had condemned an offender* And why should fathers be allowed to
beat, or schoolemaesters be suffered to whip children, or to punish them being
angry? It is no longer correction, but revenge. Punishment ^^ unto children as
phisike; and would any man endure a physician, that were angry and wroth
against his patient? Our selves (did we well) during the time of our anger,
should never lay hands one our servants. So long as our pulse panted, and we
feel any concitation, so long remit we the party: And things will seem far
otherwise unto us, if we once come to our senses again, and shall better
bethink us. Then is it passion that commandes. It is passion that speaks and
not we. Athwart it, faults seem much greater unto us, as bodies do athwart a
foggie mist. Whosoever is hungry, uses meat, but who so will use chastisement,
should never hunger nor thirst after it. Moreover, corrections given with
discretion and moderation, are more gently received, and with more good to him
that receives them. Otherwise he shall never think to have been justly
condemned, by a man who is transported by rage and choler, and for his
justification alleges the extraordinary motions of his master, the
inflammation of his face, his unwonted oaths, his chafing, his vnquiernesse and
hi^ ra^h precipitation.

Ora tument ira, nigrescunt sanguine venae,
Lumina Gorgoneo saeuius igne micant. Ovid. art. Am. lib. 3. 53.

The face with anger swelles, the veins grow black with blood,
The eyes more fiercely shine then Gorgons, fiery mood.
Suetonius writes, that Caius Rabirius, having by Caesar been condemned,
nothing, did him so much good toward the people (to whom he appealed) to make
him obtain his suit, as the sharpnes and over boldness which Caesar had declared
in that judgment. Saying is one thing, and doing another. A man must consider
the sermon apart and the preacher several. Those have made themselves good
sport, who in our days have gone about to check the verity of our Church, by
the ministers vice: She fetches her testimony from elsewhere. It is a foolish
manner of arguing, and which would soon reduce all things to a confusion. An
honest man may sometimes have false opinions, and a wicked man may preach
truth: Yea such a one as believes it not. Verily, it is a pleasing harmony,
when doing and saying go together. And I will not deny, but saying, when
deeds follow, is of more efficacy and authority: As said Eudamidas, when he
heard a Philosopher discourse of war: These speeches are good, but he that
speaks them, is not to be believed, For his ears were never accustomed to
hear the clang of trumpets, nor rattling of drums. And Cleomenes hearing a
Rethoritian speak of valor, burst out into an extreme laughter: Whereat the
other being offended, he said unto him: I would do as much if it were a
Swallowe should speak of it, but were he an Eagle, I should gladly hear him.
Me seems I perceive in ancient men's writings, that he who speaks what he
thinks, touches nearer the quick, then he who counterfaits. Hear Cicero
speak of the love of liberty; then listen to Brutus, their very words will
tell you and sound in your ear, the latter was a man raedie to purchase it
with the price of his life. Let Cicero, that father of eloquence treat of the
contempt of death, and let Seneca discourse of the same; the first draws it-on
languishing, and you shall plainly perceive, he would feign resolve you of a
thing, whereof he is not yet resolved himself. He gives you no heart, for
himself has none: Whereas the other does rowze, animate and inflame you. I
never look upon an Author, be they such as write of virtue and of actions, but
I curiously endevor to find out what he was himself. For, the Ephori of
Sparta, hearing a dissolute liver propose a very beneficial advise unto the
people, commanded him to hold his peace, and desired an honest man to assume
the invention of it unto himself and to propound it. Plutarkes compositions,
if they be well favored, do plainly manifest the same unto us: And I am
persuaded I know him inwardly: Yet would I be glad, we had some memories of
his own life: And by the way I am fallen into this discourse, by reason of the
thanks I owe unto Aulus Gellius, in that he has left us written this story
of his manners, which fitteth my subject of anger. A slave of his, who was a
lewd and vicious man, but yet whose ears were somewhat fed with
Philosophical documents, having for some faults by him committed, by the
commandment of Plutarke his master, been stripped naked, whilst another
servant of his whipped him, grombled in the beginning, that he was whipped
without reason, and had done nothing: But in the end, mainly crying out, he
fell to railing and wronging his master, vpbraiding him, that he was not a true
Philosopher, as he vanted himself to be, and how he had often heard him say,
that, it was an unseemly thing in a man to be angry. And that he had made a
book of it: And now all plonged in rage, and engulfed in choler to cause him
so cruelly to be beaten, was clean contrary to his own writing. To whom
Plutarke with an unaltered, and milde-settled countenance, said thus unto him.
What? Thou rascal, whereby do thou judge I am now angry? Does my
countenance, does my voice, does my color, or does my speech give thee any
testimony, that I am either moved or chollerike? Me seems, mine eyes are
not staringly-wilde, nor my face troubled, nor my voice frightfull or
distempered: Do I wax read? Do I foame at the mouth? Does any word escape
me I may repent heareafter? Do I startle and quake? Do I rage and ruffle with
anger? For, to tell thee true, these are the right signs of choler and tokens
of anger. Then turning to the party that whipped him, continue still thy work,
quoth he whilst this fellow and I dispute of the matter. This is the report of
Gellius. Architas Tarentinus returning from a war, where he had been Captain
general, found his house all out of order, husbandry all spoiled, and by the
ill government of his Baily, his ground all waste and ^^manured; and having
called for him, said thus; Away bad man, for if I were not angry, I would have
the whipped for this. Plato likewise, being vexed and angry with one of his
slaves, commanded Speusippus to punish him, excusing himself, that now being
angry he would not lay hands upon him. Charillus the Lacedemonian, to on
Ilelot or country hind behaved himself over insolently and audaciously
toward him; By the Gods (said he) If I were not now angry, I would presently
make thee die. It is a passion which pleases and flattereth it self. How many
times being moved by any false suggestion, if at that iustant we be presented
with any lawful defense or true excuse, do we fall into rage against truth
and innocence it self? Touching this purpose, I have retained a wonderful
example of antiquity. Piso in diverse other respects, a man of notable virtue,
being angry, and chafing with one of his Soldiers, who returning from forage
or boot-haling, could not give him an accoumpt where he had left a
fellow-Souldier of his, and thereupon concluding he had killed or made him
away, forthwith condemned him to be hanged. And being upon the gallows ready
to die; behold his companion, who had stragled abroad, coming home, whereat
all the army rejoiced very much, and after many embracings and signs of joy
between the two soldiers, the hangman brought both unto Piso; all the
company hoping, it would be a great pleasure unto him; but it fell out clean
contrary* for through shame and spite his wrath still burning was redoubled,
and with a sly devise his passion instantly presented to his mind, he made
three guilty, for so much as one of them was found innocent; and caused them all
three to be dispat^h^d. The first Soldier because he was aliedie condemned;
the second, which had strag^ed abroad, by reason he was the cause of his
fellows death; and the hangman, for that he had not fulfilled his Generalles
commandment. Those who have to deal with froward and skittish women have no
doubt seen what rage they will fall into, if when they are most angry and
cha^ing, a man be silent and patient, and disdain to foster their anger and
wrath, Celius the Orator was by nature exceeding fretfull and cholerike. To one
who was with him at supper, a man of a mild and gentle conversation, and who
because he would not move him, seemed to approve what ever he said, and yield
to him in every thing; as unable to endure his peevishnes should so pass
without some nourishment, burst out into a rage, and said unto him. For the
love of God deny me something, that we may be two. So women are never angry,
but to the end a man should again be angry with them, therein imitating the
laws of Love. Phocion to a man who troubled his discourse with brawling and
skolding at him, in most injurious manner, did nothing else but hold his peace
and given him what leisure he would to vent his choler; which done, without
taking any notice of it, began his discourse again where he had left it off,
There is no reply so sharp as such silent contempt. Of the most chollerike and
teastie man of France (which is ever an imperfection, but more excusable in a
military man; for it must needs be granted, there are in that profession some
men who cannot well avoyde it) I ever say, he is the patientest man I know to
bridle his choler; it mooveth and trannsporteth him with such fury and
violence,

-- magno veluti cum flamma sonore Virg. Ae^. lib. 462.

Virgea suggeritur cost is vndantis aheni,
Exultantque aestu latices, furit in^us aquai
Fumidus atque al^e spumis exuberat amnis,
Nec iam se capit vnda, volat vapor ater ad auras,
As when a fago^ flame with hurring sounds
Under the ribs of boiling cauldron lies,
The water swelles with heat beyond the bounds,
Whence steeming streams raging and foming rise,
Water out-runn's it self, black vapors fly to skies.
that he must cruelly enforce himself to moderate the same. And for my part,
I know noe passion I were able to ^mother with such temper and abide with such
resolution. I would not set wisdom at so high a rate. I respect not so much
what he does, as how much it costs him not to do worse. Another boasted in my
presence, of his behauiours order and mildness, which in truth is singular: I
told him, that indeed it was much, namely in men of so eminent quality, as
himself was, on whom all eyes are fixed, always to show himself in a good
temper: but that the chiefest point consisted in providing inwardly and for
himself; and that in mine opinion, it was noe discreet part inwardly to
fret: which, to maintain that mark and formal outward appearance, I feared
he did. Choler is incorporated by concealing and smothering the same, as
Diogenes said to Demosthenes, who fearing to be seen in a Tavern, withdrew
himself into the same: The more thou recoylest back, the further thou go
into it. I would rather persuade a man, though somewhat out of season, to give
his boy a whirret on the ea^e, then to dissemble this wise, stern or severe
countenance, to vex and fret his mind. And I would rather make show of my
passions, then smother them to my cost: which being vented and expressed, become
more languishing and weak: Better it is to let it is point work outwardly,
then bend it against our selves. Omnia vitia in aperto leviora Sen. episti 56.
sunt: and tunc perniciosissimae, quum simulata sanitate subsidunt. All vices
are then less perilous when they lie open to be seen, but then most
pernicious, when they lurk under counterfeited soundness. I ever warn those
of my household, who by their offices-authoritie may sometimes have occasion to
be angry, first to husband their anger; then not to employ it upon every slight
cause; for that empeacheth the effect and worth of it. Rash and ordinary
brawling is converted to a custom, and that is the reason each man contemnes
it: That which you employ against a servant for any theeving, is not percei^ed,
because it is the same he has sundry times s^ene you use against him, if he
have not washed a glass well o^ misplaced a stool. Secondly, that they be not
angry in vain, but ever have regard their ch^ding come to his ears with whom
they are offended: for, commonly some will brawle before he come in their
presence, and chide a good while after he is gone,

and secum petulans amentia ce^ tat. Claud. in (...) 1. 48.

Madness makes with it self a fray,
Which fondly does the wanton play.
and wreake their anger against his shadow, and make the storm fall where no
man is either chastised or interressed, but with the rumor of their voice, and
sometimes with such as cannot do withal. I likewise blame those who being
angry, will brave and mutime when the party with whom they are offended is
not by. These Rodomantados must be employed on such as fear them.

Mugitus veluti cum prima in praelia taurus Vir Aen. l. 12. 1. 03.

Terrificos ^iet, atque ir asci in cornua tentat,
Arborts obnixus trunco, ventosque lac^ssit
Ictibus, and sparsa ad pugnam proludit arena.
As when a furious Bull to his first combat mooves
His terror-breeding lowes, his horn to anger prooves,
Striving against a trees trunk, and the wind with strokes,
His preface made to fight with sca^tered sand, provokes.
When I chance to be angry, it is in the earnest^st manner that may be, but yet
as briefly and as secretly, as is possible. I loose my self in hastiness and
violence, but not in trouble: So that, let me spend all manner of injurious
words at random and without all heed, and never respect to place my points
pertinently, and where they may do most hurt: For commonly I employ nothing
but my tongue. My boys escape better cheap in great matters, then in small
trifles. Slight occasions surprise me, and the michiefe is, that after you are
once fallen into the pit, it is no matter who thrusts you in, you never cease
till you come to the bottom. The fall presses, hasteneth, mooveth and
furthereth it self. In great occasions I am pleased, that they are so just.
that every body expects a reasonable anger to ensue. I glorify my self to
deceive their expectation. Against these I bandy and prepare my self; they
make me summon up my wits, and threaten to carry me very far, if I would
follow them. I easily keep my self from falling into them, and if I stay for
them, I am strong enough to reject the impulsion of this passion, what violent
cause soever it has. But if it seize upon and once preoccupate me, what vain
cause soever it has, it does clean transport me: I condition thus with those
that may contest with me, when you perceve me to be first angry, be it right or
wrong, let me hold-on my course, I will do the like to you, when ever it shall
come to my lot. The rage is not engendered but by the concurrencie of cholers,
which are easily produced one of another, and are not borne at one instant. Let
us allow every man his course, so shall we ever be in peace. Oh profitable
prescription, but of an hard execution! I shall some time seem to be angry for
the order and direction of my house, without any just emotion. Accoding as my
age yields my humors more sharp or peevish, so do I endeavor to oppose my
self against them, and if I can I will hereafter enforce my self to be less
froward and not so teasty. As I shall have more excuse and inclination to be
so; although I have heretofore been in their number that are least. A word
more to conclude this Chapter: Aristotle says, Choler does sometimes serve as
arms unto Virtue and Valor. It is very likely: notwithstanding such as
gainesay him, answer pleasantly, it is a weapon of a new fashion and strange
use: For we moove other weapons, but this mooveth us: our hand does not guide
it, but it directs our hand; it holds us, and we hold not it.

The two and thirtieth Chapter.
A defense of Seneca and Plutarke.

THe familiarity I have with these two men, and the aid they afford me in my
old age, and my Book merely framed of their spoils, binds me to wed and
maintain their honor. As for Seneca, amongst a thousand petty-Pamphlets,
those of the pretended reformed religion have published for the defense of
their cause, which now and then proceed from a good hand, and which, pity it
is, it should not be employed in more serious and better subjects: I have
heretofore seen one, who to prolong and fill up the similitude, he would
find between the government of our unfortunate late king Charles the ninth
and that of Nero, compares the whilom lord Cardinal of Loren^ unto Seneca;
their fortunes to have been both chief men in the government of their
Princes, and therewithal their manners, their conditions and their demeanours:
wherein (in mine opinion) he does the said lord Cardinal great honor: for,
although I be one of those that highly respect his spirit, his worth, his
eloquence, his zeal toward his religion and the service of his King; and his
good fortune to have been borne in an age, wherein he was so new, so rare,
and there withal so necessary for the commonwealth, to have a Cleargie-man
of such dignity and nobility, sufficient and capable of so weighty a charge:
yet to confess the truth, I esteem not his capacity such, nor his virtue so
exquisitely unspotted, nor so entire or constant, as that of Seneca. Now this
Book whereof I speak, to come to his intention, makes a most injurious
description of Seneca, having borrowed his reproaches from Dion the Historian,
to whose testimony I give no credit at all: For besides, he is inconstant, as
one who after he has called Seneca exceeding wise, and shortly after termed
him a mortal enemy to Neroes vices, in other places makes him covetous, given
to usury, ambitious base-minded, voluptuous and under false pretenses, and
fained shows, a counterfeit Philosopher; his virtue appears so lively, and
wisdom so vigorous in his writings; and the defense of these imputations is
so manifest, as well of his riches, as of his excessive expenses, that I
believe no witness to the contrary. Moreover, there is great reason we
should rather give credit to Roman Historians in such things, then to
Graecians and strangers, whereas Tacitus and others speak very honorably of
his life and death, and in all other circumstance declare him to have been a
most excellent and rarely-vertuous man. I will allege noe other reproach
against Dions judgment, then this, which is unavoidable: that is, his
understanding of the Roman affairs, is so weak and ill advised, as he dares
defend and maintain Julius Caesar's cause against Pompey, and bl^sheth not to
justify Antonius against Cicero. But let us come to Plutarke; John Bodine is a
good modern Author* and endowed with much more judgment then the
common-rabble of Scriblers and blur-papers which now adays stuff Stationers
shops, and who deserves to be judged, considered and had in more then
ordinary esteem. Nevertheless I find him somewhat malapert and bold in that
passage of his Method of History, when he accuses Plutarke, not only of
ignorance (wherein I would have let him say his pleasure, for that is not
within my element) but also that he often writes, things, altogether
incredible and merely fabulous (these are his very words) If he had simply
said things otherwise than they are, it had been no great reprehension: for,
what we have not seen, we receive from others and upon trust: And I see him
sometime, wittingly and in good earnest report one and same story diversely: As,
the judgemenns of three best captains that ever were, spoken by Hanibal, is
otherwise in Flaminius his life, and otherwise in Pyrrhus. But to tax him, to
have taken incredible and impossible things for ready payment, is to accuse the
more judicious author of the World of want of judgment. And see here his
example: As (says he) when he reports, that a Child of Lacedemon suffered all
his belly and guts to be torn out by a Cubbe or young Fox, which he had
stolen. and kept close under his garment, rather than he would discover his
theft. First, I find this example ill chosen: Forasmuch as it is very heard
to limit the powers of the soules-faculties, whereas of corporal forces, we
have more law to limite and know them: And therefore, had I been to write of
such a subject I would rather have made choice of an example of this second
kind. And some there be less credible. As amongst others, that which he
reports of Pyrrhus, who being fore wounded, gave so great a blow with a sword
unto one of his enemies, armed at all assayes, and with all pieces, as he cleft
him from the Crown of the head down to the groine, so that the body fell in
two pieces. In which example I find no great wonder, nor do I admit of his
excuse, wherewith he cloaketh Plutarke, to have added this Word, (as it is
said) to forewarne us, and restrain our belief. For, if it be not in things
received by authority and reverence of antiquity or religion, neither would
himself have received, nor proposed to us* to believe things in themselves
incredible: And that (as it is said) he does not here set down this
phrase to that purpose, may easily be perceived, by what himself in other
places tells us upon the subject of the Lacedemonian Childrens patience, of
examples happened in his time, much harder to be persuaded: As that which
Cicero has also witnessed before him because, (as he says) he had been there
himself: That even in their times there were Children found prepared to endure
all manner of patience, whereof they made trial before Dianaes Altar, and
which suffered themselves to be whipped, till the blood trilled down all
parts of their body, not only without crying, but also without sobbing: and
some who voluntarily suffered themselves to be ^courged to death. And what
Plutarke also reports, and a hundredth other witnesses aver, that assisting
at a sacrifice, a burning coal happened to fall into the sleeve of a
Lacedemonian child, as he was busy at incensing, suffered his arm to burn
so long, until the smell of his burnt flesh came to all the bystanders. There
was nothing according to their custom, so much called their reputation in
question, and for which they endured more blame and shame, than to be surprised
stealing. I am so well instructed of those men's greatness of courage, that
this report, does not only not seem incredible to me, as to Bodine, but I
do not so much as deem it rare, or suppose it strange: The Spartane story is
full of thousands of much more rare and cruel examples; then according to this
rate, it contains nothing but miracle. Concerning this point of stealing,
Marcellinus reports, that whilst he lived, there could never be found any
kind of torment that might in any sort compel the Egyptians surprised
filching (which was much used amongst them) to confess and tell but their
names. A Spanish Peasant being laid upon the rack, about the accomplices of the
murder of the Praetor Lucius Piso, in the midst of his torments cried out, his
friends should not stir, but with all security assist him, and that it was not
in the power of any grief or pain to wrest one word of confession from him:
and the first day nothing else could possibly be drawn from him: The next
morrow as he was led toward the rack, to be tormented a new, he by strong
violence freed himself from out his keepers hands, and so furiously ran with
his head against a Wall, that he burst his brains out, and presently fell
down dead. Epicharis, having glutted and wearied the moody cruelty of Neroes
Satellites or officers, and stoutly endured their fire, their beatings, and
their engines a whole day long, without any one voice, or word of revealing her
conspiracy, and the next day after, being again brought to the torture, with
her limbs bruzed and broken, convayed the lace or string of her Gown over one
of the pillars of the Chair wherein she sat, with a sliding knot in it, into
which suddenly thrusting her head, she strangled herself with the weight of
her body: Having the courage to dye so, and steal from the first torments;
seems she not purposely to have lent her life to the trial of her patience
of the precedent day, only to mock that Tyrant, and encorage others to attempt
the like enterprise against him? And he that shall enquire of our Argolettiers
or Free-booters, what experiences they have had in these our late Civil wars,
shall no doubt find effects and examples of patience, of obstinacy and
stif-neckednesse in these our miserable days, and amidst the effeminate, and
puling worldlings far beyond the Egyptian, and well worthy to be compared to
those already reported of Spartan virtue. I know, there have been found seely
boores, who have rather endured to have their feet broiled upon a Greedyron,
their fingers ends crushed and wrung with the lock of a Pistole, their eyes all
bloody to be thrust out of their heads with wringing and wresting of a cord
about their foreheads, before they would so much as be ransomed. I have seen
and spoken with one, who had been left all naked in a ditch for dead, his
neck all bruised and swollen, with a halter about it, wherewith he had been
dragged a whole night at a horses tail through thick and thin, with a
hundred thrusts in his body, given him with daggers, not to kill him outright,
but to grieve and terrify him, and who had patiently endured all that, and
lost both speech and sense, fully resolved (as himself told me) rather to die
a thousand deaths (as verily, if you apprehend what he suffered, he past more
then one full death) then promise any ransom; yet was he one of the wealthiest
husbandmen in all his country. How many have bin seen, who have patiently
endured to be burnt and roasted for unknown and wilful opinions, which they had
borrowed of others: My self have known a hundred and a hundred women (for,
the saying is, Gaskoine heads have some prerogative in that) whom you might
sooner have made to bite a red-hot piece of iron, then recant an opinion, they
had conceived in anger. They will be exasperated and grow more fell against
blows and compulsion. And he who first invented the tale of that woman, which
by no threats or stripes, would leave to call her husband pricke-lowse, and
being cast into a pond and duckt under water, lifted up her hands, and joining
her two thumbs-nailes in act to kill lice above her head, seemed to call him
lousie still, devised a fable, whereof in truth we daily see the express image
in diverse women's obstinacy and wilfulness. And yet obstinacy is the sister
of constancy, at least in vigor and steadfastness.

A man must not judge that which is possible, and that which is not, according
to that which is credible and incredible to our sense and understanding, as I
have already said elsewhere. And it is a great fault, wherein the greater
number of men do daily fall (I speak not this of Bodine) to make a
difficulty in believing that of others, which themselves neither can nor would
do. Every man persuades himself, that the chiefe-forme of humane nature is in
himself; according to her, must all others be directed. The proceedings that
have no reference to hirs, are false and fa^^ed. Is any thing proposed unto him
of another man's faculties or actions; The first thing he calls to the
judgment of his consultation* is his own examples; according as it goes in
him, so goes the worlds order. Oh dangerous sottishness, and intolerable
foppery! I consider some men a farre-off, beyond and above my self, namely
amongst those ancient ones: and though I manifestly acknowledge mine own
insufficiency to follow or come near them by a thousand paces; I cease not to
keep them still in view, and to judge of those wards and springs that raise
them so high; the seeds whereof I somewhat perceive in my self: as likewise I
do of the minds extreme baseness, which amazeth me nothing at all, and I
misbelieve no more. I see the turn those give to wind up themselves, and I
admire their greatness, and those starts which I perceive to be so wondrous
fair, I embrace them: and if with man wrength I reach not unto them, at least
my judgment does most willingly apply it self unto them. The other example,
he alleges of things incredible, and altogether fabulous, reported by
Plutarke, is, that Agesilaus was fined by the Ephories, because he had drawn
tee hearts and good wills of all his fellow-cittizens ento himself alone. I
know not what mark of falsehood, or show of impossibiiltie he finds in it;
but so it is* that Plutarke speaks there of things which in all likelihood
were better known to him, then to us: And as it was not strange in Geecce, to
see men punished and exiled, only because they were too popular, and pleased
the common people over much. Witness the Ostracisme amongst the Athenians, and
the Petalisme among the Siracusans. There is another accusation in the same
place, which for Plutarkes sake does somewhat touch me, where he says, that
he has very well and in good truth sorted the Romans with the Romans, and
the Graecians amongst themselves, but not the Romans with the Graecians,
witness (says he) Demosthenes and Cicero, and Aristides, Syll^ and Lysander
Marcellus and Pelopidas; Pompey and Agesilaus, deming thereby that he has
favored the Graecians, in giving them so unequal companions. It is a just
reproving of that, which is most excellent and commendable in Plutarke: Eor, in
his comparisons (which is the most admirable part of his work, and wherein in
mine opinion he so much pleased himself) the faithfulness and sincerity of
his judgment equalleth their depth and weight. He is a Philosopher that
teaches us virtue. But let us see, whether we can warrant him from this
reproach of prevarication and false-hood. That which I imagine has given
occasion or ground to this judgment is, that great and farre-spreading luster
of the Roman names, which still are tingling in our ears, and never our of
our minds. We do not think, Demosthenes may equal the glory of a Consul,
of a Pro^ousull and a Questor of this great Common wealth of Rome. But he that
shall impartially consider the truth of the matter, and men in themselves,
which Plutarke did chiefly aim at, and more to balance their custom, their
natural dispositions and their sufficiency, then their fortune: I am of a
clean opposite opinion to Bodine, and think that Cicero and old Cato are much
behind or short of their parallels. For this purpose, I would rather have
chosen the example of young Cato compared to Phocion: for in that pair might
well be found a more likely disparitie for the Romans advantage. As for
Marcellus, Sylla and Pompey, I see very well, how their exploites of war, be
more swollen, glorious and pompous, then the Craecians, whom Plutarke compares
unto them; but the most virtuous, and fairest actions, no more in war, then
elsewhere, are not always the most famous. I often see the names of some
Captains smothered under the brightness of other names of lesser desert:
witness Labienus, Ventidius, Telesinus and diverse others. And to take him in
that sense, were I to complain for the Graecians, might not I say, that
Camillus is much less comparable unto Themistocles, the Gracchi to Agis and
Cleomenes, and Numa to Lycurgus? But it is folly at one glance to judge of
things with so many and diverse faces. When Plutarke compares them, he does not
for all that equal them. Who could more eloquently, and with more conscience
note their differences? Does he compare the victories, the exploites of arms,
the power of the armies conducted by Pompey and his triumphs unto those of
Agesilaus? I do not believe (says he) that Xenophon himself (were he living)
though it were granted him to write his pleasure for the advantage of
Agesilaus, durst ever dare to admit any comparison between them. Seems he to
equal Lysander to Sylla? There is no comparison (says he) neither in number
of victories, nor in hazard of battles between them: for, Lysander only
obtained two sea-battels, etc. This is no derogation from the Romans. If he
have but simply presented them vntothe Graecians, what ever disparitie may be
between them, he has not in any sort wronged them. And Plutarke does not
directly counterpoise them. In some there is none perferred before others; He
compares the parts and the circumstances one after another* and severally
judges of them. If therefore any would go about to convince him of favor,
he should narrowly sift out some particular judgment; or in general and
plain terms say, he has missed in sorting such a Grecian to such a Roman,
forasmuch as there are other more sortable and correspondent, and might better
be compared, as having more reference one unto another.

The three and thirtieth Chapter.
The History of Spurina.

PHilosophy thinks, she has not ill employed her means, having yielded the
sovereign rule of our mind, and the authority to restrain our appetites,
unto reason. Amongst which, those who judge there is none more violent, than
those which love begets, have this for their opinion, that they hold both
of body and soul; and man is wholly possessed with them: so that health it
self depended of them, and phisike is sometimes constrained to serve them
insteede of a Pandership. But contrariwise, a man might also say, that the
commixture of the body does bring abatement and weakness unto them; because
such desires are subject to sacietie and capable of material remedies. Many
who have endeavored to free and exempt their minds from the continual
alarumes, which this appetite did assail them with, have used incisions, yea
and cut off the mooving, turbulent and unruly parts. Others have alayed the
force and fervency of them by frequent applications of cold things, as snow and
vinegar. The haire-cloths which our forefathers used to wear for this purpose,
whereof some made shirts, and some waste-bands or girdles, to torment their
reigns. A Prince told me not long since, that being very young, and waiting in
the Court of King Francis the first, upon a solemn feastival day, when all the
Court endeavored to be in their best clothes, a humor possessed him to putte-on
a shirt of haire-cloth, which he yet keeps, and had been his fathers; but
what devotion soever possessed him, he could not possibly endure until night
to put it off again* and was sick a long time after, protesting he thought no
youthly heat could be so violent, but the use of this receipt would cool and
alay; of which he perhaps never assayed the strongest: For, experience
shows us, that such emotion does often maintain it self vnderbase, rude and
slovenly clothes: and haire-cloathes do not ever make those poor that wear
them. Zenocrates proceeded more rigorously? for, his Disciples to make trial
of his continency, having convayed that beauteous and famous curtizan Lais
naked into his bed, saving the weapons of her beauty, wanton alurements, and
amorous or love-procuring pocions, feeling that maugre all Philosophical
discourses, and strict rules, his skittish body began to mutiny, he caused
those members to be burned, which had listened to that rebellion. Whereas the
passions that are in the mind, as ambition, covetousness and others, trouble
reason much more: for, it can have no aid but from it is own means; nor are
those appetites capable of sacietie, but rather sharpened by enjoying, and
augmented by possession. The example alone of Julius Caesar may suffice to show
us the disparitie of these appetites, for never was man more given to amorous
delights. The curious and exact care he had of his body, is an authentical
witness of it, for so much as he used the most lascivious means that then were
in use, as to have the hairs of his body smeered and perfumed all over, with
an extreme and labored curiosity; being of himself a goodly personage,
white, of a tall and comely stature, of a cheerful and seemly countenance, his
face full and round, and his eyes brown lively; if at least Suetonius may be
believed: For, the statues which nowadayes are to be seen of him in Rome,
answer not altogether this portraiture we speak of. Besides his wives, which
he changed four times, without reckoning the bies, or Amors in his youth with
Nicomedes King of Bythinia, he had the Maidenhead of that so far, and
highly-renowmed Queen of Egypt, Cleopatra; witness young Caesarion, whom he
begotte of her. He also made love unto E^no^ Queen of Mauritania, and at Rome,
to Posthumia, wife unto Servius Sulpitius: to Lolio, wife to ^abinius to
Tertulla, of Crassus; yea unto Mutia, wife to great Pompey, which as Historians
say, was the cause her Husband was divorced from her. Which thing Plutarke
confesses not to have known. And the Curious both father and son twitted
Pompey in the teeth, at what time he took Caesar's Daughter to wife, that he
made himself Son in law to one, who had made him Cuckold, and himself was
wont to call Aegystus. Besides all this number, he entertained Servilia the
sister of Cat^, and mother to Marcus Brutus, whence (as diverse hold) proceeded
that great affection, he ever bare to Marcus Brutus; for his Mother bare him at
such a time as it was not unlikely he might be borne of him. Thus, (as me
seems) have I good reason to deem him a man extremely addicted to all
amorous licenciousnesse, and of a wanton-lascivious complexion. But the oother
passion of ambition, wherewith he was infinitely infected, and much tainted,
when he came once to withstand the same, it made him presently to give ground.
And touching this point, when I call Mahomet to remembrance (I mean him that
subdued Constantinople, and who brought the final extermination of the name of
Graecians) I know not where these two passions are more equal balanced:
equally an indefatigable letcher, and a never-tired soldier. But when in his
life they seem to strive and concur one with another, the mutinous heat,
does ever gourmandize the amorous flame. And the latter, although out of
natural season did never attain to a full and absolute authority, but when he
perceived himself to be so aged, that he was utterly unable longer to undergo
the burden of War. That which is aleaged, as an example on the contrary side
of Ladisla^s King of Naples, is very well worth the noting, who though he were
an excellent, courageous and ambitious Captain, proposed unto himself, as the
principal scope of his ambition, the execution of his sensuality, and
enjoining of some rare and unmatched beauty. So was his death: Having by a
continual tedious siege brought the City of Florence to so narrow a pinch,
that the inhabitants were ready to yield him the victory, he yielded the same
to them, upon condition they would deliver into his hands a wench of excellent
beauty that was in the city, of whom he had heard great commendations; which
they were enforced to grant him, and so by a private injury to warrant the
public ruin of the City. She was the Daughter of a notable rare Physician,
and whilst he lived chief of his profession: Who seeing himfelie engaged in
so stuprous a necessity, resolved upon an haughty enterprise; Whilst all were
busy adorning his daughter, and besetting her with costly jeweles, that she
might the more delight and please this new Kingly lover, he also gave her an
exquisitely-wrought, and sweetly-perfumed handkircher, to use in their first
approaches and embracements, a thing commonly in use amongst the Women of that
Country. This Handkercher strongly empoysoned according to the cunning skill of
his Art, coming to wipe both their enflamed secret parts and open pores, did
so readily convay and disperse it is poison, that having suddenly changed their
heat into cold, they immediately deceased one in another aims. But I will
now return to Caesar. His pleasures could never make him loose one minute of
an hour, nor turn one step from the occasions, that might any way further his
advancement. This passion did so soveraignly oversway all others, and possessed
his mind with so uncontrolled an authority, that she carried him whither she
list. Truly I am grieved, when in other things I consider this man's
greatness, and the wondrous parts that were in him; so great sufficiency in
all manner of knowledge and learning, as there is almost no science wherein he
has not written; He was so good an Orator, that diverse have preferred his
eloquence before Ciceroes: And himself (in mine opinion) in that faculty
thought himself nothing short of him. And his two Anti-Catoes, were especially
written to overbalance the eloquence which Cicero had employed in his Cato.
And for all other matters; was ever mind so vigilant, so active, and so
patient of labor as his? And doubtless, it was also embellished with sundry
rare seeds of virtue. I mean lively, natural and not countersets. He was
exceeding sober, and so homely in his feeding, that Oppius reports: how upon
a time, through a certain Cooks negligence, his meat being dressed with a
kind of medicinable Oil, in stead of Olive-oyle, and so brought to the
boorde, although he found it yet he fed heartily of it, only because he would
not shame his Host. Another time he caused his Baker to be whipped, because
he had served him with other, than common household bread, Cato himself was
wont to say of him, that he was the first sober man, had addressed himself to
the ruin of his country. And whereas the same Cato called him one day drunkard,
it happened in this manner, Being both together in the Senate house, where
Catilines conspiracy was much spoken of, wherein Caesar was greatly suspected
to have a hand; a note was by a friend of his brought, and in very secret sort
delivered him, which Cato perceiving, supposing it might be something, that the
Conspiratours advertized him of, instantly summoned him to show it, which
Caesar to avoid a greater suspicion, refused not: It was by chance an amorous
letter, which Servilia Catoes sister writ to him: Cato having read-it, threw it
at him, saying, hold it again thou drunkard. I say, it was rather a word of
disdain and anger, than an express reproach of this vice; as often we
nicke-name those that anger us, with the first nicke-names of reproaches, that
come into our mouth, though merely impertinent to those with whom we fall out.
Considering, that the vice wherewith Cato charged him, has near coherencie
unto that, wherein he had surprised Caesar: for Venus and Bacchus (as the
vulgar Proverb says) agree well together; but with me Venus is much more
blithe and game-some, being accompanied with sobriety.

The examples of his mildness and clemency, toward such as had offended him,
are infinite: I mean, besides those he showed during the civil wars, which
(as by his own writings may plainly appear) he used to blandish and
allurehis enemies, to make them fear his future domination and victory the
less. But if any shall say, those examples are not of validity to witness his
genuine and natural affability, we may lawfully answer, that at least they
show us a wonderful confidence, and greatness of courage to have been in
him. It has often befalne him, to send whole armies back again to his
enemies, after he had vanquished them, without dayning to bind them so much,
as with an oath, if not to favor, at least not to bear arms against him. He
has three or four times taken some of Pompeys chief Captains prisoners, and
as often set them at liberty again. Pompey declared all such as would not
follow and accompany him in his wars, to be his enemies; and he caused those
to be proclaimed as friends, who either would not stir at all, or not
effectually arm themselves against him. To such of his Captains as fled from
him, to procure other conditions, he sent them their weapons, their horses and
all other furniture. The Cities he had taken by maine force, he freed to
follow what faction they would, giving them no other garrison, then the memory
of his clemency and mildnes. In the day of his great battle of Pharsalia, he
expressly inhibited, that unless they were driven to unavoidable extremity, no
man should lay hands upon any Roman citizen. In my judgment these are very
hazardous parts, and it is no wonder, if in the civil wars or tumultuous
broiles, we have now on foot, those that fight for the ancient laws and state
of their country, as he did, do not follow and imitate the example. They are
extraordinary means, and which only belongs to Caesar's fortune, and to his
admirable foresight, succesfully to direct, and happily to conduct them. When
I consider the incomparable greatness and invaluable worth of his mind, I
excuse Victory, in that she could not well give him over, in this most unjust
and unnatural cause. But to return to his clemency; we have diverse genuine
and lively examples, even in the time of his al-swaying government, when all
things were reduced into his hands, and he needed no longer to dissemble.
Caius Memmius, had written certain detracting and railing orations against
him, which he at full and most sharply had answered, nevertheless he
shortly after helped to make him Consul. Caius Calvus, who had composed diverse
most injurious Epigrams against him having employed sundry of his friends to
be reconciled to him again, Caesar descended to write first unto him. And our
good Catullus, who under the name of Mamurra had so rudely and bitterly railed
against him, at last coming to excuse himself, Caesar that very night made
him to suppe at his own table. Having been advertised how some were
overlavish in railing against him, all he did was but in a public oration to
declare how he was advertised of it. His enemies, he feared less then he
hated them. Certain conspiracies and conventicles were made against his life,
which being discovered unto him, he was contented by an edict to publish, how
he was thoroughly informed of them, and never prosecuted the Authors. Touching
the respect he ever bare unto his friends; Caius Oppius traveling with him,
and falling very sick, having but one chamber he resigned the same unto him,
and himself was concented to lie all night abroad and upon the bare ground.
Concerning his justice, he caused a servant of his whom he exceedingly loved,
to be executed, for so much as he had lain with the wife of a Roman Knight,
although noe man sued or complained of him. Never was man, that showed more
moderation in his victory, or more resolution in his adverse fortune. But all
these noble inclinations, rich gifts, worthy qualities, were altered
smoothered and eclipsed by this furious passion of ambition; by which he
suffered himself to be so far mis-ledde, that it may be well affirmed, she
only ruled the Stern of all his actions. Of a liberal man, she made him a
common thee^e, that so he might the better supply his profusion and
prodigality; and made him utter that vile and most injurious speech; that if
the wickedst and most pernicious men of the world, had for his service and
furtherance been faithful unto him, he would to the utmost of his power have
cherished and preferred them, as well as if they had been the honestest: It so
besotted, and as it were made him drunk with so extreme vanity, that in the
presence of all his fellow citizens he durst vaunt himself, to have made
that great and farre-spread Roman Commonwealth, a shapelesse and bodilesse
name; and pronounce, that his Sentences or Answers should thence forward serve
as Laws: And sitting, to receive the whole body of the Senate coming toward
him: and suffer himself to be adored: and in his presence divine honors to be
done him. To conclude, this only vice (in mine opinion) lost, and overthrew in
him the fairest natural and richest in genuitie that ever was; and has made
his memory abominable to all honest minds, insomuch as by the ruin of his
country, and subversion of the mightiest State and most flourishing
Commonwealth, that ever the world shall see, he went about to procure his
glory. A man might contrariewise find diverse examples of great persons,
whom pleasure has made to forget the conduct of their own affairs, as
Marcus Antonius, and others: but where love and ambition should be in one
equal balance. and with like forces mate one another, I will never doubt, but
Caesar would gain the prize and gole of the victorle. But to come into my path
again. It is much, by discourse of reason, to bridle our appetites, or by
violence to force our members, to contain themselves within the bounds of
duty. But to whippe us for the interest of our neighbors, not only to shake off
this sweet pleasing passion, which tickleth us with selfe-joying pleasure, we
apprehend and feel to see our selves grateful to others, and of all men beloved
and sued unto: but also to hate and scorn those graces, which of it are the
cause; and to condemn our beauty, because some others will be set on sire with
it, I have seen few examples like to this. Spurina a young Gentleman of
Thuscanie,

Qualis gemma micat flavum quae dividit aurum, Virg Ae^^. 10. 134.

Aut collo decus aut capiti, vel quale per artem,
Inclusum buxo aut Ericia terebintho,
Lucet ebur.
As when a precious stone clear rays does spread.
Set in Pure gold, adorning neck or head:
Or as fair I v'ry shines in box enclosed,
Or workemanly with Mountain gum disposed.
being endowed with so alluringly-excessive and singular beauty, that the
chastest eyes could not possibly gainstand or continently resist the sparkling
glances thereof; not contented to leave so great a flame succourlesse, or
burning fever remediless, which he in all persons, and every where enkindled,
entered into so furious despite against himself, and those rich gifts, nature
had so prodigally conferred upon him (as if they must bear the blame of others
faults) that with gashes, and skars, he wittingly mangled, and voluntarily
cutthat perfect, proportion and absolute feature, which nature had so curiously
observed in his unmatched face; whereof to speak my opinion, such out rages
are enemies to my rules. I rather admire, then honor such actions. His intent
was commendable, and his purpose conscientious, but in my seeming somewhat
wanting of wisdom. What? if his deformity or ugliness was afterward an
instrument to induce others to fall into the sin of contempt and vice of
hatred, or fault of envy for the glory of so rare commendation; or of slander,
interpreting his humor to be a frantic ambition; Is there any form, whence
vice (if so it please) may not wrest an occasion, in some manner to exercise it
self? It had been more just, and therewithal more glorious, of so rare gifts
of God, to have made a subject of exemplar virtue and orderly method. Those
which sequester themselves from public offices, and from this infinite number
of thornie and so many-faced rules, which in civil life, bind a man of exact
honesty and exquisite integrity: in mine opinion reap a goodly commodity,
what peculiar sharpness soever they enjoyne themselves. It is a kind of
death, to avoid the pain of well-doing, or trouble of well-living. They may
have another prise, but the prise of vneasines me thinks they never had. Nor
that in difficulty, there be any thing that is amid the waves of the worldly
multitude, beyond keeping himself upright and untainted, answering loyally and
truly discharging all members and several parts of his charge. It is happily
more easy for one, in honest sort to neglect and pass over all the sex, then
duly and wholly to maintain himself in his wives company. And a man may
more incuriously fall into poverty, then into plenteousnesse; being justly
dispensed. Custom, according to reason, does lead to more sharpness then
abstinence has. Moderation is a virtue much more toylesome, then sufferance.
The chaste and well living of young Scipio, has a thousand several fashions;
that of Diogenes but one. This does by so much more exceed all ordinary lives
in innocence and vnspottednesse, as those which are most exquisite and
accomplished, exceed in profit and outgoe it in force.

The four and thirtieth Chapter.
Observations concerning the means to war after the manner of Julius Caesar.

IT is reported of diverse chief Generals in war, that they have particularly
affected some peculiar book or other: as Alexander the great highly esteemed
Homer; Scipio Affrieanus, Xenophon: Marcus Brutus, Polybius; Charles the fifth,
Philip de Comines: And it is lately averred, that in some places, and with some
men, Machiavell is much accounted of: But our late Marshall Strozzi, who had
made especial choice to love Caesar; without doubt, I think of all other
chose best: for truly he ought to be the Breviarie of all true Soldiers, as
being the absolute and perfect chief pattern of Military profession And God
he knows with what grace, and with what decorum, he has embellished this
rich subject, with so pure a kind of speech, so pleasing and so absolutely
perfect, that to my taste, there are no writing in the world, which in this
subject may be compared to his. I will here register certain particular and
rare parts concerning his manner of war, which yet remain in my memory. His
Army being some what afrighted, upon the report that ran of the great
forces, which king Iuba brought against him, instead of abating the opinion his
soldiers had conceived of it, and to diminish the means or forces of his
enemy, having caused them to be assembled altogether, thereby to assure and
encourage them, he took a clean contrary course, to that which in like cases
we are accustomed to do: for he bad them troble themselves no more to find out
the number of the forces, which his enemies brought against him, for himself
had already true knowledge and certain intelligence of them: and told them a
number far exceeding both the truth and report of them: following what Cyrus
commands in Xenophon. For a smuch as the deceit is not of like interrest,
for a man to find his enemies in effect weaker then he hoped, then stronger
indeed, having once conceived an opinion of their weakness. He enured all
his Soldiers simply to obey, without controling, gainesaying, or speaking of
their captains desseignes, which he never communicated unto them, but upon the
last point of execution: and was pleased, if by chance they had any inkling of
them, so to deceive them, presently to change his opinion: And having prefixed a
place to quarter-in at night, he has often been seen to march further, and
lengthen his journey, namely if the weather were foul, or if it rained. The
Swizzers in the beginning of his wars in Gaul, having sent toward him to
give them free passage through the Roman countries, and he being resolved by
force to empeach them, did notwithstanding show them very good looks, and
took, certain days respit to give them an answer, during which time he
might have leisure to assemble his Army together. These poor people knew not
how well he could husband time: For he often repeated, that the skill to
embrace occasisons in the nicke, is the chiefest part of an absolute Captain:
And truly the diligence he used in all his exploits, is incredible; and the
like was never heard of. If he were not over conscientious in that under color
of some treaty, parlie or accord, to take any advantage of his enemies: he
was as little scrupulous, in that he required no other virtue in his Soldiers
but valor; and except mutiny and disobedience, he punished not grealy other
vices. After his victories, he often gave them the reins to all
licentiousness, for a while dispensing them from all rules of military
discipline; saying moreover his soldiers were so well instructed, that though
they were in theit gayest clothes, pranked up, musked and perfumed, they would
notwithstanding run furiously to any combat. And in truth he loved to see
them richly armed, and made them wear gilt, graven and silvered armours, that
their care to keep them clean and bright, might make them more fierce, and
ready to defend themselves. Speaking to them, he ever called them by the name
of Fellow Soldiers; a name used at this day by some Captains; which his
successor Augustus afterward reformed, esteeming he had done it for the
necessity of his affairs, and to flatter the hearts of those which followed
him but voluntarily;

-- Rheni mihi Caesar in vndis. Lucan. l. 5. 289.

Dux erat, hic socius facinus quos inquinat, aequat.
When Caesar past the Rheine he was my General,
My Fellow here: sin, whom it stains, makes fellowes-al.
but that this custom was over-lowelie for the dignity of an Emperor, and
chiere General of an Army, and brought up the fashion again to call them
ouly Soldiers. To this courtesy, Caesar did notwithstanding intermixe a great
severity, to suppress and keep them humble. His ninth Legion having mutined
near unto Placentia, he presently cassiered the same with great ignominy
unto it, notwithstanding that Pompey were yet on foot and strong; and would
not receive it into favor, but with humble petitions and entreatie. He did
more appease them by authority and audacitie, then by mildness and
affability. Where he speaks of his passage over the river of Rheine,
toward Germany, he says, that deeming it unworthy the honor of the Roman
people, his Army should pass over in ships, he caused a bridge to be built,
that so it might pass over drie-foote. Their he erected that admirable
bridge, whereof he so particularly describes the frame: For he never more
willingly dilates himself in describing any of his exploites, then where he
endeuoreth to represent unto us the subtilitie of his inventions, in such
kinds of manual works. I have also noted this in his book, that he much
accompteth of his exhortations he made to his Sculdiers before any fight: for
where he would show to have been either surprised or urged, he ever alleges
this, that he had so much leisure as to make an oration to his Soldiers or
Army: Before that great battle against those of Tournay; Caesar (says he)
having disposed of the rest, ran suddenly whither fortune carried him, to
exhort his men: and meeting with the tenth Legion he had not leisure to say
any thing else unto them, but that they should remember their former wonted
virtue, they should nothing be danted, they should stoutly resist the encounter
of their adversaries; and forasmuch as the enemy was come within an
arrow-shoote unto him, he gave the signal of the battle; and suddenly going
elsewhere, to encourage others, he found them already together by the ears;
See here what himself says of it in that place. Verily his tongue has
indivers places much bestead, and done him notable service, and even whilst he
lived, his military eloquence was so highly regarded, that many of his Army
were seen to copy and keep his orations; by which means diverse volumes were
filled with them, and continued many ages after his death, His speech had
particular graces, so that his familiar friends, and namely Augustus, hearing
that rehearsed, which had been collected of his, knew by the Phrases and
words, what was his or not. The first time that with any public charge he
issued out of Rome, he came in eight days to the river of Rhone, having ever
one or two Secretaries before him, who continually writ what he endited, and
one behind him that carried his sword. And surely, if one did nothing but
run up and down, he could very hardly attain to that promptitude, wherewith
ever being victorious, having left Gaul, and following Pompey to Brundusium,
in eighteen days he sabdued all Italy; returned from Brundusium to Rome, and
thence went even to the heart of Spain, where he past many extreme
difficulties, in the wars between Afranius and Petreius, and at the long
siege of Marseille: from whence he returned into Macedon, overthrew the Roman
Army at Pharsalia; thence pursuing Pompey he passed into Aegipt, which he
subdued; from Aegipt he came unto Syria, and into the country of Pontus, where
he fought with Pharnaces; thence into Africa, where he defeated Scipio and
Iuba, and thence through Italy he returned into Spain, where he overthrew
Pompeyes children Iucau. l. 4 505. Virg. Ae^. li. 12 684.


O cior and caeli flammis and tigride foeta.
Ac veluti montis saxum de vertice praeceps
Cum ruit avulsum vento, seu turbidus imber
Proluit, aut annis solvit sublapsa vetustas,
Fertur in abruptum magno mons improbus actu
Exult atque solo, silvas, armenta, virosque,
Involvens secum.
Swifter then breed-yong Tiger, or heavens flash,
And as from mountains top a headlong stone
Rent-off by wind, or by storms troublous dash
Washt-off, or loosed by age of years are gone,
Crosse-carried with great force that hill-like mass
Bounds on the earth, and rowles with it in one.
Woods, herds, and men, and all that neere-it was.
Speaking of the siege of Avaricum, he says, that it was his custom, both day
and night, ever to be near and about such workmen, as he had set a work. In
all enterprises of consequence he was ever the first skout-man, or survayer of
any place: and his Army never approached place, which he had not viewd or
survayed himself. And if we may believe Suetonius, at what time he attempted
to pass over into England, he was the first man that sounded the passage. He
was wont to say, that he esteemed that victory much more, which was conducted
by advise, and managed by counsel, then by maine strength and force. In the
war against Petreius and Afranius* Fortune presenting an apparent occasion of
advantage unto him, he says, that he refused it, hoping with a little more
time, but with less hazard, to see the overthrow of his enemy. Where he also
plaide a notable part, to command all his Army to swim over a river, without
any necessity, Lucan. l. 4. 151.


-- rapuitque ruens in praeli^ miles,
Quod fugiens timtisset iter, mox vdareceptis
Memb^^ fovent armis, gelidosque a gurgite cursu
Restituunt artus.
The Soldier rids that way in haste to fight,
Which yet he would have fearde in haste of flight;
His limbs with water wet and cold before,
With arms he covers, running does restore.
I find him somewhat more wary and considerate in his enterprises, then
Alexander; for the latter seems to seek out, and by maine force to run
into dangers, as an impetuous or raging torrent, which without heed,
discretion, or choice, shockes and checkmates what ^r^ it meets withal.

Sic tauri formis volvitur Aufidus, Her. car. lib. 4. ^d. 14 25.

Qui Regna Dauni perfluit Appuli
Dum saevit, horrendamque cultis
Diluviem meditatur agris.
So Bull-fac't Aufidus still rolling grows,
Which through Apulias ancient kingdom flows,
When he does rage in threatening meditation
To bring on fair fields fearful inundation.
And to say truth, his hap was to be most employed in the springtime, and
first heat of his age: whereas Caesar was well stricken in years, when he
began to follow arms. Alexander was of a more cholerike, sanguine and
violent constitution, which humor he stirred up with wine, whereof Caesar was
very abstinent. But where occasions of necessity were offered, and where the
subject required it, there was never man that so little regarded his person. As
for me, me seems I read indivers of his exploits, a certain resolution
rather to loose himself, than to abide the brunt or shame to be overthrown.
In that great battle, which he fought against those of Turnay, seeing the
vangarde of his Army somewhat enclining to route, even as he was, without
shield or target, he ran headlong to the front of his enemies: Which many
other times happened unto him. Hearing once how his men were besieged, he past
disguized through the midst and thickest of his enemies camp, so to encourage
and awe them with his presence. Having crossed the way to Dyrrhachium, with
very few forces, and perceiving the rest of his Army (the Conduct whereof he
had left unto Antonius,) to be somewhat slow in coming, he undertook all
alone, to repasse the Sea, notwithstanding a violent and raging Tempest; and
secretly stole himself away to fetch the rest of his forces: All the havens on
that side, yea and all the Sea being possessed by Pompey, And concerning the
enterprises he underwent with armed hand, there are diverse of them, which in
respect of the hazard, exceed all discourse of military reason: for, with how
weak means undertook he to subdue the Kingdom of Egypt, and afterward to
front the forces of Scipio and Iuta, which were ten parts greater than his?
Me thinks such men have had a kind of more than humane confidence of their
fortune: And himself was wont to say, that Haughty enterprises were to be
executed and not consulted upon. After the battle of Pharsalia, having sent
his Army before into Asia, and himself with only one ship passing through
the strait of Hellespont, he met on the Seas with Lucius Cassius, attended
on with ten tall ships of War; he was so far from shunning him, that he
durst not only stay for him but with all haste make toward and summon him, to
yield himself to his mercy; which he did. Having undertaken that furious
siege of Alexia, wherein were fourscore thousand men of Defense, and all
France up in arms, with a resolution to run upon him and raise the siege,
and having an Arm^e on foot of one hundred and nine thousand horse, and two
hundred forty thousand foot; What a fond hardy and outrageous confidence was
it in him, that he would never give over his attempt and resolve in two so
great difficulties together? Which he notwithstanding under went: And after he
had obtained so notable a battle of those which were without, he soon
reduced those that were besieged in the Town to his mercy. The very like
happened to Lucullus at the siege of Tigranocerta, against King Tigranes but
with an unlike condition, seeing his enemies demissenesse, with whom Lucullus
was to deal. I will here note two rare and extraordinary events, touching
the siege of Alexia; the one, that the French men being all assembled together
with a purpose to meet with Caesar, having diligently survaied and exactly
numbered all their forces, resolved in their counsel, to cutte-off a great part
of this huge multitude for fear they might breed a confusion. This example is
new, to fear to be over many; yet if it be well taken, it is very likely,
that The body of an Army ought to have a well proportioned greatness, and
ordered to indifferent bounds. Whether it be for the difficulty to feed the
same, or to lead it in order and keep it in awe. And we may easily verify by
examples, that These numerous and infinite Armies have seldom brought any not
able thing to pass: According to Cyrus his saying in Xenophon. It is not the
multitude of men, but the number of good men that causes an advantage: The
rest rather breeding confusion and trouble, than help or avail. And Baiazeth
took the chiefest foundation of his resolution, against the advice of all his
Captains, to join fight with Tamburlane, only because the innumerable number
of men, which his enemy brought into the field, gave him an assured hope of
route and confusion. Scanderbeg, a sufficient and most expert Judge in such a
case, was wont to say, that ten or twelve thousand trusty and resolute
fighting men, ought to suffice any sufficient Chieftaine of War, to warrant
his reputation in any kind of military exploite. The other point, which
seems to be repugnant both unto custom and reason of War, is, that
Vercingentorix, who was appointed chief General of all the forces of the
revolted Gauls, undertook to immure and shut himself into Alexia. For, He
that has the commandment of a whole Country. ought never to engage
himself, except in cases of extreamitie, and where all his rest and last
refuge goes on it, and has no other hope lest him, but the defense of such a
place. Otherwise he ought to keep himself free, that so he may have means to
provide in all parts of his Government. But to return to Caesar, he became
in time somewhat more slow, heedy, and considerate, as witnesses his familiar
friend Oppius; deeming, he should not so easily hazard the honor of so many
Victories which one only disaster, or mis-encounter, might make him loose. It
is that the Italians are wont to say, when they will or blame or reproach any
man with this overdaring, or rash fond-hardinesle, which is often seen in
young men, calling them, Bisognosid honor, as much to say as needy of honor:
And that being yet hungry, greedy and void of reputation, they have reason to
seek after it, whatsoever it may cost them; Which they should never do, that
have already acquired the same. There may be some just moderation in this
desire of glory, and some sacietie in this appetite, as well as in others;
Diverse do so practice it. He was far from that religion of the ancient
Romans, who in their Wars would never prevail but with mere and genuine
virtue: But rather joined more conscience unto it, than now-adayes we should
do; And would never allow of all means, were he never so certain to get the
victory. In his Wars against Ariovistus, whilst he was in Parley with him,
some tumult or insurrection happened between the two armies, which began by
the fault or negligence of some of Ariovistus horsemen. In which hurlie-burlie
Caesar found himself to have a great advantage over his en^emies. which
notwithstanding he would not embrace, for fear he might be taxed or suspected
to have proceeded falsely, or consented to any treachery. At what time soever he
went to fight, he was accustomed to wear a very rich garment, and of a sheene
and garish color, that so he might the better be marked. When his Soldiers
were nearest unto their enemies, he restrained and kept them very short. When
the ancient Graecians would accuse or tax any man of extreme insufficiency,
they used this common Proverb; That he could neither read nor swim: And
himself was of this opinion, that the art of swimming was most necessary and
beneficial in War, and a Soldier might reap diverse commodities by it. If
he were in haste, and to make speed, he would ordinarily swim over all the
Rivers he met withal: and loved greatly to travel on foot, as Alexander the
Great was wont. In Egypt being on a time forced (to save himself) to leap
into a little Whirry or Boat, and so many of his people following him, that he
was in danger to sink, he rather chose to fling himself into the Sea, which
he did; and swimming came into his fleet, that was more than two hundred paces
from him, holding his writing-Tables in his left hand out of the Water, and
with his teeth drawing his Coat of Arms after him, that his enemies might not
enjoy it: and this did he being well stricken in years. No General of War
had ever so much credit with his Soldiers. In the beginning of his civil
wars, his Centeniers offered him every one, at their own charges to pay and
find him a man at Arms, and his foote*men to serve him for nothing and those
that were best able, to defray the poor and needy.

Our late Admiral of France Lord Chastillion, in our late civil wars showed
such an example: For, the Frenchmen of his army, at their proper cost and
charges helped to pay such strangers as followed him. Few examples of so loving
and earnest affection may be found amongst those that follow the old manner of
war, and strictly hold themselves under the ancient policy of their laws.
Passion has more sway over us, then reason: Yet has it chanced in the wars
against Hanniball, that imitating the example of the Roman Peoples liberality
in the City, the Soldiers and Captains refused their pay, and in Marcellus
his camp, those were called mercenarie, that took any pay. Having had some
defeat near unto Dyrrachium, his Soldiers came voluntarily before him, and
offered themselves to be punished; so that he was more troubled to comfort, then
to chide them. One only of his Cohortes (whereof ten went to a Legion) held
fight above four hours with four of Pompeies whole Legions, until it was
well-nigh all defeated with the multitude and force of arrows: And in his
trenches were afterward found one hundred and thirty thousand shafts. A
Soldier of his, named Scava, who commanded one of the entrances, did so
invincibly defend and keep himself, that he had one of his eyes thrust out,
and one shoulder and one thigh thrust through, and his shield flawed and
pierced in two hundred and thirty several places. It has befalne to many of
his Soldiers, being taken prisoners, to choose rather to die then promise to
follow any other faction, or receive any other entertainment. Granius
Petronius taken by Scipio in Affricke: After Scipio had caused all his fellows
to be put to death, sent him word that he gave him his life, for so much as he
was a man of rank and a Questor: Petronius answered, that Caesar's Soldiers
were wont to give life to others, and not accept it themselves; And
therewithal with his own hands killed himself. Infinite examples there are
of their fidelity. That part, which they acted, who were beseiged in Salona, a
City which took partwith Caesar against Pompey, must not be forgotten, by
reason of a rare accident that there happened. Marcus O^tavius, having long time
beleagred the Town, they within were reduced to such extreamitie and pinching
necessity of all things, that to supply the great want they had of men, most
of them being already or hurt or dead; they had set all their slaves at
liberty, and for the behoof of their engines, were compelled to cut off all
their women's hairs, to make ropes with them; besides a wonderful lack of
victualles resolving notwithstanding never to yield themselves: After they had
a long time lingered the siege, and that Octavius was thereby become more
careless, and less heeding or attentive to his enterprise; they one day about
high noone (having first ranged their wives and children upon the walls, to
set the better face upon the matter) rushed out in such a fury upon the
beseigers, that having put to rout and defeated the first, the second, and
third corpse de guard; then the fourth and the rest; and having forced them to
quit their trenches, chased them even to their ships: and Octavius with much
ado saved himself in Dyrrachium, where Pompey was. I remember not at this
time, to have read of any other example, where the beleagred do in gross
beat the beleagrers, and get the maistrye and possession of the field; nor
that a sallie has drawn a mere and absolute victory of a battle into
consequence

The five and thirtieth Chapter.
Of three good women.

THey are not to be had be dozens, as each one knows, namely in rights and
duties of marriage; For, it is a bargain full of so many thornie circumstances,
that it is hard the will of a woman should long keep her self whole and
perfect therein. And although men have somewhat a better condition in the same,
yet have they much to do. The touchstone and perfect trial of a good marriage,
respects the time that the society continues; whether it have constantly
been mild loyal and commodious. In our age, they more commonly reserve to
enstall their good offices, and set forth the vehemence of their affections
toward their lost husbands: And then seek they at least to yield some
testimony of their good will. Oh late testimony and out of season, whereby they
rather show, they never love them but when they are dead. Our life is full of
combustion and scolding, but our disease full of love and of courtesy. As
fathers conceal affection toward their children; so they to maintain an
honest respect, cloak their love toward their husbands. This mystery
answers not my taste. They may long enough scratch and dishevell themselves;
let me enquire of a chamber-maide or of a secretary, how they were, how they
did, and how they have lived together: I can never forget this good saying,
Iactantius maerent, quae minus dolent, They keep a ^owling with most
ostentation, who are less sorrowful at heart. Their lowering and puling is
hateful to the living, and vain to the dead. We shall easily dispense with
them to laugh at us when we are dead, upon condition they smile upon us while
we live. Is not this the way to reviue a man with spite; that he who has
spitten in my face when I was living, shall come and clawe my feet when I am
dead? If there be any honor for a woman to weep for her husband, it belongs
to her that has smiled upon him when she had him. Such as have wept when they
lived, let them laugh when they are dead, as well outwardly as inwardly.
Moreover, regard not those blubred eyes, nor that pittie-mooving voice; but
view that demeanor, that color and cheerful good plight of those cheeks,
under their great vailes; thence it is she speaks plain French. There are few
whose health does not daily grow better and better; a quality that cannot
lie. This ceremonious countenance looks not so much backward, as foreward:
It is rather a purchase then a payment. In mine infancy, an honest and most
fair Lady (who yet lives, the widdowe of a Prince) had somewhat more of I
wot not what in her attires, then the laws of widowehood would well permit. To
such as blamed her for it: ^t is (said she) because I intend no more new
acquaintances, and have no mind at all to marry again. Because I will not
altogether dissent from out custom, I have here made choice of three women,
who have also employed the utmost endevor of their goodness and affection, about
their husbands deaths. Yet are they examples somewhat different and so urging
that they hardly draw life into consequence. Pliny the younger, had dwelling
near unto a house of his in Italy a neighbor wonderfully tormented with
certain ulcers, which much troubled him in his secret parts. His wife
perceiving him to droope and languish away, entreated him she might leasurely
search and nearly view the quality of his disease, and she would more freely
then any other tell him what he was to hope for: Which having obtained, and
curiously considered the same, she found it impossible ever to be cured, and
all he might expect was but to lead a long, dolorous, and languishing life; and
therefore for his more safety and sovereign remedy, persuaded him to kill
himself. And finding him somewhat nice and backward to effect so rude an
enterprise: Think not my dear friend (quoth she) but that the sorrows and
griefs, I see thee feel, touch me as near and more, if more may be, as they
self, and that to be rid of them, I will apply the same remedy to my self,
which I prescribe to thee. I will accompany thee in thy cure, as I have done
in thy sickness: remoove all fear, and assure they self, we shall have
pleasure in this passage, which shall deliver us from all torments, for we will
happily go together: That said, and having cheared up her husbands courage she
determined they should both headlong throw themselves into the sea from out a
window of their house, that over looked the same: and to maintain this loyal,
vehement and never to be severed affection to the end, wherewith she had
during his life embraced him, she would also have him die in her arms; and
fearing they might fail her, and through the fall, or fear or apprehension
her hold-fast might be loosed, she caused herself to be fast bound unto him
by the middle: And thus for the ease of her husbands life she was contented to
forgo her own. She was but of mean place and low fortune: and amidde such
condition of people, it is not so strange to see some parts of rare virtue and
exemplare goodness.

-- extremaper illos
Iustitia excedens terris vestigia fecit. Virg. Georg. Il. 2. 473.

Justice departing from the earth did take
Of them her leave, through them last passage make.
The other two are noble and rich; where examples of virtue are rarely lodged.
Arria wife unto Cecinna Paetus, a man that had been consul was mother of
another Arria, wife to Thrasea Paetus; whose virtue was so highly renowned
during the time of Nero; and by mean of his sonne-in-lawe, grandmother to
Fannia: For, the resemblance of these men's and women's names and fortunes has
made diverse to mistake them. This first Arria, her husband Cecinna Paetus,
having been taken prisoner by the Soldiers of Claudius the Emperor, after
the overthrow of Scribonianus, whose faction he had followed, entreated those
who led him prisoner to Rome* to take her into their ship, where for the
service of her husband she should be of the less charge and incommoditie to
them, then a number of other persons, which they must necessarily have, and
that she alone might supply and stead him in his chamber, in his kitchen and
all other offices; which they utterly refused, and so hoised sails, but she
leaping into a Fishers boat, that she immediately hired, followed him aloof
from the further shore of Sclavonia. Being come to Rome, one day, in the
Emperors presence, Iunia the widow of Scribonianus, by reason of the
neerenesse and society of their fortunes, familiarly accosted her, but she
rudely, with these words, thrust her away. What (quoth she) shall I speak to
thee, or shall I listen what thou say: Thou, in whose lap Scribonianus thy
husband was slain, and thou yet live? and thou breathest? These words with
diverse other signs, made her kinsfolks and friends perceive, that she
purposed to make herself away, as impatient to a abide her husbands fortune.
And Thrasea her son in law, taking hold of her speeches, beseeching her that
she would not so vnheedily spoil her self, he thus bespake her. What? If I
were in Cecinnaes Fortune or the like, would you have my wife your daughter to
do so? What else? make you a question of it? (answered she) Yes mary would I,
had she lived so long and in so good-agreeing sort with thee, as I have done
with my husband. These and suchlike answers, increased the care they had of
her; and made them more heedfully to watch, and nearly to look unto her. One
day, after she had uttered these words to her keepers; you may look long
enough to me, well may you make me die worse but you shall never be able to
keep me from dying: and therewith furiously flinging her self out of a chair
(wherein she fate) with all the strength she had, she fiercely ran her head
against the next wall; with which blow having sore hurt her self, and falling
into a dead swowne, after they had with much ado brought her to her self
again: Did I not tell you (quoth she) that if you kept me from an easy death,
I would choose another, how hard and difficult soever? The end of so admirable
a virtue was this. Her husband Paetus wanting the courage to do himself to
death, unto which the Emperors cruelty reserved him; one day, having first
employed discourses and exhortations, befitting the counsel she gave him to
make himself away, she took a Dagger that her husband wore, and holding it
outright in her hand, for the period of her exhortation: Do thus Paetus said
she) and at that instant, stabbing herself mortally to the heart, and
presently pulling the Dagger out again, she reached the same unto her
husband, and so yielded up the ghost, uttering this noble, generous and
immortal speech* Paete non dolet, she had not the leisure to pronounce other
than these three words, in substance material and worthy her self, Hold
Paetus, it has done me no hurt.

Casta suo gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto. Ma^t. li. 1. epig. 14. 1.

Quem de visceribus traxerat ipsa suis:
Si qua fides, vulnus quod feci, non dolet, inquit.
Sed quod tu facies, id mihi Paete dolet.
Chaste Arria when she gave her Paetus that sharp sword,
Which from her bowels she had drawn forth bleeding new
The wound I gave and have, if you will trust my word,
Griev's not, said she, but that which mill be made by you.
It is much more lively in his own natural, and of a richer Sense; for both
her husbands wound and death, and her own hurts, she was so far from
grieving to have been the counselor and motive of them, that she rejoiced to
have performed so haughty and courageous an act, only for the behoof of her
dear husband, and at the last gasp of her life, she only regarded him; and
to remove all fear from him, to follow her in death, which Paetus beholding,
he immediately wounded himself with the same dagger, ashamed (as I suppose) to
have had need of so dear an instruction, and precious a teaching. Pompea
Paulina, an high and noble-borne young Roman Lady, had wedded Seneca, being very
aged. Nero (his fair disciple) having sent his Satellites or officers toward
him, to denounce the decree of his death to him: which in those days was done
after this manner. When the Roman Emperors had condemned any man of quality to
death, they were wont to send their officers unto him, to choose what death he
pleased, and to take it within such and such a time, which according to the
temper of their choler, they prescribed unto him, sometimes shorter, and
sometimes longer, giving him that time to dispose of his affairs, which also
by reason of some short warning they diverse times took from him: And if the
condemned party seemed in any sort to strive against their will, they would
often send men of purpose to execute him, either cutting the v^i^s of his arms
and legs, or compelling him to take and swallow poison. But men of honor stayed
not that enforcement, but to that effect used their own Physicians or Surgeons.
Seneca, with a reposed and undaunted countenance listened attentively to their
charge, and presently demanded for paper and ink to make his last will and
testament, which the Captain refusing him, he turned toward his friends, and
thus bespake them. S^^h (my loving friends) I cannot bequeath you any other
thing in remembrance or acknowledgement of what I owe you, I leave you at least
the richest and best portion I have, that is the image of my manners and my
life, which I beseech you to keep in memory; which doing, you may acquire the
glory and purchase the name of truly sincere and absolutely-true friends And
therewithal som^^mes appeasing the sharpnes of the sorrow he saw them endure
for his sake, with mild and gentle speeches, sometimes raising his voice to
chide them; Where are (said he) those memorable precepts of Philosophy? What is
become of those provisions, which for so many years together we have laid up,
against the brunts and accidents of Fortune? Was Nero^s innated cru^ly unknown
unto us? What might we expect or hope-for at his hands who has murdered his
Mother and massacred his Brother, but that he would also do his Tutor and
Governor to death that has fostred and brought him up? Having uttered these
words to all the bystanders, he turned him to his wife, as she was ready to
sink down, and with the burden of her grief to faint in heart and*
strength; he coll^d and e^braced her about the neck, and heartily entreated
her, for the love of him, somewhat more patiently to bear this accident; and
that his hour was come, wherein he must show no longer by discourse and
disputation, but in earnest effect, declare the fruit he had reaped by his
study; and that undoubtedly he embraced death, not only without grief, but
with exceeding joy? Wherefore my deere-deere heart, do not dishonor it by thy
tears, l^st thou seem to love thy self more than my reputation. Assuage thy
sorrows, and comfort thy self in the knowledge thou have had of me and of my
actions; leading the rest of thy life by the honest occupations to which thou
art addicted. To whom Paulina, having somewhat rouzed her drooping spirits, and
by* a thrice-noble affection awakened the magnanimity of her high-setled
courage, answered thus: No Seneca, think not that in this necessity I will
leave you with out my company.

I would not have you imagine that the virtuous examples of your life have not
also taught me to die: And when shall I be able to do it or better, or more
honestly, or more to mine own liking, then with your self? And be resolved I
will go with you, and be partaker of your fortune. Seneca taking so generous a
resolve, and glorious a determination of his wife in good part* and to free
himself from the fear he had to leave her after his death, to his enemies
mercy and cruelty: Oh my dear Paulina,! I had (quoth he) persuaded thee
what I thought was convenient, to lead thy life more happily, and do thou
then rather choos^ the honor of a glorious death? Assuredly I will not envy
thee: Be the constancy and resolution answerable to our common end; but be the
beauty and glory greater on thy side. That said, the vei^es of both their
a^mes were cut, to the end they might bleed to death; but because Senecaes
were somewhat shrunken up through age and abstinence, and his blood could have
no speedy course, he commanded the veins of his thighs to be launced: And
fearing lest the torments he felt, might in some sort entender his wifes heart;
as also to deliver ^imselfe from the affliction, which greatly yearned him to
see her in so pitteous plight: after he had most lovingly taken leave of her,
he be^ought her to be pleased she might be carried into the next chamber, which
was accordingly performed. But all those incisions being unable to make him
die, he willed Statius Annous his Physician to give him some poisoned potion,
which wrought but small effect in him, for through the weakness and coldenesse
of his members, it could not come unto his heart. And therefore they caused a
warm bath to be prepared, wherein they laid him* then perceiving his end to
approach, so long as he had breath, he continued his excellent discourses,
concerning the subject of the estate, wherein he found himself, which his
Secretaries, so long as they could hear his voice, collected very diligently,
whose last words continued long time after in high esteem and honor amongst
the better sort of men, as Oracles; but they were afterward lost, and great
pity it is they never came unto our hands. But when he once began to feel
the last pangs of death, taking some of the water, wherein he lay bathing, all
bloody, he therewith washed his head, saying, I vow this water unto Jupiter
the* Deliver^r. Nero being advertised of all this, fearing lest P^ulinaes death
(who was one of the best alied Ladies in Rome, and to whom he bare no
particular grudge) might cause him some reproach, sent in all post haste to
have her incisions closed up again, and if possibly it could be, to save her
life; which her servants by vnwriting unto her, performed, she being more than
half dead and void of any sense. And that afterward, contrary to her intent,
she lived, it was very honorable, and as be^itted her virtue, showing by the
pale ^ew and wanne color of her face, how much of her life she had wasted by
her incisions. Lo here my three true Stories, which in my concei^e are as
pleasant and as tragical, as any we devise at our pleasures, to please the
vulga^ sort with all: and I wonder, that those who invent so many fabulous
tales, do not rather make choice of infinite excellent, and quaint Stories,
that are found in Books, wherein they should have less trouble to write them,
and might doubtless prove more pleasing to the hearer, and profitable to the
Reader. And whosoever would undertake to frame a complete and well-joynted
body of them, need neither employe nor add any thing of his own unto it
except the ^igaments, as the ^oldring of another metal, and by this means
might compact sundry events of all kinds, disposing and diversifying them,
according as the beauty and luster of the work should require: And very near,
as Ovid has sown and contrived his Me^amorphosis, with that strange number of
diverse fables. In the last couple, this is also worthy consideration, that
Paulina offreth willingly to leave her life for her husbands sake, and that her
husband had also other times quit death for the love of her. There is no great
counterpoyze in this exchange for us: but according to his Sto^ke humor, I
suppose he persuaded himself to have done as much for her prolo^ging his life
for her avail, as if he had died for her. In one of his letters, he writes
to Lucilius, after he has given him to understand how an ague having surprised
him in Rome* contrary to his wives opinion, who would needs have stayed him,
he suddenly took his Coach, to go unto a house of his into the Country; and
how he told her that the ague he had, was no bodily fever, but of the place:
and follows thus: At last she let me go, earnestly recommending my health
vntome. Now I who know, how her life lodges in mine, begin to provide for
my self, that consequently I may provide for her: The privilege my age has
bestowed on me, in making me more constant, and more resolute in many things, I
loose it; whenever I call to mind, that in this aged corpse there harbors a
young woman, to whom I bring some profit. Since I cannot induce her to love
me more courageously, she induces me to love my self more carefully; for
something must be l^nt to honest affections, and sometimes, although occasions
urge us to the contrary, life must be revoked again, yea with torment. The
soul must be held fast with ones teeth, since the law to live in honest men,
is not to live as long as they please, but so long as they ought. He who
esteems not ^is wife or a friend so much, ^^ that he will not lengthen his
life for them, and will ob^^inately die, that man is over-nice, and too
^ff^minate: The Soul must command that unto her self, when the utility of
our friends requires it: we must sometimes lend our selves unto our friends,
and when we would die for us, we ought for their sak^s to interrupt our
deseigne. It is a testimony of high courage to return to life for the respect
of other^ as diverse notable men have done: and to preserve age is a part of
singular integrity (the chiefest commodity whereof, is the carelessness of
her continuance, and a more couragi^us and disdaine^ull use of life) if a man
perceive such an office to be pleasing, acceptable and profitable to any
well-affected friend. And who does it, receives thereby a grateful m^^de and
pleasing rec^mpence: for what can be sweeter, than to be so dear unto his
wife, that in respect of her a man become more dear unto himself; So my
Paulina, has not only charged me with her fear, but also with mine. It has
not been sufficient for me to cons^der, how resolutely I might dye, but I
have also considered how irresolutely she might endure it. I have enforced my
self to live: And to live is sometimes magnanimity: Read here his own
words, as excellent as is his usage.

The six and thirtieth Chapter.
Of the worthiest and most excellent men.

IF a man should demand of me, which of all men that ever came to my
knowledge, I would make choise-of, me seems, I find three, who have been
excellent above all others. The one is, Homer, not that Aristotle or Varro,
(for example sake) were not peradventure as wise and as sufficient as he: Nor
that Virgil, (and possibly in his own art) be not comparable unto him. I
leave that to their judgments that know them both. I who know but one of them,
according to my skill may only say this, that I cannot be persuaded, the Muses
themselves did ever go beyond the Roman.

Tal^ facit carmen docta t^studine, quale Propert. li. 2. ^l: 34. 79.

-- Cynthius impositis temperat articulis.
He on his learned Lu^e such verse does play,
As Phoebus should thereto his fingers lay.
In which judgment, this must notwithstanding not be forgotten, that Virgil
does especially derive his sufficiency from Homer, and he is his guide and
School^master; and that but one only glance or sentence of the Iliads, has
given both body and matter to that great and divine Poem of the Aeneid. My
meaning is not to accoump^ so: I entermix diverse other circumstances, which
yield this man most admirable unto me, and as it were beyond humane condition.
And truly I am often amazed, that he who has produced, and by his authority
brought so many Deitie^ in credit with the World, has not obtained to be
reputed a God himself. Being blind and indigent; having lived before ever the
Sciences were redacted into strict rules and certain observations, he had so
perfect knowledge of them, that all those which since his time have labored to
establish Policies or Commonwealths, to manage wars, and ^o write either of
Religion or Philosophy, in what Sect soever or of all A^tes, have made use of
him, as of an absolutely-perfect Master in the knowledge of all things; and of
his Books, as of a Seminary, a Spring-garden or Storehouse of all kinds of
sufficiency and learning.

Qui quid sit purchrum* quid turpe, quid v^ile, quid non, ^or. li. epist. 23

Pl^ntus ac melius Chrysippo ac Crantore dicit.
What is fair, What is foul, What p^ofit may, What no^,
Better than Crantor or Chrysippus, Homer wrote.
And as another says:

-- a quo ceu font perrenni Ovid. Am. li 3. ^l. 8. 25.

Vatum Pierijs labra rigantur aquis.
By whom, as by an ever-flowing-filling spring,
With Muses liquor Poets lips are bath'de to sing.
And another:

Add Heliconiadum comites, quorum vnus Homerus Lucr. l* 3. 1081.

Astrapotitus.
Muses companions add to these, of all
One only Homer has in heaven his stall.
And another:

-- cuiusque ex ore profuso Ma^il ^st. l. 2. 8.

Omnis posterit as latices in carmina duxit,
Amnemque in tenu^s, a^sa est deducere rivos:
Vnius foecunda bonis.
From whose large mouth for verse all that since live
Drew water, and grew bolder to derive,
Into thin shallow rivers his deep floods:
Richly luxuriant in one man's goods.
It is against natures course* that he has made the most excellent production,
that may be; for, the ordinary birth of things is imperfect: They are
augmented by increase, and corroborated by growth. He has reduced the infancy
of Poesy, and diverse other Sciences to be ripe perfect and complete. By which
reason he may be termed the first and last of Poets, following the noble
testimony, antiquity has left us of him, that having had no man before him,
whom he might imitate, so has he had none after him, could imitate him* His
words (according to Aristotle) are the only words that have motion and
action: they are the only substantial Words. Alexander the Great, having
lighted upon a rich casket amongst D^rius his spoils, appointed the same to
be safely kep^ for himself, to keep his Homer in: saying, he was the best
adviser, and faithfullest counselor he had in his military affairs. By the
same reason said C^eom^nes, son to Anaxandridas, that he was the
Lacedaemonians Poet; for he was an excellent good teacher or Master of War
like discipline. This singular praise and particular commendation has also
been given him by Plutarke, where he says, that he is the only Author in the
world, who yet never distasted Reader, or glutted man; ever showing himself
other, and different to the Readers; and ever flourishing with a new grace.
That Wagge Alcibiades, demanding one of Homers books of one who prosessed
letters, because he had it not, gave him a whirrit one the care; as if a man
should find one of our Priests, without a Breviarie. Xenophanes one day made
his moan to Hieron the Tyrant of Siracusa, that he was so poor as he had not
wherewithal to find two servants: How comes that to pass? (answered
Hieron) Homer, who was much poorer than thou art, dead as he is, finds more
then ten thousand. What left Panaetius vnsaide, when he named Plato the Homer
of Philosophers? Besides what glory may be compared to his? There is nothing,
lives so in men's mouths as his name and his works; nothing so known and
received as Troy, as Helen and her Wars, which paradventure never were. Our
Children are yet called by the names he invented three thousand years since
and more. Who knows not Hector? Who has not heard of Achilles? Not only
some particular races, but most nations seek to derive themselves from his
inventions. Mach^m^t, asecond of that name, Emperor of Turks, writing to Pope
Pius the second: I wonder (says he) how the Italians will bandie against me,
seeing we have our common offspring, from the Trojans; and I as well as they
have an interest to revenge the blood of Hector upon the Graecians, whom they
favor against me. Is it not a worthy Comedy, whereof Kings, Commonwealths,
Principalities and Emperors, have for many ages together played their parts,
and to which this great Universe serves as a Theater: seven cities of Greece
strived amongst themselves about the places of his birth. So much honor his
very obscurity procured him.

Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae, A. Gel. ^^ct. At.
13 c. II.

Rhodes, Salamis, Colophon, Chios, Argos, Smyrna, with Athens,
The other is Alexander the great. For, who shall consider his age, wherein he
began his enterprises; the small means he had to ground so glorious a
desseigne upon the authority he attained unto in his infancy, amongst the
greatest Commanders, and most experienced Captains in the world, by whom he
was followed: the extraordinary favor, wherewith fortune embraced him, and
seconded so many of his haughtie-dangerous exploites, which I may in a manner
call rash or fond-hardie.

Impellens quicquid sibi summapetenti Lucan. l. 1. 148.

Obstaret, gaudensque viam fecisse ruina.
While he shot at the highest, all that might stay
He for'st, and joy de with ruin to make way.
That eminent greatness, to have at the age of thirty years passed
victorious through all the habitable earth, and but with half the life of a
man to have attained the utmost endeavor of humane nature; so that you cannot
imagine his continuance lawful, and the lasting of his increase in fortune,
and progress in virtue even unto a just term of age, but you must suppose
something above man, to have caused so many Royal branches to ^ssue from out
the loins of his Soldiers, leaving the world after his death to be shared
between four succes^ours, only Captains of his Army, whose succeeders,
have so long time since continued, and descendents maintained that large
possession. So infinite, rare and excellent virtues that were in him, as
justice, temperance, liberality, integrity in words, love toward his, and
humanity toward the conquered. For in truth, his manners seem to admit no just
cause of reproach: indeed some of his particular, rare and extraordinary
actions, may in some fort be taxed. For it is impossible to conduct so great,
and direct so violent motions with the strict rules of justice. Such men ought
to be judged in gross, by the mistress end of their actions. The ruin of
Thebes; the murder of Menander, and of Ephestions Physician; the maslacre of
so many Persian prisoners at once: of a troop of Indian Soldiers, not without
some prejudice unto his word and promise: and of the Cosseyans and their little
children, are escapes somewhat hard to be excused. For, concerning Clitus, the
fault was expiated beyond it is merit; and that action, as much as any other,
witnesses the integrity and cheerefulnes of his complexion, and that it was a
complexion in it self excellently formed to goodness; And it was wittily
said of one, that he had virtues by nature, and vices by accident. Concerning
the point, that he was somewhat to lavish a boaster, and over-impatient to
hear himself ill-spoken-of; and touching those mangers, arms, and bits,
which He caused to be scattered in India, respecting his age and the
prosperity of his fortune, they are in my conceit pardonable in him. He that
shall also consider his many military virtues, as diligence, foresight
patience; discipline, policy, magnanimity, resolution and good fortune;
wherein, though Ha^^balls authority had not taught it us, he has been the
first and chief of men: the rare beauties, matchless features, and
incomparable conditions of his person, beyond all comparison, and
wonder-breeding; his carriage; demeanor, and venerable behavior, in a face so
young, so verm^ill, and heart-enflaming:

Qualis vbi Occani perfusus Lucifer vnda, Virg Aen. l. 8. 589.

Quen^ Venus ante alios astrorum diligit ignes.
Extulit os sacrum caelo, tenebra squere solvit,
As when the day star washed in Ocean-streames,
Which Venus most of all the stars esteems,
Shows sacred ligh, tshakes darkenesse-off with beams.
The excellency of his wit, knowledge and capacity; the continuance and
greatness of his glory, unspotted, untainted, pure and free from all blame or
envy: insomuch as long aftet his death, it was religiously believed of many,
that the medalls or brooches representing his person brought good luck unto
such as wore or had them about them. And that more Kings and Princes have
written his gestes and actions, then any other historians, of what quality
soever, have registered the gests, or collected the actions of any other King or
Prince that ever was: And that even at this day, the Mahometists, who contemn
all other histories, by special privilege, allow, receive, and only honor
his. All which premises duly considered together, he shall confess, I have
had good reason to prefer him before Caesar himself who alone might have
made me doubt of my choice. And it must needs be granted, that in his
exploites there was more of his own; but more of fortunes in Alexanders
achievements. They have both had many things mutually alike, and Caesar
happily some greater. They were two quick and devouring fires, or two swift
and surrounding streams, able to ravage the world by sundry ways.

Et velut immissi diversis partibus ignes Lib. 12 521.

Arentem in silvam, and virgulta sonantia lauro:
Aut vbi decursu rapido de montibus altis
Dant sonitum spumosi amnes, and in aequora currunt,
Quisque suum populatus iter.
As when on diverse sides fire is applied
To crackling bay-shrubs, or to woods Sun dried,
Or as when foaming streams from mountains hie,
With downe-fall swift resound, and to sea fly;
Each-one does havoc^e-out his way thereby.
But grant Caesar's ambition were more moderate, it is so unhappy, in that it
met with this vile subject of the subversion of his country, and universal
empairing of the world; that all parts imparcially collected and put together
in the balance, I must necessarily bend to Alexanders side. The third, and in
my judgment, most excellent man, is Epaminondas. Of glory he has not so much
as some, and is far short of diverse (which well considered is no
substantial part of the thing) of resolution and true valor, not of that
which is set-on by ambition, but of that, which wisdom and reason may settle
in a well disposed mind, he had as much as may be imagined or wished for. He
has in mine opinion, made as great trial of his virtues, as ever did
Alexander or Caesar: for although his exploites of war be not so frequent,
and so high-raised, yet being thoroughly considered, they are as weighty, as
resolute, as constant, yea and as authentical a testimony of hardines and
military sufficiency, as any man's else. The Graecians, without any
contradiction affoorded him the honor, to entitle him the chief and first man
among themselves: and to be the first and chief man of Greece is without all
question to be chief and first man of the world. Touching his knowledge and
worth, this ancient judgment does yet remain amongst us, that never was man
who know so much, nor never man that spoke less then he. For he was by Sect a
Pythagorian; and what he spoke, no man ever spoke better: An excellent and most
persuasive Orator was he. And concerning his manners and conscience therein
he far outwent all that ever meddled with managing affairs: For in this one
part, which ought especially to be noted, and which alone declares what we
are, and which only I counter poise to all others together, he gives place to
no Philosopher; no not to Socrates himself. In whom innocence is a quality,
proper, chief, constant, uniform and incorruptible. In comparison of which,
it seems in Alexander subalternall, uncertain, variable, effeminate and
accidental. Antiquine judged that precisely to sift out, and curiously to pry
into all other famous Captains, there is in every one severally some special
quality, which makes him renowned and famous. In this man alone, it is a
virtue and sufficiency, every where complete and alike; which in all offices
of humane life, leaves nothing more to be wished-for. Be it in public or
private; in peaceable negotiations or warlike occupations; be it to live or
die, greatly or gloriously, I know no form or fortune of man, that I admire or
regard, with so much honor, with so much love. True it is, I find this
obstinacy in poverty, somewhat scrupulous; and so have his best friends
pourtrayed-it. And this only action (high notwithstanding and very worthy
admiration) I find or deem somewhat sharp; so as I would nor wish, nor
desire the imitation thereof in me, according to the form it was in him.
Scipio Aemilianus alone (would any charge him with as fierce, and noblie-minded
an end, and with as deep and universal knowledge of Sciences) might be placed
in the other scale of the balance against him. Oh what a displeasure has
swift-gliding Time done me, even in the nicke, to deprive our eyes, of the
chiefest pair of lives, directly the noblest that ever were in Plutarke, of
these two truelyworthy personages: by the universal consent of the world, the
one chief of Graecians, the other principal of Romans. What a matter, what a
workman! For a man that was noe Saint, but as we say, a gallant-honest man, of
civil manners and common customs; of a temperate haughtiness; the richest
lise I know (as the vulgar saying is) to have lived amongst the living, and
fraughted with the richest qualities, and most to be desired parts (all things
imparcially considered) in my humor, is that of Alcibiades. But touching
Epaminondas. for a pattern of excessive goodness, I will here insert certain
of his opinions, The sweetest contentment he had in all his life, he witnesses
to have been, the pleasure he gave his father and mother, of his victory upon
Le^ctra: he staketh much, in preferring their pleasure, before his content, so
just and full of so glorious an action. He thought it unlawful, yea were it
to recover the liberty of his country. for any one to kill a man, except he
knew some just cause. And therefore was he so backward in the enterprise of
Pelopidas his companion, for the deliverance of Thebes. He was also of
opinion, that in a battle a man should avoid to encounter his friend, being on
the contrary part; and if he met him, to spare him. And his humanity or
gentleness, even toward his very enemies, having made him to be suspected of
the ^^otians, for so much as after he had miraculously forced the Lacedaemonians
to open him a passage, which at the entrance of Mor^^ near Corinth, they had
undertaken to make-good, he was contented, without fur there pursuing them in
fury, to have marched over their bellies; was the cause he was deposed of his
office of Captain General. Most honorably for such a cause; and for the
shame it was to them, soon after to be forced by necessity to advance him to
his first place: and to acknowledge how their glory, and confess that their
safety did only depend on him: victory following him as his shadow, whither
soever he went: and as the prosperity of his country was borne by and with
him, so it died with and by him.

The seven and thirtieth Chapter.
Of the resemblance between children and fathers.

THis ^udling up of so much trash, or packing of so many several pieces, is
done so strangely, as I never lay hands on it, but when an over lazy idleness
urges me; and no where, but in mine own house. So has it been compact at
sundry pauses, and contrived at several intervalls, as occasions have sometime
for many months together, here and there in other places, detained me.
Besides, I never correct my first imaginations by the second; it may happen, I
now and then alter some word, rather to diversifie, then take any thing away.
My purpose is, to represent the Progress of my humors, that every part be
seen or member distinguished, as it was produced. I would to God I had begun
sooner, and knew the tracke of my changes, and course of my variations. A boy
whom I employed to write for me, supposed, he had gotten a rich booty, when he
stole some parts, which he best liked. But one thing comforts me that he shall
gain no more, then I lost by them. I am grown elder by seven or eight years
since I began them; nor has it been without some new purchase. I have by
the liberality of years acquainted my self with the stone chollike. Their
commerce and long conversation, is not easiely past-over without some suchlike
fruit. I would be glad, that of many other presents, they have ever in store,
to bestow upon such as wait upon them long, they had made choice of some one,
that had been more acceptable unto me: for they could never possess me with
any, that, even from my infancy, I hated more. Of all accidents incident to
age, it was that I feared most. My self have many times thought, I went on too
far, and that to hold out so long a journey, I must of necessity, in the
end, stumble upon some such unpleasing chance. I perceived plainly, and
protested sufficiently, it was high time to depart, and that according to the
^ule of skillfull chirurgions, who when they must cut off some member, life
must be seared to the quick, and cut to the sound flesh. That nature is wont
to make him pay intolerable usury, who does not yield or pay the same in due
time. I was so far from being ready to make lawful tender of it, that in
eighteen months, or thereabouts, I have continued in so yrkesome and
unpleasing plight, I have already learned to apply my self unto it; and am now
entering into covenant with this chollicall kind of life; for therein I find
matter, wherewith to comfort me, and to hope better. So much are men enured in
their miserable estate, that no condition is so poor, but they will accept; so
they way continue in the same. Hear M^cen^^.

Debilem facito ma^^, Sen. epist. 101. f

Debilem pede, coxa,
Lubricos quate dentes,
Vita dum superest, been est.
Make me be weak of hand,
Scarce on my legs to stand,
Shake my loose teeth with pain,
It Is well, so life remain.
And Tamburlane cloked the fantastical cruelty, he exercised upon Lazars or
Leprousmen, with a foolish kind of humanity, putting all he could find or
heare-of, to death, (as he said,) to rid them from so painful and
miserable a life, as they lived. For, there was none so wretched amongst them,
that would not rather have been three times a Leaper, than not to be at all.
And Antisthenes the Stoic, being very sick, and crying out: Oh who shall
deliver me from my tormenting evils? Diogenes, who was come to visit him,
forth with presenting him a knife; Mary, this, said he, and that very
speedily, i^ thou please: I mean not of my life, replied he, but of my
sickness. The sufferances which simply touch us in mind, do much less
afflict me, then most men: Partly by judgment; For the World deemeth diverse
things horrible, or avoydable with the loss of life, which to me are in manner
indifferent: Partly, by a stupide and insensible complexion, I have in
accidents, that hit me not point-blancke: Which complexion I esteem one of the
better parts of my natural condition. But the truely-essentiall and corporal
sufferances, those I taste very sensibly: Yet is it, having othertimes
fore-apprehended them with a delicate and weak sight and by the enjoying of
this long health and happy rest, which God has lent me, the better part of my
age, somewhat empaired: I had by imagination concciued them so intolerable,
that in good truth, I was more afraid, than since I have found hurt in them:
Whereupon, I daily augment this opinion: That most of our souls faculties (as
we employ them) do more trouble than stead the quiet repose of life. I am
continually grapling with the worst of all diseases, the most grievous, the
most mortal, the most remediless and the most violent. I have already had
trial of five or six long and painful fittes of it: Nevertheless, either I
flatter my self, or in this plight there is yet something, that would feign
keep life and soul together, namely in him, whose mind is free from fear of
death, and from the threats, conclusions and consequences, which physic is
ever buzzing into our heads. But the effect of pain it self, has not so
sharp a smarting, or so pricking a sharpness, that a settled man should enter
into rage or fall into despair. This commodity at least, I have by the
chollicke, that what I could never bring to pass in my self, which was,
altogether to reconcile, and throwly to acquaint my self with death, she
shall atchieve, she shall accomplish: for, by how much more she shall
importune and urge me, by so much less shall death be fearful unto me, I
had already gotten, not to be beholding to life, but only in regrad of life,
and for lives sake: She shall also untie this intelligence, and loose this
combination. And God grant, if in the end her sharpness shall happen to
surmount my strength, she cast ^^ce not into the other extreamitie, no less
vicious, no less bad, that is, to love and desire to die

Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes. Mart. l. 10. ^pig. 47. v^t.

Nor fear thy latest doom,
Nor wish it ere it come.
They are two passions to be feared, but one has her remedy nearer than the
other. Otherwise, I have ever found that precept ceremonious, which so
precizely appoints a man to set a good countenance, a settled resolution, and
disdainefull carriage, upon the sufferance of evils. Why does Philosophy,
which only respects liveliness and regards effects, ammuze it self about
these external apparances? Let her leave this care to Mimikes, to Histrions,
and to Rhethoricke Masters, who make so great accoumpt of our gestures. Let her
hardly remit this vocal lithernesse unto evil, if it be neither cordial, nor
stomacall* And let her lend her voluntary plants to the kind of sighs,
sobbes, palpatations and palenesse, which nature has exempted from our
puissance, Always provided, the courage be without fear, and words sance
despair; let her be so contented. What matter is it if we bend our arms, so
we writhe not our thoughts? She frames us for our selves, not for others: to
be, not to seem. Let her apply her self to govern our understanding, which
she has undertaken to instruct. Let her in the pangs or fittes of the
chollike, still maintain the soul capable to acknowledge her self and follow
her accustomed course, resisting sorrow and enduring grie^e* and not shamefully
to prostrate her self at his feet: Moved and chafed with the combat, not
basely suppressed nor faintly overthrowen: Capable of entertainment and other
occupations, unto a certain limite. In so extreme accidents, it is cruelty,
to require so composed a ward at our hands. If we have a good game, it skills
not, though we have an ill countenance. If the body be any whit eased by
complaining, let him do it: If stirring or agitation please him, let him
turn, roll and toss himself as long as he list: If with raising his voice,
or sending it forth with more violence, he think his grief any thing alayed
or vented (as some Physicians affirm, it some what eases women great with
child, and is a mean of ea^ie or speedy delivery) fear he not to do it;
or if he may but entertain his torment, let him mainely cry out. Let us not
command our voice to depart, but if she will, let us not hinder it. Epicurus
does not only pardon his wise man to crie-out, when he is grieved Ci^. T^sc.
qu. l. 2
or vexed, but persuades him to it. Pugiles etiam quum feriunt, in iactandis
cestibus inge^iscunt, quia profundenda voce omne corpus intenditur, venit que
plaga vehementior. Men when they fight with sand-baoges or such heavy Weapons,
in fetc^ing their blow and driving it, will give a groan with all, because by
stretching their voice all their body is also strayned, and the stroke comes
with more vehemence. We are vexed and troubled enough with the evil, without
troubling and vexing our selves with these superfluous rules. This I say to
excuse those, which are ordinarily seen to rage in the fittes and storm in
the assaults of this sickness: for, as for me, I have hitherto past it over
with somewhat a better countenance, and am content to groan without braying
and exclaiming. And yet I trouble not my self, to mainetaine this exterior
decency; for, I make small reckoning of such an advantage; In that I lend my
sickness what it requires: But either my pain is not so excessive, or I
bear it with more constancy than the vulgar sort. Indeed I must confess,
when the sharp fittes or throws assail me, I complain, and vex my self,
but yet I never fall into despair, as that fellow:

Eiulatu, questu, gemitu, fremitibus C^^. ibid.

Resanando multum flebiles v^ces refert.
with howling, groaniug, and complaint of fates,
Most lamentable cries he imitates.
I feel my self in the greatest heat of my sickness; and I ever found my
self capable and in tune, to speak, to think and to answer, as soundly as at
any other time, but not so constantly, because my pain does much trouble and
distract me. When I am thought to be at the lowest, and that such as are
about me spare me, I often make a trial of my forces, and propose them such
discourses as are furthest from my state. There is nothing impossible for me,
and me thinks I can do all things upon a sudden fit, so it continue not
long. Oh why have not I the gift of that dreamer; mentioned by Cicero, who
dreaming, that he was closely embracing a young wench; found himself rid of
the stone in his sheets! Mine do strangely dis-wench me. In the intermission
or respites of this outrageous pairre, when as my Vreters (through which the
urine passes from the reins to the bladder) languish without gnawing me, I
suddenly return into my ordinary form: for so much as my mind takes no other
allarume, but the sensible and corporal. All which I certeinely owe unto the
care I have had to prepare my self by reason and discourse of such accidents:

-- laborum Virg. Aen. l. 6. 103.

Nulla mihi nova nuncfacies inopinaque surgit,
Omnia praecept, at que animo mecum ante peregi.
No new or unexpected form is cast
Of travels in my breast: all I forecast,
In my mind with self I all forepast.
I am handled somewhat roughly for a Prentise, and with a violent and rude
change; being at one instant fallen from a very pleasing, calm, and most happy
condition of life, unto the most do^orous, yrkesome and painful, that can
possibly be imaginad: For, besides that in it self it is a disease greatly to
be feared, it is beginnings or approaches are in me sharper or more difficult*
than it is wont to trouble others withal. The pangs and fittes thereof do so
often assail me, that in a manner I have no more feeling of perfect health.
Notwithstanding I hitherto keep my spirit so seated, as if I can but join
constancy unto it, I find my self to be in a much better state of life, than
a thousand others, who have neither ague nor other infirmity, but such as for
want of discourse they give themselves. There is a certain fashion of subtle
humility, which proceeds of presumption: As this: That in many things we
acknowledge our ignorance, and are so courteous to avowe, that in Natures
works, there are some qualities and conditions, which to us are imperceptible,
and whereof our sufficiency cannot discover the means, nor find out the
causes. By this honest and conscientious declaration, we hope to gain, that
we shall also be believed in those, we shall say to understand. We need not
go to cull out miracles, and choose strange difficulties: me seems, that
amongst those things we ordinarily see, there are such incomprehensible
rarities, as they exceed all difficulty of miracles. What monster is it, that
this tear or drop of seed, whereof we are engendered brings with it; and in it
the impressions, not only of the corporal form, but even of the very thoughts
and inclinations of our fathers? Where does this drop of water contain or
lodge this infinite number of forms? And how bear they these resemblances, of
so rash, and unruly a progress, that the childs child shall be answerable to
his grandfather, and the nephew to his uncle? In the family of Lepidus the
Roman, there have been three, not successively, but some between, that were
borne with one same eye covered with a cartilage or gristle. There was a race
in Thebes, which from their mothers womb, bare the form of a burre, or iron
of a lance; and such as had it not, were judged as mis-begotten and deemed
unlawful. Aristotle reports of a certain Nation, with whom all women were
common, where children were alloted their fathers, only by their resemblances.
It may be supposed, that I am indebted to my father for this stony quality;
for he died exeeedingly tormented with a great stone in his bladder. He never
felt himself troubled with the disease, but at the age of sixty seven
years: before which time he had never felt any likelihoode or motion of it,
nor in his reins, nor in his sides, nor elsewhere: and until then had lived
in very prosperous health, and little subject to infirmities, and continued
seven years and more with that disease training a very dolorous lives-end. I
was borne five and twenty years before his sickness, and during the course
of his healthy state his third child. Where was all this while the propension or
inclination to this defect, hatched? And when he was so far from such a
disease, that light part of his substance wherewith he composed me, how could
it for her part, bear so great an impression of it? And how so closely
covered, that forty five years after, I have begun to have a feeling of it?
And hitherto alone, among so many brethren and sisters, and all of one mother.
He that shall resolve me of this progress, I will believe him as many other
miracles as he shall please to tell me: always provided (as commonly they
do) he go not about to pay me, with a doctrine much more difficult and
fantastical, then is the thing it self (let Physicians somewhat excuse my
liberty:) for by the same infusion and fatal infinuation, I have received the
hate and contempt of their doctrine. The Antipathie, which is between me and
their art, is to me hereditarie. My father lived three score and fourteen
years: My grandfather three score and nine; my great grandfather very near
four score, and never fasted or took any kind of Physic. And whatsoever
was not in ordinary use amongst them, was deemed a drug. Physic is grounded
upon experience and examples. So is mine opinion. Is not this a manifest kind
of experience and very advantageous? I know not whether in all their registers,
they are able to find me three more, borne, bred, brought up, and diceased,
under one roof, in one same chimnie, that by their own direction and regiment
have lived so long. Wherein they must needs grant me, that if it be not
reason, at least it is Fortune that is on my side. Whereas among Physicians
fortune is of more consequence, then reason. Low-brought, and weak as I am
now, let them not take me at an advantage, nor let them not threaten me: for
that were insulting a^rogance. And to say truth, I have by my familiar examples
gained enough upon them although they would take hold and stay there. Humane
things have not so much constancy: It is now two hundred years; wanting but
eighteen, that this Essay continues with us: For, the first was borne in the
year of our Lord one thousand four hundred and two, Some reason there is why
this experience should now begin to fail us. Let them not vpbraide me with
those infirmities, which now have seized upon me: Is it not sufficient to have
lived seven and forty years in good and perfect health for my part? Suppose
it be the end of my carriere, yet it is of the longest, Mine ancestors by some
se^ret instinct and natural inclination have ever l^athed all manner of
Physic: for the very sight of drugs bred a kind of horror in my father. The
Lord of Gaviac mine uncle by the fathers side, a man of the church, sickish
even from his birth, and who notwithstanding made his weak life to hold out
until sixty seven years; falling once into a dangerous and vehement
continual fever, it was by the Physicians concluded, that unless he would
aid himself (for they often ^erme that aid, which indeed is impeachment)
he was but a dead man. The good soul, afrighted as he was, at that horrible
sentence, answered thus, why when I am a dead man: But shortly after God made
their prognostications to prove vain. The Lord of Bussaguet last of the
brethren (for they were four) and by much the last, he alone submitted
himself to that art, as I imagine by reason of the frequence he had in other
Sciences; for he was a Counselor in the Court of Parliament, which prospered
so ill with him, that though he were in show of a very strong complexion, he
died long before the others, except one, the Lord of Saint Michaell. It may
well be, I have received of them that natural dyspathie unto Physic. Yet if
there had been no other consideration but this, I would have endeavored to
force it. For, all these conditions, which without reason are borne in us, ate
vicious. It is a kind of malady a man must fight withal. It may be I had
such a propension, but I have settled and strongthned the same by discourses,
which in me have confirmed the opinion I have of it. For, I have also the
consideration to refuse Physic by reason of the sharpness of it is taste. It
would not easily agree with my humor, who think health worthy to be
purchased, with the price of all cautheries and incisions, how painful so
ever. And following Epicurus, me seems that all manner of voluptuousness
should be avoided, if greater griefs follow them: And griefs to be sought
after, that have greater volup^uousnesse ensuing them. Health is a very
precious jewel, and the only thing, that in pursuit of it deserves, a man
should not only employ, time, labor, sweat and goods, but also life to get
it; forasmuch as without it, life becomes injurious unto us. Voluptuousnes,
Science and virtue, without it tarnish and vanish away. And to the most
constant and exact discourses, that Philosophy will imprint in our minds to
the contrary, we need not oppose any thing against it but the image of Plato,
being visited with the falling sickness, or an Apoplexy; and in this
presupposition challenge him to call the richest faculties of his mind to help
him.

All means that may bring us unto health, can not be esteemed of me either
sharp or dear. But I have some other apparances, which strangely make me to
distrust all this ware. I do not say but there may be some art of it: It is
certain, that amongst ^o many of Natures works, there are some things proper
for the preservation of our health. I know there are some simples, which in
operation are moistning and some drying: My self have found by experience that
radish-rootes are windy, and senie-leaves breed looseness in the belly. I
have the knowledge of diverse such experiments, as I know that Mutton
nourishes that Wine warmeth me. And Solon was wont to say, that eating was as
all other Drugges are, a medicine against the disease of hunger. I disallow not
the use we draw ^^^m the world, nor doubt I of Natures power and
fruitefulnesse, and of her application to our need. I see, that the
Pickrell*fish, and the Swallows live well by her laws. I greatly distrust the
inventions of our wit, of our art and of our Science: in favor of which we
have forsaken Nature, and abandoned her rules; wherein we can neither observe
limitation, nor keep moderation. As we term justice, the composition of the
first laws that come unto our hands, and their practice and dispensation very
often most wicked and vnconvenient. And as those which mock and condemn it,
intend nevertheless to wrong this noble virtue; but only to condemn the
abuse and profanation of so sacred a title: So likewise in Physic, I know
her glorious name, her proposition, and her promise, so profitable to mankind:
but what it desseigneth amongst us, I neither honor nor respect. (...),
experience makes me fear it, for of all I know, I see no kind of men so
soon sick, nor so late cured, as those who are under the urisdiction of
Physic. Their very health is distempered and corrupted by the constraint of
^their prescriptions. Physicians are not contented to have the government over
Sickness, but they make Health to be sick, lest a man should at any time
escape their authority. Of a constant and perfect health, do they not frame
an argument of some future dangerous sickness? I have often been sick, and
without any their help, I have found my sickenesses (though I never meddled
with the bitterness of their prescriptions) as easy to be tolerated, and as
short, as any man's else, and yet I have felt diverse. My health is free and
sound, without any rules or discipline) except of my own custom and pleasure.
I find noe difference in places, all are alike to me to dwell in: forbeing
sick, I need no other commodities, then those I must have when I am in
health. I am nothing passionated, though I be without Physician, without
Apothecary, or without physical help; whereat I see some as much troubled in
mind, as they are with their disease, What? does the best Physician of them
all make us perce^ve any happiness or continuance in his life, as may w^^nesse
some manifest effect of his skill and l^^rning? There is no Nation, but has
continued many ages without physic: yea the first ages, which is as much to
say, the best and most happy: and the tenth part of the world has as yet no
use of it. Infini^e Nations know it not; where they live both more healthie
and much longer then we do: yea and amongst us, the common ^ort live happily
without it. The Romans had been six hundred years before ever they received
it: by means or interposition of Cato the Censor, they banish^ it their
City, who declared how easily man might live without it, having lived
himself four score and five years, and his wife until she was ex^reamely
old, not without Physic, but indeed without any Physician: For, whatsoev^r
is by experience found healthie for our body and health, may be termed
physic. He entertained (as Pi^tarke says) his family in health, by the use
(as far as I remember) of Hares milk: As the Arcadians (says Plinic) cure
all malladies with Cowes milk. And the Lybians (says Herodotus) do generally
enjoy a perfect health, by observing this custom, which is, so soon as their
children are about four years old, to cauterize and sear the veins of
their head and temples, whereby they cut off the way to all rheumes and
defluxions. And the countrie*people where I dwell, use nothing against all
diseases, but some of the strongest wine they can get, with store of saffron
and spice in it; and all with one like fortune. And to say true, of all this
dive^siti^ of rules, and confusion of prescriptions, what other end or effect
works it, but to evacuate the belly? which a thousand home-simples will do as
well. And I know not whether it be as profitable (as they say) and whether our
nature require the residents of her ex^rements, until a certain measure, as
wine does his lees for his preservation. You see often men very healthy, by
some strange accidents, to fall into violent vomi^es, and fluxes, and void
great store of excrements, without any praecedent need, or succeeding
benefit: yea with some empairing and prejudice. I learned of Plato not long
since, that of three motions, which belong to us, the last and worst, is that
of purgations, and that no man, except he be a fool, ought to undertake it;
unless it be in great extreamitie. The evil is troubled and stirred up by
contrary oppositions. It is the form of life, that gently must diminish,
consume and bring it to an end. Since the violent twinges of the drug and
malady are ever to our loss; since the quarrel is cleared in us, and the
drug a trustlesse help; by it is own nature an enemy to our health, and but
by trouble has no access in our state. Let Us give them leave to go on. That
order which provideth for Fleas and Moles, does also provide for men, who have
the same patience to suffer themselves to be governed, that Fleas and Moles
have. We may fairly cry bo-bo-boe; it may well make us hoarse, but it will
nothing advaunce it. It is a proud and impetuous order. Our fear and our
despair, in liew of enviting the same unto it, does distaste and delay it out
of our help: he owes his course to evil, as well as to sickness. To suffer
himself to be corrupted in favor of one, to the prejudice of the others
rights, he will not do it; so should they fall into disorder. Let us go on in
the name of God; let us follow; He leadeth-on such as follow him: those that
follow him not he haleth-on, both with their rage and physic together. Cause
a purgation to be prepared for your brain; it will be better employed unto
it, then to your stomach. A Lacedemonian being asked, what had made him live
so long in health, answered, The ignorance of physic- And Adrian the
Emperor, as he was dying, ceased not to cry out, that the number of
Physicians had killed him. A bad wrestler became a Physician. Courage, said
Diogenes to him, thou have reason to do so, for now shall thou help to put
them into the ground, who have heretofore aided to lay thee on it. But
according to Nicoles, they have this hap, That the Sun does manifest their
success, and the earth does cover their fault, And besides, they have a very
advantageous fashion among themselves, to make use of all manner of events;
for, whatsoever either Fortune or Nature, or any otherstrange cause (whereof
the number is infinite) produces in us, or good or healthful, it is the
privilege of Physic to ascribe it unto herself. All the fortunate successes
that come to the patient, which is under their government, it is from nature he
has them. The occasions that have cured me, and which heal a thousand others,
who never send or call for Physicians to help them, they usurp them in their
subjects. And touching ill accidents, either they utterly disavow them, in
imputing the blame of them to the patient, by some vain reasons, whereof they
never miss to find a great number; as he lay with his arms out of the bed,
he has heard the noise of a coach;

-- rhedarum transitus arcto Iuv* sat. 3. 236.

Vicorum inflexu.
Coaches could hardly pass,
The lane so crooked was.
His Window was left open all night; He has lain upon the left side, or
troubled his head with some heavy thought. In some, a word, a dream, or a
look, is of them deemed a sufficient excuse, to free themselves from all
imputation: Or if they please, they will also make use of this emparing, and
thereby make up their business; and as a mean which can never fail them,
when by their applications the disease is grown desperate, to pay us with the
assurance, that if their remedies had not been, it would have been much
worse. He, whom but from a cold they have brought to a Cotidian Ague, without
them should have had a continual fever. They must needs thrive in their
business, since all ills redownd to their profit. Truly they have reason to
require of the pacient an application of favorable confidence in them; which
must necessarily be in good earnest, and yielding to apply itself unto
imaginations, over-hardly to be believed, Plato said very well and to the
purpose, that freely to lie belonged only to Physicians, since our health
depends on their vanity and falsehood of promises. Aesope an Author of
exceeding rare excellence, and whose graces few discover, is very pleasant in
representing this kind of tyrannical authority unto us. which they usurp
upon poor souls, weakened by sickness, and overwhelmed through fear; for
he reports, how a sick man being demanded by his Physician, what operation
he felt by the Physic he had given him. I have sweat much, answered he;
that is good, replied the Physician, Another time he asked him again how he
had done since; I have had a great cold and quivered much, said he: that is
very well, quoth the Physician again, The third time he demanded of him, how
he felt himself; He answered, I swell and puffe-vp as it were with the
dropsy; That Is not amiss, said the Physician. A familiar friend of his
coming afterward to visit him, and to know how he did? Verily (said he) my
friend I die with being too too well. There was a more equal Law in Egypt, by
which for the first three days the Physician took the patient in hand, upon
the patients perrill and fortune; but the three days expired, it was at his
own. For, What reason is there, that Aesculapius their patron must have been
stricken with Thunder, for so much as he recovered Hippolitus from death to life?

Nampater omnipotens aliquem indignatus ab vmbris,
Mortalem infernis, ad lumina surgere vitae. Vi^g. Ae^ l. 7. 770.

Ipse repertorem medicinae talis, and artis
Fu^mine Phoebigenam slygias detrusit advndas,
Jove scorning that from shades infernal night,
A mortal man should rise to life's new light
Apolloes son to hell he thunder-threw.
Who such an art found out, such medicine knew,
and his followers must be absolved, that send so many souls from life to
death? A Physician boasted unto Nicocles, that his Art was of exceeding great
authority, It is true (quoth Nicocles) for, it may kill so many people without
fear of punishment by Law. As for the rest, had I been of their counsel, I
would surely have made my discipline more sacred and mysterious. They had
begun very well, but the end has not answered the beginning. It was a good
ground, to have made Gods and Doemons Authors of their Science, to have
affi^med a peculiar language and writing to themselves. Howbeit Philosophy
supposes it to be folly to persuade a man to his profit, by ways not
understood: Vt si quis medicus imperet vt sumat: As if a Physician should bid a
man take.

Terrigenam* herbigradam, demiportam, sanguine cassam, Ci^. divin. lib. 2.

One earth-borne, goe-by grass, house-bearing* slimilie, bloodlesse.
It was a good rule in their art, and which accompanies all fanaticall,
vain, and supernatural arts, that the pacients belief must by good hope and
assurance preoccupate their effect and operation. Which rule they hold so
far forth, that the most ignorant and bungling horseleach is fitter for a man
that has confidence in him, than the skilfullest and learned Physician. The
very choice of most of their Drugges, is somewhat mysterious and divine. The
left font of a Tortoyze; The stale of a Lizard; The dongue of an Elephant; The
liver of a Mole, Blood drawn from under the right wing of a white Pigeon; And
for us who are troubled with the stone-cholike (so disdainfully abuse they our
misery) Some Rattes pounded to small powder; and such other foolish trash,
which rather seem to be magike-spells or charms* than effects of any solid
science. I omit to speak of The odd number of their pills; The destination
of c^rtaine days and feasts of the year; The distinction of hours to gather
the simples of their ingredients; And the same rewbarbative and severely-grave
look of theirs, and of their port and countenan^^; Which ^l^^i^ himself
mocketh at. But, as I was about to say they have failed, for so much as they have
not added this to their fair beginning, to make their assemblies more
religious, and their consuitations more secret. No prosane man should have
access unto them, no more than to the secret ceremonies of Aesculapius. By
which means it comes to pass, that their irresolution, the weakness of
their Arguments, divinations and grounds, the sharpness of their
contestations full of hatred, of jealousy and particular considerations, being
apparent to all men; a man must needs be stark blind, ^^ he who falls into
their hands, see not himself greatly endangered. Who ever saw Physician use
his fellows receipt, without diminishing or adding somewhat unto it? Whereby
they greatly betrai^ their Art; And make us perceive, they rather respect
their reputation, and consequently their profit, than the welfare or interest
of their pacients. He is the wis^st amongst their Doctors, who has long since
prescribed them, that one alone should meddle to cure a sick man; for, if it
prosper not with him, and he do no good, the reproach will not be great to the
Art of Physic, through the fault of one man alone; and on the other side, if
it thrive well with him, the Glory shall be the greater. Whereas if they be
mani^, every hand-while they discover their mystery, because They oftener
happen to d^e ill than well. They should have been content with the perpetual
dis-agreeing, which is ever found in the opinions of the principal Masters and
chiese Authors of their Science, known but by such as are conversant in
Books, without making apparent show of the controversies, and inconstanties of
their judgment, which they foster and continue amongst themselves. Will we
have an example of the ancient debate of Physic? Hirophil^s places the
original cause of sickness in the humors: Erasistratus, in the blood of the
A^te^i^s: As^l^^^ad^s, in the ^nvisible Atoms that pass into our pores:
Al^meon, in the abundan^^^r de^ence of co^porall forces: Diocles, in the
inequal^^ie of the bodies elements, and in the (...) of the a^e, we breathe:
Strato, in the abundance, cruditie and corruption of the ^o^^^shment we take:
Hipocrates does place it in the spirits. There is a friend of the^rs, whom they
know better than I, who to this purpose cries out; that the most important
science in use amongst us (as that which has charge of our health and
preservation) is by ill hap, the most uncertain, the most confused, and most
agitated with infinite changes. There is no great danger to mistake the height
of the Sun, or misse-reckon the fraction of some As^^^n^m^cal^ s^pputation;
but herein, whereon our being and chief freehold does wholly depend it is no
wisdom to abandon ou^ selves to the mercy of the agitation of so ma^^^old ^on
rari^ wind^s. Before the Peloponesian war, there was no great news of this
science. Hipocrates brought it into credit. Whatsoever he established,
Chrysippus overthrewe, Afterward Erasistrat^s Grandchild to Aristotle,
re-enve^st what ever Chrysippus had written of it. After these, start up the
Empeirikes, who concerning the managing of this Art, took a new course*
altogether different from those ancient fathers. And when their credit began
to growesta^e; Hirophilus brought another kind of Physic into use, which
As^l^piades when his ^u^ne came, impugned, and in the end subverted. Then came
the opinions of Themi^on to be in great authority, then those of Musa, and
afterward those of Vect^^s V^l^ns, a famous Physician, by reason of the
acquaintance he had with Messalina. During the time of N^ro, the soveraintie
of Physic fell to the hands of Thessalus, who abolished and condemned
whatsoever had been held of it before his time. This man's Doctrine was
afterward wholly overthrown by Crinas of Mars^ille, who a new revived and
framed, that all men should direct and rule medicinable operations to the
Ephemerides and motions of the star^es, to eat, to drink, to sleep at what
hour it should please Luna and M^rcu^ie. His authority was soon after
supplanted by Charinus; a Physician of the same town of Mars^illes, who not
only impugned ancient Physic, but also the use of warm and public bathes,
which had been accustomed so many ages before. He caused men to be ba^h^d in
cold Water; yea, were it in the deep of Winter he plunged and dived sick men
into the running stream of Rivers. Until Plinies time noe Roman had ever
damned to exercise the Art of Physic, but was ever used by strangers and
Graecians, as at this day it is used in France by Latinizers. For, as a famous
Physician says, we do not easily admit and allow that Physic, which we
understand, nor those Drugs we gather our selves. If those Nations from whom
we have the Wood Guiacum, the Salsapar^ille, and the Wood Desqu^ne, have any
Physician amongst them, how much think we by the same commendation of the
strangeness, rareness and d^a^th, they will rejoice at our coleworts and
pa^sly? For, who dar^th contemn things sought and fetch so farre-off with the
hazard of so long and dangerous a peregrination? since these ancient mutations
of physic, there have been infinite others, that have continued unto our
days, and most often entire and universal mutations; as are those which
Paracelsus, Fioravanti and Argenterius have produced: for (as it is told me)
they do not only change a receipt, but also the whole contexture and policy
of phisickes whole body, accusing such as hitherto have made profession
thereof, of ignorance and cousinage. Now I leave to your imagination, in what
plight the poor patient finds himself. If we could but be assured, when
they mistake themselves, their physic would do us no harm, although not
profit us; It were a reasonable composition, for a man to hazard himself to
get some good, so he endangered not himself to loose by it. Aesope reports
this story; that one who had bought a Mooreslave, supposing his black hew had
come unto him by some strange accident, or ill usage of his former Master with
great diligence caused him to be medicined with diverse bathes and sundry
potions: It fortuned the Moore did no whi^ mend or change his swarthie
complexion, but lost his former health. How often comes it to pass, and how
many times see we physicians charge one another with their pacients death. I
remember a popular sickness, which some years since, greatly troubled the
Towns about me, very mortal and dangerous; the rage whereof being over-past,
which had carried away an infinite number of persons: One of the most famous
physicians in all the country, published a book, concerning that disease;
wherein he advises himself, that they had done amiss to use phl^botomie*
and confesses, it had been one of the principal causes of so great an
inconvenience. Moreover, their Authors hold, that there is no kind of
Physic, but has some hurtful part in it. And ^^ those that f^t ou^ turn,
do in some sort harm us; what must those do, which are given us to no
purpose, and out of season? As for me, if nothing else belonged thereunto, I
deem it a matter very dangerous* and of great prejudice for him who loathes
the taste, or abhorres the smell of a potion, to swallow it at so vnconvenient
hours, and so much against his heart. And I think it much d^stempereth a
sick man, namely in a season he has so much need of rest. Besides, consider
but the occasions, on which they ordinarily ground the cause of our
sickenesses; they are so light and delicate, as thence I argue, That a very
small error in compounding of their Drugges, may occasion us much de^riment.
Now if the mistaking in a Physician be dangerous, it is very ill for us: for it
is hard if he fall not often into it. He has need of many parts, diverse
considerations and several circumstances to proportion his desseigne justly.
He ought to know the sick man's complexion, his temper, his humors, his
inclinations, his actions, his thoughts and his imaginations. He must be
assured of external circumstances; of the nature of the place; the condition
of the air; the quality of the weather; the situation of the Planets, and
their influences. In sickness, he ought to be acquainted with the causes,
with the signs, with the affections and critical days: In drugges ^^ should
understand their weight, their virtue and their operation, the country, the
figure, the age, the dispensation. In all these parts, he must know how to
proportion and refer them one unto another; thereby to bege^ a perfect
Symmetrie or due proportion of each part: wherein if he miss never so little,
or if amongst so many wheels and several motions, the least be out of tune or
temper; it is enough to mar all.

God knows how hard the knowledge of most of these parts is: As for example,
how shall he find out the proper sign of the disease, every malady being
capable of an infinite number of signs; How many debates, doubts and
controversies have they amongst themselves about the interpretations of Urine?
Otherwise whence should that continual alt^^^ation come we see amongst them,
about the knowledge of the disease? How should we excuse this fault, wherein
they fall so often, to take a Martin for a Fox? In those diseases I have had
(so they admitted any difficulty) I could never yet find three agreeing in on^
opinion. I more willingly note examples that concern my self. A Gentleman in
Paris was not long since cut off the stone by the appointment of Physicians, in
whose bladder they found no more stone, then in his hand: Where also a Bishop,
who was my very good friend, had by his Physicians been earnestly sol^cited to
be cut; and my self, because they were of his counsel, upon their words,
aided to persuade him to it; who being deceased and opened, it was found, he
had no infirmity but in his reins. They are less excusable in this d^sease,
for so much as it is in some sort palpable. Whereby I judge the art of
Surgery much more certain; For it sees and handl^th what it does; and
therein is less conjecture and divination. Whereas Physicians have no speculum
matricis, to discover our brain, our ^ungs and our l^ver unto them. The very
promises of physic are incredible. For being to provide for diverse and
contrary accidents, which often trouble us together, and with a kind of
necessary relation one unto another; as the heat of the liver, and the cold of
the stomach, they will persuade us, that with their ingredients, this one shall
warm the stomach, and this other cool the liver; the one has charge to go
directly to the reins, yea even to the bladder, without enstalling his
operation any where else, and by reason of it is secret propriety, keeping his
force and virtue, all that long way, and so full of stops or lets, until it
come to the place, to whose service it is destinated. Another shall dry the
brain, and another moisten the lungs. Of all this hotch-pot having composed a
mixture or potion, is it not a kind of raving, to hope their several virtues
shall devide and separate themselves from out such a confusion or c^mmixture,
to run to so diverse charges? I should greatly fear they would loose or change
the^r tickets and trouble their quarters. And who can imagine, that in this
liquid confusion, these faculties be not corrupted, confounded and alter one
another? What? that the execution of this ordenance depends from another
officer, to whose trust and mercy we must once moreforsake our lives? As we
have doublet and hose-makers to make our clothes, and are so much the better
fitted, in as much as each medleth with his own trade, and such have their
occupation more strictly limited, then a Tailer that will make all. And as for
our necessary food, some of our great Lords, for their more commodity and ease
have several cooks, as some only to dress boiled meats, and some to roste,
others to bake, whereas if one Cook alone would supply all three in general,
he could never do it so exactly. In like sort for the curing of all diseases,
the Egyptians had reason to reject this general mystery of Physicians, and
to sunder this profession for every malady, allotting each part of the body
his distinct workman. For, every particular part was thereby more properly
attended, and less confusedly governed, and for so much as they regarded but
the same especially. Our Physicians never remember, that he who will provide
for all, provideth for nothing; and that the total and summarie policy of
this little world, is unto them vndig estible Whilst they feared to stop the
course of a bloody flux, because he should not fall into an ague, they killed me
a friend of mine, who was more worth then all the rabble of them; yea were they
as many more. They balance their diuinatious of future things, with present
cuils, and because they will not cure the brain in prejudice of the stomach,
they offend the stomach and empaire the brain, and all by their seditious and
tumultuary drugs. Concerning the variety and weakness of the reasons of this
Art, it is more apparent then in any other Art. Aperitive things are good for a
man that's troubled with the collike, because that opening and dilating the
passages, they address this slimie matter whereof the gravel and stone is
engendered, and so convay downward whatsoever begins to harden and petrifie
in the reins: A peritive things are dangerous for a man that's troubled with
the collike, because that opening and dilating the passages, they address
toward the reins, the matter engendring gravel, which by reason of the
propensions they have with it, easily seizing on the same, must by consequence
stay great store of that which is convaied unto them. Moreover, if by chance it
fortune to meet with a body, somewhat more gross then it ought to be, to pas^e
all those strait turnings, which to expel the same they must glide through;
that body being moved by those soluble things, and cast in those strait
channels, and coming to stop them, it will doubtless hasten a certain and
most dolorous death. They have a like constancy about the counsels they give
us, touching the regiment of our life. It is good to make water often; for by
experience we see, that permitting the same idly to lie still, we give it
leisure to discharge it self of her lees and excrements, which may serve to
breed the stone in the bladder: It is good to make water but seldom, for the
weighty dregs it draws with it, are not easily carried away, except by
violence: as by experience is seen in a torrent that runs very swift, which
sweepeth and cleanses the place through which he passes, much more then does a
slow-gliding stream. Likewise it is good to have often copulation with women;
for that opens the passages, and convaieth the gravel away: It is also
hurtful; for it heateth, wearieth, and weakneth the reins. It is good for one
to bathe himself in warm water; for so much as that loses and moistneth the
places where the gravel and stone lurketh: It is also bad; because this
application of external heat helps the reins to concoct, to harden and
petrifie the matter disposed unto it. To such as are at the bathes, it is more
healthful to eat but little at night, that the water they are to drink the
next morning, finding the stomach empty, and without any obstacle, it may
work the greater operation: on the other side, it is better to eat but a
little at dinner, lest a man might hinder the operation of the water, which is
not yet perfect, and not to charge the stomach so suddenly, after this other
travel, and leave the office of digesting unto the night, which can better do
it then the day; the body and spirit being then in continual motion and
action. Lo here how they in all their discourses juggle, dally, and trifle at
our charge, and are never able to bring me a proposition, but I can presently
frame another to the contrary, of like force and consequence. Let them then no
longer rail against those who in any sickness, suffer themselves gently to be
directed by their own appetite, and by the counsel of nature; and who remit
themselves to common fortune. I have by occasion of my travels seen almost all
the famous Bathes of Christendom, and some years since have begun to use them:
For, in general I deem bathing to be very good and healthy, and I am
persuaded, we incur no small incommodities in our health, by having neglected
and lost this custom, which in former times were generally observed very near
amongst all Nations, and is yet with diverse at this time to wath their bodies
every day: And I cannot imagine but that we are much the worse with keeping our
bodies all over-crusted, and our pores stopped with grease and filth. And
touching the drinking of them, fortune has first made it to agree very well
with my taste: secondly it is natural and simple; and though vain, nothing
dangerous: whereof this infinity of people of all sorts and complexions, and
of all nations that come to them, does warrant me. And although I have as yet
found no extraordinary good or wondrous effect in them, but rather having
somewhat curiously examined the matter, I find all the reports of such
operations, which in such places are reported, and of many believed, to be
false and fabulous. So easily does the world deceive it self, namely in things
it desires, or feign would have come to pass. Yet have I seen but few or
none at all, whom these waters have made worse; and no man can without malice
deny, but that they stir up a man's appetite, make easy digestion, and
except a man go to them overweake and faint (which I would have none do) they
will add a kind of new mirth unto him. They have not the power to raise men
from desperate diseases. They may stay some light accident, or prevent the
threats of some alteration. Whosoever goes to them, and resolves not to be
merry, that so he may enjoy the pleasure of the good company resorts to them,
and of the pleasant walks or exercises, which the beauty of those places,
where bathes are commonly seated, does afford and delight men withal; he
without doubt loses the better part and most assured of their effect. And
therefore have I hitherto chosen to stay my self and make use of those, where
I found the pleasure of the situation most delightsome, most conveniencie of
lodging, of victuals and company, as are in France the bathes of Banieres;
those of Plombieres, on the frontiers of Germany and Loraine; those of Baden
in Switzerland; those of Lucea in Tuscanie; and especially those of Della
villa^, which I have used most often and at diverse seasons of the year. Every
nation has some particular opinion concerning their use, and several laws
and forms how to use them, and all different: And as I have found by
experience the effect in a manner all one. In Germany they never use to drink
of their waters; but bathe themselves for all diseases, and will lie padling in
them, all most from Sun to Sun. In Italy if they drink nine days of the
water, they wash themselves other thirty days with it. And commonly they
drink it mixed with other drugges, thereby to help the operation. Here our
Physicians appoint us when we have drunk to walk upon it, that so we may
help to digest it: There, so soon as they have drunk, they make them lie a
bed, until they have voided the same out again, continually warming their
stomach and feet with warm clothes. All the Germans whilst they lie in the
water, do particularly use cupping glasses, and scarifications: And the
Italians use their Do^ci^, which are certain spowts running with warm waters,
convaied from the bathes-spring in leaden pipes, where, for the space of a
month, they let it spout upon their heads, upon their stomach, or upon any
other part of the body, according as need requires, one hour in the
forenoone, and as long in the after noone* there are infinite other differences
of customs in every country: or to say better, there is almost no
resemblances between one and other. See how this part of Physic, by which
alone I have suffered my self to be carried away, which though it be the least
artificial, yet has she the share of the confusion and uncertainty, seen in
all other parts and every where of this art. Poets may say what they list, and
with more emphasis and grace: witness these two Epigrames.

Alcon hesterno signum Iovis attigit. Ille Lucil. Auso^. epig. 73

Quamvis marmoreus, vim patitur medici.
Ecce hodie iussus transferri ex ^de vetusta,
Effertur, quamuis sit Deus at que lapis.
Alcon looked yester-day on carved Jove.
Jove, though of Marble, feels the letches force,
From his old Church to day made to remoove,
Though God and Stone, he is carried like a coarse.
And the other:

Lotus nobiscum est hilaris, coenavit and idem, Mart. l. 6. epig. 53.

Inventus mane est mortuus Androgoras.
Tam subitae mortis causam Fustine requiris?
In somnis medicum viderat Hermocratem.
Androg^ras in health bathed over night with us,
And merry supt, but in the morn stark dead was found.
Of his so sudden death, the cause shall I discuss.
Hermocrates the Leech he saw in sleep unsound.
Upon which I will tell you two pretty stories. The Baron of Caupene in
Chalosse and I, have both in common the right of the patronage of a benifice,
which is of a very large precinct, situated at the feet of our Mountains,
named Lohontan. It is with the inhabitants of that corner, as it is said to be
with those of the valley of Angrougne. They lead a kind of peculiar life; their
attire, and their customs apart and several. They were directed and governed
by certain particular policies and customs, received by tradition from Father
to Child: Whereto, without other Laws or Compulsion, except the reverence and
awe of their custom and use, they awefully tied and bound themselves. This
petty state had from all antiquity continued in so happy a condition, that no
neighboring severe judge had ever been troubled to enquire of their life and
affairs, nor was ever Atturny or Pety fogging Lawyer called for, to give them
advise or counsel; no^ stranger sought unto to determine their quarrels or
decide their contentions; neither were ever beggars seen amongst them. They
always avoided commerce and shunned alliances with the other World, least they
should alter the purity of their orders and policy; until such time (as they
say) that one amongst them, in their fathers days, having a mind pufft up
with a noble ambition, to bring his name and credit in reputation, devised to
make one of his Children Sir John Lackelatine, or Master Peter-an-Oake: And
having made him learn to write in some neighbor Town not far off, at last
procured him to be a Country Notary, or Petty-fogging Clarke. This fellow
having gotten some pelf and become great, began to disdain their ancient
customs, and put the pomp and stateliness of our higher regions into their
heads. It fortuned that a chief Gossip of his had a Goat dishorned, whom he
importunately solicited to sue the Trespasser, and demand law and right at the
Judge or Iusticers hands, that dwelt there-abouts; And so never ceasing to sow
sedition and breed suits amongst his neighbors, he never left till he had
confounded and marred all. After this corruption or intrusion of law (they say)
there ensued presently another mischief of worse consequence, by means of a
Quacke-salver, or Empirike Physician that dwelt amongst them, who would needs
be married to one of their daughters, and so endenizon and settle himself
amongst them.

This gallant began first to teach and instruct them in the names of agewes,
rheumes and impostumes; then the situation of the heart, of the liver and
other entrails: A Science until then never known or heard of among them. And
in stead of garlike, wherewith they had learned to expel, and were wont to
cure all diseases, of what quality and how dangerous soever they were, he
induced and inured them, were it but for a cough or cold, to take strange
compositions and potions: And thus began to traffic not only their health,
but also their deaths. They swear, that even from that time, they have
apparently perceived, that the evening Sereine or night-calme bred the headache
and blasted them; that to drink being hot or in a sweat empaired their
helthes; that Autumn winds were more unwholesome and dangerous, then those of
the Springe-time: And that since his slibbersawces, potions and physic came
first in use; they find themselves molested and distempered with Legions of
unaccustomed malladies and unknown diseases; and plainly feel and sensibly
perceive a general weakness and declination in their ancient vigor; and that
their lives are nothing so long, as before they were. Lo here the first of my
tales. The other is, that before I was troubled with the stone-chollicke and
gravel in the bladder, hearing diverse make especial account of a hee-goats
blood, as of an heavenly Manna sent in these latter-ages for the good and
preservation of man's life: and hearing men of good under standing speak of it,
as of an admirable and much-good-working drugge, and of an infallible
operation: I, who have ever thought my self subject to all accidents, that may
in any sort fall on man, being yet in perfect health, began to take pleasure
to provide my self of this miracle, and forthwith gave order (according to
the receipt) to have a Bucke-goate gotten, and carefully fed in mine own
house. For the blood must be drawn from him in the hottest month of Summer,
and he must only be fed with soluble herbs, and drink nothing but
White Wind. It was my fortune to come to mine own house the very same day the
Goat should be killed; where some of my people came in haste to tell me, that
my Cook found two or three great bowls in his paunch, which in his maw
amongst his meat shocked one against another. I was so curious as I would
needs have all his garbage brought before me; the thick and large skin
whereof I caused to be opened, out of which came three great lumpes or bodies,
as light as any sponge, so framed as they seemed to be hollow, yet outwardly
hard and very firm, bemotled with diverse dead and wannis^ colors: The one
perfectly as round as any bowl, the other two somewhat lesser, and not so
round, yet seemed to grow toward it. I have found (after I had made diligent
inquiry among such as were wont to open such beasts) that it was a seld-seene
and unheard of accident. It is very likely they were such stones as ours be,
and cozen-germanes to them; which if it be, it is but vain for such as be
troubled with the stone or gravel to hope to be cured, by means of a
beasts-blood, that was drawing near unto death, and suffered the same disease.
For, to aleadge the blood cannot participate of that contagion', and does no
whit thereby alter his accustomed virtue, it may rather be inferred, that
nothing ingendreth in a body, but by consent and communication of all the
parts. The whole mass does work, and the whole frame agitate altogether,
although one part, according to the diversity of operations, does contribute
more or less than another; whereby it manifestly appears, that in all parts
of this bucke-goate, there was some grettie or petrificant quality. It was not
so much for fear of any future chance, or in regard of my self, that I was
so curious of this experiment; as in respect, that as well in mine own house,
as elsewhere in sundry other places, it comes to pass, that many women do
often gather and lay up in store, diverse such kinds of slight drugges to help
their neighbors, and other people with them, in time of necessity; applying
one same remedy to an hundred several diseases: yea many times such as they
would be very loath to take themselves; with which they often have good luck,
and well thrives it with them. As for me I honor Physicians, not according to
the common-received rule, for necessity sake (for to this passage another of
the Prophet may be alleged, who reprooved King Asa, because he had recourse
unto Physicians) but rather for love I bear unto themselves; having seen
some, and known diverse honest men amongst them, and worthy all love and
esteem. It is not them I blame, but their Art; yet do I not greatly condemn
them for seeking to profit by our foolishness (for most men do so) and it is
a thing common to all worldlings. Diverse professious and many vacations, both
more and less worthy than theirs, subsist and are grounded only upon public
abuses and popular errors. I send for them when I am sick, if they may
conveniently be found; and love to be entertained by them, rewarding them as
other men do. I give them authority to enjoyne me to keep my self warm, if
I love it better so than otherwise. They may choose, be it either leekes or
lettuce, what my broth shall be made withal, and appoint me either white or
clarer to drink; and so of other things else, indifferent to my taste, humor
or custom. I know well it is nothing to them, for so much as Sharpness and
Strangeness are accidents of Physickes proper essence. Lycurgus allowed and
appointed the sick men of Sparta to drink wine. Why did he so? Because being
in health, they hated the use of it. Even as a Gentleman who dwells not far
from me, uses wine as a sovereign remedy againg agews, because being in
perfect health, he hates the taste thereof as death. How many of them see we
to be of my humor? That is, to disdain all Physic for their own behoof,
and live a kind of formal free life, and altogether contrary to that, which
they prescribe to others? And what is that, but a manifest abusing of our
simplicity? For, they hold their life as dear, and esteem their health as
precious as we do ours, and would apply their effects to their skill, if
themselves knew not the uncertainty and falsehood of it. It is the fear of
pain and death; the impatience of the disease and grief; and indiscreete
desire and headlong thirst of health, that so blinds them, and us. It is
mere faintnes that makes our conceit; and pusillanimitie forces our
credulity, to be so yielding and pliable. The greater part of whom do
notwithstanding not believe so much, as they endure and suffer of others: For I
hear them complain, and speak of it no otherwise than we do. Yet in the
end are they resolved. What should I do then? As if impatience were in
itself a better remedy than patience Is there any of them, that has yielded
to this miserable subjection, that does not likewise yield to all manner of
impostures? or does not subject himself to the mercy of whomsoever has the
impudency to promise him recoverie, and warrant him health?

The Babilonians were wont to carry their sick people into the open streets;
the common sort were their physicians: where all such as passed by were by
humanity and civilitie to enquire of their state and malady, and according to
their skill or experience, give them some ^ound advise and good counsel. We
differ not greatly from them: There is no poor Woman so simple, whose mumbling
and muttering, whose slibber-slabbers and drenches we do not employ. And as
for me, were I to buy any medicine, I would rather spend my money in this
kind of physic, than in any other; because therein is no danger or hurt to
be feared. What Homer and Plato said of the Egyptians, that they were all
Physicians, may well be said of all people. There is neither Man nor Woman,
that vanteth not himself to have some receipt or other, and does not hazard
the same upon his neighbor, if he will but give credit unto him.

I was not long since in a company, where I wot not who of my fraternity,
brought news of a kind of pills, by true account, composed of a hundred and
odd several ingredients; Whereat we laughed very heartily, and made our
selves good sport: For, what rock so hard were able to resist the shocke, or
withstand the force of so thick and numerous a battery? I understand
nevertheless, of such as took of them, that the least grain gravel dained
not to stir at all. I cannot so soon give over writing of this subject, but
I must needs say a word or two, concerning the experience they have made of
their prescriptions, which they would have us take as a warrantize or assurance
of the certainty of their drugges and potions. The greatest number, and as I
deem, more than the two thirds of medicinable virtues, consist in the
quintessence or secret propriety of simples, whereof we can have no other
instruction but use and custom. For, Quintessence is no other thing than a
quality, whereof we cannot with our reason find out the cause. In such trials
or experiments, those which they affirm to have acquired by the inspiration of
some Demon, I am contented to receive and allow of them (for, touching
miracles, I meddle not with them) or be it the experiments drawn from things,
which for other respects fall often in use with us: As if in Wool, wherewith
we wont to cloth our selves, some secret exsiccating or drying quality, have by
accident been found, that cures kibes or chilblaines in the heels; and if in
reddishes, we eat for nourishment, some opening or aperitive operation have
been discovered. Galen reports, that a Leprous man chanced to be cured, by
means of a Cup of Wine he had drunk, for so much as a Viper was by fortune
fallen into the Wine caske. In which example we find the mean, and a very
likely directory to this experience. As also in those, to which Physicians
affirm, to have been addressed by the examples of some beasts. But in most of
other experiences, to which they say they came by fortune, and had no other
guide but hazard, I find the progress of this information incredible. I
imagine man, heedfully viewing about him the infinite number of things,
creatures, plants and metals. I wot not where to make him begin his Essay;
And suppose he cast his first fantasy upon an Elkes-Horne, to which an easy
and gentle credulity must be given; he will be as far to seek, and as much
troubled in his second operation: So, many diseases and several circumstances
are proposed unto him, that before he come to the certainty of this point, unto
which the perfection of his experience should arrive, man's wit shall be to
seek, and not know where to turn himself; And before (amiddest this infinity
of things) he find out what this Horn is: Amongst the numberless diseases
that are, what an Epilepsie is; the sundry and manifold complexions in a
melancholy man; So many seasons in Winter: So diverse Nations amongst
Frenchmen; So many ages in age; So diverse celestial changes and
alterations, in the conjunction of Venus and Saturn; So several and many
parts in a man's body, nay in one of his fingers. To all which being neither
guided by argument, nor by conjecture, nor by example, or divine inspiration,
but by the one ly motion of fortune; it were most necessary, it should be by a
perfectly artificial, well-ordred, and methodicall fortune. Moreover, suppose
the disease thoroughly cured, how shall he rest assured, but that either the
evil was come to his utmost period, or that an effect of the hazard, caused
the same health? Or the operation of some other thing, which that day he had
either eaten, drunk or touched? or whether it were by the merit of his
Grand-mothers prayers? Besides, suppose this experiment to have been perfect,
how many times was it applied and begun a new; And how often was this long and
tedious web of fortunes and encounters woven over again, before a certain
rule might be concluded? And being concluded, by whom is it I pray you? Amongst
so many millions of men, you shall scarce meet with three or four, that well
duly observe, and carefully keep a Register of their experiments; shall it be
your, or his hap, to light truly, or hit just with one of them three or
four? What if another man? Nay what if a hundred other men have had and made
contrary experiments, and clean opposite conclusions, and yet have sorted
well? We should peradventure discern some show of light, if all the judgments
and consultations of men were known unto us. But That three Witnesses and
three Doctors shall sway all mankind, there is no reason. It were requisite,
humane nature had appointed and made special choice of them and that by
express procuration and letter of atturny they were by her declared our Judges
and deputed our Atturnies.

To my Lady of Duras.
MAdame, the last time it pleased you to come and visit me, you found me upon
this point. And because it may be, these toys of mine may happily come to your
hands: I would have them witness, their Author reputeth himself highly
honored, for the favors it shall please you to show them. Wherein you shall
discern the very same demeanor and selfe-countenance, you have seen in his
conversasion. And could I have assumed unto my self any other fashion, than
mine own accustomed, or more honorable and better form, I would not have
done it: For, all I seek to reap by my writings, is, they will naturally
represent and to the life, pourtray me to your remembrance. The very same
conditions and faculties, it pleased your Lady-ship to frequent and receive,
with much more honor and courtesy, than they any way deserve, I will place and
reduce (but without alteration and change) into a solid body, which may
happily continue some days and years after me: Where, when soever it shall
please you to refresh your memory with them, you may easily find them, without
calling them to remembrance; which they scarsely deserve. I would entreat you
to continue the favor of your Friend-ship toward me, by the same qualities,
through whose means it was produced. I labor not to be beloved more and
esteemed better being dead, than alive. The humor of Tyberius is ridiculous
and common, who endeavored more to extinguish his glory in future ages, than
yield himself regardfull and pleasing to men of his times. If I were one of
those, to whom the World my be indebted for praise, I would quit it for the one
moytie, on condition it would pay me beforehand: And that the same would
hasten, and in great heaps environ me about, more thick than long, and more
full than lasting. And let it hardly vanish with my knowledge, and when this
sweet alluring sound shall no more tickle mine ears. It were a fond conceit,
now I am ready to leave the commerce of men, by new commendations, to go
about, anew to beget my self unto them.

I make no account of goods, which I could not employ to the use of my life.
Such as I am so would I be elsewhere then in Paper. Mine art and industry have
been employed to make my self of some worth. My study and endeavor to do,
and not to write. I have applied all my skill and devoire to frame my life.
Lo-heere mine occupation and my work. I am a less maker of books, then of any
thing else. I have desired and aimed at sufficiency, rather for the benefit
of my present and essential commodities, then to make a Storehouse, and hoard
it up for mine heirs. Whosoever has any worth in him, let him show it in his
behavior, manners and ordinary discourses; be it to treat of love or of
quarrels, of sport and play or bed-matters, at board or elsewhere; or be it in
the conduct of his own affairs, or private household matters. Those whom I see
make good books, having tattered hosen and ragged clothes on, had they
believed me they should first have gotten themselves good clothes. Demand a
Spartan, whether he would rather be a cunning Rhethorician, then an excellent
Soldier: nay were I asked, I would say, a good Cook, had I not some to serve
me. Good Lord (Madame) how I would hate such a commendation, to be a sufficient
man in writing, and a foolish-shallow-headed brain or coxcombe in all things
else: yet had I rather be a fool; both here and there, then to have made so
bad a choice, wherein to employ my worth. So far am I also from expecting, by
such trifles to gain new honor to my self: as I shall think I make a good
bargain, if I loose not a part of that little, I had already gained. For,
besides that this dombe and dead picture, shall derogate and steal from my
natural being, it fadgeth not and has no reference unto my better state, but
is much fallen from my first vigor and natural jollity, enclining to a kind of
drooping or mouldinesse. I am now come to the bottom of the vessel, which
begins to taste of his dregs and lees. Otherwise (good Madame) I should not
have dared so boldly to have ripped up the mysteries of Physic, sick,
considering the esteem and credit your self, and so many others, ascribe
unto it, and hold it in; had I not been directed thereunto by the authors of the
same. I think they have but two ancient ones in Latin, to wit Pliny and
Celsus. If you fortune at any time to look into them, you shall find them to
speak much more rudely of their Art, then I do. I but pinch it gently, they
cut the throat of it. Pliny amongst other things, does much scoff at them,
for so much as when they are at their wits end, and can go no further, they have
found out this goodly shift, to send their long-turmoiled, and to no end much
tormented patient, with their drugs and diets, some to the help of their vows
and miracles, and some others to hot Baths and waters. (Be not offended noble
Lady, he means not those on this side, under the protection of your house,
and all Gramontoises.) They have a third kind of shift or evasion to shake us
off and discharge themselves of the imputations or reproaches, we may justly
charge them with, for the small amendment of our infirmities; whereof they have
so long had the survay and government, as they have no more inventions or
devises left them, to ammuse us with; that is, to send us, to seek and take
the good air of some other Country. Madam, we have harped long enough upon one
string; I hope you will give me leave to come to my former discourses again,
from which for your better entertainment, I had somewhat digressed.

It was (as far as I remember) Pericles, who being demanded, how he did; you
may (said he) judge it by this, showing certain scroules or briefes he had tied
about his neck and arms. He would infer, that he was very sick, since he was
forced to have recourse to such vanities, and had suffered himself to be so
dressed. I affirm not, but I may one day be drawn to such fond opinions, and
yield my life and health to the mercy, discretion and regiment of Physicians. I
may happily fall into this fond madness; I dare not warrant my future
constancy. And even then if any ask me how I do, I may answer him as did
Pericles; You may judge, by showing my hands fraughted with six drammes of
Opium. It will be an evident token of a violent sickness. My judgment shall
be exceedingly out of temper. If impacience or fear get that advantage upon
me, you may thereby conclude some quelling fever has seized upon my mind. I
have taken the pains to plead this cause, whereof I have but small
understanding, somewhat to strengthen and comfort natural propension, against
the drugs and practice of our Physic, which is derived into me from mine
ancestors: lest it might only be a stupid and rash inclination; and that it
might have a little more form. and that also those, who see me so constant
against the exhortations and threats, which are made against me, when
sickness comes upon me, may not think it to be a mere conceit, and simple
wilfulness; And also, lest there be any so peevish, as to judge it to be some
motive of vain glory. It were a strange desire, to seek to draw honor from
an action, common both to me, to my Gardener, or to my Groom. Surely my heart
is not so pufft up, nor so windy, that a solid, fleshy and marrowy pleasure,
as health is; I should change it for an imaginary, spiritual and airy delight.
Renown or glory (were it that of Aymons four sons) is over-deerely bought by
a man of my humor, if it cost him but three violent fits of the chollike. Give
me health a Gods name. Those that love our Physic, may likewise have their
considerations good, great and strong. I hate no fantasies contrary to mine. I
am so far from vexing myself, to see my judgment differ from other men's, or
to grow incompatible of the society or conversation of men, to be of any other
faction or opinion then mine own; that contrariwise (as variety is the most
general fashion that nature has followed, and more in the minds, then in the
bodies; for so much as they are of a more supple and yielding substance, and
susceptible or admitting of forms) I find it more rare to see our humor or
desseignes agree in one. And never were there two opinions in the world alike,
no more than two hairs, or two grains. Diversity is the most universal
quality.

The end of the second Book.
THE ESSAYS OR MORAL, POLITIC AND MILITARY Discourses Of LO. MICHAEL de
Montaigne, Knight Of the noble Order of St. MICHAEL, and one of the Gentlemen
in Ordinary of the French king HENRY the Third his Chamber.

THE THIRD BOOK.

1613

THE ESSAYS OF MICHAEL Lord of Montaigne.
The third Book.
The first Chapter.
Of profit and honesty.

NO man living is free from speaking foolish things; the ill luck is, to
speak them curiously:

Naeiste magno conatu magnas nugas Ter. Heant. act. 4. see. 1.
dixerit.
This fellow sure with much a do,
Will tell great tales and trifles too.
That concerns not me; mine slip from me with as little care, as they are of
small worth: whereby they speed the better. I would suddenly quit them, for the
least cost were in them: Nor do I buy, or sell them, but for what they weigh.
I speak unto Paper, as to the first man I meet. That this is true, mark well
what follows. To whom should not treachery be detestable, when Tiberius
refused it on such great interest? One sent him word out of Germany, that if he
thought it good, Ariminius should be made away by poison. He was the mightiest
enemy the Romans had, who had so vilely ysed them under Varus, and who only
empeached the increase of his domination in that country. His answer was; that
the people of Rome were accustomed to be revenged on their enemies by open
courses, With weapons in hand; not by subtle steights, nor in bugger mugger:
thus left he the profitable for the honest. He was (yon will say) a cosener. I
believe it; that is no wonder in men of his profession. But the confession of
virtue, is of no less consequence in his mouth that hates the same, for so
much as truth by force does wrest it from him, and if he will not admit it in
him, at least, to adorn himself, he will put it on. Our composition, both
public and private, is full of imperfection; yet is there nothing in nature
unserviceable, no not inutility itself; nothing thereof has been insinuated
in this huge universe, but holds some fit place therein. Our essence is
symented with crased qualities; ambition, jealosie, envy, revenge,
superstition, despair, lodge in us, with so natural a possession, as their
image is also discerned in beasts: yea and cruelty, so unnatural a vice: for
in the midst of compassion, we inwardly feel a kind of bitter-sweetpricking
of malicious delight, to see others suffer; and children feel it also:

Suaue mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis, Luer. l. 2. 1.

Eterra magnum alterius spectare laborem.
It Is sweet on graund seas, when winds waves turmoyle,
From land to see an others grievous toil.
The seed of which qualities, who should root out of man, should ruin the
fundamental conditions of our life: In matter of policy likewise; some
necessary functions are not only base, but faulty: vices find therein a
seat, and employ themselves in the stitching up of our frame; as poisons in
the preservation of our health. If they become excusable, because we have need
of them, and that common necessity effaceth their true property; let us resign
the acting of this part to hardy Citizens, who stick not to sacrifice their
honors and consciences, as those of old, their lives, for their Countries
avail and safety. We that are more weak, had best assume taskes of more ease
and less hazard. The Commonwealth requires some to betray, some to lie, and
some to massaker: leave we that commission to people more obedient and more
p^^able. Truly, I have often been vexed, to see our judges, by fraud or false
hopes of favor or pardon, draw on a malefactor, to bewray his offense,
employing therein both couzinage and impudency. It were fit for justice, and
Plato himself, who favors this custom, to furnish me with means more
suitable to my humor. It Is a ^a^^cious justice, and in my conceit no less
wounded by it self, then by others. I answered not long since, that hardly
could I betray my Prince for a particular man, who should be very rysery to
betray a particular man for my Prince. And loath not only to deceave, but that
(...) me; whereto I will neither furnish matter nor occasion. In that little
business I have managed between our Princes, amid the divisions and
subdiuisions, which at (...) day so (...) and turn oil us, I have curiously
eeded, that they mistake me not, nor (...) themselves in my mask. The
professors of that trade hold themselves most covert; presending and (...) the
greatest indifference and nee^enesse to the cause they can. As for me, I offer
my self in my liveliest reasons, in a form most mine own: A tender and young
Negotiation, and who had rather fail in my business, then in my self. Yet
has this been ^ithetto with so good hap (for surely fortune is in these
matters a principal actor) that few have dealt between party and party with
less suspicion, and more inward favor. I have in all my proceedings an open
fashion, easy to insinuate and give it self credit at first acquaintance.
Sincerity, plainness, and naked truth, in what age so ever, find also their
opportunity and employment. Besides, their liberty is little called in
question, or subject to hate, who deal without respect of their own interest.
And they may truly use the answer of (...) unto the Athenians, complaining of
his bitter inuectives and sharpness of his speech: Consider not, my masters
whether I am free, but whether I be so, without taking ought, or better (...)
my state by it. My liberty also has easily discharged me from all suspicion of
faintness, by it is vigor (nor forbearing to speak any thing, though it bite
or stung them; I could not have said worse in their absence) and because it
carries an apparent show of simplicity and carelessness. I pretend no other
fruit by negotiating, then to negotiate; and annex no long pursuites or
propositions to it. Every action makes his particular game, win he if he can.
Nor am I urged with the passion of love or hate unto great men; nor is my will
shackled with anger, or particular respect. I regard our Kings with an
affection simply lawful, and merely civil, neither moved nor vnmooved by
private interest: for which I like my self the better. The general and just
cause binds me no more then moderately, and without violent fits. I am not
subject to these piercing pledges and inward gages. Choler and hate are beyond
the duty of justice, and are passions fitting only those, whose reason is not
sufficient to hold them to their duty: Vtatur motu animi, qui vti ratione non
potest, Let him use the motion of his mind, that cannot use reason. All
lawful intentions are of themselves temperate: if not, they are altered into
sedicious and unlawful. It is that makes me march every where with my head
aloft, my face and heart open. Verily (and I fear not to avouch it) I could
easily for a need, bring a candle to Saint Michell, and another to his Dragon,
as the good old woman. I will follow the best side to the fire, but not into
it, if I can choose. If need require, let Montaigne my Mannor-house be
swallowed up in the public ruin: but if there be no such necessity, I will
acknowledge my self beholding unto fortune if she please to save it; and for
it is safety employ as much scope as my endeavors can afford me. Was it not
A^^icus, who cleaving to the right (but loosing side) saved himself by his
moderation, in that general Ship^racke of the world, amidst so many changes
and diverse alterations? To private men, such as he was, it is more easy. And
in such kind of businesses, I think one deals justly, not to be too forward
to insinuate or inuit himself: To hold a staggering or middle course, to bear
an unmoved affection, and without inclination in the troubles of his country,
and public divisions, I deem neither seemly nor honest: Ea non media, sed
nu^^a via est velut euenium expectantium, quo fortuna consilia sua applicent,
That is not the midway, but a mid way, or no way, as of those that expect the
event with intent to apply their dessignes as fortune shall fall out. That may
be permitted in the affairs of neighbors. So did Gelon the tyrant of Siracusa
suspend his inclination in the Barbarian wars against the Greeks, keeping
Ambassadors at Delphos, with presents, to watch on what side the victory would
light, and to apprehend the fittest occasion of reconcilement with the victors.
It were a kind of treason to do so in our own affairs and domestical
matters, wherein of necessity one must resolve and take aside; but for a man
that has neither charge, nor express commandment to urge him; not to busy
or entermedle himself therein, I hold it more excusable; (Yet frame I not
this excuse for my self) then in foreign and strangers wars, wherewith
according to our laws, no man is troubled against his will, Nevertheless
those, who wholly engage themselves into them, may carry such an order and
temper, as the storm (without offending them) may glide over their head, Had
we not reason to hope as much of the deceased Bishop of Orleans, Lord of
Moruillters? And I know some, who at this present worthily bestirre
themselves, in so even a fashion or pleasing a manner, that they are likely to
continue on foot, whatsoever injurious alteration or fall, the heavens may
prepare against us. I hold it only fit for Kings to he angry with Kings: And
mock at those rash spirits, who from the bravery of their hearts offer
themselves to so vnproportionate quarrels. For one undertakes not a particular
quarrel against a Prince, in marching against him openly and courageously, for
his honor, and according to his duty: If he love not such a man; he does
better; at least he esteems him. And the cause of laws especially, and
defense of the ancient state, has ever found this privilege, that such as
for their own interest, disturb the same, excuse (if they honor not) their
defendors. But we ought not term duty (as now a days we do) a sower rigor,
and intestine crabbednesse, proceeding of private interest and passion; nor
courage a treacherous and malicious proceeding. Their disposition to
frowardness and mischief, they entitle zeal: That Is not the cause does heat
them, it is their own interest: They kindle a war, not because it is just,
but because it is war. Why may not a man bear himself between enemies
featly and faithfully? Do it, if not altogether with an equal (for it may
admit different measure) at least with a sober affection, which may not so much
engage you to the one, that he look for all at your hands. Content your self
with a moderate proportion of their favor, and to glide in troubled waters
without fishing in them. The Other manner of offering ones uttermost endeavors
to both sides, implies less diseration then conscience. What knows he, to
whom you betray another, as much your friend as hmselfe, but you will do the
like for him, when his turn shall come. He takes you for a villain; that
whilst he hears you, and gathers out of you; and makes his best use of your
disloyalty: For, double fellows are only beneficial in what they bring, but
we must look, they carry away as little as may be. I carry nothing to the one,
which I may not (having opportunity) say unto the other, the accent only
changed a little: and report either but indifferent or known, or common
things* Noe benefit can induce me to lie unto them; what is entrusted to my
silence I conceal religiously, but take as little in trust as I can* Princes
secrets are a troublesome charge, to such as have naught to do with them. I
ever by my good will capitulate with them, that they trust me with very
little; but let them assuredly trust what I disclose unto them. I always knew
more then I would. An open speech opens the way to another, and draws all out,
even as Wiue, and Love. Philippides in my mind, answered king Lysi^^achus
wisely, when he demanded of him; what of his wealth or state he should
empare unto him; Which and what you please (quoth he) so it be not your
secrets. I see every one mutiny, if another conceal the deapth or mystery of
the affairs from him, wherein he pleases to employ him, or have but purloyned
any circumstance from him. For my part, I am content one tell me no more of his
business then he will have me know or deal in, nor desire I, that my
knowledge exceed or strain my word. If I must needs be the instrument of
cozinage, it shall at least be with safety of my conscience. I will not be
esteemed a servant, nor so affectionate, nor yet so faithful, that I be
judged fit to betray any man. Who is unfaithful to himself, may be excused
if he be faithless to his Master. But Princes entertain not men by halfes,
and despise bounded and condicionall service. What remedy? I freely tell them
my limits; for, a slave ^ must not be but unto reason; which yet I cannot
compass: And they are to blame; to exact from a free man, the like subjection
unto their service, and the same obligation, which they may from those they
have made and bought; and whose fortune depends particularly and expressly on
theirs. The laws have delivered me from much trouble: they have chosen me
aside to follow, and appointed me a master to obey: all other superiority
and duty, ought to be relative unto that and be restrained. Yet may it not
be concluded, that if my affection should otherwise transport me, I would
presently afforde my helping hand unto it. Will and desires are a law to
themselves, actions are to receive it of public institutions: All these
proceedings of mine, are some what dissonant from our forms. They should
produce noe great effects, nor hold out long among us. Innocence it self
could not in these times nor negotiate without dissimulation, nor traffic
without lying. Neither are public functions of my diet; what my profession
requires thereto, I furnish in the most private manner I can. Being a child, I
was plunged into them up to the ears, and had good success; but I got loose
in good time. I have often since shunned meddling with them, seldom accepted
and never required; ever holding my back toward ambition; but if not rowers,
who go forward as it were backward; Yet so, as I am less beholding to my
resolution, then to my good fortune, that I was not wholly embarked in them.
For, there are courses lesle against my taste, and more comfortable to my
carriage, by which if here tofore it had called me to the service of the
commonwealth, and my advancement unto credit in the world; I know that in
following the same I had exceeded the reason of my couceite. Those which
commonly say against my prosession, that what I term liberty, simplicity and
plainness in my behavior, is art, cunning and subtilty: and rather
discretion, then goodness; industry then nature; good wit, then good hap; do
me more honor then shame. But truly they make my cunning ouercunning. And
whosoever has traced me and nearely looked into my humors, lie loose a good
wager if he confess not, that there is noe rule in their school, could, a
midde such crooked paths and diverse windings, square and raport this natural
motion, and maintain an appearance of liberty and license, so equal and
inflexible; and that all their attention and wit, is not of power to bring them
to it. The way to truth is but one and simple; that of particular profit and
benefit of affairs a man has in charge, double, uneven and accidental. I
have often seen these counterset (...) artificial liberties in practice, but
most commonly without success. They savor of Aesopes. Ass; who in emulation
of the dog, laid his two fore-feete very jocondly upon his masters
shoulders; but look how many blandishments the pretty dog received, under
one, so many bastinadoes were redoubled upon the poor Asles back. Id maxim
quemque decet; quod est cuiusque suum Cic. off. l. 1.
maxim: that becomes every man especially, which is his own especially: I
will not deprive cousinage of her rank that were to understand the world but
ill: I know it has often done profitable service, it supporteth, yea and
nourishes the greatest part of men's vacations.

There are some lawful vices; as many-actions, or good or excusable unlawful.
Justice in it self natural and universal is otherwise ordered, and more
nobly distributed, then this other especial, and national justice, restrained
and suited to the need of our policy: Very iuris germanaeque iustitiae
solidam et expressam effigiem nullam tenemus; vmbra Cic. off. l. 3.
and imaginibus vtimur. We have noe lively nor life-like purtrature of upright
law and natural justice: we use but the shadows and colors of them. So
that wise Dandamys, hearing the lives of Socrates, Pythagoras and Diogenes
repeated, in other things, judged them great and worthy men, but overmuch
subjected to the reverence of the laws: which to authorize and second, true
virtue is to decline very much from his natural vigor: and not only by their
permission, but persuasions diverse vicious actions are committed and take
place. Ex Senatus consultis plobisque scitis scelera exercentur. Even by
decrees of counsel, and by statute-lawes are mischiefs put in practice. I
follow the common phrase, which makes a difference between profitable and
honest things; terming some natural actions which are not only profitable but
necessary, dishonest and filthy. But to continue our examples of treason. Two
which aspired unto the kingdom of Thrace, were fallen into controversy for
their right. The Emperor hindered them from falling together by the ears: the
one under color of contriving some friendly accord by an enterview inuiting
the other to a feast in his house, emprisoned and murthred him. Justice
required, that the Romans should be satisfied for this outrage: some
difficulties empeached the ordinary course. What they could not lawfully do
without war and hazard, they attempted to accomplish by treason: what they
could not honestly archieue, they profitably compassed. For exployting
whereof, Pomponius Flaccus was thought most fit: who trayning the fellow
into his Nets by fained words and sugared aslurances; in liew of the favor
and honor he promised him, sent him bound hand and foot to Rome. One
traitor ouer-reached another, against common custom: For, they are all full
of distrust, and it is very hard to surprise them in their own art: witness
the heavy and dismal experience we have lately felt of it. Let who list be
Pomponius Flaccus; and there are too-too many that will be so. As for my
part, both my word and faith, are as the rest; pieces of this common body:
their best effect is the public service: that is ever presupposed with me. But
as, if one should command me to take the charge of the Rolls or Records of
the Palace, I would answer: I have noe skill in them: or to be a leader of
Pioners, I would say; I am called to a worthier office: Even so, who would go
about to employ me, not to murder or poison, but to lie, betraye, and
forswear my self, I would tell him; If I have robbed or stolen any thing from
any man, send me rather to the Galleys. For, a Gentleman may lawfully speak
as did the Lacedaemonians, defeated by Antipater, upon the points of their
agreement: You may impose as heavy burdens, and harmefull taxes upon us as you
please; but you loose your time, to command us any shameful or dishonest
things. Every man should give himself the oathe, which the Egyptian Kings,
solemnlie and usually presented to their judges; Not to swerve from their
consciences, what command soever they should receive from themselves to the
contrary. In such commissions there is an evident note of ignominy and
condemnation. And whosoever gives them you, accuses you; and if you conceave
them right, gives you them as a trouble and burden. As much as the public
affairs amend by your endeavors, your own empaireth: the better you do, so
much the worse do you. And it shall not be new, nor peradventure without
shadow of justice, that he who sets you a work, becomes your ruin. If
treason be in any case excusable, it is only then, when it is employed to
punish and betraye treason. We shall find many treacheries, to have been not
only refused, but punished by them, in whose favor they were under taken. Who
knows not the sentence of Fabritius, against Pyrrus his Physician? And the
commander has often severely revenged them on the partic he employed in
them, refusing so unbridled a credit and power, and disavowing so lewd and so
vile an obedience. Iaropelc Duke of Russia, solicited an Hungarian Gentleman,
to betraye Bol^slaus King of Polonia, in contriuing his death, or furnishing
the Russians with means to work him some notable mischief. This gallant,
presently bestirres him in it, and more then ever applying himself to the
Kings service obtained to be of his counsel, and of those he most trusted.
By which advantages, and with the opportunity of his masters absence, he
betrayde Vicilicia, a great and rich city to the Russians: which was wholly
sacked and burnt by them, with a general slaughter, both of the inhabitants, of
what sex or age soever, and a great number of nobility there abouts, whom to
that purpose he had assembled. Iaropelc his anger thus assuaged with revenge,
and his rage mitigated (which was not without pretext, for Bol^slaus had
mightily wronged and in like manner incensed him) and glutted with the fruit
of treason, examining the ugliness thereof, naked and alone, and with
imparciall eyes behoulding the same, not distempred by passion, conceaved such
a remorse, and took it so to heart, that he forthwith caused the eyes of his
isntrumental executioner to be pulled out, and his tongue and privy parts to
be cut of. Antigonus persuaded the Argyraspides soldiers, to betray Eumenes
their general, and his adversary, unto him, whom when they had delivered, and
he had caused to be slain; himself desired to be the Commissarie of divine
justice, for the punishment of so detestable a treachery: and resigning them
into the hands of the Governor of the Province, gave him express charge, in
what manner soever it were, to rid himself of them, and bring them to some
mischievous end. Whereby, of that great number they were, not one ever after
saw the smoke of Macedon. The better they served hit turn, the more wicked
he judged them, and the more worthy of punishment. The slave that betraide
the corner wherein his master P. Sulpicius lay hid, was set at liberty,
according to the promise of Syllas proscription: But according to the promise
of common reason, being freed, he was thrown headlong from off the Tarpeyan
rock. And Clouis King of France, in liew of the goldenarmes he had promised
the three servants of Cannacre, caused them to be hanged, after they had by his
solicitation betraide their master unto him. They hang them up with the purse
of their reward about their necks. Having sasatisfied their second and
special faith, they also satisfy the general and first. Mahomet the second,
desirous to rid himself of his brother (through jealousy of rule, and
according to the style of that race) employed one of his officers in it; who
stifled him, by much water powered down his throat all at once: which done, in
expiation of the fact, he delivered the murderer into the hands of his
brothers mother (for they were brethren but by the fathers side) she, in his
presence, opened his bosom, and with her own revenging hands searching for
his heart, plucked it out, and cast it unto dogs to eat. Even unto vile
dispositions (having made use of a filthy action) it is so sweet and
pleasing, if they may with seeuritie, as it were, in way of recompense and
holy correction, sow one sure stitche of goodness, and justice unto it.
Besides; they respect the ministers of such horrible crimes, as people, that
still vpbraide them with them, and covet by their deaths to smother the
knowledge, and cancel the testimony of their practices. Now if perhaps, not
to frustrate the public need of that last and desperate remedy, one reward
you for it: yet, he who does it (if he be not as bad himself) will hold
you a most accursed and execrable creature. And deemeth you a greater traitor,
then he whom you have betrayed: for with your own hands, he touches the
lewdness of your disposition, without disavowing, without object. But
employeth you, as we do outcast persons in the executions of justice: an
office as profitable as little honest. Besides the baseness of such
commissions, there is in them a prostitution of conscience. The daughter of
Sejanus, could not in Rome, by any true formal course of law, be put to
death, because she was a virgin: that laws might have their due course, she
was first deflowred by the common hangman, and then strangled. Not his hand
only, but his soul is a slave unto public commodity. When Amurath the
first, to aggrauate the punishment of his subjects, who had given support unto
his sons unnatural rebellion, appointed their nearest kinsmen to lend their
hands unto this execution: I find it very honest in some of them, who rather
chose unjustly to be held guilty of another parricide, then to serve justice
with their own. And whereas in some paltrie towns forced in my time, I have
seen base varlets for sauegarde of their own lives, yield to hang their
friends and companions, I ever thought them of worse condition, then such as
were hanged. It is reported, that Witoldus Prince of Lituania, introduced an
order with that nation, which was that the party condemned to die, should with
his own hands make himself away; finding it strange, that a third man being
guitlesse of the fact, should be employed and charged to commit a murder.
When an urgent circumstance, or any violent and unexpected accident, induces a
Prince for the necessity of his estate, or as they say for state matters, to
break his word and faith, or otherwise forces him out of his ordinary duty,
he is to ascribe that necessity unto a lash of Gods rod: It is no vice, for
he has quit his reason, unto a reason more public, and more powerful, but
surely it is ill fortune. So that to one, who asked me what remedy? I replyde,
none; were he truly rackt between these two extremes ( Sed videat ne
quaeratur latebra periurio. But let him take heed he seek not a starting
hole for perjury) he must have done it; Cic. off. l. 3.
but if he did it sans regret or scruple, if it grieved him not to do it,
it is an argument his conscience is but in ill terms. Now were there any one
of so tender or cheuerell a conscience, to whom no cure might seem worthy of
so extreme a remedy: I should prise or regard him no whit the less. He
cannot loose himself more handsomelie nor more excusable. We cannot do every
thing, nor be in every place. When all is done, thus and thus, must we often,
as unto our last Anchor and sole refuge, resign the protection of our
vessellvnto the only conduct of heaven. To what juster necessity can he
reserve himself? What is less possible for him to do, then what he cannot
effect, without charge unto his faith, and imputation to his honor? things
which peradventure should be dearer to him, then his own salvation, and the
safety of his people. When with enfoulded arms he shall devoutly call on God
for his aid, may he not hope, that his fatherly mercy shall not refuse the
extraordinary favor, and sinne-forgiuing grace of his all powerful hand,
unto a pure and righteous hand? They are dangerous exemples, rare and crased
exceptions to our natural rules: we must yield unto them, but with great
moderation, and heedie circumspection. No private commodity, may any way
deserve we should offer our conscience this wrong the commonwealth may, when
it is most apparent and important. Timoleon did fitly warrant and ward the
strangeness of his exploite by the tears he shed, remembering it was with a
brotherly hand he slew the tyrant, And it neerelie pinched his selfe-gnawne
conscience, that he was compelled to purchase the common good, at the rate of
his honesty. The sacred Senate it self, by his means delivered from
thraldom, durst not definitively decide of so haughty an action, and rend in
two so urgent and different semblances. But the Siracusans having opportunelie
and at that very instant sent to the Corinthians, to require their protection,
and a governor able to re-establish their town in former majesty, and
deliver Sicilie from a number of petty tyrants, which greeuoushe oppressed the
same: they appointed Timoleon, with this new caucat and declaration: That
according as he should well or ill demean himself in his charge, their
sentence should incline, either to grace him as the redeemer of his country, or
disgrace him, as the murderer of his brother. This fantastical conclusion,
has some excuse upon the danger of the example, and importance of an act so
different. and they did well, to discharge their judgment of it, or to embarke
him some where else, and on their considerations Now the proceedings of
Timoleon in his renowned journey did soon yield his cause the cleerer, so
worthily and virtuously did he every way bear himself therein. And the good
hap, which ever accompanied him in the encombrances and difficulties he was to
subdue in the atchieuement of his noble enterprise, seemed to be sent him by
the Gods, conspiring to second, and consenting to favor his justification:
This man's end is excusable, if ever any could be. But the increase and profit
of the public revenues, which served the Roman Senate for a pretext of the
ensuing-foule conclusion I purpose to relate, is not of sufficient force to
warrant such injustice. Certain cities had by the order and permission of the
Senate, with money purchased their liberty, at the hands of L. Sylla. The
matter coming in question again, the Senate condemned them, to be fineable
and taxed as before: and the money they had employed for their ransom, should
be deemed as lost and forfetted. Civil wars do often produce such enormous
examples: That we punish private men, for so much as they have believed us, when
we were other then now we are. And one same magistrate does lay the penalty
of his change on such as cannot do withal. The Schoolmaster whippeth his
scholar for his docilitie, and the guide streeketh the blind man he leads. A
horrible image, of justice. Some rules in Philosophy are both false and
fainte. The example proposed unto us, of respecting private utility before
faith given, has not sufficient power by the circumstance they add unto it.
Thieves have taken you, and on your oath to pay them a certain sum of money,
have set you at liberty again: They err, that say, an honest man is quit of
his word and faith without paying, being out of them hands; There is noe
such matter, What fear and danger has once forced me to will and consent
unto, I am bound to will and perform boing out of danger and fear. And
although it have but forced my tongue, and not my will, yet am I bound to make
my word good, and keep my promise. For my part, when it has sometimes
unadvisedly overrun my thought, yet have I made a conscience to disavowe the
same. Otherwise we should by degrees come to abolish all the right a third man
takes and may challenge of our promises. Quasi vero forti viro vis possit
adhiberi. Cic. off. l. 3.
As though any force could be used upon a valiant man, It Is only lawful for
our private interest to excuse the breach of promise, if we have rashly
promised things in them selves wicked and unjust. For, the right of virtue
ought to overruled the right of our bond. I have heretofore placed Fpaminondas
in the first rank of excellent men, and now recant it not. Unto what high
pitch raised he the consideration of his particular duty? who never slew man
he had vanquished; who for that invaluable good of restoring his country her
liberty, made it a matter of conscience, to murder a Tyrant or his accomplices,
without a due and formal course of law: and who judged him a bad man, how good
a citizen soever, that amongst his enemies and in the fury of a battle,
spared not his friend, or his host. Loc here a mind of a rich composition.
He matched unto the most violent and rude actions of men, goodness and
courtesy, yea and the most choice and delicate, that may be found in the
school of Philosophy. This so high-raised courage, so swelling and so
obstinate against sorrow, death and poverty, was it nature or art, made it
relent, even to the utmost strain of exceedeng tenderness and debonaretie of
complexion? Being clothed in the dreadful liuerie of steel and blood, he
goes on crushing and brusing a nation, invincible to all others, but to
himself: yet mildely relenteth in the midst of a combat or confusion, when he
meets with his host or with his friend. Verily, this man was deservedly fit to
command in war, which in the extremest fury of his innated rage, made him to
feel the sting of courtesy, and remorse of gentleness: then when all
enflamed, it foamed with fury, and burned with murder. It Is a miracle, to be
able to join any show of justice with such actions. But it only belongs to
the unmatched courage of Epaminondas, in that confused plight, to join
mildness and facility of the most gentle behavior that ever was, unto them,
yea and pure innocence it self. And whereas one told the Mamertins, that
statutes were of no force against armed men: another to the Tribune of the
people, that the time of justice and war, were two: a third, that the
confused noise of war and clang of arms, hindered him from understanding the
sober voice of the laws: This man was not so much as empeached from conceiving
the mild sound of civilitie and kindness. Borrowed he of his enemies the
custom of sacrificing to the Muses (when he went to the wars) to qualify
by their sweetness and mildness, that martial fury, and hostile surlinesse?
Let us not fear, after so great a master, to hold that some things are
unlawful, even against our fellest enemies: that public interest, ought not
to challenge all of all, against private interest: Manente memoria etiam in
dissidio publicorum foederum privati iuris: Some memory of private right
continuing even in disagreement of public contracts.

-- and nulla potentia vires Ovid. Punt. l. 1. ^l. 8. 37.

Praestandi, ne quid peccet amicus, habet:
No power has so great might,
To make friends still go right.
And that all things be not lawful to an honest man, for the service of his
King, the general cause and defense of the laws. Non enim patria praestat
omnibus officijs, and ipsi conducit pios habere cives Cic. off. l. 3.
in parents. For our country is not above all other duties; it is good for
the country to have her inhabitants use piety toward their parents. It Is an
instruction befitting the times: we need not harden our courages with these
plates of iron and steel; it suffices our shoulders be armed with them: it is
enough to dippe our pens in ink, too much, to die them in blood. If it be
greatness of courage, and the effect of a rare and singular virtue, to neglect
friendship, despise private respects and bonds; ones word and kindred, for the
common good and obedience of the Magistrate: it is verily able to excuse us
from it, if we but allege, that it is a greatness unable to lodge in the
greatness of Epaminondas his courage. I abhor the enraged admonitions of
this other unruly spirit.

- dum tela micant, non vos pietatis imago Luan. l. 7. 320. Caes.

Vlla, nec aduersa conspect^ front parents
Commoveant, vult us gladio turbante verendos.
While swords are brandisht, let no show of grace
Once moove you, nor your parents face to face,
But with your swords disturb their reverend grace.
Let us bereave wicked, bloody and traitorous dispositions, of this pretext of
reason: leave we that impious and exorbitant justice, and adhere unto more
humane imitations, Oh what may time and example bring to pass! In an encounter
of the civil wars against Cinna, one of Pompeyes soldiers, having
unwittingly slain his brother, who was on the other side, through shame and
sorrow presently killed himself; And some years after, in another civil
war of the said people, a soldier boldly demanded a reward of his Captains
for killing his own brother. Falsely do we argue honor, and the beauty of
an action, by it is profit: and conclude as ill, to think every one is bound
unto it, and that it is honest, if it be commodious.

Omnia non pariter rerum sunt omnibus apta. Prop. l. 3. el. 8. 7

All things alike to all
Do not well-fitting fall.
Choose we out the most necessary and most beneficial matter of humane
society, it will be a marriage: yet is it, that the Saints counsel finds and
deemeth the contrary side more honest, excluding from it the most reverend
vocation of men: as we to our races assign such beasts as are of least esteem.

The second Chapter.
Of Repenting.

OThers fashion man, I repeat him; and represent a particular one, but ill
made; and whom were I to form a new, he should be far other then he is; but he
is now made. And though the lines of my picture change and vary, yet loose they
not themselves. The world runs all on wheels: All things therein moove
without entermission; yea the earth, the rocks of Caucasus, and the Pyramides
of Egypt, both with the public and their own motion. Constancy it self is
nothing but a languishing and wavering dance. I cannot settle my object; it
goes so unquietly and staggering, with a natural drunkenness. I take it in
this plight, as it is at the instant I ammuse my self about it. I describe not
the essence, but the passage; not a passage from age to age, or as the people
reckon, from seven years to seven, but from day to day, from minute to
minute. My history must be fitted to the present. I may soon change, not only
fortune, but intention. It is a counter-roule of diverse and variable accidents,
and irresolute imaginations, and sometimes contrary: whether it be that my
self am other, or that I apprehend subjects, by other circumstances and
considerations. Howsoever, I may perhaps gain say my self, but truth (as
Demades said) I never gainsay: Were my mind settled, I would not essay, but
resolve my self. It is still a Prentise and a probationer. I propose a mean
life, and without luster: It Is all one. They fasten all moral Philosophy as
well to a popular and private life, as to one of richer stuff. Every man
bears the whole stamp of humane condition. Authors communicate themselves
unto the world by some special and strange mark; I the first, by my general
disposition; as Michael de Montaigne; not as a Grammarian, or a Poet, or a
Lawyer. If the world complain, I speak too much of my self, I complain, it
thinks no more of it self. But is it reason, that being so private in use, I
should pretend to make my self public in knowledge? Or is it reason, I should
produce into the world, where fashion and art have such sway and command, the
raw and simple effects of nature; and of a nature as yet exceeding weak? To
write books without learning, is it not to make a wall without stone or such
like thing? Conceits of music are directed by art; mine by hap. Yet have I
this according to learning, that never man handled subject, he understood or
knew, better then I do this I have undertaken; being therein the cunningest
man alive.

Secondly, that never man waded further into his matter, nor more distinctly
sifted the parts and dependances of it, nor arrived more exactly and fully to
the end he proposed unto himself. To finish the same, I have need of naught
but faithfulness: which is therein as sincere and pure as may be found. I
speak truth, not my belly-full, but as much as I dare; and I dare the more,
the more I grow into years: for it seems, custom allows old age more
liberty to babbell, and indiscretion to talk of it self. It cannot herein be,
as in trades; where the Crafts-man and his work do often differ. Being a man
of so sound and honest conversation, write he so foolishly? Are such learned
writings come from a man of so weak a conversation? who has but an ordinary
conceit, and writes excellently, one may say his capacity is borrowed, not of
himself. A skillful man, is not skillful in all things: But a sufficient man,
is sufficient every where, even unto ignorance. Here my book and my self
march together, and keep one pace. Elsewhere one may commend or condemn the
work, without the worke-man; here not: who touches one, touches the other.
He who shall judge of it without knowing him, shall wrong himself more then
me: he that knows it, has wholly satisfied me. Happy beyond my merit, If I
get this only portion of public approbation, as I may cause men of
understanding to think, I had been able to make use and benefit of learning,
had I been endowed with any: and deserved better help of memory. excuse we
here what I often say, that I seldom repent my self, and that my conscience
is contented with it self; not of an Angels or a horses conscience, but as of
a man's conscience. Adding ever this clause, not of ceremony, but of true and
essential submission; that I speak inquiring and doubting, merely and simply
referring my self, from resolution, unto common and lawful opinions. I teach
not; I report: Noe vice is absolutely vice, which offends not, and a sound
judgment accuses not: For, the deformity and incommoditie thereof is so
palpable, as peradventure they have reason, who say, it is chiefly produced by
sottishness and brought forth by ignorance; so hard is it, to imagine one
should know it without hating it. Malice sucks up the greatest part of her own
venom, and therewith impoysoneth herself. Vice, leaves, as an ulcer in the
flesh, a repentance in the soul, which still scratcheth, and bloodieth it
self. For reason effaceth other griefs and sorrows, but engendereth those of
repentance: the more yrkesome, because inward: As the cold and heat of agues
is more offensive then that which comes outward. I account vice (but each
according to their measure) not only those which reason disalowes, and nature
condemns, but such as man's opinion bath forged as false and erroneous, if
laws and custom authorize the same. In like manner there is not goodness but
gladdeth an honest disposition. There is truly I wot not what kind or
congratulation, of well doing, which rejoices in our selves, and a generous
jollitie, that accompanies a good conscience. A mind courageously vicious,
may happily furnish it self with security, but she cannot be fraught, with
this selfe-ioyning delight and satisfaction. It is noe small pleasure, for one
to feel himself preserved from the contagion of an age so infected as ours,
and to say to himself; could a man enter and see even into my soul, yet
should he not find me guilty, either of the affliction or ruin of any body,
nor culpable of envy or revenge, nor of public offense against the laws, nor
tainted with innovation, trouble or sedition; nor spotted with falsifying of my
word; and although the liberty of times allowed and taught it every man, yet
could I never be induced to touch the goods or diue into the purse of any
French man; and have always lived upon mine own, as well in time of war, as of
peace: nor did I ever make use of any pooremans labor, without reward. These
testimonies of an unspotted conscience are very pleasing, which natural joy is
a great benefit unto us; and the only payment never fails us. To ground the
recompense of virtuous actions, upon the approbation of others, is to undertake
a most uncertain or troubled foundation, namely in an age so corrupt and times
so ignorant, as this is: the vulgar peoples good opinion is injurious. Whom
trust you in seeing what is commendable; God keep me from being an honest
man, according to the description I daily see made of honor, each one by
himself. Quae fuerant vitia, mores sunt. What erst were vices, are now grown
fashious. Some of my friends, have sometimes attempted to school me roundly,
and sift me plainly, either of their own motion, or envited by me, as to an
office, which to a well composed mind, both in profit and lovingnesse,
exceeds all the duties of sincere amity. Such have I ever entertained with
open arms of courtesy, and kind acknowledgement. But now to speak from my
conscience, I often found so much false measure in their reproaches and praises,
that I had not greatly erred if I had rather erred, then done well after their
fashion. Such as we especially, who live a private life not exposed to any
gaze but our own, ought in our hearts establish a touchstone, and thereto
touch our deeds and try our actions; and accordingly, now cherish, and now
chastise our selves. I have my own laws and tribunal, to judge of me,
whether I adresse my self more then any where else. I restrain my actions
according to other, but extend them according to my self. None but your self
knows rightly whether you be demisse and cruel, or loyal and devout. Others
see you not, but guess you by uncertain conjectures: They see not so much
your nature, as your art. Adhere not then to their opinion, but hold unto your
own. Tuo tibi iudicio est vtendum. Virtutis and viciorum grave ipsius
conscientiae pondus Cic. Not. Deor. L. 3.
est: qua sublata iacent omnia; You must use your own judgment: The weight of
the very conscience of vice and virtues is heavy: take that away, and all is
down. But where as it is said, that repentance nearely follows sin,
seems not to emplye sin placed in his rich array, which lodges in us as in
his proper mansion. One may disavowe and disclaim vices, that surprise us, and
whereto our passions transport us: but those, which by long habit are rooted
in a strong, and ankred in a powerful will, are not subject to contradiction.
Repentance is but a denying of our will, and an opposition of our fantasies
which diuerts us here and there. It makes some disauow his former virtue and
continency.

Quae men's est hodie, cur eadem non puero fuit, Hor. car. l. 4. od. 10 7.

Vel cur his animis incolumes non redeunt genae?
Why was not in a youth same mind as now?
Or why bears not this mind a youthful brow?
That is an exquisite life, which even in his own private keeps it self in
awe and order. Every one may play the jugler, and represent an honest man upon
the stage; but within, and in bosom, where all things are lawful, where all
is concealed; to keep a due rule or formal decorum, that is the point. The
next degree, is to be so in ones own home, and in his ordinary actions,
whereof we are to give accoumpt to no body: wherein is no study, nor art, And
therefore Bias describing the perfect state of a family, whereof (says he)
the master, be such inwardly by himself, as he is outwardly, for fear of
the laws, and respect of men's speeches. And it was a worthy saying of Julius
Drusus, to those worke-men, which for three thousand crowns, offered so to
reform his house, that his neighbors should no more over look into it: I
will give you six thousand (said he) and contriue it so, that on all sides
every man may look into it. The custom of Agesilaus is remembered with honor,
who in his travail was wont to take up his lodging in churches, that the
people, and Gods themselves might pry into his private actions. Some have been
admirable to the world, in whom nor his wife, nor his servant ever noted any
thing remarkable. Few men have been admired of their familiars. No man has
been a Prophet, not only in his house, but in his own country, says the
experience of histories. Even so in things of naught. And in this base example,
is the image of greatness discerned. In my climate of Gascoigne they deem it
a jest to see me in print. The further the knowledge which is taken of me is
from my home, of so much more worth am I. In Guienne I pay Printers; in other
places they pay me. Upon this accident they ground, who living and present
keep close-lurking, to purchase credit when they shall be dead and absent. I
had rather have less. And I cast not my self into the world, but for the
portion I draw from it. That done, I quit it. The people attend on such a man
with wonderment, from a public act, unto his own doors: together with his
roabes he leaues-of his part; falling so much the lower, by how much higher
he was mounted. View him within, thereall is turbulent, disordered and vile.
And were order and formality found in him, a lively, impartial and well sorted
judgment is required, to perceive and fully to discern him in these base and
private actions. Considering that order is but a dumpish and drowsy virtue: To
gain a Battle, perform an Embassage, and govern a people, are noble and
worthy actions; to chide, laugh, sell, pay, love, hate, and mildely and justly
to converse both with his own and with himself; not to relent, and not
gainsay himself, are things more rare, more difficult and less remarkable.

Retired lives sustain that way, what ever some say, offices as much more
crabbed, and extended, then other lives do. And private men (says Aristotle)
serve virtue more hardly, and more highly attend her, then those which are
magistrates or placed in authority. We prepare our selves unto eminent
occasions, more for glory then for conscience. The nearest way to come unto
glory, were to do that for conscience, which we do for glory. And me seems
the virtue of Alexander represents much less vigor in her large Theater,
then that of Socrates, in his base and obscure excercitation. I easily conceive
Socrates, in the room of Alexander; Alexander in that of Socrates I cannot. If
any ask the one, what he can do, he will answer, Conquer the world; let
the same question be demanded of the other, he will say, lead my life
conformably to it is natural condition; A science much more generous, more
important, and more lawful.

The worth of the mind consists not in going high, but in marching orderly.
Her greatness is not excercised in greatness; in mediocritye it is. As those,
which judge and touch us inwardely, make no great accoumpt of the brightness
of our public actions; and see they are but streakes and points of clear
Water, surging from a bottom, otherwise slimie and full of mud: So those who
judge us by this gay outward appearance, conclude the same of our inward
constitution, and cannot couple popular faculties as theirs are, unto these
other faculties, which amaze them so far from their level. So do we
attribute savage shapes and ougly forms unto devils. As who does not ascribe
high-raised eyebrows, open nostrils, a stern frightfull visage, and a huge
body unto Tamburlane, as is the form or shape of the imagination we have
fore-conceiued by the brute of his name? Had any heretofore showed me Erasmus,
I could hardly had bin induced to think, but whatsoever he had said to his boy
or hosts, had been Adages and Apothegmes. We imagine much more fitly an
Artificer upon his close stool or on his wife, then a great judge, reverend
for his carriage and regardfull for his sufficiency; we think, that from
those high thrones they should not abase themselves so low, as to live. As
vicious minds are often incited to do well by some strange impulsion, so are
virtuous spirits moved to d^e ill. They must then be judged by their settled
estate, when they are near themselves, and as we say, at home, if at any time
they be so; or when they are nearest unto rest, and in their natural seat.
Natural inclinations are by institution helped and strengthened, but they
neither change nor exceed. A thousand natures in my time, have a thwart, a
contrary discipline, escaped toward virtue or toward vice.

Sic vbi desuetae siluis in carcere clausae, Lucan. l. 4. 237.

Mansueuere ferae, and vultui posuere minaces,
Atque hominem dedicere pati, si torrida paruus
Venit in or a cruor, redeunt rabiesque furorque,
Admonitaeque tument gustato sanguine fauces,
Feruet, and a trepido vix abstinet ir a magistro.
So when wild beasts, disused from the wood,
Fierce looks laide-downe, grow tame, closde in a cage,
Taught to bear man, if then a little blood
Touch their hot lips, fury returns and rage;
Their jaws by taste admonisht swell with veins,
Rage boyles, and from fainte keeper scarce abstaines.
These original qualities are not grubd out, they are but covered, and hidden:
The Latin tongue is to me in a manner natural; I understand it better then
French; but it is now forty years, I have not made use of it to speak, nor
much to write: yet in some extreme emotions and sudden passions, wherein I
have twice or thrice falen, since my years of discretion; and namely once,
when my father being in perfect health, fell all along upon me in a swoune, I
have ever, even from my very heart uttered my first words in latin: Nature
rushing and by force expressing it self, against so long a custom; the like
example is aleaged of diverse others. Those which in my time, have attempted to
correct the fastions of the world by new opinions, reform the vices of
appearance; those of essence they leave untouched if they increase them not: And
their increase is much to be feared. We willingly protract all other
well-doing upon these external reformations, of less cost, and of greatter
merit; whereby we satisfy good-cheape, other natural consubstantiall and
intestine vices. Look a little into the course of our experience. There is no
man (if he listen to himself) that does not discover in himself a peculiar
form of his, a swaieng form, which wrestleth against the institution, and
against the tempests of passions, which are contrary unto him. As for me, I
feel not my self much agitated by a shocke; I commonly find my self in mine
own place, as are sluggish and lumpish bodies. If I am not close and near
unto my self, I am never farre-off: My debauches or excesses transport me not
much. There is nothing extreme and strange: yet have I sound fits and vigorous
lusts.* The true condemnation, and which touches the common fashion of our
men, is, that their very retreat is full of corruption and filth: The Idea of
their amendment blurred and deformed; their repentance crazed and faulty, very
near as much as their sin. Some, either because they are so fast and
naturally joined unto vice, or through long custom, have lost all sense of
it is ugliness. To others (of whose rank I am) vice is burthenous, but they
counter-ballance it with pleasure, or other occasions: and suffer it, and at a
certain rate lend themselves unto it; though basely and viciously. Yet might
happily so remote a disproportion of measure be imagined, where with justice,
the pleasure might excuse the offense, as we say of profit, Not only being
accidental, and out of sin, as in thefts, but even in the very exercise of
it, as in the acquaintance, or copulation with women; where the provocation is
so violent, and as they say, sometime irresistable, In a town of a kinsman of
mine; the other day, being in Armignac, I saw a country man, commonly
sirnemed the Thief: who himself reported his life to have been thus. Being
borne a beggar, and perceiving, that to get his bread by the sweat of his brow
and labor of his hands, would never sufficiently arm him against penury, he
resolved to become a Thief; and that trade had employed all his youth safely,
by means of his bodily strength: for he ever made up Harvest and Vintage in
other men's grounds; but so far off, and in so great heaps, that it was
beyond imagination, one man should in one night carry away so much upon his
shoulders: and was so careful to equal the pray, and disperce the mischief
he did, that the spoil was of less import to every particular man.

He is now in old years indifferently rich; for a man of his condition
(Godamercy his trade) which he is not ashamed to confess openly, And to
reconcile himself with God, he affirms, to be daily ready, with his
gettings, and other good turns, to satisfy the posterity of those he has
heretofore wronged or robbed; which if himself be not of ability to
perform (for he cannot do all at once) he will charge his heirs withal,
according to the knowledge he has, of the wrongs by him done to every man. By
this description, be it true or false, he respects theaft, as a dishonest
and unlawful action, and hates the same: yet less then pinching want: He
repents but simply; for in regard it was so counterballanced and recompensed,
he repents not. That is not that habit which incorporates us unto vice, and
confirms our understanding in it; nor is it that boisterous wind, which by
violent blastes dazeleth and troubles our minds, and at that time confoundes,
and ouerwhelmes both us, our judgment, and all into the power of vice. What I
do, is ordinarily full and complete, and I march (as we say) all in one
piece: I have not many motions, that hide themselves and slinke away from my
reason, or which very near are not guided by the consent of all my parts,
without division, or intestine sedition: my judgment has the whole blame, or
commendation; and the blame it has once, it has ever: for, almost from it is
birth, it has been one, of the same inclination, course and force. And in
matters of general opinions, even from my infancy, I ranged my self to the
point I was to hold. Some sins there are outrageous, violent and sudden;
leave we them.

But those other sins, so often reassumed, determined and advised upon,
whether they be of complexion, or of profession and calling, I cannot conceive
how they should so long be settled in one same courage, unless the reason and
conscience of the sinner were thereunto inwardly privy and constantly willing.
And how to imagine or fashion the repentance thereof, which he vanteth, does
some times visit him, seems somewhat hard unto me. I am not of Phythagoras
Sect, that men take a new soul, when to receive Oracles, they approach the
images of Gods; unless he would say with all, that it must be a strange one,
new, and lent him for the time: our own, giving so little sign of
purification, and cleanesse worthy of that office, They do altogether against
the Stoycall precepts, which appoint us to correct the imperfections and vices
we find in our selves, but withal forbid us to disturb the quiet of our
mind. They make us believe, they feel great remorse, and are inwardly much
displeased with sin; but of amendment, correction or intermission, they show
us none. Surely there can be noc perfect health; Where the disease is not
perfectlye removed. Were repentance put in the scale of the balance, it
would weigh down sin. I find no humor so easy to be counterfeited as
Devotion: If one conform not his life and conditions to it, her essence is
abstruse and concealed, her appearance gentle and stately.

For my part, I may in general wish to be other then I am; I may condemn and
mislike my universal form; I may beseech God to grant me an undefiled
reformation, and excuse my natural weakness; but me seems I ought not to
term this repentance noe more then the displeasure of being neither Angel
nor Cat^. My actions are squared to what I am and conformed to my condition. I
cannot do better: And repentance does not properly concern what is not in
our power; sorrow does. I may imagine infinite dispositions of a higher pitch,
and better governed then mine, yet do I nothing better my faculties; noe more
then mine arm becomes stronger, or my wit more excellent, by conceiving some
others to be so. If to suppose and wish a more nobler working then ours, might
produce the repentance of our own, we should then repent us of our most
innocent actions: for so much as we judge that in a more excellent nature, they
had heene directed with greater perfection and dignity; and our selves would
do the like. When I consult with my age of my youths proceedings, I find
that commonly, (according to my opinion) I managed them in order. This is all
my resistance is able to perform. I flatter not my self: in like
circumstances, I should ever be the same. It is not a spot, but a whole dye,
that staynes me. I acknowledge noe repentance, that is superficial, mean and
ceremoious. It must touch me on all sides, before I can term it repentance.
It must pinch my entrails, and afflict them as deeply and thoroughly, as God
himself beholdes me. When in negotiating, many good fortunes have slipped me
for want of good discretion, yet did my proiects make good choice, according to
the occurrences presented unto them. Their manner is ever to take the easier
and surer side. I find that in my former deliberations, I proceeded, after my
rules, discreetely, for the subjects state propounded to me; and in like
occasions, would proceed a like; a hundred years, hence. I respect not what
now it is, but what it was, when I consulted of it. The consequence of all
dessignes consistes in the seasons; occasions pass, and matters change
vncessantlie. I have in my time run into some gross, absurd and important
errors; not for want of good advise, but of good hap. There are secret and
indiuinable parts in the objects men do handle; especially in the nature of
men and mute conditions, without show, and sometimes unknown of the very
possessours, produced and stirred up by sudden occasions. If my wit could
neither find nor presage them, I am not offended with it; the function thereof
is contained within it is own limits. If the success beat me, and favor the
side I refused; there is noe remedy; I fall not out with my self; I accuse my
fortune, not my endeavor: that is not called repentance. Phocion had given the
Athenians some counsel, which was not followed; the matter, against his
opinion, succeeding happily; How now Phocion, (quoth one) art thou pleased the
matter has thriued so well? yea (said he) and I am glad of it, yet repent
not the advice I gave.

When any of my friends come to me for counsel, I bestow it frankly and
clearelie, not as (well nigh all the world does) wavering at the hazard of the
matter, whereby the contrary of my meaning may happen, that so they may justly
find fault with my advise: for which I care not greatly. For they shall do
me wrong, and it became nor me to refuse them that duty. I have no body to
blame for my faults or misfortunes, but my self. For in effect I seldom use
the advice of other unless it be for complements sake, and where I have need
of instruction or knowledge of the fact. Marry in things wherein naught but
judgment is to be employed; strange reasons may serve to sustain, but not to
divert me. I lend a favorable and courteous ear unto them all. But (to my
remembrance) I never believed any but mine own. With me they are but Flies
and Moathes, which distract my will. I little regard mine own opinions, other
men's I esteem as little: Fortune pays me accordingly. If I take no counsel
I give as little. I am not much sought after for it and less credited when I
give it: Neither know I any enterprise, either private or public, that my
advise has directed and brought to conclusion. Even those whom fortune had
some-way tide thereunto, have more willingly admitted the direction of others
conceits, then mine. As one that am a jealous of the rights of my quiet, as of
those of my authority; I would rather have it thus.

Where leaving me, they iumpe with my profession, which is, wholly to settle
and contain me in my self. It is a pleasure unto me, to be disinteressed
of other men's affairs, and disingaged from their contentions. When suits or
businesses be ouer-past, how-so-ever it be, I greeve little at them. For, the
imagination that they must necessarily happen-so, puts me out of pain;
behold them in the course of the Universe, and enchained in Stoy call causes.
Your fantazie cannot by wish or imagination, remove one point of them, but
the whole order of things must reverse both what is past, and what is to come.
More-over, I hate that accidental repentance which old age bringes with it.

He that in ancient times said, he was beholden to years, because they had
rid him of voluptuousness, was not of mine opinion. I shall never give
impuissance thanks, for any good it can do me. Nec tam aversa vnquam
videbitur ab opere suo providentia, vt debilitas inter optima inuenta sit. Nor
shall foresight ever be seen so auerse from her own work, that weakness
be found to be one of the best things. Our appetites are rare in olde-age:
the blow over-passed, a deep sacietie seazeth upon us: Therein I see no
conscience. Fretting care and weakness, imprint in us an effeminate and
drowzie virtue.

We must not suffer our selves so fully to be carried into natural
alterations, as to corrupt or adulterate our judgment by them. Youth and
pleasure have not heretofore prevailed so much over me, but I could ever (even
in the midst of sensualities) discern the ugly face of sin: nor can the
distaste which years bring on me, at this instant, keep me from discerning
that of voluptuousness in vice. Now I am no longer in it, I judge of it as if
I were still there. I who lively and attentively examine my reason, find it to
be the same that possessed me in my most dissolute and licentious age; unless
perhaps, they being enfeebled and empayred by years, do make some difference:
And find, that what delight it refuses to affoorde me in regard of my
bodily health, it would no more deny me, then in times past, for the health
of my soul. To see it out of combat, I hold it not the more courageous. My
temptations are so mortified and crazed, as they are not worthy of it is
oppositions; holding but my hand before me, I be-calme them. Should one present
that former concupiscence unto it, I fear it would be of less power to
sustance it than heretofore it has been. I see in it, by it self no increase
of judgment, nor access of brightness, what it now judges, it did then.
Wherefore if there be any amendment, it is but diseased. Oh miserable kind of
remedy, to be beholden unto sickness for our health. It is not for our
mishap, but for the good success of our judgment to perform this office.
Crosses and afflictions, make me do nothing but curse them. They are for
people, that cannot be awaked but by the whip. The course of my reason is the
nimbler in prosperity; It is much more distracted and busied in the digesting
of mischiefs, than of delights. I see much cleare^ in fair weather. Health
forewarneth me, as with more pleasure, so to better purpose than sickness. I
approached the nearest I could unto amendment and regularity, when I should
have enjoyed the same; I should be ashamed and vexed, that the misery and
mishap of my old age could exceed the health, attention and vigor of my youth:
and that I should be esteemed, not for what I have been, but for what I am
leaft to be. The happy life (in my opinion) not (as said Antisthenes) the happy
death, is it that makes man's happiness in this world.

I have not preposterously busied my self to tie the tail of a Philosopher,
unto the head and body of a varlet: nor that this paultrie end, should disavow
and belie the fairest, soundest, and longest part of my life. I will present my
self, and make a general muster of my whole, every where uniformly. Were I
to live again, it should be as I have already lived. I neither deplore what
is past, nor dread what is to come: and if I be not deceived, the inward parts
have nearly resembled the outward. It is one of the chiefest points wherein I
am beholden to fortune, that in the course of my bodies estate, each thing has
been carried in season. I have seen the leaves, the blossoms, and the fruit;
and now see the drooping and withering of it. Happily, because naturally. I
bear my present miseries the more gently, because they are in season, and with
greater favor make me remember the long happiness of my former life. In like
manner, my discretion may well be of like proportion in the one and the other
time: but sure it was of much more performance, and had a better grace, being
fresh, jolly and full of spirit, then now that it is worn, decrepite and
toylesome.

I therefore renounce these casual and dolourous reformations. God must touch
our hearts; our conscience must amend of it self, and not by re-inforcement
of our reason, nor by the enfeebling of our appetites. Voluptuousness in it
self is neither pale nor discouloured, to be discerned by bleare and troubled
eyes. We should affect temperance and chastity for it self, and for Gods
cause, who has ordained them unto us: that which Catars bestow upon us, and
which I am beholden to my chollicke for, is neither temperance nor chastity. A
man cannot boast of contemning or combating sensuality, if he see her not, or
know not her grace, her force and most attractive beauties. I know them both,
and therefore may speak it. But me thinks our souls in age are subject unto
more importunate diseases and imperfections, then they are in youth. I said so
being young, when my beardlesse chinne was vpbraided me; and I say it again,
now that my gray beard gives me authority. We entitle wisdom, the
frowardness of our humors, and the distaste of present things; but in truth
we abandon not vices, so much as we change them; and in mine opinion for the
worse. Besides a silly and ruinous pride, combersome tattle, wayward and
unsociable humors, superstition and a ridiculous carking for wealth, when the
use of it is well nigh lost, I find the more envy, injustice and lewdness
in it. It sets more wrinckles in our minds, then on our foreheads: nor are
there any spirits, or very rare ones, which in growing old taste not sowrely
and mustily. Man marches entirely toward his increase and decrease. View but
the wisdom of Socrates, and diverse circumstances of his condemnation, I dare
say he something lent himself unto it by prevarication of purpose: being so
near, and at the age of seventie, to endure the benumming of his spirits
richest pace, and the dimming of his accustomed brightness. What Metamorphoses
have I seen it daily make in diverse of mine acquaintances? It is a powerful
malady, which naturally and imperceptible glideth into us: There is required
great provision of stu^^, heed and precaution, to avoid the imperfections
wherewith it charge us; or at least to weaken their further progress. I
find that notwithstanding all my entrenchings, by little and little it gets
ground upon me: I hold out as long as I can, but know not whither at length it
will bring me. Hap what hap will, I am pleased the world know from what
height I tumbled.

The third Chapter.
Of three commerces or societies.

WE must not cleave so fast unto our humors and dispositions. Our chiefest
sufficiency is, to apply our selves to diverse fashions. It is a being, but
not a life, to be tied and bound by necessity to one only course. The
goodliest minds are those that have most variety and pliablenesse in them.
Behold an honorable testimony of old Cato: Huic versatile ingenium sic
pariter ad omnia fuit, vt natum ad id vnum diceres, quodcunque ageret. Iiu.
bell. Mac. l. 9.
He had a wit so turneable for all things alike, as one would say he had
been only borne for that he went about to do. Were I to dress my self
after mine own manner, there is no fashion so good, whereto I would be so
affected or tied, as not to know how to leave and loose it. Life is a motion
unequal, irregular and multiforme. It is not to be the friend (less the
master) but the slave of ones self to follow incessantly, and be so addicted
to his inclinations, as he cannot stray from them, nor wrest them. This I say
now, as being extremely pestred with the importunity of my mind, for so much as
she cannot ammuse her self, but whereon it is busied; not employ it self,
but bent and whole. How light soever the subject is one gives it, it willingly
amplifieth, and wire-drawes the same, even unto the highest pitch of toil.
It Is idleness is therefore a painful trade unto me, and offensive to my
health. Most wits have need of extravagant stuff, to vn-benumme and exercise
themselves: mine has need of it, rather to settle and continue it self:
Vitia otij negotio discutienda sunt, The vices of idleness should be shaken
off with business: For, the S^^. ep. 56.
most laborious care and principal study of it, is, to study it self.
Books are one of those businesses that seduce it from study. At the first
thoughts that present themselves, it rouzeth up and makes proof of all the
vigor it has. It exercises it is function sometimes toward force, sometimes
toward order and comeliness, it rangeth, moderates and fortifieth. It has of
it self to awaken the faculties of it: Nature having given it, as unto all
other, matter of it is own for advantage, and subjects fit enough whereon to
devise and determine. Meditation is a large and powerful study to such as
vigorously can taste and employ themselves therein. I had rather forge then
furnish my mind.

There is no office or occupation either weaker or stronger, then that of
entertaining of ones thoughts according to the mind, whatsoever it be. The
greatest make it their vacation, Quibus viuere est cogitare, to whom it is all
one to live and to meditate. Nature has also favored it with this privilege,
that there is nothing we can do so long; nor action, whereto we give our
selves more ordinarily and easily. It is the work of Gods (says Aristotle)
whence both their happiness and ours proceeds. Reading serves me
especially, to awake my conceit by diverse objects; to busy my judgment, not
my memory. Few entertainments then, stay me without vigor and force. It Is
true that courtesy and beauty possess me, as much or more, then weight and
depth. And because I slumber in all other communications, and lend but the
superficial parts of my attention unto them, it often befalls me, in such
kind of weak and absurd discourses, (discourses of countenance) to blurt out
and answer ridiculous toies, and fond absurdities, unworthy a child; or
wilfully to hold my peace; therewithal more foolishly and incivilly. I have a
kind of raving fancie-full behavior, that retireth me into my self; and on
the other side, a gross and childish ignorance of many ordinary things; by
means of which two qualities, I have in my days committed five or six as
sottish tricks, as any one whosoever; which to my derogation may be reported.
But to follow my purpose, this harsh complexion of mine makes me nice in
conuersing with men (whom I must pick and cull out for the nonce) and unfit
for common actions. We live and negotiate with the people: If their behavior
importune us, if we disdain to lend our selves to base and vulgar spirits,
which often are as regular as those of a finer mould; and all wisdom is
vasavourie, that is not conformed to common insipience. We are no longer to
intermeddle either with our, or other men's affairs: and both public and
private forsake such kind of people.

The least wrested, and most natural proceedings of our mind, are the
fairest; the best occupations, those which are least forced. Good God, how good
an office does wisdom unto those, whose desires she squareth according to
their power! There is no science more profitable. As one may, was the burden
and favored saying of Socrates: A sentence of great substance. We must
address and stay our desires, to things most easy and nearest. Is it not a
fond-peevish humor in me, to disagree from a thousand; to whom my fortune
joineth me, without whom I cannot live, to adhere unto one or two, that are
out of my commerce and conversation; or rather to a fantastical conceit, or
fancie-full desire, for a thing I cannot obtain? My soft behaviors and mild
manners, enemies to all sharpness and foes to all bitterness, may easily have
discharged me from envy and contention. To be beloved, I say not, but not to
be hated, never did man give more occasion. But the coldness of my
conversation, has with reason robbed me of the good will of many; which may be
excused, if they interpret the same to other, or worse sense. I am most capable
of getting rare amities, and continuing exquisite acquaintances. For so much as
with so greedy hunger I snatch at such acquaintances as answer my taste and
square with my humor. I so greedily produce and headlong cast my self upon
them, that I do not easily miss to cleave unto them, and where I light-on, to
make a steadie impression; I have often made happy and successful trial of
it.

In vulgar worldly friendships, I am somewhat cold and barren; for my
proceeding is not natural, if not unresisted and with hoised-full sails.
Moreover, my fortune having enured and allured me, even from my infancy, to
one sole-singular and perfect amity, has verily, in some sort, distasted me
from others: and over-deeply imprinted in my fantasy, that it is a beast
sociable and for company, and not of troop, as said an ancient writer. So
that it is naturally a pain unto me, to communicate my self by halves, and
with modification; and that servile or suspicious wisdom, which in the
conversation of these numerous and imperfect amities, is ordained and proposed
unto us: Prescribed in these days especially, Wherein one cannot speak of the
world but dangerously or falselie. Yet I see, that who (as I do) makes for
his end, the commodities of his life (I mean essential commodities) must
avoid as a plague, these difficulties and quaintness of humor.

I should commend a high-raysed mind, that could both bend and discharge it
self: that wherever her fortune might transporte her, she might continue
constant: that could discourse with her neighbor of all matters, as of her
building, of her hunting and of any quarrel; and entertain with delight a
Carpenter or a Gardener. I envy those which can be familiar with the meanest
of their followers, and vouchafe to contract friendship, and frame discourse
with their own servants. Nor do I like the advice of Plato, ever to speak
imperiouslye unto our attendants, without blithnesse and sance any
familiarity: be it to men or women servants. For, besides my reason, it is
inhumanitie, and injustice, to attribute so much unto that prerogative of
fortune: and the govenrment, where less inequality is permited between the
servant and master, is, in my conceit the more indifferent. Some other study
to rouse and raise their mind; but I to abase and prostrate mine: it is not
faulty but in extension.

Narras et genus Aeaci, idor. ^ar. l. 3 od 19. 2.

Et pugnata sacro bella sub Ilio.
Quo Chium pretio cadum
Mercemur, quis aquam temperet iguibus,
Quo praebente domum, et quota
Pelignis caream frigoribus, taces.
You tell of Aeacus the pedigree;
The wars at sacred Troy you do display,
You tell not at what price a hogs-head we
May buie of the best Wine; who shall allaye
Wine-fire with water. at whose house to hold.
At what a-clock, I may be kept from cold,
Even as the Lacedemonian valor had need of moderation, and of sweet and
pleasing soundes of Flutes, to flatter and allaye it in time of war, least it
should run headlong into rashness and furye: whereas all other nations use
commonly pearcing soundes and strong shouts, which violently excite, and
inflame their souldyers courage: so think I (against ordinarye custom) that
in the employment of our spirit, we have for the most part more need of lead
then wings; of coldenesse and quiet, then of heat and agitation. Above all,
in my mind, The only way to play the fool well, is to seem wise among
fools: to speak as though ones tongue were ever bent to Fauelar' in punta
diforchetta, To Ital. Preu.
syllabize or speak minsinglie. One must lend himself unto those he is with,
and sometimes affect ignorance: Set force and subtlety aside; In common
employments it is enough to reserve order; dragge your self even close to the
ground, if they will have it so. The learned stumble willingly on this block;
making continual muster, and open show of their skill, and dispersing their
books abroad: And have in these days so filled the closets, and possessed
the ears of Ladies, that if they retain not their substance, at least they
have their countenance: using in all sorts of discourse and subject how base
or popular soever, a new, an affected and learned fashion of speaking and
writing.

Hoc sermon pauent, hoc iram, gaudia, curas, Iuuen. Sat. 6. 189.

Hoc cuncta effundunt animi secreta, quid vltra?
Concumbunt docte.
They in this language fear, in this they fashion
Their joys, their cares, their rage, their inward passion;
What more? they learned are in copulation.
And allege Plato, and Saint Thomas for things, which the first man they
meet would decide as well, and stand for as good a witness. Such learning as
could not enter into their mind, has staid on their tongues. If the well
borne will give any credit unto me, they shall be pleased to make their own
and natural riches to prevail and be of worth: They hide and shroud their
forms under fortaine and borrowed beawties: It is great simplicity, for any
body to smoother and conceal his own brightness, to shine with a borrowed
light: They are buried and entombed under the Art of CAPSVLA TOTAE, It is
because they do not sufficiently know themselves: the World contains nothing
of more beauty: It is for them to honor Arts, and to beawtifie embellishment.
What need they more then to live beloved and honored? They have, and know but
too much in that matter. There needs but a little rouzing and enflaming of the
faculties that are in them.

When I see them meddling with Rhetoric, with Law, and with Logic, and such
like trash, so vain and unprofitable for their use; I enter into fear, that
those who advise them to such things, do it, that they may have more law to
govern them under that pretense. For, what other excuse can I devise for them?
It is sufficient, that without us, they may frame, or roll the grace of their
eyes, unto cheerfulness, unto severity, and unto mildness: and season a No
with frowardness, with doubt and with favor; and require not an interpretor
in discourses made for their service. With this learning they command without
control, and overruled both Regents and Schools. Yet if it offend them to
yield us any pre-eminence, and would for curiosity sake have part in books
also: Poesy is a study fit for their purpose: being a wanton, ammusing,
subtle, disguised, and prattling Art; all in delight, all in show, like to
themselves. They may also select diverse commodities out of History. In Moral
Philosophy, they may take the discourses which enable them to judge of our
humors, to censure our conditions, and to avoid our guiles and treacheries;
to temper the rashness of their own desires. to husband their liberty:
lengthen the delights of life; gently to bear the inconstancy of a servant,
the peevishness or rudeness of a husband, the importunity of years, the
vnwellcomnesse of wrinckles, and such like minde-troubling accidents. Lo hear
the most and greatest share of learning I would assign them. There are some
particular, retired and close dispositions.

My essential form is fit for communication, and proper for production: I am
all outward and in appearance; borne for society and unto friendship. The
solitude I love and commend, is especially but to retire my affections and
redeem my thoughts unto my self; to restrain and closevp, not my steps,
but my desires and my ears, resigning all foreign solicitude and trouble,
and mortally shunning all manner of servitude and obligation; and not so much
the throng of men as the importunity of affairs. Local solitariness (to say
truth) does rather extend and enlarge me outwardly; I give my self to
State-businesse, and to the world, more willingly when I am all alone. At the
Court, and in press of people, I close and slinke into mine own skin.
Assemblies thrust me again into my self. And I never entertain my self so
fondly, so licenciously, and so particularly, as in places of respect, and
ceremonious discretion. Our follies make me not laugh, but our wisdoms do.
Of mine own complexion, I am no enemy to the agitations and stirrings of our
Courts: I have there past great part of my life: and am enured to be merry in
great assemblies; so it beeby entermission, and suitable to my humor.

But this tenderness and coinesse of judgment (whereof I speak) does
perforce tie me unto solitariness. Yea even in mine own house, in the
midst of a numerous family and most frequented houses, I see people more
then a good many, but seldom such as I love to converse or communicate
withal. And there I reserve, both for my self, and others, an unaccustomed
liberty; making truce with ceremonies, assistance, and invitings, and such
other troublesome ordinances of our courtesy (O servile custom and
importunate manner) there every man demeaneth himself as he pleases, and
entertaineth what his thoughts affect; whereas I keep my self silent,
meditating and close, without offense to my guests or friends.

The men whose familiarity and society I hunt after, are those which are
called honest, virtuous and sufficient: the image of whom does distaste and
divert me from others. It is (being rightly taken) the rarest of our forms;
and a form or fashion chiefly due unto nature.

The end or scope of this commerce, is principally and simply familiarity,
conference and frequentation: the exercise of minds, without other fruit. In
our discourses, all subjects are alike to me: I care not though they want
either weight or depth; grace and pertmency are never wanting; all therein is
tainted with a ripe and constant judgment, and commixt with goodness,
liberty, cheerfulness, and kindness. It is not only in the subject of Laws
and affairs of Princes, that our spirit shows it is beauty, grace and vigor:
It shows them as much in private conferences. I know my people by their very
silence and smyling, and peradventure discover them better at a Table, then
sitting in serious counsel.

Hippomacus said, he discerned good Wrestlers but by seeing them march through
a Street. If learning vouchsafe to step into our talk, she shall not be
refused; yet must not she be stern, mastring, imperious and importunate, as
commonly she is; but assistant, and docile of hirselfe. Therein we seek for
nothing but recreation and pastime: when we shall look to be instructed,
taught and resolved, we will go seek and sue to her in her Throne. Let her if
she please keep from us at that time; for, as commodious and pleasing as she
is: I presume that for a need we could spare her presence, and do our
business well-enough without her. Wits well borne, soundly bred and exercised
in the practice and commerce of men, become gracious and plausible of
themselves. Art is but the Checke-roule, and Register of the Productions
uttered, and conceits produced by them.

The company of fair, and society of honest women is likewise a sweet commerce
for me: Nam^^s quoque oculos cruditos habemus, for we also have learned eyes.
If the mind have Ci^. parad.
not so much to solace hir-selfe, as in the former; the corporal senses, whose
part is more in the second, bring it to a proportion near unto the other;
although in mine opinion not equal. But it is a society wherein it behooveth a
man somewhat to stand upon his guard; and especially those that are of a strong
constitution, and whose body can do much, as in me. In my youth I heated my
self therein and was very violent; and endured all the rages and furious
assaults, which Poets say happen to those who without order or discretion
abandon themselves over-loosly and riotously unto it. True it is indeed, that
the same lash has since stood me instead of an instruction.

Quicunque Argolica de class Capharea fugit, Ovid. Trist. l. 1. el. 1. 83.

Semper ab Euboicis vela retorquet aquis.
Greek Sailers that Capharean Rocks did fly,
From the Euboean Seas their sails still ply.
It is folly to fasten all ones thoughts upon it, and with a furious and
indiscreet affection to engage himself unto it: But on the otherside, to
meddle with it without love or bond of affection, as Comediants do, to play a
common part of age and manners, without ought of their own but bare-conned
words, is verily a provision for ones safety: and yet but a cowardly one; as is
that of him, who would forgo his honor, his profit or his pleasure for fear
of danger; for it is certain that the practisers of such courses, cannot hope
for any fruit able to moove or satisfy a worthy mind.

One must very earnestly have desired that, whereof he would enjoy an absolute
delight: I mean, though fortune should unjustly favor their intention: which
often happens because there is no woman, how deformed and unhandsome soever,
but thinks hir-selfe lovely, amiable and praiseworthy, either for her age,
her hair or gate (for there are generally no more fair then foul ones) And
the Brachmanian maids wanting other commendations; by Proclamation for that
purpose, made show of their matrimonial parts unto the people assembled, to
see if thereby at least they might get them husbands. By consequence there is
not one of them, but upon the first oath one makes to serve her, will very
easily be persuaded to think well of her self. Now this common treason and
ordinary protestations of men in these days, must needs produce the effects,
experience already discovers: which is, that either they join together, and
cast away themselves on themselves, to avoid us, or on their side follow also
the example we give them; acting their part of the play, without passion;
without care, and without love, lending themselves to this intercourse: Neque
affectui suo aut alieno obnoxiae: Neither liable to their own nor other folks
affection. Thinking, according to Lysias persuasions in Plato, they may so much
the more profitably and commodiously yield unto us; by how much less we love
them: Wherein it will happen as in Comedies, the spectators shall have as much
or more pleasure, as the Comedians. For my part, I no more acknowledge Venus
without Cupid, then a motherhood without an offspring: They are things which
enter-lend and enter-owe one another their essence. Thus does this cozening
rebound on him that uses it; and as it costs him little, so gets he not much
by it. Those which made Venus a Goddess, have respected that her principal
beauty was incorporeall and spiritual. But she whom these kind of people
hunt after, is not so much as humane, nor also brutall; but such as wild
beasts, would not have her so filthy and terrestrial. We see that imagination
enflames them, and desire or lust urges them, before the body: We see in one
and other sex, even in whole herds, choice and distinctions in their
affections, and amongst themselves acquaintances of long continued good will
and liking. And even those to whom age denies bodily strength, do yet bray,
neigh, roar, skip and wince for love. Before the deed we see them full of
hope and heat; and when the body has played his part, even tickle and tingle
themselves with the sweetness of that remembrance: some of them swell with
pride at parting from it, others all weary and glutted, ring out songs of glee
and triumph. Who makes no more of it but to discharge his body of some natural
necessity, has no cause to trouble others with so curious preparation. It is
no food for a greedy and clownish hunger. As one that would not be accounted
better then I am, thus much I will display of my youths wanton-errours: Not
only for the danger of ones health that follows that game (yet could I not
avoid two, though light and cursorie assaults) but also for contempt, I have
not much been given to mercenarie and common acquaintances. I have coveted to
set an edge on that sensual pleasure by difficulty, by desire, and for some
glory. And liked Tiberius his fashions, who in his amors was swa^ed as much by
modesty and nobleness, as by any other quality. And Floras humor, who would
prostitute her self to none worse then Dictators, Consuls, or Censors, and
took delight in the dignity and greatness of her lovers, does somewhat suit
with mine. Surely glittering pearls and silken clothes add some thing unto
it, and so do titles, nobility and a worthy train. Besides which, I made
high esteem of the mind, yet so as the body might not justly be found fault
withal: For, to speak my conscience, if either of the two beauties were
necessarily to be wanting, I would rather have chosen to want the mental,
whose use is to be employed in better things. But in the subject of love; a
subject that chiefly has reference unto the two senses of seeing and touching,
some thing may be done without the graces of the mind, but little or nothing
without the corporal. Beauty is the true auailefull advantage of women: It is
so peculiarly theirs, that ours though it require some features and different
allurements, is not in her right kue, or true bias, unless confused with
theirs; childish and beardlesse. It is reported, that such as serve the great
Turk under the title of beauty (whereof the number is infinite) are dismissed
at furthest when they once come to the age of two and twenty years. Discourse,
discretion, together with the offices of true amity, are better found amongst
men: and therefore govern they the worlds affairs. These two commerces or
societies are accidental and depending of others; the one is troublesome and
tedious for it is raritie; the other withers with old age: nor could they have
sufficiently provided for my lives necessities. That of books, which is the
third, is much more solid-sure and much more ours; some other advantages it
yields to the two former; but has for her share constancy and the facility
of her service. This accosteth and secondeth all my course, and every where
assisteth me: It comforts me in age, and solaceth me in solitariness: It
eases me of the burden of a weary-some sloth; and at all times rids me of
tedious companies; it abateth the edge of fretting sorrow, on condition it be
not extreme and over-insolent. To divert me from any importunate imagination or
insinuating conceit, there is no better way then to have recourse unto books:
with ease they allure me to them, and with facility they remoove them all.
And though they perceive I neither frequent nor seek them, but wanting other
more essential, lively, and more natural commodities, they never mutiny or
murmr at me; but still entertain me with one and selfsame visage. He
may well walk a foot, that leads his horse by the bridle, says the proverb.
And our James king of Naples and Sicilie, who being fair, young, healthy and
in good plight, caused himself to be carried abroad in a plain wagon or
skreene, lying upon an homely pillow of course feathers, clothed in a suit of
homespunne gray, and a bonet of the same, yet royally attended on by a gallant
troop of Nobles, of Litters, Coches, and of all sorts of choice led-horses, a
number of gentlemen, and officers, represented a tender and wavering
austeritie. The sick man is not to be moaned, that has his health in his
sleeve. In the experience and use of this sentence, which is most true,
consists all the commodity I reap of books. In effect I make no other use
of them, then those who know them not. I enjoy them, as a miser does his gold;
to know, that I may enjoy them when I list; my mind is settled and satisfied
with the right of possession. I never travel without books, nor in peace nor
in war; yet do I pass many days and months without using them. It shall
be anon, say I or to morrow, or when I please; in the mean while the time
runs away, and passes without hurting me. For it is wonderful, what repose
I take, and how I continue in this consideration, that they are at my elbow to
delight me when time shall serve: and in acknowledging what assistance they
give unto my life. This is the best munition I have found in this humane
peregrination; and I extremely bewail those men of understanding that want the
same. I accept with better will all otehr kinds of ammusements, how slight
soever, for so much as this cannot fail me. At home I betake me somewhat the
oftener to my Library, whence all at once I command and survay all my household;
It is seated in the chief entry of my house, thence I behold under me my
garden, my base court, my yard, and look even into most rooms of my house.
There without order, without method, and by peece-meales I turn over and
ransacke, now one book and now another. Sometimes I muse and rave; and walking
up and down I endight and enregister these my humors, these my conceits. It
is placed on the third story of a tower. The lowermost is my Chapel; the
second a chamber with other lodgings, where I often lie, because I would be
alone. Above it is a great wardrobe. It was in times past the most
unprofitable place of all my house. There I pass the greatest part of my lives
days, and wear out most hours of the day. I am never there a nights: Next
unto it is a handsome neat cabinet, able and large enough to receive fire in
winter, and very pleasantly windowed. And if I feared not care, more then cost;
(care which drives and diverts me from all business) I might easily ione a
convenient gallerie of a hundred paces long, and twelve broad, on each side of
it, and upon one floor; having already, for some other purpose, found all the
walls raised unto a convenient height. Each retired place requires a walk.
My thoughts are prone to sleep, if I sit long. My mind goes not alone as if
legs did moove it. Those that study without books, are all in the same
case. The form of it is round, and has no flat side, but what serves for my
table and chair: In which bending or circling manner, at one look it offreth
me the full sight of all my books, set round about upon shelves or desks,
five ranks one upon anotehr. It has three bay-windowes, of a farre-extending,
rich and unresisted prospect, and is in diameter sixteen paces void. In winter
I am less continually there: for my house (as the name of it imports) is
pearched upon an over-pearing hillocke; and has no part more subject to all
wethers then this: which pleases me the more, both because the access unto it
is somewhat troublesome and remote, and for the benefit of the exercise, which
is to be respected; and that I may the better seclude my self from company,
and keep incrochers from me: There is my seat, that is my throne. I endeavor
to make my rule therein absolute, and to sequester that only corner from the
community of wife, of children and of acquaintance. Elsewhere I have but a
verbal authority, of confused essence. Miserable, in my mind is he, who in
his own home, has no where to be to himself; where he may particularly
court, and at his pleasure hide or withdraw himself. Ambition paieth her
followers well, to keep them still in open view, as a statue in some
conspicuous place. Magna Sen. cons. ad Pol. c. 26. p.
seruitus est magna fortuna: A great fortune is a great bondage. They cannot
be private so much as at their privy, I have deemed nothing so rude in the
austeritie of the life, which our Churchmen affect, as that in some of their
companies they institute a perpetual society of place, and a mumerous
assistance amongst them in any thing they do. And deem it somewhat more
tolerable to be ever alone, then never able to be so. If any say to me, It is
a kind of vilifying the Muses, to use them only for sport and recreation, he
wots not as I do, what worth, pleasure, sport and passe-time is of: I had
well nigh termed all other ends ridiculous. I live from hand to mouth, and with
reverence be it spoken, I live but to my self: there end all my designs.
Being young I studied for ostentation; then a little to enable my self and
become wiser; now for delight and recreation; never for gain. A vain conceit
and lavish humor I had after this kind of stuff; not only to provide for my
need but somewhat further to adorn and embellish my self withal: I have
since partly leaft it. Books have and contain diverse pleasing qualities to
those that can duly choose them. But no good without pains; no Roses without
prickles. It is a pleasure not absolutely pure and neat, no more then all
others; it has his enconueniences attending on it and sometimes weighty ones:
The mind is therein exercised, but the body (the ear whereof I have not yet
forgotten) remains there-whilst without action, and is wasted, and
ensorrowed. I know no excess more hurtful for me, nor more to be avoided by
me, in this declining age. lo here my three most favored and particulare
employments. I speak not of those I owe of duty to the world.

The fourth Chapter.
Of diuerting and diuersions.

I Was once employed in comforting of a trulie-afflicted Lady: the greatest
part of their discourses are artificial and ceremonious.

Vberibus semper lachrimis, semperque paratis. Iuuen. Sat. 6. 273.

In statione sua, atque expectantibus illam,
Quo iubeat manare modo.
With plenteous tears; still ready in their stand,
Expecting still their Mistresses command,
How they must flow, when they must go.
Men do but ill in opposing themselves against this passion; for opposition
does but incense and engage them more to sorrow and quietness: The disease is
exasperated by the jealousy of debate. In matters of common discourse, we see,
that what I have spoken without heed or care, if one come to contest with me
about it, I stiffly maintain and make good mine own; much more if it be a
thing wherein I am interessed. Besides, in so doing, you enter but rudely into
your matter, whereas a Physicians first entertainment of his pacient should be
gracious, cheerful and pleasing. An ugly and froward Physician wrought never
any good effect. On the contrary then, we must at first assist and smoothe
their laments, and witness some approbation and excuse thereof. By which
means you get credit to go on, and by an easy and insensible inclination,
you fall into more firm and serious discourses and fit for their amendment. I,
who desired chiefly but to gull the assistants, that had their eyes cast on
me, meant to salve their mischief; I verily find by experience, that I have
but an ill and unfruitful vain to persuade. I present my reasons either too
sharp, or too dry; or too stirringly or too carelessly. After I had for a
while applied my self to her torment, I attempted not to cure it by strong and
lively reasons; either because I want them, or because I supposed I might
otherwise effect my purpose the better. Nor did I cull out the several
fashions of comfort prescribed by Philosophy: That the thing lamented is not
ill, as Cleanthes: or but a little ill, as the Peripatetikes: That to lament is
neither just, nor commendable; as Chrysippus; Nor this Epicurus, most agreeing
with my manner, to translate the conceit of ykresome into delightsome things;
Nor to make a load of all this mass, dispensing the same, as one has
occasion, as Cicero. But fair and softly declining our discourses, and by
degrees bending them unto subjects more near; then a little more remote, even
as she more or less inclined to me. Ivnperceaueably remooved those doleful
humors from her; so that as long as I was with her, so long I kept her in
cheerful countenance,, and untroubled fashion; wherein I used diversion.
Those which in the same service succeeded me, found her no whit amended: the
reason was, I had not yet driven my wedge to the root. I have peradventure
else where, glaunced at some kinds of public diuersions. And the military
customs used by Pericles in the Peloponensian war, and a thousand others
elsewhere, to divert or withdraw the army of an enemy from their own
country, is too frequent in histories. It was an ingenious diuerting,
wherewith the Lord of Himbercourt saved both himself and others in the town
of Liege, into which the Duke of Burgondie, who beleagred the same, had caused
him to enter, to perform the covenants of their accorded yielding. The
inhabitants thereof, to provide for it, assembled by night, and began to
mutiny against their former agreement, determining upon this advantage to set
upon the Negotiators, now in their power. He perceiving their intent, and
noise of this shoure ready to fall upon him, and the danger his lodging was
in, forthwith rushed out upon them two citizens (whereof he had diverse with
him) furnished with most plausible and new offers to be propounded to their
counsel; but indeed forged at that instant to serve his turn withal, and to
ammuse them. These two stayed the first approaching storm, and carried this
incensed Hydra-headed-monster multitude back to the townehouse, to hear their
charge, and accordingly to determine of it. The consultation was short; when
lo a second tempest came rushing on, more furiously enraged then the former;
to whom he immediately dispatched four new and semblable intercessors, with
protestations, that now they were in earnest to propose and declare new and
far more ample conditions unto them, wholly to their content and
satisfaction; whereby this disordered rout was again drawn to their Conclaue
and Senate House. In sum, he by such a dispensation of amusements, diuerting
their headlong fury, and dissipating the same with vain and frivolous
consultations, at length lulled them into so secure a sleep* that he gained
the day, which was his chiefest drift and only aimed scope. This other story
is also of the same predicament. Atalanta a maid of rare surpassing beauty,
and of a wondrous strange disposition, to rid herself from the importunate
pursuit of a thousand amorous suitors, who solicited her for marriage,
prescribed this law unto them; that she would accept of him that should equal
her in running; on condition those she should overcome might lose their lives.
Some there were found, who deemed this prize worthy the hazard, and who
incurred the penalty of so cruel a match. Hippomenes coming to make his
essay after the rest, devoutly addressed himself to the divine protectresse of
all amorous delights, earnestly inuoking her assistance; who gently listening to
his hearty prayers, furnished him with three golden Apples, and taught him how
to use them. The scope of the race being plain, according as Hippomenes
perceived his swift* footed mistress to approach his heels, he let fall (as at
unawares) one of his Apples: the heedlesse maiden gazing and wondering at the
alluring beauty of it, failed not to turn and take it up.

Obstupuit virgo, nitidique cupidine pomi, Ovid. M^t. lib. 10. 666.

Declinat cursus, aurumque volubile tollit.
The maid amazed, desiring that fair gold,
Turns by her course, takes it up as it rold.
The like he did (at his need) with the second and third: until by this
digressing and diverting, the goal and advantage of the course was judged his,
When Physicians cannot purge the rheum, they divert and remove the same unto
some less dangerous part. I also perceive it to be the most ordinary receipt
for the minds diseases. Abducendus etiam nonnunquam animus est ad alia studia,
sollicitudines, curas, negotia: Loci denique mutatione, tanquam aegroti non
conualescentes, saepe curandus est: Our mind also is sometimes to be diuerted
to other studies, cogitations, cares and businesses: and lastly to be cured by
change of place, as sick folks use, that otherwise cannot get health. We make
it seldom to shocke mischiefs with direct resistance: we make it neither to
bear nor to break, but to shun or divert, the blow. This other lesson is too
high, and over-hard. It is for them of the first rank, merely to stay upon
the thing it self, to examine and judge it. It belongs to one only
Socrates, to accost and entertain death with an undaunted ordinary visage, to
become familiar and play with it. He seeks for no comfort out of the thing it
self. To die seems unto him a natural and indifferent accident: thereon he
wishly fixes his sight, and thereon he resolves without looking elsewhere.
Hegosias his disciples, who with hunger starued themselves to death, incensed
thereunto with the persuading discourses of his lessons; and that so thick as
King Ptolomey forbad him any longer to entertain his school with such
murtherous precepts. Those considered not death in it self, they judge it not:
This was not the limit of their thoughts, they run on, and aim at another
being. Those poor creatures we see on scaffolds, fraught with an ardent
devotion, therein to the uttermost of their power, employing all their senses;
their ears attentive to such instructions as Preachers give them, their hands
and eyes li^t up toward heaven; their voice uttering loud and earnest
prayers; all with an eager and continual ruth-mooving motion; do verily what
in such an unavoidable exigent is commendable and convenient. One may well
commend their religion, but not properly their constancy. They shun the
brunt; they divert their consideration from death; as we use to dandle and
busy children, when we would lance them or let them blood. I have seen some,
who if by fortune they chanced to cast their eyes toward the dreadful
preparations of death, which were round about them, fall into trances, and with
fury cast their cogitations elsewhere. We teach those that are to passe-over
some steepy down fall or dreadful abisse, to shut or turn aside their eyes.
Subrius Flauius, being by the appointment of Nero to be put to death by the
hands of Niger, both chief commanders in war: when he was brought unto the
place where the execution should be performed, seeing the pit Niger had caused
to be dug for him uneven and unhandsomely made; Nor is this pit (quoth he to
the soldiers that stood about him) according to the true discipline of war:
And to Niger, who willed him to hold his head steady, I wish thou would
stricke as steddily. He guessed right; for Nigers arm trembling, he had diverse
blows at him before he could strike it off. This man seems to have fixed his
thoughts surely and directly on the matter. He that dies in the fury of a
battle, with weapons in hand thinks not then on death, and neither feels nor
considers the same: the heat of the fight transports him. An honest man of
my acquaintance, falling down in a single combat, and feeling himself stabbed
nine or ten times by his enemy, was called unto by the bystanders to call on
God and remember his conscience: but he told me after, that albeit those
voices came unto his ears, they had no whit moved him, and that he thought on
nothing, but how to discharge and revenge himself. In which combat he
vanquished and slew his adversary.

He who brought L. Syllanus his condemnation, did much for him; in that when he
heard him answer he was prepared to die, but not by the hands of base
villains; ran upon him with his soldiers to force him; against whom
obstinately defending himself though unarmed) with fists and feet; he was
slain in the conflict: dispersing with a ready and rebellious choler the
painful sense of a long and fore-prepared death; to which he was assigned. We
ever think on somewhat else: either the hope of a better life does settle and
support us, or the confidence of our childrens worth; or the future glory of
our name; or the avoiding of these lives mischieues; or the revenge hanging
over their heads that have caused and procured our death:

Spero equidem medijs, si quid ^ia numina possunt, Virg. Aen. l. 4. 382.

Supplicia hausurum scopulis, and nomine Dido
Saepe vocaturum.
Audiam, and haec manes veniet mihi fama sub imos. 387.

I hope, if powers of heaven have any power,
On rocks he shall be punished, at that hour,
He often on Didoes name shall pitiless exclaim.
This shall I hear, and this report, shall to me in my grave resort.
Xenophon sacrificed with a crown on his head, when one came to tell him the
death of his son Gryllus in the battle of Mantinea. At the first hearing
whereof he cast his crown to the ground; but finding upon better relation how
valiantly he died, he took it up and put it on his head again. Epicurus
also at his death comforted himself in the eternity and worth of his
writings. Omnes clari and nobilitati labores fiunt tolerabiles. Cic. Tusc. l. 2.
All glorious and honorable labors are made tolerable. And the same wound,
and the same toil (says Xenophon) touches not a General of an army, as it
does a private soldier. Epaminondas took his death much the more cheerfully,
being informed that the victory remained on his side. Haec sunt solatia, haec
fomenta summorum dolorum: These are the comforts, Ibid.
these the eases of most grievous pains. And such other like circumstances
ammuse, divert and remoove us from the consideration of the thing in it self.
Even the arguments of Philosophy, at each clappe wrest and turn the matter
aside, and scarcely wipe away the scabbe thereof. The first man of the first
Philosophical School and Superintendent of the rest, that great Zeno, against
death, cried out; No evil is honorable; death is: therefore is death no
evil. Against drunkenness; No man entrusts his secrets to a drunkard; every
one to the wise: therefore the wise will not be drunk. Is this to hit the
white? I love to see, that these principal wits cannot rid themselves of our
company. As perfect and absolute as they would be, they still are but gross
and simple men. Revenge is a sweet-pleasing passion; of a great and natural
impression: I perceive it well, albeit I have made no trial of it. To divert
of late a young Prince from it, I told him not, he was to offer the one side
of his cheek, to him who had struck him on the other, in regard of charity;
nor displaid I unto him the tragical events Poesy bestows upon that
passion. There I left him, and strove to make him taste the beauty of a
contrary image: the honor, the favor and the good will he should acquire by
gentleness and goodness: I diverted him to ambition. Behold how they deal in
such cases. If your affection in love be over-powerfull, disperse or dissipate
the same, say they; and they say true, for I have often, with profit made
trial of it: Break it by the virtue of several desires, of which one may be
Regent or chief Master, if you please; but for fear it should misuse and
tyrannize you, weaken it with dividing, and protract it with diverting the same.

Cum morosa vago singultiet inguine vena, Pers. Sat. 6. 73. Lucr. l. 4. 1056.

Conijcito humorem collectum in corpora quaeque.
When raging lust excites a panting tumor,
To diverse parts send that collected humor.
And look to it in time, lest it vex you, if it have once seized on you.

Si non prima novis conturbes vulnera plagis,
Volgiuagaque vagus Venere ante recentia cures, Lucr. l. 4. ^061.

Unless the first wounds with new wounds you mix,
And ranging cure the fresh with common tricks.
I was once nearly touched with a heavy displeasure, according to my
complexion; and yet more just then heavy: I had peradventure lost my self in
it, had I only relied upon mine own strength. Needing a vehement diversion to
withdraw me from it; I did by Art and study make my self a Lover, whereto my
age assisted me; love discharged and diverted me from the inconvenience, which
good will and amity had caused in me. So is it in all things else. A sharp
conceit possesses, and a violent imagination holds me: I find it a shorter
course to alter and divert, then to tame and vanquish the same: if I cannot
substitute a contrary unto it, at least I present another unto it. Change ever
eases, variety dissolveth, and shifting dissipateth. If I cannot buckle with
it, I slip from it: and in shunning it, I stray and double from it. Shifting of
place, exercise and company, I save my self amid the throng of other studies
and ammusements, where it loses my tracke, and so I slip away. Nature
proceeds thus, by the benefit of inconstancy: For, the time it has bestowed
on us, as a sovereign Physician of our passions, chiefly obtaines his purpose
that way, when fraughting our conceits with other and different affairs, it
dissolveth and corrupts that first apprehension, how forcible soever it be. A
wise man sees little less his friend dying at the end of five and twenty
years, then at the beginning of the first year; and according to Epicurus,
nothing less: for he ascribed no qualification of perplexities, either to the
foresight or antiquity of them. But so many other cogitations cross this,
that it languisheth, and in the end grows weary. To divert the inclination of
vulgar reports, Alcibiades cut off his fair dogs cares and tail, and so
drove him into the market place; that giving this subject of prattle to the
people, they might not meddle with his other actions. I have also seen some
women, who to divert the opinions and conjectures of the babbling people, and to
divert the fond tatling of some, did by counterfeit and dissembled affections,
ouershadow and cloak true affections. Amongst which I have noted some, who in
dissembling and counterfeting have suffered themselves to be intrapped wittingly
and in good earnest; quitting their true and original humor for the fained: of
whom I learn, that such as find themselves well seated, are very fools to
yield unto that mask. The common greetings, and public entertainements being
reserved unto that set or appointed servant, believe there is little
sufficiency in him, if in the end he usurp not your room and send you unto
his. This is properly to cut out and stitch up a shoe, for another to put on. A
little thing does divert and turn us; for a small thing holas us. We do not
much respect subjects in gross and alone: they are circumstances, or small and
superficial images that move and touch us; and vain rindes which rebound
from subjects.

Folliculos vt nunc ter etes aestate cicadae Lucr. l. 5. 812.

Linquunt.
As grasse-hoppers in summer now forsake
The round-grown sheafes, which they in time should take.
Plutarke himself bewailes his daughter by the fopperies of his childehood.
The remembrance of a farewell, of an action, of a particular grace, or of a
last commendation, afflict us. Caesar's goune disquieted all Rome, which his
death had not done; The very sound of names, which gingleth in our ears, as,
Oh my poor master; or, Alas my dear friend; Oh my good father; or, Alas my
sweet daughter, When such like repetitions pinch me, and that I look more
nearely to them, I find them but grammatical laments, the word and the ^^ne
wound me. Even as Preachers exclamations do often move their auditorie more,
then their reasons; and as the pity full groan of a beast yerneth us though
it be killed for our use; without poysing or entering there-whilst, into the
true and massy essence of my subject

His se stimulis dolor ipse lacessit.
Grief by these prouocations. Lucan. l. 2. 42.

Puts it self in more passions.
They are the foundations of our mourning. The conceit of the stone, namely in
the yard has sometime for three or four days together, so stopped my urine,
and brought me so near deathes-dore, that it had been mere folly in me, to
hope, nay to desire, to avoid the same, considering what cruel pangs that
painful plight did seize me with. Oh how cunning a master in the murdering
art, or hangmans trade was that good Emperor, who caused malefactors yardes
to be fast-tide, that so he might make them dye for want of pissing. In which
ill plight finding my self, I considered by how flight causes and frivolous
objects, imagination nourished in me the grief to loose my life: with what
Atoms the consequence and difficulty of my dislodging was contrived in my
mind; to what idle conceits and frivolous cogitations we give place in so
weighty a case or important affair. A Dog, a Horse, a Hare a Glass, and
what not? were corrupted in my loss. To others, their ambitious hopes, their
purse, their learning; In my mind as sottishly. I view death carelessely when
I behold it universally as the end of life. I ouerwhelme and contemn it thus
in great, by retayle it spoils and proules me. The tears of a Lacquey, the
distributing of my cast suits, the touch of a known hand, an ordinary
consolation; does disconsolate and ^ntende^ me. So do the plaints and of
fables trouble and vex our minds; and the wailing laments of Dydo, and Ariadne
passionare even those, that believe them not in Virgill, nor in Catullus: It is
an argument of an obstinate nature, and indurate heart, not to be moved
therewith: as for a wonder, they report of Polemon: who was not so much as
appaled, as the biting of a Dog, who took away the braune or calfe of his leg.
And no wisdom goes so far, as by the due judgment to conceive aright the
evident cause of a Sorrow and grief, so lively and wholly that it suffer or
admit noe accession by presence, when eyes and ears have their share therein:
parts that cannot be agitated but by vain accidents. Is it reason, that even
arts should serve their purposes, and make their profit of our imbecility and
natural blockishnes? An Orator (says Rethorick) in the play of his pleading,
shall be moved at the sound of his own voice, and by his fained agitations;
and suffer himself to be cozoned by the passion he represents: imprinting a
lively and essential sorrow, by the iugling he acts, to transfer it into
the judges, whom of the two it concerns less: As the persons hired at our
funerals, who to aid the ceremony of mourning, make sale of their tears by
measure, and of their sorrow by weight. For although they strive to act it in a
borrowed form, yet by habituating and ordering their countenance, it is
certain they are often wholly transported into it, and entertain the
impression of a true and unfeigned melancholy. I assisted amongst diverse others
of his friends, to convey the dead corpse of the Lord of Grammont from the
siege of Laferre, where he was untimely slain, to Soissous. I noted that
every where as we passed a long, we filled with lamentation and tears all the
people we met, by the only show of our conuoyes mourning attire; for the
deceased man's name was not so much as known, or hard of about those quarters.
Quintilian reports, to have seen Comediants so far engaged in a sorrowful
part, that they wept after being come to their lodgings: and of himself, that
having undertaken to move a certain passion in another, he had found
himself surprised not only with shedding of tears, but with a palenesse of
countenance, and behavior of a man truly dejected with grief. In a country
near our Mountains, the women say and unsay, weep and laugh with one breath:
as Martin the Priest; for, as for their lest husbands they increase their way
mentings by repetition of the good and graceful parts they were endowed with,
therewithal under one they make public relation of those imperfections; to
work, as it were some recompense unto themselves, and transchange their pity
unto disdain; with a much better grace then we, who when we loose a late
acquaintance, strive to load him with new and forged praises, and to make him
far other, now that we are deprived of his sight, then he seemed to be when
we enjoyed and beheld him. As if mourning were an instructing party; or tears
cleared our understanding by washing the same. I renounce from this time
forward all the favorable testimonies any man shall affoorde me, not because
I shall deserve them, but because I shall be dead. If one demand that fellow,
what interest he has in such a siege; The interest of example (will be say)
and common obedience of the Prince; I nor look nor pretend any benefit
thereby; and of glory I know how small a portion comes to the share of a
private man, such as I am. I have neither passion nor quarrel in the matter;
yet the next day shall you see him all changed, and chafing, boiling and
blushing with rage, in his rank of battle, ready for the assault. It is the
glaring reflecting of so much steel, the flashing thundering of the Cannon,
the clang of trumpers, and the rattling of Drums, that have infused this new
fury, and rankor in his swelling veins. A frivolous cause, will you say: How
a cause? There needs none to excite our mind. A doting humor without body,
without substance ouerswayeth and tosseth it up and down, Let me think of
building Castles in Spain, my imagination will forge me commodities and
afforde me means and delights wherewith my mind is really tickled and
essentially gladded. How often do we pester our spirits with anger or
sadness by such shadows, and entangle our selves into fantastical passions
which alter both our mind and body? what astonished, flearing and confused
mumpes and mowes does this dotage stir up in our visages? what skippings and
agitations of members and voice, seems it not by this man alone, that he has
false visions of a multitude of other men with whom he does negotiate; or
some inward Goblin that torments him? Enquire of your self, where is the
object of this alteration? Is there any thing but us in nature, except
subsisting nullitye? over whom it has any power? Because Cambyses dreamed
that his brother should be King of Persia, he put him to death; a brother
whom he loved, and ever trusted. Aristodemus King of the Messenians killed
himself; upon a conceit he took of some ill presage, by, I know not what
howling of his Dogs, And King Midas did as much, being troubled and vexed by a
certain unpleasing dream of his own. It is the right way to prize ones life
at the right worth of it, to forgo it for a dream. Hear notwithstanding our
minds triumph over the bodies weaknesses and misery; in that it is the prey
and mark of all wrongs and alterations, to seed on and aim at. It has
surely much reason to speak of it.

O prima infoelix fingenti terra Prometheo; Pro p. l. 3. el. 4. 7.

Ille parum cauti pectoris egit opus.
Corpora disponens, meant em non vidit in art;
Recta animi primum debuit esse via.
Unhappy earth first by Prometheus formed,
Who of small providence a work performed:
He framing bodies saw in art no mind?
The minds way first should rightly be assigned.
The fifth Chapter.
Upon some verses of Virgill.

PRofitable thoughts, the more full and solid they are, the more combersome
and heavy are they; vice, death, poverty and diseases, are subjects that weigh
and grieve. We must have our mind instructed with means to sustain and
combat mischiefs, and furnished with rules how to live well and believe
right: and often rouse and exercise it in this goodly study. But to a mind of
the common stamp; it must be with intermission and moderation; it grows
weak, by being continually over-wrested: When I was young, I had need to be
advertised and solicited to keep my self in office: Mirth and health (says
one) suit not so well with these serious and grave discourses. I am now in
another state. The conditions of age do but overmuch admonish, instruct and
preach unto me. From the excess of iollity, I am fallen into the extreme of
severity; more peevish and more untoward. Therefore, I do now of purpose
somewhat give way unto licentious allurements; and now and then employ my mind
in wanton and youthful conceits, wherein she recreates her self. I am now but
too much settled; too heavy and too ripe. My years read me daily a lesson of
coldness and temperance. My body shunneth disorder, and fears it: it has his
turn to direct the mind toward reformation; his turn also to rule and sway;
and that more rudely and imperiously. Be I awake or a sleep, it does not
permit me one hour but to ruminate on instruction, on death, on patience and
on repentance. As I have heer^tofore defended my self from pleasure, so I now
ward my self from temperance: it haleth me too far back, and even to
stupidity. I will now every way be master of my self. Wisdom has her
excesses, and no less need of moderation, then folly. So that least I should
wither, tarnish and over cloy my self with prudence, in the intermissions my
evils afford me;

Men's intenta suis ne sict vsque malis. Ovid. Trist. li. 4. ^. 1. 4.

Still let not the conceit attend,
The ils that it too much offend.
I gently turn aside, and steal mine eyes from viewing that tempestuous and
cloudy sky, I have before me; which (thanks be to God) I consider without
fear, but not without contention and study. And ammuse my self with the
remembrance of passed youth-tricks:

-- animus quod perdidit, optat, Petron. Arb. Sa^.

Atque in praeterita se totus imagine versat.
The mind, what it has lost, does wish and cast,
And turn and wind in Images forepast.
That infancy looks forward, and age backward; was it not that which Ianus
his double visage signified? years entraine me if they please; but backward.
As far as mine eyes can discern that fair expired season, by fits I turn
them thitherward. If it escape my blood and veins, yet will I not root the
image of it out of my memory:

-- hoc est, Mart. l. 10. epig. 23. 7.

Vinere bis, vita posse priore frui,
This is the way for any to live twice,
Who can of former life enjoy the price.
Plato appoints old men to be present at youthful exercises, dances and games,
to make them rejoice at the bodies agility and comeliness of others, which is
now no longer in them; and call to their remembrance, the grace and favor of
that blooming age: and wills them to give the honor of the victory to that
young man, who has gladded and made most of them merry. I was heretofore wont
to note sullen and gloomy days, as extraordinary: now are they my ordinary
ones; the extraordinary are my fair and clear days. I am ready to leap for
joy, as at the receaving of some unexpected favor, when nothing grieueth me.
Let me tickle my self, I can now hardly wrest a bare smile from this wretched
body of mine. I am not pleased but in conceit and dreaming: by sleight to
turn aside the way-ward cares of age: but sure ther-s need of other remedies,
then dreaming, A weak contention of art against nature. It is mere
simplicity, as most men do, to prolong and anticipate humane in commodities.
I had rather be less while old, then old before my time. I take hold even of
the least occasions of delight I can meet withal. I know by how hearsay
diverse kinds of wise, powerful and glorious pleasures: but opinionis not of
sufficient force over me, to make me long for them. I would not have them so
stately, lofty and disdainful; as pleasant gentle and Sen, cp 99.
ready. A natura discedimus; populo nos damus, nullius rei bono auctori; We
forsake nature, We follow the people aucthor of no good. My Philophie is in
action, in natural and present little in conceit. What if I should be pleased
to play at cob-nut, or whip a top?

Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem. Ennius.

He did not prize what might be said,
Before how al might safe be laid.
Voluptuousness is a quality little ambitious; it holds it self rich enough
of it self without any access of reputation; and is best affected where it is
most obscured. That young man should deserve the whip. who would spend his time
in choosing out the nearest Wine, and best sauces. There is nothing I ever knew
or esteemed less: I now begin to learn it. I am much ashamed of it, but
what can I do withal? and am more ashamed and vexed, at the occasions that
compel me to it. It is for us to dally, doat and trifle out the time; and for
youth to stand upon nice reputation, and hold by the better end of the staff.
That creeps toward the world and marches toward credit; we come from it.
Sibi arma, sibi equos, sibi Cic. de Senectute.
hastas, sibi clauam, sibi pilam, sibi natationes and cursus habeant: nobis
senibus, ex lusionibus multis, talos relinquant, and tesseras; Let them keep
their armor, their horses, their lances, their polaxes, their tennis, their
swimming, and their running; and of their many games, let them put over to us
old men the tables and the cards. The very laws send us home to our lodgings.
I can do no less in favor of this wretched condition, whereto my age forces
me, then furnish it with somewhat to dandle and ammuse it self, as it were
childehood; for when all is done we fall into it again. And both wisdom and
folly shall have much a do, by enterchange offices to support and succor me
in this calamity of age. Ho. l. 4. ^d. 12. 27.


Misce stultitiam consilijs breuem.
With short-like-foolish tricks,
Thy grauest counsels mix.
Withal I shun the lightest pricklings; and those which heretofore could not
have scratcht me, do now transpearce me. So willingly my habit does now begin
to apply it self to evil: Cic. de. Seen.
infragili corpore odiosa omnis offensio est: all offenses is yrkesome to a
crazed body.

Mensque pati durum sustinet agra nihil. Ovid. Pont. ^^. el. 6. 18.

A sick mind can endure,
No hard thing for her cure.
I have ever been ticklish and nice in matters of offense, at this present I
am more tender, and every where open.

Et minimae vires frangere quassavalent. Ovid. Trist. l. 3. el. 11. 22.

Least strength can break,
Things worn and weak.
Well may my judgment hinder me from spurning and repining at the
inconveniences which nature allots me to endure; from feeling them it cannot.
I could find in my heart to run from one end of the world to another, to
search and purchase one year of pleasing and absolute tranquillity; I who
have no other scope, then to live and be merry. Drouzie and stupide
tranquillity is sufficiently to be found for me, but it makes me drouzie and
dizzie; therefore I am not pleased with it. If there be any body, or any good
company in the cuntrie, in the city, in France, or any where else, resident
traveiling, that likes of my conceits, or whose humors are pleasing to me,
they need but hold up their hand, or whistle in their fiste, and I will store
them with Essays, of pithe and substance, with might and maine. Seeing it is
the minds privilege to renew and recover it self on old age, I earnestly
advise it to do it: let it bud, blossom, and flourish if it can, as Misle-toe
on a dead tree. I fear it is a traitor; so straightly is she clasped, and so
hard does she cling to my body, that every hand while she forsakes me; to
follow her in her necessities. I flatter her in private, I urge her to no
purpose; in vain I offer to divert her from this combination, and bootlesse it
is for me to present her Seneca or Catullus, or Ladies, or stately dances; if
her companion have the chollicke, it seems she also has it. The very powers
or faculties that are particulare and proper to her, cannot then rouse
themselves: they evidently seem to be en-rheumed: there is no blithenesse in
her productions, if there be none in the body. Our scholars are to blame, who
searching the causes of our minds extraordinary fits and motions, besides they
ascribe some to a divine fury, to love, to warre-like fierceness, to Poesy,
and to Wine; if they have not also allotted health her share. A health
youthful, lusty, vigorous, full, ^dle, such as heretofore the April of my
years and security offorded me by fittes. That fire of iocondnesse stirs
up lively and bright sparckles in our mind, beyond our natural brightness
and amongst the most working, if not the most desperate Enthusiasmes or
inspirasions. Well, it is no wonder if a contrary estate clogge and nail my
spirit, and draw from it a contrary effect.

Ad nullum consurgit opus, cum corpore lauguet, Cor. Gal. el. 1. 125.

It to no work does rise,
When body fainting lies.
And yet would have me beholden to him, for lending (as he says) much less to
this consent, then bears the ordinary custom of men. Let us at least whilste
we have truce, chase all evils, and expel all difficulties from our society.

Dum licet obduct a soluatur front senectus:
With wrinckled wimpled for head let old years, Hor. epod. 13. 7.

While we may, be rosolu'd to merry cheeres.
Tetrica sunt amoenanda iocularibus, Unpleasant things, and sour matters
should be sweetened and made pleasant with sportefull mixtures. I love a
lightsome and civil discretion, and loathe a roughness and austeritie of
behavior: suspecting every peevish and wayward countenance.

Tristemque vultus tetrici arrogantiam.
Of austere countenance, Mart. l. 7. epig 57. 9.

The sad sour arrogance.
Et habet tristis quoque turba cynaedos,
Fiddlers are often had,
Among people that are sad.
I easily believe Plato, who says, that easy or hard humors, are a great
prejudice unto the minds goodness or badnesse. Socrates had a constant
countenance, but light-some and smyling: not frowardly constant, as old
Crassus, who was never seen to laugh. Virtue is a pleasant and buxom quality.
Few, I know will snarle at the liberty of my writings, that have not more cause
to snarle at their thoughts-loosenes. I conform my self unto their courage,
but I offend their eyes. It is a well ordered humor to wrest Platos writings,
and strain his pretended negotiations with Phedon, Dion, Stella, Archeanassa.
Non pudeat dicere, quod non pudeat sentire. Let us not be ashamed to speak,
what we shame not to think. I hate a way ward and sad disposition, that
glideth over the pleasures of his life, and fastens and feeds on miseries. As
flies that cannot cleave to smooth and sleeke bodies, but seize and hold on
rugged and uneven places. Or as Cupping-glasses, that affect and suck none but
the worst blood. For my part I am resoluted to dare speak whatsoever I dare
do: And am displeased with thoughts not to be published. The worst of my
actions or conditions seem not so ugly unto me, as I find it both ugly and
base not to dare to avouch them. Every one is wary in the confession; we should
be as heedy in the action. The boldness offending is somewhat recompensed and
restrained by the boldness of confessing* he that should be bound to tell
all, should also bind himto do nothing which one is forced to conceal. God
grant this excess of my license draw men to freedom, beyond these cowardly
and squeamish virtues, sprung from our imperfections; and that by the expense
of my immoderation, I may reduce them unto reason. One must sur^ay his faults
and study them, ere he be able to repeat them. Those which hide them from
others, commonly conceal them also from themselves; and esteem them not
sufficiently hidden, if themselves see them. They withdraw and disguise them
from their own consciences. Quare vicia confitetur? Quia etiam nunc in illis
est, somnium narrare vigilantis est. Why does noe S^n. ep. 53. (...).
man confess his faults? Because he is yet in them; and to declare his
dream, is for him that is waking. The bodies evils are discerned by their
increase. And now we find that to be the gout which we termed the rheum or a
bruise. The evils of the mind are darkened by their own force; the most
infected feels them least. Therefore is it, that they must often a day be
handled, and violently be opened and rent from out the hollow of our bosom. As
in the case of good; so of bad offices, only confession is sometimes a
satisfaction. Is there any deformity in the error, which dispenses us to
confess the same? It is a pain for me to dissemble: so that I refuse to take
charge of other men's secrets, as wanting heart to disauow my knowledge. I cannot
conceal it; but deny it I cannot, without much a do and some trouble. To be
perfectly secret, one must be so by nature; not by obligation. It is a small
matter to be secret in the Princes service, if one be not also a liar. He that
demanded Thales Milesius, whether he should solemnly deny his lechery; had he
come to me, I would have answered him, he ought not do it: for a lie is in mine
opinion, worse then lechery. Thales advised him otherwise, bidding him swear,
thereby to warrant the more by the less. Yet was not his counsel so much the
election, as multiplication of vice. Whereupon we sometimes use this byword,
that we deal well with a man of conscience, when in counterpoise of vice we
propose some difficulty unto him? but when he is enclosed between two vices, he
is put to a hard choice. As Origin was dealt with all, either to commit
idolatry, or suffer himself to be Sodomaticaly abused by a filthy Egiptian
slave, that was presented unto him; he yielded to the first condition, and
viciously, says one. Therefore should not those women be distasted, according
to their error, who of late protest, that they had rather charge their
conscience with ten men, then one Mass. If it be indiscretion so to divulge
ones errors, there is no danger though it come into example and use, For Ariston
said, that The winds men fear most, are those which discover them. We must
tuck up this homely rag, that cloaketh our manners. They send their conscience
to the stews, and keep their countenance in order. Even traitors and
murderers observe the laws of complements, and thereto ^ixe their endeavors. So
that neither can injustice complain of inciuility, nor malice of indiscretion.
T's pitry a bad man is not also a fool, and that decency should cloak his
vice. These pargettings belong only to good and sound walls, such as deserve to
be whited, to be preserved. In favor of Hugonots, who accuse our auricular
and private confession, I confess my self in public; religiously and purely.
Saint Augustine, Origene, and Hippocrates, have published their errors of their
opinions; I likewise of my manners. I greedily long to make my self known; nor
care I at what rate, so it be truly: or to say better, I hunger for nothing;
but I hate mortally to be mistaken by such as shall happen to know my name. He
that does all for honor and glory, what thinks he to gain by presenting
himself to the world in a mask, hiding his true being from the peoples
knowledge? Commend a crook-back for his comely stature, he ought to take it as
an injury: if you be a coward, and one honoreth you for a valiant man, is it of
you he speaks? you are taken for another: I should like as well, to have him
glory in the cour^sies and lowtings that are showed him, supposing himself to
be ringleader of a troop when he is the meanest follower of it, Archelaus king
of Macedon, passing through, a street some body cast water upon him, was advised
by his followers to punish the party: yea but (quoth he) who ever it was, he
cast not the water upon me, but upon him he thought I was. Socrates to one that
told him he was railed upon and ill spoken of? Tush (said he) there is not such
thing in me. For my part, should one commend me to be an excellent Pilote, to
be very modest, or most chaste, I should owe him no thanks. Likewise should
any man call meetraitour, thief or drunkard, I would deem my self but little
wronged by him. Those who misknow themselves, may feed themselves with false
approbations; but not I, who see and search my self into my very bowels, and
know full well what belongs unto me. I am pleased to belesse commended,
provided I be better known. I may be esteemed wise for such conditions of
wisdom, that I account mere follies. It vexes me, that my Essays serve
Ladies in liew of common ware and stuff for their hall: this Chapter will
prefer me to their cabinet: I love their society some what private; their
public familiarity wants favor and savor. In farewels we heat above ordinary
our affections to the things we forgo. I here take my last leave of this
worlds pleasures: lo here our last embraces. And now to our theme. Why was
the act of generation made so natural, so necessary and so just, seeing we
fear to speak of it without shame, and exclude it from our serious and
regular discourses we pronounce boldly, to rob, to murder, to betray; and this
we dare not but between our teeth. Are we to gather by it, that the less we
breath out in words the more we are allowed to furnish our thoughts with? For
words least used least written and least concealed should best be understood,
and most generally known. No age, no condition are more ignorant of it, then
of their bread. They are imprinted in each one, without expressing, without
voice or figure. And the sex that does it most, is most bound to suppress it.
It is an action we have put in the precincts of silence, whence to draw it were
an offense: not to accuse or judge it. Nor dare we beat it but in
circumlocution and picture. A notable favor, to a criminal offender, to be so
execrable, that justice deem it injustice to touch and behold him, freed and
saved by the benefit of this condemnations severity. It is not herein as in
matters of books, which being once called-in and forbidden become more
saleable and public? As for me, I will take Aristotle at his word, that
bashfulnesse is an ornament to youth, but a reproach to age. These verses are
preached in the old school; a school of which I hold more then of the
modern: her virtues seem greater unto me, her vices less.

Deux qui par trop fuiant Venus estriueut
Failent aut aut que ceux qui trop la suiuent.
Who strives ore much Venus to shun, offends
Alike with him, that wholly her intends,
Tu dea, tu rerum naturam sola gubernas, Lucr. l. 1. 22.

Nec sine te quisquam dias in luminis oras
Exoritur, neque fit laetum, nec amabile quicquam,
Goddess, thou rul'st the nature of all things.
Without thee nothing into this light springs.
Nothing is lovely, nothing pleasures brings.
I know not who could set Pallas and the Muses at odds with Venus, and make
them cold and flow in affecting of love; as for me, I see no Deities that
better suit together, nor more endebted one to another. Who* ever shall go
about to remove amorous imaginations from the Muses, shall deprive them of the
best entertainment they have, and of the noblest subject of their work: and
who shall debar Cupid the service and conversation of Poesy, shall weaken
him of his best weapons. By this means they cast upon the God of
acquaintance, of amity and goodwil; and upon the Goddesses, protectresses of
humanity, and justice, the vice of ingratitude, and imputation of
churlishness. I have not so long been cashiered from the state and service of
this God, but that my memory is still acquainted with the force of his worth
and valor.

-- agnosco veteris vestigia flammae. Virg. Ae^. l. 4. 23.

I feel and feeling know, How my old flames regrow.
There commonly remain some relics of shiuering and heat after anague,

Nec mihi d^ ficiat^alor hic, hyemantibu, annis.
When Winter years com-on,
Let not this heat be gone.
As dry, as sluggish and as vnwieldie as I am, I feel yet some warm cinders
of my passed heat.

Qual'^ alto Aegeo perch Aquiloneo Noto
Cessi che tutto prima il volse et scosse,
Nons' accheta ei pero, ma il suono ^'l moto,
Ritien delionde anco agitat^^t gross.
As graund Aegean Sea, because the voice
Of winds does cease, which it before enraged,
Yet does not calm, but still retains the noise
And motion of huge billows vnaswaged.
But for so much as I know of it, the power and might of this God, are found
more quick and lively in the shadow of the Poesy, then in their own essence.

Et versus digitos habet.
Verses have full effect,
Of fingers to erect, Iuuen. Sat. 6. 197.

It represents a kind of air more lovely then love it self. Venus is not
so fair, nor so alluring all naked, quick and panting, as she is here in
Virgill.

Dixerat, and niveis hinc atque hinc diua lacertis Virg. Ae^. l. 8. 387.

Cunctant^m amplexu mollifouet: Ille repent
Accepit folitam flammam, notusque medullas
Intrauit calor, and labefacta per ossa cucurrit.
Nonsecus atque olim tonitru cum rupta corusco,
Ignea rima micans percurrit lumine nimbos.
So said the Goddess, and with soft embrace,
Of Snow-white arm, the grim-fire does enchase,
He straight took wonted fire, known heat at once,
His marrow pearc't, ran through his weakened bones;
As fiery flash with thunder does divide,
With radiant lightning through a storm does glide.
-- ea verba loquutus,
Optatos dedit amplexus, placidumque petiuit. Ibi* 404.

Coniugis infusus gremio per membra soporem.
A sweet embrace, when he those words had said
He gave, and his limbs pleasing-rest he praid
To take in his wives bosom lolling-laide.
What therein I find to be considered, is, that he depainteth her somewhat
stirring for a maritall Venus. In this discreet match, appetites are not
commonly so fondling; but drowsi^ and more sluggish. Love disdaineth a man
should hold of other then himself, and deals but faintly with acquaintances
begun and entertained under another title; as marriage is. Alliances, respects
and means, by all reason, weigh as much or more, as the grace and beauty. A
man does not mary for himself, whatsoever he allegeth; but as much or more for
his posterity and family. The use and interest of marriage concerns our
offspring, a great way beyond us. Therefore does this fashion please me, to
guide it rather by a third hand, and by another sense, then our own: All
which, how much does it dissent from amorous conuentions? Nor is it other then
a kind of incest, in this reverend alliance and sacred bond, to employ the
efforts and extravagant humor of an amorous licentiousnes, as I think to have
said elsewhere. One should (says Aristotle) touch his wife soberlie,
discreetly and severely, least that tickling too lasciviously, pleasure
transport her beyond the bounds of reason. What he speaks for conscience,
Physicians allege for health: saying that pleasure excessively whotte,
voluptuous and continual, alters the seed, and hinders conception. Some
other say besides, that to a languishing congression (as naturally that is) to
store it with a couuenient, and fertile heat, one must but seldom, and by
moderate intermissions present himself unto it.

Quo rapiet sitiens venerem interiusque recondat. Virg Geor. l. 3. 137.

Thirsting to snatch a fit,
And inly harbor it.
I see no marriages fail sooner, or more troubled, then such as are concluded
for beauties sake, and hudled up for amorous desires. There are required more
solid foundations, and more constant grounds, and a more wary marching to it:
this earnest youthly heat serves to no purpose. Those who think to honor
marriage, by joining love unto it (in mine opinion) do as those, who to do
virtue a favor, hold, that Nobility is noe other thing then Virtue. Indeed
these things have some affinity; but therewithal great difference: their
names and titles should not thus be commixt: both are wronged so to be
confounded. Nobility is a worthy, goodly quality, and introduced with good
reason; but in as much as it depends on others, and may fall to the share of
my vicious and worthless fellow, it is in estimation far short of virtue.
If it be a virtue, it is artificial and visible; relying both on time and
fortune; diverse in form, according unto countries; living and mortal; without
birth, as the river Nilus genealogicall and common; by succession and
similitude; drawn along by consequence, but a very weak one. Knowledge,
strength, goodness, beauty, wealth and all other qualities fall within
compass of commerce and communication: whereas this consumes it self in it
self, of no employment for the service of others. One proposed to one of our
Kings the choice of two competitors in one office, the one a Gentleman, the
other a Yeoman: he appointed that without respect unto that quality, he who
deserved best should be elected; but were their valor or worth fully a-like,
the Gentleman should be regarded: this was justly to give nobility her right
and rank. Antigonus, to an unknown young man, who sued unto him for his
fathers charge, a man of valor and who was lately deceased: My friend (quoth
he) in such good turns, I weigh not my soldiers noble birth, so much as
their sufficiency. Of truth it should not be herein, as with the officers of
Spartan kings; Trumpetors, Musitions, Cooks, in whose room their children
succeeded, how ignorant soever, before the best experienced in the trade. Those
of Calicut make of their nobility a degree above humane. Marriage is
interdicted them, and all other vocations, saving war. Of Concubines they may
have as many as they list, and women as many lechardes, without Jealousy one
of another. But it is a capital crime, and vnremissible offense to contract or
marry with any of different condition: Nay they deem themselves disparaged and
polluted, if they have but touched them in passing by. And as if their honor
were much iniuried and interressed by it, they kill those who but approach some
what to near them. In such sort, that the ignoble are bound to cry as they
walk along, like the Gondoliers or Watermen of Venice along the streets,
least they should iustle with them: and the nobles command them to what side of
the way they please. Thereby do these avoid an obloquie which they esteem
perpetual; and those an assured death. No continuance of time, no favor of
Prince, no office, no virtue, nor any wealth can make a clown to become a
gentleman. Which is much furthered by this custom, that marriages of one trade
with another are stricktlie for bidden. A Shoo-maker cannot marry with the race
of a Carpenter; and parents are precisely bound to train up orphans in their
fathers trade, and in no other. Whereby the difference, the distinction and
continuance, of their fortune is maintained. A good marriage (if any there be)
refuses the company and conditions of love; it endeavors to present those of
amity. It is a sweet society of life, full of constancy, of trust, and an
infinite number of profitable and solid offices, and mutual obligations: No
woman that thoroughly and impartially tastes the same,

( Optat^ quam iunxit lumine taeda
Whom loues-fire joined in double band, Cat^l. co^. Ber. 79.

With wished light of marriage brand)
would forgo her estate to be her husbands master. Be she lodged in his
affection, as a wife, she is much more honorably and surely lodged. Be a man
passionately entangled in any unlawful lust or love, let him then be demanded
on whom he would rather have some shame or disgrace to alight; either on his
lawful wife, or on his lechard mistress whose misfortune would afflict him
most, and to whom he wishes greater good or more honor. These questions
admit no doubt in an absolute sound marriage. The reason we see so few good, is
an apparent sign of it is worth, and a testimony of it is price. Perfectly to
fashion and rightly to take it, is the worthiest and best part of our society.
We cannot be without it, and yet we disgrace and vilify the same. It may be
compared to a cage, the birds without despair to get in, and those within
despair to get out. Socrates being demanded, whether was most commodious, to
take, or not to take a wife; Which soever a man does (quoth he) he shall repent
it. It is a match whereto may well be applied the common saying, homo homini aut
Deus, aut* Lupus. Man unto man is either Eras* chil. 1. cent. 169. 70.
a God or a Wolf* to the perfect erecting wereof are the concurrences of
diverse qualities required: It is now a days found most fit or commodious for
simple minds and popular spirits whom dainties, curiosity and idleness do
not so much touble. Licentious humors, debaushed conceits (as are mine) who
hate all manner of duties, bonds, or obseruances are not so fit, so proper,
and so suitable for it.

Et mihi dulce magis resolute viuere collo. Cor. Gal. el. ^. 61.

Sweeter it is to me, with loose neck to live free.
Of mine own disposition, would wisedoome it self have had me, I should have
refused to wed her. But we may say our pleasure; the custom and use of common
life over bears us. Most of my actions are guided by example, and not by
election: Yet did I not properly enuite my self unto it, I was led and brought
thereunto by strange and unexpected occasions: For, not only incommodious
things, but foul, vicious and inevitable, may by some condition and accident
become acceptable and allowed. So vain is man's posture and defense. And truly
I was then drawn unto it, being but ill prepared and more backward, then now
I am that have made trial of it. And as licentious as the world reputes me, I
have (in good truth) more stricktly observed the laws of wedlock, then either
I had promised or hoped. It is no longer time to wince when one has put on the
shackles. A man ought wisely to husband his liberty; but after he has once
submitted himself unto bondage, he is to stick unto it by the laws of common
duty or at least enforce himself to keep them. Those which undertake that
covenant to deal therein with hate and contempt, do both iniustly and
incommodiously. And that goodly rule I see pass from hand to hand among women,
as a sacred Oracle,

Serston mary comme maistre:
Et t'en guard comme d'un traistre.
Your husband as your master serue-yee:
From him as from false friend preserue-yee.
which is as much to say; Bear thy self toward him with a constrained, enemy
and distrustful reverence (a style of war, and cry of defiance) is likewise
injurious and difficult. I am to mild for such crabbed dissignes. To say
truth, I am not yet come to that perfection of sufficiency and quaintness of
wit, as to confound reason with injustice: and laugh or scoff at each order or
rule, that iumps not with my humor. To hate superstition, I do not presently
cast my self into irreligion. If one do not always discharge his duty, yet
ought he at least ever love, ever acknowledge it: It is treason for one to
marry unless he wed. But go we on. Our Poet describes a marriage full of
accord and good agreement, wherein notwithstanding there is not much loyalty.
Did he mean it was not possible to perform loves rights, and yet reserve some
rightes toward marriage; and that one may, bruise it, without altogether
breaking it? A servant may pick his masters purse, and yet not hate him.
Beauty, opportunity, destiny, (for destiny has also a hand therein)

-- fatum est in partibus illis. (...). (...). 9. 32

Quas sinus abscondit; nam si tibi fideracassent,
N^l faciet longi mensura incognita nervi.
In those parts there is fate, which hidden are;
If then thou be not wrought-for by thy star,
The measure of long nerves, unknown to nothing serves.
have entangled a wo^an to a stranger, yet peradventure not so absolutely but
that some bond may be left to hold her to her husband. They are two dissignes,
having several and unconfounded paths leading to them. A woman may yield to
such a man, whom in no case she would have married. I mean not for the
conditions of his fortune, but for the qualities of his person. Few men have
wedded their sweet hearts, their paramours or mistresses, but have come home by
weeping Cross, and ere long repented their bargain. And even in the other
world, what an unquiet life leads Jupiter with his wife, whom before he had
secretly known, and lovingly enioied? This is as they say, to beray the
panier, and then put it on your head. My self have seen in some good place,
love, shamefully and dishonestly cured by marriage: the considerations are to
much different. We love without disturbance to our selves; two diverse and in
themselves contrary things. Isocrates said, that the town of Athens pleased
men, even as Ladies do whom we serve for affection. Every one loved to come
thither, to walk and pass away the time: but none affected to wed it: that is
to say, to endenison, to dwell and habituate himself therein. I have (and that
to my spite and grief) seen husbands hate their wives, only because
themselves wronged them: Howsoever, we should not love them less for our
faults; at least for repentance and compassion they ought to be dearer unto us.
These are different ends (says he) and yet in some sort compatible. Wedlock
has for his share honor, justice, profit and constancy: a plain, but more
general delight. Love melts in only pleasure; and truly it has it more
ticklish, more lively, more quaint, and more sharp: a pleasure inflamed by
difficulty: there must be a kind of stinging, tingling and smarting. It is no
longer love, be it once without Arrows, or without fire. The liberality of
Ladies is to profuse in marriage, and blunts the edge of affection and desire.
To avoid this inconnenience, see the punishment inflicted by the laws of
Lycurgus and Plato. But Women are not altogether in the wrong, when they refuse
the rules of life prescribed to the World, for so much as only men have
established them without their consent. There is commonly brauling and
contention between them and us. And the nearest consent we have with them, is
but stormy and tumultuous. In the opinion of our Author, we heerin use them
but inconsiderately. After we have known, that without comparison they are
much more capable and violent in Loues-effectes then we, as was testified by
that ancient Priest, who had been both man and woman, and tried the passions
of both sexes.

Venus huic erat vtraque nota:
Of both sorts he knew venery. Ovid. Meta. l. 3. 323. Tiros.

We have moreover learned by their own mouth, what trial was made of it,
though in diverse ages, by an Emperor and an Empress of Rome, both skillful
and famous masters in lawless lust and unruly wantonness; for he in one
night deflowred ten Sarmatian virgins, that were his captives; but she realy
did in one night also, answer five and twenty several assaults, changing her
assailants as she found cause to supplye her need, or fit her taste,

-- adhuc ardens rigidae tentigine vuluae Iu^en. Sat. 6. 127.

Et lass^ta viris, non dum satiata recessit.
and that upon the controversy happened in Catalogne, between a wife and a
husband; she complaining on his over violence and continuance therein (not so
much in my conceit, because she was thereby ouerlabored (for but by faith I
believe not miracles) as under this pretext, to abridge and bridle the authority
of husbands over their wives, which is the fundamental part of marriage: And to
show that their frouning, sullenness and peevishness exceed the very nuptial
bed, and trample underfoot the very beauties, graces and delights of Venus;
to whose complaint her husband, a right churlish and rude fellow answered, that
even on fasting days he must needs do it ten times at least) was by the
Queen of Aragon given this notable sentence: by which after mature
deliberation of counsel, the good Queen to establish a rule and imitable
example unto al posterity, for the moderation and required modesty in a lawful
marriage, ordained the number of six times a day, as a lawful, necessary and
competent limit. Releasing and diminishing a great part of her sexes need and
desire: to establish (quoth she) an easy form, and consequently permanent and
immutable. Here upon doctors cry out; what is the appetite and lust of women,
when as their reason, their reformation and their virtue, is retailed at such a
rate? considering the diverse judgment of our desires: for Solon master of the
lawiers school allows but three times a month, because this matrimonial
intercourse should not decay or fail. Now after we believed (say I) and
preached thus much, we have for their particular portion allotted them
continency; as their last and extreme penalty. There is no passion more
importunate then this, which we would have them only to resist: Not simply, as
a vice in it self, but as abhemination and execration, and more then irreligion
and parricide; whilst we our selves without blame or reproach offend in it at
our pleasure. Even those amongst us, who have earnestly labored to overcome
lust, have sufficiently vowed, what difficulty, or rather vn^ esistable
impossibility they found in it, *using nevertheles material remedies, to tame,
to weaken and cool the body. And we on the other side would have them sound,
healthy, strong, in good liking, wel-fed and chaste together, that is to say,
both hot and cold. For marriage which we auerie should hinder them from
burning, affords them but small refreshing, according as our manners are. If
they meet with a husband, whose force by reason of his age is yet boiling, he
will take a pride to spend it elsewhere:

Sit tandem pudor, aut eamus inius, Mart l. 12. epig. 99. 10.

Multis mentula millibus redempta,
Non est haec tua, Basse, vendidisti.
The Philosopher Polemon was justly called in question by his wife, for sowing
in a barren field the fruit due to the fertile. But if they match with broken
stuff in full wedlock, they are in worse case then either virgins or widows.
We deem them sufficiently furnished, if they have a man lie by them. As the
Romans reputed Clodia Laeta a vestall virgin defloured, whom Caligula had
touched, although it was manifestly proved he had but approached her: But on
the contrary, their need or longing is thereby increased; for but the touch or
company of any man whatsoever stirs up their heat, which in their solytude
was hushed* and quiet, and lay as cinders raked up in ashes. And to the end,
as it is likely, to make by this circumstance and consideration their chastity
more meritorious: Bolestaus and King his wife, King and Queen of Poland,
lying together, the first day of their marriage vowed it with mutual consent,
and in despite of all wedlock commodity of nuptiall-delightes maintained the
same. Even from their infancy we frame them to the sportes of love: their
instruction, behavior, attire, grace, learning and all their words aims
only at love, respects, only affection. Their nurces and their keepers
imprint no other thing in them, then the loveliness of love, were it but by
continually presenting the same unto them, to distaste them of it: My daughter
(all the children I have) is of the age wherein the laws excuse the forwardest
to marry. She is of a slow, nice and mild complexion, and has accordingly
been brought up by her mother, in a retired and particular manner: so that
she begins but now to put-off childish simplicity. She was one day reading
a French book before me, an obscene word came in her way (more bawdie in
sound then in effect, it signifies the name of a Tree and another thing) the
woman that looks to her, staid her presently, and somewhat churlishly making
her step over the same: I let her alone, because I would not cross their
rules, for I meddle nothing with this government; women's policy has a
mystical proceeding, we must be content to leave it to them. But if I be not
deceived, the conversation of twenty laqueis could not in six months have
settled in her thoughts, the understanding, the use and consequences of the
found belonging to those filthy silables, as did that good old woman by her
check and interdiction.

Motus doceri gaudet Ionicos
Matura virgo, et fingitur artubus Id r. ca* ^. 3. ^d ^ 21.

I am nunc, et incestos amores
De tenero meditatur vngui.
Maids mariage-ripe straight to be taught delight
Ionique daunces, fram'de by art aright
In every joint, and even from their first hair
Incestuous loves in meditation bear.
Let them somewhat dispense with ceremonies, let them fall into free liberty of
speech; we are but children, we are but gulles, in respect of them, about any
such subject. Hear them relate how we sue, how we woo, how we solicit and
how we entertain them, they will soon give you to understand, that we can
say, that we can do, and that we can bring them nothing, but what they already
knew, and had long before disgested without us. May it be) as Plato says)
because they have one time or other been themselves wanton, licentious and
amorous lads? Mine ears happened one day in a place, where without suspicion
they might listen and steal some of their private, lavish and bold
discourses; oh why is it not lawful for me to repeat them? Birlady (quoth I
to my self) It is high time indeed for us to go study the phrases of
Amadis, the metaphors of Aretine, and eloquence of Boccace, thereby to become
more skillful, more ready and more sufficient to confront them: surely we
bestow our time well; there is nor quaint phrase, nor choice word, nor
ambiguous figure, nor patheticall example, nor love-expressing gesture, nor
alluring posture, but they know them all better then our books: It is a
cunning bred in their veins and will never out of the flesh,

Et mentem Venus ^psa dedit. Virg. Geor. l 3. 267.

Venus her self assign'de,
To them both means and mind,
which these skill infusing Schoole-mistrisses nature, youth, health and
opportunity, are ever buzzing in their ears, ever whispering in their minds:
They need not learn, not take pains about it; they beget it; with them it is
borne.

Nec tantum niueo gauisa est nulla columbe
Compar, vel si quid dicitur improbius, Catul. ^leg 4. 125.

Oscula mordenti semper decerpererostro:
Quantum praecipue multiuola est mulier.
No pigeons hen, or pair, or what worse name
You list, makes with her Snow-white cock such game,
With biting bill to catch when she is kissed,
As many minded women when they list.
Had not this natural violence of their desires been somewhat held in awe, by
fear and honor, wherewith they have been provided we had all been defamed.
All the worlds motions bend and yield to this conjunction: it is a matter
euery-where infused; and a Center whereto all lines come, all things look. The
ordinances of ancient and wise Rome, ordained for the service and instituted
for the behoof of love, are yet to be seen: together with the precepts of
Socrates to instruct courtizans.

Nec non libelli Stoici inter sericos Hor. Epod. 8. 15.

Iacere puluillos amant.
Even Stoics books are pleased
Amidst silk cushions to be eased.
Zeno among other laws, ordered also the struglings, the opening of legs,
and the actions, which happen in the deflowring of a virgin. Of what sense was
the book of Sirato the Philosopher, of carnal copulation? And whereof treated
Theophrastus in those he entitled, one The Lover, the other, Of Love? Whereof
Aristippus in his volume Of ancient deliciousness or sports? What implied or
what imported the ample and lively descriptions in Plato, of the loves
practiced in his days? And the lover of Demetrius Phalereus? And Clinias, or
the forced lover of Heraclides Ponticus? And that of Artisthenes, of the
getting of children, or of weddings? And the other, Of the Master or of the
lover? And that of Aristo, Of amorous exercises? Of Cleanthes, one of love,
another of the Art of love? The amorous dialogues of Spherus? And the filthy
intolerable, and without blushing not to be uttered table of Jupiter and Juno,
written by Chrysippus? And his so lascivious fifty Epistles? I will omit the
writings of some Philosophers, who have followed the sect of Epicurus,
protectresse of all manner of sensuality and carnal pleasure. Fifty several
Deities were in times past allotted to this office. And there has been a
nation found, which to allay and cool the lustful concupiscence of such as
came for devotion, kept wenches of purpose in their temples to be used; and it
was a point of religion to deal with them before one went to prayers. Nimirum
propter continentiam incontinentia necessaria est, incendiumignibus
ex^inguitur. Belike we must be incontinent that we may be continent, burning is
quenched by fire. In most places of the world, that part of our body was
Deified. In that same province, some flead it to offer, and consecrated a piece
thereof; others offered and consecrated their seed. In another the young men did
publicly pierce, and in diverse places open their yard between flesh and skin,
and through the holes put the longest and biggest sticks they could endure, and
of those sticks made afterward a fire, for an offering to their Gods, and were
esteemed of small vigor and less chastity, if by the force of that cruel
pain they showed any dismay. Elsewhere, the most sacred magistrate was
reverenced and acknowledged by those parts. And in diverse ceremonies the
portraiture thereof was carried and showed in pomp and state, to the honor of
sundry Deities. The Egyptian Dames in their Bacchanalian feasts wore a wodden
one about their necks, exquisitly fashioned, as huge and heavy as every one
could conveniently bear: besides that which the statue of their God
represented, which in measure exceeded the rest of his body. The married women
heere-by, with their Coverchefs frame the figure of one upon their forheads; to
glory themselves with the enjoying they have of it; and coming to be widows,
they place it behind, and hide it under their quoifes. The greatest and wisest
matrons of Rome, were honored for offering flowers and garlands to God Priapus.
And when their Virgins were married, they (during the nuptials) were made to sit
upon their privities. Nor am I sure, whether in my time, I have not seen a
glimps of like devotion. What meant that laughtermooving, and maids
looke-drawing piece our Fathers wore in their breeches, yet extant among the
Switzers? To what end is at this present day the show of our formal pieces
under our Gascoine hoses? and often (which is worse) above their natural
greatness, by falsehood and imposture? A little thing would make me believe,
that the said kind of garment was invented in the best and most upright ages,
that the world might not be deceived, and all men should yield a public
account of their sufficiency. The simplest nations have it yet somewhat
resembling the true form. Then was the worke-mans skill instructed, how it is
to be made, by the measure of the arm or foot. That good-meaning man, who in
my youth, thorowout his great city, caused so many fair, curious and ancient
statues to be guelded, left the sense of seeing might be corrupted, following
the advice of that other good ancient man;

Flagitij principium est nudare inter cives corpora: Cie. Tusc. l. 4. En.

Among civil people sin,
By baring bodies we begin.
should have considered, how in the mysteries of the good Goddess, all
appearance of man was excluded; that he was no whitneerer, if he did not also
procure both horses and asses, and al length nature her self to be guelded.

Omne adeo genus in torris, hominumque, ferarumque, Virg. Georg. l. 3. 244.

Et genus ^quoreum, pecudes, pictaeque volucres,
In furias ignemque ruunt.
All kinds of things on earth, wild beasts, mankind,
Field-beasts, faire-fethered foul, and fish (we find)
Into loves fire and fury run by kind.
The Gods (says Plato) have furnished man with a disobedient, skittish, and
tyrannical member; which like an untamed furious-beast, attempteth by the
violence of his appetite to bring all things under his beck. So have they
allotted women another as insulting, wild and fierce; in nature like a
greedy, devouring, and rebellious creature, who if when he craveth it, he
be refused nourishment, as impatient of delay, it enrageth; and infusing that
rage into their bodies, stops their conduicts, hinders their respiration,
and causes a thousand kinds of inconveniences; until sucking up the fruit of
the general thirst, it have largely bedewed and enseeded the bottom of their
matrix. Now my lawgiver should also have considered, that peradventure it were
a more chaste and commodiously fruitful use, betimes to give them a knowledge
and taste of the quick; then according to the liberty and heat of their
fantasy, suffer them to guess and imagine the same. In lieu of true
essential parts, they by desire surmise, and by hopesubstitute others, three
times as extravagant. And one of my acquaintance was spoiled, by making open
show of his in place, where yet it was not convenient to put them in possession
of their more serious use. What harm cause not those huge draughts or
pictures, which wanton youth with chalk or coals draw in each passage, wall,
or stairs of our great houses? whence a cruel contempt of our natural store
is bred in them. Who knows, whether Plato ordaining amongst other
well-instituted Commonwealths, that men and women, old and young, should in
their exercises or Gymnastickes, present themselves naked one to the sight of
another, aimed at that or no? The Indian women, who daily without interdiction
view their men all over, have at least wherewith to assuage and cool the sense
of their seeing. And whatsoever the women of that great kingdom of Pegu say,
who from their waste downward, have nothing to cover themselves but a single
cloth slit before; and that so straight, that what nice modesty, or
ceremonious decency soever they seem to affect, one may plainly at each step
see what God has sent them: that it is an invention or shift devised to draw
men unto them, and withdraw them from other men or boys, to which unnatural
brutish sin that nation is wholly addicted: it might be said, they lose more
then they get: and that a full hunger is more vehement, then ^ne which has
been glutted, be it but by the eyes. And Livia said, that to an honest woman,
a naked man is no more then an Image. The Lacedemonian women, more
virgin-wives, then are our maidens, saw every day the young men of their city,
naked at their exercises: themselves nothing precise to hide their thighs in
walking, esteeming themselves (says Plato) sufficiently clothed with their
virtue, without vardingall. But those, of whom S. Augustine speaks, have
attributed much to nakedness, who made a question, whether women at the last
day of judgment should rise again in their proper sex, and not rather in
ours, lest even then they tempt us in that holy state. In sum, we lure and
every way flesh them: we incessantly inflame and encite their imagination: and
then we cry out, but oh, but oh the belly. Let us confess the truth, there are
few amongst us, that fear not more the shame they may have by their wives
offenses, then by their own vices; or that cares not more (oh wondrous
charity) for his wives, then his own conscience; or that had not rather be a
thief and church-robber, and have his wife a murderer and an heretic, then
not more chaste then himself. Oh impious estimation of vices. Both we and
they are capable of a thousand more hurtful and unnatural corruptions, then
is lust or lasciviousness. But we frame vices and weigh sins, not according
to their nature, but according to our interest; whereby they take so many
different unequal forms. The severity of our laws makes women's inclination
to that vice, more violent and faulty, then it is condition bears; and
engages it to worse proceedings then is their cause. They will readily offer
rather to follow the practice of law, and plead at the bar for a fee, or go
to the wars for reputation, then in the midst of idleness and deliciousness
be tied to keep so hard a Sentinel, so dangerous a watch. See they not
plainly, how there is neither Merchant, Lawyer, Soldier, or Churchman, but
will leave his accounts, forsake his client, quit his glory and neglect his
function, to follow this other business? And the burden bearing porter,
souterly cobbler, and toilefull labourer, all harassed, all besmeared, and all
bemoiled, through travel, labor and trudging, will forget all, to please
himself with this pleasing sport.

Number tu quae tenuit dives Achaemenes, Her. car. l. 2. ^^. 12. 21.

Aut pinguis Phrygiae Mygdonias opes,
Permutare velis crine Liciniae,
Plenas aut Arabum domos,
Dum fragrantia detorquet ad os^ula
Ceruicem, aut facili saeuitianegat,
Quae poscente magis ga^deat eripi,
Interdum rapere occupet?
Would you exchange for your fair mistress hair,
All that the rich Achaemenes did hold,
Or all that fertile Phrygias soil does bear,
Or all the Arabians store of spice and gold?
Whilst she to fragrant kisses turns her head,
Or with a courteous coinesse them denies;
Which more then he that speeds she would have sped,
And which sometimes to snatch she foremost hies?
I wot not whether Caesar's exploits, or Alexanders atchivements exceed in
hardiness the resolution of a beauteous young woman, trained after our manner,
in the open view and uncontrolled conversation of the world, solicited and
battered by so many contrary examples, exposed to a thousand assaults and
continual pursuits, and yet still holding her self good and vnvanquished.
There is no point of doing more thornie, nor more active, then this of not
doing. I find it easier, to bear all ones life a combersome armor on his
back, then a maidenhead. And the vow of virginity, is the noblest of all
vows, because the hardest. Diaboli virtus in lumbis est: Hier^n.
The devils master-point lies in our loins, says S. Jerome. Surely we have
re^igned the most difficult and vigorous devoire of mankind unto women, and
quit them the glory of it, which might stead them as a singular motive to
opinionate themselves therein: and serve them as a worthy subject to brave us,
and trample under feet that vain pre-eminence of valor and virtue we pretend
over them. They shall find (if they but heed it) that they shall thereby not
only be highly regarded, but also more beloved. A gallant undaunted spirit
leaves not his pursuits for a bare refusal; so it be a refusal of
chastity, and not of choice. We may swear, threaten and wailingly complain;
we lie, for we love them the better. There is no enticing lure to wisdom and
secret modesty; so it be not rude, churlish, and froward. It is blockishnesse
and baseness to be obstinately wilful against hatred and contempt: But
against a virtuous and constant resolution, matched with an acknowledging
mind, it is the exercise of a noble and generous mind. They may accept of our
service unto a certain measure, and make us honestly perceive how they
disdain us not: for, the law which enioineth them to abhor us, because we
adore them; and hate us, for so much as we love them; is doubtless very cruel,
were it but for it is difficulty. Why may they not listen to our offers, and
not gainsay our requests, so long as they contain themselves within the
bounds of modesty* Wherefore should we imagine, they inwardly affect a freer
meaning? A Queen of our time said wittily, that to refuse men's kind summo^s,
is a testimony of much weakness, and an accusing of ones own facility: and
that an unattempted Lady could not vaunt of her chastity. Honors limits are
not restrained so short; they may somewhat be slacked, and without offending
somewhat dispensed withal. At the end of his frontiers* there is left a free,
indifferent, and newter space. He that could drive and force his mistress into
a corner, and reduce her into her fort, has no great matter in him, if he be
not content with his fortune. The price or honor of the conquest is rated by
the difficulty. Will you know what impression your merits, your services and
worth have made in her heart? Judge of it by her behavior and disposition.

Some one may give more, that (all things considered) gives not so much. The
obligation of a benefit has wholly reference unto the will of him that gives:
other circumstances which fall within the compass of good-turnes, are dumb,
dead and casual. That little she gives may cost her more, then all her
companion has. If rareness be in any thing worthy estimation, it ought to be
in this. Respect not how little it is, but how few have it to give. The value
of money is changed according to the coin, stamp or mark of the place.
Whatsoever the spite or indiscretion of some, may upon the excess of their
coffeehouse, make them say; Virtue and truth do ever recover their
advantage. I have known some, whose reputation has long time been impeached
by wrong, and intere^^ed by reproach, restored unto all men's good opinion and
general approbation, without care or Art, only by their constancy; each
repenting and denying what he formerly believed. From wenches somewhat
suspected, they now hold the first rank amongst honorable Ladies. Some told
Plato, that all the world spoke ill of him; Let them say what they list (quoth
he) I will so live, that I Will make them recant and change their speeches.
Besides the fear of God, and the reward of so rare a glory, which should
incite them to preserve themselves, the corruption of our age enforces them
unto it: and were I in their clothes, there is nothing but I would rather do,
then commit my reputation into so dangerous hands. In my time, the pleasure of
reporting and blabbing what one has done (a pleasure not much short of the act
it self in sweetness) was only allowed to such as had some assured, trusty
and singular friend; whereas now-a-daies, the ordinary entertainements and
familiar discourses of meetings and at tables, are the boastings of favors
received, graces obtained, and secret liberalities of Ladies. Verily it is too
great an abiection, and argues a baseness of heart, so fiercely to suffer
those tender, dainty, deliciousioies, to be persecuted, pelted, and foraged
by persons so ungrateful, so indiscreet, and so giddy-headed. This our
immoderate and lawless exasperation against this vice, proceeds and is bred
of jealousy; the most vain and turbulent infirmity that may afflict man's
mind.

Quis vetat appo^ito lumen de lumine sumi? O^id. Art. Amand^. 3. 93.

Dent licet assidue, nil tamen inde perit.
To borrow light of light, who would deny?
Though still they give, nothing is lost thereby.
That, and Envy her sister, are (in mine opinion) the fondest of the troop.
Of the latter, I cannot say much; a passion which how effectual and powerful
soever they set forth; of her good favor she medleth not with me. As for the
other, I know it only by sight. Beasts have some feeling of it. The shepherd
Cratis being fallen in love with a she Goat, her Bucke for jealousy beat out
his brains as he lay asleep. We have raised to the highest strain the
excess of this moodie fever, after the example of some barbarous nations: The
best disciplined have therewith been tainted, it is reason; but not carried
away by it:

Ense maritali nemo confossus adulter,
Purpureo stygias sanguine tinxit ^quas.
With husbands sword yet no adultrer slain,
With purple blood did Stygian waters stain.
Lucullus, Caes^r, Pompey, Anthoni^, Cato, and diverse other gallant men were
Cuckolds, and knew it, though they made no stir about it. There was in all
that time but one gullis^^ coxcombe Lepidus, that died with the anguish of it.

Ah tum te miserum malique fati, C^tu^. lyr. epig. 15. 17.

Quem attractis pedibus patente porta,
Percurrent mugilesque raphanique.
Ah thee then wretched, of accursed fate,
Whom Fish-wives, Redish-wives of base estate,
Shall scoffing over-runne in open gate.
And the God of our Poet, when he surprised one of his companions napping with
his wife, was contented but to shame them:

Atque aliquis de ijs non tristibus optat, O^id. Met. l. 4. 187.

Sic fieri turpis.
Some of the merier Gods does wish in heart,
To share their shame, of pleasure to take part.
And yet forbeareth not to be en^lamed with the gentle dalliances, and amorous
blandishments she offers him, complaining that for so slight a matter he
should distrust her to him deare-deare affection:

Quid causas pet is ex alto? ^iducia cessit ^^rg. Aen. l. 2. 395.

Quo tibi Divamei?
So far why fetch you your pleas pedigree?
Whither is fled the trust you had in me?
And which is more, she becomes a suitor to him in the behalf of a bastard of
hers,

Arma rogo genitrix nato. Ibid. 382.

A mother for a son, I crave,
An armor he of you may have.
Which is freely granted her: And Vulcan speaks honorably of Aeneas:

Arma acrifacienda viro. Ibid. 441.

An armor must be hammered out,
For one of courage stern and stout.
In truth with an humanity, more then humane. And which excess of goodness
by my consent shall only be left to the Gods:

Nec divis homines componier aequum est. Catul. eleg. 4. 141.

Nor is it meet, that men with Gods
Should be compared, there is such ods.
As for the confusion of children, besides that the gravest lawmakers appoint
and affect it in their Commonwealths, it concerns not women, with whom this
passion is, I wot not how, in some sort better placed, fitter seated.

Saepe etiam Juno maxima coelicolum Catul. eleg. 4. 138.

Coniugis in culpa flagravit quotiaiana.
Even Juno chief of Goddesses often time,
Has grown hot at her husbands daily crime.
When jealousy once seazeth on these silly, weak, and vnresisting souls,
it is pitiful, to see, how cruelly it tormenteth, how insultingly it
tyrannizeth them. It insinuates it self under color of friendship: but after
it once possesses them, the same causes which served for a ground of
good will, serve for the foundation of mortal hatred. Of all the minds
diseases, that is it, whereto most things serve for sustenance, and fewest for
remedy. The virtue, courage, health, merit and reputation of their husbands,
are the firebrands of their despite, and motives of their rage.

Nullae sunt inimicitiae nisi amoris acerbae. Prop. l. 2. el. 8. 3*

No enmities so bitter prove,
And sharp, as those which spring of love.
This consuming fever blemisheth and corrupts all that otherwise is good and
goodly in them. And how chaste or good a huswife soever a jealous woman is,
there is no action of hers, bu^ tastes of sharpness and smaks of
importunity. It is a furious perturbation, a moodie agitation, which throws
them into extremities altogether contrary to the cause. The success of one
Octauius in Rome was strange, who having laien with, and enioied the love of
Pontia Post humia, increased his affection by enjoying her, and instantly sued
to mary her; but being unable to persuade her, his extreme passionate love
prec^pitated him into effects of a most cruel, mortal and inexorable hatred;
whereupon he killed her. Likewise the ordinary Symptoms or passions of this
other amorous disease, are intestine hates, sly Monopolies, close conspiracies:

Notumque, furens quid foemina possit. Virg. Aen. l. 5. 6

It is known what a woman may,
Whose raging passions have no stay.
And a raging spite, which so much the more fretteth itself, by being forced
to excuse it self under pretense of good will. Now the duty of chastity has
a large extension and farrereaching compass. Is it their will, we would have
them to bridle? That Is a part very pliable and active. It is very nimble and
quick-rolling to be stayed. What? If dreams do sometimes engage them so
far, as they cannot dissemble nor deny them; It lies not in them (nor
perhaps in chastity it self, seeing she is a female) to shield themselves
from concupiscence and avoid desiring. If only their will interesse and engage
us, where and in what case are we? Imagine what great throng of men there would
be, in pursuit of this privilege, with winged-speed (though without eyes and
without tongue) to be conveyed upon the point of every woman that would buy
him. The Scythian women were wont to thrust out the eyes of all their slaves
and prisoners taken in war, thereby to make more free and private use of
them. Oh what a furious advantage is opportunity! He that should demand of me,
what the chief or first part in love is, I would answer, To know how to take
fit time; even so the second, and likewise the third. It is a point which may
do all in all. I have often wanted fortune, but sometimes also enterprise. God
shield him from harm, that can yet mock himself with it. In this age more
rashness is required; which our youths excuse under color of heat. But should
our women look nearer unto it, they might find, how it rather proceeds of
contempt. I supersticiously feared to offend; and what I love, I willingly
respect. Besides that, who depriveth this merchandise of reverence, defaceth
all luster of it. I love that a man should therein somewhat play the child,
the dastard and the servant. If not altogether in this, yet in some other
things I have some aires or motives of the sottish bashfulnesse, whereof
Plutarch speaks; and the course of my life has diversely been wounded and
tainted by it: a quality very ill beseeming my universal form. And what is
there amongst us, but sedition and ^arring? Mine eyes be as tender to bear a
refusal, as to refuse; and it does so much trouble me to be troublesome to
others, that where occasions force me or duty compels me to try the will
of any one, be it in doubtful things, or of cost unto him, I do it but
faintly and much against my will: But if it be for mine own private businesle
(though Homer say most truly, that in an indigent or needy man, bashfulnesse is
but a ^ond virtue) I commonly substitute a third party, who may blush in my
room: and direct them that employ me, with like difficulty: so that it has
sometimes befallen me, to have the will to deny, when I had not power to
refuse. It is then folly, to go about to bridle women of a desire, so fervent
and so natural in them. And when I hear them brag to have so virgin-like a
will and cold mind, I but laugh and mock at them. They recoile too far
backward. If it be a toothlessebeldame or decrepit grandame, or a young dry
pthisicke siarveling; if it be not altogether credible, they have at least some
color or appearance to say it. But those which stir about, and have a little
breath left them, mar but their market with such stuff: for so much as
inconfiderate excuses are no better then accusations. As a Gentleman my
neighbor, who was suspected of insufficiency,

Languidi^^ tenera cui pendens sicula beta, Ca^^l. ^le. 3. 21.

Nunquam se mediam sustulis ad tunicam.
to justify himself, three or four days after his marriage, swore
confidently, that the night before, he had performed twenty courses: which oath
has sinceserved to convince him of mere ignorance, and to divorce him from
his wife. Besides, this allegation is of no great worth: For, there is nor
continency nor virtue, where no resistance is to the c^ntrary. It is true, may
one say, but I am not ready to yield. The Saints themselves speak so. This is
understood of such as boast in good earnest of their coldness and
insensibilitie, and would be credited with a serious countenance: for, when it
is from an affected look (where the eyes give words the lie) and from the
faltring speech of their profession (which ever works against the wool) I
allow of it. I am a duteous servant unto plainness, simplicity and liberty:
but there is no remedy, if it be not merely plain, simple or infantine; it
is fond, inept and unseemly for Ladies in this commerce: it presently
inclines and bends to impudency. Their disguisings, their figures and
dissimulations cozen none but fools; there lying sits in the chair of
honor; it is a by-way, which by a false posterne leads us unto truth. If we
cannot contain their imaginations, what require we of them? the effects? Many
there be, who are free from all strangers-communication, by which chastity may
be corrupted, and honesty defiled.

Illud saepe facit, quod fine test facit. M^^t. l. 7. epig. 6^. 6.

What she does with no witness to it,
She often may be found to do it.
And those whom we fear least, are per adventure most to be feared: their
secret sins are the worst.

Offender moecha simpliciore minus.
Pleased with a whores simplicity, Ibid. l. 6. epig. 7. 6.

Offended with her nicitie.
There are effects, which without impuritie may loose them their pudicitie; and
which is more, without their knowledge. Obstetrix virginis cuiusdam
integritatem manu velut explorans, sive malevolentia, sive inscitia, sive c^su,
dum inspicit, perdidit: A Midwife searching with her finger into a certain
maidens virginity, either for ill will, or of unskillfulness, or by chance,
whilst she seeks and looks into it, she lost and spoiled it. Some one has
lost or wronged her virginity in looking or searching for it; some other
killed the same in playing with it. We are not able precisely to circumscribe
them the actions we forbid them: Our law must be conceived under general and
uncertain terms. The very Idea we forge unto their chastity is ridiculous.
For, amongst the extremest examples or patterns I have of it, it is Fatua the
wife of Faunas, who after she was married, would never suffer her self to be
seen of any man whatsoever. And Hierons wife; that never felt her husbands
stinking breath, supposing it to be a quality common to all men. It were
necessary, that to satisfy and please us, they should become insensible and
invisible. Now let us confess, that the knot of the judgment of this duty
consists principally in the will. There have been husbands who have endured
this accident, not only without reproach and offense against their wives, but
with singular acknowledgement, obligation and commendation to their virtue.
Some one that more esteemed her honesty then she loved her life, has
prostituted the same unto the lawless lust and raging sensuality of a mortal
hateful enemy, thereby to save her husbands life; and has done that for him,
which she could never have been induced to do for her self. This is no place
to extend these examples: they are too high and over-rich, to be presented in
this luster: let us therefore reserve them for a nobler seat. But to give you
some examples of a more vulgar stamp: Are there not women daily seen amongst
us, who for the only profit of their husbands, and by their express order and
brokage, make sale of their honesty? And in old times Phau^ius the Argian,
through ambition offered his to king Philip. Even as that Galba, who bestowed a
supper on Mecenas, perceiving him and his wife begin to bandy eie-trickes and
signs, of civilitie shrunk down upon his cushion, as one oppressed with
sleep; to give better scope unto their love; which he avouched as pretily: for
at that instant, a servant of his presuming to lay hands on the plate which was
on the table, he cried outright unto him; How now varlet? See thou not I
sleep only for Mecenas? One may be of a loose behavior, yet of purer will and
better reformed, then another who frames her self to a precise appearance. As
some are seen complain because they vowed chastity before years of
discretion or knowledge: so have I seen others unfeignedly bewail and truly
lament that they were vowed to licentiousness and dissoluteness before the
age of judgment and distinction. The parents lewdness may be the cause of
it; or the force of impulsive necessity, which is a shrewd counselor, and a
violent perswader. Though chastity were in the East Indias of singular
esteem, yet the custom permitted, that a married wife might freely betake her
self to what man soever did present her an Elephant: and that which some
glory, to have been valued at so high a rate. Phedon the Philosopher, of a
noble house, after the taking of his country Elis, professed to prostitute the
beauty of his youth to all comers, so long as it should continue, for money to
live with and bear his charges. And Solon was the first of Greece (say some)
who by his laws, gave women liberty, by the price of their honesty, to
provide for their necessities: A custom which Herodotus reports, to have
been entertained before him in diverse Commonwealths. And moreover, what
fruit yields this careful vexation? For, what justice soever be in this
passion, yet should we note whether it harrie us unto our profit or no.
Thinks any man that he can ring them by his industry?

Pone seram, cohibe; sed quis custodiet ipsos
Custodes? cauta est, and ab illis incipit vxor. Inveu. Sat. 6. 247.

Keep her with lock and key: but from her who shall keep
Her Keepers? She begins with them, her wits so deep,
What advantage suffices them not, in this so skillful age? Curiosity is every
where vicious; but herein pernicious. It is mere folly for one to seek to be
resolved of a doubt, or search into a mischief; for which there is no remedy,
but makes it worse, but festereth the same: the reproach whereof is increased,
and chiefly published by jealousy: and the revenge whereof does more wound
and disgrace our children, then it helps or graceth us. You waste away and
die in pursuit of so concealed a mystery of so obscure a verification.
Whereunto how pitiously have they arrived, who in my time have attained their
purpose? If the accuser, or intelligencer present not withal the remedy and
his assistance, his office is injurious, his intelligence harmefull, and which
better deserves a stabbe, then does a lie. We flout him no less, that
toileth to prevent it, then laugh at him that is a Cuckold and knows it not.
The character of cuckoldrie is perpetual; on whom it once fastneth, it holds
for ever. The punishment bewraieth it more then the fault. It is a goodly
fight, to draw our private misfortunes from out the shadow of oblivion or
dungeon of doubt, for to blazon and proclaim them on Tragical Stages: and
misfortunes which pinch us not, but by relation. For (as the saying is) she is
a good wife, and that a good marriage, not that is so indeed, but whereof no man
speaks. We ought to be wittily-wary to avoid this irk some, this tedious and
unprofitable knowledge. The Romans were accustomed, when they returned from any
journey, to send home before, and give their wives notice of their coming,
that so they might not surprise them. And therefore has a certain nation
instituted the Priest to open the way unto the Bridegroom, on the wedding day,
thereby to take from him the doubt and curiosity of searching in this first
attempt, whether she come a pure virgin to him, or be broken and tainted with
any former love. But the world speaks of it. I know a hundred Cuckolds, which
are so, honestly and little indecently. An honest man and a gallant spirit, is
moaned, but not disesteemed by it. Cause your virtue to suppress your mishap;
that honest-minded men may blame the occasion, and curse the cause; that he
which offends you, may tremble with only thinking of it. And moreover, what
man is scot-free, or who is not spoken of in this sense, from the meanest unto
the highest?

-- tot qui legionibus imperitavit, Lu^r. l. 3. 1070

Et melior quam tu mult is fuit, improbe, rebus.
He that so many bands of men commanded,
Thy better much, sir knave, was much like branded.
See thou not how many honest men, even in thy presence, are spoken of and
touched with this reproach? Imagine then they will be as bold with thee, and
say as much of thee elsewhere. For no man is spared. And even Ladies will
scoff and prattle of it. And what do they now adays more willingly flout at,
then at any well-composed and peaceable marriage? There is none of you all but
has made one Cuckold or other: Now nature stood ever on this point, Kae me
I Will kae thee, and ever ready to be even, always on recompenses and
vicissitude of things, and to give as good as one brings. The long-continued
frequence of this accident, should by this time have seasoned the bitter taste
thereof: It is almost become a custom. Oh miserable passion, which has also
this mischief, to be incommunicable.

Fors etiam nostris invidit quaestibus aures. Catul. her. Ar^on. 170.

Fortune even ears envied,
To hear us when we cried.
For, to what friend dare you entrust your greevances, who, if he laugh not at
them, will not make use of them, as a direction and instruction to take a share
of the quarie or booty to himself? As well the sowrenesse and inconveniences,
as the sweetness and pleasures incident to marriage, are secretly concealed by
the wiser sort. And amongst other importunate conditions belonging to wedlock,
this one, unto a babbling fellow as I am, is of the chiefest; that tyrannous
custom makes it uncomely and hurtful, for a man to communicate with any one
all he knows and thinks of it. To give women advice to distaste them from
jealousy, were but time lost or labor spent in vain. Their essence is so
infected with suspicion, with vanity and curiosity, that we may not hope to
cure them by any lawful mean. They often recover of this infirmity by a
form of health, much more to be feared, then the disease it self. For even as
some enchantment cannot rid away an evil, but with laying it on another, so
when they lose it, they transfer and bestow this malady on their husbands.
And to say truth, I wot not whether a man can endure any thing at their hands
worse then jealousy: of all their conditions it is most dangerous, as the head
of all their members. Pittaeus said, that every man had one imperfection or
other: his wives cursed pate was his; and but for that, he should esteem
himself most happy. It must needs be a weighty inconvenience, wherewith so
just, so wise and worthy a man, felt the state of his whole life distempered:
what shall we petie fellows do then? The Senate of Marceille had reason to
grant and enroll his request, who demanded leave to kill himself, thereby to
free and exempt himself from his wives tempestuous scolding humor; for it is
an evil, that is never clean rid away, but by remooving the whole piece: and
has no other composition of worth, but flight or sufferance; both too-too
hard, God knows. And in my conceit, he understood it right, that said, a good
marriage might be made between a blind woman and a deaf man. Let us also take
heed, lest this great and violent strictness of obligation we enioine them,
produce not two effects contrary to our end: that is to wit, to set an edge
upon their suitors stomachs, and make women more easy to yield. For, as
concerning the first point, enhancing the price of the place, we raise the
price and endeare the desire of the conquest. Might it not be Venus her self,
who so cunningly enhanced the market of her ware, by the brokage or panderizing
of the laws? knowing how sottish and tastlesse a delight it is, were it
enabled by opinion, and endeared by dearness? To conclude, it is all but
hogs flesh, varied by sauce, as said Flaminius his host. Cupid is a roguish
God; his sport is to wrestle with devotion and to contend with justice. It is
his glory, that his power checketh and copes all other might, and that all
other rules give place to his.

Materiam culpae prosequiturque suae. Ovid. Trist. l. ^. el. 1. 34.

He prosecutes the ground,
Where he is faulty found.
And as for the second point; should we not be less Cuckolds if we less
feared to be so? according to women's conditions: whom inhibition inciteth, and
restraint inviteth.

Vbi velis nolunt, vbi nolis volunt vl^r^: Ter. Eunuc. act. 4. sc^. 6. Lucan.
l. 2. 4^^.

They will not when you will,
When you will not, they will.
Concessapudet ire via.
They are ashamed to pass
The way that granted was.
What better interpretation can we find concerning Messalinas demeanor? In the
beginning she made her silly husband Cuckold, secretly and by stealth (as the
fashion is) but perceiving how uncontrolled and easily she went on with her
matches, by reason of the stupidity that possessed him, she presently
contemned and forsook that course, and began openly to make love, to avouch
her servants, to entertain and favor them in open view of all men; and would
have him take notice of it, and seem to be distasted with it: but the silly
gull and senseless coxombe awaked not for all this, and by his over-base
facility, by which he seemed to authorize and legitimate her humors, yielding
her pleasures weerish, and her amors tastelesse: what did she? Being the wife
of an Emperor, lusty, in health and living; and where? In Rome, on the worlds
chief Theater, at high noonday, at a stately feast, in a public ceremony;
and which is more, with one Silius, whom long time before she had freely
enioied, she was solemnly married one day that her husband was out of the City.
Seems it not that she took a direct course to become chaste, by the
retchlesnesse of her husband? or that she sought another husband, who by
jealousy might whet her appetite, and who insisting might incite her? But the
first difficulty she met with, was also the last. The drowzie beast rouzed
himself and suddenly started up. One has often the worst bargains at the
hands of such sluggish logger-heads. I have seen by experience, that this
extreme patience or longsufferance, if it once come to be dissolved, produces
most bitter and outrageous revenges: for, taking fire all at once, choler and
fury hudling all together, becoming one confused chaos, clattereth forth
their violent effects at the first charge.

Irarumque omnes ^ffundit habenas. Virg. A^^. l. 12. 499.

It quite lets loose the rain,
That anger should restrain.
He caused both her and a great number of her instruments and abettors to be
put to death, yea such as could not do withal, and whom by force of whipping
she had allured to her adulterous bed. What Virgil says of Venus and Vulcan,
Lucretius had more sutably said it of a secretly-stolne enjoying between her
and Mars.

-- belli fer a munera Mav^rs Lucret. l. 1. 33.

Armipotens regit, in gremium qui saepe tuum se
Reijcit, aeterno devinctus vulnere amoris:
Pascit amore avidos inhians in te Dea visus,
Eque tuo pendet resupini spiritus ore:
Hunc tu Diva tuo recubantem corpore sancto
Circunfusa super, suaveis ex ore loquelas
Funde.
Mars mighty-arm'd, rules the fierce feats of arms,
Yet often casts himself into thine arms,
Obliged thereto by endless wounds of love,
Gaping on thee feeds greedy sight with love,
His breath hangs at thy mouth who upward lies;
Goddess thou circling him, while he so lies,
With thy celestial body, speeches sweet
Power from thy mouth (as any Nectar sweet.)
When I consider this, reijcit, pascit, inhians, molli, fovet, medullas,
labefacta, pendet, percurrit, and this noble circunfusa, mother of gentle
infusus; I am vexed at these small points and verbal allusions, which since
have sprung up. To those well-meaning people, there needed no sharp encounter
or witty equivocation: Their speech is altogether full and massy, with a
natural and constant vigor: They are all epigram; not only tail, but head,
stomach and feet. There is nothing forced, nothing wrested, nothing limping;
all marches with like tenor. Contextus totus virilis est, non sunt circa
flosculos occupati. The whole composition or text is manly, they are not
bebusied about Rhetorike flowers. This is not a soft quaint eloquence, and only
without offense, it is sinnowie, material, and solid; not so much delighting,
as filling and ravishing, and ravisheth most the strongest wits, the wittiest
conceits. When I behold these gallant forms of expressing, so lively, so
nimble, so deep: I say not this is to speak well, but to think well. It is
the quaintness or liveliness of the conceit, that elevateth and puffes up the
words. Pectus est quod disertum facit. It is a man's own breast, that makes him
eloquent. Our people term judgment, language; and full conceptions, fine
words. This pourtraiture is directed not so much by the hands dexterity, as by
having the object more lively printed in the mind. Gallus speaks plainly,
because he conceives plainly. Horace is not pleased with a slight or
superficial expressing, it would betray him; he sees more clear and further
into matters: his spirit pickes and ransacketh the whole storehouse of words
and figures, to show and present himself; and he must have them more then
ordinary, as his conceit is beyond ordinary. Plutarch says, that he discerned
the Latin tongue by things. Here likewise the sense enlightneth and produces
the words: no longer windy or spungie, but of flesh and bone. They signify
more then they utter. Even weak ones show some image of this. For, in Italy,
I spoke what I listed in ordinary discourses, but in more serious and pithy, I
durst not have dared to trust to an Idiome, which I could not wind or turn
beyond it is common grace, or vulgar bias. I will be able to add and use in it
somewhat of mine own. The managing and emploiment of good wits, endeareth and
gives grace unto a tongue: Not so much innovating as filling the same with
more forcible and diverse services, wresting, straining and enfolding it. They
bring no words unto it, but enrich their own, waigh-downe and cramme-in their
signification and custom; teaching it unwonted motions; but wisely and
ingenuously. Which skill how little it is given to all, may plainly be
discerned by most of our modern French Writers. They are over-bold and
scornful, to shun the common trodden path: but want of invention and lack
of discretion loses them. There is nothing to be seen in them but a
miserable strained affectation of strange Inke-pot terms; harsh, cold and
absurd disguisements, which in stead of raising, pull down the matter. So they
may gallantize and flush it in novelty, they care not for efficacy. To take
hold of a new farre-fetcht word, they neglect the usual, which often are more
significant, forcible and sinnowy. I find sufficient store of stuff in our
language, but some defect of fashion. For there is nothing but could be framed
of our Hunters gibbrish words or strange phrases, and of our Warriors peculiar
terms; a fruitful and rich soil to borrow off. And as herbs and trees are
bettered and fortified by being transplanted, so forms of speech are
embellished and graced by variation. I find it sufficiently plenteous, but not
sufficiently pliable and vigorous. It commonly fails and shrinketh under a
pithy and powerful conception. If your march therein be far extended, you
often feel it droope and languish under you, unto whose default the Latin
does now and then present his helping hand, and the Greek to some others. By
some of these words which I have culled out, we more hardly perceive the
Energi^ or effectual operation of them, for so much as use and frequencie have
in some sort abased the grace and made their beauty vulgar. As in our ordinary
language, we shall sometimes meet with excellent phrases, and quaint
metaphors, whose blithnesse fades through age, and color is tarnish by to
common using them. But that does nothing distaste those of sound judgment, nor
derogate from the glory of those ancient Authors, who, as it is likely were
the first that brought these words into luster, and raised them to that
strain. The Sciences handle this over finely, with an artificial manner, and
different from the vulgar and natural form. My Page makes love, and
understands it feelingly; Read Leon Hebraeus or Ficinus unto him; you speak of
him, of his thoughts and of his actions, yet understands he nothing what you
mean. I nor acknowledge nor discern in Aristotle, the most part of my ordinary
motions. They are clothed with other robes, and shrouded under other vestures,
for the use of Academicall schools. God send them well to speed: but were I of
the trade, I would naturalize Art, as much as they Artize nature. Benbo and
Equicola. When I write, I can well omit the company, and spare the remembrance
of books; for fear they interrupt my form. And in truth good Authors deiect
me too-toomuch, and quail my courage. I willingly imitate that Painter, who
having bungler-like drawn, and fondly represented some Cocks, forbad his
boys to suffer any live Cock to come into his shop. And to give my self some
luster or grace have rather need of some of Antinonydes the Musicions
invention; who when he was to play any music, gave order that before or after
him, some other bad musicions should cloy and surfeit his auditory. But I can
very hardly be without Plutarke; he is so universal and so full, that upon all
occasions, and whatsoever extravagant subject you have undertaken, he intrudeth
himself into your work, and gently reaches you a helpeaffording hand,
fraught with rare embelishments, and inexaustible of precious riches. It
spights me, that he is so much exposed unto the pillage of those which haunt
him. He can no sooner come in my sight, or if I cast but a glance upon him, but
I pull some leg or wing from him. For this my dissignement, it much fitteth
my purpose, that I write in mine own house, in a wild country, where no man
helps or releeveth me; where I converse with no body that understands the
Latin of his Paternoster and as little of French. I should no doubt have done
it better else where, but then the work had been less mine: whose principal
drift and perfection, is to be exactly mine; I could mend an accidental
error, whereof I abound in mine unwary course; but it were a kind of treason
to remoove the imperfections from me, which in me are ordinary and constant.
When any body else, or my self have said unto my self: Thou art to full of
figures or allegories; here is a word meerely-bred Gaskoyne; that is a dangerous
phrase: (I refuse none that are used in the frequented streets of France; those
that will combat use and custom by the strict rules of Grammar do but jest)
there is an ignorant discourse, that is a paradoxical relation; or there is a
foolish conceit: thou do often but dally: one will think thou speak in
earnest, what thou have but spoken in jest* Yea (say I) but I correct
unadvised, not costumarie errors. Speak I not so every where? Do I not lively
display my self? that suffices; I have my will; All the world my know me by
my book, and my book by me: But I am of an Apish and imitating condition.
When I meddled with making of verses (and I never made any but in Latin) they
evidently accused the Poet I came last from reading: And of my first Essays,
some taste a little of the stranger. At Paris I speak somewhat otherwise then
at Montaigne. Whom I behold with attention, does easily convay and imprint
something of his in me. What I heedily consider, the same I usurp: a foolish
countenance, a crabbed look, a ridiculous manner of speech. And vices more:
Because they prick me, they take fast hold upon me, and leave me not,
unless I shake them off. I have more often been heard to swear by imitation,
then by complexion. Oh injurious and dead-killing imitation: like that of those
huge in greatness and matchless in strength Apes, which Alexander met withal
in a certain part of India: which otherwise it had been hard to vanquish. But
by this their inclination to counterfeit whatsoever they saw done, they
afforded the means. For, thereby the Hunters learned in their sight to put on
shoes, and tie them with many strings and knots; to dress their heads with
diverse strange attires, full of sliding-knots; and dissemblingly to rub their
eyes with Glue, or Birde-lime. So did those silly harmless beasts
indiscreetly employ their Apish disposition. They ensnared, glewed, entrameled,
haltred and shackled themselves. That other faculty of Extemp^re and wittily
representing the gestures and words of another, which often causes sport and
breeds admyring, is no more in me then in a block. When I swear after mine
own fashion, it is only by God; the directest of all oaths. They report that
Socrates swore by a Dog; Zeno by that interiection (now a days used amongst
the Italies) Cappari; and Pithagoras by water and by air. I am so apt at
unawares to entertain these superficial impressions, that if but for three
days together I use my self to speak to any Prince with your Grace or your
Highness, for eight days after I so forget my self, that I shall still use
them for your Honor or your Worship: and what I am wont to speak in sport or
jest the next day after I shall speak in good serious earnest. Therefore in
writing I assume more unwillingly much beaten arguments, for fear I handle
them at others charges. All arguments are alike fertile to me. I take them upon
any trifle. And I pray God this were not undertaken by the commandment of a
mind as fleeting. Let me begin with that likes me best for all matters are
linked one to another. But my conceit displeases me, for so much as it commonly
produces most foolish dotages from deepest studies; and such as content me on
a sudden, and when I least look for them; which as fast fleet away, wanting
at that instant some hold fast. On horseback, at the table, in my bed; but
most on horseback, where my amplest meditations and my farthest reaching
conceits are. My speech is somewhat nicely jealous of attention and silence;
if I be in any earnest talk, who interrupteth me, cuts me off. In travel,
even the necessity of ways breaks off discourses. Besides that I most
commonly travel without company, which is a great help for continued
reasonings; whereby I have sufficient leisure to entertain my self. I thereby
have that success I have in dreams; In dreaming I commend them to my memory
(for what I dream I do it willingly) but the next morning, I can well call to
mind what color they were of, whether blithe, sad or strange; but what in
substance, the more I labor to find out, the more I overwhelme them in
oblivion. So of casual and vnpremeditated conceits that come into my brain,
naught but a vain image of them remains in my memory; so much only, as
suffices unprofitably to make me chafe, spite and fret in pursuit of them.
Well then, leaving books aside and speaking more materially and simply; when
all is done, I find that love is nothing else but an insatiate chirst of
enjoying a greedily desired subject. Nor Venus that good huswife, other, then a
tickling delight of emptying ones seminary vessels: as is the pleasure which
nature gives us to discharge other parts: which becomes faulty by
immoderation, and defective by indiscretion. To Socrates, love is an appetite
of generation by the mediation of beauty. Now considering oftentimes the
rediculous tickling, or titilation of this pleasure, the absurd, giddy and
hare-braind motions wherewith it tosseth Zeno, and agitates Cratippus; that
unadvised rage, that furious and with cruelty enflamed visage in loves lustful
and sweetest effects: and then a grave, stern, severe surly countenance in so
fond-fond an action, that one has pell-mell lodged our joys and filthes
together: and that the supremest voluptuousness both ravisheth and plaineth,
as does sorrow: I believe that which Plato says to be true, that man was made
by the Gods for them to toy and play withal.

-- quanam ista ioc a^^di Ssuitia?
What cruelty is this, so set on jesting is?
And that Nature in mockery left us the most troublesome of our actions, the
most common* thereby to equal us, and without distinction to set the foolish and
the wise, us and beasts all in one rank: no barrel better Hering. When I
imagine the most contemplative and discreetly-wise-men in these terms in that
humor, I hold him for a cozoner, for a cheater to seen either studiously
contemplative, or discreetly wise. It is the foulness of the Peacockes feet,
which does abate his pride, and stoop his gloatiug-eyed tail;

-- ridentem dicere verum,
Quid vetat?
What should forbid thee sooth to say, yet be as merry as we may. Hor. ser. l.
1* sat. 2. 24.

Those which in plays refuse serious opinions, do as one reports, like unto
him who dreadeth to adore the image of a Saint, if it want a cover, an approne
or a tabernacle. We feed full well, and drink like beasts; but they are not
actions that hinder the offices of our mind. In those, we hold good our
advantage over them; whereas this brings each other thought under subjection,
and by it is imperious authority make-brutish and dulleth all Platoes
philosophy and divinity; and yet he complains not of it. In all other things
you may observe decorum and maintain some decency: all other operations admit
some rules of honesty: this cannot only be imagined, but vicious or
ridiculous. See whether for example sake, you can but find a wise or discreet
proceeding in it. Alexander said, that he knew himself mortal chiefly by this
action, and by sleeping: sleep does stifle, and suppresseth the faculties of
our soul; and that, both endeavors and dissipates them. Surely it is an
argument not only of our original corruption, but a badge of our vanity and
deformity. On the one side nature urges us unto it; having thereunto combined,
yea fastened, the most noble, the most profitable, and the most
sensually-pleasing, of all her functions; and on the other suffers us to
accuse, to condemn and to shun it, as insolent, as dishonest and as lewder
to blush at it, and allow, yea and to commend abstinence. Are not we most
brutish, to term that work beastly which begets, and which makes us? Most
people have concurred in diverse ceremonies of religion, as sacrifices,
luminaries, fastings, incensings, offerings; and amongst others, in condemning
of this action. All opinions agree in that, besides the so far extended use
of circumcision. We have perad venture reason to blame our selves, for making
so foolish a production as man, and to entitle both the deed and parts thereto
belonging, shamful (mine are properly so at this instant). The Esseniens, of
whom Plinte speaks, maintained themselves a long time without nurces, or
swathling clothes, by the arriual of strangers that came to their shoares, who
seconding their fond humor, did often visit them. A whole nation hazarding
rather to consume, then engage themselves to feminine embracements; and rather
loose the succession of all men, then forge one. They report that Zeno never
dealt with woman but once in all his life; which he did for civility, least
he should over obstinately seem to contemn the sex. Each one auoideth to see
a man borne, but all run hastily to see him dye. To destroy him we seek a
spacious field and a full light; but to construct him, we hide our selves in
some dark corner, and work as close as we may. It is our duty to conceal
our selves in making him; it is our glory, and the orginall of many virtues to
destroy him, being framed. The one is a manifest injury, the other a greater
favor; for Aristotle says, that in a certain phrase where he was borne, to
bonifie or benefit, was as much to say as to kill one. The Athenians, to equal
the disgrace of these two actions being to cleanse the I Will of Delos, and
justify themselves unto Apollo, forbad within that precinct all burial and
births. Nostri nosmet poenitet, We are weary of our selves. There are some
nations that when they are eating, they cover themselves. I know a Lady (yea
one of the greatest) who is of opinion that to chew is an unseemly thing, which
much empaireth their grace Ter. Phor.
and beauty: and therefore by her will she never comes abroad with an appetite.
And a man that cannot endure one should see him eat; and shunneth all company
more when he fills, then when he emptieth himself. In the Turkish Empire
there are many, who to excel the rest, will not be seen when they are
feeding, and who make but one meal in a week: who mangle their face and cut
their limbs; and who never speak to any body; who think to honor their
nature, by disnaturing themselves: oh fantastical people, that prize
themselves by their contempt, and mend their empairing. What monstrous beast is
this that makes himself a horror to himself, whom his delights displease,
who ties himself unto misfortune? some there are that conceal their life,

Exilioque* domos and dulcia limina mutant. Virg Geor. l. 2. 51 ^*

They change for banishment, The places that might best content.
and steal it from the sight of other men: That eschew health, and shun
mirth as hateful qualities and harmefull. Not only diverse Sects, but many
people curse their birth and bless their death. Some therebe that abhor the
glorious Sun, and adore the hiddious darkness. We are not ingenious but to
our own vexation: It is the true food of our spirits force: a dangerous and
most unruly implement.

O miseri quorum gaudia crimen habent, Corn. Gal. ^l. 1. 188.

O miserable they, whose joys in fault we lay.
Alas poor silly man, thou have but too-too many necessary and unavoidable
incommodities, without increasing them by thine own invention, and are
sufficiently wretched of condition without any art: thou aboundest in real
and essential deformities, and need not forge any by imagination. Do
thou find thy self to well at ease, unless the moity of thine ease molest
thee? Find thou to have supplied or discharged al necessary offices, whereto
nature engages thee, and that she is idle in thee, if thou bind not thy self
unto new offices? thou fear not to offend her universal and undoubted
laws, and art moved at thine own partial and fantastical ones. And by how
much more particular, uncertain, and contradicted they are, the more endeavors
thou bestowest that way. The positive orders of thy parish tie thee, those of
the world do nothing concern thee. Run but a little over the examples of
this consideration; thy life is full of them. The verses of these two Poets,
handling lasciviousnes so sparingly and so discreetly, as they do, in my
conceit seem to discover, and display it nearer; ladies cover their bosom
with networke; priests many sacred things with a veil, and painters shadow
their works, to give them the more luster, and to add more grace unto them.
And they say that the streakes of the Sun, and force of the wind, are much
more violent by reflection, then by a direct line. The Egyptian answered him
wisely, that asked him, what he had hidden under his cloak? it is (quoth he)
hidden under my cloak, that thou may not know what it is. But there are
certain other things which men conceal to show them. Here this fellow more
open.

Et nudam pressi corpus adusque meum. Quid. Am. l. 1. el. 5. 24.

My body I applide, Even to her naked side,
Me thinks he baffles me. Let Martial at his pleasure tuck-vp Uenus he makes
her not by much appear so wholly. He that speaks all he knows, does cloy and
distaste us. Who fears to express himself, leads our conceit to imagine
more them happily he conceiueth. There is treason in this kind of modesty: and
chiefly as these do, in opening us so fair a path unto imagination: Both the
action and description should taste of purloyning, The love of the Spaniards,
and of the Italians pleases me; by how much more respective and fearful it
is the more nicely close and closely nice it is, I wot not who in ancient time
wished his throat were as long as a Cranes neck, that so he might the longer
and more leasurely taste what he swallowed. That wish were more to purpose
then this sudden and violent pleasure: Namely in such natures as mine, who am
faulty in suddainenesse. To stay her fleeting, and delay her with preambles,
with them all serves for favor, all is construed to be a recompense, a
wink, a cast of the eye, a bowing, a word, or a figue, a beck is as good as a
Dew guard. He that could dine with the smoke of roste-meat, might we not dine
at a cheap rate? would he not soon be rich? It is a passion that commixeth
with small store of solid essence, great quantity of doting vanity, and
febricitant raving: it must therefore be required and served with the like. Let
us teach Ladies, to know how to prevail; highly to esteem themselves; to
ammuse, to circumvent and cozen us. We make our last charge the first: we show
our selves right French men: ever rash, ever headlong. Wire-drawing their
favors, and enstalling them by retaileeach one, even unto miserable old age,
finds some listes end, according to his worth and merit. He who has no
jovisance but in enjoying; who shootes not but to hit the mark; who loves not
hunting but for the prey; it belongs not to him to entermeddle with our
School. The more steps and degrees there are: the more delight and honor is
there on the top. We should be pleased to be brought unto it, as unto stately
Palaces, by diverse porches several passages, long and pleasant Galleries, and
well contrived turnings. This dispensation would in the end, redound to our
benefit; we should stay on it, and longer jove to lie at Rack and Manger; for
these snatches and away, mar the grace of it. Take away hope and desire, we
grow faint in our courses, we come but lagging after: Our mastery and absolute
possession, is infinitely to be feared of them: After they have wholly yielded
themselves to the mercy of our faith and constancy, they have hazarded
something: They are rare and difficult virtues: so soon as they are ours, we
are no longer theirs.

-- post quam cupidae mentis satiata libido est.
Verba nihil metuere, nihil periuria curant. Catul. Arg. v. 147.

The lust of greedy mind once satisfied,
They sear no words, nor reke oaths falsified,
And Thrasonides a young Grecian, was so religiously amorous of his love, that
having after much suit gained his mistress heart and favor, he was refused to
enjoy her, least by that jouissance he might or quench, or satisfy, or
languish that burning flame and restless heat wherewith he gloryed, and so
pleasingly fed himself. Things far fetched and dearly bought are good for
Ladies. It is the dear price makes viands savor the better. See but how the
form of salutations, which is peculiar unto our nation, does by it is facility
bastardize the grace of kisses, which Socrates says, to be of that
consequence, weight and danger, to ravish and steal our hearts. It is an
unpleasing and injurious custom unto Ladies, that they must afford their lips
to any man that has but three Lackies following him, how unhandsome and
loathsome soever he be:

C^^^s liuida naribus caninis,
Dependet glacies, rigetque barba: Mart. l. 5. epig. 94 10.

Centum occurrere malo culilingis.
From whose dog-nosthrils black-blew Ise depends,
Whose beard frost-hardned stands on bristled ends, etc.
Nor do we our selves gain much by it: for as the world is divided into four
parts, so for four fair ones, we must kiss fistie foul: and to a nice or
tender stomach, as are those of mine age, one ill kiss does surpay one good.
In Italy they are passionate and languishing suitors to very common and
mercenarie women; and thus they defend and excuse themselves, saying; That even
in enjoying there be certain degrees; and that by humble services, they will
endeavor to obtain that, which is the most absolutely perfect. They sell but
their bodies, their wills cannot be put to sale; that is too free, and too
much it is own. So say these, that it is the will they attempt, and they have
reason: It is the will one must serve and most solicit. I abhor to imagine
mine, a body void of affection. And me seems, this frenzy has some
affinity with that boys fond humor, who for pure love would wantonize with
that fair Image of Venus, which Praxiteles had made: or of that furious
Egyptian, who lusted after a dead woman's corpse which he was enbaulming and
stitching up: which was the occasion of the law that afterward was made in
Egypt: that the bodies of fair, young and nobly borne women, should be kept
three days, before they should be delivered into the hands of those who had
the charge to provide for their funerals and burials. Periander did more
miraculoussie: who extended his conjugal affection (more regular and lawful)
unto the enjoying of Melissa his deceased wife. Seems it not to be a lunatique
humor in the Moon, being otherwise unable to enjoy Endimion her favorite
darling, to lull him in a sweet slumber for many months together; and feed
hirselfe with the jouislance of a boy, that stirred not but in a dream? I say
likewise, that a man loves a body without a soul, when he loves a body
without his consent and desire. All enioyings are not alike. There are some
hecticke, faint and languishing ones, A thousand causes, besides affection and
good will, may obtain us this grant of women. It is no sufficient testimony
of true affection: therein may lurk treason, as elsewhere: they sometime go
but faintlie to work, and as they say with one buttocke;

Tanquam thura merumque parent; Ibid. l. 11. epi 14. 5. 12.

As though they did dispense,
Pure Wine and Frankincense.
Absentem mar more amue putes. Ibid. epig. 61. 8.

Of Marble you would think she were,
Or that she were not present there.
I know some, that would rather lend that, then their coach; and who emparte
not themselves, but that way: you must also mark whether your company pleases
them for some other respect, or for that end only, as of a lustie-strong grome
of a Stable: as also in what rank, and at what rate you are there lodged or
valued;

-- tibi si datur vni Catul. eleg. 4. 147:

Quo lapide illa diem candidiore notet.
If it afforded be to thee alone,
Whereby she counts that day of all days one.
What if she eat your bread, with the sauce of a more pleasing imagination?

Te tenet, absentes alios suspirat amores.
Thee she retains, yet sigheth she Tibul. l. 4. el. 5. 11.

For other loves that absent be.
What? have we not seen some in our days, to have made use of this action,
for the execution of a most horrible revenge, by that means murdering and
empoysoning (as one did) a very honest woman? such as know Italy will never
wonder, if for this subject, I seek for no examples elsewhere. For the said
nation may in that point be termed Regent of the world. They have commonly more
fair women, and fewer foul then we; but in rate and excellent beauties I
think we match them. The like I judge of their wi^^; of the vulgar sort they
have evidently many more. Blockishnes is without all comparison more rare
amongst them: but for singular wits, and of the highest pitch, we are no whit
behind them. Were I to extend this comparison, I might (me thinks) say,
touching valor, that on the other-side, it is in regard of them popular and
natural amongst us: but in their hands one may sometimes find it so complete
and vigorous, that it exceeds all the most forcible examples we have of it.
The marriages of that country are in this somewhat defective. Their custom
does generally impose so severe obseruances, and slavish laws upon wives, that
the remotest acquaintance with a stranger, is amongst them as capital as the
nearest. Which law causes, that all approaches prove necessarily
substanciall: and seeing all comes to one reckoning with them, they have an
easy choice: and have they broken down their hedges? Believe it, they will
have fire: Luxuria ipsis vinculis, sicut fera bestia, irritata, deinde emissa:
Luxury is like a wild beast, first made fiercer with tying, and then let
loose. They must have the reins given them a little.

Vidi ego nuper equum contra sua frenat enacem*
Ore reluctanti fulminis ire modo. Quid. am l. 3. ^l. 4. 13.

I saw, spite of his bit, a resty colt,
Run headstrong headlong like a thunderbolt.
They allay the desire of company, by giving, it some liberty. It is a
commendable custom with our nation, that our children are entertained in noble
houses there, as in a school of nobility to be trained and brought up as
Pages. And it is said to be a kind of discourtesie, to refuse it a gentleman. I
have observed (for, so many houses so many sever all forms and orders) that
such Ladies as have gone about to give their waiting women, the most austere
rules, have not had the best success. There is required more then ordinary
moderation: a great part of their government must be left to the conduct of
their discretion: For, when all comes to all no discipline can bridle them in
each point. True it is, that she who escapes safe and unpolluted from out the
school of freedom, gives more confidence of hirselfe, then she who comes
sound out of the school of severitie and restraint. Our forefathers framed
their daughters countenances unto shamefastness and fear, (their inclinations
and desires always alike) we unto assurance. We understand not the matter.
That belongs to the Sarmatian wenches, who by their laws may lie with noe
man, except with their own hands they have before killed another man in war.
To me that have no right but by the ears, it suffices, if they retain me to
be of their counsel, following the privilege of mine age: I then advise both
them and us to embrace abstinence, but if this season be too much against it,
at least modesty and discretion. For, as Aristippus (speaking to some young
men who bl^shed to see him go into a bawdy house) said, the fault was not in
entering, but in not coming out again, She that will not exempt her
conscience, let her exempt her name: though the substance be not of worth, yet
let the appearance hold still good. I love gradation and prolonging, in the
distribution of their favors. Plato shows, that in all kinds of love,
facility and readiness is forbidden to defendants. It Is a trick of
greediness, which it behooves them to cloak with their art, so rashly and
fond-hardily to yield themselves in gross. In their distributions of favors,
holding a regular and moderate course, they much better deceive our desires,
and conceal theirs. Let them ever be flying before us: I mean even those
that intend to be overtaken as the Scithians are wont, though they seem to
run away, they beat us more, and sooner put us to route. Verily according to
the law which nature gives them, it is not fit for them to will and desire:
their part is to bear, to obey and to consent. Therefore has nature bestowed
a perpetual capacity; on us a seld and uncertain ability. They have always
their hour, that they may ever be ready to let us enter. And whereas she has
willed our appetites should make apparent show and declaration, she caused
theirs to be concealed and inward: and has furnished them with parts unfit
for ostentation; and only for defense. Such prankes as this, we must leave to
the Amazonian liberty. Alexander the great marching through Hircania,
Thalestris Queen of the Amazones came to meet him with three hundred lances of
her sex, all well mounted and compleately armed; having left the residue of a
great army, that followed her, beyond the neighboring mountains. And thus
aloud, that all might hear she bespake him; That the farre-resounding fame of
his victories, and matchless valor, had brought her thither to see him, and
to offer him her means and forces, for the advancing and furthering of his
enterprises. And finding him so fair, so young and strong, she, who was
perfectly accomplished in all his qualities, advised him to ly with her that so
there might be borne of the most valiant woman in the world, and only valiat
man then living, some great and rare creature for posterity. Alexander thanked
her for the rest; but to take leisure for her last demands accomplishment, he
staide thirteen days in that place, during which, he reuelled with as much
glee, and feasted with as great iollitie as possibly could be devised, in
honor and favor of so courageous a Princes. We are well-nigh-in all things
parciall and corrupted Judges of their action, as no doubt they are of ours. I
allow of truth as well when it hurts me, as when it helps me. It is a foul
disorder, that so often urges them unto change, and hinders them from settling
their affection on any one subject: as we see in this Goddess, to whom they
impute so many changes and several friends. But withal it is against the
nature of love, not to be violent, and against the condition of violence, to be
constant. And those who wonder at it, exclaim against it, and in women search
for the causes of this infirmity, as incredible and unnatural: why see they
not how often, without any amazement and exclaiming, themselves are possessed
and infected with it? I might happily seem more strange to find any constant
stay in them. It is not a passion merely corporeal. If no end be found in
coueteousnesse, nor limit in ambition, assure your self there is nor end nor
limit in letchery, It yet continues after sacietie: nor can any man prescribe
it or end or constant satisfaction: it ever goes on beyond it is possession,
beyond it is bounds. And if constancy be peradventure in some sort more
pardonable in them then in us: They may readily allege against us, our ready
inclination unto day lie variety and new ware: And secondly allege without us,
that they buy a pigge in a poake. Ione Queen of Naples caused Andreosse her
first husband to be strangled and hanged out of the bars of his window, with
a cord of Silk and gold wouen with her own hands; because in bed-businesse
she found neither his members nor endeavors answerable the hope she had
conceived of him, by viewing his stature, beauty, youth, and disposition, by
which she had formerly been surprised and abused. That action has in it more
violence then passion: so that on their part at least necessity is ever
provided for: on our behalf it may happen otherwise. Therefore Plato by his
laws did very wisely establish, that before marriages the better to decide
it is opportunity, competent Judges might be appointed to take view of young men
which pretended the same, al naked: and of maidens but to the waste: in making
trial of us, they happily find us not worthy their choice:

Experta latus, madidoque simillima loro
Inguina nec lassa stare coacta manu Marti l. 7. epig. 57. 3.

Deserit imbelles thalamos.
It is not sufficient, that will kerpe a lively course: weakness and
incapacity may lawfully break wedlock;

Et quoerendum aliunde foret neruosius illud
Quod posset Zonam solituere virgineam. Catul. eleg. 3. 27.

Why not, and according to measure, an amorous intelligence, more licencious
and more active?

Si blando nequeat superesse labori.
If it cannot out last, labor with pleasure past.
But is it not great impudency, to bring our imperfections and weakness, in
place where Virg. Geor. l 3. 127.
we desire to please, and leave a good report and commendation behind us? for
the little I now stand in need of.

-- advnum
Mollis opus.
Unable to hold out, one only busy bout,
I would not importune any one, whom I am to reverence.

-- fuge suspicari,
Cuius vndenum trepidauit at as
Claudere lustrum. Her. card. 2. ^d. 4. 22.

Him of suspicion clear,
Whom age has brought well near
To five and fifty year,
Nature should have been pleased to have made this age miserable, without
making it also ridiculous. I hate to see one for an inch of wretched vigor,
which enflames him but thrice a week, take-on and swagger as fiercely, as if he
had some great and lawful dayes-worke in his belly: a right blast or puff of
wind: And admire his itching, so quick and nimble, all in a moment to be
lubberly squat and benumbed. This appetite should only belong to the blossom
of a prime youth. Trust not unto it, though you see it second that
indefatigable, full, constant and swelling heat, that is in you: for truly it
will leave you at the best, and when you shall most stand in need of it. Send
it rather to some tender, irresolute and ignorant girl, which yet trembles
for fear of the rod, and that will blush at it,

Indum sanguineo veluti violauerit ostro, Virg' Ae^^. 12. 67.

Si quis ebur, vel mista rubent vbi lilia, multa
Albarosa.
As if the Indian Yuory one should taint,
With blodie Scarlet-graine, or Lillies paint,
White entermixt with red with Roses enter-spred.
Who can stay until the next morrow, and not die for shame, the disdain of
those love sparkling eyes, privy to his faintness, dastardise and
impertinencie;

Et taciti fecere tamen conuitia vultus. ^uid. A^^. 1. el. 7. 21.

The face though silent, yet silent vpbraydes-it.
he never felt the sweet contentment, and the sence-moouing earnestnes, to have
beaten and tarnished them by the vigorous exercise of an officious and active
night. When I have perceived any of them weary of me, I have not presently
accused her lightness: but made question whether I had not more reason to
quarrel with nature, for handling me so unlawfully and uncivilly,

Si non longa satis, si non been mentula crassa: Lus. P^iap. penu^. 1. ^^. 8. 4.

Nimirum sapiunt vident que paruam
Matronae quo que mentulam illibenter.
and to my exceeding hurt. Each of my pieces are equally mine, one as another:
and no other does more properly make me a man then this. My whole pourtraiture
I universally owe unto the world. The wisdom and reach of my lesson, is all in
truth, in liberty, in essence: Disdaining in the catalogue of my true duties,
these easy, saint, ordinary and provincial rules. All natural, constant and
generall^; whereof ciuility and cerimonie, are daughters, but bastards. We
shall easily have the vices of appearance, when we shall have had those of
essence. When we have done with these, we run upon others, if we find need of
running. For there is danger, that we devise new offices, to excuse our
negligence toward natural offices, and to confound them. That it is so, we see
that in places where faults are bewitchings, bewitchings are but faults. That
among nation, where laws of seemelinesse are more rare and slack, the
primitive laws of common reason are better observed: The innumerable multitude
of so manifold duties stifling, languishing and dispersing our care. The
applying of our selves unto slight matters, with-draweth us from such as be
just. Oh how easy and plausible a course do these superficial men undertake,
in respect of ours. These are but shadows under which we shroud, and wherewith
we pay one another. But we pay not, but rather heap debt on debt, unto that
great and dreadful judge, who tucks up our clouts and rags from about our
privy parts, and is not squeamish to view all over, even to our most inward
and secret deformities: a beneficial decency of our maidenly bashfulnesse,
could it debar him of this tainted discovery. To conclude, he that could
recover or vn-be^o^ man, from so scrupulous and verbal a superstition, should
not much prejudice the world. Our life consists partly in folly, and partly
in wisdom. He that writes of it but reverently and regularly, omits the
better moytie of it. I excuse me not unto my self, and if I did, I would
rather excuse my excuses, then any fault else of mine: I excuse my self of
certain humors, which in number I hold stronger, then those which are on my
side: In consideration of which I will say thus much more (for I desire to
please all men; though it be a hard matter, Esse vnum hominem accommodatum ad
tantam morum, ac sermonum and voiuntatum varietatem, That one man should be
applyable to so great variety of manners, speeches and dispositions) that they
are not to blame me, for what I cause auctorities received and approved of many
ages, to utter: and that it is not reason, they should for want of ryme deny
me the dispensation, which ever some of our churchmen usurp and enjoy in this
season; whereof behold here two, and of the most pert and cocker amongst them:

Rimula dispeream, ni monogramma tua est.
Un vit a' amy la content et bien traitte.
How many others more? I love modesty; nor is it from judgment that I have
made choice of this kind of scandalous speech; it is nature has chosen the
same for me: I commend it no more, then all forms contrary unto received
custom: only I excuse it; and by circumstances as well general, as
particular, would qualify the imputation. Well, let us proceed. Whence comes
also the usurpation of sovereign authority, which you assume unto your selves,
over those that favor you to their cost and prejudice,

Si furtiua dedit nigra munuscula nocte, Catul. el. 4. 145.

If she have given by night, The stolen gift of delight.
that you should immediately inuest withal the interest, the coldness, and a
wedlock auctority? It is a free bargain, why do you not undertake it on those
terms you would have them to keep? There is no prescription upon voluntary
things. It is against form, yet it is true, that I have in my time managed
this match (so far as the nature of it would allow) with as much conscience
as any other whatsoever, and not without some color of justice: and have given
them no further testimony of mine affection, then I sincerely felt: and have
lively displaide unto them the declination, vigor and birth of the same; with
the fits and deferring of it: A man cannot always keep an even pace, nor ever
go to it alike. I have bin so sparing to promise, that (as I think) I have
paid more then either I promised or was due. They have found me faithful,
even to the service of their inconstancy: I say an inconstancy avowed, and
sometimes multiplied. I never broke with them, as long as I had any hold, were
it but by a threads end: and whatsoever occasion they have given me by their
ficklenes, I never fell-of unto contempt and hatred: for such familiarities,
though I attain them on most shameful conditions, yet do they bind me unto
some constant good will. I have sometime given them a taste of choler and
indiscreet impacience, upon occasions of their wyles, sleights,
close-conuayances, controversies and contestations between us; for, by
complexion, I am subject to hasty and rash motions, which often empeach my
traffic, and mar my bargains, though but mean and of small worth. Have
they desired to essay the liberty of my judgment, I never dissembled to give
them fatherly council and and biting advise, and showed my self ready to
scrath them where they itched. If I have given them cause to complain of me,
it has bin most for finding a love in me, in respect of our modern fashion,
foolishly conscientious. I have religiously kept my word in things: that I
might easily have bin dispensed with. They then yielded sometimes with
reputation, and under conditions, which they would easily suffer to be
infringed by the conqueror. I have more then once, made pleasure In her
greatest efforts strik sail unto the interest of their honor: and where reason
urged me, armed them against me, so that they guided themselves more safely and
seuerly by my prescriptions, if they once freely yielded unto them, then they
could have done by their own. I have as much as I could endeavored to take on
my self the charge and hazard of our appointments, thereby to discharge them
from all imputation; and ever contrived our meetings in most hard, strange and
unsuspected manner, to be the less mistrusted, and (in my seeming) the more
accessible. They are opened, especially in those parts, where they suppose
themselves most concealed. Things lest feared are lest defended and observed.
You may more securely dare, what no man thinks you would dare, which by
difficulty becomes easy. Never had man his approches more impertinently,
genitale. This way to love, is more according to discipline. But how ridiculous
unto our people, and of how small effect, who better knows then I? yet will I
not repent me of it; I have no more to loose by the matter,

-- me tabulasacer Her. car. l ^. od. 5 13.

V^tiua paries, indicat vuida,
Suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta maris Deo.
By tables of the vows which I did owe
Fastened thereto the sacred wall does show;
I have hung-vp my garments water-wet,
Unto that God whose power on seas is great.
It is now high time to speak plainly of it. But even as to another, I would
perhaps say; My friend thou dotest, the love of thy times has small affinity
with faith and honesty;

-- haec si tu postule^ Y^^. ^^^^^. ^ct. 1. sc. 1

Ratione certa facere, nihilo plus agas,
Quam si des operam, vt cum ratione insanias.
If this you would by reason certain make,
You do no more, then if the pains you take,
To be stark mad, and yet to think it reason fit,
And yet if I were to begin anew, it should be by the very same path and
progress, how fruitless soever it might prove unto me. Insufficiency and
so^tishnesse are commendable in a discommendable action. As much as I separate
my self from their humor in that, so much I approach unto mine own.
Moreover, I did never suffer my self to be wholly given over to that sport; I
therewith pleased, but forgot not my self. I ever kept that little
understanding and discretion, which nature has bestowed on me, for their
service and mine; some motion toward it, but no dotage. My conscience also was
engaged therein, even unto incontinency and excess, but never unto
ingratitude, treason, malice or cruelty. I bought not the pleasure of this vice
at all rates; and was content with it is own and simple cost. Nullum intrase
vi^ium est, There is no vice contained in it self. I hate almost alike a
crouching and dull lasinesse, and a toilesome and thorny working. The one
pincheth, the other dulleth me. I love wounds as S^^. epi 95.
much as bruses, and blood wipes as well as dry-blowes. I had in the practice
of this solace, when I was fitter for it, an even moderation between these two
extremities. Love is a vigila^^, lively and blithe agitation: I was neither
troubled nor tormented with it, but heated and distempred by it: There we must
make a stay; It is only hurtful unto fools. A young man demanded of the
Philosopher Panetius, whether it would be seem a wise man to be in love; Let
wisemen alone (quoth he) but for thee and me that are not so, it were best not
to engage our selves into so stirring and violent a humor, which maks us slaves
to others and contemptible unto our selves. He said true, for we ought not
entrust a matter so dangerous, unto a mind that has not wherewith to sustain
the approaches of it, nor effectually to quail the speech of Agesilaus; That
wisdom and love cannot live together: It is a vain occupation (it is true)
unseemly, shameful and lawless: But using it in this manner, I esteem it
wholesome and fit to rouse a dull spi^^^ and a heavy body: and as a physician
experienced, I would prescribe the same unto a man of my complexion and form,
as soon as any other receipt, to keep him awake and in strength, when he is
well in years; and delay him from the gripings of old age. As long as we are
but in the suburbs of it, and that our pulse yet beats.

Dum noua canities, dum prima and recta senectus, ^^^^^. Sat 3. 26.

Dum superest Lachefi quod torqueat, and pedibus me
Port^ meis, nullo dex^ram subeunte bacillo.
While hoarie hairs are new, and ould-age fresh and straight,
While Lachesis has yet to spin, while I my weight
Bear on my feeete, and stand, without staff in my hand.
We had need to be solicited and tickled, by some biting agitation, as this
is. See but what youth, vigor and iollitie it restored unto wise Anacreon. And
Socrates, when he was elder then I am, speaking of an amorous object: leaning
(says he) shoulder to shoulder, and approaching my head unto his, as we were
both together looking upon a book, I felt, in truth, a sudden tingling or
prickling in my shoulder, like the biting of some beast, which more then five
days after tickled me, whereby a continual itching glided into my heart. But
a casual touch, and that but in a shoulder, to inflame, to distemper and to
distract a mind, enfeebled, tamed and cooled through age; and of all humane
minds the most reformed. And why not I pray you? Socrates was but a man, and
would neither be nor seem to be other. Philosophy contends not against
natural delights, so that due measure be joined therewith; and allows the
moderation, not the shunning of them. The efforts of her resistance are
employed against strange and bastard or lawless ones. She says, that the
bodies appetites ought not to be increased by the mind. And wittily advises
us, that we should not excite our hunger by sacietie; not to stuff, instead of
filling our bellies: to avoid all jouissance that may bring us to want: and
shun all meat and drink, which may make us hungry or thirsty. As in the
service of love, she appoints us to take an object, that only may satisfy the
bodies need, without once moving the mind: which is not there to have any
doing, but only to follow and simply to assist the body. But have I not reason
to think, that these precepts, which (in mine opinion are elsewhere somewhat
rigorous) have reference unto a body which does his office; and that a dejected
one, as a weakened stomach may be excused if he cherish and sustain the same
by art, and by the entercouse of fantazie, to restore it the desires, the
delights and blithnesse, which of it self it has lost? May we not say, that
there is nothing in us, during this earthly prison, simply corporal, or purely
spiritual? and that injuriously we dismember a living man? that there is
reason we should carry our selves in the use of pleasure, at least as
favorably as we do in the pangs of grief? For example, it was vehement,
even unto perfection, in the souls of Saints, by repentance. The body had
naturally a part therein, by the right of their combination, and yet might have
but little share in the cause: and were not contented that it should simply
follow and assist the afflicted soul: they have tormented the body it self
with convenient and sharp punishments; to the end that one with the other, the
body and the soul might a vie plunge man into sorrow; so much the more saving,
by how much the more smarting. In like case, in corporal pleasures, is it not
injustice to quail and cool the mind and, say, it must thereunto be
entrained, as unto a forced bond, or servile necessity? She should rather
hatch and cherish them, and offer and invite it self unto them; the charge of
swaying rightly belonging to her. Even as in my conceit, it is her part, in her
proper delights, to inspire and infuse into the body all sense or feeling which
his condition may bear, and endeavor that they may be both sweet and healthy
for him. For, as they say, it is good reason; that the body follow not his
appetites to the minds prejudice or damage. But why is it not likewise
reason, that the mind should not follow hers to the bodies danger and hurt? I
have no other passion that keeps me in breath. What avarice, ambition,
quarrels, suits in law, or other contentions work and effect in others, who as
my self have no assigned vacation, or certain leisure, love would perform
more commodiously: It would restore me the vigilancie, sobriety, grace and
care of my person; and assure my countenance against the wrinckled frowns of
age (those deformed and wretched frowns) which else would blemish and deface
the same; It would reduce me to serious, to sound and wise studies, whereby I
might procure more love, and purchase more estimation: It would purge my mind
from despair of it self, and of its use, acquainting the same again with it
self: It would divert me from thousands of irksome tedious thoughts, and
melancholy carking cares, wherewith the doting idleness and crazed condition
of our age does charge and comber us: It would restore and heat, though but in
a dream, the blood which nature forsakes: It would uphold the drooping
chinne, and somewhat strengthen or lengthen the shrunken finewes, decayed
vigor, and dulled lives-blithenesse of silly wretched man, who gallops apace
to his ruin. But I am not ignorant how hard a matter it is to attain to such
a commodity: Through weakness and long experience, our taste is grown more
tender, more choice and more exquisite. We challenge most, when we bring least;
we are most desirous to choose, when we least deserve to be accepted: And
knowing our selves to be such, we are less hardy and more distrustful:
Nothing can assure us to be beloved, seeing our condition and their quality. I
am ashamed to be in the company of this green, blooming and boiling youth;

Cuius in indomito constantior inguine neruus,
Quam noua collibus arbor inhaeret: Hor. Epod. 12. 19.

Why should we present our wretchedness admid this their iollitie?

Possint vt iuuenes visere feruidi Hor. car. l. 4. ^d. 13. 26.

Multo non fine risu,
Dilapsam in cineres facem,
That hot young men may go and see,
Not without sport and merry glee,
Their firebrarnds turned to ashes be.
They have both strength and reason on their side: let us give them place: we
have no longer hold fast. This bloome of budding beauty, loves not to be
handled by such nummed, and so clomsie hands, nor would it be dealt-with by
means purely material or ordinary stuff, For, as that ancient Philosopher
answered one that mocked him, because he could not obtain the favor of a
yongling, whom he suingly pursued: My friend (quoth he) the hook bites not at
such fresh cheese. It is a commerce needing relation and mutual
correspondency: other pleasures that we receive, may be requitted by
recompenses of different nature: but this cannot be repaid but with the very
same kind of coin. Verily, the pleasure I do others in this sport, does more
sweetly tickle my imagination, then that is done unto me. Now if no generous
mind, can receive pleasure where he returns none; it is a base mind that
would have all duty and delights to feed with conference, those under whose
charge he remains. There is no beauty, nor favor, nor familiarity so
exquisite, which a gallant mind should desire at this rate. Now if women can
do us no good but in pity, I had much rather not to live at all, then to live
by alms. I would I had the privilege to demand of them, in the same style I
have heard some begin Italy: Fate been per voi, Do some good for your self:
or after the manner that Cyrus exhorted his soldiers; Whosoever loves me,
let him follow me. Consort your self, will some say to me, with those of your
own condition, whom the company of like fortune will yield of more easy
access. Oh sottish and wallowish composition;

-- nolo
Barbam vellere mortuo leoni. Mar. l. 10. epig. 90. 9.

I will not pull (though not a fearde)
When he is dead a Lions beard.
Xenophon uses for an objection and accusation against Menon, that in his love
he dealt with fading objects. I take more sensual pleasure by only viewing
the mutual, even proporcioned and delicate commixture of two young beauties; or
only to consider the same in mine imagination, then if my self should be
second in a lumpish, sad and disproporcioned conjunction. I refigne such
distasted and fantastical appetites unto the Emperor Galba, who meddled with
none but cast, worn, hard-old flesh, And to that poor slave,

O ego dij faciant talem te cernere possim,
Char aque mutatis osculaferre comis.
Amplectique meis corpus non pingue lacertis. Quid. P^nt. l* 1. el. 5. 49.

Gods grant I may behold thee in such case,
And kiss thy changed locks with my dearest grace,
And with mine arms thy limbs not fat embrace.
And amongst blemishing-deformities, I deem artificial and forced beauty to
be of the chiefest. Emonez a young lad of Chios, supposing by gorgeous attires
to purchase the beauty, which nature denied him, came to the Philosopher
Ar^silaus, and asked of him, whether a wise man could be in l^ue, or no? Yes
marry (quoth he) so it were not with a painted and sophisticate beauty, as
thine is. The fowlenesse of an old known woman is in my seeming, not so aged
nor so ill-fauoured, as one that is painted and sleeked. Shall I bouldly speak
it, and not have my throat cut for my labor? Love is not properly nor
naturally in season, but in the age next unto infancy:

Quam si puellarum insereres choro,
Mill sagaces falleret hospites,
Discrimen obscurum, solutis Hor. car. l. 2. ^d. 5. 12.

Crinibus, ambiguoque vultu.
Whom if you should in crew of wenches place,
With hair loose-hanging, and ambiguous face,
Strangely the vndiscern'd distinction might
Deceive a thousand strangers of sharp sight.
No more is perfect beauty. For, whereas Homer extends it until such time as
the chinne begins to bud. Plato himself has noted the same for very rare, And
the cause for which the Sophister Dion termed youths budding hayres;
Aristogitons and Harmodij, is notoriously known. In man-hoode I find it
already to be somewhat out of date, much more in old age.

Importunus enim transuolat aridas
Quercus. Ibid. l. 4. od. 13. 9.

Importune love does ouer-flie.
The Oaks with withered olde-age dry.
And Margaret Queen of Navarre, lengthens much (like a woman) the privilege
of women: Ordaining thirty fears to be the season, for them to change the
title of fair into good. The shorter possession we allow it over our lives,
the better for us. Behold it is behavior, It is a princock boy, who in his
school, knows not, how far one proceeds against all order: study, exercise,
custom and practice, are paths to insufficiency: the novices bear all the
sway; Amor ordinem nescit, Love knows or keeps no order. Surely it is course
has more garb, when it is commixt with unadvisedness and trouble: faults and
contrary successes, give it edge and grace: so it be eager and hungry, it
little imports whither it be prudent. Observe but how he staggers, stumbleth
and fooleth; you fetter and shackle him, when you guide him by art and
discretion: and you force his sacred liberty, when you submit him to those
bearded, grim and tough-hard hands. Moreover I often hear them display this
intelligence as absolutely spiritual disdaining to draw into consideration the
interest which all the senses have in the same. All serves to the purpose: But
I may say, that I have often seen some of us excuse the weakness of their
minds, in favor of their corporal beauties; but I never saw them yet, that in
behalf of the mindes-beauties, how sound and ripe soever they were, would
afforde an helping hand unto abedy, that never so little falls into
declination. Why does not some one of them long to produce that noble
Socraticall brood; or breed that precious gem, between the body and the mind,
purchasing with the price of her thighs a Philosophical and spiritual breed
and intelligence? which is the highest rate she can possibly value them at.
Plato appoints in his laws, that he who performs a notable and worthy
exploite in war, during the time of that expedition, should not be denide a
kiss or refused any other amorous favor, of whomsoever he shall please to
desire it, without respect either of his ill-fauourdnes, deformity, or age.
What he deemeth so just and allowable in commendation of Military valor, may
not the same be thought as lawful in commendation of some other worth? and why
is not some one of them possessed with the humor to preocupate on her
companions the glory of this chaste love? chaste I may well say;

-- nam si quando ad praelia ventum est,
Vt quondam stipulis magnus sine viribus ignis Virg. Geor. l. 3. 98. ^

In cassum furit.
If once it come to handy-gripes; as great,
But force-lesse fire in stubble; so his heat
Rages amain, but all in vain.
Vices smoothered in ones thought, are not the woorst. To conclude this notable
commentary, escaped from me by a flux of babbling: a flux sometimes as violent
as hurtful,

Vt missum sponsi furtiuo munere malum,
Procurrit casto virginis e gremio: Catul. eleg 1* 19

Quod miserae oblitae molli sub vest locatum,
Dum aduentu matris prosilit, excutitur,
Atque illud prono praeceps agitur decursu,
Huic manat tristi conscius ore rubor.
As when some fruit by stealth sent from her friend,
From chaste lap of a virgin does descend,
Which by her, under her soft aprone plast,
Starting at mothers coming thence is cast:
And trilling down in have does headlong go,
A guilty blush in her sad face does floe.
I say, that both male and female, are cast in one same moulde; instruction and
custom excepted, there is no great difference between them: Plato calls
them both indifferently to the society of all studies, exercises, charges and
functions of war and peace, in his Commonwealth. And the Philosopher
Antisthenes took away al distinction between their virtue and ours. It is much
more easy to accuse the one sex, then to excuse the other. It is that which
some say prouerbialie. Ill may the Kill call the Oven burnt tail.

The sixth Chapter.
Of Coaches.

IT is easy to verify, that excellent authors, writing of causes do not only
make use of those which they imagine true, but eftsoons of such as themselves
believe not: always provided they have some invention and beauty. They speak
sufficiently, truly and profitably, if they speak ingeniouslie. We cannot
assure* our selves of the chief cause: we hudle up a many together, to see
whether by chance it shall be found in that number,

Namque vnam dicere causam. Lucret. l. 6. 700.

Non satis est, verum plures vnde vna tamensit.
Enough it is not one cause to devise,
But more, whereof that one may yet arise,
Will you demand of me, whence this custom arises, to bless and say God
help to those that sneese? We produce three sorts of wind; that issuing
from below is too indecent; that from the mouth, implies some reproach of
gourmandise; the third is sneesing: and because it comes from the head, and
is without imputation, we thus kindly entertain it: Smile not at this
subtlety, it is (as some say) Aristotle's. Me seems to have read in Plutarch
(who of all the authors I know, has best commixt art with nature, and coupled
judgment with learning) where he yields a reason, why those which travel by
sea, do sometimes feel such qua^mes and risings of the stomach, saying, that
it proceeds of a kind of fear: having found-out some reason, by which he
prooveth, that fear may cause such an effect. My self who am much subject
unto it, know well, that this cause does nothing concern me. And I know it,
not by argument, but by necessary experience, without alleging what some have
told me, that the like does often happen unto beasts, namely unto swine, when
they are farthest from apprehending any danger: and what an acquaintance of
mine has assured me of himself, and who is greatly subject unto it, that
twice or thrice in a tempestuous storm, being surprised with execeeding fear,
all manner of desire or inclination to vomit had left him. As to that ancient
good fellow; Peius vexabar quam vt periculum mihi succurreret. I was worse
vexed then that danger covld help me. I never apprehended fear upon the
water; nor any where else (yet have I often had ^^st cause offered me, if death
it self may give it) which either might trouble or astonie me. It proceeds
sometimes as well from want of judgment, as from lack of courage. All the
dangers I have had, have been when mine, eyes were wide-open and my sight
clear, sound and perfect: For, even to fear, courage is required. It has
sometimes steaded me, in respect of others, to direct and keep my flight in
order, that so it might be, if not without fear, at least without dismay and
astonishment. Indeed it was moved, but not amazed nor distracted. Undaunted
minds march further, and represent flight, not only temperate, settled and
sound, but also fierce and bold* Report we that which Alcibiades relates of
Socrates his companion in arms. I found (says he) after the route and
discomfiture of our army, both him and Lachez in the last rank of those that
ran away, and with all safety and leisure considered him, for I was mounted
upon an excellent good horse, and he on foot, and so had we combatted all day.
I noted first, how in respect of Lachez, he showed both discr^^te judgment and
^ndanted resolution: then I observed the vndismaide bravery of his march,
nothing different from his ordinary pace: his look orderly and constant, duly
obs^^uing and ^eedily judging what ever passed round about him: sometimes
viewing the one, and sometimes looking on the other both friends and enemies,
with so composed a manner, that he seemed to encourage the one and menace the
other, signifying, that whosoever should attempt his life, must purchase the
same, or his blood at a high-valued rate; and thus they both saved themselves;
for, men do not willingly graple with these; but follow such as show or fear
or dismay. Lo hear the testimony of that renow^ed Captain, who teaches us
what we daily find by experience, that there is nothing does sooner cast us
into dangers, then an inconsiderate greediness to a^^^de them. Quo timoris
minus est, eo minus ferme periculi est. The less fear there is most commonly,
the less danger there is. Our people is to blame, to say, such a one fears
death, when it would signify, that he thinks on it, and does foresee the
same. Foresight does equally belong as well to that which concerns us in
good, as touch us in evil. To consider and judge danger, is in some sort, not
to be danted at it. I do not find my self sufficiently strong to withstand
the blow and violence of this passion of fear, or of any other impetuosity,
were I once therewith vanquished and deterred, I could never safely recover my
self. He that should make my mind forgo her footing, could never bring her
unto her place again. She does over lively sound, and over deeply search into
hirselfe: And therefore never suffers the wound which pierced the same, to be
thoroughly cured and consolidated. It has been happy for me: that no infirmity
could ever yet displace her. I oppose and present my self in the best ward I
have, against all charges and assaults that beset me. Thus the first that
should bear me away, would make me unrecoverable. I encounter not two: which
way soever spoil should enter my hold, there am I open, and remedilesly
drowned. Epicurus says, that a wise man can never pass from one state to its
contrary. I have some opinion answering his sentence, that he who has once
been a very fool, shall at no time prove very wise. God sends my cold
answerable to my clothes, and passions answering the means I have to endure
them. Nature having discovered me on one side, has covered me one the other.
Having disarmed me of strength, she has armed me with insensibility, and a
regular or soft apprehension. I cannot long endure (and less could in my
youth) to ride either in coach or litter, or to go in a boat; and both in the
City and country I hate all manner of riding, but a horseback: And can less
endure a litter, then a coach, and by the same reason, more easily a rough
agitation upon the water, whence commonly proceeds fear, then the soft
stirring a man shall feel in calm weather. By the same easy gentle motion,
which the oars give, conuaying the boat under us, I wot not how, I feel both
my head intoxicated and my stomach distempered: as I cannot likewise abide a
shaking stool under me. When as either the sail, or the gliding course of the
water does equally carry us away, or that we are but towed, that gently,
gliding and even agitation, does no whit distemper or hurt me. It is an
interrupted and broken motion, that offendes me; and more when it is
languishing. I am not able to displaye it is form. Physicians have taught me
to bind and gird my self with a napkin or swath round about the lower part of
my belly, as a remedy for this accident; which as yet I have not tried, being
accustomed to wrestle and with stand such defects as are in me; and tame them
by my self. Were my memory sufficientlye informed of them, I would not think
my time lost, here to set down the infinite variety, which histories present
unto us, of the use of coaches in the service of war: diverse according to the
nations, and different according to the ages: to my seeming of great effect and
necessitye. So that it is wondrouslye strange, how we have lost all true
knowledge of them; I will only aleadge this, that even lately in our fathers
time, the Hungarians did very auailefully bring them into fashion, and
profitablie set them a work against the Turks; every one of them containing a
Targattier and a Muskettier, with a certain number of harquebus^s or caliuers,
ready charged; and so ranged, that they might make good use of them: and all
over covered with a pauesado, after the manner of a Galliotte. They made the
front of their battle with three thousand such coaches: and after the Cannon
had playde, caused them to discharge and shoot off volie of small shot upon
their enemies, before they should know or feel, what the rest of their forces
could do: which was no small advancement; or if not this, they mainely drove
those coaches amidde the thickest of their enemies squadrons, with purpose to
break, disroute and make way through them. Besides the benefit and help they
might make of them, in any suspicious or dangerous place, to flank their
troops marching from place to place: or in have to encompasse, to embarricado,
to cover or fortify any lodgement or quarter. In my time, a gentleman of
quality, in one of our frontieres, vnwealdy and so burly of body, that he
could find no horse able to bear his weight, and having a quarrel or deadly
fude in hand, was wont to travail up and down in a coach made after this
fashion, and found much ease and good in it. But leave we these warlike
coaches, as if their nullity were not sufficiently known by better tokens; The
lastkings of our first race were wont to travel in chariors drawn by four
oxen. Mark Antonie was the first, that caused himself, accompanied with a
minsterell harlot to be drawn by Lions fitted to a coach. So did Heliogabalus
after him, naming himself Cibele the mother of the Gods; and also by Tigers,
counterfetting God Bacchus: who sometimes would also be drawn in a coach by
two Stagges: and an-other time by four mastiue Dogs: and by four naked
wenches, causing himself to be drawn by them in pomp and state, he being
all naked. The emperor Firmus, made his coach to be drawn by Estriges of
exceeding greatness, so that he rather seemed to fly, then to roll on
wheels. The strangeness of these inventions, does bring this other thing unto
my fantasy. That it is a kind of pusilanimity in Monarkes, and a testimony
that they do not sufficiently know what they are, when they labor to show
their worth, and endeavor to appear unto the world, by excessive and
intolerable expenses. A thing, which in a strange country might somewhat be
excused; but amongst his native subjects, where he swayeth all in all, he
draws from his dignity the extremest degree of honor, that he may possible
attain unto. As for a gentleman, in his own private house to apparel
himself richly and curiously, I deem it a matter vain and superfluous; his
house, his household, his train and his kitchen do sufficiently answer for
him. The counsel which Isocrates gives to his King (in my conceit) seems
to carry some reason: when he wills him to be richly-stored and stately
adorned with mooueables and housholde-stuffe, for so much as it is an expense of
continuance, and which descends even to his posterity or heirs: And to
avoid all magnificences, which presently vanish both from custom and memory.
I loved when I was a younger brother to set my self forth and be gaye in
clothes, though I wanted other necessaries; and it became me well: There are
some on whose backs their rich Robes weep, or as we say their rich clothes
are lyned with heavy debts. We have diverse strange tales of our ancient Kings
frugalitie about their own persons, and in their gifts: great and far
renouned Kings both in credit, in valor and in fortune. Demosthenes mainely
combats the law of his City, who assigned their public money to be
employed about the stately setting forth of their plays and feasts: He
wills that their magnificence should be seen in the quantity of tall ships
well manned and appointed, and armies well furnished. And they have reason to
accuse Theophrastus, who in his book of riches established a contrary
opinion, and vpholdeth such a quality of expenses, to be the true friute of
wealth and plenty. They are pleasures (says Aristotle) that only touch the
vulgar and basest communalty, which as soon as a man is satisfied with them,
vanish out of mind; and whereof no man of sound judgment of gravity can make
any esteem. The employment of it, as more profitable, just and durable would
seem more royal, worthy and commendable, about ports, heavens,
fortifications and walls; in sumptuous buildings, in churches, hospitales,
colleges, mending of heighwayes and streets, and such like monuments: in
which things Pope Gregory the thirteenth shall leave aye-lasting and
commendable memory unto his name: and wherein our Queen Catherin should witness
unto succeeding ages her natural liberality and exceeding bounty, if her
means were answarable to her affection. Fortune has much spighted me to
hinder the structure and brake-off the finishing of our new-bridge in our great
City; and before my death to deprive me of all hope to see the great
necessity of it set forward again. Moreover, it appears unto subjects,
spectators of these triumphs, that they have a show made them of their own
riches, and that they are feasted at their proper charges: For, the people do
easily presume of their kings, as we do of our servants; that they should
take care plenteously to provide us of whatsoever we stand in need of, but
that on their behalf they should no way lay hands on it. And therefore the
Emperor Galba, sitting at supper, having taken pleasure to hear a musicion
play and sing before him, sent for his casket, out of which he took a handful
of Crowns and put them into his hand, with these words; Take this, not as a
gift of the public money, but of mine own private store. So is it, that it
often comes to pass, that the common people have reason to grudge, and that
their eyes are fed, with that which he should feed their belly. Liberality
it self, in a sovereign hand is not in her own luster: private men have more
right, and may challenge more interest in her. For, taking the matter exactlye
as it is, a King has nothing that is properlye his own; he owes even
himself to others. Authority is not given in favor of the authorizing, but
rather in favor of the authorized. A superior is never created for his own
profit, but rather for the benefit of the inferior: And a Physician is
instituted for the sick, not for himself. All Magistracy, even as each art,
rejects her end out of her self. Nulla ars in se versatur. No art is all in
it self. Wherefore the governors and overseers of Princes childhood or
minority, who so earnestly endeavor to imprint this virtue of bounty and
liberality in them; and teach them not to refuse any thing, and esteem
nothing so well employed, as what they shall give (an instruction which in my
days I have seen in great credit) either they prefer and respect more their
own profit then their masters; or else they understand not aright to whom they
speak. It is too easy a matter to imprint liberality in him, that has
wherewith plenteously to satisfy what he desires at other men's charges. And
his estimation being directed not according to the measure of the present, but
according to the quality of his means, that exercises the same, it comes
to prove vain in so puissant hands. They are found to be prodigal, before
they be liberal. Therefore is it but of small commendation, in respect of
other royal virtues. And the only (as said the tyrant Dionyfius) that agreed
and squared well with tyranny it self. I would rather teach him the verse of
the ancient labourer,

(...) Plat de Athen. Eras. chil. 3. cent. 1. ad. 32.

Not whole sackes, but by the hand
A man should sow his seed in the land.
That whosoever will reap any commodity by it, must sow with his hand, and
not power out of the sack: that corn must be discreetly scattered, and not
lavishly dispersed: And that being to give, or to say better, to pay and
restore to such a multitude of people, according as they have deserved, he
ought to be a loyal, faithful, and advised distributer thereof. If the
liberality of a Prince be without heedy discretion and measure, I would rather
have him covetous and sparing. Princely virtue seems to consist most in
justice. And of all parts of justice, that does best and most belong to Kings,
which accompanies liberality. For, they have it particularly reserved to
their charge; whereas all other justice, they happily exercise the same by the
intermission of others. Immoderate bounty, is a weak mean to acquire them
good will: for, it rejects more people, then it obtains: Quo in plures vsus
sis, minus in multos Cic. off. l. ^.
vti possis. Quid autem est stultius, quam, quod libenter facias, curare vt id
diutius facere non possis? The more you have used it to many, the less may you
use it to many more: And what is more fond, then what you willingly would do,
to provide you can no longer do it? And if it be employed without respect of
merit, it shameth him that receives the same, and is received without grace.
Some Tyrants have been sacrificed to the peoples hatred, by the very hands of
those, whom they had rashly preferred and wrongfully advanced: such kind of
men, meaning to assure the possession of goods unlawfully and indirectly
gotten, if they show to hold in contempt and hatred, him from whom they held
them, and in that combine themselves unto the vulgar judgment and common
opinion. The subjects of a Prince, rashly excessive in his gifts, become
impudently excessive in begging: they adhere, not unto reason, but unto
example. Verily we have often just cause to blush, for our impudency. We are
over-paid according to justice, when the recompense equalleth our service: for,
do we not owe a kind of natural duty to our Princes? If he bear our
charge, he does overmuch; it suffices if he assist it: the overplus is
called a benefit, which cannot be exacted; for the very name of liberality
implies liberty. After our fashion, we have never done; what is received is
no more reckoned of: only future liberality is loved: Wherefore the more a
Prince does exhaust himself in giving, the more friends he impoverisheth. How
should he satisfy intemperate desires, which increase according as they are
replenished? Who so has his mind on taking, has it no more on what he has
taken. Covetousness has nothing so proper, as to be ungrateful. The example
of Cyrus shall not ill fit this place, for the behoof of our kings of these
days, as a touchstone, to know whether their gifts be well or ill employed;
and make them perceive, how much more happily that Emperor did wound and
oppress them, then they do. Whereby they are afterward forced to exact and
borrow of their unknown subjects, and rather of such as they have wronged and
aggrieved, then of those they have enriched and done good unto: and receive no
aids, where any thing is gratitude, except the name. Craesus vpbra^ded him with
his lavish bounty, and calculated what his treasure would amount unto, if he
were more sparing and close-handed. A desire surprised him to justify his
liberality, and dispatching letters over all parts of his dominions, to such
great men of his estate, whom he had particularly advanced, entreated every
one to assist him with as much money as they could, for an urgent necessity of
his; and presently to send it him by declaration: when all these count-bookes
or notes were brought him, each of his friends supposing that it sufficed not,
to offer him no more then they had received of his bounteous liberality, but
adding much of their own unto it, it was found, that the said sum amounted
unto much more, then the niggardly sparing of Croesus. Whereupon Cyrus said, I
am no less greedy of riches, then other Princes, but am rather a better
husband of them. You see with what small venture I have purchased the
invaluable treasure of so many friends, and how much more faithful treasurers
they are to me, then mercenarie men would be, without obligation and without
affection: and my exchequer or treasury better placed then in paltery coafers;
by which I draw upon me the hate, the envy and the contempt of other Princes.
The ancient Emperors were wont to draw some excuse, for the superfluity of
their sports and public shows, for so much as their authority did in some
sort depend (at least in appearance) from the will of the Roman people; which
from all ages was accustomed to be flattered by such kinds of spectables and
excess.

But they were particular-ones who had bred this custom, to gratify their
con-citizens and fellows: especially with their purse, by such profusion and
magnificence. It was clean altered, when the masters and chief rulers came
once to imitate the same. Pecuniarum translatio Cic. Off. l. 1.
a justice dominis ad alienos non debet liberalis videri. The passing of money
from right owners to strangers should not seem liberality. Philip, because
his son endeavored by gifts to purchase the good will of the Macedonians, by
a letter seemed to be displeased and chid him in this manner: What? Would
thou have thy subjects to account thee for their purse-bearer, and not repute
thee for their King? Will thou frequent and practice them? Then do it with the
benefits of thy virtue, not with those of thy coafers: Yet was it a goodly
thing, to cause a great quantity of great trees, all branchie and green, to be
far brought and planted in plots yielding nothing but dry gravel,
representing a wild shady forest, divided in due seemly proportion: And the
first day, to put into the same a thousand Estriges, a thousand Stagges, a
thousand wild Boares, and a thousand Buckes, yielding them over to be hunted
and killed by the common people: the next morrow in the presence of all the
assembly to cause a hundred great Lions, a hundred Leopards, and three hundred
huge Bears to be baited and tugged in pieces: and for the third day, in
bloody manner and good earnest to make three hundred couple of Gladiators or
Fencers, to combat and murder one another; as did the Emperor Probus. It was
also a goodly show, to see those wondrous huge Amphitheaters all enchased with
rich marble, on the out side curiously wrought with carved statues, and all the
inner side glittering with precious and rare embellishments,

Baltheus en gemmis, en illita porticus auro.
A belt beset with gemmes behold,
Behold a walk bedawb'd with gold.
All the sides round about that great void, replenished and environed from the
ground unto the very top, with three or four score ranks of steps and
seats, likewise all of marble covered with fair cushions,

-- exeat, inquit, Iauen. Sat. 3. 153.

Si pudor est, and de pulvino surgat equestri,
Cuius res legi non sufficit.
If shame there be, let him be gone, he cries,
And from his knightly cushion let him rise,
Whose substance to the law does not suffice.
Where might conveniently be placed an hundred thousand men, and all sit at
ease. And the plaine-ground-worke of it, where sports were to be acted, first
by Art to cause the same to open and chap in sunder with gaps and cranishes,
representing hollow cavernes which vomited out the beasts appointed for the
spectacle: That ended, immediately to overflow it all with a maine deep sea,
fraught with store of sea monsters and other strange fishes, all over-laid with
goodly tall ships, ready rigd and appointed to represent a Sea Fight; and
thirdly, suddenly to make it smooth and dry again, for the combat of
Gladiators: and fourthly being forthwith cleansed, to strewe it over with
Vermillion and Storay, insteede of gravel, for the erecting of a solemn
banquet, for all that infinite number of people: the last act of one only day.

-- quoties nos descendentis arenae
Vidimus in parts, ruptaque voragine terrae
Emersisse feras, and ijsdem saepe latebris
Aurea cum croceo creuerunt arbuta libro.
Nec solum nobis siluestria cernere monstra
Contigit, aequoreos ego cum certantibus vrsis
Spectaui vitulos, et equorum nomine dignum,
Sed deforme pecus.
How often have we beheld wild beasts appear
From broken gulfes of earth, upon some part
Of sand that did not sink? how often there
And thence did golden boughs oresaffron'd starte?
Nor only saw we monsters of the wood,
But I have seen Sea-calues whom Bears withstood,
And such a kind of beast as might be named
A horse, but in most foul proportion framed.
They have sometimes caused an high steepy mountain to arise in the midst of
the said Amphitheaters, all ouer-spred with fruitful and flourishing trees of
all sorts, on the top whereof gushed out streams of water, as from out the
source of a purling spring. Other times they have produced therein a great tall
Ship floating up and down, which of it self opened and split a sunder, and
after it had disgorged from out it is bulk, four or five hundred wild beasts
to be baited, it closed and vanished away of itself, without any visible
help. Sometimes from out the bottom of it, they caused streakes and purlings
of sweet water to spoute up, bubling to the highest top of the frame, and
gently watring, sprinkling and refreshing that infinite multitud. To keep and
cover themselves from the violence of the wether, they caused that huge
compass to be all ouer-spred, sometimes with purple sails, all curiously
wrought with the needle, sometimes of silk, and of some other color, in the
twinkling of an eye, as they pleased, they displaid and spread, or drew and
pulled them in again.

Quamuis non modico caleant spectacula sole
Velareducuntur cumvenit Hermogenes.
Though fervent Sun make it hot to see a play,
When linnen-thieues come, sails are kept away.
The nets likewise, which they used to put before the people, to save them from
harm and violence of the baited beasts, were wouen with gold.

auro quoque tortarefulgent
Retia.
Nets with gold enterlaced,
Their shows with glittring graced.
If any thing be excusable in such lavish excess, it is, where the invention
and strangeness breeds admiration, and not the costly charge. Even in those
vanities, we may plainly perceive how fertile and happy those former ages
were of other manner of wits, then ours are. It happens of this kind of
fertility, as of all other productions of nature. We may not say what nature
employed then the utmost of her power. We go not, but rather creep and
stagger here and there: we go our pace. I imagine our knowledge to be weak
in all senses: we neither discern far-forward, nor see much backward. It
embraces little, and lives not long: It is shot both in extension of time,
and in amplenesse of matter or invention.

Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona Her. car. l. 4. ed. 9. 25.

Multi, sed omnes illachrymabiles
Vrgentur, ignoti^ longa
Nocte.
Before great Agamemnon and the rest,
Many lived valiant, yet are all suppressed,
Vnmoan'd, unknown, in dark oblivions nest.
Et supera bellum Troianum and funera Troiae, Lucret. l. 5. 326.

Mul^s alias alij quoque res cecinere poetae.
Beside the Trojan war, Troyes funeral night,
Of other things did other Poets write.
And Solons narration concerning what he had learned of the Aegiptian Priests,
of their states long-life, and manner how to learn and preserve strange or
foreign histories, in mine opinion is not a testimony to be refused in this
consideration. Si interminatam in omnes parts Cit. Not. De^. l. 1.
magnitudinem regionum videremus, and temporum, in quam se inijciens animus and
intendens, ita late longeque peregrinatur, vt nullam oram vltimi videat, in qua
possit insistere: In haec immenfitate infinita, vis innumerabilium appareret
formarum. If we behold an unlimited greatness on all sides both of religions
and times, whereupon the mind casting it self and intentine does travel
far and near, so as it sees no bounds of what is last, whereon it may
insist; in this infinite immenfi^te there would appear a multitude of
innumerable forms. If whatsoever has come unto us by report of what is past
were true, and known of any body, it would be less then nothing, in respect
of that which is unknown. And even of this image of the world, which whilst
we live therein, glideth and passes away, how wretched, how weak and how
short is the knowledge of the most curious? Not only of the particular events,
which fortune often makes exemplar and of consequence: but of the state of
mighty common wealths, large Monarkies and renowned nations, there escapes our
knowledge a hundred times more, then comes unto our notice. We keep a
coil, and wonder at the miraculous invention of our artilerie, and rest amazed
at the rare devise of Printing: when as unknown to us, other men, and an other
end of the world named China, knew and had perfect use of both, a thousand
years before. If we saw as much of this vaste world, as we see but a least
part of it, it is very likely we should perceive a perpetual multiplicity,
and euer-rouling vicissitude of forms. Therein is nothing singular, and
nothing rare, if regard be had unto nature, or to say better, if relation be
had unto our knowledge: which is a weak foundation of our rules, and which
does commonly present us a right-false Image of things. How vainly do we
now-adaies conclude the declination and decrepitude of the world, by the fond
arguments we draw from our own weakness, drooping and declination:

Iamque adeo affecta est ^tas, affectaque tellus: Lucret. l. 2. 1159.

And now both age and land
So sick affected stand.
And as vainly did another conclude it is birth and youth, by the vigor he
perceived in the wits of his time, abounding in novelties and invention of
diverse Arts:

Verum, vt opinor, habet novitatem, summa, recensque Ibid. 5. 330.

Natura est mundi, neque pridem exordia cepit:
Quare etiam quaedam nunc arts expoliuntur,
Nunc etiam augescunt, nunc addita navigijs sunt
Multae.
But all this world is new, as I suppose,
Worlds nature fresh, nor lately it arose:
Whereby some arts refined are in fashion,
And many things now to our navigation
Are added, daily grown to augmentation.
Our world has of late discovered another (and who can warrant us whether it
be the last of his brethren, since both the Demons, the Sybilles, and all we
have hitherto been ignorant of this?) no less large, fully-peopled,
all-things-yeelding, and mighty in strength, than ours: nevertheless so new
and infantine, that he is yet to learn his A. B. C. It is not yet full fifty
years that he knew neither letters, nor weight, nor measures, nor apparel,
nor corn, nor vines. But was all naked, simply-pure, in Natures lap, and
lived but with such means and food as his mother-nurce affoorded him. If we
conclude aright of our end, and the foresaid Poet of the infancy of his age,
this late-world shall but come to light, when ours shall fall into darkness.
The whole Universe shall fall into a palsy or convulsion of sinnowes: one
member shall be maimed or shrunken, another nimble and in good plight. I
fear, that by our contagion, we shall directly have furthered his
declination, and hastened his ruin; and that we shall too dearly have sold
him our opinions, our new-fangles and our Arts. It was an unpolluted,
harmless infant world; yet have we not whipped and submitted the same unto
our discipline, or schooled him by the advantage of our valor or natural
forces; nor have we instructed him by our justice and integrity; nor subdued
by our magnanimity. Most of their answers, and a number of the negotiations
we have had with them, witness that they were nothing short of us, nor
beholding to us for any excellency of natural wit or perspicuitie, concerning
pertinencie. The wonderful, or as I may call it, amazement-breeding
magnificence of the never-like seen Cities of Cusco and Mexico, and amongst
infinite such like things, the admirable Garden of that King, where all the
Trees, the Fruits, the Herbs and Plants, according to the order and
greatness they have in a Garden, were most artificially framed in gold: as
also in his Cabinet, all the living creatures that his Country or his Seas
produced, were cast in gold; and the exquisite beauty of their works, in
precious Stones, in Feathers, in Cotton and in Painting; show that they yielded
as little unto us in cunning and industry. But concerning unfeigned devotion,
awefull observance of laws, unspotted integrity, bounteous liberality, due
loyalty and free liberty, it has greatly availed us, that we had not so
much as they: By which advantage, they have lost, castaway, sold, undone and
betrayed themselves.

Touching hardiness and undaunted courage, and as for matchless constancy,
vnmooved assuredness, and vndismaied resolution against pain, smarting,
famine and death it self; I will not fear to oppose the examples which I may
easily find amongst them, to the most famous ancient examples, we may with
all our industry discover in all the Annalles and memories of our known old
World. For, as for those which have subdued them, let them lay aside the wiles,
the policies and stratagems, which they have employed to cozen, to cunny-catch,
and to circumvent them; and the just astonishment which those nations might
justly conceive, by seeing so unexpected an arrival of bearded men; diverse in
language, in habit, in religion, in behavior, in form, in countenance; and
from a part of the world so distant, and where they never heard any habitation
was: mounted upon great and unknown monsters; against those, who had never so
much as seen any horse, and less any beast whatsoever apt to bear, or taught
to carry either man or burden; covered with a shining and hard skin, and
armed with slicing-keene weapons and glittering armor: against them, who for
the wonder of the glistring of a looking-glass or of a plain knife, would
have changed or given inestimable riches in Gold, Precious Stones and Pearls;
and who had neither the skill nor the matter wherewith at any leisure, they
could have pierced our steel: to which you may add the flashing-fire and
thundering roar ofshotte and Harguebuses; able to quell and daunt even Caesar
himself, had he been so suddenly surprised and as little experienced as
they were: and thus to come unto, and assault silly-naked people, saving where
the invention of weauing of Cotton cloth was known and used: for the most
altogether unarmed, except some bows, stones, staves and wodden bucklers:
vnsuspecting poor people, surprised under color of amity and well-meaning
faith, over-taken by the curiosity to see strange and unknown things: I say,
take this disparity from the conquerors, and you deprive them of all the
occasions and cause of so many unexpected victories. When I consider that
sterne-vntamed obstinacy, and undaunted vehemence, wherewith so many thousands
of men, of women and children, do so infinite times present themselves unto
inevitable dangers, for the defense of their Gods and liberty: This generous
obstinacy to endure all extremities, all difficulties and death, more easily
and willingly, then basely to yield unto their domination, of whom they have
so abhominably been abvsed: some of them choosing rather to starve with hunger
and fasting, being taken, then to accept food at their enemies hands, so
basely victorious: I perceive, that whosoever had undertaken them man to man,
without ods of arms, of experience or of number, should have had as dangerous
a war, or perhaps more, as any we see amongst us.

Why did not so glorious a conquest happen under Alexander, or during the time
of the ancient Greeks and Romans? or why befell not so great a change and
alteration of Empires and people, under such hands as would gently have
polished, reformed and incivilized, what in them they deemed to be barbarous
and rude: or would have nourished and fostered those good seeds, which nature
had there brought forth: adding not only to the manuring of their grounds and
ornaments of their cities such arts as we had; and that no further then had
been necessary for them, but therewithal joy ning unto the original virtues
of the country, those of the ancient Grecians and Romans? What reputation and
what reformation would all that farre-spredding world have found, if the
examples, demeanors and policies, wherewith we first presented them, had
called and allured those uncorrupted nations, to the admiration and imitation
of virtue, and had established between them and us a brotherly society and
mutual correspondencie? How easy a matter had it been, profitably to
reform, and christianly to instruct, minds yet so pure and new, so willing to
be taught, being for the most part endowed with so docile, so apt and so
yielding natural beginnings? whereas contrariwise, we have made use of their
ignorance and inexperience, draw them more easily unto treason, fraud,
luxury, avarice and all manner of inhumanitie and cruelty, by the example of
our life, and pattern of our customs. Who ever raised the service of
merchandise and benefit of traffic to so high a rate? So many goodly cities
ransacked and razed; so many nations destroyed and made desolate; so infinite
millions of harmless people of all sexes, states and ages, massacred, ravaged
and put to the sword; and the richest, the fairest and the best part of the
world topsituruied, ruined and defaced for the traffic of Pearls and Pepper:
Oh mecanicall victoryes, oh base conquest. Never did blind ambition, never did
greedy revenge, public wrongs or general enmities, so moodily enrage, and so
passionately incense men against men, unto so horrible hostilities, bloody
dissipation, and miserable calamities.

Certain Spaniardes coasting along the Sea in search of mines, fortued to
land in a very fertile, pleasant and well peopled country: unto the inhabitants
whereof they declared their intent, and showed their accustomed persuasions;
saying: That they were quiet and well meaning-men, coming from
farre-countries, being sent from the King of Castile, the greatest king of the
habitable earth, unto whom the Pope, representing God on earth, had given the
principality of all the Indies. That if they would become tributaries to him,
they should be most kindly used and courteously entreated: They required of
them victualles for their nourishment; and some gold for the behoof of
certain Physical experiments. Moreover, they declared unto them, the
believing in one only God, and the truth of our religion, which they
persuaded them to embrace, adding thereto some minatorie threats. Whose answer
was this: That happily they might be quiet and well-meaning, but their
countenance showed them to be otherwise: As concerning their King, since he
seemed to beg, he showed to be poor and needy: And for the Pope, who had
made that distribution, he expressed himself a man loving dissension, in going
about to give unto a third man, a thing which was not his own: so to make it
questionable and litigious amongst the ancient possessors of it. As for
victualles, they should have part of their store: And for gold, they had but
little, and that it was a thing they made very small accoumpt of, as merely
unprofitable for the service of their life, whereas all their care was but how
to pass it happily and pleasantly: and therefore, what quantity soever they
should find, that only excepted which was employed about the service of their
Gods, they might bouldly take it. As touching one only God, the discourse of
him had very well pleased them: but they would by no means change their
religion, under which they had for so long time lived so happily: and that they
were not accustomed to take any counsel, but of their friends and
acquaintance. As concerning their menaces, it was a sign of want of judgment,
to threaten those, whose nature, condition, power and means was to them
unknown. And therefore they should with all speed hasten to avoid their
dominions, for so much as they were wont to admit or take in good part the
kindenesses and remonstrances of armed people, namely of strangers, otherwise
they would deal with them, as they had done with such others, showing them the
heads of certain men sticking upon stakes about their City, which had lately
been executed. Lo here an example of the stammering of this infancy.

But so it is, neither in this, nor in infinite other places, where the
Spaniards found not the merchandise they sought for, neither made stay or
attempted any violence, whatsoever other commodity the place yielded: witness
my Canibales. Of two the most mighty and glorious Monarkes of that world, and
peradventure of all our Western parts, Kings over so many Kings: the last
they deposed and overcame: He of Peru, having by them been taken in a battle,
and set at so excessive a ransom, that it exceeds all belief, and that
truly paid: and by his conversation having given them apparent signs of a
free, liberal, undaunted and constant courage, and declared to be of a pure,
noble, and well composed understanding; a humor possessed the conquerors,
after they had most insolently exacted from him a Million, three hundred five
and twenty thousand, and five hundred waights of gold; besides the silver and
other precious things, which amounted to no less a sum (so that their horses
were all shood of massive gold) to discover what disloyalty or treachery
soever it might cost them) what the remainder of this kings treasure might be,
and without controlment enjoy what ever he might have hidden or concealed from
them. Which to compass, they forged a false accusation and proof against him;
That he practiced to raise his provinces, and intended to induce his subjects
to some insurrection, so to procure his liberty. Whereupon, by the very
judgment of those who had complotted this forgery and treason against him, he
was condemned to be publicly hanged and strangled: having first made him to
redeem the torment of being burned alive, by the baptism which at the instant
of his execution in charity they bestowed upon him. A horrible and the like
never heard of accident: which nevertheless he vndismayedly endured with an
unmoved manner, and truly-royall gravity, without ever contradicting himself
either in countenance or speech. And then, somewhat to mittigate and circumvent
those silly vnsuspecting people amazed and astonished at so strange a
spectacle, they counterfetted a great mourning and lamentation for his death
and appointed his funerals to be solemnly and sumptuously celebrated.

The other King of Mexico, having a long time manfully defended his besieged
City, and in that tedious siege, showed what ever pinching-sufferance and
resolute-perseverance can effect, if ever any courageous Prince or warre-like
people showed the same; and his disastrous success having delivered him alive
into his enemies hands, upon conditions to be used as beseemed a King: who
during the time of his imprisoment, did never make the least show of any thing
unworthy that glorious title. After which victory, the Spaniards not finding
that quantity of gold, they had promised themselves, when they had ransacked
and ranged all corners, they by means of the crue^lest tortures and horriblest
torments they could possibly devise, began to wrest and draw some more from
such prisoners as they had in keeping. But unable to profit any thing that
way, finding stronger hearts then their torments, they in the end fell to such
moody outrages, that contrary to all law of nations, and against their solemn
vows and promises, they condemned the King himself and one of the chiefest
Princes of his Court, to the Rack, one in presence of another: The Prince,
environed round with hot burning coals, being overcome with the exceeding
torment, at last in most pittious sort turning his dreary eyes toward his
Master, as if he asked mercy of him for that he could endure no longer* The
king fixing rigorously and fiercely his looks upon him, seeming to vpbraide
him with his remissness and pusilanimity, with a stern and settled voice
uttered these few words unto him; What? supposest thou I am in a cold bath?
am I at more ease then thou art? Where at the silly wretch immediately fainted
under the torture, and yielded up the ghost. The king half roasted, was carried
away: Not so much for pity (for what ruth could ever enter so barbarous
minds, who upon the surmised information of some odd piece or vessel of
gold, they intended to get, would broyle a man before their eyes, and not a
man only, but a king, so great in fortune and so renouned in desert?) but
for so much as his unmatched constancy did more and more make their inhumane
cruelty ashamed: They afterward hanged him, because he had courageously
attempted by arms to deliver himself out of so long captivity and miserable
subjection; where he end ed his wretched life, worthy an high minded and never
danted Prince. At another time, in one same fire, they caused to be burned all
alive four hundred common men, and three score principal Lords of a
province, whom by the fortune of war they had taken prisoners. These
narrations we have out of their own books: for they do not only auouche,
but vauntingly publish them. May it be, they do it for a testimony of their
justice or zeal toward their religion? verily they are ways ouerdifferent and
enemies to so sacred an end. Had they proposed unto themselves to enlarge and
propagate our religion, they would have considered, that it is not amplified by
possession of lands, but of men: and would have been satisfied with such
slaughters, as the necessity of war brings, without indifferently adding
thereunto so bloody a butchery, as upon savage beasts; and so universal as
fire or sword could ever attain unto; having purposely preserved no more then
so many miserable bond slaves, as they deemed might suffice for the digging,
working and service of their mines: So that diverse of their chieftaines have
been executed to death, even in the places they had conquered, by the
appointment of the Kings of Castile, justly offended at the seld-seene horror
of their barbarous demeanours, and well nigh all disesteemed, contemned and
hated. God has meritoriously permitted, that many of their great pillages, and
ill gotten goods, have either been swallowed up by the revenging Seas in
transporting them, or consumed by the intestine wars and civil broils,
wherewith themselves have devoured one another; and the greatest part of them
have been ouer-whelmed and buried in the bowels of the earth, in the very
places they found them, without any fruit of their victory. Touching the
objection which some make, that the receipte, namely in the hands of so
thrifty, wary and wise a Prince, does so little answer the fore-conceaved hope,
which was given unto his predecessors and the said former abundance of riches,
they met withal at the first discovery of this newfound world, (for
although they bring home great quantitye of gold and silver, we perceive the
same to be nothing, in respect of what might be expected thence) it may be
answered, that the use of money was there altogether unknown; and consequently,
that all their gold was gathered together, serving to no other purpose, then
for show, state and ornament, as a mooveable reserved from father to son by
many puissant Kings, who exhausted all their mines; to collect so huge a heap
of vessels and statues for the ornament of their Temples, and embellishing of
their Palaces: whereas all our gold employed in commerce and traffic
between man and man. We mince and alter it into a thousand forms: we spend,
we scatter and disperce the same to several uses. Suppose our Kings should
thus gather and heap up all the gold they might for many ages hoarde up
together, and keep it close and untouched. Those of the kingdom of Mexico
were somewhat more encivilized, and better artistes, then other nations of that
world. And as we do, so judged they, that this Universe was near his end:
and took the desolation we brought amongst them as an infallible sign of it.
They believed the state of the world, to be divided into five ages, and in
the life of five succeeding Suns, whereof four had already ended their
course or time; and the same which now shined upon them, was the fifth and
last. The first perished together with all other creatures, by an universal
inundation of waters. The second by the fall of the heavens upon us which
stifled and overwhelmed every living thing: in which age they affirm the
Giants to have been, and showed the Spaniards certain bones of them,
according to whose proportion the stature of men came to be of the height of
twenty handfuls. The third, was consumed by a violent fire, which burned and
destroyed all. The fourth by a whirling emotion of the air and winds, which
with the violent fury of it self, removed and overthrew diverse high
mountains: saying, that men dyed not of it, but were transformed into Munkeis.
( Oh what impressions does not the weakness of man's belief admit?) After the
consummation of this fourth Sun, the world continued five and twenty years
in perpetual darkness: in the fifteenth of which one man and one woman were
created, who renewed the race of mankind. Ten years after, upon a certain
day, the Sun appeared as newly created: from which day begins ever since
the calculation of their years. On the third day of whose creation, died their
ancient Gods, their new ones have day by day been borne since. In what manner
this last Sun shall perish, my aucthor could not learn of them. But their
number of this fourth change, does iumpe and meet with that great conjunction
of the Stars, which eight hundred and odd years since, according to the
Astrologians supposition, produced diverse great alterations and strange
novelties in the world. Concerning the proud pomp and glorious magnificence,
by occasion of which I am fallen into this discourse, nor Greece, nor Rome, nor
Aegipt, can (be it in profit, or difficulty or nobility) equal or compare
sundry and diverse of their works. The cawcy or highway which is yet to be
seen in Peru, errected by the Kings of that country, stretching from the
city of Quito, unto that of Cusco (containing three hundred leagues in length)
straight, even, and fine, and twenty paces in breadth, curiously paved, raised
on both sides with goodly, high masonrie-walles, all along which, on the inner
side there are two continual running streams, pleasantly beset with beauteous
trees, which they call Moly. In framing of which, where they met any
mountains or rocks, they have cut, raised and leuelled them, and filled all
hollow places with lime and stone. At the end of every days journey, as
stations, there are built stately great palaces, plentiously stored with all
manner of good victuals, apparel and arms, as well for daily way-fairing
men, as for such armies that might happen to pass that way. In the estimation
of which work I have especially considered the difficulty, which in that place
is particvlarly to be remembered. For they built with no stones that were less
then ten foot square: They had no other means to carry or transport them, then
by mere strength of arms to draw and dragge the carriage they needed: they
had not so much as the art to make scaffolds; nor knew other devise, then to
raise so much earth or rubish, against their building, according as the work
rises, and afterward to take it a way again. But return we to our coaches.
In stead of them, and of all other carrying beasts they caused themselves to
be carried by men, and upon their shoulders. This last King of Peru, the same
day he was taken, was thus carried upon rafters or beams of massiue Gold,
sitting in a fair chair of state, likewise all of gold, in the middle of his
battle. Look how may of his porters as were slain, to make him fall (for
all their endeavor was to take him alive) so many others, and as it were auye,
took and underwent presently the place of the dead: so that he could never be
brought down or made to fall, what slaughter so ever was made of those kind of
people, until such time as a horseman furiously ran to take him by some
part of his body, and so pulled him to the ground.

The seventh Chapter.
Of the incommoditie of greatness.

SInce we cannot attain unto it, let us revenge our selves with railing
against it: yet is is not absolute railing, to find fault with any thing:
There are defects found in all things, how fair soever in show, and desirable
they be. It has generally this evident advantage, that when ever it pleases
it will decline, and has well-nigh the choice of one and other condition. For
a man does not fall from all heights; diverse there are, whence a man may
descend without falling. Verily, me seems, that we value it at too high a
rate: and prize over-deare the resolution of those, whom we have either seen
or heard, to have contemned, or of their own motion rejected the same. Her
essence is not so evidently commodious, but a man may refuse it without wonder.
Indeed I find the labor very hard in suffering of evils; but in the
contentment of a mean measure of fortune, and shunning of greatness, therein
I see no great difficulty. In my conceit, it is a virtue, whereunto my self,
who am but a simple n^nny, might easily attain, and without great contention.
What shall they do, who would also bring into consideration, the glory, which
accompanies this refusal, wherein may fall more ambition, then even in the
desire and absolute enjoying of greatness? For so much as ambition is never
better directed according to it self, then by a straying and unfrequented
path. I sharpen my courage toward patience, and weaken the same against desire.
I have as much to wish for as another, and leave my wishes as much liberty and
indiscretion: but yet, it never came into my mind, to wish for Empire, for
royalty or eminency of high and commanding fortunes. I aim not that way: I
love my self too well. When I think to grow, it is but meanly; with a forced
and coward advancement; fit for me: yea in resolution, in wisdom, in health,
in beauty and also in riches. But this credit, this aspiring reputation, this
overswaying authority, suppresseth my imagination. And clean opposite to some
other, I should peradventure love my self better, to be the second or third
man in Perigot, then the first in Paris: At least, without faining, I had
rather be the third man in Paris, then the first in charge. I will neither
contend with an Usher of a door, as a silly unknown man; nor with gaping and
adoration make a Lane through the throng as I pass. I am enured to a mean
calling; mediocrity best fitteth me, as well by my fortune, as by mine own
humor. And have showed by the conduct of my life and course of my enterprises,
that I have rather sought to avoid, then otherwise to embrace beyond the degree
of fortune that at my birth it pleased God to call me unto. Each natural
constitution, is equally just and easy. My mind is so dull and slow, that I
measure not good fortune according to her height, but rather according to her
facility. And if my heart be not great enough, it is ratably free and open, and
who bids me, bouldly to publish my weakness. Should any will me, on the one
part, to confer and consider the life of L. Thorius Balbus, a worthy gallant
man, wise, fair, goodly, healthie, of good understanding, richly-plentious in
all manner of commodities and pleasures, leading a quiet easefull life,
altogether his own, with a mind armed, and well prepared against death,
superstition, griefs, cares and other encombrances of humane necessity; dying
in his old age, in an honorable battle, with his weapons in his hand, for
the defense of his country; and on the other side the life of M. Rugulus, so
high and great, as all men know, together with his admirable and glorious end:
the one unmentioned and without dignity, the other exemplare and wonderful
renouned: truly I would say what Cicero says of it, had I the gift of
well-speaking as he had. But if I were to suit them unto mine, I would also
say, that the former is as much agreeing to my quality, and to the desire I
endeavor to conform my quality unto, as the second is far beyond it. That to
this I cannot attain but by veneration; and to the other I would willingly
attain by custom. But return we to our temporal greatness, whence we have
digressed. I am distasted of all mastry, both active and passive. Otanes one of
the seven that by right might challenge the crown, or pretend the kingdom of
Persia, resolved upon such a resolution as I should easily have done the like:
which was, that he utterly renounced all manner of claim he might in any sort
pretend unto that crown, to his fellow competitores, were it either by
election or chance: always provided that both himself and all his, might live
in that Empire, free from all subjections, and exempted from all manner of
commandment, except that of the ancient laws: and might both challenge all
liberty, and enjoy all immunities, that should not prejudice them: being as
impacient to command, as to becommanded. The sharpest and most aificile
profession of the world, is (in mine opinion) worthily to act and play the
King. I excuse more of their faults, then commonly other men do: and that in
consideration of the downe-bearing weight of their immense charge, which much
astonisheth me: It is a very hard task to keep a aue measure, in so
unmeasurable a power. Yet is it, that even with those, that are of a less
excellent nature, it is a singular incitation to virtue, to be seated in such a
place, where you shall do no manner of good, that is not registered and
recorded: And where the least well-dooing, extends to so many persons: And
where your sufficiency (as that of Preachers) is principally directed to the
people; a weak and parciall judge, easily to be beguiled, and easy to be
pleased There are but few things, of which we may give a sincere judgment: for
there be very few, wherein in some sort or other, we are not particularly
interessed. Superiority and inferioritie, maistrie and subjection, are jointly
tied unto a natural kind of envy and contestation; they must perpetually
enter-spoile one another. I believe neither the one nor the other, concerning
her companions rights: let us suffer reason to speak of it, which is
inflexible and impassible, when or how we shall make an end. I was not long
since reading of two Scottish books striving upon this subject. The popular
makes the King to be of worse condition then a Carter: and he that extolleth
Monarchy, places him both in power and sovereignty, many steps above the
Gods. Now the incommoditie of greatness, which here I have undertaken to note
and speak of, (upon some occasion lately befalne me) is this. There is
peradventure nothing more pleasing to the commerce of men, then the Essays,
which we through jealousy of honor or valor, make one against another, be
it in the exercise of the body or of the mind: wherein sovereign greatness,
has no true or essential part. Verily, it has often seemed unto me, that
through over much respect, Princes are therein used disdainefully and treated
iniurioushe: For, the thing whereat (in my youth) I was infinitely offended,
was, that those which were trained and schooled with me, should for bear to
do it in good earnest, because they found me unworthy to be withstood or to
resist their endeavors. It is that we daily see to happen unto them; every man
finding himself unworthy to force himself against them. If one perceive them
never so little affected to have the victory, there is none but will strive to
yield it them, and that will not rather wrong his glory, then offend theirs:
No man imployeth more diligence then needs he must to serve their honor.
What share have Princes in the throng, where all are for them? Me thinks I
see those Paladines of former ages, presenting themselves in ioustes, tiltings
and combats, with bodies and arms enchanted. Brisson running against
Alexander, counterfetted his course: Alexander chid him for it: but he should
have caused him to be whipped. For this consideration, was Carneades wont to
say, that Prince children learned nothing aright but to manage and ride
horses; for so much as in all other exercises, every manyeeldeth, and gives
them the victory: but a horse who is neither a flatterer nor a Courtier, will
as soon throw the child of a king as the son of a base porter. Homer has
been forced to consent that Venus (so sweet a saint and delicate a Goddess)
should be hurt at the siege of Troy, thereby to ascribe courage and hardiness
unto her qualities never seen in those that are exempted from danger. The Gods
themselves are fained to be angry, to fear, to be jealous, to grieve, to
show passion, and be subject to mortal sense, thereby to honor them with the
virtues which Poets devise and Philosophers invent amongst us: Nay, they are
supposed to run away* and to have a feeling of all our imperfections. Who
does not participate both hazard and difficulties, cannot justly pretend
interest in the honor, or challenge share in the pleasure, that follows
dangerous actions or hazardous attemps. It is pity a man should be so
powerful, that all things must yield and give place unto him. Such as are in
so high eminency of greatness, their fortune reiects society and conversation
too far from them; she places them in over remote and uncouth places. This
easefull life and plausible facility to bring all under, and subject men's
minds, is an enemy to all manner of pleasure. It is a kind of sliding* and
not a going* It is to sleep, and not to live. Conceive man accompanied with
omnipotency, you ouerwhelme him: he must in begging manner crave some
empeachment and resistance of you. His being and his good, is in want and
indigence. Their good qualities are dead and lost: for, they are not heard but
by comparison, and they are excluded: they have little knowledge of true
praise, being beaten with so continual and uniform an approbation. Have they
to do with the simplest of their subjects? thy have no mean to take advantage
of him, if he but say; It is because he is my King, he supposes to have
sufficiently expressed, and you must understand, that in so saying, he has
lent a helping hand to overthrow himself. This quality suppresseth and
consumes all other true and essential qualities: they are even drowned in the
Royalty; which gives them no leave, to make the offices of their charge to
prevail, except in such actions as directly concern and stead the same. To be
a King, is a matter of that consequence, that only by it he is so. That
strange glimmering and eye-dazeling light, which round about enuironeth,
overcasteth and hides him from us: our weak sight is thereby bleared and
dissipated, as being filled and obscured by that greater and further-spredding
brightness. The Senate allotted the honor and prise of eloquence unto Tiberius;
he refused it, supposing that if it had been true, he could not revenge
himself of so limited and partial judgment. As we yield Princes all
advantages of honor, so we aucthorize their defects and sooth-vp their vices:
not only by approbation, but also by imitation. All Alexanders followers bare
their heads sideling, as he did. And such as flattered Dionysius, in his own
presence did run and iustle one another, and either stumbled at, or over-threw
what ever stood before their feet, to infer; that they were as short-sighted
or spur-blinde, as he was. Natural imperfections have sometimes served for
commendation and favor. Nay I have seen deafnesle affected. And because the
master hated his wife, Plutarch has seen courtiers to sue a divorce of
theirs, whom they loved very well. And which is more paillardise and all manner
of dissolution has thereby been held in credit; as also disloyalty,
blasphemy, cruelty, heresy, superstition, irreligion, wantonness and worse,
if worse may be. Yea by an example more dangerous, then that of Mithridates his
flatterers, who for so much as their master pretended to have skill in physic,
and aspired to the honor of a good Physician, came to him to have their
members incized and cauterized. For, these others suffer to have their souls
cauterized; a much more precious and nobler part then the body. But to end
where I began: Adrian the Emperor debating with Fauorinus the Philosopher about
the interpretation of some word; Fauorinus did soon yield the victory unto
him, his friends finding fault with him for it; you but jest, my masters
(quoth he) would you not have him to be much wiser then I, who has the
absolute command over thirty legions? Augustus writ some verses against Asinius
Pollio, which Pollio hearing, he said, I will hold my peace; for, it is no
wisdom to contend in writing with him, who may proscribe. And they had
reason: For, Dionysius, because he could not equal Philoxenus in Poesy, nor
match Plato in discourse, condemned the one to the stone-quaries, and sent the
other to be sold as a slave in the I Will of Aegina.

The eight Chapter.
Of the Art of conferring.

IT is a custom of our law, to condemn some, for the warning of others. To
condemn them because they have misdone, were folly, as says Plato. For what
is once done can never be undone: but they are condemned to the end that they
should not offend again, or that others may avoid the example of their
offense. He who is hanged is not corrected, but others by him. Even so do I.
My errors are sometimes natural, incorrigible and remediless. But whereas
honest men profit the Commonwealth in causing themselves to be imitated. I
shall happily benefit the same, in making my self to be evitated.

Nonne vides Albivt male viuat filius, utque Hor Ser. l. 1. Sect. 4. 109.

Barrus inops? magnum documentum, ne patriam rem
Perdere quis velit.
Do you not see, how that man's son lives badly,
That man's a beggar by his spending madly?
A lesson great, that none take joy: His patrimony to destroy.
By publishing and accusing my imperfections, some man may peradventure learn
to fear them. The parts I most esteem in my self, reap more honor by
accusing, then by commending my self. And that is the cause I more often fall
into them again, and rest upon them. But when all the cards be told, a man
never speaks of himself, without loss. A man's own condemnations are ever
increased: praises ever decreased. There may be some of my complexion, who am
better instructed by contrariety then by similitude; and more by escaping then
by following. Cato senior had a special regard to this kind of discipline,
when he said, that wisemen have more to learn of fools, then fools of
wisemen. And that ancient player on the Lyra, whom Pausantas reports, to have
been accustomed to compel his scholars sometimes to go hear a bad Player,
who dwelt right over against him; where they might learn to hate his discordes
and false measures. The horror of cruelty draws me nearer unto clemency, then
any pattern of clemency can possibly win me. A cunning rider or skillful
horseman does not so properly teach me, to sit well on horseback, as does
one of our Lawyers, or a Venetian by seeing him ride. And an ill manner of
speech does better reform mine, then any well-polished form of speaking. The
sottish countenance of another, does daily advertise and forewarne me. That
which pricketh, touches and rouzeth better, then that which delights. These
times are fit to reform us backward, more by dissenting, then by consenting;
more by difference then by accord. Being but little instructed by good
examples, I make use of bad: the lesson of which is ordinary. I have
endeavored, nay I have labored to yield my self as pleasing and affable, as I
saw others peevish and froward: as constant, as I saw others variable; as
gentle and mild, as I perceived others intractable and wild: and as good and
honest, as I discerned others wicked and dishonest. But I proposed certain
invincible measures unto my self. The most fruitful and natural exercise of
our spirit, is, in my selfe-plea^ing conceit, conference. The use whereof, I
find to be more delightsome, then any other action of our life: And that is
the reason, why, if I were now forced to choose, (being in the mind I now am
in) I would rather yield to loose my sight, then fogoe my hearing or my speech.
The Athenians and also the Romans, did ever hold this exercise in high honor
and reputation, namely in their Academies. And at this day, the Italians do
yet keep a kind of form and trace of it, to their great profit, as may
apparently be discerned by comparing their wits unto ours. The study and
plodding on books, is a languishing and weak kind of motion, and which
heateth or earnesteth nothing; whereas conference does both learn, teach and
exercise at once. If I confer^e with a stubborn wit, and encounter a sturdy
wrestler, he touches me to the quick, hits me on the flanks, and pricks me
both on the left and right side: his imaginations vanquish and confound mine.
Jealousy, glory and contention, drive, cast and raise me above my self. And an
unison or consent, is a quality altogether tedious and wearisome in
conference. But as our mind is fortified by the communication of regular and
vigorous spirits; it cannot well be expressed, how much it loses and is
bastardized, by the continual commerce and frequentation, we have with base,
weak and dull spirits. No contagion spreds it self further then that. I know
by long experience what an ell of it is worth. I love to contest and discourse,
but not with many, and only for my self. For, to serve as a spectacle unto
great men, and by way of contention* for one to make a glorious show of his
ready wit and running tongue; I deem it a profession far unfitting a man of
honor. Sottishnes is an ill quality, but not to be able to endure it, and to
fret and vex at it, as it happens to me, is another kind of imperfection,
which in opportunity is not much behind sottishnes: and that is it I will now
accuse in my self: I do with great liberty and facility, enter into
conference and disputation: for so much as opinion finds but a hard soil to
enter and take any deep root in me. No propositions amaze me, no conceit
wounds me, what contrariety soever they have to mine. There is no fantazie
so frivolous or humor so extravagant, that in mine opinion is not sortable to
the production, of humane wit. We others, who debar our judgment of the
right to make conclusions, regard but negligently the diverse opinions: and if
we lend it not our judgment, we easily afford it our ears. Where one scale
of the balance is altogether empty. I let the other waver too and fro, under
an old wives dreams. And me seems, I may well be excused, if I rather accept
an odd number, then an even: Thursday in respect of Friday, if I had rather
make a twelfth or fourteenth at a table, then a thirteenth: if when I am
traveling I would rather see a Hare coasting, then crossing my way: and rather
reach my left, then my right foot, to be shod. All such fond conceits, now in
credit about us, deserve at feast to be listened unto. As for me, they only
bear away inanity, and surely they do so. Vulgar and casual opinions are yet
of some weight, which in nature are something else then nothing. And who wadeth
not so far into them, to avoid the vice of superstition, falls happily into
the blame of wilfulness. The contradictions then of judgments, do neither
offend nor moove, but awaken and exercise me. We commonly shun correction
whereas we should rather seek and present our selves unto it, chiefly when it
comes by the way of conference, and not of regency. At every opposition, we
consider not whether it be just; but be it right or wrong, how we may avoid
it: In steed of reaching our arms, we stretch forth our claws unto it. I
should endure to be rudely handled and checked by my friends, though they
should call me fool, coxcombe or say I raved. I love a man that does stoutly
express himself, amongst honest and worthy men and whose words answer his
thoughts. We should fortify and harden our hearing, against the tenderness of
the cerimonious sound of words. I love a friendly society and a virile and
constant familiarity: An amity, which in the earnestness and vigor of it is
commerce, flattereth it self: as love in bitings and bloody scratchings. It is
not sufficiently generous or vigorous, except it be contentious and quarelous:
If she be civilized and a skillful artiste: if it fear a shocke or free
encounter, and have her starting hoales or forced by-ways. Neque enim
disputari sine reprehersione potest. Disputation cannot be held without
reprehension. When I am impugned or contraried, then is mine attention and not
mine anger, stirred up; I advance my self toward him, that does gainesay and
instruct me. The cause of truth, ought to be the common cause, both to one and
other: What can he answer? The passion of choler has already wounded his
judgment: trouble, before reason has seized upon it. It were both profitable
and necessary, that the determining of our disputations, might be decided by
way of wagers; and that there were a material mark of our losses: that we
might better remember and make more accoumpt of it: and that my boy might say
unto me: Sir, if you call to mind; your contestation, your ignorance and your
selfe-wilfulnesse, at several times, cost you a hundred crowns the last
year: I feast, I cherrish and I embrace truth, where and in whom soever I
find it, and willingly and merrily yield my self unto her; as soon as I see
but her approach, though it be a farre-off, I lay down my weapons and yield
my self vanquished. And always provided, one persist not or proceed therein,
with an over imperious stiffnesse or commanding surlinesse; I am well pleased
to be reprooved. And I often accomodate my self unto my accusers, more by
reason of civilitie, then by occasion of amendment: loving by the facility of
yielding, to gratify and foster their liberty, to teach or advertise me. It
is notwithstanding no easy matter to draw men of my times unto it. They have
not the courage to correct, because they want the heart to endure correction:
And ever speak with dissimulation in presence one of another. I take so great
a pleasure to be judged and known, that it is indifferent to me, in whether
of the two forms I be so. Mine own imagination does so often contradict and
condemn it self, that if another do it, all is one unto me; especially
seeing, I give his reprehension no other authority then I list. But I shall
break a straw or fall at ods with him, that keeps himself so alost; as I
know some, that will fret and chafe if their opinions be not believed, and who
take it as an injury, yea and fall out with their best friends, if they will
not follow it. And that Socrates ever smiling, made a collection of such
contradictions as were opposed to his discourse, one might say, his force was
cause of it; and that the advantage being assuredly to fall on his side, he
took them as a subject of a new victory. Nevertheless we see on the contrary,
that nothing does so nicely yield our sense unto it as the opinion of
pre-eminence and disdain of the adversary. And that by reason, it rather
befits the weakest to accept of oppositions in good part, which restore and
repair him. Verily I seek more the conversation of such as curb me, then of
those that fear me. It is an unsavory and hurtful pleasure, to have to do
with men, who admire and give us place. Antisthenes commanded his children,
never to be boholding unto, or thank any that should command them. I feel my
self more lusty and cranke for the victory I gain over my self, when in the
heat or fury of the combat, I perceive to bend and fall under the power of my
adversaries reason, then I am pleased with the victory, I obtain of him by his
weakness. To conclude, I receave all blows and allow all attaints given
directly, how weak soever: but am very impacient at such as are stricken at
randan and without order, I care but little for the matter, and with me
opinions are all one, and the victory of the subject in a manner in different.
I shall quietly contest a whole day, if the conduct of the controvesie be
followed with order and decorum. It is not force nor subtlety, that I so much
require, as form and order. The form and order, daily seen in the
altercations of Shepherds, or contentions of shop-prentise-boyes; but never
amongst us; If they part or give one another over, it is with incivility: and
so do we. But their wrangling, their brawling and impacience, cannot make them
to forgo or forget their theme.

Their discourse holds on his course. If they prevent one another, if they
stay not for, at least they understand one another. A man does ever answer
sufficiently well for me, if he answer what I say. But when the disputation
is confounded and orderlesse, I quit the matter, and betake me to the form,
with spite and indiscretion: and embrace a kind of debating, teasty,
headlong, malicious and imperious, whereat I afterward blush. It is impossible
to treat quietly and dispute orderly with a fool. My judgment is not only
corrupted under the hand of so imperious a master, but my conscience also. Our
disputations ought to be forbidden and punished, as other verbal crimes. What
vice raise they not, and heap up together, being ever swayed and commanded
by choler? First we enter into enmity with the reasons, and then with the
men. We learn not to dispute, except it be to contradict: and every man
contradicting and being contradicted, it commonly follows, that the fruit of
disputing, is to loose and to disanull the truth. So Plato in his common
wealth, forbids foolish, unapt and base-minded spirits, to undertake that
exercise. To what purpose go you about to quest or enquire that which is with
him, who has neither good pace nor proceeding of worth? No man wrongs the
subject, when he quits the same, for want of means to treat or manage it. I
mean not a scholasticall and artist mean, but intend a natural mean, and of
a sound understanding. What will the end be? one goes Eastward, and another
Westward: They loose the principal, and stray it in the throng of incidents.
At the end of an hours wrangling, they wot not what they seek for: one is
high, another low, and another wide. Some take hold of a word, some of a
similitude. Some forget what was objected against them, so much are they
engaged in the pursuit and think to follow themselves, and not you. Some
finding themselves weake-backt, fear all, refuse all, and at the very entrance
mingle the subject and confound the purpose: or in the heat of the
disputation, mutine to hold their peace altogether: through a spightfull
ignorance, affecting a proud kind of contempt, or a foolish modesty auoydiug
of contention. Provided that one strike and hit, he cares not how open he
lie. Another compteth his words, and wayeth them for reasons; Another
employeth no thing but the advantage of his voice and wind. Here one
concludes against himself; here another wearieth you with idle prefaces, and
frivolous digressions. Another armeth himself before hand with injuries, and
seeks after a Dutch quarrel, to rid himself of the society, and shake off
the conference of a spirit, that presses and over bears his. This last has
no insight at all in reason, but still beleagreth you with the dialecticall or
logical close of his clavs^, and ties you to the rule of his art or form of
his skill. Now who does not enter into distrust of sciences, and is not in
doubt, whether in any necessity of life he may reap solid fruit of them; if
he consider the use we have of them? Nihil sanantibus literis. Since learning
does not cure. Who has learnt any wit or understanding in Logique? Where are
her fair promises? Nec admelius vi^endum nec, ad commodius disserendum. Nether
to live better or to dispute fitter. Shall a man hear more brabling or
confusion in the tittle-tatle of fish wi^es or scoulding sluts, then in the
public disputations of men of this profession? I had rather my child should
learn to speak in a Tavern, then in the schools of well-speaking Art. Take
you a master of arts, and confer with him, why does he not make us
perceive his artificial exceliencie, and by the admiration of his
reasons-constancie, or with the beauty of his quaint order, and grace of his
method, ravish silly women, and bleare ignorant men as we are? Why does he
not sway, wind, and persuade us as he list? Why should one so advantageous in
matter and conduct, entermixe injuries, indiscretion and chollericke rage with
his fence? Let him pull-of his twofaced hoode, his gown and his latin, let
him not fill our ears with merely believed Aristotle, you will discover and
take him for one of us, and worse if worse my be. Me thinks this implication
and entangling of speech, wherewith they do so much importune us, may fitly
be compared unto juglers play of fast and loose: their nimblenesse combats
and forces our senses, but it nothing shakes our belief: Take away their
juggling, what they do is but base, common and slight. Though they be more
witty and nimble spirited, they are not the less foolish, simple and unapt. I
love wit, and honor wisdom, as much as them that have it. And being rightly
used, it is the noblest, the most forcible, yea and richest purchase men can
make. But in such (of which kind the number is infinite) that upon it
establish their fundamental sufficiency and worth: that from their wit refer
themselves to their memory, sub aliena vmbra latentes: reposing them under
another man's protection; and can do nothing but by the book (if I may be bold
to say so) I hate the same, a little more then sottishnes. In my country, and
in my days, learning and bookishnes, does much mend purses, but minds nothing
at all. If it chance to find them empty light and dry, it fills, it
over-burthens and swells them: a raw and indigested mass: if thin, it does
easily purify, clarify, extenuate and subtilize them, even unto exinanition
or evacuation. It is a thing of aquality very near indifferent: a most
profitable accessory or ornament unto a well borne mind, but pernicious and
hurtfully domagable unto any other. Or rather a thing of most precious use,
that will not basely be gotten, nor vilie possessed. In some hands a royal
scepter, in other some a rude mattocke. But let us proceed. What greater or
more glorious victory can you expect, then teach your enemy, that he cannot
withstand you? When you gain the advantage of your proposition, it is Truth
that wins: when you get the advantage of the order and conduct, it is you
that win. I am of opinion, that both in Plato and in Xenophon, Socrates
disputes more in favor of the disputers, then in grace of the disputation:
and more to instruct Euthydemus and Protagoras with the knowledge of their
impertinency, then with the impertinency of their art. He takes hold of the
first matter, as he who has a more profitable end, then to clear it; that is,
to clear the spirits he undertakes to manage and to exercise. Agitation,
stirring and hunting is properly belonging to our subject or drift; we are not
excusable to conduct the same ill and impertinently, but to miss the game, and
fail in taking, that is another matter. For we are borne to quest and seek
after truth; to possess it belongs to a greater power. It is not (as
Democritus said) hidden in the deepes of abisse: but rather elevated in
infinite height of divine knowledge. The world is but a School of inquisition.
The matter is not who shall put in, but who shall run the fairest courses. As
well may he play the fool that speaks truly, as he that speaks falsely:
for we are upon the manner, and not upon the matter of speaking. My humor
is, to have as great aregarde to the form, as to the substance; as much
respect to the Advocate, as to the cause; as Alcibiades appointed we should
do. And I day lie ammuse my self to read in authors, without care of their
learning: therein seeking their manner, not their subject. Even as I pursue the
communication of some famous wit, not that he should teach me, but that I may
know him; and knowing him (if he deserve it) I may imitate him. Every one may
speak truly, but to speak orderly, methodically, wisely and sufficiently,
few can do it. So falsehood proceeding of ignorance does not offend me;
ineptnesse and trifling does. I have broken-off diverse bargains, that would
have been very commodious unto me, by the impertinencie of their contestation,
with whom I did bargain. I am not moved once a year, with the faults or
ouersights of those, over whom I have power: but touching the point of the
sottishinesse and foolishness of their allegations, excuses, and defenses,
rude and brutish, we are every day ready to go by the ears. They neither
understand what is said nor wherefore, and even so they answer; a thing able to
make one despair. I feel not my head to shock hard but by being hit with
another. And I rather enter into composition with my peoples vices, then with
their rashness, importunity and foolishness. Let them do less, provided
they be capable to do. You live in hope to inflame their will: But of a block
there is nothing to be hoped for, nor any thing of worth to be enjoyed. Now,
what if I take things otherwise then they are? So it may be: And therefore I
accuse my impatience. And first I hold, that it is equally vicious in him, who
is in the right, as in him, that is in the wrong: For, it is ever a kind of
tyrannical sharpness, not to be able to endure a form different from his:
and verily, since there is not a greater fondness, a more constant
gullishnesse, or more heteroclite insipidity then for one to move or vex
himself at the fondness, at the gullishnesse, or insipidity of the world: For
it principally formalizeth and moves us against our selves: and that
Philosopher of former ages should never have wanted occasion to weep, so long
as he had considered himself. Miso, one of the seven sages (a man of a
Timonian disposition and Democraticall humor) being demanded, where-at he
laughed alone; he answered, because I laugh alone; How many follies do I
speak and answer every day, according to my self; and then how much more
frequent according to others? And if I bite mine own lips at them, what ought
others to do? In fine, we must live with the quick, and let the water run
under the bridge, without any care, or at least without alteration to us. In
good sooth, why meet we sometimes with crooked, deformed, and in body misshapen
men, without falling into rage and discontent, and cannot endure to light-vpon
a froward, skittish, and ill-ranged spirit, without falling into anger and
vexation? This vicious austeritie is rather in the Judge, then in the fault.
Let us ever have that saying of Plato in our mouths: What I find unwholesome,
is it not to be unhealthy my self? Am not I in fault my self? May not mine
own advertisement be retorted against my self? Oh wise and divine restraint,
that curbeth the most universal and common error of men: Not only the
reproaches, we do one to another, but our reasons, our arguments and matters
controversed, are ordinarily retortable unto us: and we pinch our selves up in
our own arms. Whereof antiquity has left me diverse grave examples. It was
ingeniously spoken and fit to the purpose, by him that first devised the same.

Stercus cuique suum been olet. Eras. chil. 3. cent. 4. ad. 2.

Every man's ordure well, To his own sense does smell.
Our eyes see nothing backward. A hundred times a day we mock our selves, upon
our neighbors subject, and detest some defects in others, that are much more
apparent in us; yea and admire them with a strange impudency and vnheedinesse.
Even yesterday, I chanced to see a man of reasonable understanding, who no
less pleasantly then justly flouted at another fond fashion, and yet upon
every silly occasion does nothing but molest all men with the impertinent
bedrowle and register of his pedigrees, genealogies and alliances, more then
half false and wrested in; (for it is the manner of such people, commonly to
undertake such foolish discourses, whose qualities are more doubtful and less
sure) who if he had impartially considered and looked upon himself, should
doubtless have found himself no less intemperate, indiscreet, and tedious,
in publishing and extolling the prerogative of his wives pedigree and descent.
Oh importunate presumption, wherewith the wife sees her self armed by the
hands of her own husband. If he understand Latin, a man should say to him,

Age si h^c non insanit satis sua sponte, instiga. Ter. And. act. 4. sc. 2.

Go too, if of her own accord before,
She were not mad enough, provoke her more.
I say not, that none should accuse, except he be spotless in himself: For
then none might accuse: no not spotless in the same kind of fault. But my
meaning is, that our judgment charging and blaming another, of whom there is
then question, spares us nothing, of an inward and severe jurisdiction. It is
an office of charity, that he who cannot remove a vice from himself, should
nevertheless endeavor to remove it from others, where it may have a less
hurtful and froward seed. Nor do I deem it a fit answer, for him that
warns me of my fault, to say, the same is likewise in him. But what of that?
Well meaning warning is always true and profitable. Had we a good and sound
nose, our own ordure should be more unsavory unto ourselves, forasmuch as it
is our own. And Socrates is of opinion, that he, who should find himself, and
his son, and a stranger guilty of any violence or injury, ought first begin by
himself, and present himself to the sentence and condemnation of the law, and
for his own discharge and acquital implore the assistance of the executioners
hand: secondly for his son, and lastly for the stranger. If this precept take
his tune somewhat too high: it should at least be first presented to the
punishment of ones own conscience. Our senses are our proper and first judges,
who distinguish not things, but by external accidents; and no marvel, if in
all parts of the service belonging to our society, there is so perpetual and
universal commixture of ceremonies and superficial apparances: so that the
best and most effectual part of policies, consists in that. It is man with
whom we have always to do, whose condition is marvellously corporal. Let
those, who in these latter days have so earnestly labored, to frame and
establish unto us, an exercise of religion and service of God, so contemplative
and immateriall, wonder nothing at all, if some be found, who think, it would
have escaped and mouldred away between their fingers, if it had not held and
continued amongst us, as a mark, a title and instrument of division and
faction, more then by it self. As in conference: The gravitie, the gown and
the fortune of him that speaks, does often add and win credit unto vain,
trifling and absurd discourses. It is not to be presumed, that one of these
gowne*Clarkes or quoifed Serjants, so followed, and so redoubted, have not some
sufficiency within him, more then popular: and that a man so sullen so grim
and so disdainful, to whom so many commissions, charges and aucthorities are
given* be not more sufficient and worthy, then another, who saluteth and
vaileth to him so farre-off, and whom no man employeth. Not only the words,
but the powtings of such people, are considered and registered, every one
applying himself to give them some notable and solid interpretation. If they
sloope to common conference, and that a man afford or show them other then
reverence and approbation, they overthrow you with the authority of their
experience: they have read, they have heard, seen and done goodly things, you
are clean overwhelmed with examples. I would feign tell them, that the fruit
of a Chirurgions experience, is not the story of his practices, or the
remembrance that he has cured four who had the plague, and healed as many
that had the Gout, except he know and have the wit, from his use and
experience, to draw a method how to frame his judgments and by his skill and
practice make us perceive, he is become wiser in his art. As in a consort of
instruments, one hears not severally a Lute, a Vyol, a Flute, or a pair of
Virginalles, but a perfect-full harmony: the assembly and fruit of all those
instruments in one. If their travels and charges have amended them, it is in
the production of their understanding to make it appear. It suffices not to
number the experiments; they ought to be well poised and orderly sorted: and to
extract the reasons and conclusions they contain, they should be well
disgested and thoroughly distilled. There were never so many Historians. It is
ever good and profitable to hear them: for out of the magazin of their
memory, they store us with diverse good instructions and commendable documents.
Verily a chief part, for the assistance and directing of our life. But now a
days we seek not after that, but raher whether the Collectors and reporters
of them be praise worthy themselves. I hate all manner of tyranny, both
verbal and effectual. I willingly bandie and oppose my self against these
vain and frivolous circumstances, which by the senses delude our judgment;
and holding my self aloof of from these extraordinary greatnesses, have
found, that for the most part, they are but men as others be:

Rarus enim ferme sensus communis in illa
Fortuna. ^^ven. S^t. 8. 73.

For common sense is seldom found
In fortunes that so much abound.
They are peradventure esteemed and discerned less then they be, for so much as
they undertake more, and so show themselves; they answer not the charge they
have taken. There must necessarily be more vigor and strength in the bearer,
then in the burden. He who is not grown to his full strength, leaves you to
guess, whether he have any left him beyond that, or have been tried to the
utmost of his power. He who sainteth under his burden, bewraieth his measure
and the weakness of his shoulders. That's the reason, why amongst the wiser
sort, there are so many foolish and unapt minds seen, and more then of
others. They might happily have been made good husbandmen, thriving merchants,
and plodding artificers. Their natural vigor was cut out to this proportion.
Learning is a matter of great consequence: they faint under it. To enstall and
distribute, so rich and so powerful a matter, and availefully to employ the
same, their wit has neither sufficient vigor, nor conduct enough to manage
it. It has no prevailing virtue but in a strong nature; and they are very
rare: and such as are but weak (says Socrates) corrupt and spoilingly deface
the dignity of Philosophy, in handling the same. She seems faulty and
unprofitable, being ill placed and unorderly disposed. Lo how they spoil and
entangle themselves.

Humani qualis simulator simius oris,
Quem puer arridens, pretioso stamine serum Claud. ^^trop. 1. 303.

Velavit, nudasque nates ac terga reliquit,
Ludibrium mensis.
Such counterfets as Apes are of man's face,
Whom children sporting at, featly incase
In coastly coats, but leave his backeside bare
For men to laugh at, when they feasting are.
To those likewise, who sway and command us, and have the world in their own
hands, it is not sufficient to have a common understanding, and to be able to
do, what we can effect. They are far beneath us, if they be not much above
us. As they promise more, so owe they more. And therefore silence is in them,
not only a countenance of respect and gravity, but often of thrift and
profit: Megabysus going to visit Apelles in his worke-house, stood still a
good while without speaking one word, and then began to discourse of his
works. Of whom he received this rude and nipping check: So long as thou
heldest thy peace, by reason of thy garish clothes, goodly chains and stately
pomp, thou seemedst to be some worthy gallant: but now thou have spoken, there
is not the simplest boy of my shop, but scorneth and contemns thee. That great
state of his, those rich habilliments, and goodly train, did not permit him to
be ignorant with a popular ignorance and to speak impertinently of painting.
He should have kept mute, and concealed his external and presuming
sufficiency. Unto how many fond and shallow minds, has in my days, a sullen,
cold and silent countenance, served as a title of wisdom and capacity?
Dignities, charges and places, are necessarily given, more by fortune then by
merit: and they are often to blame, that for it lay the blame on Kings.
Contrariwise it is a wonder, that being so untoward, they should therein have
so good luck: Principis est virtus maxima, nosse suos. Chief virtue it is
known, In Kings to know their own. For Nature has not given them so perfect
a sight, that it might extend it self and overlooke so many people, to
discern their pre-excellency; and enter their breasts, where lodges the
knowledge of our will and better worth. It is by conjectures, and as it were
groping they must try us: by our race, alliances, dependences, riches learning,
and the peoples voice: all over-weake arguments. He that could devise a mean,
how men might be judged by law, chosen by reason, and advanced by desert,
should establish a perfect form of a Commonwealth. Yea but he has brought
that great business unto a good pass. It is to say something: but not to say
sufficiently. For, this sentence is justly received, That counsels ought not to
be judged by the events. The Carthaginians were wont to punish the ill counsels
of their Captains, although corrected by some fortunate success. And the
Roman people has often refused triumphs too famous, succesfull and most
profitable victories, for so much as the Generals conduct, answered not his good
fortune. It is commonly perceived by the worlds actions, that fortune, to
teach us, how far her power extends unto all things; and who takes
pleasure to abate our presumption, having not been able to make silly men
wise, she has made them fortunate, in envy of virtue: And commonly gives her
self to favor executions, when as their complot and devise is merely hirs.
Whence we daily see, that the simplest amongst us, compass diverse great and
important affairs, both public and private. And as Sirannez the Persian
Prince, answered those, who seemed to wonder how his negotiations succeeded so
ill, his discourses being so wise: That he was only master of his discourses,
but fortune mistress of his affairs success. These may answer the like; but
with a contrary bias. Most things of the world are made by themselves.

Fata viam inveniunt.
Fates find and know, which way to go. Sirg. Aen. l. 3. 395.

The issue does often aucthorize a simple conduct. Our interposition is in a
manner nothing else but an experience, and more commonly a consideration of use
and example, then of reason. And as one amazed at the greatness of some
business, I have sometimes understood by those who had achieved them, both
their motives and addresses: wherein I have found but vulgar advises: and the
most vulgar and used, are peradventure the surest and most commodious for the
practice, if not for the show. And what if the plainest reasons are the best
seated: the meanest, basest and most beaten, are best applied unto affairs? To
maintain the aucthority of our Kings-counsell, it is not requisite, that
profane persons should be partakers of it, and look further into it, then
from the first bar. To uphold it is reputation, it should be reverenced upon
credit, and at full. My consultation does somewhat roughly hew the matter, and
by it is first show, lightly consider the same: the maine and chief point of
the work, I am wont to resign to heaven.

Permit diuis caetera,
How all the rue shall go, Hor. l. 1. od. 9 9

Give leave to Gods to know.
Good and bad fortune, are in my conceit two sovereign powers It Is folly to
think, that humane wisdom may act the full part of fortune. And vain is his
enterprise, that presumes to embrace both causes and consequences, and lead
the progress of his fact by the hand. And above all, vainest in military
deliberations. There was never more circumspection and militaty wisdom, then
is sometimes seen amongst us: May it be that manfeareth to loose himself by
the way, reserving himself to the catastrophe of that play? I say moreover,
that even our wisdom and consultation for the most part follows the conduct
of hazard. My will and my discourse, is sometimes moved by one air, and
sometimes by another: and there be many of these motions, that are governed
without me. My reason has daily impulsions and casual agitations:

Vertuntur species animorum, and pectoramotus Virg. Geor. l^. ^ 20.

Nunc alios, alios dum nubila ventis agebat.
Concipiunt.
The shows of minds are changed, and breasts conceive
At one time motions, which anon they leave,
And others take again, As winds drive clouds amain.
Let but a man look who are the mightiest in Cities and who thrive best in
their business: he shall commonly find, they are the silliest and poorest in
wit. It has happened to simple women, to weak children, and to mad men, to
command great states, as well as the most sufficient Princes. And the gullish
or shallow-pated (says Thucidides) do more ordinarily come unto them, then
the wisest and subtilest. We ascribe their good fortunes effects, unto their
prudence.

-- vt quisque fortuna vtitur, Pla^c. Pscu. a^^. 5 sc. 4.

Ita praecellit: at que exinde sapere illum omnes dicimus.
As men their fortune use, so they excel,
And so we say, they are wise and do well.
Wherefore I say well, that howsoever, events are but weak testimonies of our
worth and capacity. I was now upon this point, that we need but look upon a
man advanced to dignity; had we but three days before known him to be of
little or no worth at all: an image of greatness, and an Idea of sufficiency,
does insensibly glide and creep into our opinions; and we persuade our
selves, that increasing in state and credit and followers, he is also
increased in merit. We judge of him, not according to his worth; but after the
manner of castingcounters, according to the prerogative of his rank. But let
fortune turn her wheel, let him again decline and come down amongst the
vulgar multitude; every one with admiration enquireth of the cause, and how he
was raised so high. Good Lord, is that he? will some say. What? knew he no
more? had he no other skill when he was so aloft? Are Princes pleased with so
little? Now in good sooth we were in very good hands, will others say. It is a
thing my self have often seen in my days. Yea the very mask of greatness,
or habit of majesty, represented in Tragedies, does in some sort touch and
beguile us. The thing I adore in Kings, is the throng of their adoratores. All
inclination and submission is due unto them, except the minds. My reason is
not framed to bend or stoop; my knees are. Melanthius being demanded, what he
thought of Dionysius his tragedy, answered, I have not seen it, so much was it
over-clouded with language. So should those say, that judge of great men's
discourses: I have not understood his discourse, so was it ouerdarkned with
gravity, with greatness and with majesty. Antisthenes one day persuaded the
Athenians, to command, that their asses should as well be employed about the
manuring of grounds, as were their horses: who answered him, that the Ass was
not borne for such service: that is all one (quoth he) there needs but your
allowance for it: for the most ignorant and incapable men you employ about the
directing of your wars, leave not to become out of hand most worthy, only
because you employ them. Whereupon depends the custom of so many men, who
canonize the king, whom they have made amongst them, and are not contented to
honor him, unless they also adore him. Those of Mexico, after the ceremonies
of his consecration are finished, dare no more look him in the face: but as if
by his royalty, they had deified him, they afterward deem him to be a God:
amongst the oaths, they make him swear to maintain their religion, to keep
their laws, to desend their liberties, to be valiant, just and debonaire; he
is also sworn to make the Sun march in his accustomed light: in time of need
to cause the clouds shower down their waters; to enforce rivers to run in
their right wonted channels; and compel the earth to produce all necessary
things for his people. I differ from this common fashion, and more distrust
sufficiency, when I see it accompanied with the greatness of fortune, and
applanded by popular commendation. We should heedfully mark, of what
consequence it is, for a man to speak in due time, to choose fit opportunity,
to break or change his discourse with a magistrale authority: to defend
himself from others oppositions, by a nod or moving of the head, by a smile,
a shrug or a silence, before an assembly, trembling with reverence and respect.
A man of monstrous fortune, chancing to shoot his boult, and give his opinion
upon a frivolous subject, which but jestingly was tossed too and fro at his
table, began ever thus; he cannot choose but be a liar, or an ignorant ass,
that will say otherwise then, etc. Follow this Philosophical point, out
comes a dagger, and there is some mischief. Lo here another aduertisment;
from whence I reap good use; Which is, that in disputations and conferences,
all good seeming words, ought not presently to be allowed and accepted. Most
men are rich of a strange sufficiency. Some may chance to speak a notable
saying, to give a good answer, to use a witty sentence, and to propound it,
without knowing the force of it. That a man holds not all he borrows, may
peradventure be verified in my self. A man should not always yield, what
truth or goodness soever it seems to contain. A man must either combat the
same in good earnest, or draw-backe, under color of not understanding the
matter: to try on all parts, how it is placed in it is author. It may fortune,
that we shut our selves up, and further the stroke, beyond its bearing. I have
sometimes in necessity and throng of the combat, employed some reuiradoes or
turnings, which beyond my intent, have prooved false offers. I but gave them by
tale, and they were received by weight. Even as when I contend with a vigorous
man; I please my self to anticipate his conclusions: I ease him the labor to
interpret himself, I endeavor to prevent his imperfect and yet budding
imagination: the order and pertinencie of his understanding for warns and
menaceth a far off: of these others I do clean contrary; a man must
understand or presuppose nothing but by them. If they judge in general terms:
This is good; that is naught: and that they iump right; see whither it be
fortune, that iumpeth for them. Let them a little circumscribe and restrain
their sentence; wherefore it is, and which way it is. These universal
judgments, I see so ordinarily say nothing at all. They are men, that salute a
whole multitude, in throng and troop. Such as have true knowledge of the same,
salute and mark it by name and particularly. But it is a hazardous enterprise.
Whence I have oftener and daily seen, to happen that wits weakly grounded,
intending to show themselves ingenious, by observing in the reading of some
work, the point of beaury: stay their admiration with so bad a choice, that in
liew of teaching us the authors excellency, they show us their own ignorance.
This manner of exclaimation is safe; Lo this is very excellent; Surely this is
very good, having heard a whole page of Virgil. And that is the shift whereby
the subtle save themselves, But to undertake to follow him by shrugs and
crinches, and with an axpresse selected judgment to go about to mark which
way a good author surmounteth himself; pondning his words, his phrases, his
inventions, and his several virtues one after another: Away; go by; It is not
for you. Videndum est non modo, quid quisque loquatur, sed etiam quid quisque
sentiat, at que etiam qua de causa quisque sentiat. Man must take heed not
only what he speaks, but what he thinks, and also why he thinks. I daily
heat fools utter vnfoolish words. Speak they any good thing; let us
understand whence they know it, how far they understand and whereby they hold
it. We help them to employ this fine word, and this goodly reason, which they
possess not, and have but in keeping; they have happily produced the same by
chance and at randan, our selves bring it in credit and esteem with them. You
lend them your hand; what to do? to konne you no thanks, and thereby become
more simple, and more foolish. Do not second them; let them goe-on: they will
handle this matter as men affraide to bewray themselves, they dare neither
change her seat or light, nor enter into it. Shake it never so little, it
escapes them; quit the same how strong and goodly soever it be. They are
hand-some weapons, but ill hafted. How often have I seen the experience of it?
Now if you come to expound and confirm them, they take hold of you, and
presently steal the advantage of your interpretation from you. It was that
which I was about to say: It was just my conceit: if I have not so expressed it,
it is but for want of speech. Handy-dandy, what is this? Malice it self must
be employed to correct this fierce rudeness. Hegesias his position, that a man
must neither hate nor accuse, but instruct, has some reason else where. But
here, it is injustice to affist, and inhumanity to raise him up again, that
has nothing to do with it, and is thereby of lesser worth. I love to have
them entangle and bemire themselves more then they are and if it be possible,
to wade so deep into the gulf of error, that in the end they may recall and
advise themselves. Sottishness and distraction of the senses, is no disease
curable by a trick of aduertisment. And we may fitly say of this reparation,
as Cyrus answered one, who urged him to exhort his army in the nicke when the
battle should begin; That men are not made warlike and courageous in the
field, by an excellent oration; no more then one becomes a ready cunning
musition, by hearing a good song. They are prentisages that must be learnt a
forehand, by long and constant institution. This care we owe to ours, and this
assiduitie of correction and instruction: but to preach to him that first
passes by, or sway the ignorance or fondness of him we meet next, is a
custom I cannot well away with. I seldom use it, even in such discourses as
are made to me; and I rather quit all, then come to these far-fetcht and
magistrale instructions. My humor is no more proper to speak, then to write,
namely for beginners. But in things commonly spoken, or amongst others, how
falls and absurd soever I judge them, I never cross or gibe them, neither by
word nor sign. Further, nothing does more spite me in sottishness then that
it pleases it self more, then any reason may justly be satisfied. It is ill
luck, that wisdom forbids you to please and trust your self, and sends you
always away discontented and fearful: whereas wilfulnes and rashness, fill
their guests with gratulation and assurance. It is for the simplest and least
able, to look at other men over their shoulders, ever returning from the
combatful of glory and gladness. And most often also, this outrecuidance of
speech and cheerfulness of countenance, gives them the victory over the
bystanders, who are commonly weak, and incapable to judge aright and discern
true advantage. Obstinacy and earnestness in opinion, is the surest trial of
folly and self conceit. Is there any thing so assured, so resolute, so
disdainefull, so contemplative, so serious and so grave, as the Ass; May we
not commixe with the title of conference and communication, the sharp and
interrupted discourses, which mirth and familiarity introduces amongst
friends, pleasantly dallying and wittily jesting one with another? An exercise,
to which my natural blithenesse makes me very apt. And if it be not so
wire-drawne and serious, as this other exercise I now speak of, yet is it no
less sharp or ingenious, no less profitable, as it seemed to Lycurgus. For
my regard I bring more liberty then wit unto it, and have there in more luck
then invention: but I am perfect in sufferance; for I endure the revenge, not
only sharp but also indiscreete, without any alteration. And to any assault
given me, if I have not presently or stoutly wherewith to work mine own
amends, I ammuse not my self to follow that ward or point, with a tedious and
selfe-wil'd contestation, enclining to pertinacie: I let it pass, and hanging
down mine ears, remit my self to a better hour to right my self. He is not
a merchant that ever gains. Most men change both voice and countenance, where
might fails them: And by an importunate rage, instead of avenging themselves,
they accuse their weakness and therewith bewray their impacience. In this
^ollitie we now and then harp upon some secret strings of our imperfections;
which settled or considerate we cannot tonch without offense: and we profitably
enter-aduertize our selves of our defects. There are other handy-sportes in
discreet, fond and sharp, just after the French manner; which I hate
mortally: I have a tender and sensible skin: I have in my days seen two
Princes of our royal blood brought to their graves for it. It is an ill
seeming thing for men, in jest to hitte, or in sport to strike on another. In
other matters, when I shall judge of any body. I demand of him, how far or
how much he is contented with himself how: how far his speath or his work
pleases him. I will avoid these goodly excuses, I did it but in jest:

Ablatum medijs opus est incudibus istud.
This work away was brought, Ovid. Trist. l. 1. l. 1. ^leg. 6. 29.

Half hammered, half wrought.
I was not an hour there; I have not seen him since. Now I say, let us then
leave these parts, give me one that may represent you whole and entire, by
which it may please you to be measured by another. And then; what find you
fairest in your own work? is it that or this part? the grace or the matter,
the invention, the judgment, or the learning? For I ordinarily perceive, that
a man misseth as much in judging of his own work, as of another. Not only
by the affection, he therein imployeth; but because he has not sufficiency to
know, nor skill to distinguish it. The work of it is own power and fortune,
may second the worke-man, and transport him beyond his invention and knowledge.
As for me, I judge not the worth of another work more obscurely then of mine
own: and place my Essays sometimes low, sometimes high, very inconstantly
and doubtfully. There are diverse books profitable by reason of their subjects
of which the author reapeth no commendations at all: And good books, as also
good works, which make the workman ashamed. I shall write the manner of our
bankets, and the fashion of our garments; and I shall write it with an ill
grace: I shall publish the Edicts of my time, and the letters of Princes that
publicly pass from hand to hand: I shall make an abridgement of a good book
(and every abridgement of a good book, is a fool abridged) which book shall
come to be lost; and such like things. Posterity shall reap singular profit by
such compositions: but I, what honor, except by my good fortune? Many famous
books are of this condition.

When I read Philip de Commines, (now diverse years since) a right excellent
author, I noted this speech in him, as a saying not vulgar: That a man should
carefully take heed* how he do his master so great or much service, that he
thereby be hindered from finding his due recompense for it. I should have
commended the invention, but not him. After that I found it in Tacitus:
Beneficia Corn. Tacit. Annal. l. 4.
eo vsque lata sunt, dum videntur exolui posse, vbi multum antevenere progratia
odium redditur. Benefits are so long wel-come, as we think they may be
requited, but when they much exceed all power of recompense, hate is returned
for thanks and good will. And Seneca very stoutely. Nam qui putat esse turpe
non reddere, non vult esse cui reddat. For he that thinks it a shame not to
S^n. epist. 81. f. Cicero.
requite, could wish, he were not whom he should requite. Q. Cicero with a
looser byas: Qui se non putat satisfacere, amicus esse nullo modo potest. He
that thinks he does not satisfy, can by no means be a friend. The subject
according as it is, may make a man be judged learned, wise and memorious: but
to judge in him the parts most his own and best worthy, together with the
force and beauty of his mind; it is very requisite we know first what is his
own, and what not: and in what is not his own, what we are beholding to him
for, in consideration of his choice, disposition, ornament, and language he
has thereunto furnished. What if he have borrowed the matter and empaired the
form? as many times it comes to pass. We others that have little practice
with books, are troubled with this; that when we meet with any rare or quaint
invention in a new Poet, or forcible argument in a Preacher, we dare not yet
commend them, until we have taken instruction of some wise man, whether that
part be their own or another bodies. And until then I ever stand upon mine
own guard. I come lately from reading over, (and that without any
intermission) the story of Tacitus (a matter not usual with me; it is now
twenty years, I never spent one whole hour together upon a book) and I have
now done it, at the instant request of a gentleman, whom France holds in high
esteem; as well for his own worth and valor, as for a constant form of
sufficiency and goodness, apparently seen in diverse brethren of his. I know no
author, that in a public register entermixeth so many considerations of
manners, and particular inclinations. And I deem clean contrary, to what he
thinks: who being especially to follow the lives of the Emperors of his
time, so diverse and extreme in all manner of form, so many notable and great
actions, which, namely their cruelty produced in their subjects: he had a more
powerful and attractiue matter, to discourse and relate, then if he had been
to speak or treat of battles and universal agitations. So that I often find
him barren, slightly running-over those glorious deaths, as if he feared to
attediate and molest us with their multitude and continuance. This form of
history is much more profitable: Public innouations, depend more on the
conduct of fortune: private on ours. It is rather a judgment, then a deduction
of an history: therein are more precepts, then narrations: It is not a book to
read, but a volume to study and to learn: It is so fraught with sentences,
that right or wrong they are hudled up: It is a seminary of mortal, and a
magazine of pollitique discourses, for the provision and ornament of those,
that possess some place in the managing of the world. He ever pleads with
solid and forcible reasons; after a sharp and witty fashion: following
affected and labored style of his age: They so much loved to raise and puff
themselves up, that where they found neither sharpness nor subtility in
things, they would borrow it of words. He draws somewhat near to Senecas
writing. I deem Tacitus more sinnowy, Seneca more sharp. His service is more
proper to a crazed troubled state, as is ours at this present: you would often
say, he pourtrayeth and touches us to the quick. Such as doubt of his faith,
do many festly accuse themselves to hate him for somewhat else. His opinions
be sound, and encl^^ing to the better side of the Roman affairs. I am
nevertheless something grieved, that he has more bitterly judged of Pompey,
then honest men's opinions, who lived and conuersed with him, do well
allow-off: to have esteemed him altogether equal to Marius and Silla, saving
that he was more close and secret. His intention and canuasing for the
government of affairs, has not been exempted from ambition, nor cleared from
revenge: and his own friends have feared, that had he gotten the victory, it
would have transported him beyond the limits of reason; but not unto an
unbridled and raging measure. There is nothing in his life that has threatened
us with so many fest a cruelty, and express tyranny. Yet must not the
suspicion be counterpoised to the evidence: So do not I believe him.

That his narrations are natural and right, might happily be argued by this:
That they do not always exactly apply themselves to the conclusions of his
judgments; which he pursues according to the course he has taken, often
beyond the matter he shows us; which he has dained to stoop unto with one
only glance. He needs no excuse to have approoved the religion of his times,
according to the laws which commanded him, and been ignorant of the true and
perfect worship of God. That Is his ill fortune, not his defect. I have
principally considered his judgment, whereof I am not every where thoroughly
resolved. As namely these words contained in the letter, which Tiberius being
sick and aged, sent to the Senate. What shall I write to you my masters, or
how shall I write to you, or what shall I not write to you in these times? May
the Gods and Goddesses loose me worse, then I daily feel my self to perish,
if I can tell. I cannot perceive why he should so certainly apply them unto a
stinging remorse, tormentiug the conscience of Tiberius: At least when my self
was in the same plight, I saw it not. That has likewise seemed somewhat demisse
and base unto me, that having said, how he had exercised a certain honorable
magistracy in Rome, he goes about to excuse himself, that it is not for
ostentation, he spoke it: This on trick, namely in a mind of his quality,
seems but base and cource unto me: For, not to dare speak roundly of
himself, accuses some want of courage: A constant, resolute and high
judgment, and which judges soundly and surely, every hand while uses his
own examples, as well as of any strange thing; and witnesses as freely of
himself as of a third person: A man must ouergoe these populare reasons of
ciuility, in favor of truth and liberty. I dare not only speak of my self:
but speak alone of my self. I stragle when I write of any other matter, and
digress from my subject. I do not so discreetly love my self, and am so tide
and commixt to my self, as that I can not distinguish and consider my self a
part: as a neighbor; as a tree. it is an equal error, either not to see how
far a man's worth stretches, or to say more of it then one sees good cause.
We owe more love to God, then to our selves, and know him less, and yet we
talk our fill of him. If his writings relate any thing of his conditions: he
was a notable man, upright and courageous; not with a superstitious virtue, but
Philosophical and generous: He may be found over-hardy in his testimonies: As
where he holds, that a soldier carrying a burden of wood, his hands were so
stiffly benumbed with cold, that they stuck to his wood, and remained so fast
unto it, that as dead flesh they were divided from his arms. In such cases I
am wont to yield unto the authority of so great testimonies. Where he also
says, that Vespasian by the favor of the God Serapis, healed in the ^itie of
Alexandria a blind woman, with the rubbing and anointing her eyes with fasting
spertle: and some other miracles, which I remember not well now: he does it by
the example and devoire of all good historians. They keep a register of
important events: among public accidents, are also populare reports and vulgar
opinions. It is their part to relate common conceits, but not to sway them.
This part belongs to Divines and Philosophers, directors of consciences.
Therefore that companion of his, and as great a man as he, said most wisely:
Equidem plura transcrib^ quam credo: Nam nec affirmare sustineo, de quibus
dubito, nec subducere quae accepi: I write out more then I believe: for neither
can I bide to affirm what I doubt of, nor to withdraw what I have heard: And
that other: Haec neque affirmare neque refellere operae precium est: fama rerum
standum est. It is not worth the talk, or to avouch, or to refute these
things; we must stand to report. And writing in an age, wherein the belief of
prodigies began to decline, he says, he would notwithstanding not ommit to
insert in his Annals, and give footing to a thing received and allowed of so
many honest men, and with so great reverence by antiquity. It is very well
said: That they yield us the history, more according as they receive, then
according as they esteem it. I who am king of the matter I treat of, and am
not to give account of it to any creature living, do nevertheless not
altogether believe my self for it: I often hazard upon certain outslips of my
mind, for which I distruct my self; and certain verbal wilie-beguilies,
whereat I shake mine ears: but I let them run at hab or nab; I see some
honor them selves with such like things: It Is not for me alone to judge of
them. I present my self standing and lying, before and behind, on the right
and left side, and in all by natural motions. Spirits alike in force, are not
ever alike in application and taste. Lo here what my memory does in gross, and
yet very uncertainly present unto me of it. In brief, all judgments are
weak, demisse and imperfect.

The ninth Chapter.
Of Vanity.

THere is peradventure no vanity more manifest, then so vainly to write of it.
What Divinity has so divinely expressed thereof unto us, ought of all men of
understanding to be diligently and continually meditated upon. Who sees not,
that I have entered so large a field, and undertaken so high a pitch, wherein so
long as there is either Ink or Paper in the world, I may incessantly wander
and fly without encombrance? I can keep no register of my life by my actions:
fortune places them too Iowe: I hold them of my fantasies. Yet have I seen a
gentleman, who never communicated his life, but by the operations of his belly;
you might have seen in his house, set out for a show, a row of basins for
seven or eight days: It was all his study; it was all his talk: All other
discourses were unsavory to him. These are somewhat more civil, the excrements
of an old spirit, sometimes hard, sometimes laxatiue; but ever indigested.
And when shall I come unto an end of representing a continual agitation or
incessant alteration of my thoughts, what subject soever they happen upon;
since Diomedes filled six thousand books only with the subject of Grammar?
What is idle babbling like to produce, since the faltring and liberty of the
tongue has stuffed the world with so horrible a multitude of volumes? So many
words only for words. Oh Pythagoras, why did thou not conjure this tempest?
One Galba of former ages, being accused for living idly; answered, that all
men ought to give an account of their actions, but not of their abiding. He was
deceived; for justice has also knowledge and animaduersion over such as gather
stubble (as the common saying is) or look about for gape* seed. But there
should be some correction appointed by the laws, against foolish and
unprofitable writers, as there is against vagabonds and loiterers: so should
both my self and a hundred others of our people be banished. It is no
mockery: Scribbling seems to be a Symthome or passion of an irregular and
licentious age. When writ we ever so much as we have done since our intestine
troubles? or when filled the Romans so many volumes, as in the times of their
ruin? Besides that, the r^fining of wits in a common wealth, does seldom make
them the wiser: this idle working proceeds of this that all men do over*
slowly give them selves to the office of their function, and are easily
withdraw from it. The corruption of the times we live in, is wrought by the
particular contribution of every one of us: some confer treason unto it, some
injustice, other some irreligion, tyranny, avarice and cruelty; according as
they are more or less powerful: the weaker sort, whereof I am one imparte
foolishness, vanity and idleness unto it. It seems to be the season of
vain things; when the domageable press us. In a time, where to do evil is
common: to do nothing profitable, is in a manner commendable. One thing
comforts me, that I shall be of the last, that shall be attached: whilst they
shall provide for the worser sort and the most hurtful, I shall have leisure
to amend my self: For, me thinks it would be against reason busily to
insist and pursue petty inconveniences, when great ones infect us. And the
Physician Philotimus, to one that offered him his finger to dress, by whose
face, look and breath he apparently perceived, that he had an impostume in his
loonges; My friend (quoth he) It is now no fit time to busy your self about
your nails. Yet concerning this purpose, I saw not many years since a friend
of mine, whose name and memory (for diverse respects,) I hold in singular
account, who in the midst of our troublous mischiefs: when, no more then at
this time, neither law, nor justice, nor magistrate was executed or did his
office, published certain silly reformations, concerning the excess of
apparel gluttony and diet, and abuses committed among petty-fogging lawiers.
They be ammusings wherewith a people in a desperate taking is fed, that so men
may say they are not clean forgotten. Even so do these others, who mainely
apply them selves to forbid certain manners of speech, dances and vain
sports, unto a people wholly given over to all licenciousnesse and execrable
vices. It is then no convenient time for a man to wash and netifi^ himself
when he is assailed, by a violent fever. It only belongs to Spartans, to
trick, to comb and wash themselves at what time they are ready to cast
themselves into some extreme hazard of life. As for me, I am subject to this
ill custom, that if but a pump sit not handsomely upon my foot, I shall also
neglect my shirt and my cloak: for I disdain to correct my self by halses:
when I am in bad estate, I flesh my self on evil and abandon my self through
despair, and run to downfall, and (as the saying is) cast the have after the
hatchet. I grow obstinate in empairing; and esteem my self no more worthy of
my care, either all well or all evil. It is a favor to me, that the
desolation of our state does sutably meet with the desolation of my age: I
rather endure that my evils should thereby be surcharged, then if my goods had
thereby been troubled. The words I utter against misfortune, are words of
spite. My courage insteede of yielding, does grow more obstinate; and contrary
to others. I find my self more given to devotion, in prosperous then adverse
fortune: according to Xenophons rule, if not according to his reason. And I
rather look on heaven with a cheerful eye, to thank it, then to beg any
thing. I am more careful to increase my health when it smiles upon me, then to
recover it when I have lost it. Prosperities are to me as discipline and
instruction, as adversities and crosses are to others. As if good fortune were
incompatible with a good conscience, men never become honest but by adverse and
cross chances. Good fortune is to me a singular motive unto moderation, and
forcible spur unto modesty. Prayers win me, menaces reject me, sauoures
relent me, fear imperuerseth me. Amongst humane conditions, this one is very
common, that we are rather pleased with strange things then with our own: we
love changes, affect alterations, and like innouations.

Ipsa dies ideo nos grato perluit haus^u,
Quod permutatis hora recurrit equis.
Times therefore us refresh with welcome air,
Because their hours on changed horse do repair.
And my share is therein. Such as follow the other extremity, only to be
well pleased with and in themselves; and selfe-conceitedly to over* esteem
what they possess above others; and acknowledge no form fayrer, then that
they see; if they be not more advised then we, they are indeed more happy. I
envy not their wisdom, but grudge their good fortune: This greedy humor of
new and unquenchable desire of unknown things, does much increase and nourish
in me a desire to travel: but diverse other circumstances confer unto it. I
am well pleased to neglect and shake* of the government of mine own household.
It is some pleasure to command, were it but a molehill, and a delight to be
obaied. But it is a pleasure over-vniforme and languishing. Besides that it is
ever necessarily intermixed with troublous cares, and hart-wearing thoughts.
Sometimes the indigence and oppression of your own people; sometimes the
contentions and quarrels of your neighbors, and othertimes their insulting and
usurpation over you, does vex, does trouble and afflict you,

Aut verberatae grandine vine^, Her. ^ar. l. 3. ^d. 1. 29.

Fundusque mendax, arbore nunc aquas
Culpante, nunc torrentia agros
Sydera, nunc hyemes iniquas.
Or Vineyards beat and wet with hail and rain,
Or grounds defrauding hope, while trees complain;
Sometime of waters, sometime of those stars,
That scorch the fields, sometime of winters wars.
And that God will hardly once in half a year send you a season, that shall
thoroughly please your Bailey, and content your Receauer: and that if it be good
for your vines, it be not hurtful for your meddowes.

Aut nimijs torret feruoribus aetherius Sol,
Aut subiti perimunt imbres, gelidaeque pruinae, Lucret. l. 5* 215.

Flabraque ventorum violento turbine vexent.
Or with excessive heat heavens Sun does toast,
Or sudden storms do kill, and chilling frost,
Or violent whirle-winde blasts do vex the coast.
As that new and well-shapen shoe of that man of former ages, which hurts and
wrings your foot: and that a stranger knows not what it costs you, and what
you contribute to maintain the show of that order, which is seen in your
household: and which peradventure you purchase at too high a rate. It was very
late before I betook my self to husbandry. Those whom nature caused to be
borne before me, have long time rid me of that careful burden: I had
already taken another habit, more suitable to my complexion. Nevertheless by
that I have observed therein, I find it to be rather a troublesome, then a
hard occupation. Whosoever is capable of any other thing, may easily discharge
that. If I would seek to grow rich; that way would seem ouer-long and tedious
to me: I would then have served our kings; a trade more beneficial then all
others; since I pretend but to get the reputation, that as I have gotten
nothing, so have I not wasted any thing; suitable to the rest of my life; as
unfit to affect any good, as improper to work any evil of consequence: and
that I only seek to wear out my life, I may (God be thanked) do it without
any great attention: if the worst come to pass, before poverty assail you,
seek by prevention to cut of your charges, and by husbanding your expenses
keep before hand with it; that is it I trust unto, and hope to reform my self
before it come near or enforce me to it. As for other matters, I have
forestalled many degrees and established sundry ways in my mind, to live and
rub out with less then I have. I say to live with contentment. Non
aestimatione Cic. Parad.
census, verum victu atque cultu, terminatur pecuniae modus. The measure of
money is lymited not by the estimate of wealth or place, but by the manner of
living and other furniture. My very need does not so precisely possess my
whole estate, but that without touching to the quick or empairing the maine,
fortune shall find something to play upon, or take hold of. My very presence
as ignorant and grim as it is, affords much help to my household affairs: I
apply my self thereunto but somewhat dispightfully: considering the manner of
my house, which is, that severally to burn my candle at one end, the other is
thereby nothing spared. Travels do not much hurt me, were it not for the
charges* which are exceeding great and beyond my ability: having ever been
accustomed to journey not only with necessary, but also decent equipage: and
that is the reason I make but short iorneis and travel not to often: wherein I
employ but the scumme and what I can well spare, temporising and differing,
according as it comes more or less. I will not have the pleasure of my
wandering to corrupt the delight of my retiring. Contrary-wise my intent is,
that they nourish and favor one another. Fortune has steaded me in this; that
since my chiefest profession in this life, was to live delicately and quietly,
and rather negligently then seriously, it has deprived me of need to hoard up
riches, to provide for the multitude of my heirs. For one, if that be not
sufficient for him, where with I have lived so plentiously, at his own peril
be it. His indiscretion shall not deserve, that I wish him more. And every man
(according to the example of Phocion) prouid^th sufficiently for his children,
that prouid^th they be not unlike to him. I should by no means be of Crates
his mind, or commend his proceeding. He left his money with a banquier upon this
condition: That if his children were fools he should deliver it them: but
proouing wise and able to shift for themselves, he should distribute the same
amongst the greatest fools. As if fools being least capable to make shift
without it, were more capable to use riches. So it is, that the hurt*
proceeding from my absence, does not (in mine opinion) deserve, so long as I
shall have means to bear it, I should refuse to accept the occasions that
offer themselves, to distract me from this toylesome assistance. There is ever
some piece out of square. Sometimes the business of one house, and other times
the affairs of another, do hurry you. You pry too near into all things:
herein, as well as else where, your perspicuity does harm you. I steal from
such occasions as may move me to anger; and remove from the knowledge of
things, that thrive not: yet can I not so use the matter, but still I stumble
(being at home) upon some inconvenience, which displeases me. And slight
knaveries, that are most hidden from me are those I am best acquainted with
Some there are, which to avoid a further mischief, a man must help to
concea^^ himself: vain prickings (vain sometimes) but yet ever prickings.
The least and sleightest hindrances, are the sharpest. And as the smallest
letters hurt our eyes most, so the least affairs grieve us most: A multitude
of slender evils offends more, then the violence of one alone, how great
soever. Even as ordinary thorns being small and sharp prick us more sharply
and sans threatening, if on a sudden we hit upon them. I am no Philosopher:
Evils oppress me according as they weigh; and weigh according to their form,
as well as according to the matter; and often more. I have more insight in
them, then the vulgar sort; and so have I more patience. To conclude, if they
hurt me not, they lie heavy upon me. Life is a tender thing, and easy to be
distempered. Since I began to grow toward peevish age, andby consequence
toward frowardnes, nemo enim resisti^ S^^. ^p. 1. 13* f.
sibi eum ceperit impelli; For no man stays himself when he is set on going.
What ever fond cause has brought me to it; I provoke the humor that way:
which afterward by his own motion is sos^red and exasperated, atracting and
heaping up one matter upon another, to feed it self withal.

Stillici^i^ casus lapidem cauat:
By often falling on,
Even water breaks a stone.
These ordinary distilling drops consume and v^cerate me. Ordinary
inconveniences are never light. They are continual and irreparable, if they
continually and inseperatly arise from the members of husbandry. When I
consider my affairs a far off, and in gross, I find, be it because I have
no exact memory of them, that hitherto they have thrived beyond my reasons and
expectation. Me thinks I draw more from them, then there is in them: then good
success betraieth me. But am I waded into the business? See I all these
parcels march?

Tum vero in curas animum deducimus omnes. Virg. Aen. l. 5. 720.

Then we our mind divide,
To cares on every side.
A thousand things therein give me cause to desire and fear. Wholly to forsake
them is very easy unto me: without toyling and vexation altogether to apply my
self unto them; is most hard. It is a pity full thing, to be in a place,
where whatsouer you see, does set you a work and concern you. And me
thinks, I enjoy more blithely and taste more choisely the pleasures of a
stranger house, then of mine own: and both my mind and taste run more
freely and purely on them. Diogenes answered according to my humor when being
demanded what kind of Wine he liked best: Another man's, said he. My father
delighted to build at Montaigne* where he was borne: and in all this policy of
domestik affairs, I love to make use of his examples and rules; unto which I
will as much as possibly I can tie my successors. Could I do better for him, I
would perform it. I glory his will is at this day practiced by me, and does
yet work in me. God forbid I should ever suffer any image of life to perish
under my hands, that I may yield unto so good and so kind a father. If I have
undertaken to finish any old piece of wall, or repair any building either
imperfect or decayed: it has certainly been, because I had rather a respect
to his intention, then a regard to my contentment. And I blame my negligence or
lithernesse, that I have not continued to perfect the foundations he had laid,
or beginnings he had left in his house: by so much the more, because I am in
great likelihood to be the last possessor of it, namely of my race, and set the
last hand unto it. For, concerning my particular application, neither the
pleasure of building, which is said to be so bewitching, nor hunting, nor
hauking, nor gardens, nor such other delights of a retired life, can much
embusie or greatly ammuse me. It is a thing for which I hate my self, as of
all other opinions, that are incommodious to me. I care not so much to have
them vigorous and learned, as I labor to have them easy and commodious unto
life. They are indeed sufficiently true and sound, if they be profitable and
pleasing. Those, who hearing me relate mine own insufficiency in matters
pertaining to husbandry or thrift, are still whispering in mine ears, that it
is but a kind of disdain, and that I neglect to know the implements or tools
belonging to husbandry or tillage, their seasons and orders; how my wines are
made, how they graft; and understand or know the names and forms of herbs,
of simples, of fruits, and what belongs to the dressing of meats wherewith I
live and whereon I feed; the names and prizes of such stuffes I cloth my
self withal, only because I do more seriously take to heart some higher
knowledge; bring me in a manner to deaths door. That is mere sottishness;
and rather brutishness then glory: I would rather be a cunning horseman, then
a good Logician.

Quin tu aliquid saltem potius quorum indiget vsus, Virg. buc. ecl. 2. 71.

Viminibus mollique paras detexere iunco?
Why rather with soft wings make you not speed,
To worke-vp something, whereof there is need?
We hinder our thoughts from the general and maine point, and from the causes
and universal conducts; which are very well directed without us, and omit our
own business; and Michael, who concerns us nearer then man. Now I most
commonly stay at home, but I would please my self better there, then any where
else.

Sit meaesedes vtinam senectae,
Sit modus lasso maris, and viarum, Hor. car. l. 2. od. 6. 6.

-- Militiaeque.
Some repair and rest to mine old age I crave,
Iournying, sailing, with a weary warring,
O let an end have.
I wot not whether I shall come to an end of it. I would that in lieu of some
other part of his succession, my father had resigned me that passionate love
and dear affection, which in his aged years he bare unto his household
husbandry. He was very fortunate, in conforming his desires unto his fortune,
and knew how to be pleased with what he had. Politic Philosophy may how it
list accuse the baseness and blame the sterilitie of my occupation, if as he
did, I may but once find the taste of it. I am of this opinion, that the
honorablest vacation, is to serve the Commonwealth, and be profitable to many.
Fructus enim ingeni^ and virtutis, omnisque praestantiae, Cicer. Amic.
tum maximus accipitur, quum in proximum quemque confertur. For then is most
fruit reaped, both of our wit and virtue, and all other excellency, when it is
bestowed upon our neighbors. As for me, I depart from it: partly for
conscience sake; (for whence I discern the wait, concerning such vacations, I
also discover the slender means I have to supply them withal: And Plato a
master workman in all politic government, omitted not to abstain from them)
partly for lithernesse. I am well pleased to enjoy the world, without troubling
or pressing my self with it; to live a life, only excusable: and which may
neither be burdensome to me, nor to any other. Never did man go more
plainly and carelessly to work in the care and government of a third man, then
I would, had I a ground to work upon. One of my wishes at this instant, should
be to find a son in law, that could handsomely allure and discreetly beguile
my old years, and lull them asleep; into whose hands I might depose, and in
all sov^^raigntie resign the conduct and managing of my goods; that he might
dispose of them as I do, and gain upon them what I gain: always provided he
would but carry a truly-thankfull and friendly mind. But what? we live in a
world, where the loyalty of our own children is not known. Whosoever has
the charge of my purse when I travel, has it freely and without control: as
well might he deceive me in keeping of reckonings. And if he be not a Devil,
I bind him to deal well and honestly, by my careless confidence. Multi
fallere docuerunt, dum timent falli, and alies ius peccands suspicando
fecerunt. Many have taught others to deceive, while themselves fear to be
deceived, and have given them just cause to offend, by suspecting them
unjustly. The most ordinary assurance I take of my people, is a kind of
disacknowledge or neglect: I never presume vices, but after I have seen them:
and trust more young men, such as I imagine to be least debaushed and corrupted
by ill examples. I had rather hear at two months end, that I have spent four
hundred crowns, then every night when I should go to my quiet bed, have mine
ears tired and my mind vexed with three, five, or seven. Yet in this kind of
stealing, have I had as little stolen from me as any other: True it is, I lend
a helping hand to ignorance. I wittingly entertain a kind of troubled and
uncertain knowledge of my money: until it come to a certain measure I am
content to doubt of it. It is not amiss if you allow your boy or servant some
small scope for his disloyalty and indiscretion. If in gross we have
sufficiently left to bring our matters to pass, this excess of
fortunes-liberalitie, let us somewhat more suffer it to stand to her mercy: It
is the gleaners fee. After all, I esteem not so much my peoples fidelity, as
I disesteeme their injury. Oh base and absurd study, for a man to study his
money, and please himself with handling and counting the same: for that is the
way whereby covetousness makes her approches. Since eighteen years, that I
have had the full disposing of my goods in mine own hands, I could never yet
be brought to over-looke, neither titles nor books, no not so much as the
principal affairs, that should necessarily pass through my knowledge and care.

It is no Philosophical contempt, to neglect worldly and transitory things:
my taste is not so exquisitly nice; for I value them according to their worth
at least: but truly it is an inexcusable slothfulness and childish negligence.
What would I not rather do, then read a contract? And more willingly, as a
slave to my business, with carke to over-looke, and care to survay a company
of old-dustie books, and plod upon mustie writings? and which is worse, other
men's, as so many do daily for money? I have nothing so dear as care and
pain: and I only endeavor to become careless and retchlesse. I had, in mine
opinion, been fitter (if it might be) to live by others fortune, without
bounden duty or bondage. And yet I wot not (the matter being thoroughly sifted)
whether according to my humor and fortune, what I must endure with my
affairs, and pocket up at my servants and familiars hands, has not more
abiection, importunity and sharpness, then the following of another man
should have, better borne then my self, and who should guide me somewhat at
mine ease. Servitus obedientia est fra^ti animi and abi^cti, arbitrio carentis
suo: Service is an obedience of an abject broken C^c. Parad. 5.
heart, that cannot dispose of it self. Crates did worse, who voluntarily cast
himself into the liberties of poverty, only to rid himself of the
inconveniences, indignities and cares of his house. Which I would not do: I
hate poverty as much as grief; yet could I find in my heart to change this
manner of life, with another less glorious and not so troublesome. Being
absent, I discharge my self of all such careful thoughts, and should less
feel the ruinous downe-fall of a Town, then being present, the fall of a
Tile. Alone my mind is easily freed, but in company, it endures as much as a
Plough-mans. My horse vncurb'd, his reins misplaced, or a stirrup or a strap
hitting against my leg, will keep me in a check a whole day long. I rouse
my courage sufficiently against inconvenience; mine eyes I cannot.

Sensus o superi sensus! At home I am ever answerable for whatsoever is amiss.
Few masters (I speak of mean condition, as mine is; whereof if any be, they
are the more happy) can so fully rely upon a second, but still a good part of
the burden shall lie upon them. That does peradventure take something from my
fashion, in entertaining of guests or new comers; and happily I have been
able to stay some, more by my kitchen, then by my behavior or grace: as do
the peevish and fantastical; and I greatly diminish the pleasure I should take
in my house, by the visitations and meetings of my friends. No countenance is
so foolish, or so ill beseeming a gentleman in his own house, as to see him
vexed or troubled about his household or domes^icke affairs; to see him whisper
one of his servants in the ear, and threaten another with his looks. It
should insensibly glide-on, and represent an ordinary course. And I utterly
dislike, that a man should entertain h^^ guests with either excusing, or
boasting of the entertainment he affoordeth them. I love order and cleanliness,

-- and cantharus and lanx, H^^. l. 1. epist. 5. 23.

Ostendun^ mihime.
My dish, my drinking kanne,
Show me what kind of man.
well nigh as much as plenty: In mine own house I exactly look unto
necessity, little unto state, and less unto ornament. If your neighbors
servant be fighting with his companion, if a dish be overthrowen, you but laugh
at it: you sleep quietly whilst Sir such a one is busy casting up of
accounts, and over-seeing his stock with his steward, and all about your
provision for to morrow. I speak according to mine opinion: omitting not in
general to think, how pleasing an ammusement it is to certain natures, to
see a quiet and prosperous household, directed by a formal and guided by a
regular order. But not intending to fasten mine own errors and inconveniences
to the matter: Nor to gainsay Plato, who deemeth that the happiest occupation
any man can follow, is, to apply himself to his own private business,
without injustice. When I journey, I have nothing to care for but my self, and
how my money is laid out: which is disposed with one only precept. Over-many
parts are required in hoarding and gathering of goods: I have no skill in it.
In spending, I have some knowledge, and how to give my expenses day; which
indeed is it is principal use. But I attend it over-ambitiously, which makes it
both unequal and deformed: and besides that immoderate in one and other
visage. If it appear and make a good show, if it serve the turn, I
indiscreetly go after it; and as indiscreetly restrain my self, if it shine
or smile not upon me. Whatsoever it be, either Art or nature, that imprints
this condition of life into us, by relation to others, it does us much more
hurt then good. In going about to frame apparances according to the common
opinion, we defraud our selves of our owneprofits. We care not so much, what
our state, or how our being is, in us and in effect, as we do how and what it
is, in the public knowledge of others. Even the goods of the mind, and
wisdom it self, seem fruitless unto us, if only enioied by us: except it
be set forth to the open view and approbation of strangers. There are some,
whose gold runs by streams in places under ground, and that imperceptible:
others extend the same in plates and leaves: So that to some, pence are worth
crowns, to others the contrary: the world judging the employment and value,
according to the outward show. All over-nice care and curious heed about
riches, has a touch or a taste of avarice. Even their dispending and over
regular and artificial liberalities are not worth a wary heede-taking, and
countervaile not a painful diligence. Who so will make his expense even and
just, makes it strict and forced. Either close-keeping or employing of money,
are in themselves things indifferent; and admit no color of good or evil, but
according to the application of our will. The other cause that draws me to
these iourneies or vagaries, is the dissent or disparitie in the present
manners of our state: I could easily comfort my self with this corruption, in
regard of the public interest;

-- peioraque s^cula f^rri, Iuven. sat. 13. 28.

Temporibus, quorum sceleri non invenit ipsa
Nomen, and a nullo posuit natura met allo.
Times worse then times of Iron, for whose bad frame
And wickedness even nature finds no name,
Nor has from any metal set the same.
But not for mine own: I am in particular over-pressed by it. Forround about
where I dwell, we are, by the overlong licentiousness of our intestine civil
wars, almost grown old, in so licentious and riotous a form of state,

Quippe vbi fas versum atque nefas; Virg. Georg. l. 1. 505.

As where of good and bad,
There is no difference had.
That in good truth, it were a wonder, if it should continue and maintain it
self.

Armati terram exercent, semperque recentes Virg. Aen. l. 9. 612.

Convectare invat praedas, and vivere rapto.
They armed plow the land, and joy to drive,
And draw new booties, and on rapine live.
To conclude, I see by our example, that the society of men does hold and is
sewed together, at what rate soever it be: where ever they be placed, in
mooving and closing, they are ranged and stowed together; as uneven and rugged
bodies, that orderlesse are hudled in some close place, of themselves find the
way to be united and joined together one with another: and many times better,
then Art could have disposed them. King Philip assembled a rabble of the most
leaud, reprobate and incorrigible men he could find out, all which he placed
in a City, which of purpose he had caused to be built for them, of whom it
bare the name. I imagine, that even of their vices, they erected a politic
contexture amongst themselves, and a commodious and just society. I see not
one action, or three, or a hundred, but even diverse manners, admitted and
commonly used: so extravagant (namely in disloyalty) and so barbarous in
inhumanitie, which in my conceit, are the worst and most execrable kind of
vices, that I have not the heart so much as to conceive them without horror:
All which I in a manner admire as much as I detest. The exercise of these
egregious villainies, bears a brand of vigor and hardiness of mind, as much
as of error and irregular confusion. Necessity composeth, and assembleth men
together. This casual combining is afterward framed into laws. For, there
have been some as barbarously-savage, as humane opinion could possible
produce, which notwithstanding have kept their bodies in as good health and
state, in long life, as those of Plato or Aristotle could do. And to say true,
all these descriptions of policy, fained by Art and supposition, are found
ridiculous and foolish, to be put in practice. These great and long-continuing
altercations, about the best form of society, and most commodious rules to
unite us together, are altercations only proper for the exercise of our wit:
As in arts, diverse subjects are found, that have no essence but in agitation
and disputing, without which they have no life at all. Such an Idea of policy,
or picture of government, were to be established in a new world; but we take a
world already made and formed to certain customs: we engender not the same
as Pyrrha, nor beget it as Cadmus. By what means soever we have the privilege
to re-erect and range the same anew, we can very hardly wrest it from the
accustomed habit and fold it has taken, except we break all. Solon being
demanded, whether he had established the best laws he could for the
Athenians: answered, yea of those they would have received: with such a shift
does Varre excuse himself; saying, that if he were newly to begin to write
of religion, he would plainly tell what his belief were of it: But being
already received, he will speak more of it according to custom, then to
nature. Not to speak by opinion, but consonant to truth, the most excellent
and best policy, for any nation to observe, is that under which it has
maintained it self. It Is form and essential commodity does much depend of
custom. We are easily displeased with the present condition: yet do I hold
that to wish the government of few, in a popular estate: or in a Monarchy,
another kind of policy, it is a manifest vice and mere folly.

Aim l' est at tell que tu le uois estre, P^^rac.

S'il est royal, aim laroyaute,
S'il est de peu, ou bien communante,
Aim l' aussi, car Dieu t'y a faict naistre.
Love thou the state, as thou see it to be,
If it be Regal, love the royal race,
If of a few, or Commonweal, embrace
It as it is; borne there God pointed thee.
So was the good Lord of Pibrac wont to speak of it, whom we have lately lost:
a man of so quaint and rare wit, of so sound judgment, and of so mild and
affable behavior. The untimely loss of whom, with that of the Lord of Foix,
both fatally happening to us at one time, are surely losses of great consequence
unto our crown. I wot not well, whether France, amongst all the men it has
left, is able to afford us two such other Gentlemen, as may either in
sincerity and worth, or in sufficiency and judgment, for the counsel of our
Kings, match these two Gascoynes. They were two minds diversely fair; and
verily, if we respect the corrupted age wherein we live, both rare and
gloriously-shining, every one in her form. But alas, what destiny had placed
them on the Theater of this age, so dissonant and different in proportion from
our deplorable corruption, and so far from agreeing with our tumultuous
storms? Nothing does so nearly touch and so much overlay an estate, as
innovation: Only change does give form to injustice, and scope to tyranny. If
some one piece be out of square, it may be underpropped: one may oppose himself
against that, which the alteration, incident, and corruption, natural to all
things, does not too much elonge and draw us from our beginnings and grounded
principles: But to undertake to re-erect and found again so huge a mass, and
change or remoove the foundations of so vast a frame, belongs only to them,
who in stead of purging, deface; and in lieu of cleansing, scrape out: that
will amend particular faults by an universal confusion, and cure diseases by
death: Non tam commutandarum quam overtendarum rerum cupidi. Not so desirous to
have things altered, as overthrowen. The world is fondly unapt to cure it
self: So impatient with that which vexes or grieveth it, that it only aims
to rid it self of it, never regarding at what rate. We see by a thousand
examples, that it does ordinarily cure it self at it is own charges: To be
freed from a present evil, is no perfect cure, except there be a general
amendment of condition. The end of a skillful Surgeon, is not to mortify
the bad flesh, it is but the beginning and addressing of his cure: he aims
further, that is, to make the natural to grow again, and reduce the party to
his due being and quality. Whoever proposes only to remoove what gnaweth
him, shall be to seek: for good does not necessarily succeed evil: another,
yea a worse evil may succeed it. As it happened unto Cesars murderers, who
brought the commonwealth to so distresfull a plunge, that they repented
themselves they ever meddled with the same. The like has since fortuned to
diverse, yea in our days. The French that live in my times, know very well what
to speak of such matters. All violent changes and great alterations, disorder,
distemper and shake a state very much. He that should rightly respect a sound
recovery or absolute cure, and before al other things thoroughly consult about
it, might happily grow slaoke in the business, and beware how he set his hand
unto it. Pacuvius Calavius corrected the vice of this manner of proceeding by a
notable example. His fellow Citizens had mutined against their magistrates; He
being a man of eminent authority in the City of Capua, found one day the means
to shut up the Senate in the Guildhall or Palace, then calling the people
together in the market place, told them; That the day was now come, wherein
with full and unresisted liberty, they might take vengeance of the tyrants,
that had so long and so many ways oppressed them, all which he had now at his
mercy, alone and unarmed. His opinion was, that orderly by lots, they should be
drawn out one after another: which done, they might particularly dispose of
every one: and whatsoever should be decreed of them, should immediately be
executed upon the place; provided they should therewithal presently advise and
resolve to nominate and establish some honest and vndetected man, to supply the
room of the condemned, lest their City should remain void of due officers.
To which they granted, and heard no sooner the name of a Senator read, but a
loud exclamation of a general discontent was raised against him: which
Pacuvius perceiving, he requested silence, and thus bespake them. My
contrymen, I see very well, that man must be cut off, he is a pernicious
and wicked member; but let us have another sound-good man in his place; and
whom would you name for that purpose? This unexpected speech bred a distracted
silence; each one finding himself to seek and much confounded in the choice.
Yet one, who was the boldest-impudent amongst them, nominated one whom he
thought fittest; who was no sooner heard, but a general consent of voices,
louder then the first, followed, all refusing him: as one taxed with a hundred
imperfections, lawful causes and just objections, utterly to reject him. These
contradicting humors growing more violent and hot, every one following his
private grudge or affection, there ensued a far greater confusion and
hurly-burly in drawing of the second and third Senator, and in naming and
choosing their successors; about which they could never agree. As much
disorder and more consusion about the election, as mutual consent and
agreement about the demission and displacing. About which tumultuous trouble,
when they had long and to no end labored and wearied themselves, they began,
some here, some there, to scatter and steal away from the assembly: every
one with this resolution in his mind, that the oldest and best known evil,
is ever more tolerable, then a fresh and unexperienced mischief. By seeing our
selves piteously tossed in continual agitation: for what have we not done?

Eheu cicatricum and sceleris pudet, Hor. car. l. 1. od. 95. 33.

Fratrumque: quid nos dur a refugimus
Aetas? quid intactum nefasti
Liquimus? vnde manus iuventus
Metu Deorum continuit? quibus
Pepercit aris?
Alas for shame of wickedness, and scarres
Of brother-country-men in civil wars.
We of this hardened world, what do we shun?
What have we execrable left undone?
To set their hand whereto has youth not dared
For fear of Gods? what altars has it spared?
I am not very sudden in resolving or concluding.

-- ipsa si velit salus, Ter. Adel. act. 4. sc. 7.

Servare prorsus non potest hanc familiam:
This family if safety would
Keep safe, I do not think it could.
Yet are we not peradventure come unto our last period. The preservation of
states, is a thing in all likelihood exceeding our understanding. A civil
policy (as Plato says) is a mighty and puissant matter, and of very hard and
difficult dissolution; it often endures against mortal and intestine
diseases: yea against the injury of unjust laws, against tyranny, against the
ignorance and debordement of Magistrates, and against the licentiousness and
sedition of the people. In all our fortunes, we compare our selves to that
which is above us, and look toward those that are better. Let us measure our
selves by that which is beneath us, there is no creature so miserably wretched,
but finds a thousand examples to comfort himself withal. It is our fault,
that we more unwillingly behold what is above us, then willingly what is
beneath us, And Solon said, that should a man heap up in one mass all evils
together, there is none, that would not rather choose to carry back with him
such evils as he already has, then come to a lawful division with other men
of that chaos of evils, and take his allotted share of them. Our Commonwealth
is much crazed, and out of tune. Yet have diverse others been more dangerously
sick, and have not died. The Gods play at hand-ball with us, and toss us up
and down on all hands. Enimvero Dij nos homines quasi pilas habent. Plaut.
capt. Prel.
The Gods perdie do reckon and racket us men as their tennis-balles. The
destinies have fatally ordained the state of Rome, for an exemplar pattern of
what they can do in this kind. It contains in it self all forms and
fortunes that concern a state: whatsoever order, trouble, good or bad fortune
may in any sort effect in it. What man may justly despair of his condition,
seeing the agitations, troubles, alterations, turmoiles and motions, wherewith
it was tossed to and fro, and which it endured? If the extension of rule, and
far-spreading domination, be the perfect health of a state, of which opinion I
am not in any wise (and Isocrates does greatly please me, who instructs
Nicocles, not to envy those Princes, who have large dominations, but such as
can well maintain and orderly preserve those that have been hereditarily
escheated unto them) that of Rome was never so sound, as when it was most sick
and distempered. The worste of it is form, was to it the most fortunate. A man
can hardly distinguish or know the image of any policy under the first
Emperors: it was the most horrible and turbulent confusion that could be
conceived, which notwithstanding it endured and therein continued; preserving,
not a Monarchy bounded in her limits, but so many nations, so different, so
distant, so evil affected, so confusedly commanded, and so unjustly conquered.

-- nec gentibus vllis Lucret. l. 1. 82.

Commodat in populum terrae pelagique potentem,
Inuidiam fortuna suam.
Fortune does to no other nation lend
Envy, against that people force to bend,
Which both by land and sea their force extend.
All that shakes does not fall: The contexture of so vast a frame houlds by
more then one nail. It houlds by it is antiquity: as old buildings, which age
has robbed of foundation, without loame or mortar, and nevertheless live and
subsist by their own weight,

-- nec iam validis radicibus haerens Ibid 138.

Pondere tuta suo est.
Though now to no strong root it stick so fast,
Yet is it safe by selfe-waight, and will last.
Moreover he goes not cunningly to work, that only suruayes the flanks and
dykes: to judge well of the strength of a place; he must heedily mark how, and
view which way it may be approached, and in what state the assailant stand. Few
vessels sink with their own weight, and without some extraordinary violence.
Cast we our eyes about us, and in a general suruay consider all the world;
all is tottring; all is out of frame. Take a perfect view of all great states
both in Christendom and where ever else we have knowledge-of, and in all places
you shall find a most evident threatening of change and ruin:

Et sua sunt illis incommoda, parque per omnes
Tempestas.
Their discommodities they know:
One storm alike ore-all does grow.
Astrologers may sport themselves, with warning us, as they do of imminent
alterations and succeeding revolutions: their divinations are present and
palpable, we need not pry into the heavens to find them out. We are not
only to draw comfort from this universal aggregation of evils and threats; but
also some hope for the continuance of our state: for so much as naturally nothing
falls, where all things fall: a general disease is a particular health:
Conformity is a quality enemy to dissolution. As for me, I nothing despair
of it, and me thinks I already perceive some starting holes to save us by:

Deus haec fortasse benigna Hor epod. 13. 10.

Reducet in sedem vice.
It may be, God with gracious intercourse
Will re-establish these things in their course.
Who knows, whether God has determined it shall happen of them, as of bodies
that are purged, and by long grievous sickenesses brought to a better and
sounder state; which thoroughly purged diseases do afterward yield them a more
entire and purely-perfect health, then that they took from them? That which
grieveth me most, is, that coumpting the symptoms or affects of our evil, I
see as many merely proceeding of nature, and such as the heavens send us, and
which may properly be termed theirs, as of those that our own surfeit, or
excess, or misse-diet, or humane indiscretion confer upon us. The very Planets
seem orderly to declare unto us, that we have continued long enough, yea and
beyond our ordinary limits. This also grieves me, that the nearest evil
threatening us, is not a distemper or alteration in the whole and solid mass,
but a dissipation and divulsion of it: the extremest of our fears. And even
in these fantastical humors or dotings of mine, I fear the treason of my
memory, least unwarily it have made me to register somethings twice. I hate to
correct and agnize my self, and can never endure but grudgingly to review and
repolish what once has escaped my pen. I here set down nothing that is new
or lately found out. They are vulgar imaginations; and which peradventure
having been conceived a hundred times, I fear to have already enrolled them.
Repetition is ever tedious, were it in Homer: But irksome in things, that have
but one superficial and transitory show. I am nothing pleased with
inculcation or wresting-in of matters, be it in profitable things, as in
Seneca. And the manner of his Stoike school displeases me, which is, about
every matter, to repeat at large, and from the beginning to the end, such
principles and presuppositions, as serve in general: and every hand-while to
re-allege anew the common arguments, and universal reasons. My memory does
daily grow worse and worse, and is of late much empaired:

Pocula lethaeos vt si duc^ntia somnos, Hor. Epod. 14: 3

-- Arente fauce traxerim.
As though with dry lips I had drunk that up,
Which draws oblivions sleep in drowsy cup.
I shall henceforward be feign (for hitherto thanks be to God, no capital
fault has happened) whereas others seek time and occasion, to premeditate what
they have to say, that I avoid to prepare my self, for fear I should tie my
self to some strict bond, on which I must depend. To be bound and tied does
somewhat distract me: namely when I am wholly to rely and depend on so weak
an instrument, as is my memory. I never read this story, but I feel a
certain proper and natural offense. Lyncestez being accused of a conspiracy
against Alexander, the very same day, that according to custom, he was led
forth in presence of all the army, to be heard in his own defense, had in his
mind a premeditated oration, which he had studiously learned by rote, whereof,
stammering and faltring, having uttered some words: And wrestling with his
memory, and striving to run-it over again, he was suddenly charged by the
soldiers that were about him and slain with pikes; as they who held him to be
convicted. His amazement and silence, served them as a confession. For they
supposed that having had so long leisure in prison to prepare himself, it was
not (as they thought his memory failed him, but his guilty conscience bridled
so his tongue and deprived him of his wonted faculties. It was truly well
spoken. The very place, the company and expectation astonieth a man, when he
most aims at an ambition of well-speaking. What can a man do, when a mere
oration shall bring his life into consequence? As for me, if I be tide unto a
prescript kind of spenking, what binds me to it, does also loose me from it,
when I have committed and wholly assigned my self unto my memory; I so
strongly depend on the same, that I ouerwhelme it: she faints under her own
burden. So much as I refer my self unto her, so much am I divided from my
self: until I make trial of my countenance. And I have sometimes been in
pain, in concealing the bondage whereunto I was engaged: whereas my dessigne,
in speaking, to represent a maine carelessness of accent and countenance,
sudden and vnpremeditated, or ca^ull motions as rising of present occasions;
rather loving to say nothing of any worth, then make show I came provided to
speak well: a thing above all unseemly, to men of my profession, and of over
strict an obligation, to one that cannot hold much: Preparation gives more to
hope, then it brings with it. A man does often strip himself into his doblet,
to leap shorter, then he did in his gown. Nihil est his, qui placere volunt,
tam adversarium, quam expectati^. There is none so great an enemy, to them that
would please, as expectation. It is written of Curio the Orator, that when he
proposed the distribution of the parts of his oration, into three or four; or
the number of his arguments and reasons, it was his ordinary custom, either to
forget some one, or add one or two more unto it. I have ever shunned to fall
into such an inconvenience: as one hating these selfepromises and
prescriptions: Not only for the distrust of my memory; but also because this
form draws over near unto an artiste. Simplicior a militares decent. Plain
words and manners become Martialists. Suffices, I have now made a vow unto my
self, no more to undertake the charge, to speak in any place of respect: For,
to speak in reading what one has written: besides that it is most foolish and
absurd, it is a matter of great disadvantage to such as by nature were
interressed or might do any thing in the action. And wholly to rely or cast my
self to the mercy of my present invention, much less: I have it by nature so
dull and troubled, that it cannot in any wise supply me in sudaine, and stead
me in important necessities. May it please the gentle reader, to suffer this
one part of Essay to run on, and this third strain or addition of the rest
of my pictures pieces. I add, but I correct not: First, because he who has
hypothekised or engaged his labor to the world, I find appearance, that he
has no longer right in the same: let him, if he be able, speak better else
where, and not corrupt the work he has already madesale-off; Of such people,
a man should buy nothing, but after they are dead: let them thoroughly think on
it, before they produce the same. Who hastens them? My book is always one:
except that according as the Printer goes about to renew it, that the buyers
depart not altogether empty-handed, I give my self law to add thereto (as it
is but vncoherent chocky, or ill joined in-laid-worke) some supernumeral
emblem. They are but over-waights, which disgrace not the first form, but
give some particular price unto every one of the succeeding, by an ambitious
pety subtility. Whence notwith standing, it may easily happen, that some
transposition of chronology is thereto commixt: my reports taking place
according to their opportunity, and not ever according to their age. Secondly,
for so much as in regard of my self, I fear to loose by the exchange: My
understanding does not always go forward, it sometimes goes also backward: I
in a manner distrust mine own fantasies as much, though second or third as I
do when they are the first; or present, as past. We many times correct our
selves as foolishly, as we tax others unadvisedly. I am grown aged by a
number of years since my first publications, which were in a thousand five
hundred and four score. But I doubt whether I be increased one inch in
wisdom. My self now, and my self anon, are indeed two; but when better; in
good sooth I cannot tell. It were a goodly thing to be old, if we did only
march toward amendment. It is the motion of a drunkard, stumbling, reeling,
giddiebrain'd, formeles; or of reeds, which the air does causually wave to
and fro, what way it blows. Antiochus in his youth, had stoutly and
vehemently written in favor of the Academy; but being old he changed copy,
and writ as violently against it: which of the two I should follow, should I
not ever follow Antiochus? Having once established a doubt, to attempt to
confirm the certainty of humane opinions, were it not an establishing of a
doubt, and not of the certainty? and promise, that had he had another age given
him with assurance to live, he should ever have been in terms of new
agitations; not so much better, as other and different? Public favor has
given me some more bouldnes, then I hoped for: but the thing I fear most, is
to breed a glutting saciety. I would rather spur, then be weary. As a wiseman
of my time has done. Commendation is ever pleasing, from whom, from whence, or
wherefore so ever it come: yet ought a man to be informed of the cause, if he
will justly please and applaud himself therewith. Imperfections themselves
have their means to be recommended. Vulgar and common estimation, is little
happy if it come to encounter: And I am deceived, if in my days, the worst
compositions and absurdest books have not gained the credit of popular breath.
Verily I am much beholding to diverse honest men, and I thank them, that
vouchsafe to take my endeavors in good part. There is no place where the
deffects of the fashion do so much appear, as in a matter, that in it self
has nothing to recommend it. Good reader blame not me, for those that pass
here, either by the fantazie or unwariness of others: for every hand, each
workman, brings his own unto them. I neither meddle with orthography (and would
only have them follow the ancient) nor with curious pointing: I have small
experience in either. Where they altogether break the sense, I little trouble
my self therewith; for at least they discharge me. But where they will
wrest-in and substitute a false sense (as often they do) and wyre-draw me to
their conceits, then they spoil me. Nevertheless, when the sentence is not
strong or sinnowie according to my meaning, an honest man may reject it to be
mine. He that shall know how little laborious I am and how framed after mine
own fashion, will easily believe, I would rather endite anew, as many more
other Essays, then subject my self to trace these over again, for this
childish correction. I was saying erewhile, that being plunged in the deepest
mine of this new kind of metal, I am not only deprived of great familiarity
with men of different custom from mine; and other opinions, by which they
hold together by a knot, commanding all other knots: but am not also without
some hazard, amongst those, with whom all things are equally lawful: most of
which cannot now adays empaire their market toward our justice: whence the
extreme degree of licenciousnesse proceeds. Casting over all the particular
circumstances that concern me, I find no one man of ours, to whom the
inhibition of our laws costeth any thing, either in gain ceasing, or in loss
appearing (as Lawyers say) more then unto my self. And some there be, that in
chollericke heat and humourous fury will crack and vaunt much, that will
perform a great deal less then my self, if once we come to an equal
balance. As a house at all times freely open, much frequented, of great haunt
and officious in entertaining all sorts of people (for I could never be
induced, to make an implement of war thereof: which I perceive much more
willingly to be sought-out and flocked unto, where it is furthest from my
neighbors) my house has merited much popular affection: And it were a hard
matter to gourmandize my self upon mine own dunghill: And I repute it a
wonderful and exemplar strangeness, that having undergone so many
stormie-wrackes, so diverse changes and tumultuous-neighbour agitations, it does
yet to this day continue free, and (as I may say) an undefiled virgin from
shedding of blood, spoil or sacking. For, to say true, it was possible for a
man of my disposition to escape from a constant and continual form,
whatsoever it was. But the contrary invasions, hostile incursions, alternations
and vicissitudes of fortune, round about me, have hitherto more exasperated,
then mollified the humor of the country: and recharge me with dangers and
invincible difficulties. I have escaped. But it greeveth me that it is rather
by fortune: yea and by my discretion then by justice: And it vexes me, to be
without the protection of the laws and under any other safeguard, then theirs.
As things now stand, I live more then half by the favor of others; which is a
severe obligation. I would not be endebted for my safety, neither to the
goodness, nor to the goodwill of other great men, which applaude themselves
with my liberty and legalitie; nor to the facility of my predecessors or mine
own manners: for, what if I were other then I am? If my demeanor, the
liberty of my conversation, or happily alliance, bind my neighbors: It is a
cruelty, that they should acquit themselves of it, in suffering me to live, and
that they may say; we give him a free and and undisturbed continuation of
divine service, in the chaple of his house, whilst all other Churches round
about him are by us profaned and deserted; and we freely allow and pardon him
the fruition of his goods and use of his life, as he maintains our wives,
and in time of need keeps our cattle. It is long since, that in my house,
we have a share in Lycurgus the Athenians praise, who was the general
storier, depositary and guardian of his fellow-cittizens goods and purses. I am
now of opinion, that a man must live by law and authority, and not by
recompense or grace. How many gallant men have rather made choice to loose
their life, then be endebted for the same? I shun to submit my self to any
manner of obligation. But above all, to which binds me by duty of bonds of
honor. I find nothing so dear, as what is given me: and that because my
will remains engaged by a title of ingratitude: And I more willinglye receive
such offices, as are to be sold. A thing easy to be believed; for these I
give nothing but money; but for those, I give my self. The bond that houldes
me by the law of honesty, seems to me much more urgent and forcible, then
that of civil compulsion. I am more gentlye tide by a Notarie, then by my
self. Is it not reason, that my conscience be much more engaged to that,
wherein she has simply and only been trusted? Else, my faith owes nothing;
for she had nothing lent her. Let one help himself with the confidence or
assurance he has taken from me. I would much rather break the prison of a
wall or of the laws, then the bond of my word. I am nicely scrupulous in
keeping of my promises, nay almost supersticious; and in all subjects I
commonly pass them uncertain and conditional. To such as are of no weighty
consequence, I add force with the jealousy of my rule: she rackes and
charge me with her own interest. Yea, in such enterprises as are altogether
mine own and free, if I speak the word, or name the point, me thinks I
prescribe the same unto me: and that to give it to another knowledge, it is
to preordaine it unto himself. Me seems I absolutely promise, when I speak.
Thus I make but small brag of my propositions. The condemnation I make of my
self, is more mooving, forcible and severe, then that of the judges, who only
take me by the countenance of common obligation: the constraint of my
conscience is more rigorous and more strictly severe: I faintly follow those
duties, to which I should be haled, if I did not go to them. Hoc ipsum it a
iustum est quod recte fit, si voluntarium. This is so just, as it is well done,
if it be voluntary. If the action have no glimps of liberty, Cic. off. l. 1.
it has neither grace nor honor.

Quod me ius cogit, vix voluntate impetrent. Ter. Ad. act. 3. sc. 4.

What law enforces me to do,
By will they can scarce win me to.
Where necessity draws me, I love to relent my will. Quia quicquid imperio
cogitur, exigenti magis, quam praestanti acceptum refertur. For whatsoever is
enforced by command, is more imputed to him that exacteth then in him that
performs. I know some, that follow this air, even unto injustice: They will
rather give, then restore; sooner lend, then pay; and more sparingly do good
to him, to whom they are bound to do it. I bend not that way, but am mainely
against it. I love so much to disoblige and discharge my self, that I have
sometimes esteemed as profit, the ingratitudes, the offenses, and indignities I
had received of those, to whom either by nature or accidents, I was by way of
friendship somewhat behoulding: taking the occasion of their fault for a
quittance and discharge of my debt. Although I continue to pay them the
apparent offices with common reason; I notwith standing find some sparing in
doing that by justice, which I did by affection, and somewhat to ease my self
with the attention and diligence of my inward will. Est prudentis sustinere vt
cursum, sic impetum Cic. de. A^^^.
benevolentiae. It is a wisemans part to keep a hand as on the course, so on
the career of his goodwill: Which where ever I apply my self, is in me too
urgent and over-pressing: at least for a man that by no means would be
enthronged. Which husbandry stands me in stead of some comfort, about the
imperfections of those that touch me. Indeed I am much displeased, they should
thereby be of less worth: but so it is, that I also save something of my
engagement and application toward them. I allow of him, that loves his child
so much the less, by how much more he is either deformedly crooked, or
scald-headed: And not only when he is knavish or shrewd, but also being
unlucky or ill borne (for God himself has in that abated of his worth and
natural estimation) always provided, that in such a cold and slight
affection, he bear himself with moderation and exact justice. In me,
proximitie of blood does nothing diminish, but rather aggravate defects. After
all, according to the skill I have in the knowledge of benefits and
thankfulness, which is a knowledge very subtle and of great use, I see no man
more free and less indebted, then hitherto I am my self. What ever I owe, the
same I owe simply to common and natural obligations. There is no man more
absolutely quit and clear else whence.

-- nec sunt mihi nota potentum
Munera.
With gifts I am not much acquainted,
Of mighty men, and much less tainted.
Princes give me sufficiently, if they take nothing from me, and do me much
good, if they do me no hurt: it is all I require of them. Oh how much am I
beholding to God, for so much as it has pleased him, that whatsoever I enjoy, I
have immediately received the same from his grace: that he has particularly
reserved all my debt unto himself. I most instantly beseech his sacred mercy,
that I may never owe any man so much as one essential God-a-mercie. Oh thrice
fortunate liberty, that has brought me so far. May it end successefully. I
endeavor to have no manner of need of any man. In me omnis spes est mihi. All
my hope for all my help is my self. It is a thing that every man may effect
in himself: but they more easily, whom God has protected and sheltred from
natural and urgent necessities. Indeed it is both lamentable and dangerous, to
depend of others. Our selves, which is the safest and most lawful refuge, are
not very sure under our selves. I have nothing that is mine own, but my self:
yet is the possession thereof partly defective and borrowed. I manure my self,
both in courage (which is the stronger) and also in fortune, that if all things
else should forsake me, I might find something, wherewith to please and
satisfy my self. Eleus Hippias did not only store himself with learning,
that in time of need he might ioifully withdraw himself amongst the Muses,
and be sequestered from all other company: nor only with the knowledge of
Philosophy, to teach his mind to be contented with her, and when his chance
should so dispose of him, manfully to pass over such incommodities, as
exteriorlie might come unto him. But moreover he was so curious in learning to
dress his meat, to notte his hair, to make his clothes, breeches and shoes,
that as much as could possibly be, he might wholly rely and trust to himself,
and be freed from all sorraine help. A man does more freely and more blithely
enjoy borrowed goods: when it is not a bounden iovissance and constrained
through need: and that a man has in his will the power, and in his fortune
the means to live without them. I know my self well. But it is very hard for
me to imagine any liberality of another body so pure toward me, or suppose
any hospitality so free. so hearty and genuine, as would not seem affected,
tyrranicall, disgraced and attended on by reproach, if so were that necessity
had forced and tied me unto it. As to give is an ambicious quality, and of
prerogative, so is taking a quality of submission. Witness the injurious and
pickthanke refusal, that Baiazeth made of the presents which Themir had sent
him. And those which in the behalf of Soliman the Emperor were sent to the
Emperor of Calicut, did so vex him at the heart, that he did not only utterly
reject and scornfully refuse them; saying, that neither himself nor his
predecessors before him, were accustomed to take any thing, and that their
office was rather to give; but besides he caused the Ambassadors, to that end
sent unto him, to be cast into a deep dungeon. When Thetis (says Aristotle)
flattereth Jupiter: when the Lacedaemonians flatter the Athenians, they do not
thereby intend to put them in mind of the good they have done them, which is
ever hateful, but of the benefits they have received of them. Those I see
familiarly to employ and make use of all men, to beg and borrow of all men,
and engage themselves to all men, would doubtless never do it, knew they as I
do, or tasted they as I have done, the sweet content of a pure and
vndepending liberty: and if therewithal (as a wiseman ought) they did duly
ponder what it is for a man to engage himself into such an obligation, or
liberty depriving bond. It may happily be paid sometimes, But it can never be
utterly dissolved. It is a cruel bondage, to him that loves, thoroughly and by
all means to have the free scope of his liberty. Such as are best and most
acquainted with me, know, whether ever they saw any man living, less
soliciting, less craving, less inportuning or less begging, then I am, or
that less employeth or charge others, which if I be, and that beyond all
modern example, it is no great wonder, sithence so many parts of my humors or
manners contribute thereunto. As a natural kind of stubbornness; an
impatience to be denied; a contraction of my desires and desseignes; and an
insufficiency or vntowardlinesse in all manner of affairs; but above all, my
most favored qualities, lethall sloathfulnesse, and a genuine liberty. By all
which means, I have framed an habit, mortally to hate, to be behoulding to
any creature else, or to depend of other, then unto and of my self. True it is,
that before I employ the beneficence or liberality of an other, in any light
or weighty occasion, small or urgent need soever: I do to the utmost power
employ all that ever I am able, to avoid and forbear it. My friends do
strangely importune and molest me, when they solicit and urge me to entreat
a third man. And I deem it a matter of no less charge and imputation, to
disingage him that is endebted unto me, by making use of him, then to engage
my self unto him that owes me nothing. Both which conditions being removed,
let them not look for any combersome, negotious and careful matter at my
hands (for I have denounced open war unto all manner of carke and care) I am
commodiously easy and ready in times of any bodies necessity. And I have also
more avoided to receave, then sought to give: which (as Aristotle says) is
also more facile. My fortune has afforded me small means to benefit others
and that little she has bestowed on me, the same has she also meanly and
indifferently placed. Had she made me to be so borne that I might have kept
some rank amongst men, I would then have been ambicious in procuring to be
beloved, but never to be feared or admired. Shall I express it more
insolentlie? I would have had as much regard unto pleasing, as unto profiting.
Cyrus does most wiselye, and by the mouth of an excellent Captain and also a
better Philosopher, esteem his bounty and prise his good deeds, far
beyond his valor and above his warlike conquests. And Scipio the elder,
wheresoever he seeks to prevail and set forth himself, rateth his
debonairitie and valueth his humanity above his courage and beyond his
victories: and has ever this glorious saying in his mouth: That he has left
his enemies as much cause to love him, as his friends. I will therefore say,
that if a man must thus owe any thing, it ought to be under a more lawful
title, then that whereof I speak, to which the law of this miserable war
does engage me; and not of so great a debt, as that of my total preservation
and whole estate: which does vnreparablie over-whelme me. I have a thousand
times gone to bed in mine house, imagining I should the very same night,
either have been betrayed or slain in my bed: compounding and conditioning
with fortune, that it might be without apprehension of fearful astonishment
and languishment; And after my prayers, have cried out,

Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit?
Shall these our grounds so decked and dressed, Virg. eclo. 1. 11.

By godless soldiers be possessed?
What remedy? It is the place where my self and most of my ancestors were
borne: therein have they placed their affection and their name. We harden our
selves unto whatsoever we accustom our selves. And to a wretched condition, as
ours is, custom has been a most favorable present, given us by nature,
which enureth and lulleth our sense asleep, to the suffering of diverse evils.
Civil wars have this one thing worse then other wars, to cause every one
of us to make a watchtower of his own house.

Quam miserum, porta vitam muroque tueri, O^id. Trist. l. 4. el. 1. 69.

Vixque suae tutum viribus esse domus!
How hard with gate and wall our life to guard,
And scarce be safe in our own houses bard
It is an irksome extremity, for one to be troubled and pressed even in his
own household and domestical rest. The place wherein I dwell, is ever both the
first and last to the battery of our troubles: and where peace is never
absolutely discerned,

Tum quoque cum pax est, trepidant formidine belli. Lucan. l. 1. 256

Even when in peace they are,
They quake for fear of war.
-- quoties pacem fortuna lacessit, Ibid. 252.

Hac iter est bellis, melius fortuna dedisses
Orb sub Eoo sedem, gelidaque sub Arcto,
Errantesque domos.
As often as fortune troubles peace, their race
Wars makes this way: fortune with better grace,
In th'Easterne world thou should have given them place,
Or wandering tents for war, under the cold North-starre.
I sometimes draw the means to strengthen my self against these
considerations, from carelessness and idleness: which also in some sort bring
us unto resolution. It often befulleth me, with some pleasure, to imagine what
mortal dangers are, and to expect them. I do even hood-winkt, with my head in
my bosom and with stupiditie, plunge my self into death, without considering
or knowing it, as into a deep, hollow and bottomless abyss, which at one
leap does swallow me up, and at an instant does cast me into an eternal
slumber, full of insipiditie and indolencie. And in these short, sudden or
violent deaths, the consequence I foresee of them, affoords me more comfort,
then the effect of fear. They say, that even an life is not the best, because
it is long, so death is the best, because it is short. I estrange not my self
so much by being dead, as I enter into confidence with dying. I enwrap and
shroud my self in that storm, which shall blind and furioosly wrap me, with
a ready and insensible charge. Vea if it happened (as some gardners say) that
those Roses and Violets are ever the sweeter and more odoriferous, that grow
near unto Garlike and Onions, for so much as they suck and draw all the ill
savours of the ground unto them: so that these depraved natures would draw and
suck all the venom of mine air, and infection of my climate; and by their
neerenesse unto me, make me so much the better and purer; that I might not lose
all. That is not; but of this, something may be, for so much as goodness is the
fairer and more attracting when it is rare, and that contrariety stifneth, and
diversity encloseth well-doing in it self, and by the jealousy of opposition
and glory, it does inflame it. Thieves and stealers (godamercie their
kindness) have in particular nothing to say to me: no more have I to them. I
should then have to do with over-many sorts of men. Alike consciences lurk
under diver^ kinds of garments: Alike cruelty, disloialtie and stealing. And
so much the worse, by how much it is more base, more safe and more secret under
the color of laws. I hate less an open-professed injury, then a deceiving
traitrous wrong; an hostile and warlike, then a peaceful and lawful. Our
fever has seized upon a body, which it has not much empaired. The fire was
in it, but now the flame has taken hold of it. The report is greater; the hurt
but little. I ordinarily answer such as demand reasons for my voiages: That I
know what I shun, but w^t not what I seek. If one tell me, there may be as
little sound health amongst strangers, and that their manners are neither
better nor purer, then ours: I answer first that it is very hard:

Tam multa scelerum facies. Virg. Georg. l. 1. 506.

The forms so manifold
Of wickedness we hold.
Secondly, that it is ever a gain, to change a bad estate for an uncertain.
And that others evils, should not touch us so near as ours. I will not forget
this, that I can never mutiny so much against France, but I must needs look
on Paris with a favorable eye: It has my heart from my infancy: whereof it
has befalne me as of excellent things: the more other fair and stately
cities I have seen since, the more her beauty has power and does still
usurpingly gain upon my affection. I love that City for her own sake, and
more in her only subsisting and own being, then when it is full-fraught and
embellished with foreign pomp and borrowed garish ornaments: I love her so
tenderly, that even her spots, her blemishes and her warts are dear unto me. I
am no perfect Frenchmen, but by this great-matchlesse City, great in people,
great in regard of the felicity of her situation; but above all, great and
incomparable in variety and diversity of commodities: The glory of France,
and one of the noblest and chief ornaments of the world. God of his mercy free
her, and chase away all our divisions from her: Being entirely united to her
self, I find her defended from all other violence. I forewarne her, that of
all factions, that shall be the worst, which shall breed discord and sedition
in her. And for her sake, I only fear her self. And surely, I am in as great
fear for her, as for any other part of our state. So long as she shall
continue, so long shall I never want a home or retreat, to retire and shroud my
self at all times: a thing able to make me for get the regret of all other
retreates. Not because Socrates has said it, but because such is in truth my
humor, and peradventure not without some excuse, to esteem all men as my
countrymen; and as I kindly embrace a Polonian as a Frenchman; postposing this
natural bond, to universal and common. I am not greatly stricken with the
pleasantness of natural air. Acquaintances altogether new and wholly mine,
do in my conceit countervaile the worth of all other vulgar and casual
acquaintances of our neighbors. Friendships merely acquired by our selves,
do ordinarily exceed those, to which we are joined, either by communication
of Climate, or affinity of blood. Nature has placed us in the world free and
unbound, we emprison our selves into certain streights: As the kings of
Perfia* who bound themselves never to drink other water, then of the river
Choaspez; foolishly renouncing all lawful righ of use in all other waters: and
for their regard dried up all the rest of the world. What Socrates did in his
latter days, to deem a sentence of banishment worse, then a doom of death
against himself, being of the mind I am now, I shall never be neither so base
minded, nor so strictly habituated in my country, that I would follow him. The
celestial lives, have diverse images, which I embrace more by estimation, then
by affection. And some to extraordinary, and so highly elevated, which because
I am not able to conceive, I cannot embrace by estimation. This humor was very
tenderly appehended by him, who deemed all the world to be his City. True it
is, he disdained peregrinations, and had not much set his foot beyond the
territory of Athens. What, if he bewailed the money his friend offered to lay
out, to disingage his life, and refused to come out of prison, by the
intercession of others, because he would not disobey the laws, in a time
wherein they were otherwise so corrupted? These examples are of the first kind
for me Of the second there are others, which I could find in the very same man.
Many of these rare examples exceed the power of my action; but some exceed also
the force of my judgment. Besides these reasons, I deem travel to be a
profitable exercise. The mind has therein a continual exercitation, to mark
things unknown, and note new objects. And as I have often said, I know no
better school, to fashion a man's life, then incessantly to propose unto him
the diversity of so many other men's lives, customs, humors and fantazies; and
make him taste or apprehend one so perpetual variety of our natures shapes or
forms. Therein the body is neither absolutely idle nor wholly troubled: and,
that moderate agitation does put him into breath. My self, as crazed with the
chollicke as I am, can sit eight, yea sometimes ten hours on horseback,
without weariness or tyring.

Vires vltra sortemque senectae. Virg. Aen. l. 6. 114.

Beyond strength ordinary,
Which old years use to carry.
No weather is to me so contrary, as the scorching heat of the parching Sun.
For, these Vmbrels or riding canapies, which since the ancient Romans, the
Italians use, do more weary the arms, then ease the head. I would faine-faine
know what industry it was in the Persians, so anciently, and even in the
infancy of luxuriousness (as Xenoph^n reports) to fan themselves, and at
their pleasures to make cold shades. I love rainy and durty weather, as duckes
do. The change either of air or climate does nothing distemper me. All
heavens are alike to me, I am never vexed or beaten, but with internal
alterations, such as I produce my self, which surprise and possess me least
in times of way-fairing. It is a hard matter to make me resolve of any
journey: but if I be once on the way, I hold out as long and as far, as
another. I strive as much in small, as I labor in great enterprises: and to
prepare my self for a short journey or to visit a friend, as to undertake a
farre-set voyage. I have learned to frame my journies after the Spanish
fashion, all at once and outright; great and reasonable. And in extreme heats,
I travel by night, from Sunne-set to Sunne-rising. The other fashion,
confusedly and in haste to bait by the way and dine, especially in Winter, when
the days are so short, is both troublesome for man, and incommodious for
horse. My Iades are the better, and hold out longer. No horse did ever fail
me, that held out the first days journey with me. I water them in all waters;
and only take care of their last watering, that before I come to mine Inn
they have way enough to beat their water. My slothfulness to rise in the
morning, allows such as follow me sufficient leisure to dine, before we
take horse. As for me, I never feed over-late: I commonly get an appetite in
eating, and no otherwise: Iam never hungry but at the table. Some complain,
that being married, and well stricken in years, I have enured my self, and
been pleased to continue this exercise. They do me wrong: The best time for a
man to leave his house, is when he has so ordered and settled the same, that
it may continue without him: and when he has so disposed his affairs, that
they may answer the ancient course and wonted form. It is much more
indiscretion, and an argument of want of judgment, to go from home, and leave
no trusty guard in his house, and which for lack of care may be slow or
forgetful in providing for such necessities, as in your absence it may stand
in need of. The most profitable knowledge, and honourablest occupation for a
matron or mother of a family, is the occupation and knowledge of huswiferie. I
see diverse covetous, but few huswives. It is the mistresse-qualitie that all
men should seek after, and above all other endeavor to find: as the only
dowry, that serves, either to ruin and overthrow, or to save and enrich our
houses. Let no man speak to me of it; according as experience has taught me,
I require in a married woman the Oeconomicall virtue above all others. Wherein I
would have her absolutely skillful, since by my absence I commit the whole
charge, and bequeath the full government of my household to her.

I see (and that to my grief) in diverse houses the master or goodman come home
at noone all weary, durty and dusty, with drudging and toiling about his
business, when the mistress or good-wife is either scarce up, or if she be,
she is yet in her closet, dressing, decking, smugging or trimming of her
self. It is a thing only fitting Queens or Princes; whereof some doubt might
be made. It is ridiculous that the idleness, and unjust that the lithernesse
of our wives should be fostered with our sweat, and maintained by our travel:
No man (as near as I can) shall fortune to have a more free and more absolute
use, or a more quiet and more liquid fruition of his goods, then I have. If the
husband bring matter; nature her self would have women to bring form.
Concerning duties of wedlocke-friendship, which some happily imagine to be
interessed or prejudiced by the husbands absence, I believe it not.
Contrariwise, it is a kind of intelligence, that easily grows cold by an
over-continuall assistance, and decaieth by assiduitie; for, to stand still at
rack and manger breeds a satietie. Every strange woman seems to us an
honest woman: And all feel by experience, that a continual seeing one
another, cannot possibly represent the pleasure, men take by parting and
meeting again. These interruptions fill me with a new kind of affection,
toward mine own people, and yield me the use of my house more pleasing:
vicissitude does now and then en-earnest my mind toward one, and then toward
another. I am not ignorant how true amity has arms long enough, to embrace,
to claspe and hold from one corner of the world Unto another: namely in this,
where is a continual communication of offices, that cause the obligation, and
revive the remembrance thereof. The Stoickes say, that there is so great an
affinity and mutual relation, between wise men, that he who dineth in
France, feeds his companion in Egypt; and if one of them do but hold up his
finger, where ever it be, all the wise men dispersed upon the habitable land,
feel a kind of aid thereby. IoVissance and possession, appertain chiefly
Unto imagination. It embraces more earnestly and incessantly what she goes to
fetch, then what we touch. Summon and count all your daily ammusements; and
you shall find, you are then furthest and most absent from your friend, when
he is present with you. His assistance releaseth your attention, and gives
your thoughts liberty, at all times and upon every occasion, to absent
themselves. If I be at Rome, or any where else, I hold, I survay and govern my
house and the commodities, which I have left about and in it. I even see my
walls, my trees, my grass and my rents, to stand, to grow, to decay and to
diminish, within an inch or two of that I should do when I am at home.

Ante oculos errat domus, errat forma locorum.
My house is still before mine eyes,
There still the form of places lies.
If we but only enjoy what we touch, farewell our crowns when they are in our
coafers, and adieu to our children, when they are abroad or a hunting; we would
have them nearer. In the garden is it far off? within half a days journey?
What, within ten leagues, is it far or near? If it be near: what is eleven,
twelve, or thirteen? and so step by step. Verily that woman who can prescribe
unto her husband, how many steps end that which is near, and which step in
number begins the distance she counts far, I am of opinion, that she stay him
between both.

-- excludat iurgia finis. Hor. l. 2. epist. 1. 38.

Let the conclusion, Exclude confusion.
Vtor permisso, caudaeque pilos vt equinae
Paulatim vello: and demo vnum, demo etiam vnum
Dum cadat elusus ratione ruentis acervi.
Ivse the grant, and pluck by one and one Ibid. 45.

The horse-taile hairs, till when the bush is gone,
I leave the Jade a curtall tail or none.
And let them boldly call for Philophie to help them. To whom some might
reproach, since she neither discerns the one nor other end of the joint,
between the overmuch and the little; the long and the short; the light and the
heavy, the near and the far; since she neither knows the beginning nor
ending thereof, that she does very uncertainly judge of the middle. Rerum nature
a nullam nobis dedit cognitionem finium: Nature has affoorded us no knowledge
of her ends. Are they not yet wives and friends of the deceased, that are not
at the end of this, but in the other world? we embrace both those that have
been, and those which are not yet, not only the absent. We did not condition,
when we were married, continually to keep our selves close hugging one
another, as some, I wot not what little creatures do, we see daily; or as
those bewitched people of Karenti, in a kind of dogged manner. And a woman
should not have her eyes so greedily or so dotingly fixed on her husbands
forepart, that if need shall require, she may not view his hinder-partes. But
might not the saying of that cunning Painter, who could so excellently set
forth their humors and pourtray their conditions, fitly be placed here,
lively to represent the cause of their complaints?

Vxor, si cesses, aut te amare cogitat, Ter. Adelph. act. 1. s^. 1.

Aut tete amari, aut potare, aut animo obsequi,
Et tibi been esse soli, cum sibi sit male.
If you be slow, your wife thinks that in love you are,
Or are beloved, or drink, or all for pleasure care,
And that you only farewell, when she ill does fare.
Or might it be, that opposition and contradiction do naturally entertain,
and of themselves nourish them: and that they are sufficiently accomodated,
provided they disturb and incommode you? In truly-perfect friendship, wherein
I presume to have some skill and well-grounded experience; I give my self more
unto my friend, than I draw him unto me. I do not only rather love to do him
good, then he should do any to me; but also, that he should rather do good
unto himself, then unto me; For then does he me most good, when he does it to
himself. And if absence be either pleasing or beneficial unto him, it is to
me much more pleasing, then his presence: and that may not properly be termed
absence, where means and ways may be found to enter-advertise one another. I
have heretofore made good use, and reaped commodity by our absence and
distance. We better replenished the benefit, and extended further the
possession of life, by being divided and farre-asunder: He lived, he reioiced,
and he saw for me, and I for him, as fully, as if he had been present: Being
together, one party was idle: We confounded one another. The separation of the
place, made the conjunction of our minds and wills, the richer. This
insatiate and greedy desire of corporal presence, does somewhat accuse the
weakness in the iovissance of souls. Concerning age, which some allege
against me, it is clean contrary. It is for youth, to subject and bondage it
self to common opinions, and by force to constrain it self for others. It
may fit the turn of both; the people and it self: We have but overmuch to
do with our selves alone. According as natural commodities fail us, let us
sustain our selves by artificial means. It is injustice, to excuse youth in
following her pleasures, and forbid age to devise and seek them. When I was
young, I concealed my wanton and covered my youthful passions, with wit; and
now being aged, I endeavor to pass the sad and incident to years, with
sport and debauches. Yet do Platoes laws forbid men to travel abroad, before
they are forty or fifty years of age, that so their travel may sort more
profitable, and prove more instructive. I should more willingly consent to
this other second article of the said laws, which forbids men to wander
abroad, after they are once threescore. Of which age, few that travel
farre-journies return home again. What care I for that? I undertake it not,
either to return or to perfect the same. I only undertake it to be in motion:
So long as the motion pleases me, and I walk that I may walk. Those run
not, that run after a Benefice or after a Hare: But they run, that run at
barriers and to exercise their running. My de^scigne is every where divisible,
it is not grounded on great hopes: each day makes an end of it. Even so is my
life's voyage directed. Yet have I seen diverse farre-countries, where I would
have been glad to have been stayed. Why not? If Chrysippus, Diogenes,
Cleanthes, Antipater and Zeno, with so many other wise men of that
roughly-severe, and severely-strict Sect, forsook their Countries (without
just cause to be offended with them) only to enjoy another air? Truly the
greatest grief of my peregrinations, is, that I cannot have a firm
resolution, to establish my abiding where I would. And that I must ever resolve
with my self to return, for to accommodate my self unto common humors. If I
should fear to die in any other place, then where I was borne; if I thought I
should die less at my ease, far from mine own people: I would hardly go
out of France, nay I should scarcely go out of mine own parish, without
feeling some dismay. I feel death ever pinching me by the throat, or pulling
me by the back: But I am of another mould; to me it is ever one, and at all
times the same. Nevertheless if I were to choose, I think it should rather be
on horseback, than in a bed; from my home, and far from my friends. There is
more hartssorrow, than comfort, in taking ones last farewell of his friends. I
do easily forget or neglect these duties or complements of our common or
civil courtesy. For, of Offices appertaining to unaffected amity, the same
is the most displeasing and offensive: And I should as willingly forget to give
a body that great adieu, or eternal farewell. If a body reap any commodity
by this assistance, he also finds infinite inconveniences in it. I have seen
diverse die most piteously, compassed and beset round with their friends and
servants: Such multitudes, and thronging of people does stifle them. It is
against reason, and a testimony of small affection, and little care they have of
you should die at rest. One offends your eyes, another molesteth your ears,
the third v exeth your mouth: You have neither sense nor limme, or part of
your body, but is tormented and grieved. Your heart is ready to burst for pity
to hear your friends moanes and complaints; and to rive asunder with spite to
hear peradventure some of their wailings and moans, that are but fained and
counterfeit. If a man have ever had a mild or tender nature, being weak and
ready to die, he must then necessarily have it more tender and relenting. It is
most requisite, that in so urgent a necessity, one have a gentle hand and
fitly applied to his senses, to scratch him where he itcheth; or else he ought
not be clawed at all. If we must needs have the help of a Midwife, to bring
us into this world, there is reason we should also have the aiding-hand of a
wise man, to deliver us out of the same. Such a one, and there with all a true
friend, should a man beforehand purchase very dear, only for the service of
such an occasion. I am not yet come to that disdainful vigor, which so
fortifieth it self, that at such times nothing aideth, nor nothing troubles:
I fly a lower pitch. I seek to squat my self, and steal from that passage:
not by fear, but by Art. My intent is not in such an action, to make either
trial or show of my constancy. Wherefore? Because, then shall the right and
interest I have in reputation cease. I am content with a death united in it
self, quiet and solitary, wholly mine, convenient to my retired and private
life. Clean contrary to the Roman superstition, where he was judged unhappy,
that died without speaking, and had not his nearest friends to close his eyes.
I have much ado to comfort my self, without being troubled to comfort others:
cares and vexations ^now in my mind, without needing circumstances to bring me
new; and sufficient matter to entertain my self, without borrowing any. This
share belongs not to the part of society: It is the act of one man alone. Let
us live, laugh and be merry amongst our friends, but die and yield up the ghost
amongst strangers, and such as we know not. He who has money in his purse,
shall ever find some ready to turn his head, make his bed, rub his feet,
attend him, and that will trouble and importune him no longer than he list:
and will ever show him an indifferent and well-composed countenance, and
without grumbling or grudging give a man leave to do what he please, and
complain as he list. I daily endeavor by discourse to shake off this childish
humor and inhumane conceit, which causes, that by our griefs and pains we
ever desire to moove our friends to compassion and sorrow for us, and with a
kind of sympathy to condole our miseries and passions. We endeare our
inconveniences beyond measure, to extract tears from them: And the constancy
we so much commend in all others, undauntedly to endure all evil fortunes; we
accuse and vpbraid to our nearest allies, when they molest us: we are not
contented they should have a sensible feeling of our calamities, if they do
not also afflict themselves for them. A man should as much as he can set forth
and extend his joy; but to the utmost of his power, suppress and abridge his
sorrow. He that will causelessly be moaned, and sans reason, deserves not to be
pitied when he shall have cause and reason for it. To be ever complaining and
always moaning, is the way never to be moaned and seldom to be pitied: and so
often to seem over-passionately-pitifull, is the mean to make no man
feelingly-ruthfull toward others. He that makes himself dead being alive, is
subject to be accounted alive when he is dying. I have seen some take pepper
in the nose, for so much as they were told that they had a cheerful
countenance; that they looked well; that they had a temperate pulse: to force
laughter, because some betrayed their recoverie: and hate their health, because
it was not regreetable. And which is more, they were no women. I for the most,
represent my infirmities such as they are: And shun such words as are of
evil presage, and avoid composed exclamations. If not glee and mirth, at least
an orderlysetled countenance of the bystanders and assistants, is
sufficiently-convenient to a wise and discreet sicke-man, who though he see
himself in a contrary state, he will not pick a quarrel with health. He is
pleased to behold the same, sound and strong in others; and at least for
company-sake to enjoy his part of it. Though he feel and find himself to
faint and sink down, he does not altogether reject the conceits and
imaginations of life, nor does he avoid common entertainments. I will study
sickness when I am in health: when it comes, it will really enough make her
impression, without the help of my imagination. We deliberately prepare our
selves before hand for any voyage we undertake, and therein are resolved: the
hour is set when we will take horse, and we give it to our company, in whose
favor we extend it. I find this unexpected profit by the publication of my
manners, that in some sort it serves me for a rule. I am sometimes surprised
with this consideration, not to betray the history of my life. This public
declaration, binds me to keep my self within my course, and not to
contradict the image of my conditions: commonly less disfigured and
gaine-said, then the malignitie and infirmity of modern judgments does
bear. The uniformity and singleness of my manners, produces a visage of
easy interpretation; but because the fashion of them is somewhat new and
strange, and out of use, it gives detraction to fair play. Yet is it true,
that to him, who will go about loyally to iniure me, me thinks I do
sufficiently afford him matter, whereby he may detract and snarle at my avowed
and known imperfections, and wherewith he may be satisfied, without vain
contending and idle skirmishing. If my self by preoccupating his discovery and
accusation, he thinks I bar him of his snarling, it is good reason he take
his right, toward amplification and extension: Offense has her rights beyond
justice: And that the vices, whereof I show him the roots in me, he should
amplify them to trees. Let him not only employ there unto those that possess
me, but those which but threaten me. Injurious vices, both in quality and in
number. Let him beat me that way. I should willingly embrace the example of
Dion the Philosopher. Antigonus going about to scoff and quip at him touching
his birth and offspring, he interrupted him and took the word out of his
mouth: I am (said he) the son of a bondslave, a butcher, branded for a
rogue, and of a whore, whom my father by reason of his base fortune, took to
wife: Both were punished for some misdeede. Being a child, an Orator bought me
as a slave, liking me for my beauty and comeliness; and dying, left me all
his goods; which having transported into this city of Athens, I have applied
my self unto Philosophy. Let not Historians busy themselves in seeking news
of me. I will at large blaz on my self, and plainly tell them the whole
discourse. A generous and free-minded confession does disable a reproach and
disarme an injury. So it is, that when all Cards be told, me seems, that I am
as often commended as dispraised beyond reason. As also me thinks, that even from
my infancy, both in rank and degree of honor, I have had place given me,
rather above and more, than less and beneath that which appertained to me. I
should better like to be in a country, where these orders might either be
reformed or contemned. Amongst men, after that striving or altercation for the
prerogative or upper hand in going or sitting, exceeds three replies, it
becomes incivill. I neither fear to yield and give place, nor to follow and
proceed unjustly, so I may avoid such irksome and importunate contestations.
And never did man desire precedencie or place before me, but I quitted the same
without grudging. Besides the profit I reap by writing of my self, I have
hoped for this other, that if ever it might happen my humors should please or
sympathize with some honest man, he would before my death seek to be
acquainted with me, or to overtake me. I have given him much ground: For,
whatsoever a long acquaintance or continual familiarity might have gained him
in many wearisome years, the same has he in three days fully seen in this
Register; and that more safely and more exactly. A pleasant fantazie is this of
mine; many things I would be loath to tell a particular man, I utter to the
whole world. And concerning my most secret thoughts and inward knowledge, I
send my dearest friends to a Stationers shop.

Excutienda damus praecordia. Pers. sat. 5. 22.

Our very entrails we
Lay forth for you to see.
If by so good marks and tokens, I had ever known or heard of any one man,
that in this humor had been answerable to me, I would assuredly have wandered
very far to find him out: For, the exceeding joy of a sortable and in one
consent agreeing company, cannot (in mine opinion) be sufficiently endeared or
purchased at too high a rate. Oh God! who can express the value or conceive
the true worth of a friend? How true is that ancient golden saying, that the
use of a friend is more necessary and pleasing, then of the elements, water and
fire. But to return to my former discourse: There is then no great
inconvenience in dying far from home and abroad. We esteem it a part of
duty and decency to withdraw our selves for natural actions, less hideous
and less disgraceful then this. But also those that come unto that, in
languishing manner to draw a long space of life, should not happily wish with
their misery to trouble a whole family. Therefore did the Indians of a
certain country deem it just and lawful, to kill him that should fall into
such necessity. And in another of their Provinces, they though it meet to
forsake him, and as well as he could leave him alone to seek to save
himself. To whom at last, prove they not themselves tedious and intolerable?
Common offices proceed not so far. Perforce you teach cruelty unto your best
friends; obdurating by long use, both wife and children, not to feel, nor to
conceive, nor to moan your evils any longer. The groans and outcries of my
chollike, cause no more ruth and wailing in any body. And should we conceive
pleasure by their conversation (which seldom happens, by reason of the
disparitie of conditions, which easily produces either contempt or envy
toward what man soever) is it not too-too much, therewith to abuse a whole age?
The more I should see them with a good heart to strain themselves for me, the
more should I bewail their pain. The law of courtesy allows us to lean
upon others, but not so unmannerly to lie upon them and underpropped our selves in
their ruin. As he who caused little infants to be slain, that with their
innocent blood he might be cured of a malady he had. Or another who was
continually stored with young teudrels or lasses, to keep his old-frozen limbs
warm a nights, and entermix the sweetness of their breath with his
old-stinking and offensive vapors. Decrepitude is a solitary quality. I am
sociable even unto excess, yet do I think it reasonable, at last to
substract my opportunity from the sight of the world, and hatch it in my self.
Let me shroud and shrugge my self into my shell, as a tortoise: and learn to
see men, without taking hold of them. I should outrage them in so steep a
passage. It is now high time to turn from the company. But here will somesay,
that in thesefarre journies you may peradventure fall into some miserable
dog-hole or poor cottage, where you shall want all needful things. To whom I
answer, that for things most necessary insuch cases, I ever carry most of them
with me: And that, wherever we are, we cannot possibly avoid fortune, if
she once take upon her to persecute us. When I am sick, I want nothing that is
extraordinary: what nature cannot work in me, I will not have a Bolus, or a
glister to effect. At the very beginning of my agues or sickenesses that cast
me down, whilst I am yet whole in my senses and near unto health, I reconcile
my self to God by the last duties of a Christian; whereby I find my self
free and discharged; and think I have so much more reason and authority over
my sickness, I find less want of Notaries and counsel, then of Physicians.
What I have not disposed of my affairs or settled of my state when I was in
perfect health, let none expect I should do it being sick. Whatever I will
do for the service of death, is always ready done. I dare not delay it one
only day. And if nothing be done, it is as much to say, that either some doubt
has delaide the choice: For, sometimes it is a good choice, not to choose at
all: Or that absolutely I never intended to do any thing. I write my book to
few men, and to few years. Had it been a matter of lasting continuance, it
should have been compiled in a better and more polished language: According to
the continual variation, that hitherto has followed our French tongue. Who
may hope, that it is present form shall be in use fifty years hence? It daily
changes and slips our hands: and since I could speak the same, it is much
altered and well nigh half varied. We say it is now come to a full perfection.
There is no age but says as much of hirs. It lies not in my power, so long as
it glideth and differs and alters as it does, to keep it at a stay. It is
for excellent and profitable compositions to fasten it unto them, whose credit
shall either diminish or increase, according to the fortune of our state. For
all that, I fear not to insert therein diverse private articles, whose use is
consumed amongst men living now adays: and which concern the particular
knowledge of some, that shall further see into it, then with a common
understanding. When all is done, I would not (as I often see the memory of the
deceased tossed too and fro) that men should descant and argue: Thus and thus
be judged; thus he lived; thus he meant: had he spoken when his life left him,
he would have given I wot what: There is no man knew him better then my self.
Now, as much as modesty and decorum does permit me; I here give a taste of my
inclinations and an essay of my affection: which I do more freely and more
willingly by word of mouth, to any that shall desire to be thoroughly informed
of them. But so it is, that if any man shall look into these memorialls, he
shall find, that either I have said all, or desseigned all. What I cannot
express, the same I point at with my finger.

Verum animo satis haec vestigia parva sagaci Lutt. lib. 1. 4. 19.

Sunt, per quae possis cognoscere cateratnte.
But this small footing to a quicke-sent mind
May serve, whereby safely the rest to find.
I leave nothing to be desired or divined of me. If one must entertain
himself with them, I would have it to be truly and justly. I would willingly
come from the other world, to give him the lie, that should frame me other then
I had been: were it he meant to honor me. I see that of the living, men
never speak according to truth; and they are ever made to he, what they are
not. And if with might and maine, I had not vpheld a friend of mine whom I have
lately lost, he had surely been mangled and torn in a thousand contrrary
shapes. But to make an end of my weak humors: I confess, that in traveling
I seldom alight in any place or come to any Inn, but first of all I cast in
my mind whether I may conveniently lie there, if I should chance to fall
sick; or dying, die at my ease and take my death quietly. I will, as near as
I can be lodged in some convenient part of the house, and in particular from
all noise or stinking favors; in no close, filthy or smoaky chamber. I seek
to flatter death by these frivolous circumstances: Or as I may rather say, to
discharge my self from all other trouble or encombrance; that so I may wholly
apply and attend her, who without that shall happily lie very heavy upon me. I
will have her take a full share of my lives eases and commodities; it is a
great part of it and of much consequence, and I hope it shall not belie what is
past. Death has some forms more easy then others, and assumeth diverse
qualities; according to all men's fantazies. Among the natural ones, that
proceeding of weakness and heavy dullness, to me seems gentle and pleasant.
Among the violent I imagine a precipice more hardly, then a ruin that
overwhelmes me: and a cutting blow with a sword, then a shot of an harquebuse:
and I would rather have chosen to drink the potion of Socrates, then wound my
self as Cato did. And though it be all one yet does my imagination perceive a
difference, as much as is between death and life, to cast my self into a
burning furnace, or in the channel of a shallow river. So foolishly does our
fear respect more the mean, then the effect. It is but one instant; but of
such moment, that to pass the same according to my desire, I would willingly
renounce many of my lives-dayes. Since all men's fantazies, find either excess
or diminution in her sharpensse; since every man has some choice between the
forms of dying, let us try a little further, whether we can find out some
one, free from all sorrow and grief. Might not one also make it seem
voluptuous, as did those who died with Anthonic and Cleopatra? I omit to speak
of the sharp and exemplar efforts, that philosophy and religion produce. But
amongst men of no great fame, some have been found (as one Petronius, and one
Tigillinus at Rome) engaged to make themselves away, who by the tenderness of
their preparations have in a manner lulled the same asleep. They have made it
pass and glide away, even in the midst of the security of their accustomed
pastimes and wanton recreations: Amongst harlots and good fellows; no speech of
comfort, no mention of will or testament, no ambitious affectation of
constancy, no discourse of their future condition, no compunction of sins
committed, no apprehension of their soules-health, ever troubling them; amid
sports, plays, banketting, surfeiting, chambring, jesting, music and singing
of amorous verses: and all such popular and common entertainments. Might not
we imitate this manner of resolution in more honest affairs and more
commendable attempts? And since there are deaths good unto wise men and good
unto fools, let us find some one that may be good unto such as are between
both. My imagination presents me some easy and mild countenance thereof, and
(since we must all die) to be desired. The tyrants of Rome have thought, they
gave that criminal offender his life, to whom they gave the free choice of
death. But Theophrastus a Philosopher so delicate, so modest and so wise, was
he not forced by reason, to dare to utter this verse, latinized by Cicero:

Vitam regit fortuna non sapientia. Cic. Tusc. qu. l. 5. Theoph. Calisth.

Fortune our life does rule,
Not wisdom of the school.
Fortune gives the facility of my lives-condition some aid; having placed it
in such a time, wherein it is neither needful nor combersome unto my people.
It is a condition I would have accepted in all the seasons of my age: but in
this occasion to trusse up bag and baggage, and take up my bed and walk: I am
particularly pleased, that when I shall die, I shall neither breed pleasure
nor cause sorrow in them. She has caused (which is the recompense of an
artist) that such as by my death may pretend any material benefit, receive
thereby elsewhere, jointly a material loss and hinderance. Death lies
sometimes heavy upon us, in that it is burdensome to others: and interesseth
us with their interest, almost as much as with ours: and sometimes more; yea
altogether. In this inconveniency of lodging that I seek, I neither entermix
pomp nor amplitude; For, I rather hate it. But a certain simple and homely
propriety, which is commonly found in places where less Art is, and that
nature honors with some grace peculiar unto her self. Non ampliter sed
munditer convivium. Plus salis quam sumptus. Not a great, but a neat feast.
More conceit then cost. Plantin.


And then, it is for those, who by their urgent affairs are compelled to
travel in the midst of deep Winter, and amongst the Grisons, to be surprised
by such extreamities in their journies. But I, who for the most part never
travel, but for pleasure, will neither be so ill advised, nor so simply
guided. If the way be foul on my right hand, I take the left: If I find my
self ill at ease or unfit to ride, I stay at home. Which doing, and observing
this course, in very truth I see no place, and come no where, that is not as
pleasant, as convenient and as commodious as mine own house. True it is, that
I ever find superfluity superfluous: and observe a kind of troublesomenesse
in delicateness and plenty. Have I omitted or left any thing behind me that
was worth the seeing? I return back; It is ever my way, I am never out of it.
I trace no certain line, neither right nor crooked. Coming to any strange
place, find I not what was told me? As it often fortuneth, that others
judgments agree not with mine, and have most times found them false, I grieve
not at my labor: I have learned that what was reported to be there, is not. I
have my bodies complexion as free, and my taste as common, as any man in the
world. The diversity of fashions between one and other nations, concerns me
nothing, but by the varieties-pleasure. Each custom has his reason. Be the
trenchers or dishes of wood, of pewter or of earth: be my meat boiled, roasted
or baked; butter or oil, and that of Olives or of Wall-nuts; hot or cold; I
make no difference; all is one to me: And as one, that is growing old, I accuse
the generous faculty; and had need that delicatnesse and choice, should stay
the indiscretion of my appetite, and sometime ease and solace my stomach. When
I have been out of France, and that to do me courtesy, some have asked me,
whether I would be served after the French manner, I have jested at them, and
have ever thrust-in amongst the thickest tables and fullest of strangers. I am
ashamed to see our men besotted with this foolish humor, to fret and chafe,
when they see any fashions contrary to theirs. They think themselves out of
their element, when they are out of their Village. Where ever they come they
keep their own country fashions, and hate, yea and abhor all strange
manners: Meet they a countriman of theirs in Hungary, they feast that good
fortune: And what do they? Marry close and join together, to blame, to
condemn and to scorn so many barbarous fashions as they see. And why not
Barbarous, since not French? Nay happily they are the better sort of men, that
have noted and so much exclaimed against them. Most take going out but for
coming home. They travel close and covered, with a silent and incommunicable
wit, defending themselves from the contagion of some unknown air. What I
speak of such, puts me in mind in the like matter, of that I have heretofore
perceived in some of your young Courtiers. They only converse with men of
their coat; and with disdain or pity look upon us, as if we were men of
another World. Take away their new fangled, mysterious and affected courtly
complements, and they are out of their byase. As far to seek and short of
us, as we of them. That saying is true; That An honest man is a man compounded.
Clean contrary, I travel fully glutted with out fashions: Not to seek
Gaskoines in Sicilie; I have left over many at home. I rather seek for
Graecians and Persians: Those I accost, them I consider, and with such I
endevor to be acquainted: to that I prepare and therein I employ my self. And
which is more, me seems, I have not met with many manners, that are not worth
ours. Indeed I have not wandered far, scarsly have I lost the sight of our
Chimnies. Moreover, most of the casual companies you meet withal by the way,
have more incommodity than pleasure: a matter I do not greatly take hold of,
and less now that age does particularize and in some sort sequester me from
common forms. You suffer for other, or others endure for you. The one
inconvenience is yrkesome, the other troublesome: but yet the last is (in my
conceit) more rude. It is a rare, chance and seld-seene fortune, but of
exceeding solace and inestimable worth, to have an honest man, of singular
experience, of a sound judgment, of a resolute understanding and constant
resolution, and of manners comformable to yours, to accompany or follow you
with a goodwill. I have found great want of such a one in all my voyages. Which
company a man must seek with discretion and with great heed obtain, before he
wander from home. With me no pleasure is fully delightsome without
communication; and no delight absolute, except imparted. I do not so much as
apprehend one rare conceit, or conceive one excellent good thought in my
mind, but me thinks I am much grieved and grievousty perplexed, to have
produced the same alone, and that I have no simpathyzing companion to impart it
unto. Si cum hac exceptione detur sapientia, vt illam inclusam tencam, nec
enunciem, reijciam. If wisdom should be offered with this exception, that I
should keep it concealed, and not utter it, I would refuse it. The other
strained it one note higher. Si contigerit ea vita sapienti, vt omnium rerum
Cic. Offic. lib 1.
affluentibus copijs, quamvis omnia, quae cognitione digna sunt, summo otio
secum ipse consideret and contempletur, tamen si solitudo tanta sit, vt hominem
videre nonpossit, excedat e vita. If a wiseman might lead such a life, as in
abundance of all things he may in full quiet contemplate and consider all
things worthy of knowledge, yet if he must be so solitary as he may see no man,
he should rather leave such a life. Architas his opinion is suitable to mine,
which was, that it would be a thing unpleasing to the very heavens and
distastefull to man, to survay and walk within those immense and divine and
celestial bodies, without the assistance of a friend or companion: Yet is it
better to be alone, than in tedious and foolish company. Aristippus loved to
live as an alien or stranger every where.

Me si faeta meis paterentur ducere vitam Virg. A^^. lib. 4. 339.

Auspicijs,
If fates would me permit
To live as I think fit,
I should choose to wear out my life with my bum in the saddle, ever riding.

-- visere gestiens, Her car. lib. 3. ^d. 3. 54.

Quaparte debacchentur ignes,
Qua nebulae pluvijque rores.
Delighting much to go and see
Where fiery heats rage furiously,
Where clouds and rainy dews most be.
Have you not more easy pastimes? What is it you want? Is not your house well
seated, and in a good and wholesome air? Sufficiently furnished, and more then
sufficiently capable? His Royal Majesty has in great state been in the same,
and more than once taken his repast there. Does not your family in rule and
government leave many more inferior to her, than above her eminency? Is there
any local thought or care, that as extraordinary does vlcerate, or as
indigestible does molest you?

Quae te nunc coquat and vexet sub pectore fixa. E^^i. Cic. Senect. p.

Which now boyles in thy breast.
And let us thee take no rest.
Where do you imagine you may be without empeachment or disturbance? Nunquam
simpliciter fortuna indulget. Fortune never favors fully without exception.
You see then, there is none but you that trouble and busy your self: and
every where you shall follow your self, and in all places you shall complain.
For, Here below there is no satisfaction or content, except for brutall or
divine minds. He who in so just an occasion has no content, where does he
imagine to find it? Unto how many thousands of men, does such a condition as
yours, bound and stay the limits of their wishes? Reform but your self; by
that you may do all: Whereas toward fortune you have no right or interest,
but patience. Nulla placida quies est, Sen. ep. 56. ^^.
nisi quam ratio composuit. There is no pleasing settled rest, but such as
reason has made-vp. I see the reason of this advertisement, yea I perceive it
well. But one should sooner have done and more pertinently, in one bare word to
say unto me: Be wise. This resolution is beyond wisdom. It is her Work and
her production. So does the Physician, that is ever crying to a languishing,
heart-broken sicke-man, that he be merry and pull up a good heart; he should
less foolishly persuade him if he did but bid him, To be healthy; as for me, I
am but a man of the common stamp. It is a certain, sound and of
easie-vnderstanding precept: Be content with your own; that is to say with
reason: the execution whereof notwithstanding is no more in the wiser sort, than
in my self: It is a popular word, but it has a terrible far-reaching
extension. What comprehends it not? All things fall within the compass of
diseretion and modification. Well wot, that being taken according to the bare
letter, the pleasure of travel brings a testimony of unquietness and
irresolution. Which to say truth, are our mistrisse and predominant qualities.
Yea, I confess it: I see nothing, be it but a dream or by wishing, whereon I
may take hold. Only variety and the possession of diversity does satisfy
me: if at least any thing satisfy me. In travel this does nourish me, that
without interest I may stay my self; and that I have means commodiously to
divert my self from it. I love a private life, because it is by mine own
choice, that I love it, not by a diffidence or disagreeing from a public life;
which peradventure is as much according to my complexion. I thereby serve my
Prince more joifully and genuinely, because it is by the free election of my
judgment and by my reason, without any particular obligation. And that I am
not cast or forced thereunto, because I am unfit to be received of any other,
or am not beloved: so of the rest. I hate those morsels that necessity does
carve me. Every commodity, of which alone I were to depend* should ever hold
me by the throat:

Alter remus aq^as, alter mihi radat are^as.
Let me cut waters with one oar, Propert. li 3. ^l. 2. 23.

With the other shave the sandy shore.
One string alone can never sufficiently hold me. You will say, there is
vanity in this ammusement. But where not? And these goodly precepts are
vanity, and Mere vanity is all worldly wisdom. Dominus novit cogitationes
sapientum* quoniam vanae sunt. The Lords knows Psalm. 93. 11.
the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain. Such exquisite subtilities, are
only fit for sermons. They are discourses, that will send us into the other
World on horseback. Life is a material and corporal motion; an action
imperfect and disordered, by it is own essence: I employ or apply my self to
serve it according to it self.

Quisqu^ suos pat^mur manes: ^^r. ^^n. l. 6. ^43.

All of us for our merit,
Have some attending spirit.
Sic est faciendum, vt contra naturam vniversam nihil contendamus, ea tamen
conservata, propriam Cic. Offic. lib. 1.
sequamur. W^ must so work, as we endeavor nothing against nature in general,
yet so observe it, as we follow o^r own in special. To what purpose are these
heaven-looking and nice points of Philosophy, on which no humane being can
establish and ground it self? And to what end serve these rules, that exceed
our use and excel our strength? I often see, that there are certain Ideaes or
forms of life proposed unto us, which neither the proposer nor the Auditors
have any hope at all to follow; and which is worse, no desire to attain. Of
the same paper, whereon a Judge writ but even now the cond^mnation against an
adulterer, he will tear a scantlin, thereon to write some love-lines to his
fellow-iudges wife. The same w^ma^ from whom you came lately, and with whom you
have committed that vnlawfull-pleasing sport, will soon after, even in your
presence, ratle and scold more bitterly against the same fauli in her
neighbor, than ever Portia or Lucrece could. And some condemn men to di^ for
crimes, that themselves esteem no faults. I have in my youth seen a notable
man with one hand to present the people most excellent and well-written verses,
both for invention and extreme licentiousness; and with the other hand, at the
same instant, the most sharpe-railing reformation, according to Divinity, that
happily the World has seen these many-many years. Thus goes the world, and
so go men. We let the laws and precepts follow their way, but we keep
another course: Not only by disorder of manners, but often by opinion and
contrary judgment. Hear but a discourse of Philosophy read; the invention,
the eloquence and the pertinencie, does presently tickle your spirit and moove
you. There is nothing tickleth or pricketh your conscience: it is not to her
that men speak^* Is it not true? Ariston said, that Neither Bath nor Lecture
are of any worth, except the one wash clean, and the other cleanse all filth
away. One may busy himself about the bark, when once the pith is gotten out:
As when we have drunk off the Wine, we consider the graving and workmanship
of the cup. In all the parts of ancient Philosophy, this one thing may be
noted, that one same worke-man publishes some rules of temperance, and
therewithal some compositions of love and licentiousness. And Xenophon in
Cliniaes bosom, writ against the Aristipp^an virtue. It is not a miraculous
conversion, that so does wave and hull them to and fro. But it is, that Solon
does sometimes represent himself in his own colors, and sometimes in form of
a Lawgiver: now he speaks for the multitude, and now for himself. And takes
the free and natural rules to himself; warranting himself with a constant
and perfect soundness.

Curentur dubij medicis maioribus ^gri.
Let patients in great doubt, ^ur. sat. 13. 124.

Seek great Physicians out.
Antisthenes allows a wise man to love and do what he list, without respect
of laws, especially in things he deemeth needful and sit: Forasmuch as he
has a better understanding than they, and more knowledge of virtue. His
Disciple Diogenes said; To perturbations we should oppose, reason; to fortune,
confidence: and to laws, nature: To dainty and tender stomachs, constrained
and artificial or dinances. Good stomachs are simply served with the
prescriptions of their natural appeti^^. So do our Physicians, who whilst
they tie their pacients to a strik't diet of a panada or a sirope, feed
themselves upon a melone, dainty fruits, much good meat, and drink all manner
of good Wine. I wot not what Books are, nor what they mean by wisdom and
philosophy (quoth the Curtizan Lais) but sure I am, those kinds of people
knock as often at my gates, as any other men. Because our licenciousnesse
transports us commonly beyond what is lawful and allowed, our lives-precepts
and laws have often been wrested or restrained beyond universal reason.

Nemo satis credit tantum delinquere, quantum Inv. sat. 14. 233

Permittas.
No man thinks it enough so far to offend
As you give lawful leave (and thereto end)
It were to be wished, there were a greater proportion between commandment
and obedience: And unjust seems that aim or goal whereto one cannot
possibly attain. No man is so exquisitely honest or upright in living, but
brings all his actions and thoughts within compass and danger of the laws;
and that ten times in his life might not lawfully be hanged. Yea happily such a
man, as it were pity and dangerously-hurtfull to loose, and most unjust to
punish him.

-- Olle quid ad te,
De cute quid faciat ille vel illa sua;
Fool, what have thou to do, what he or she Mart. li. 7. epig. 9. 1.

With their own skins or themselves doing be?
And some might never offend the laws, that notwithstanding should not deserve
the commendations of vertuovs men: and whom philosophy might meritoriously and
justly cause to be whipped. So troubled, dimme-sighted and partial is this
relation. We are far enough from being honest according to God: For, we
cannot be such according to our selves. Humane wisdom could never reach the
duties, or attain the devoires it had prescribed unto it self. And had it at
any time attained them, then would it doubtless prescribe some others beyond
them, to which it might ever aspire and pretend. So great an enemy is our
condition unto consistence. Man does necessarily ordain unto himself to be
in fault. He is not very crafty, to measure his duty by the reason of
another being, than his own. To whom prescribes he that, which he expects no
man will perform? Is he unjust in not doing that, which he cannot possibly
atchieve? The laws which conde^^e us, not to he able; condemn us for that we
cannot perform. If the worst happen, this deformed liberty, for one to
present himself in two places, and the actions after one fashion, the
discourses after an other; is lawful in them, which report things: But it
cannot be in them, that acknowledge themselves as I do. I must walk with my
pen, as I go with my feet. The common high way must have conference with
other ways. Catoes virtue was vigorous, beyond the reason of the age he lived
in: and for a man that entermedled with governing other men, destinated for the
common service; it might be said to have been a justice, if not unjust, at
least vain and out of season. Mine own manners, which scarce disagree one
inch from those now current, make me notwithstanding in some sort, strange,
uncouth and unsociable to my age. I wot not, whether it be without reason, I am
so distasted and out of liking with the world, wherein I live and frequent: but
well I know, I should have small reason to complain, the world were distasted
and out of liking with me, since I am so with it. The virtue assigned to the
worlds affairs, it is a virtue with sundry byases, turnings, bendings and
elbowes, to apply and join it self to humane imbecilitie: mixed and
artificial: neither right, pure or costant, nor merely innocent. Our Annals
even to this day, blamesome one of our Kings, to have over-simply suffered
himself to be led or misled by the conscientious persuasions of his
Confessor. Matters of state have more bold precepts.

-- exeat aula, L^ca^. bell. cir. lib. 8. 493.

Qui vult esse pius.
He that will godly be,
From Court let him be free.
I have heretofore assayd to employ my opinions and rules of life, as new, as
rude, as imp^lished or as unpolluted, as they were naturally borne with me, or
as I have attained them by my institution; and wherewith, if not so
commodiously, at least safely in particular, I serve mine own turn, unto the
service of public affairs and benefit of my Commonwealth: A scholasticall and
novice virtue; but I have found them very unapt and dangerous for that purpose.
He that goes in a ^resse or throng of people, must sometimes step aside, hold
in his elbowes, cross the way, advance himself, start back, and forsake the
right way, according as it falls out: Live he not so much as he would himself,
but as others will: not according to that he proposes to himself, but to that
which is proposed to him: according to times, to men and to affairs; and as
the skillful Mariner, sail with the wind. Plato says, that who escapes
untainted and cleane-handed from the managing of the world; escapes by some
wonder. He says also, that when he instituteth his Philosopher as chief over
a Commonwealth; he means not a corrupted or law-broken commonwealth, as that
of Athens; and much less, as ours, with which wisdom herself would be
brought to a nonplus, or put to her shifts. And a good herb, transplanted
into a soil very diverse from her nature, does much sooner conform it self
to the soil, then it reformeth the same to it self. I feelingly perceive that
if I were wholly to envre my self to such occupations, I should require much
change and great repairing. Which could I effect in me (and why not with time
and diligence?) I would not. Of that little which in this vacation I have made
triall-of, I have much distasted my self: I sometimes find certain
temptations arise in my mind, toward ambition; but I start aside, bandie and
opinionate my self to the contrary:

At tu Catulle obstinatus obdura. Catul. ly^. p^^* 8. 19.

Be thou at any rate,
O^durate, obstinate.
I am not greatly called, and I invite my self as little unto it. Liberty and
idleness, my chief qualities, are qualities diameterly contrary to that
mystery. We know not how to di^^inguish men's faculties. They have certain
divisions and limits uneasy and over nice to be chosen. To conclude by the
sufficiency of a private life, any sufficiency for public use, it is ill
concluded: Some one directs himself well, that cannot so well direct others;
and composeth Essays, that could not work effects. Some man can dispose and
order a siege, that could but ill command and marshall a battle: and
discourses well in private, that to a multitude or a Prince would make but a
bad Oration. Yea peradventure, it is rather a testimony to him that can do one,
that he cannot do the other, but otherwise. I find that high spirits are not
much less apt for base things, then base spirits are for high matters. Could
it be imagined, that Socrates would have given the Athenians cause to laugh at
his own charges, because he could never justly count the suffrages of his
tribe, and make report thereof unto the counsel? Truly the reverence I bear
and respect I owe unto that man's perfections, deserves that his fortune bring
to the excuse of my principal imperfections, one so notable example. Our
sufficiency is retailed into small parcells. Mine has no latitude, and is in
number very miserable. Saturninus answered those, who had conferred all
authority upon him, saying. Oh you my fellow soldiers, you have lost a good
Captain, by creating him a bad General of an Army. Who in time of infection
vanteth himself, for the worlds-service, to employ a genuine or sincere
virtue, either knows it not, (opinions being corrupted with manners; in good
sooth, hear but them paint it forth, mark how most of them magnify
themselves for their demeanours, and how they form their rules: in liew of
pourtraying virtue, they only set forth mere injustice and vice: and thus
false and adulterate they present the same to the institution of Princes) or if
he know it, he wrongfully boasts himself; and whatever he says, he does
many things whereof his own conscience accuses him. I should easily believe
Seneca, of the experience he made of it in such an occasion, upon condition he
would freely speak his mind of it unto me. The honourablest badge of
goodness in such a necessity, is ingenuously for a man to acknowledge both
his own and others faults; to stay and with his might, hinder the inclination
toward evil: and avie to follow this course, to hope and wish better. In
these dismembrings or havocks of France, and divisions wherinto we are
miserably fallen, I perceive every man travel and busy himself to defend his
own cause, and the better sort, with much dissembling and falsehood. He that
should plainly and roundly write of it, should write rashly and viciously.
Take the best and justest part; what is it else but the member of a crased,
worme-ea^en and corrupted body? But of such a body the member least sick, is
called sound: and good reason why, because our qualities have no title but in
comparison. Civil innocence is measured according to places and seasons. I
would be glad to see such a commendation of Agesilaus in Xenophon, who being
entreated of a neigbour Prince, with whom he had sometimes made war, to
suffer him to pass through his country, was therewith well pleased; granting
him free passage through Peloponnese, and having him at hi^ mercy, did not only
not emprison nor empoison him, but according to the tenor of his promise,
without show or offense or unkindness, entertained him with all courtesy and
humanity. To such humors, it were a matter of no moment: At other times and
elsewhere, the liberty and magnanimity of such an action shall be highly
esteemed. Our gullish Gaberdines would have mocked at it. So little affinity is
there between the Spartan and the French innocence. We have notwithstanding
some honest men amongst us; but it is after our fashion. He whose manners are in
regularity established above the age he liveth-in; let him either wrest or
muffle his rules: or (which I would rather persuade him) let him withdraw
himself apart, and not meddle with us. What shall he gain thereby?

Egregium sanctumque virum sicerno, bimembri I^^e. sat. 13. 64*

Hoc monstrum puero, and miranti iam sub aratro
Piscibus inventis and foetae compare mulae.
See I a man of holiness and virtues rare.
To births bimembred, under wonderful plow-share,
Fish found, or moiles with fool, this moster I compare.
One may bewail the better times, but not a void the present: one may desire
other magistrates but notwithstanding he must obey those he has: And happily
it is more commendable to obey the wicked, than the good. So long as the image
of the received, allowed and ancient laws of this Monarchy shall be extant
and shine in any corner thereof; there will I be; there will I abide. And if by
any disaster they shall chance to have contradiction or empeachment amongst
themselves, and produce two factions, of doubtful or hard choice: my election
shall be to avoid, And if I can escape this storm. In the mean while,
either nature or the hazard of war, shall lend me that helping hand. I
should freely have declared my self between Caesar and Pompey. But between
those three thieves which came after, where either one must have hid himself,
or followed the wind: which I deem lawful, when reason swayeth no longer.

Quo diversus abis? Virg. A^n. lib. 5 166.

Whither have you recourse,
So far out of your course?
This mingle-mangle is somewhat beside my text. I stragle out of the path; yet
is it rather by license, then by vnadvisednesse: My fantasies follow one
another: but sometimes a farre-off, and look one at another; but with an
oblique look. I have heretofore cast mine eyes upon some of Platoes Dialogues;
bemolted with a fantastical variety: the first part treated of love, all the
latter of Rhetoric. They fear not those variances; and have a wonderful
grace in suffering themselves to be transported by the wind; or to seem so.
The titles of my chapters, embrace not always the matter: they often but
glance at it by some mark: as these others, Andria, Eunuchus; or these, Sylla,
Cicero, Torquatus. I love a Poe^icall kind of march, by friskes, skips and
jumps. It is an art (says Plato) light, nimble, fleeting and light-brain'd.
There are some treatises in Plutarke, where he forgets his theme, where the
drift of his argument is not found but by incidencie and chance, all stuffed
with strange matter. Mark but the vagaries in his Demon of Socrates. Oh God*
what grace has the variation, and what beauty these startings and nimble
escapes; and then most, when they seem to emply carelesenesse and casualtie:
It is the vnheedie and negligent reader, that loses my subject, and not my
life. Some word or other shall ever be found in a corner, that has relation to
it, though closely couched. I am indiscreetly and tumultuously at a fault; my
style and wit are still gadding alike. A little folly is tolerable in him, that
will not be more sottish; say our masters precepts, and more their examples. A
thousand Poets labor and languish after the prose-manner, but the best ancient
prose, which I indifferently scatter here and there forver^e, shines every
where, with a poetical vigor and boldness, and represents some air or
touch of it is fury: Verily she ought to have the maistry and pre-eminence
given her in matters of speech. A Poet (says Plato) seated on the Muses
footestoole, does in a fury powre-out whatsoever comes in his mouth, as the
pipe or cock of a fountain, without considering or ruminating the same: and
many things escape him, diverse in color, contrary in substance, and broken in
course. Ancient Divinity is altogether Poesy (say the learned) and the first
Philosophy. It is the original language of the Gods. I understand that the
matter distinguishes it self It sufficiently declares where it changes,
where it concludes, where it begins, and where it rejoyneth; without
enterlacings of words, joining ligaments and binding seames wrested-in for the
service of weak and vnattentive ears: and without glossing or expounding my
self. What is he, that would not rather not be read at all, then read in
drowsy and cursorie manner: Nihil est tam vtile, quod in transit^ profit.
There is nothing so profitable, that being lightly past over, will do good. If
to take books in hand were to learn them: and if to see, were to view them*
and ^f to run them over, were to seize upon them, I should be to blame, to
make my self altogether so ignorant as I say* Since I cannot stay the readers
attention by the weight: Manco male, if I happen to stay him by my intricate
confusion: yea but he will afterward repent, that ever he ammused himself
about it. You say true, but he shall have ammused himself upon it. And there
be humors, to whom understanding causes disdain, who because they shall not
know what I mean will esteem me the better, and will conclude the mystery
and depth of my sense by the obscurity: Which, to speak in good earnest, I
hate as death, and would shun it* if I could avoid my self. Aristotle
vaunteth in some place to affect the same. A vicious affectation. For So Much as
the often breaking of my Chapters, I so much used in the beginning of my book,
seemed to interrupt attention, before it be conceived: Disdaining for so little
a while to collect and there seat it self: I have betaken my self to frame
them longer; as requiring proposition and assigned leisure. In such an
occupation, he to whom you will not grant one hour, you will allow him
nothing. And you do naught for him, for whom you do, but in doing some other
thing. Sithence peradventure I am particularly tied and precisely vowed, to
speak by halves, to speak confusedly, to speak discrepantly. I therefore
hate this trouble-feast reason: And these extravagant projects, which so much
molest man's life, and these so subtle opinions, if they have any truth; I deem
it over-deare, and find it too incommodious. On the other side, I labor to set
forth vanity and make sottishness to prevail, if it bring me any pleasure.
And without so nicely controlling them, I follow mine own natural
inclinations. I have elsewhere seen some houses ruined, statues overthrowen,
both of heaven and of earth: But men be always one. All that is true: and yet
I can not so often survay the vast ^oombe of that City so great, so populous
and so puissant, but I as often admire and reverence the same. The care and
remembrance of evils is recommended unto us. Now have I from my infancy been
bred and brought up with these: I have had knowledge of the affairs of Rome,
long time before I had notice of those of my house. I knew the Capitol, and
it is platform, before I knew Lovure, the palace of our Kings in Paris; and
the River Tiber, before Seyne. I have more remembered and thought upon the
fortunes and conditions of L^cullus, Metellus and Scipio, then of any of our
contrymen* They are deceased, and so is my father, as fully as they: and is
as distant from me and life in eighteen years as they were in sixteen
hundred: Whose memory, amity and society, I notwithstanding omit not to
continue, to embrace and converse withal, with a perfect and most lively
union. Yea of mine own inclination, I am more officious toward the deceased.
They can no longer help themselves; but (as me seems) they require so much
the more my aid: There is Gratitude, and there appears she in her perfect
luster. A benefit is less richly assigned, where r^trogradation and reflection
is. Arcesilaus going to visit C^esibius that was sick, and finding him in very
poor plight, fair and softly thrust some money under his boulster, which he
gave him: And concealing it from him, left and gave him also a qnittance for
ever being beholding to him. Such as have at any time deserved friendship, or
love or thanks at my hands, never lost in the same, by being no longer with me.
I have better paid and more carefully rewarded them, being absent and when
they least thought of it. I speak more kindly and affectionately of my
friends, when there is least means, that ever it shall come to their ears, I
have heretofore undergone a hundred quarrels for the defense of P^mpey and
Brutus his cause. This acquaintance continues to this day between us. Even of
present things we have no other hold, but by our fantazie. Perceiving myself
unfit and unprofitable for this age, I cast my self to that other; And am so
besotted with it that the state of the said ancient, free, just and flourishing
Rome, (for I neither love the birth, nor like the old age of the same) does
interest, concern and passionate me. And therefore can I not so often look
into the situation of their streets and houses, and those wondrousstrange
ruins, that may be said to reach down to the Antipodes, but so often must I
ammuse my self on them. Is it Nature or by the error of fantasy, that the
seeing of places, we know to have been frequented or inhabited by men, whose
memory is esteemed or mentioned in stories, does in some sort moove and stir
us up as much or more, than the hearing Ci^. s. de fin.
of their noble deeds, or reading of their compositions? Tanta vis admonitionis
inest in locis: Et id quidem in hac vrbe infinitum; quacunque enim ingredimur,
in aliquam historiam vestigium ponimus. So great a power of admonition is in
the very place, And that in this City is most infinite; for which way soever
we walk, we set our foot upon some History. I am much delighted with the
consideration of their countenance, port and abilliments. I ruminate those
glorious names between my teeth, and make mine ears to ring with the sound of
them. Ego illos veneror, and tantis nominibus semper assurgo. I do reverence
them, and at their names I do rise and make curtefie: Of things but in some
sort great, strange and admirable, I admire their common parts. I could wish to
see them walk and suppe together, and hear their discourses. It were
Ingratitude to despise, and impiety to neglect the relics or images of so
many excellent, honest good men, and therewithal so valiant, which I have
seen live and die: And who by their examples, had we the wit or grace to
follow them, afford us so many notable instructions. And Rome as it stands
now, deserves to be loved: Confederated so long since, and sharing titles with
our Crown of France: Being the only common and universal City: The
Sovereign Magistrate therein commanding, is likewise known abroad in diverse
other places. It is the chief Metropolitan City of all Christian Nations:
Both French and Spaniards, and all men else are there at home. To be a Prince
of that state, a man needs but be of Christendom, where ever it be seated.
There Is no place here on earth, that the Heavens have embraced with such
influence of favors and grace, and with such constancy: Even her ruin is
glorious with renown, and swollen with glory.

Laudandis preciosior ruinis.
Even made more honorable.
By ruins memorable.
Low-levelled as she lies, and even in the tomb of her glory, she yet
reserveth the lively image and regardfull marks of Empire. Vt palam sit vno in
loco gaudentis opus esse nature. So as it is clear, in one place is set-forth
the work of Nature in her iollity. Some one would blame himself, yea and
mutiny, to feel himself tickled with so vain a pleasure. Our humors are not
over vain, that be pleasant. Whatsoever they be, that constantly content a man
capable of common understanding, I could not find in my heart to moan or
pity him. I am much beholding to fortune, in as much as until this day, she
has committed nothing outragiously against me, or imposed any thing upon me,
that is beyond my strength, or that I could not well bear. It is not happily her
custom, to suffer such as are not importunate or over busy with her, to live
in peace.

Quanto quisque sibi plura negaverit,
A Dijs plura feret, nil cupientium,
Nudus castra peto, multa petentibus, Hor c^^* lib. 3. ^d* 16* 2^. 42.

Desunt multa.
The more that men shall to themselves deny,
The more the Gods will give them: threed-bare I
Follow the camp of them that naught desire,
They still want much, that still do much require.
If she continue so, I shall depart very well content and satisfied.

-- nihil supra
Deos lacesso. -- Hor. c^^. l. 2. ^d. 18. 11.

More than will serve, to have
Of Gods I do not crave.
But beware the shocke: Thousands miscarry in the haven, and are cast away
being nearest home. I am easily comforted with what shall happen here when I
am gone. Things present trouble me sufficiently, and set me thoroughly a work.

Fortunae caetera mando. Ovid. Metam ^. 2. 140.

The rest I do commit
To Fortune (as is fit.)
Besides, I am not tied with that strong bond, which some say, binds men to
future times, by the children bearing their names, and succeeding them in
honors. And being so much to be desired, it may be I shall wish for them so
much the less. I am by my self but overmuch ^^ed unto the world, and fastened
unto life: I am pleased to be in Fortunes hold by the circumstances properly
necessary to my state, without enlarging her jurisdiction upon me by other
ways: And I never thought, that to be without children, were a defect, able to
make man's life less complete and less contented. A barren state or sterill
vacation, have also their peculiar commodities. Children are in the number of
things, that need not greatly be desired; especially in these corrupted days,
wherein it would be so hard a matter to make them good. Bona iam nec na^ci
licet, ita corrupta sunt semina. We cannot now have good things so much as
grow, the seeds are so corrupt. Yet have they just cause to moan them, that
having once gotten, lose them untimely. He who left me my house in charge,
considering my humor, which was to stay at home so little, foresaw I should be
the overthrow of it. He was deceived: I am now as I came unto it, if not
somewhat better. And that, without any Office or Church-living; which are no
small helps. As for other matters, if Fortune have offered me no violent or
extraordinary offense, so has she not showed me any great favor or
extraordinary grace. Whatsoever I have belonging to it, that may properly be
termed her gifts, was there before I came unto it; yea and a hundred years
before. I particularly enjoy no essential good, or possess no sol^d benefit,
that I owe unto her liberality: Indeed she has bestowed some wind-pufft
favors upon me, which may rather be termed titular and honorable in show, then
in substance, or material: And which, in good truth, she has not granted, but
offered me. God he knows, to me, who am altogether material; not satisfied
but with realitie, which must also be massy and substantial: And who, if I
durst confess it, would not think avarice much less exc^sable then ambition:
nor grief less evitable, then shame: not health less desirable, then
learning: or riches, less to be wished, then nobility. Amongst her vain
favors, I have none does so much please my fond selfe-pleasing conceit, as an
authenticke Bull, charter or patent of denizonship or borgeouship of Rome,
which at my last being there, was granted me by the whole Senate of that City:
garish and trimly adorned with goodly Seals, and written in fair golden
Letters: bestowed upon me with all gracious and free liberality. And for so much
as they are commonly conferred in diverse styles, more or less favorable: and
that before I had ever seen any, I would have been glad to have had but a
pattern or formular of one; I will for the satisfaction of any, if he fortune
to be possessed with such a curiosity as mine, here set down the true copy or
transcript of it: and thus it is.

Quod Horatius Maximus, Martius Cecius, Alexander Mutus, almae vrbis
conservatores de Illustrissimo viro Michaele Montano, Equite sancti Michaelis,
and a Cubiculo Regis Christianissimi, Romana civitate donando, ad Senatum
retulerunt, S. P. Q. R. de care ita fieri censuit.
CVm veteri more and instituto cupide illi semper studios^que suscepti sint,
qui virtute ac nobilitate praestantes, magno Reipublicae nostrae vsui atque
ornamento fuissent, vel esse aliquando possent: Nos maiorum nostrorum exempl^
atque auctoritate permoti, praeclara^ hanc Consuetudinem nobis imitandam ac
servandam fore censemus. Quam^brem cum Illustrissimus Mich^el Montanus ^ques
sancti Michaelis, and a cubiculo Regis Christianissimi; Romani nominis
studiosissimus, and familiae laud atque splendore and proprijs virtutum merit
is dignissimus ^it, qui summ^ Senatus Populique Romani iudicio ac studio in
Romanam Civitatem adsciscatur, placere Senatui P. Q. R. Illustrissimum
Michaelem Montanum rebus omnibus ornatissim^m, atque ^uic inc^^to Pop^l^
charissimum, ipsum posterosque in Romans civitatem adscribi, ornarique omnibus
and praemijs and hon^ribus, quibus illi fruuntur, qui Cives Patritijque Romans
nati aut iure optimo facti sunt. In quo censere Senatum P. Q. R. se non tam
illi Ius Civitatis largiri quam debitum tribuere, neque magis beneficium dare
quam ab ips^ accipere, qui hoc Civitatis munere accipiendo, singulari Civitatem
ipsam ornamento atque hon^r^ affecerit. Quam quidem S. C. auctoritatem ijdem
Conservatores per Senatus P. Q. R. scribas in acta referri atque in Capitolij
curia servari* privilegiumque huiusmodi fieri, solitoque vrbis sigillo
communiri curarunt.

Anno ab vrbe condita CX^ CCC XXXI. post Christum natum M. D. LXXXI. III. Idus
Martij. Horatius Fuscus sacri S. P. Q. R. scriba. Vincent. Martholus sacri S.
P. Q. R. scriba.


AT the motion of Horatius Maximus, Martius Cecius, Alexander Mutus, who are
Conservators of this beautiful City* concerning the endenizing and making
Citizen of Rome the noble Gentleman Michaell de Montaigne, Knight of the Order
of Saint Michaell, and one of the Chamber of the most Christian King, the
Senate and people of Rome thought good thereof thus to enact. Whereas by the
ancient custom and good order, they have ever and with good will been
entertained, who excelling in virtue and nobility have been, or at any time
might be of any great use or ornament unto our commonweal: We, moved by
example and authority of our Auncesters, decree, That this notable custom, by
us should be ensued and observed. Wherefore, sithence the right Noble Michael
de Montaigne, Knight of Saint Michaels Order, and one of the chamber of the
most Christian King, both is most affectionate unto the Roman name, and by the
commendations and splend^r of his pedigree, as also by the merits of his
proper virtues, most worthy to be adopted and inserted into the Roman City
with a special judgment and good will of the Senate and people of Rome: It
pleases the Senate and people of Rome that the right noble Michael de
Montaigne, adorned in all complements, and well-beloved of this famous
Communaltie, both himself and his successors should be ascribed and
^nfranchized into this Roman City, and be graced with all rewards and
honors, which they enjoy, who either have been borne, or elected, either
Citizens or Noble men of Rome. Wherein the Senate and people do decree, That
they do not so much vouchsafe him the right of their City, as give him that
is due unto him; nor do they rather give him a benefit, than receive it of
him, who by accepting this gift of the City, does countenance the City with
a singular ornament and honor. Which Act and authority of the Senates Decree,
the said Conservators caused by the Clearks of the Senate and people to be
registered and la^de-vp in the Capitol Court, and this Priveledge to be made
and signed with the Cities usual Seal.

In the year since the building of the City CX^ CCC XXXI* after the birth of
Christ a thousand five hundred eighty and one: the Ides of March. Horatius
Fuscus, and Vincent Martholus Clarks of the sacred Senate and people of Rome.

Being neither Burgeois nor Denizon of any City, I am well pleased to be so,
of the noblest and greatest that ever was heretofore, or ever shall be
hereafter. If others did so attentively consider and survay themselves as I
do, they should as I do, find themselves full of inanitie, fondness or
vanity. I can not be rid of it, except I rid and quit my self. We are all
possessed and overwhelmed therewith, as well one as the other. But such as have
a feeling of it, have somewhat the better bargain: And yet I am not sure of
it. This common opinion and vulgar custom, to look and mark elsewhere then
on our selves, has well provided for our affairs. It is an object full-fraught
with discontent, wherein we see nothing but misery and vanity. To the end we
should not wholly be discomforted. Nature has very fitly cast the action of
our sight outward: We go forward according to the stream, but to turn our
course back to our selves, is a painful motion: the sea likewise is
troubled, raging and disquieted, when it is turned and driven into it self.
Observe (says every one) the motions and brans^es of the heavens: take a
survay of all: the quarrel of this man, the pulse of that man, and another
last testament: to conclude, behold and mark ever, high or low, right or
oblique, before or behind you. It was a paradoxall commandment, which the God
of Delphos laid heretofore upon us; Saying: View your selves within; know your
selves; and keep you to your selves: Your mind and your will, which elsewhere
is consumed, bring it unto itself again: you scatter, you stragle, you stray,
and you distract your selves: call your selves home again; rowze and uphold
your selves: you are betrayed, you are spoiled and dissipated; your selves are
stolen and taken from your selves. See thou not how all this universe holds
all his sights compelled inward, and his eyes open to contemplate it self?
Both inward and outward it is ever vanity for thee; but so much less vanity,
by how much less it is extended. Except thy self, Oh man, (said that God)
every thing does first seek and study it self, and according to it is need
has limits to her travells, and bounds to her desires. There Is not one so
shallow, so empty, and so meedy as thou art who embracest the whole world: Thou
art the Scrutator without knowledge, the magistrate without juridisdiction: and
when all is done, the vice of the play.

The tenth Chapter.
How one ought to govern his will.

IN regard of the common sort of men, few things touch me, or (to speak
properly) sway me: For it is reason they touch, so they possesse-vs not. I have
great need, both by study and discourse, to increase this privilege of
insensibilitie, which is naturally crept far into me. I am not wedded unto
many things, and by consequence, not passionate of them. I have my sight
clear, but tied to few objects: My senses delicate and gentle; but my
apprehension and application hard and dull: I engage my self with difficulty.
As much as I can, I employ my self wholly to my self. And in this very
subject, I would willingly bridle and uphold mine affection, lest it be too
far plunged therein; Seeing it is a Subject I possess at the mercy of
others, and over which fortune has more interest then my self. So as even in
my health, which I so much esteem, it were requisite not to desire, nor so
carefully to seek it, as thereby I might light upon intolerable diseases. We
must moderate our selves, betwixt the hate of pain, and the love of pleasure.
Plato sets down a mean course of life between both. But to affections that
distract me from my self, and divert me elsewhere; surely, to such I oppose my
self with all my force. Mine opinion is, that one should lend himself to
others, and not give himself but to himself. Were my will easy to engage or
apply it self, I could not continue: I am over tender both by nature and
custom,

^ugax rerum, secur aque in otia natus.
Avoiding active business, Ovid. trist. li. 3. ^^. ^. 9.

And borne to secure idleness.
Contested and obstinate debates, which in the end would give mine adversary
advantage, the issue which would make my earnest pursuit ashamed, would
perchance torment me cruelly. If I vexed as other men, my soul should never
have strength to bear th'alaroms and emotions, that follow such as embrace
much. She would presently be displaced by this intestine agitation. If at any
time I have been urged to the managing of strange affairs, I have promised to
undertake them with my hand, but not with my lunges, and liver; to charge, and
not to incorporate them into me; to have a care, but nothing at all to be
over passionate of them: I look to them, but I hatch them not. I work enough
to dispose and direct the domestical troubles within mine own entrails and
veins, without harboring, or importune my self with any foreign
employments: And am sufficiently interessed with my proper, natural and
essential affairs, without seeking others businesses. Such as know how much
they owe to themselves; and how many offices of their own they are bound to
perform, shall find that nature has given them this commission fully ample
and nothing idle. Thou have business enough within thy self, therefore stray
not abroad: Men give themselves to hire. Their faculties are not their own, but
theirs to whom they subject themselves; their inmates, and not themselves, are
within them. This common humor does not please me. We should thriftily husband
our minds liberty, and never engage it but upon just occasions; which if we
judge impartially, are very few in number. Look on such as suffer themselves
to be transported and swayed, they do it every where. In little as well as in
great matters; to that which concerns, as easy as to that which touches
them not. They thrust themselves indifferently into all actions, and are
without life, if without tumultuary agitation. In negotijs sunt, negotij causa.
They are busy that they may not be idle, or else in action for actions sake.
They seek work but to be working. It is not so much because they will go, as
for that they cannot ^^and still. Much like to a rolling stone, which never
stays until it come to a lying place. To some men, employment is a mark of
sufficiency and a badge of dignity. Their spirits seek rest in action, as
infants repose in the cradle, They my be said, to be as serviceable to their
friends, as importunate to themselves. No man distributes his money to others,
but every one his life and time. We are not so prodigal of any thing, as of
those whereof to be covetous would be both commendable and profitable for us. I
follow a clean contrary course, I am of another complexion: I stay at home and
look to my self. What I wish for, I commonly desire the same but mildely; and
desire but little: so likewise I seldom employ and quietly embusie my self,
What ever they intend and act, they do it with all their will and vehemence.
There are so many dangerous steps, that for the more security, we must
somewhat slightly and superficially slide through the world, and not force it.
Pleasure it self is painful in it is beight.

-- incedis per ignes, Hor. car. l. 2. od. 1. 7.

Subpositos cineri doloso.
You pass through fire (though vnfraid)
Under deceitful ashes laid.
The town counsel of Bourdeaux chose me Mayor of their City, being far
from France; but further from any such thought. I excused my self and would
have avoided it. But they told me I was to blame; the more, because the kings
commandment was also employed therein. It is a charge, should seem so much
the more goodly, because it has neither fee nor reward, other then the honor
in the execution. It lasts two years, but may continue longer by a second
election, which seldom happens. To me it was, and never had been but twice
before: Some years p^st the Lord of Lansac; and lately to the Lord of Biron,
Marshall of France. In whose place I succeeded; and left mine to the Lord of
Matigon, likewise Marshall of France. Glorious by so noble an assistance.

Vterque bonus pacis bellique minister.
Both, both in peace and war,
Right serviceable are.
Fortune would have a share in my promotion by this particular circumstance,
which she of her own added thereunto; not altogether vain. For Alexander
disdained the Corinthian Ambassadors, who offered him the freedom and Burgeoise
of their City, but when they told him that Bacchus and Hercules were likewise
in their registers, he kindly thanked them and accepted their offer. At my
first arrival, I faithfully disciphered and conscientiously displaied my
self, such as I am indeed: without memory, without diligence, without
experience and without sufficiency; so likewise without hatred, without
ambition, without covetousness and without violence: that so they might be
duly instructed what service they might, or hope, or expect at my hands. And
for so much as the knowledge they had of my deceased father, and the honor they
bare unto his memory, had moved them to choose me to that dignity, I told them
plainly, I should be very sorry, that any man should work such an opinion in
my will, as their affairs and City had done in my fathers, while he held the
said government, whereunto they had called me. I remembered to have seen him
being an infant, and he an old man, his mind cruelly turmoiled with this
public toil; forgetting the sweet air of his own house, whereunto the
weakness of his age had long before tied him; neglecting the care of his
health and family, in a manner despising his life, which as one engaged for
them, he much endangered, riding long and painful journeies for them. Such a
one was he: which humor proceeded from the bounty and goodness of his nature.
Never was mind more charitable or more popular. This course, which I commend
in others, I love not to follow: Neither am I without excuse. He had heard,
that a man must forget himself for his neighbor: that in respect of the
general, the particular was not to be regarded. Most of the worldes-rules and
precepts hold this train, to drive us out of our selves into the wide world,
to the use of public society. They presumed to work a goodly effect, in
distracting and withdrawing us from our selves: supposing we were by a
natural instinct, too-too much tied unto it: and to this end have not spared
to say any thing. For to the wise it is no novelty, to preach things as they
serve, and not as they are. Truth has her lets, discommodities and
incompatibilities with us. We must not often deceive others, lest we beguile
our selves. And ^eele our eyes, and dull our understanding, thereby to repair
and amend them. Imperiti enimiudicant, and qui frequenter in hoc ipsum fallendi
sunt, ne errent. For unskillful meniudge, who must often even therefore be
deceived, lest they err and be deceived. When they prescribe us, to love
three, four yea fifty degrees of things before our selves, they present us
with the Art of shooters who to come nearer the mark take their aim far
above the same. To make a crooked stick straight, we bend it the contrary way.
I suppose that in the times of Pallas, as we see in all other religions, they
had some apparent mysteries, of which they made show to all the people; and
others more high and secret, to be imparted only to such as were professed.
It is likely, that the true point of friendship, which every man owes to
himself, is to be found in these. Not a false amity, which makes us embrace
glory, knowledge, riches and such like, with a principal and immoderate
affection, as members of our being; nor an effeminate and indiscrecte
friendship; Wherein happens as to the Ivy, which corrupts and ruins the Walls
it claspeth: But a sound and regular amity, equally profitable and pleasant.
Who so understands all her duties and exercises them, he is rightly
endenized in the Muses cabinet: He has attained the tipe of humane Wisdom
and the perfection of our happiness. This man knowing exactly what he owes
to himself, finds, that he ought to employ the use of other men and of the
world unto himself; which to perform, he must contribute the duties and
offices that concern him unto public society. He that lives not somewhat to
others, lives little to himself. Qui sibi amicus est, scito hunc amicum
omnibus esse; He that is friend to himself, know, he is friend to all. The
principal Sin. epist. 6. f.
charge we have, is every man his particular conduct. And for this only we
live here. As he that should forget to live well and religiously, and by
instructing and directing others, should think himself acquitted of his duty;
would be deemed a fool: Even so, who forsakes to live healthy and merrily
himself, therewith to serve another, in mine opinion takes a bad and
unnatural course. I will not, that in any charge one shall take in hand, he
refuse or think much of his attention, of his labor of his steps, of his
speech, of his sweat, and if need be of his blood,

-- nonipse pro charis amicis,
Aut patria timidus perire. Hor. car. l. 4. od. 9. 51.

Not fearing life to end
For Country or dear friend.
But it is only borrowed and accidentally; The mind remaining ever quiet and
in health: not without action, but without vexation or passion. Simply to moove
or be doing, cost's it so little, that even sleeping it is mooving and doing.
But it must have it is motion with discretion. For the body receives the
charges imposed him, justly as they are: But the spirit extends them, and
often to his hinderance makes them heavy; giving them what measure it pleases.
Like things are effected by diverse effortes and different contentions of will.
The one may go without the other. For, how many men do daily hazard
themselves in war which they regard not, and press into the danger of
battles, the loss whereof shall no whit break their next sleep? Whereas some
man in his own house, free from this danger, which he durst not so much as have
looked toward it, is for the Wars issue more passionate, and therewith has
his mind more perplexed, than the soldier, that therein employeth both his
blood and life. I know how to deal in public charges, without departing from
my self the breadth of my nail; and give my self to an other, without taking
me from my self: This sharpness and violence of desires hinders more, then
stead the conduct of what we undertake, filling us with impacience to the
events, either contrary or slow: and with bitterness and jealousy toward
those with whom we negotiate. We never govern that thing well, wherewith we
are possessed and directed.

-- Male cuncta ministrat
Impetus. --
Fury and haste do lay all waste;
Misplacing all, disgracing all,
He who therein employeth but his judgment and direction, proceeds more
cheerfully: he faines, he yields, he deferres at his pleasure according to
the occasions of necessity: he fails of his attempt, without torment or
affliction: ready and prepared for a new enterprise. He marches always with
the reins in his hand. He that is besotted with this violent and tyrannical
intention, does necessarily declare much indiscretion and injustice. The
violence of his desire transports him. They are rash motions, and if fortune
help not much, of little fruit. Philosophy wills us to banish choler in the
punishment of offenses; not to the end revenge should be more moderate, but
contrary, more weighty and surely set on: whereunto this violence seems to be
a let. Choler does not only trouble, but wearieth the executioners arms.
This passionate heat dulleth and consumes their force. As in too much speed,
festinatio tarda est; Hastiness is slow. Haste makes waste, and hinders and
stays it self: Ipsa se velocitas implicat; Swiftness entangles it self. As
for example, according as by ordinary custom I perceive, covetousness has
no greater let, then it self. The more violent and extended it is, the less
effectual and fruitful. Commonly it gathers wealth more speedily being masked
with a show of liberality. A very honest Gentleman and my good friend, was
likely to have endangered the health of his body, by an over passionate
attention and earnest affection to the affairs of a Prince, who was his
Master. Which Master has thus described himself unto me: That as another,
he discerns and has a feeling of the burden of accidents: but such as have
no remedy, he presently resolves to suffer with patience: For the rest,
after he has appointed necessary provisions, which by the vivacitie and
nimblenesse of his wit he speedily effects, he then attends the event with
quietness. Verily, I have seen in him at one instant a great carelessness and
liberty, both in his actions and countenance: Even in important and difficult
affairs. I find him more magnanimous and capable, in bad then in good
fortune. His losses are to him more glorious, than his victories; and his
mourning than his triumphs. Consider how in mere vain and frivolous actions,
as at chesse, tennis and such like sports, this earnest and violent engaging
with an ambicious desire to win, does presently cast both mind and limbs
into disorder and indiscretion. Wherein a man does both dazzle his sight and
distemper his whole body. He who demeaneth himself with most moderation both
in winning and loosing, is ever necrest unto himself, and has his wits best
about him. The less he is moved or passionate in play, the more safely does
he govern the same, and to his greater advantage. We hindet the minds seazure
and holdfast, by giving her so many things to seize upon. Some we should only
present unto her, others fasten upon her, and others incorporate into her. She
may see and feel all things, but must only feed on her self: And be
instructed in that which properly concerns her, and which merely belongs
to her essence and substance. The laws of nature teach us what is just and fit
for us. After the wisemen have told us, that according to nature no man is
indigent or wants, and that each-one is poor but in his own opinion, they
also distinguish subtly, the desires proceeding from Nature, from such as
grow from the disorders of our fantasy. Those whose end may be discerned are
merely hers; and such as fly before us and whose end we cannot attain, are
properly ours. Want of goods may easily be cured, but the poverty of the mind,
is incurable.

Nam si, quod satis est homini, id satis esse potesset,
Hoc sat erat; nunc, quum hoc non est, qui credimus porro
Divitias vllas animum mi explere potesse?
If it might be enough, that is enough for man,
This were enough, since it is not, how think we can
Now any riches fill
My mind and greedy will?
Socrates seeing great store of riches, jewels and precious stuff carried in
pomp through his City: Oh how many things (quoth he) do not I desire!
Metrodorus lived daily with the weight of twelve ounces of food: Epicurus with
less: Metrocles in winter lay with sheep, and in summer in the Cloisters of
Churches. Sufficit ad id natura, quod poscit. Nature is sufficient Sen. epist.
90.
for that which it requires. Cleanthes lived by his hands, and boasted, that
if Cleanthes would, he could nourish another Cleanthes. If that which Nature
does exactly and originally require at our hands, for the preservation of our
being, is over little (as in truth what it is, and how good cheap our life may
be maintained, cannot better be known or expressed than by this
consideration. That it is so little, and for the smalnesse thereof, it is out
of Fortunes reach, and she can take no hold of it) let us dispense something
else unto ourselves, and call the custom and condition of every* one of us by
the name of Nature. Let us tax and stint and feed our selves according to
that measure; let us extend both our appurtenances and reckonings thereunto.
For so far, me seems, we have some excuse: Custom is a second Nature, and
no less powerful* What is wanting to custom, I hold it a defect: And I had
well nigh as leefe one should deprive me of my life, as refrain or much
abridge me of the state wherein I have lived so long. I am no more upon terms
of any great alteration nor to thrust my self into a new and vn-vsuall course,
no not toward augmentation: it is no longer time to become other or be
transformed. And as I should complain if any great adventure should now befall
me, and grieve it came not in time that I might have enjoyed the same.

Quo mihi fortuna, si non concedit ur vti? H^rl. 1. epist. 5. 12.

Whereto should I have much,
If I to use it grutch?
I should likewise be grieved at any inward purchase: I were better in a
manner, never, than so late, to become an honest man: and well practiced to
live, when one has no longer life. I who am ready to depart this World, could
easily be induced, to resign the share of wisdom I have learned, concerning
the Worlds commerce, to any other man new-come into the world. It is even as
good as Mustard after dinner. What need have I of that good, which I cannot
enjoy? Whereto serves knowledge, if one have no head? It is an injury and
disgrace of Fortune, to offer us those presents, which, for so much as they fail
us when we should most need them, fill us with a just spite. Guide me no more:
I can go no longer. Of so many dismembrings that Sufficiency has, patience
suffices us. Give the capacity of an excellent treble to a Singer, that has
his lungs rotten; and of eloquence to an Hermit confined into the Deserts of
Arabia. There needs no Art to further a fall. The end finds it self in the
finishing of every work. My world is at an end, my form is expired. I am
wholly of the time past. And am bound to authorize the same, and thereto
conform my issue. I will say this by way of example; that the eclipsing or
abridging of ten days, which the Pope has lately caused, has taken me so
low, that I can hardly recover my self. I follow the years, wherein we were
wont to count otherwise. So long and ancient a custom does challenge and
recall me to it again. I am thereby enforced to be somewhat an heretic:
Incapable of innovation, though corrective. My imagination ma^gre my teeth
runs still ten days before, or ten behind; and whispers in mine ^ares:
This rule touches those, which are to come* If health it self so
sweetely-pleasing, comes to me but by fittes, it is rather to give me cause of
grief then possession of it self. I have no where left me to retire it. Time
forsakes me without which nothing is enjoyed. How small account should I make
of these great elective dignities I see in the world, and which are only given
to men, ready to leave the world! wherein they regard not so much how duly
they shall discharge them, as how little they shall exercise them: from the
beginning they look to the end. To conclude, I am ready to finish this man,
not to make another. By long custom, this form is changed into substance, and
Fortune into Nature. I say therefore, that amongst us feeble creatures, each
one is excusable to count that his own, which is comprehended under measure.
And yet all beyond these limits, is nothing but confusion.

It is the largest extension we can grant our rights. The more we amplify our
need and possession, the more we engage our selves to the crosses of fortune
and adversities. The cariere of our desires must be circumscribed, and tied to
strict bounds of nearest and contiguous commodities. Moreover, their course
should be managed, not in a straight line, having another end, but round, whose
two points hold together, and end in our selves with a short compass. The
actions governed without this reflection, I mean a near and essential
reflection, as these of the covetous, of the ambitious and so many others, that
run directly point-blancke, the course of which carries them away before
them, are erroneous and crazed actions. Most of our vacations are like plays.
Mundus vniversus exercet histrioniam. All the world does practice
stage-playing. We must play our parts duly, but as the part of a borrowed
personage. Of a visard and appearance, we should not make a real essence, nor
proper of that which is another. We cannot distinguish the skin from the
shirt. It is sufficient to disguise the face, without deforming the breast. I
see some transform and transubstantiate themselves, into as many new forms
and strange beings, as they undertake charges: and who emprelate themselves
even to the heart and entrails; and entraine their offices even sitting on
their close stool. I cannot teach them to distinguish the salutations and
cappings of such as regard them, from those that respect either their office,
their train or their mule. Tantum se fortunae permitunt, etiam vt naturam
dediscant. They give themselves so much over to Fortune, as they forget Nature.
They swell in mind and puff up their natural discourse, according to the
dignity of their office. The Mayor of Bourdeaux, and Michaell Lord of
Montaigne, have ever been two, by an evident separation. To be an advocate or
a Treasurer, one should not be ignorant of the craft incident to such callings.
An honest man is not comptable for the vice and folly of his trade, and
therefore ought not to refuse the exercise of it. It is the custom of his
country; and there is profit in it. We must live by the world, and such as
we find it, so make use of it. But the judgment of an Emperor should be
above his Empire; and to see and consider the same as a strange accident. He
should know how to enjoy himself apart; and communicate himself as James and
Peter; at least to himself. I cannot so absolutely or so deeply engage my
self. When my will gives me to any party, it is not with so violent a bond,
that my understanding is thereby infected. In the present intestine trouble of
our State, my interest has not made me forget neither the commendable
qualities of our adversaries, nor the reproachful of those I have followed.
They partially extol what ever is on their side: I do not so much as excuse
the greater number of my friends-actions. A good Orator loses not his grace
by pleading against me. The inticratenesse of our debate remooved, I have
maintained my self in equanimity and pure indifferency. Neque extra
necessitates belli, praecipuum odium gero, Nor bear I capital hatred, when I
am out of the necessity of war. Wherein I glory, for that commonly I see men
err in the contrary. Such as extend the choler and hatred, beyond their
affairs (as most men do) show that it proceeds elsewhence, and from some
private cause: Even as one being cured of an ulcer, and his fever remains
still, declares it had another more hidden beginning. It is the reason they
bear none unto the cause, in general: and for so much as it concerns the
interest of all, and of the state: But they are vexed at it, only for this;
that it touches them in private. And therefore are they distempered with a
particular passion, both beyond justice and public reason. Non tam omnia
vniversi, quam ea, qua ad quemque pertinent, singuli carpebant. All did not so
much find fault withal, as every one with those that appertained to every
one. I will have the advantage to be for us, which though it be not, I enrage
not. I stand firmly to the ^ounder parts. But I affect not to be noted a
private enemy to others, and beyond general reason, I greatly accuse this
vicious form of obstinate contesting: He is of the League, because he admireth
the grace of the Duke of Guise: or he is a Hugonote, for so much as the King of
Navarres activity amazeth him: He finds fault in the Kings behaviors,
therefore he is sedicious in his heart. I would not give the magistrate my
voice, that he had reason to condemn a book, because an heretic was therein
named and extolled to be one of the best Poets of this age. Dare we not say
that a thief has a good leg? if he have so indeed; If she be a strumpet,
must she needs have a stinking breath? In wiser ages, revoked they the proud
title of Capitolinus, they had formely given to Marcus Manlius, as the
preserver of religion and public liberty? Suppressed they the memory of his
liberality, his deeds of arms and military rewards granted to his virtues,
because to the prejudice of his countries laws, he afterward affected a
Royalty? If they once conceive a hatred against an Orator or an advocate, the
next day he becomes barbarous and vneloquent. I have elsewhere discoursed of
zeal, which has driven good men into like errors. For my self, I can say:
that he does wickedly, and this virtuously. Likewise, in prognostickes or
sinister events of affairs, they will have every man blind or dull in his
own cause: and that our persuasion and judgment, serve not the truth but the
project of our desires. I should rather err in the other extremity; So much I
fear my desire might corrupt me. Considering, I somewhat tenderly distrust my
self in things I most desire. I have in my days seen wonders, in the
indiscreete and prodigious facility of people, suffering their hopes and
beliefes, to be led and governed, as it has pleased and best fitted their
leaders: above a hundred discontents, one in the neck of another: and beyond
their fantasies and dreams. I wonder no more at those, whom the apish toys of
Apollonius and Mahomet have seduced and blinded. Their sense and understanding
is wholly smothered in their passion. Their discretion has no other choice but
what pleases them and furthereth their cause. Which I had especially observed
in the beginning of our distempered factions and factious troubles. This other
which is grown since, by imitation surmounteth the same. Whereby I observe,
that it is an inseparable quality of popular errors. The first being gone,
opinions entershocke one another, following the wind, as waves do. They are
no members of the body, if they may renounce it; if they follow not the common
course. But truly they wrong the just parts, when they seek to help them
with fraud or deceipts. I have always contradicted the same. This mean is
but for sick brains: The healthy have surer and honester ways to maintain
their resolutions and excuse all contrary accidents. The Heavens never saw so
weighty a discord and so harmefull a hatred, as that between Caesar and
Pompey; nor ever shall hereafter: Me seems notwithstanding, I see in those
noble and Heroical minds, an exemplar and great moderation of the one toward
the other. It was a jelousie of honor and emulation of command, which
transported them, not to a furious and indiscreete hatred; without malice or
detraction. In their sharpest exploites, I discover some relics of respect
and cinders of well-meaning affection. And I imagine, that had it been
possible, either of them desired rather to effect his purpose without
overthrowing his competitour, than by working his utter ruin. Note how
contrary the proceeding was between Sylla and Marius. We must not run
headlong after our affections and private interests. As in my youth, I ever
opposed my self to the motions of love, which I felt to usurp upon me; and
labored to diminish it is delights, lest in the end it might vanquish and
captivate me to his mercy: So do I now in all other occasions, which my will
apprehends with an over great appetite. I bend to the contrary of my
disposition, as I see the same plunged and drunk with it is own Wine. I shun
so far forth to nourish her pleasure, as I may not revoke it without a
bloody loss. Those minds which through stupidity see things but by halves,
enjoy this happiness, that such as be hurtful, offend them least: It is a
spiritual leprosy, that has some show of health; and such a health, as
Philosophy does not altogether contemn. But yet it may not lawfully be termed
wisdom; as we often do. And after this manner did in former times some body
mock Diogenes, who in the dead of Winter, went all naked, embracing an image
of snow, to try his patience; Who meeting him in this order, said thus unto
him; Art thou now very cold; Nothing at all, answered Diogenes. What think
thou to do then, that is either hardor exemplar by standing in the cold?
replied the other: To measure constancy, we must necessarily know sufferance,
But such minds as must behold cross events, and fortunes injuries in their
height and sharpness, which must weigh and taste them according to their
natural bitterness and charge; let them employ their skill and keep
themselves from embracing the causes, and divert their approaches. What did
King Cotys? He paid liberally for that goodly and rich Vessel, which one had
presented unto him, but for so much as it was exceeding brittle, he presently
brake it himself, that so betimes he might remoove so easy an occasion of
choler against his servants. I have in like sort shunned confusion in my
affairs, and sought not to have my goods contiguous to my neighbors, and to
such as I am to be linked in strict friendship: Whence commonly ensue causes
of alienation and unkindness. I have heretofore loved the hazardous play of
Cards and Dice; I have long since left it, only for this that notwithstanding
any fair semblance I made in my losses, I was inwardly disquieted. Let a man
of honor, who is to take a lie or endure an outrageous wrong, and cannot admit
a bad excuse for payment or satisfaction, avoid the progress of contentious
altercations. I shun melancholic complexions and froward men, as infected.
And in matters, I cannot talke-of without interest and emotion, I meddle not
with them, except duty constrain me thereunto. Melius non incipient, quam
desinent. They shall better not begin, than leave off. The surest way, is
then to prepare our selves before occasion. I know that some wisemen have taken
another course; and have not feared to engage and vehemently to insinuate
themselves into diverse objects. Those assure themselves of their own
strength, under which they shroud themselves against all manner of contrary
events, making mischiefs to wrestle one against another, by vigor and virtue of
patience:

Velut rupes vastum quae prodit in aequor, Virg. Aen. l. 10. 693.

Obvia ventorum furijs, expostaque ponto,
Vim cunctam atque minas perfert caelique marisque,
-- -- ipsa immota manens.
Much like a rock, which but's into the Maine,
Meeting with windes-rage, to the Sea laid plain,
It does the force of skies and Seas sustain,
Endure their threats, yet do th vnmoov'd remain.
Let us not imitate these examples, we shall not attain them. They opinionate
themselves resolutely to behod, and without perturbation to be spectatours of
their Countries ruin, which whilome possessed and commanded their full will.
As for our vulgar minds, therein is too much effort and roughness. Cato quit
thereby the noblest life that ever was. We seely-ones must seek to escape the
storm further off: We ought to provide for apprehension and not for patience,
and avoid the blows we cannot withstand. Zeno seeing Chremonides a young man
whom he loved, approach to sit near him; rose up suddenly. Cleanthes asking
him the reason? I understand (said he) that Physicians above all things
prescribe rest, and forbid emotion in all tumors. Socrates says not; yield not
to the allurements of beauty; maintain it, enforce your selves to the
contrary: Shun her (says he) run out of her sight and company; as from a
violent poison, that infecteth and stingeth farre-off. And his good Disciple,
faining or reciting, but in mine opinion, rather reciting then faining, the
matchless perfections of that great Cyrus, describes him distrusting his
forces to withstand the blandishments or allurings of the divine beauty of
that famous Panthea his Captive, committing the visitation and guarde of her to
an other, that had less liberty then himself. And likewise the Holy Ghost
says ne nos inducas in tentationem, Matthew. 6. 13.
and lead us not into temptation. We pray not that our reason be not encountered
and vanquished by concupiscence: but that it be not so much as assayed
therewith: That we be not reduced to an estate, where we should but suffer the
approaches, solicitations and temptations of sin: and we entreat our Lord,
to keep our conscience quiet, fully and perfectly free from all commerce of
evil. Such as say they have reason for their revenging passion, or any other
minde-troubling perturbation: say often truth, as things are, but not as they
were. They speak to us, when the causes of their error are by themselves
fostred and advanced. But retire further backward, recall their causes to
their beginning: there you surprise and put them to a non plus. Would they have
their fault be less, because it is more ancient; and that of an unjust
beginning, the progress be just? He that (as I do) shall wish his countries
welfare, without fretting or pining himself, shall be grieved, but not
swoune, to see it threatening, either his own downfall, or a continuance no
less ruinous. Oh seely-weake bark, whom both waves, winds and Pilote, hull
and toss to so contrary desseignes!

-- in tam diversa, magister,
Ventus and vnda trahunt. --
Master the wave and wind
So diverse ways do bind.
Who gapes not after the favor of Princes, as after a thing without which he
cannot live; nor is much disquieted at the coldness of their entertainment or
frowning countenance nor regards the inconstancy of their will. Who hatcheth
not his children or huggeth not honors, with a slavish propension; nor leaves
to live commodiously having once lost them. Who does good, namely for his own
satisfaction, nor is much vexed to see men censure of his actions against his
merit. A quarter of an ownce of patience provideth for such inconveniences. I
find ease in this receipt: redeeming my self in the beginning, as good cheap
as I can: By which means I perceive my self to have escaped much trouble and
manifold difficulties. With very little force, I stay these first motions of my
perturbations: And I abandon the subject which begins to molest me, and
before it transport me. He that stops not the loose, shall hardly stay the
course. He that cannot shut the door against them, shall never expel them
being entered. He that cannot attain an end in the beginning, shall not come to
an end of the conclusion. Nor shall he endure the fall, that could not endure
the starts of it. Etenim Cic. Tasc. q^. l. 4.
ipsae se impellunt, vbi semel a ratione discessum est; ipsaque sibi imbecillit
as indulget, in altumque provehitur imprudens: nec reperit locum consistendi.
For they drive themselves headlong, when once they are parted and past reason;
and weakness soothes it self, and unawares is carried into the deep, nor
can it find a place to tarry in. I feel betimes, the low winds, which are
forerunners of the storm, buzze in mine ears and sound and try me within:

-- c^^ flamina prima
Cum deprensa fr^munt sylvis, and c^ca volutant Virg. Aen. l. 10. 97.

Murmura, venturos nautis prodentia ventos.
As first blasts in the woods perceived to go
Whistle, and darkely speak in murmurs low,
Foretelling Mariners what winds will grow.
How often have I done my self an apparent injustice, to avoid the danger I
should fall into, by receiving the same, happily worse, from the judges, after
a world of troubles, and of foul, and vile practices, more enemies to my
natural disposition, then fire or torment? Convenit a litibus quantum licet,
and nescso an paulo plus etiam quam licet, abhorrentem esse; Est C^^. off. lib.
enim non mo^^ liberale, paululum non nunquam de suo iure decedere, sed
interdum etiam fructuosum. As much as we may, and it may be more then we may,
we should abhor brabling and lawing; for it is not only an ingenious part,
but sometimes profitable also at sometimes to yield a little of our right. If
we were wise indeed, we should rejoice and glory, as I heard once a
yonggentleman, borne of a very great house, very wittily and unfeignedly,
rejoice with all men that his mother had lost her suit; as if it had been a
cough, an ague, or any other yrksome burden. The favors, which fortune might
have given me, as aliances and acquaintances with such as have Sovereign
authority in those things; I have, in my conscience done much instantly to
evoide employing them to others prejudice, and not overvalue my rights above
their worth. To conclude, I have so much prevailed by my endeavors (in a good
hour I may speak it) that I am yet a virgin for any suits in law, which have
notwithstanding not omitted gently to offer me their service, and under
pretense of lawful titles insinuate themselves into my allowance, would I but
have given ear unto them. And as a pure maiden from quarrels; I have without
important offense, either passive or active, lingered out a long life, and never
heard worse than mine own name* A rare grace of heaven. Our greatest
agitations, have strange springs and ridiculous causes. What ruin did our last
Duke of Burgundy run into, for the quarrel of a cart-load of
sheepes-skinnes? And was not the graving of a seal, the chief cause of the
most horrible breach and topsie-turvy, that ever this worlds-frame endured?
For, Pompey and Casar are but the new buddings and continuation of two others.
And I have seen in my time, the wisest heads of this realm assembled with
great ceremony and public charge, about treaties and agreements, the true
deciding whereof depended in the mean while absolutely and soveraignely of the
will and consultations held in some Ladies pate or cabinet; and of the
inclination of some silly woman. Poets have most judiciously looked into this,
who but for an apple have set all Greece and Asia on fire and sword. See why
that man does hazard both his honor and life on the fortune of his rapier and
dagger; let him tell you whence the cause of that contention arises; he can
not without blushing; so vain and so frivolous is the occasion. To embarke
him, there needs but little advisement, but being once-in, all parts do
work; Then are greater provisions required, more difficult and important. How
far more easy is it not to enter, than to get forth? We must proceed
contrary to the brier, which produces a long and straight stalk at the first
springing; but after, as tired and out of breath, it makes many and thick
knots, as if they were pawses, showing to have no more that vigor and
constancy. We should rather begin gently and leasurely; and keep our
strength and breath for the perfection of the work. We direct affairs in the
beginning, and hold them at our mercy, but being once undertaken, they guide
and transport us, and we must follow them. Yet may it not be said, that this
counsel has freed me from all difficulties, and that I have not been often
troubled to control and bridle my passions: which are not always governed
according to the measure of occasions: whose entrances are often sharp and
violent. So is it, that thence may be reaped good fruit and profit. Except for
those, who in well doing are not satisfied with any benefit, if their
reputation be in question. For in truth, such an effect is not compted of but
by every one to himself. You are thereby better satisfied, but not more
esteemed, having reformed your self, before you come into action or the matter
was in sight: yet not in this only, but in all other duties of life, their
course which aim at honor, is diverse from that, which they propound unto
themselves, that follow order and reason. I find some, that inconsiderately
and furiously thrust themselves into the listes and grow slack in the course.
As Plutarke says, that Such as by the vice of bashfulnesse are soft and
tractable to grant whatsoever is demanded, are afterward as prone and facile
to recant and break their word: In like manner, he that enters lightly into a
quarrel, is subject to leave it as lightly. The same difficulty which keeps me
from embracing the same, should encite me, being once moved and therein
engaged, to continue resolute. It is an ill custom. Being once embarked, one
must either goe-on or sink. Attempt coldly (said Byas) but pursue hotly. For
want of judgment, our hearts fail us; Which is also less tolerable. Most
agreements of our modern quarrels, are shameful and false: We only seek to
save apparances, and therewhilst betray and disa-vow our true intentions. We
salve the deed: We know how we spoke it, and in what sense the bystanders
know it: yea and our friends to whom we would have our advantages known. It
is to the prejudice of our liberty and interest of our resolutions-honour,
that we dis-avow our thoughts and seek for starting holes in falsehood, to make
our agreements. We belie ourselves, to salve a lie we have given to another.
We must not look whether your action or word may admit another
interpretation, but it is your own true and sincere construction, that you
must now maintain; whatsoever it cost you. It is to your virtue and to your
conscience that men speak; parts that ought not to be disguised. Leave we
these base courses, wrangling shifts and verbal means, to petty-fogging
Lawyers. The excuses and reparations, or satisfactions, which daily I see made;
promised and given to purge indiscretion, seem to me more foul than
indiscretion it self. Better were it for one to offend his adversary again,
than in giving him such satisfaction, to wrong himself so much. You have
braved him moved by choler, and now you seek to pacify and flatter him in
your cold and better sense: Thus you abase your self more, than you were
before exalted. I find no speech so vicious in a Gentleman, as I deem any
recantation he shall make, dishonorable; especially if it be wrested from him
by authority: For So Much as obstinacy is in him more excusable, than
cowardice. Passions are to me as easy to be avoided, as they are difficult to
be moderated. Excinduntur facilius animo, quam temperantur. They are more
easily rooted out of the mind, than brought to good temper. He that can not
attain to this noble Stoicall impassibilitie, let him shrowde himself in the
bosom of this my popular stupiditie. What they did by virtue, I inure my self
to do by Nature. The middle region harbors storms; the two extremes
contain Philosophers and rural men, they concur in tranquillity and good
hap.

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, Virg. Georg. l. 2 490.

Atque metus omnes and inexorabile fatum
Subiecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari.
Fortunatus and ille, Deos qui novit agrestes,
Panaque, Silvanumque senem, Nymphasque sorores.
Happy is he that could of things the causes find,
And subject to his feet all fearfulness of mind,
Inexorable fate, and noise of greedy Hell.
And happy he, with Country Gods acquainted well,
Pan and old Silvan knows,
And all the sister shrowes.
The beginnings of all things are weak and tender. We must therefore be
cleare-sighted in beginnings: For, as in their budding we discern not the
danger, so in their full growth we perceive not the remedy. I should have
encountered a thousand crosses, daily more hard to be disgested in the course of
ambition, than it has bin uneasy for me to stay the natural inclination,
that led me unto them.

-- iure perhorrui, Hor. car. l. 3. 16. 18.

Late conspicuum tollere verticem. --
I have been much afraid for causes right.
To raise my foretop far abroad to sight.
All public actions are subject to uncertain and diverse interpretations: For,
too many heads judge of them. Some say of this my City employment (whereof I
am content to speak a word; not that it deserves it, but to make a show of my
manners in such things) I have demeaned my self like one that is to slowly
moved and with a languishing affection: And they are not altogether void of
reason. I strive to keep my mind and thoughts quiet. Cum semper Natura, tum
etiam aetate iam quietus. Both ever quiet by Nature, and now because of years.
And if at any time they are debauched to some rude and piercing impression, it
is in truth without my consent. From which natural slacknesse, one must not
therefore infer any proof of disabilitie: For, Want of care and lack of
judgment are two things: And less unkindness and ingratitude toward those
Citizens, who to gratify me, employed the utmost of all the means they could
possibly; both before they knew me and since. And who did much more for me, in
appoynting me my charge the second time, then in choosing me the first. I love
them with all my heart, and wish them all the good that may be. And truly if
occasion had been offered, I would havespared nothing to have done them
service. I have stirred and labored for them, as I do for my self. They are
a good people, warlike and generous; yet capable of obedience and discipline,
and fit for good employment, if they be well guided. They say likewise, that I
passed over this charge of mine without any deed of note or great show. It is
true. Moreover, they accuse my cessation, when as all the world was convicted
of too much doing: I have a most nimble motion, where my will does carry me.
But this point is an enemy unto perseverance. Whosoever will make use of me,
according to my self, let him employ me in affairs, that require vigor and
liberty: that have a short, a straight, and therewithal a hazardous course: I
may peradventure somewhat prevail therein. Whereas if it be tedious, crafty,
laborious, artificial and intricate, they shall do better to address
themselves to some other man. All charges of importance are not difficult. I
was prepared to labor somewhat more earnestly, if there had been great need.
For it lies in my power, to do something more than I make shew-of, and than I
love to do. To my knowledge, I have not omitted any motion that duty required
earnestly at my hands. I have easily forgotten those, which ambition blendeth
with duty and cloketh with her title. It is they, which most commonly fill the
eyes and ears, and satisfy men. Not the thing it self, but the appearance
pays them. If they hear no noise, they imagine we sleep. My humors are
contrary to turbulent humors. I could pacify an inconvenience or trouble
without troubling my self, and chastise a disorder without alteration.

Have I need of choler and inflammation; I borrow it, and therewith mask my
self: My manners are mustie, rather wallowish then sharp. I accuse not a
Magistrate that sleeps, so they that are under it sleep also. So sleep the
laws. For my part, I commend a gliding, an obscure and reposed life: Neque
submissam and abiectam, neque se efferentem. Neither too abject and submisse,
nor vaunting it self too much. But my fortune will have it so; I am Cic. off.
lib. 1.
descended of a family that has lived without noise and tumult: and of long
continuance particularly ambicious of integrity. Our men are so framed to
agitation and ostentations that goodness, moderation, equity, constancy, and
such quiet and mean qualities, are no more hard-of. Rough bodies are felt,
smooth ones are handled imperceptibly. Sickness is felt, health little or not
at all: nor things that anoint us, in regard of such as sting us, It is an
action for ones reputation and private commodity, and not for the common good,
to refer that to be done in the market place, which a man may do in the
counsel-chamber: and at noone day, what might have been effected the night
before: and to be jealous to do that himself, which his fellow can perform
as well. So did some Surgeons of Greece show the operations of their skill,
upon scaffolds, in view of all passengers, thereby to get more practice and
custom. They suppose, that good orders cannot be understood, but by the sound
of a trumpet. Ambition is no vice for petty companions, and for such endeavors
as ours. One said to Alexander: your father will leave you a great command,
easy and peaceful: the boy was envious of his fathers victories, and of the
justice of his government. He would not have enjoyed the worlds* Empire securely
and quietly. Alcibiades in Plato, loves rather to die young, fair, rich,
noble, learned, and all that in excellence, then to stay in the state of such a
condition. This infirmity is happily excusable, in so strong and full a mind.
When these petty wretched souls, are therewith enveagled; and think to
publish their fame, because they have judged a cause rightly, or continued the
order in guarding of a Cities gates; by how much more they hoped to raise
their head, so much more do they show their simplicity. This petty
well-doing, has neither body nor life. It vanishes in the first month; and
walks but from one corner of a street to another. Entertain therewith your
son and your servant, and spare not. As that ancient fellow, who having no
other auditor of his praises and appla^ding of his sufficiency, boasted with
his chamber-maide, exclaiming: Oh Perette, what a gallant and sufficient man
thou have to thy master! If the worst happen, entertain your selves in your
selves: As a Counselor of my acquaintance, having degorged a rabble of
paragraphes, with an extreme contention and like foolishness; going out of
the counsell-chamber, to a pissing place near unto it; was heard very
conscientiously to utter these words to himself: Non nobis, Domine, non nobis,
sed nomini Psalm. 115. 1.
tuo da gloriam. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the
glory. He that cannot otherwise, let him pay himself out of his own purse.
Fame does not so basely prostitute it self, nor so cheap. Rare and exemplar
actions, to which it duly belongs, could not brook the company of this
innumerable multitude of vulgar petty actions. Well may a piece of marble raise
your titles as high as you list, because you have repaired a piece of an old
Wall, or cleansed a common ditch; but men of judgment will never do it.
Report follows not all goodness, except difficulty and rarity be joined
thereunto. Yea simple estimation, according to the Stoikes, is not due to every
action proceeding from virtue. Neither would they have him commended, who
through temperance abstaineth from an old blearey'd woman. Such as have known
the admirable qualities of Scipio the Affrican, renounce the glory which
Panaetius ascribes unto him, to have abstained from gifts, as a glory, not his
alone, but peculiar to that age. We have pleasures sortable to our fortune; let
us not usurp those of greatness. Our own are more natural. They are the
more solid and firm, by how much the meaner. Since it is not for conscience,
at least for ambition let us refuse ambition. Let us disdain this infaciate
thirst of honor and renown, base and beggarly, which makes us so suppliantly
to crave it of all sorts of people: Quae est ista laus quae possit e Cic. d^
fin. l. 2.
macello peti? What praise is this, which may be fetched out of the Shambles?
By abject means, and at what vile rate soever. To be thus honored, is merely
a dishonor. Learn we to be no more greedy of glory, then we are capable of
it. To be proud of every profitable and innocent action, is it fit for men to
whom it is extraordinary and rare. They will value it, for the price it cost
them. According as a good effect is more resounding; I abate of it is goodness:
the jelousie I conceive, it is produced more because it is so resounding, than
because it is good. What is set-out to show, is half sold. Those actions have
more grace, which carelessely and under silence, pass from the hands of a
Workman, and which some honest man afterward chooses and redeemeth from
darkness, to thrust them into the worlds-light; Only for their worth. Mihi
quidem laudabiliora videntur omnia, quae sine venditatione, and sine populo
Cic. Tusc. qu. l. 2.
test fiunt: All things in sooth seem to me more commendable that are
performed with no ostentation; and without the people to witness. Said the
most glorious man of the World. I had no care but to preserve and continue,
which are deaf and insensible effects. Innovation is of great luster: But
interdicted in times, when we are most urged, and have to defend our selves but
from novelties; Abstinence from doing, is eften as generous, as doing: but it
is not so apparent. My small worth is in a manner all of this kind. To be
short, the occasions in this my charge have seconded my complexion; for which I
conne them hearty thanks. Is there any man that desires to be sick, to see his
Physician set a work? And Should not that Physician be well whipped, who to
put his art in practice, would wish the plague to infect us? I was never
possessed with this impious and vulgar passion, to wish that the troubled and
distempred state of this City, might raise and honor my government. I have
most willingly lent them my hand to further, and shoulders to aid their ease
and tranquillity. He that will not thank me for the good order and for the
sweet and undisturbed rest, which has accompanied my charge; cannot at least
deprive me of that part, which by the title of my good fortune belongs unto
me. This is my humor, that I love as much to be happy as wise: And attribute
my successes as much to the mere grace of God, as to the mean furtherance of
my operation. I had sufficiently published to the World my insufficiency: in
managing of such public affairs: Nay, there is something in me, worse than
insufficiency: Which is, that I am not much displeased therewith: and that I
endeavor not greatly to cure it, considering the course of life I have
determined to my self. Nor have I satisfied my self in this employment. But
have almost attained what I had promised unto my self: Yet have I much
exceeded, what I had promised those, with whom I was to negotiate: For I
willingly promise somewhat less, then I can perform, or hope to accomplish.
Of this I am assured, I have never left offense or hatred amongst them: To have
left either regret or desire of me. This know I certainly, I have not much
affected it.

-- Mean huic considere monstre,
Mean salis placidi vultum, fluctusque quietos Virg A^n. lib. 5 849.

Ignorare? --
Should I this monster trust? Should I not know
The calm Seas counterfeit dissembling show,
How quietly sometimes the floods will go?
The eleventh Chapter.
Of the Lame or Cripple.

TWO or three years are now past, since the year has been shortened ten
days in France. Oh how many changes are like to ensue this reformation* It was
a right remooving of Heaven and Earth together, yet nothing remooveth fromit's
own place: My Neighbors find the season of their seed and Harvest time, the
opportunity of their affairs, their lucky and unlucky days, to answer just
those seasons to which they had from all ages assigned them. Neither was the
error heretofore perceived, nor is the reformation now discerned in our use.
So much uncertainty is there in all things: So gross, so obscure and so dull
is our understanding. Some are of opinion, this reformation might have bin
redressed after a less incommodious manner; substracting according to the
example of Augustus, for some years, the bissextile or leap day: Which in
some sort, is but a day of hinderance and trouble: Until they might more
exactly have satisfied the debt: Which by this late reformation is not done:
For we are yet some days in arrerages: And if by such a mean, we might
provide for times to come, appoynting that after the revolution of such or such
a number of years, that extraordinary day might for ever be eclipsed: so that
our misreckoning should not henceforward exceed four and twenty hours. We
have no other computation of time, but years: The World has used them so many
ages: And yet is it a measure, we have not until this day perfectly
established. And such, as we daily doubt, what form other Nations have
diversely given the same; and which was the true use of it. And what if some
say, that the Heavens in growing oldecompresse themselves toward us, and cast
into an uncertainty of hours and days? And as Plutarke says of months; that
even in his days, Astrology could not yet limite the motion of the Moon? Are
not we then well holp-vp, to keep a register of things past? I was even now
plodding (as often I do) upon this, what free and gadding instrument humane
reason is. I ordinarily see, that men, in matters proposed them, do more
willingly ammuze and busy themselves in seeking out the reasons, than in
searching out the truth of them. They omit presuppositions, but curiously
examine consequences. They leave things, and run to causes. Oh conceited
discourses! The knowledge of causes does only concern him, who has the
conduct of things: Not us, that have but the sufferance of them. And who
according to our need, without entering into their beginning and essence, have
perfectly the full and absolute use of them. Nor is wine more pleasant unto him
that knows the first faculties of it. Contrariwise; both the body and the
mind, interrupt and alter the right, which they have of the Worlds use and of
themselves, commixing therewith the opinion of learning. The effects concern
us, but the means, nothing at all. To determine and distribute, belongs to
superiority and regency; as accepting, to subjection and apprentiseshippe. Let
us reassume our custom. They commonly begin thus: How is such a thing done?
Whereas they should say: Is such a thing done? Our discourse is capable to
frame an hundred other Worlds, and find the beginnings and contexture of
them. It needs neither matter nor ground. Let it but run on: It will as
well build upon emptiness, as upon fullness and with inanity as with matter.

Dare pondus idonea fume, Pers. sat. 5. 20.

That things which vanish straight
In smoke, should yet bear weight.
I find, that we should say most times: There is no such thing. And I would
often employ this answer; but I dare not: for they cry; It is a defeature
produced by ignorance and weakness of spirit. And I must commonly juggle for
company sake, to treat of idle subjects and frivolous discourses. which I
believe nothing at all. Since truly, it is a rude and quarelous humor, flatly
to deny a proposition. And few miss (especially in things hard to be
persuaded) to affirm, that they have seen it: Or to allege such witnesses,
as their authority shall stay our contradiction. According to which use, we
know the foundations and means of a thousand things that never were. And the
world is in a thousand questions descanted and bandied too and fro; the pro and
contra of which is merely false. Ita finitima sunt falsaveris, Cic. Acad qu.
lib 4.
vt in praecipitem locum non debeat se sapiens committere. Falsehood is so
near Neighbor to truth, that a wiseman should not put himself upon a
slipperie downefal. Truth and falsehood have both alike countenances, their
port, their taste and their proceedings semblable: We behold them with one
same eyes. I observe that we are not only slow in defending ourselves from
deceit, but that we seek and sue to embrace it. We love to meddle and
entangle ourselves with vanity, as conformable unto our being. I have seen the
birth of diverse miracles in my days. Although they be smoothered in their
first grouth, we omit not to foresee the course they would have taken, had
they lived their full age. The matter is to find the end of the clue; that
found, one may winde-off what he list: And there is a further distance from
nothing to the least thing in the World, than between that and the greatest.
Now the first that are embrued with the beginning of strangeness, coming to
publish their history, find by the oppositions made against them, where the
difficulty of persuasion lodges; and go about with some false patch, to botch
up those places. Besides that, Insita h^minibus libidine alendi de industria
rumores: Men having a natural desire to nourish reports. We naturally make it a
matter of conscience, to restore what has been lent us, without some usury
and accession of our increase. A particular error, does first breed a
public error: And when his turn comes, A public error begets a
particular error. So goes all this vast frame, from hand to hand, confounding
and composing it self; in such sort that the furthest-abiding testimony, is
better instructed of it, then the nearest: and the last informed, better
persuaded then the first. It is natural progress: For, whosoever believes
any thing, thinks it a deed of charity, to perswad it unto another: Which,
that he may the better effect, he fears not to add something of his own
invention thereunto, so far as he sees necessary in his discourse, to
supply the resistance and defect, he imagine^h to be in another conception.
My self, who make an especial matter of conscience to lie, and care not
greatly to ad credit or authority to what I say, perceive nevertheles, by the
discourses I have in hand, that being ernested, either by the resistance of
another, or by the earnestnes of my narration; I swell and amplify my subject
by my voice, motions, vigor and force of words: as also by extension and
amplification, not without some prejudice to the naked truth. But yet I do it
upon condition, that to the first that brings me home again, and enquireth
for the bare and simple truth at my hands: I suddenly give over my hold, and
without exaggeration emphasis or amplification, I yield both my self and it
unto him. A lively, earnest and ready speech as mine, is easy transported unto
hyperboles. There is nothing whereunto men are ordinarily more prone, then to
give way to their opinions. Where ever usual means fail us, we add
commandment, force, fire and sword. It is not without some ill fortune to come
to that pass, that the multitude of believers, in a throng where fools do in
number so far exceed the wise, should be the best touchstone of truth.
Quasi vero quidquam Cic. de divin. l. 2
sit tam valde, quam nilsapere vulgar. Sanitatis patrocinium est, insanientium
turba. As though any thing were so common as to have no wit. The multitude of
them that are mad, is a defense for them that are in their wits. It is a hard
matter for a man to resolve his judgment against common opinions. The first
persuasion taken from the very subject, seizes on the simple: whence under
the authority of the number and antiquity of testimonies, it extends it self on
the wiser sort. As for me, in a matter, which I could not believe being
reported by one: I should never credit the same, though affirmed by a hundred.
And I judge not opinions, by years. It is not long since one of our Princes,
in whom the gowt had spoiled a gentle disposition and blithe composition;
suffered himself so far to be persuaded or misled, by the report made unto
him of the wondrous deeds of a Priest, who by way of charms, spells and
gestures cured all diseases; that he undertook a long-tedious jonrny to find
him out: and by the virtue of his apprehension did so persuade, and for
certain hours so ^ull his legs asleep, that for a while he brought them to
do him that service, which for a long time they had forgotten. Had fortune
heaped five or six like accidents one in the neck of another, they had
doubtless been able to bring this miracle into nature. Whereas afterward
there was so much simplicity and so little skill found in the architect of
these works, that he was deemed unworthy of any punishment: As likewise should
be done with most suchlike things, were they thoroughly known in their nature.
Miramur ex intervallo fallentia: We wonder at those things that deceive us by
distance. Our sight does in such sort, often represent us a farre-off with
strange images, which vanish in approaching nearer. Nnnquam ad liquidum fama
perducitur. Fame is never brought to be clear. It is a wonder, to see how from
many vain beginnings and frivolous causes, so famous impressions do
ordinarily arise and ensue. Even that hinders the information of them: For,
whilst a man endeavors to find out causes, forcible and weighty ends, and
worthy so great a name, he loses the true and essential. They are so
little, that they escape our sight. And verily a right wise, heedy and subtle
inquisitor is required in such questings; imparciall and not preoccupated. All
these miracles and strange events, are until this day hidden from me: I have
seen no such monster, or more express wonder in this world, then my self.
With time and custom a man does acquaint and enure him self to all
strangeness: But the more I frequent and know my self, the more my deformity
astonieth me: and the less I understand my self. The chiefest privilege to
produce and advance such accidents, is reserved unto fortune. Traveling
yesterday thorough a village, within two leagues of my house, I found the place
yet warm of a miracle that was but newly failed and discovered, wherewith all
the country thereabout had for many months been ammused and abused; and
diverse bordering Provinces began to listen unto it, and several troops of
all qualities ceased not thick and threefold to flock thither. A young man of
that town, undertook one night in his own house (never dreaming of any
knavery) to counterfeit the voice of a spirit or ghost, but only for sport, to
make himself merry for that present, which succeeding better then he had
imagined; to make the jest extend further, and himself the merrier, he made a
country-maiden acquainted with his devise; who because she was both seely and
harmless, consented to beesecret and to second him: In the end they got
another, and were now three, all of one age and like sufficiency: and from
private spirit-talking, they began with hideous voices to cry and roar
aloud, and in, and about churches hiding themselves under the chief Altar,
speaking but by night, forbidding any light to be set up: From speeches
tending the worlds subversion, and threatening of the day of judgment (which
are the subjects, by whose authority and abusive reverence, imposture and
illusion, is more easily lurked) they proceeded to certain visions and strange
gestures, so foolish and ridiculous, that there is scarce any thing more gross
and absurd used among Children, in their childish sports. Suppose I pray you,
that fortune would have seconded this harmless devise or juggling trick; Who
knows how far it would have extended, and to what it would have grown? The
poor seely three Devils are now in prison, and may happily e're long pay dear
for their common sottishness; and I wot not whether some cheverell judge or
other, will be avenged of them for his. It is manifestly seen in this, which
now is discovered; as also in diverse other things of like quality, exceeding
our knowledge; I am of opinion that we uphold our judgment, as well to reject,
as to receive. Many abuses are engendered in the World; or to speak more
boldly, all the abuses of the World are engendered upon this, that we are
taught to fear to make profession, of our ignorance; and are bound to accept
and allow, all that we cannot refute. We speak of all things by precepts and
resolution. The Style of Rome did bear, that even the same, that a witness
deposed, because he had seen it with his own eyes; and that which a Judge
ordained of his most assured knowledge, was conceived in this form of speech,
It seems so unto me. I am drawn to hate likely things, when men go about to
set them down as infallible. I love these words or phrases, which mollify
and moderate the temerity of our propositions: It may be: Peradventure: In some
sort: Some: It is said: I think, and such like: And had I been to instruct
children, I would so often have put this manner of answering in their mouth;
enquiring, and not resolving: What means it? I understand it not: It may well
be: Is it true? that they should rather have kept the form of learners,
until three score years of age, than present themselves Doctors at ten; as
many do. Whosoever will be cured of ignorance, must confess the same. Iris is
the daughter of Thaumantis. Admiration is the ground of all Philosophy:
Inquisition the progress: Ignorance the end. Yea but there is some kind of
ignorance strong and generous, that for honor and courage is nothing beholding
to knowledge: An ignorance, which to conceive rightly, there is required no
less learning, than to conceive true learning.

Being young, I saw a law-case, which Corras a Counselor of Toulouse caused to
be printed of a strange accident of two men, who presented themselves one for
another. I remember (and I remember nothing else so well) that me thought, he
proved his imposture, whom he condemned as guilty, so wondrous strange and so
far-exceeding both our knowledge and his own, who was judge, that I found much
boldness in the sentence which had condemned him to be hanged. Let us receive
some form of sentence that may say: The Court understands nothing of it; more
freely and ingenuously, than did the Areopagites; who finding themselves urged
and entangled in a case they could not well clear or determine, appointed the
parties to come again and appear before them a hundred years after. The
witches about my country, are in hazard of their life, upon the opinion of
every new author, that may come to give their dreams a body. To apply such
examples as the holy word of God offreth us of such things (assured and
irrefragable examples) and join them to our modern events; since we neither
see the causes nor means of them, some other better wit then ours is thereunto
required. Peradventure it appertains to that only most-mightie testimony, to
tell us: This here, and that there; and not this other are of them. God must be
believed; and good reason he should be so. Yet is there not one amongst us,
that will be amazed at his own narration (and he ought necessarily to be
astonished at it, if he be not out of his wits) whether he employ it about
others matters; or against himself. I am plain and homely, and take hold on
the maine point, and on that which is most likely; avoiding ancient reproaches.
Mayor em fidem homines adhibent ijs quae non intelligunt. Cupidine humani
ingenij libentius obscura creduntur. Men give more credit to things they
understand not: Things obscure are more willingly believed through a strange
desire of man's wit. I see that men will be angry: and am forbid to doubt of it
upon pain of execrable injuries. A new manner of persuading. Mercy for Gods
sake. My belief is not carried away with blows. Let them tyrannize over such
as accuse their opinion of falsehood; I only accuse mine of difficulty and
boldness. And equally to them I condemn the opposite affirmation: if not so
imperiously. He that with bravery and by commandment will establish his
discourse, declares his reason to be weak: For a verbal and scholasticall
altercation, that they have as much appearance as their contradictors. Videantur
sane, non affirmentur modo. Indeed let them seem, so they be not avouched.
But in effectual consequence they draw from it, these have great ods. To kill
men; there is required a bright shining and clear light. And our life is over-
real and essential, to warrant these supernatural and fantastical
accidents. As for drugges and poisons, they are out of my element: they are
homicides, and of the worst kind. In which nevertheless, it is said, that one
must not always rely upon the mere confession of those people: For, they
have sometimes been seen to accuse themselves, to have made away men which
were both sound and living. In these other extravagant accusations, I should
easily say that it suffices what commendations soever he has, a man be
believed in such things as are humane: but of such as are beyond his conception
and of a supernatural effect, he ought then only be believed, when a
supernatural approbation has authorized him. That privilege it has pleased
God to give some of our testimonies, ought not to be vilified, or slightly
communicated. Mine ears are full of a thousand such tales. Three saw him such
a day in the East; three saw him the next day in the West, at such an hour, in
such a place; and thus and thus attired; v^^ily in such a case I could not
believe my self. How much more natural and more likely do I find it, that
two men should lie, then one in twelve hours, pass with the winds, from East
to West? How much more natural, that our understanding may by the volubility
of our loose capring mind be transported from his place? then that one of us
should by a strange spirit, in flesh and bone, be carried upon a broom through
the tunnell of a chimny? Let us, who are perpetually tossed too and fro with
domestical and our own illusions, not seek for foreign and unknown
illusions. I deem it a matter pardonable, not to believe a wonder, so
farreforth at least as one may divert and exclude the verification by no
miraculous way. And I follow Saint Augustines opinion, that a man were better
bend toward doubt, than incline toward certainetie, in matters of difficult
trial and dangerous belief. Some years are now past, that I traveled
through the country of a sovereign Prince: who in favor of me, and to abate
my incredulity, did me the grace, in his own presence, and in a particular
place, to make me see ten or twelve prisoners of that kind; and amongst
others an old beldam witch; a true and perfect forceresse, both by her vglines
and deformity; and such a one as long before was most famous in that
profession. I saw both proofs, witnesses, voluntary confessions, and some
other insensible marks about this miserable old woman; I enquired and talked
with her a long time, with the greatest heed and attention I could; yet am I
not casily carried away by preoccupation. In the end, and in my conscience, I
should rather have appointed them Helleborum, than Hemlocke. Captisque res
magis mentibus, quam consceleratis similis visa. The matter seemed liker to
minds captivate then guilty. Law has her own corrections for such diseases.
Touching the oppositions and arguments, that honest men have made unto me,
both there, and often elsewhere, I have found none that tie me; and that
admit not always a more likely solution, than their conclusions. True it is,
that proofs and reasons grounded upon the fact and experience. I untie not:
for indeed they have no end; but often cut them, as Alexander did his knotte.
When all is done, it is an over-valuing of ones conjectures, by them to cause a
man to be burned alive. It is reported by diverse examples (and Praestantius
says of his father) that being in a slumber much more deeply, then in a
full-sound sleep, he dreamed and verily thought himself to be a Mare, and
served certain soldiers for a sumpter-horse, and was indeed what he imagined
to be. If sorcerers dream thus materially: If dreams may sometimes be thus
incorporated into effects: I cannot possibly believe, that our will should
therefore be bound to the laws and justice: which I say, as one who am neither
a Judge, nor a Counselor unto Kings, and furthest from any such worthiness:
but rather a man of the common stamp, and both by my deeds and sayings, borne
and vowed to the obedience of public reason. He that should register my
humors, to the prejudice of the simplest law, or opinion, or custom of this
village, should greatly wrong himself, and injury me as much. For in what I
say, I gape for no other certainty, but that such was then my thought. A
tumultuous and wavering thought. It is by way of discourse that I speak of
all; and of nothing by way of advise. Nec me pudet, vt istos, faterinescire,
quod nesciam. Nor am I ashamed, as they are, to confess I know not that which
I do not know.

I would not be so hardy to speak, if of duty I ought to be believed: and so
I answered a great man, who blamed the sharpness and contention of my
exhortations. When I see you bent and prepared on one side; with all the
endeavor I can, I will propose the contrary unto you; to resolve and enlighten
your judgment, not to subdue or bind the same: God has your hearts in his
hands, and he will furnish you with choice. I am so malapert, as to desire,
that my opinions alone, should give sway to a matter of such importance. My
fortune has not raised them to so powerful and deep conclusious. Truly, I
have not only a great number of complexions, but an infinite many of opinions,
from which, had I a son of mine own, I would dissuade him, and willingly
make him to distaste them. What? If the truest are not ever the most commodious
for man; he being of so strange and untamed a composition: Whether it be to the
purpose, or from the purpose, it is no great matter. It is a common Proverb in
Italy, that He knows not the perfect pleasure of Venus, that has not lain
with a limping Woman. Either fortune, or some particular accident have long
since brought this by-saying in the peoples mouth: and it is as well spoken of
men as of women: For the Queen of the Amazons answered the Scithian, that
wooed her to loves-embracements. (...), The crooked man does it best. In that
feminine commonwealth of theirs, to avoyde the domination of men, they were
wont in their infancy to maime them, both their arms and legs and other
limbs, that might anyway adventage their strength over them, and made only
that use of them, that we in our World make of our Women. I would have said,
that the loose or disjoynted motion of alimping or crooke-backt Woman, might
addesome new kind of pleasure unto that business or sweet sin, and some
vn-assaid sensual sweetness, to such as make trial of it: but I have lately
learnt, that even ancient Philosophy has decided the matter: Who says, that
the legs and thighs of the crooked-backt or halting-lame, by reason of their
imperfection, not receiving the nourishment, due unto them, it follows that
the Genitall parts, that are above them, are more full, better nourished and
more vigorous. Or else, that such a defect hindering other exercise, such as are
therewith possessed, do less waste their strength and consume their virtue,
and so much the stronger and fuller, they come to Venus sportes. Which is also
the reason why the Graecians described their Women-Weavers, to be more hot
and earnestly-luxurious, than other Women: Because of their sitting-trade,
without any violent exercise of the body. What cannot we dispute of according
to that rate? I might likewise say of these, that the same stirring, which
their labor, so sitting does give them, does rouse and solicit them, as the
jogging and shaking of their Coache, does our Ladies. Do not these examples
fit that whereof I spoke in the beginning? That our reasons do often
anticipate the effect, and have the extension of their jurisdiction so
infinite, that they judge and exercise themselves in manity, and to a not
being? Besides the flexibility of our invention, to frame reasons unto all
manner of dreams; our imaginations is likewise found easy to receive
impressions from falsehood, by very frivolous apparances. For, by the only
authority of the ancient and public use of this word or phrase, I have
heretofore persuaded my self, to have received more pleasure of a Woman, in
that she was not straight, and have accounted her crookedness in the number of
her graces. Torquato Tasso, in the comparison he makes between Italy and
France, reports to have noted, that we commonly have more slender and spiny
legs, than the Italian Gentlemen; and imputes the cause unto our continual
riding and sitting on horseback. Which is the very same, from which Suctonius
draws another clean contrary conclusion: For, he says, that Germanicus had
by the frequent use of this exercise, brought his to be very big. There is
nothing so supple and wandering, as our understanding. It is like to Theramenez
shoe, fit for all feet. It is double and diverse, and so are matters diverse
and double. Give me a Dragma of Silver, said a Cinike Philosopher unto
Antigonus: It is not the present of a King, answered he; Give then a talent: It
is no gift for a Cinike, quoth he:

Seu plures calor ille vias, and caeca relaxat Virg. Georg. li. 1 89.

Spiramenta, novas veniat qua succus in herbas:
Seu durat magis, and venas astringit hiantes,
Ne tenues pluviae, rapidive potentia solis
Acrior, aut Boreae penetrabile frigus adurat.
Whether the heat lays open holes unseen,
Whereby the sap may pass to herbs fresh-greene:
Or rather hardens and binds gaping veins,
Lest sharp power of hot sun, or thinning raines,
Of piercing North-cold blaste,
Should scorch, consume and waste,
Ogni medagalia ha il suo river s^io; Each outside has his inside, says the
Italian. Lo why C^^tomachus was wont to say, that Carneades had surmounted the
labors of Hercules; because he had exacted consent from men; that is to say
opinion and temerity to judge. This fantasy of Carneades, so vigorous (as I
imagine) proceeded anciently, from the impudency of those, who make profession
to know; and from their excessive selfe-overweening. Aesope was set to sale,
together with two other slaves; a Chapman enquired of the first, what he could
do: he to endeare himself, answered, mountains and wonders, and what not?
For he knew and could do all things. The second answered even so for himself,
and more too: But when he came to Aesope, and demanded of him what he could
do: Nothing (said he) for these two have forestaled all, and know and can do
all things, and have left nothing for me. So has it happened in the school
of philosophy. The rashness of those who ascribed the capacity of all things to
man's wit, through spite and emulation produced this opinion in others, that
humane wit was not capable of any thing. Some hold the same extremity in
ignorance, that others hold in knowledge. To the end none may deny, that man is
not immoderate in all and every where: and has no other sentence or arrest,
than that of necessity, and impuissance to proceed further.

The twelfth Chapter.
Of Phisiognomy.

ALmost all the opinions we have, are taken by authority, and upon credit:
There is no hurt. We cannot choose worse, then by our selves, inso weak an age.
This image of Socrates his discourse, which his friends have left us, we only
approve it, by the reverence of public approbation. It is not of our own
knowledge: they are not according to our use. Might such a man be borne now
adays, there are but few would now esteem him. We discern not graces inlie
or aright; We only perceive them by a false light set out and pufft up with
art: Such as pass under their natural purity and simplicity, do easily
escape so weak and dim a sight as ours is. They have a secret, vnperceived
and delicate beauty: he had need of a clear, farre-seeing and true-discerning
sight, that should rightly discover this secret light. Is not in genuity
(according to us) cosin-germaine unto sottishness, and a quality of reproach?
Socrates makes his soul to moove, with a natural and common motion. Thus
says a plain Countryman, and thus a seely Woman: He never has other people
in his mouth, than Coach-makers, Ioyners, Cobblers and Masons. They are
inductions and similitudes, drawn from the most vulgar and known actions of
men: every one understands him. Under so base a form, we should never have
chosen the noble worthiness and brightness of his admirable conceptions: We
that esteem all those but mean and vile, that learning does not raise: and
who have no perceiving of riches, except set out in show and pomp. Our World
is framed but unto ostentation. Men are puffed up with wind, and moved or
handled by bounds, as Baloones. This man proposes no vain fantasies unto
himself. His end was, to store us with things and furnish us with precepts,
which really more substantially and jointly serve our life:

-- servare modum, finemque tenere, Lucan. b^l. ci^. lib. 2. 380.

Naturamque sequi.
To keep a mean, to hold the end,
And natures conduct to attend.
So was he ever all one alike: And raised himself to the highest pitch of
vigor, not by fits, but by complexion. Or to say better; he raised nothing, but
rather brought down and reduced all difficulties, or sharpness to their
original and natural state, and thereunto subdued vigor. For, in Cato, it is
manifestly seen, to be an outright proceeding, far-above and beyond the
common: By the brave exploites of his life, and in his death, he is ever
perceived to be mounted upon his great horses. Whereas this man keeps on the
ground, and with a gentle and ordinary pace, treats of the most profitable
discourses, and addresseth himself both unto death and to the most thorny and
crabbed crosses, that may happen unto the course of humane life. It has
indeed fortuned, that the worthiest man to be known, and for a pattern to be
presented to the world, he is the man of whom we have most certain knowledge.
He has been declared and enlightened by the most cleare-seeing men, that ever
were; the testimonies we have of him, are in faithfulness and sufficiency
most admirable. It is a great matter, that ever he was able to give such order
unto the pure imaginations of a child, that without altring or wresting them,
he has thence produced the fairest effects of our mind. He neither represents
it rich nor high-raised; but found and pure: and ever with a blithe and
undefiled health. By these vulgar springs and natural wards: by these ordinary
and common fantasies, sans mooving or without urging himself, he erected not
only the most regular, but the highest and most vigorous opinions, actions and
customs, that ever were. He it is, that brought humane wisdom from heaven
again, where for a long time it had been lost, to restore it unto man: where
her most just and laborious work is. See or hear him plead before his
judges; mark with what reasons he rouzeth his courage to the hazards of
war, what arguments fortify his patience against detraction, calumniation,
tyranny, death, and against his wives peevish head: therein is nothing borrowed
from art, or from learning. The simplest may there know their means and
might: it is impossible to go further back or lower. He has done humane
nature a great kindness, to show what and how much she can do of her self.
We are every one richer then we imagine, but we are taught to borrow, and
instructed to shift; and rather to make use of others goods and means, then of
our own. There is nothing whereon man can stay or fix himself in time of his
need. Of voluptuousness, of riches, of pleasure, of power, he ever embraces
more, then he can graspe or hold. His greediness is incapable of moderation.
The very same I find to be in the curiosity of learning and knowledge: he
cuts out more work then he can well make an end of: and much more then he
need. Extending Sen epist. 106. f
the profit of learning, as far as his matter. Vt omnium rerum, sic literarum
quoque intemperantia laboramus. We are sick of a surfeit, as of all things, so
of learning also. And Tacitus has reason to commend Agricolaes mother, to have
brideled in her son an over-burning and earnest desire of learning. It is a
good, being nearly looked unto, that contains as other humane goods, much
peculiar vanity and natural weakness: and is very chargeable. The
acquisition and purchase whereof is much more hazardous, then of all other
viandes and beverage. For, whatsoever else we have bought, we carry home
insome vessel or other, where we have law to examine it is worth: how much,
and at what time we are to take-it. But Sciences, we cannot suddenly put
them into any other vessel, then our mind: we swallow them in buying them and
go from the marketh either already infected or amended. There are some, which
insteade of nourishing, do but hinder and surcharge us; and other some, which
under color of curing, empoison us. I have taken pleasure in some place, to
see men, who for devotions sake have made a vow of ignorance, as of chastity,
poverty and penitence. It is also a kind of guelding of our inordinate
appetites, to muzzle this greediness, which provokes us to the study of
books, and deprive the mind of that voluptuous delight, which by the opinion
of learning does so tickle us. And it is richly to accomplish the vow of
poverty, to join that of the mind unto it. We need not much learning for to
live at ease. And Socrates teaches us, that we have both it, and the way to
find and make use of it, within us. All our sufficiency, that beyond the
natural, is wellnigh vain and superfluous. It is much, if it charge and
trouble us no more, then it steads us. Paucis Sen ibid.
opus est literis ad mentem bonam. We have need of little learning to have a
good mind They are febricitant excesses of our spirit: a turbulent and unquiet
instrument. Rowze up your self, and you shall find forcible arguments against
death to be in your self; most true and very proper to serve and stead you
in time of necessity. It Is they which induce a peasant swain, yea and whole
nations to die as constantly as any Philosopher. Should I have died less
merrily before I read the Thusculanes? I think not. And when I find my self
in my best wits, I perceive, that I have somewhat enriched my tongue; my
courage but little. It is even as nature framed the same at first. And against
any conflict, it shields itself, but with a natural and common march. Books
have not so much served me for instruction, as exercitation. What if learning,
assaying to arm us with new wards and fences, against natural
inconveniences, has more imprinted their greatness and weight in our
fantasy, then her reasons, quidities and subtilities, therewith to cover us?
They are subtilities indeed; by which she often awaketh us very vainly.
Observe how many slight and idle arguments the wisest and closest authors
frame and scatter about one good sound: which if you consider nearly, are but
vain and incorporall. They are but verbal wyles, which beguile us. But
for so much as it may be profitable: I will not otherwise blanch them. Many of
that condition are scattered here and there, in diverse places of this volume;
either borrowed or imitated. Yet should a man somewhat heed, he call not that
force, which is but quaintnes; or term that which is but quipping sharp,
solid; or name that good, which is but fair: quae magis gustata quam potata
delectant, which more delight us being but tasted, then swild and Cic. Tusc.
qu^. 5
swallowed down. All that which pleases, feeds not; vbi non ingenij sed
animi negotium agitur. Where it is no matter of wit, but of courage. To see the
struggling endeavors which Seneca gives himself, to prepare himself against
death; to see him sweat with panting; to see him bathe so long upon this
perch, thereby to strengthen and assure himself: I should have made question
of his reputation, had he not most vndantedly maintained the same in his death.
His so violent and frequent agitation, shows that himself was fervent and
impetuous. Magnus animus remissius loquitur, and securius: Non est alius
ingenio, alius animo color. Sen. epist. 115. ^l.. 1.
A great courage speaks softly but securely. Wit has not one color, and
courage another. He must be convicted at his own charges. And shows in some
sort, that he was pressed by his adversary. Plutarkes manner by how much more
disdainefull and farre-extending it is (in my opinion) so much more manlike and
persuasive is it: I should easily believe, that his soul had her motions more
assured and more regular. The one more sharp, pricketh and suddenly starts
us: touches the spirit more. The other more solid, does constantly inform,
establish and comfort us: touches more the understanding. That ravisheth our
judgment; this does gain it. I have likewise seen other compositions and
more reverenced, which in purtraying the combat, they endure against the
provocations of the flesh, represent them so violent, so powerful and so
invincible, that our selves, who are cast in the common mould of other men,
have as much to admire the unknown strangeness and unfelt vigor of their
temptation, as their constant resistance. To what purpose do we so arm and
steel ourselves with these labouring-efforts of learning? Let us diligently
survay the surface of the earth, and there consider so many seely-poore people
as we see toyling, sweltring and drooping about their business, which never
heard of Aristotle, not of Plato, nor ever knew what examples or precepts are.
From those does nature daily draw and afford us effects of constancy and
patterns of patience, more pure and forcible, then are those, we so curiously
study-for in schools. How many do I ordinarily see, that misacknowledge
poverty; how many that wish for death, or that pass it without any alaram or
affliction? A fellow that dungeth my gardine, has happily this morning buried
his father or his child. The very names whereby they call diseases, do
somewhat mylden and diminish the sharpenes of them. With them a Phthysique or
consumption of the lungs, is but an ordinary cough: A dysenterie or bloody
flix, but a distemper of the stomach: A pleurisy but a cold or murre: and as
they gently name them, so they easily endure them. Grievous are they indeed,
when they hinder their ordinary labor or break their usual rest: They will
not take their beds but when they think they shall die. Simplex illa and aperta
virtus in obscuram and solert^m scientiam versa est. That plain and clear
virtue is turned into obscure and cunning knowledge. I was writing this about a
time that a boistrous storm of our tumultuous broiles and bloody troubles, did
for many months space, with all it is might and horror, hang full over my head.
On the one side, I had the enemies at my gates; on the other, the Picoreurs or
free-booters, far worse foes. Non armis sed vitijs certatur. We contend not
with armor, but with vices. And at one time felt and endured all manner of
harme-bringing military injuries:

Hostis adest dextra laev^que a part timendus, Ovid. P^nt. l. 1. ^l. 4. 55.

Vicinoque malo terret vtrumque latus.
A fearful foe on left hand and on right,
Does with his neighbor harms both sides afright.
Oh monstrous War: Others work without; this inwardly and against himself:
And with her own venom gnaweth and consumes her self. It is of so ruinous
and malign a Nature; that together with all things else, she ruineth her self:
and with spiteful rage, does rent, deface and massacre it self. We do more
often see it, by and through her self, to waste, to desolate and dissolve her
self, then by or through want of any necessary thing, or by enemies force. All
manner of discipline does shun and fly it. She comes to cure sedition, and
her self is thoroughly therewith infected: She goes about to chastize
disobedience, and shows the example of it: and being employed for the defense
of Laws, enters into actual rebellion against her own ordinances. Aye me,
where are we? Our Physic brings infection.

Nostre mal s'empoyson^e
Du secours qu'on luy done.
Our evil is empoysond more
By plaster they would lay to th'sore.
-- exuperat magis aegrescitque medendo. Virg. Aen. l. 12. 46.

It rises higher, quicker,
And grows by curing sicker,
Omnia fanda nefanda mal^ permista furore, Catul. Arg^^ v. 405.

Iustificam nobis mentem avertere Deorum.
Lawful unlawful deeds with fury blended,
Have turn'nd from us the Gods just mind offended.
In these popular diseases, one may in the beginning distinguish thescund from
the sick: but if they chance to continue any time, as ours has done and does
still, all the body, yea head and heels feel themselves the worse: no part
is* exempted from corruption. For, there is no air a man draws so greedily,
or sucks so gluttonnously; and that more spreds it self, or penetrates more
deeply, then does licentiousness. Our Armies have no other bond to tie them,
or other ciment to fasten them, then what comes from strangers: It is now a
hard matter to frame a body of a complete, constant, well-ordred and coherent
Army of Frenchmen: Oh what shame is it? We have no other discipline, then what
borrowed or auxiliar Soldiers show us. As for us, we are led^on by our own
discretion and not by the commanders* each man follows his own humor: and
has more to do within, then without. It is the commandment should follow,
court and yield unto: he only ought to obey: all the rest is free and loose.
I am pleased to see, what remissness and pusilanimitie is in ambition, and by
what steps of abjection and servitude, it must arrive unto it is end. But I am
displeased to see some debonaire and well-meaning minds, yea such as are
capable of justice, daily corrupted, about the managing and commanding of this
many-headed confusion. Long suffrance begets custom; cust^me, consent and
imitation. We had too-too many infected and ill-borne minds, without
corrupting the good, the sound and the generous. So that, if we continue any
time, it will prove a difficult matter to find out a man unto whose skill and
sufficiency, the health or recovery of this state may be committed in trust,
if fortune shall happily be pleased to restore it us again.

Hunc saltem everso inven^m succurrere scclo,
Ne prohibete.
Forbid not yet this youth at least,
To aid this age more then oppressed.
What is become of that ancient precept; That Soldiers ought more to fear
their General than their enemy? And of that wonderful examplelesse example:
That the Roman army having upon occasion enclosed within her trenches, and
round-beset an apple-orchard; so obedient was she to her Captains, that the
next morning, it rose and marched away without entering the same or touching one
apple, although they were full-ripe and very delicious: So that when the owner
came, he found the full number of his apples? I should be glad, that our
Youths, in stead of the time they employ about less profitable
peregrinations, and less honorable apprentishippes, would bestow one moyty,
in seeing and observing the wars that happen on the sea, under some good
Captain or excellent Commander of Malta; the other moyty in learning and
surveying the discipline of the Turkish armies. For it has many differences
and advantages over ours. This ensues, that here our Soldiers become more
licentious in expeditions, there they prove more circumspect and fearfully
wary. For, small offenses and petty larcenies, which in times of peace, are in
the common people punished with whipping or bastonadoes, in times of war are
capital crimes. For an egg taken by a Turk without paying, he is by their
law to have the full number of fifty stripes with a cudgel. For every other
thing, how slight soever not necessary for man's feeding, even for very
trifles, they are either thrust through with a sharp stake, which they call
Empaling, or presently beheaded. I have been amazed, reading the story of
Selim, the cruellest Conqueror that ever was, to see, at what time he subdued
the Country of Egypt, the beauteous-goodly gardines round about the City of
Damasco, all open and in a conquered Country; his maine army lying encamped
round about, those gardines were left untouched and unspoiled by the hands of
his Soldiers, only because they were commanded to spoil nothing, and ^ad
not the watchword of pillage. But is there any malady in a Commonweal, that
deserves to be combated by so mortal drugge? No said Favonius, not so much
as the usurpation of the tyrannical possession of a Commonwealth. Plato
likewise is not willing one should offer violence to the quiet repose of
his-Countrys no not to reform or cure the same; and allows not that
reformation, which disturbeth or hazardeth the whole estate; and which is
purchased with the blood and ruin of the Citizens. Establishing the office of
an honest man, in these causes, to leave all there: But only to pray God, to
lend his extraordinary assisting hand unto it. And seems to be offended with
Dyon his great friend, to have therein proceeded somewhat otherwise. I was a
Platonist on that side before ever I knew there had been a Plato in the world.
And if such a man ought absolutely be banished our commerce, and refused our
society: (he who for the sincerity of his conscience, deserved by mean of
divine favor, athwart the public darkness, and through the general
ignorance of the world wherein he lived, so far to enter and so deeply to
penetrate into chaistian light) I do not think, that it befitteth us, to be
instructed by a Pagan. Oh what impiety is it, to expect from God no succor
simply his, and without our cooperation. I often doubt, whether amongst so
many men, that meddle with such a matter, any has been found of so weak an
understanding, that has earnestly been persuaded, he proceeded toward
reformation, by the utmost of deformations; that he drew toward his salvation,
by the most express causes, that we have of undoubted damnation: that
overthrowing policy, disgracing magistrates, abusing laws, under whose tuition
God has placed him; filling brotherly minds and loving hearts, with malice,
hatred and murder; calling the Devils and furies to his help; he may bring
assistance to the most sacred mildness and justice of divine Law. Ambition,
avarice, cruelty and revenge have not sufficient proppes and natural
impetuousity; let us allure and stir them up by the glorious title of
justice and devotion. There can no worse estate of things be imagined, than
where wickedness comes to be lawful: And with the Magistrates leave, to
take the cloak of virtue: Nihil in speciem fallacius, quam prava religio, vbi
deorum numen praetenditur sceleribus. There is nothing more deceiptfull to
show, than corrupt religion, when the power of Heaven is made a pretense and
cloak for wickedness. The extreme kind of injustice (according to Plato)
is, that that which is unjust, should be held for just. The common people
suffered therein greatly then; not only present losses.

-- vndique totis
Vsque adeo turbatur agris. --
Such revell and tumultuous rout
In all the country round about.
But also succeeding dommages. The living were feign to suffer, so did such as
then were scarce borne. They were robbed and pilled, and by consequence so was
I, even of hope: spoiling and depriving them of al they had to provide their
living for many years to come.

Quae nequeunt secum far aut abducere, perdunt,
Et cremat insontes turba scelesta casas:
Muris nulla fides, squallent popularibus agri.
They wretch-lesse spoil and spill what draw or drive they may not,
Guilty rogues to set fire on guilt-lesse houses stay not.
In walls no trust, the field
By spoil grows waste and wild.
Besides these mischiefs, I endured some others. I incurred the inconveniences
that moderation brings in such diseases. I was shaven on all hands: To the
Chibelin I was a Guelf, to Guelf a Ghibelin. Some one of my Poets expresses as
much, but I wot not where it is. The situation of my house, and the
acquaintance of such as dwelt round about me, presented me with one visage; my
life and actions with another. No formal accusations were made of it; for
there was nothing to take hold of. I never opposed my self against the laws;
and who had called me in question, should have lost by the bargain. They were
mute suspicions, that ran under hand, which never want appearance in so
confused a hurly-burly, no more than lack of envious or foolish wits. I
commonly afford aid unto injurious presumption, that fortune scatters
against me; by a fashion I never had, to avoid justifying, excusing or
interpreting my self; deeming it to be a putting of my conscience to
compromise, to plead for her, Perspicuitas enim, argumentatione elevatur: For
the clearing of a cause, is lessened by the arguing. And as if every man saw
into me as clear as I do my self, in lieu of withdrawing, I advance my
self to the accusation and rather endeare it; by an erroneous and scoffing
confession: except I flatly hold my peace, as of a thing unworthy any answer.
But such as take it for an over-proud confidence, do not much less disesteeme
and hate me for it, than such as take it for weakness of an indefensible
cause. Namely the great, with whom want of submission, is the extreme fault.
Rude to all justice, that is known or felt: not demisse, humble or suppliant.
I have often stumbled against that pillar. So it is, that by the harms which
befell me, an ambicious man would have hanged himself; and so would a
covetons churl. I have no care at all to acquire or get.

Sit mihi quod nunc est, etiam minus, vt mihi vivam
Quod superest aevi, si quid superesse volent dij. Hor lib. 1 epist. 18. 107.

Let me have, that I have, or less, so I may live
Unto my self the rest, if any rest God give.
But losses that come unto me by others injury, be in larceny or violence,
pinch me, in a manner as one sick and tortured with avarice. An offense
causes undoubtedly more grief and sharpness, than a loss. A thousand
several kinds of mischiefs fell upon me one in the neck of another; I
should more stoutly have endured them, had they come all at once. I bethought
my self, amongst my friends, to whom I might commit a needy, a defective and
unfortunate old age: But after I had surveyed them all, and cast mine eyes
every where, I found my self bare and far to seek. For one to sowse himself
down headlong, and from so great a height, he should heedily forecast that it
may be in the arms of a solid, steadfast, vigorous and fortunate affection.
They are rare, if there be any. In the end I perceived the best and safest way,
was to trust both my self and my necessity, unto my self. And if it should
happen to be but meanly and faintly in Fortunes grace, I might more effectually
recommend my self unto mine own favor, more closely fasten and more nearly
look unto my self. In all things men rely upon strange props, to spare their
own: only certain and only powerful, know they but how to arm themselves
with them. Every man runs out and unto what is to come, because no man is
yet come into himself. And I resolved, that they were profitable
inconveniences: for so much as when reason will not serve, we must first warn
untoward Scholars with the rod; as with fire and violence of wedges, we bring a
crooked piece of wood to be straight. It is long since I call, to keep my
self unto my self, and live sequestered from alience and strange things
notwithstanding I daily start out and cast mine eyes aside. Inclination, a
great man's favorable word, a kind look does tempt me. God he knows whether
there be penury of them now-adayes, and what sense they bear. I likewise,
without frowning, listen to the subornings, framed to draw me to some town
of merchandise or city of traffic; and so coldly defend my self, that it
seems I should rather endure to be overcome, than not. Now to a spirit so
indocile, blows are required: and this vessel, that of it self is so ready
to warpe, to vnhoope, to escape and fall in pieces, must be closed, hooped and
strongly knocked with an adze. Secondly, that this accident served me as an
exercitation to prepare my self for worse, if worse might happen: if I, who
both by the benefit of fortune and condition of my manners, hoped to be of the
last, should by this tempest be one of the first surprised. Instructing my
self betimes, to force my life and frame it for a new state. True-perfect
liberty, is, for one to be able to do and work all things upon himself.
Potentissimus est qui se habet in potestate. He is of most power, that Sen.
epist. 9.
keeps himself in his own power. In ordinary and peaceful times, a man
prepares himself for common and moderate accidents: but in this confusion,
wherein we have been these thirty years, every French man, be it in general
or in particular, does hourly see himself upon the point of his fortunes
overthrow and downfall. By so much more ought each one have his courage
stored and his mind fraughted, with more strong and vigorous provisions: Let
us thank Fortune, that has not made us live in an effeminate, idle and
languishing age: Some, whom other means could never bring unto it, shall make
themselves famous by their misfortunes. As I read not much in Histories, these
confusions of other states, without regret, that I could not better them
present; So does my curiosity make me somewhat please my self, with mine eyes
to see this notable spectacle of our public death; her symptoms and forms.
And since I could not hinder the same, I am content to be appointed as an
assistant unto it, and thereby instruct my self. Yet seek we evidently to
know in shadows, and understand by fabulous representations upon Theaters, to
show of the tragic revolutions of humane fortune. It is not with out
compassion of that we hear, but we please our selves to rowze up our
displeasure, by the rareness of these pitiful events. Nothing tickles, that
pincheth not. And good Historians avoid calm narrations, as a dead water or
mort-mere; to retreeve seditions and find out wars, whereto they know we
call them. I doubt whether I may lawfully avow, at how base a rate of my life's
rest and tranquillity, I have past it more than half in the ruin of my
Country. In accidents that touch me not in my freehold, I purchase patience
very cheap; and to complain to my self, I respect not so much what is taken
from me, as what is left me both within and without. There is comfort, in
sometimes eschewing one, and sometimes another of the evils, that one in the
neck of another surprise us, and elsewhere strike us round about. As matters
of public interrests, according as my affection is more universally scattred,
she is thereby more enfeebled. Since it is half true: Tantum ex publicis malis
sentimus, quantum ad privatas res pertinet. We feel so much of common harms
as appertain to our private estate. And that the health whence we fell was
such, that her self solaceth the regret we should have for her. It was health,
mary but in comparison of the contagion, which has followed the same. We are
not fallen very high. The corruption and the brigandage, which now is in office
and dignity, seems to me the least tolerable. We are less injuriously robbed
in the midst of a wood, then a place of security^ It was an universal
coherency of members spoiled avie one another; and most of them, with
old-rankled ulcers, which neither admitted nor demanded recovery. Truly this
shaking-fit did therefore more animate then deter me, only by the aid of my
conscience, which not only quietly, but fiercely carried it self; and I found
no cause to complain, of my self. Likewise, as God never sends men either
evils or goods absolutely pure; my health held out well for that time, yea
against her ordinary: And as without it I can do nothing, so with it, there are
few things I cannot do. She gave me means to summon and rouse up all my
provisions, and to bear my hand before my hurt, which happily would have gone
further: And proved in my patience, that yet I had some hold against fortune;
and that to thrust me out of my saddle, ther^ was required a stronger
counterbuffe. This I speak not, to provoke her to give me a more vigorous
charge. I am her servant, and yield my self unto her: For Gods sake let her be
pleased. Demand you whether I feel her assaults? I do indeed. As those whom
sorrow possesses and overwhelmeth, do notwithstanding at one time or other
suffer themselves by intermissions to be touched by some pleasure, and now and
then smile. I have sufficient power over my self, to make mine ordinary state
quiet and free from all tedious and irksome imaginations; but yet I sometimes
suffer my self by starts to be surprised with the pinchings of these
unpleasant conceits, which whilst I arm my self to expel or wrestle against
them, assail and beat me. Lo here another huddle or tide of mischief; that
on the neck of the former came rushing upon me. Both within and round about
my house, I was overtaken, in respect of all other, with a most contagious
pestilence. For, as soundest bodies are subject to grievous diseases, because
they only can force them: so the air about me being very healthy, where in no
man's momory, infection (although very near) could ever take footing: coming
now to be poisoned brought forth strange effects.

Mista senum and iuvenum densantur funer a nullum Her. car. l. 1. ^d. 28. 19.

Saeva caput Proserpina fugit.
Of old and young thick funerals are shared;
By cruel Proserpine no head is spared.
I was feign to endure this strange condition, that the sight of my house was
irksome unto me. Whatever was therein, lay all at randon, no man looked
thereunto; and was free for any that had a mind unto it. I who have so long
been a good housekeeper, and used to hospitality, was much troubled and put to
my shifts, how to find out some retreat for my family. A dismayed and
scattered family, making both her self and her friends afraid, and breeding
horror where it sought to retire for shelter; being now to shift and change
her dwelling, so soon as any of the company began to feel his finger ache,
all the rest were dismayed. Every sickness is then taken for the plague: none
has leisure to consider them. And the mischief is, that according to rules of
art, what danger soever approaches, a man must continue forty days in anxiety
or fear of that evil; in which time your own imagination does perplex you as
she list and infect your health. All which had much less touched me, had I
not been forced to bear other men's burdens and partake all their grieuances,
and for six months space, in miserable manner, to be a woeful guide to so
greatconfused a Caravane. For I ever carry my preseruatives about me, which are
resolution and sufferance. Apprehension does not greatly press me; which is
particularly feared in this sickness. And if being alone, I should have taken
it, it had been a stronger and further flight: It is a death in mine opinion,
not of the worst: It is commonly short and speeding void of lingering
giddiness, without pain, comforted by the public condition; without
ceremony without mourning, and without thronging. But for the people about us,
the hundredth part of souls cannot be saved.

-- videas desertaque regna
Pastorum, and long saltus lateque vacantes.
Kingdoms of Shepheardes desolate forlorn,
Parkes far and near lie waste, a state all torn.
In that place, my best revenue is manual: what a hundred men labored for me,
lay fallow for a long time. What examples of resolution saw we not then in all
this peoples simplicity? Each one generally renounced all care of life. The
grapes (which are the countries chief commodity) hung still and rotted upon
the vines untouched: all indifferently preparing themselves, and expecting
death, either that night or the next morrow: with countenance and voice so
little daunted, that they seemed to have compromitted to this necessity, and
that it was an universal and inevitable condemnation. It is ever such. But
what slender hold has the resolution of dying? The difference and distance of
some few hours: the only consideration of the company yields the apprehension
diverse unto us. Behold these because they die in one same month, children,
young, old; they are no more astonished, they are no longer wept*for. I saw some
that feared to stay behind, as if they had been in some horride solitude: And
commonly I knew no other care amongst them, but for graves: it much grieved
them, to see the dead carcasses scattered over the fields, at the mercy of
wild beasts; which presently began to flock thither. Oh how humane fantasies
differ and are easily disio^ned! The Neorites, a nation whilome subdued by
Alexander the Great, cast out their dead men's bodies into the thickest of their
woods, there to be devoured: the grave only esteemed happy among them. Some in
good health dug already their graves, othersome yet living did go into
them. And a day-labourer of mine, as he was dying, with his own hands and
feet pulled earth upon him, and so covered himself. Was not this a lying
down in the shade to sleep at ease? An enterprise in some sort as highly
noble, as that of some Roman Soldiers, who after the battle of Canna, were
found with their heads in certain holes or pits, which themselves had made,
and filled up with their hands, wherein they were smothered. To conclude, a
whole nation was presently by use brought to a march, that in vndantednesse
yields not to any consulted and fore-meditated resolution. The greatest number
of learnings instructions, to encourage us have more show then force, and more
ornament then fruit. We have forsaken nature, and yet we will teach her her
lesson: She, that lead us so happily, and directed us so safely: And in the
mean while, the traces of her instructions and that little, which by the
benefit of ignorance, remains of her image, imprinted in the life of this
rusticall troop of unpolished men; learning is compelled to go daily a
borrowing, thereby to make her disciples a pattern of constancy, of
innocence and of tranquillity. It is a goodly matter to see how these men
full of so great knowledge, must imitate this foolish simplicity; yea in the
first and chief actions of virtue. And that our wisdom should learn of
beasts, the most profitable documents, belonging to the chiefest and most
necessari: parts of our life. How we should live and die, husband our goods,
love and bring up our children, and entertain justice. A singular testimony
of man's infirmity: and that this reason we so manage at our pleasure, ever
finding some diversity and noveltie, leaves unto us no manner of apparent
tracke of nature. Wherewith men have done, as perfumers do with oil, they have
adulterated her, with so many argumentations, and sofisticated her with so
diverse farre-fetcht discourses, that she is become variable and peculiar to
every man, and has lost her proper, constant and universal visage: whereof we
must seek for a testimony of beasts, not subject to favor or corruption, nor
to diversity of opinions. For it is most true, that themselves march not
always exactly in natures path, but if they chance to stray, it is so little,
that you may ever perceive the tracke. Even as horses led by hand do sometimes
bound and start out of the way, but no further then their halters length, and
nevertheless follow ever his steps that leads them: And as a Hawke takes his
flight but under the limits of her cranes or twyne. Exilia, tormenta, bella,
morbos, naufragia meditare, vt nullo sis malo tyro. Banishments, torments,
wars; sicknesses, shipwracks, all these forecast and premeditate, that thou
may seem no novice no freshwater Soldier to any misadventure. What
avails this curiosity unto us, to preoccupate all humane natures
inconveniences, and with so much labor and toyling against them, to prepare
our selves, which peradventure shall nothing concern us? ( Parem passis
tristitiam facit, patiposse. It makes men as sad that they may suffer some
mischief, as if they had suffered it. Not only the blow, but the wind and
crack strikes us) Or as the most febricitant, for surely it is a kind of
fever, now to cause your self to be whipped, because fortune may one day
chance to make you endure it: and at Mid-Sommer to put-on your furred Gown,
because you shall need it at Christmas? Cast your selves into the experience
of all the mischiefs, that may befall you, namely of the extremest: there try
your self (say they) there assure your self. Contrariwise, the easiest and
most natural, were even to discharge his thought of them. They will not come
soon enough, their true being does not last us long enough, our spirit must
extend and lengthen them, and before hand incorporate them into himself, and
therewith entertain himself, as if they lay not sufficiently heavy on our
senses. They will weigh heavy enough, when they shall be there, (says one of
the masters, not of a tender, but of the hardest Sect) mean while favor thy
self: Believe what thou love best: What availes it thee to collect and
prevent thy ill fortune: and for fear of the future, lose the present; and now
to be miserable, because in time thou may be so? They are his own words.
Learning does us willingly one good office, exactly to instruct us in the
demensions of evils.

Curis acuens mortalia corda.
Men's cogitations whetting,
With sharp cares inly fretting.
It were pity, any part of their greatness should escape our feeling and
understanding. It is certain, that preparation unto death, has caused more
torment unto most, than the very sufferance. It was whilome truly said, of and
by a most judicious Author: Minus afficit sensus fatigati^, quam cogitatio.
Weariness less troubles our senses, then pensi^enesse does. The apprehension
of present death, does sometimes of it self a^nimate us, with a ready
resolution, no longer to avoid a thing altogether inevitable. Many Gladiators
have in former ages been seen, having at first fought very cowardly, most
courageously to embrace death; offering their throat to the enemies sword, yea
and bid them make haste. The sight distant from future death has need of a
slow constancy, and by consequence hard to be found. If you know not how to
die, take no care for it; Nature her self will fully and sufficiently teach
you in the nicke, she will exactly discharge that work for you; trouble not
your self with it.

Incert am frustra mortales funeris horam Catul. ^^^g. 1. 29. 16.

Quaeritis, and qua sit mors aditur a via:
Pana minor certam subito perferre^^inam,
Quod time as, gravius sustinuisse di^.
Of death th'vncertaine hour you men in vain
Enquire, and what way leath shall you distraine:
A certain sudden ruin is less pain,
More grievous long what you fear to sustain.
We trouble death with the care of life, and life with the care of death. The
one annoyeth, the other assrights us. It is not against death, we prepare our
selves; it is a thing too momentary. A quarter of an hour of passion without
consequence and without annoyance, deserves not particular precepts. To say
truth, we prepare our selves against the preparations of death. Philosophy
teaches us, ever to have death before our eyes, to foresee and consider it
before it come: Then gives us rules and precautions so to provide, that such
foresight and thought hurt us not. So do Physicians, who cast us into
diseases, that they may employ their drugges and skill about them. If we have
not known how to live, it is injustice to teach us how to die, and deforme the
end from all the rest. Have we known how to live constantly and quietly, we
shall know how to die resolutely and rep^sedly. They may brag as much as they
please. Tota Philosophorum vita commentatio mortis est. The whole life of a
Philopher is the meditation of his death. But me thinks, it is indeed the
end, yet not the scope of life. It is her last, it is her extremity; yet not
her object. Her self must be unto hirselfe, her aim, her drift and her
design. Her direct study is, to order, to direct and to suffer her self. In
the number of many other offices, which the general and principal Chapter, to
know how to live contains, is this special Article, To know how to die. And
of the easiest, did not our own fear weigh it down. To judge them by their
profit and by the naked truth, the lessons of simplicity, yield not much to
those, which Doctrine preaches to the contrary unto us. Men are different in
feeling, and diverse in force: they must be directed to their good, according
to themselves and by diverse ways:

Quo me cumque rapit tempestas, deferor hospes. Hor l. 1. epist. 1. 15.

Where I am whirld by wind and wether,
I guest-like straight am carried thither.
I never saw mean paisant of my neighbors, enter into cogitation or care,
with what assurance or countenance, he should pass this last hour. Nature
teaches him never to muze on death, but when he dies. And then has he a
better grace in it, than Aristotle; whom death perplexed doubly, both by her
self and by so long a premeditation. Therefore was it Caesar's opinion, that
The least premeditated death, was the happiest and the eas^est. Plus dolet,
quam necesse est, qui ante dolet, quam necesse est. He grieves more than he
need, That grieves before he need. The sharpness of this imagination,
proceeds from our curiosity. Thus we ever hinder our selves; desiring to
fore-runne and sway natural prescriptions: It is but for Doctors being in
health, to fare the worse by it, and to frown and startle at the image of
death. The vulgar sort, have neither need of remedy nor comfort, but when the
shocke or stroke comes. And justly considers no more of it, than he seeleth.
And is it not as we say, that the vulgares stupidity and want of appr^hension,
affoorde them this patience in private evils, and this deep carelesnes of
sinister future accidents? That their mind being more gross, dull and
blockish, is less penetrable and agitable? In Gods name, if it be so, let us
hence forth keep a school of brutality. It is the utmost fruit that Sciences
promise unto us, to which she so gently brings her disciples. We shall not
want good teachers, interpreters of natural simplicity. Socrates shall be one.
For, as near as I remember, he speaks in this sense unto the Judges, that
determine of his life: I fear me my masters (says he) that if I entreat
you not to make me die, I shall confirm the evidence of my accusers; which is,
That I profess to have more understanding than others; as having some
knowledge more secret and hid of things both above and beneath us. I know I
have neither frequented nor known death, nor have I seen any body, that has
either felt or tried her qualities, to instruct me in them. Those who fear
her, presuppose to know: As for me, I neither know who or what she is, nor
what they do in the other world. Death may peradventure be a thing
indifferent, happily a thing desirable. Yet is it to be believed, that if it
be a transmigration from one place to another, there is some amendment in
going to live with so many worthy famous persons, that are deceased; and be
exempted from having any more to do with wicked and corrupted Judges. If it be
a consummation of ones being, it is also an amendment and entrance into a long
and quiet night. We find nothing so sweet in life, as a quiet rest and
gentle sleep, and without dreams. The things I know to be wicked, as to wrong
or offend ones neighbor; and to disobey his superior, be he God or man, I
carefully sh^nne them: Such as I know not whether they be good or bad, I
cannot fear them. If I go to my death, and leave you alive; the Gods only
see, whether you or I shall prosper best. And therefore, for my regard, you
shall dispose of it, as it shall best please you. But according to my fashion,
which is to counsel good and profitable things, this I say, that for your own
conscience you shall do best to free and discharge me: except you see further
into mine own cause than my self. And judging according to my former actions,
both public and private, according to my intentions, and to the profit, that
so many of our Citizens, both young and old, draw daily from my conversation,
and the fruit, all you reap by me you cannot more justly or duly discharge
your selves toward my deserts, than by appointing (my poverty considered) that
I may live, and at the common charge be kept, in the Brytan^o: which for much
less reasons, I have often seen you freely grant to others. Impute it not to
obstinacy or disdain in me, nor tak^ it in ill part, that I, according to
custom proceed not by way of in^r^atie, and moove you to commiseration. I
have both friends and kinsfolks, being not (as Homer says) begotten of a
block or stone, no more than other men: capable to present themselves humbly
suing with tears and mourning: and I have three desolate wailing children to
moove you to pity. But I should make your City ashamed, of the age I am in,
and in that reputation of wisdom, as now I stand in prevention to yield unto
so base and abject countenances. What would the world say of other Athenians?
I have ever admonished such as have heard me speak, never to purchase or
redeem their life, by any dishonest or unlawful act. And in my countries
wars, both at Amphipolis, at Potidea, at Delia, and others, in which I have
been, I have shown by effects, how far I was from warranting my safety by
my shame. Moreover, I should interest your duty, and prejudice your calling,
and persuade you to feule vnlan full things; for, not my prayers, but the pure
and ^olide reasons of justice should persuade you. You have sw^rne to the Gods,
so to maintain your selves. Not to believe there were any, might seem I would
suspect, recriminate or retorte the fault upon you. And my self should
witness against my self, not to believe in them as I ought: distructing their
conduct, and not merely remitting my affairs into their hands. I wholly
trust and rel^e on them; and certainly hold, that in this, they will dispose
as it shall be nocetest for you, and fittest for me. Honest men, that neither
live, nor are dead, have no cause at all to fear the Gods. Is not this a
childish pleading, of an inimaginable courage; and in what necessity employed?
Verily it was reason, he should prefer it before that, which the great
Orator Lysia^ had set down in writing for him; excellency fashioned in a
judiciary Style; but unworthy of so noble a criminal. Should a man have heard
an humbly-suing voice out of Socrates his mouth? Would that proud virtue have
failed in the best of her show? And would his rich and powerful nature, have
committed her defense unto art, and in her highest Essay, renounced unto
truth and sincerity, the ornaments of his speech, to adorn and deck
himself with the embellishment of the figures and fictions of a fore-lern'nt
Oration; He did most wisely, and according to himself, not to corrupt the
tenure of an incorruptible life, and so sacred an image of humane form, to
prolong his decrepitude for one year; and wrong the immortal memory of so
glorious an end. He ought his life, not to himself, but to the worlds example.
Had it not been a public loss, if he had finished the same in some idle,
base and obscure manner? Truly, so careless and effeminate a consideration of
his death, deserved, posterity should so much more consider the same for him:
which it did. And nothing is so just in justice, as that, which fortune
ordained for his commendation. For the Athenians did afterward so detest and
abhor those, which had furthered and caused his death, that of all they were
l^athed and shunned as cursed and excommunicated men: what soever they had but
touched was held to be polluted: No man would so much as wash with them in
bathes or hot-houses: no man afford them a salutation, much less accost or
have to do with them: so that being in the end no longer able to endure this
public hatred and general contempt, they all hanged themselves. If any man
thinks, that amongst so many examples, I might have chosen for the service of
my purpose, in Socrates his sayings, I have chosen or handled this but ill: and
deemeth this disccurse, to be raised above common opinions: I have done it
wittingly: for I judge otherwise. And hold it to be a discourse, in rank and
sincerity, much shorter and lower, then vulgar opinions. It represents in an
vn-artificiall boldness, and infantine security, the pure impression and
first ignorance of nature. Because it is credible, that we naturally fear
pain, but not death, by reason of her. It is a part of our being, no less
essential than life. To what end would Nature have else engendered the hate and
horror of it, seeing it holds thererein and with it a rank of most great
profit, to foster the succession, and nourish the vicissitude of her works? And
that in this universal Commonweal, it steadeth and serves more for birth
and augmentation, then for loss, decay or ruin.

Sic rerum summa novatur. Luer. l. 2 73.

So does the sum of all,
By courses rise and fall.
Mill animas vna necat a dedit.
We thousand souls shall pay,
For one soul made away*
The decay of one life, is the passage to a thousand other lives. Nature has
imprinted in beasts, the care of themselves and of their preservation. They
proceed even to the fear of their empairing; to shocke or hurt themselves:
and that we should not shackle or beat them, accidents subject to their sense
and experience: But that we should kill them, they cannot fear it, nor have
they the faculty to imagine or conclude their death. Yet is it reported, that
they are not seen only to embrace and endure the same joyfully (most Horses
neigh in dying, and Swannes sing when it seiseth them.) But moreover, they
seek it when they need it; as by diverse examples may be prooved in the
Elephants. Besides, the manner of arguing, which Socrates uses here, is it not
equally admirable, both in simplicity and in vehemence? Verily It is much
^asier, to speak as Aristotle, and live as Caesar, than speak and live as
Socrates. Therein consists the extreme degree of difficulty and perfection;
art cannot attain unto it. Our faculties are not now so addressed. We neither
assay, nor know them; we invest our selves with others, and suffer our own to
be idle. As by some might be said of me: that here I have but gathered a
nos^gay of strange flowers, and have put nothing of mine unto it, but the thread
to bind them. Certes, I have given unto public opinion, that these borrowed
ornaments accompany me; but I mean not they should cover or hide me: it is
contrary to mine intention, who would make show of nothing that is not mine
own, yea and mine own by nature: And had I believed my self, at all
adventure I had spoken alone. I daily charge my self the more beyond my
proposition and first form, upon the fantasy of time, and through idleness.
If it mis-seeme me, as I think it does, it is no great matter; it may be
profitable for some other. Some aleadge Plato, and some mention Homer, that
never saw them, or as they say in English, many a man speaks of Robin hood,
that never shot in his how: And I have taken diverse passages from others then
in their spring. Without pain or sufficiency; having a thousand volumes of
books about me, where now I write, if I please, I may presently borrow from a
number of such botcherlypatchcotes (men that I plod not much upon) wherewith to
enamell this treaty of Phisiognomie. I need but the liminary epistle of a
Germane to store me with allegations: and we go questing that way for a fading
greedy glory, to cousin and delude the foolish world, These rapsodies of common
places, wherewith so many stuff their study, serve not greatly but for vulgar
subjects, and serve but to show and not to direct us: A ridiculous-fond fruit
of learning, that Socrates does so pleasantly enveigh and exagitate against
Euthydemus. I have seen books made of things neither studied nor ever
understood: the author coming to diverse of his learned and wise friends the
search of this and that matter, that so he might compile them into a book,
contenting himself for his own part, to have cast the plot and projected the
desseigne of it, and by his industry to have bound up the faggot of unknown
provisions: at least is the ink and paper his own. This may be said to be
a buying or borrowing, and not a making or compiling of a book. It is to teach
men, not that one can make a book, but to put them out of doubt, that he
cannot make it. A president of the law, in a place where I was, vanted
himself, to have hudled up together two hundred and od strange places in a
presidentiall law-case of his: In publishing of which, he defaced the glory,
which others gave him for it. A weak, childish and absurd boasting in my
opinion, for such a subject and for such a man. I do clean contrary; and
amongst so many borrowings, am indeed glad to filch some one; disguising and
altering the same to some new service. On hazard, to let men say, that it is
for lack of understanding it is naturally use, I give it some particular
addressing of mine own hand, to the end it may be so much less merely
strange. Whereas these put their larcenies to public view and garish show. So
have they more credit in the laws, then I. We other naturalists suppose, that
there is a great and in comparable preference, between the honor of invention
and that of allegation. Would I have spoken according to learning. I had spoken
sooner: I had written at such times as I was nearer to my studies, when I had
more wit and more memory; and should more have trusted the vigor of that age,
then the imperfection of this, had I been willing to profess writing of
books. And what if this gracious favor, which fortune has not long since
offered me by the intermission of this work, could have befalne me in such a
season, in liew of this, where it is equally desirable to possess, and ready
to loose?

Two of mine acquaintance (both notable men in this faculty) have, in my
conceit, lost much because they refused to publish themselves at forty years
of age, to stay until they were three score. Maturity has her defects, as well
as greenenesse, and worse. And as in commodious or unfit is old age unto this
kind of work, as to any other. Whosoever put's his decrepitude under the
press, commits folly, if thereby he hopes to wring out humors, that shall
not taste of dotage, of ^oppery, or of drowsiness. Our spirit becomes
costive and thickens in growing old. Of ignorance I speak sumptuously and
plentiously, and of learning meagerly and pitiously: This acce^^orily and
accidentally; That expressly and principally. And purposely I treat of
nothing, but of nothing; nor of any one science but of vnscience. I have chosen
the time, where the life I have to set forth, is all before me, the rest
holds more of death. And of my death only should I find it babbling, as
others do, I would willingly, in dislodging, give the World advise. Socrates
has been a perfect pattern in all great qualities. I am vexed, that ever he
met with so unhandsome and crabbed a body, as they say he had, and so dissonant
from the beauty of his mind. Himself so amorous and so besotted on beauty.
Nature did him wrong. There is nothing more truly semblable, as the conformity
or relation between the body and the mind. Ipsi animi, magni refert, quali in
copore locati sint: multa enim e corpore existunt, quae acuant mentem: multa,
quae obtundant. It is of great import in what body the mind is bestowed: for
many things arise of the body to sharpen the mind, and many things to dull and
rebate it. This man speaks of an unnatural ill-favourdnesse, and membrall
deformity: but we call ill-favourdnesse a kind of unseemliness at the first
sight, which chiefly lodges in the face; and by the color works a dislike
in us; A freckle, a blemmish, a rude countenance, a sower look, proceeding
often of some inexplicable cause, may be in well ordered, comely and complete
limbs. The foulness of face, which invested a beauteous mind in my dear
friend La Boitie, was of this predicament. This superficial ill-favourdnesse,
which is notwithstanding to the most imperious, is of less prejudice unto the
state of the mind: and has small certainty in men's opinion. The other, by a
more proper name called a more substantial deformity, bears commonly a
deeper inward stroke. Not every shoe of smooth-shining leather, but every
wellshapen and hansome-made shoe, shows the inward and right shape of the
foot. As Socrates said of his, that it justly accused so much in his mind had
he not corrected the same by institution. But in so saying, I suppose, that
according to his wonted use, he did but jest: and so excellent a mind, did
never frame it self. I cannot often enough repeat, how much I esteem beauty,
so powerful and advantageous a quality is she. He named it, a short tyranny:
And Plato the privilege of Nature. We have none that exceeds it in credit. She
possesses the chief rank in the commerce of society of men: She presents
itself forward: she seduceth and preoccupates our judgment, with great
authority and wonderful impression. Phryne had lost her plea, though in the
hands of an excellent lawyer, if with opening her garments, by the sudden
flashing of her beauty, she had not corrupted her judges. And I find, that
Cyrus* Alexannder and Caesar those three Masters of the World, have not
forgotten or neglected the same in atchieving their great affairs. So has not
the first Scipio. One same word in Greek imports fair and good. And even
the Holy Ghost calls often those good, which he means fair. I should
willingly maintain the rank of the goods, as employed the song, which Plato
says to have been trivial, taken from some ancient Poet; Health beeuty and
riches. Aristotle says, that the right of commanding, does of duty belong to
such as are fair; and if happily any be found, whose beauty approached to that
of the Gods images, that veneration is equally due unto them. To one that asked
him, why the fairest were both longer time and oftener frequented? This question
(quoth he) ought not to be moved but by a blind man. Most, and the greatest
Philosophers, paid for their schooling and attained unto Wisdom, by the
intermission of their beauty, and favor their comlines. Not only in men that
serve me, but in beasts also, I consider the same within two inches of
goodness. Yet me thinks, that the same feature and manner of the face and
those lineaments, by which some argue certain inward complexions, and our
future fortunes, is a thing that does not directly nor simply lodge under the
Chapter of beauty and ill favourdnesse; no more than all good favors, or
cleerenesse of air, do not always promise health; nor all fogges and
stinkes, infection, in times of the plague. Such as accuse Ladies to contradict
the beauty, by their manners, guess not always at the truth. For, In an ill
favored and ill composed face, may sometimes harbor some air of probitie, and
trust. As on the contrary, I have sometimes read between two fair eyes, the
threats of a malign and dangerous ill-boding nature. There are some favorable
Physiognomies; For in a throng of victorious enemies, you shall presently
ammiddest a multitude of unknown faces, make choice of one man more than of
others, to yield yourselfe unto and trust your life; and not properly by the
consideration of beauty. A man's look or air of his face, is but a weak
warrant; notwithstanding it is of some consideration. And were I to whippe
them, I would more rudely scourge such as maliciously belly and betray the
promises, which Nature had charactred in their front. And more severely would I
punish malicious craft in a debonaire appearance and in a mild promising
countenance. It seems there be some lucky and well boding faces, and other
some unlucky and ill presaging: And I think, there is some Art to distinguish
gently-milde faces, from nyaes and simple; the severe from the rude; the
malicious from the froward; the disdainefull from the melancholic and other
neighboring qualities. There are some beauties, not only fierce-looking, but
also sharpe-working, some others pleasing-sweete, and yet wallowishly
tastlesse. To prognosticate future successes of them, be matters I leave
undecided. I have (as elsewhere I noted) taken for my regard this ancient
precept, very rawly and simply: That We cannot err in following Nature: and
that the sovereign document is, for a man to conform himself to her. I have
not (as Socrates) by the power and virtue of reason, corrected my natural
complexions, nor by Art hindered mine inclination. Look how I came into the
World, so I goe-on: I strive with nothing. My two Mistress parts, live of their
own kindness in peace and good agreement; but my nurses milk, has (thanks
be to God) been indifferently wholesome and temperate. Shall I say thus much
by the way? That I see a certain image of bookis^ or scholasticall
preud'hommie, only which is in a manner in use amongst us, held and reputed in
greater esteem than it deserves, and which is but a servant unto precepts,
brought under by hope, and constrained by fear? I love it such as laws and
religions make not, but over-make and authorize; that they may be perceived to
have wherewith to uphold her self without other aid: sprung up in us of her
own proper roots, by and from the seed of universal reason, imprinted in
every man that is not unnatural. The same reason, that reformeth Socrates from
his vicious habit, yields him obedient both to Gods and men, that rule and
command his City: courageous in his death; not because his soul is
immortal, but because he is mortal. A ruinous instruction to all
commonweals and much more harmefull, than ingenious and subtle, is that
which persuades men, that only religious belief, and without manners,
suffices to content and satisfy divine justice. Custom makes us see an
enormous distinction between devotion and conscience. I have a favorable
appearance, both in form and in interpretation.

Quid dixi habere me? Imo habui Chreme:
Heu tantum attriti corporis ossavides. Ter H^a^* act. ^ sc^. 1.

I have; what did I say;
I had what is now away.
Alas, you only now behold,
Bones of a body worn and old.
And which makes a contrary show to that of Socrates. It has often betided me,
that by the simple credit of my presence and aspect, some that had no
knowledge of me, have greatly trusted unto it, were it about their own
affairs or mine. And even in foreign countries, I have thereby reaped
singular and rare favors. These two experiments, are hapily worthy to be
particularly related. A quidam gallant, determined upon a time to surprise both
my house and my self. His plot was, to come riding alone to my gate, and
instantly to urge entrance. I knew him by name* and had some reason to trust
him, being my neighbor and somewhat alide unto me. I presently caused my gates
to be opened, as I do to all men. He comes-in all afrighted, his horse out of
breath; both much harassed. He entertaines me with this fable; that within
half a league of my house he was suddenly set-vpon by an enemy of his, whom
I knew well and had heard of their quarrel: that his foe had wondrously put
him to his spurs; that being surprised unarmed, and having fewer in his
company then the other, he was glad to run away, and for safety had made
haste to come to my house, as to his sanctuary: That he was much perplexed for
his men, all which he supposed to be either taken or slain. I endeavored
friendly to comfort and sincerely to warrant and refresh him. Within a while
came gallopping four or five of his Soldiers, amazed, as if they had been
out of their wits, hasting, to be let-in: Shortly after came others, and
others* all proper men, well mounted, better armed, to the number of thirty or
there abouts, all seeming distracted for fear, as if the enemy that pursued
them had been at their heels. This mystery began to summon my suspicion. I
was not ignorant of the age wherein I lived, nor how much my house might be
envied: and had sundry examples of others of my acquaintance, that had been
spoiled, beset and surprised thus and thus. So it is, that perceiving with my
self, there was nothing to be gotten, though I had begun to use them kindly,
if I continued not, and being unable to rid my self of them and clear my
house without danger and spoiling all; as I ever do, I took the plainest and
natural well meaning way, and commanded they should be let in and bid
welcome. And to say truth, I am by nature little suspicious or mistrustfull, I
am easily drawn to admit excuses and incline to mild interpretations. I take
men according to common order, and suppose every one to mean as I do, and
believe these perverse and tretcherous inclinations, except I be compelled by
some autenticall testimony, no more then monsters or miracles. Besides, I am a
man that willingly commit my self unto fortune, and carelessly cast my self
into her arms: Whereof hitherto I have more just cause to commend myself,
then to complain. And have found her more circumspect and friendly* careful
of my affairs, then I am my self. There are certain actions in my life, the
conduct of which may justly be termed difficult, or if any be so disposed,
prudent. And of those, suppose the third part of them to be mine own; truly
the other two are richly hirs. We are to blame, and in my conceit we err, that
we do not sufficiently and so much as we ought, trust the heavens with
ourselves. And pretend more in our own conduct, then of right appertains unto
us. Therefore do our desseignes so often miscarry, and our intents so seldom
sort to wished effect. The heavens are angry, and I may say envious of the
extension and large privilege we ascribe unto the right of humane wisdom, to
the prejudice of theirs: and abridge them so much the more unto us, by how much
more we endeavor to amplify them. But to come to my former discourse. These
gallants kept still on horseback in my court, and would not alight: their
Captain with me in my hall, who would never have his horse set-vp, still
saying that he would not stay, but must necessarily withdraw himself, so soon
as he had news of his followers. He saw himself master of his enterprise, and
nothing was wanting but the execution. He has since reported very often, (for
he was no whit scrupulous or afraid to tell this story) that my undaunted
looks, my vndismaide countenance, and my liberty of speech, made him reject
all manner of treasonable intents or treacherous desseignes. What shall I say
more? He bids me farewell, calls for his horse, gets up, and offreth to be
gone, his people having continually their eyes fixed upon him, to observe his
looks and see what sign he should make unto them: much amazed to see him be
gone, and wondering to see him omit and forsake such an advantage. An other
time, trusting to a certain truce or cessation of arms, that lately had been
published through our camps in France, as one suspecting no harm, I
undertook a journey from home, through a dangerous and very ticklish country;
I had not rid far, but I was discovered, and behold three or four troops of
horsemen, all several ways, made after me, with purpose to entrap me: One of
which overtooke me the third day; where I was round beset and charged by
fifteen or twenty Gentlemen, who had all vizardes and cases, followed
aloofe-off by a band of Argoletiers. I was charged, I yielded, I was taken and
immediately drawn into the bosom of a thick Wood, that was not far-off;
there pulled from my Horse, stripped with all speed, my truncks and cloak* bags
rifled, my box taken; my Horses, my equipage and such things as I had,
dispersed and shared amongst them. We continued a good while amongst those
thorny bushes, contesting and striving about my ransom, which they racked so
high, that it appeared well I was not much known of them. They had long
contestation among themselves for my life. and to say truth: there were many
circumstances, threatened me of the danger I was in.

Tunc animis opus. Aenea, tunc pectore firm. Virg. A^^. l. 6.

Of courage then indeed,
Then of stout breast is need.
I ever stood upon the title and privilege of the truce and proclamation made
in the Kings name, but that availed not: I was content to quit them whatever
they had taken from me, which was not to be despised, without promising other
ransom. After we had debated the matter to and fro, the space of two or three
hours, and that no excuses could serve, they set me upon a lame jade, which
they knew could never escape them, and committed the particular keeping of my
person to fifteen or twenty harque-busiers, and dispersed my people to others
of their crew, commanding we should all diverse ways be carried prisoners;
and my self being gone two or threescore paces from them,

Iam pr^ce Pollucis, iam Castor is implorata. (...)* 4. 65.

Pollux and Castors aid,
When I had humbly praide.
behold a sudden and unexpected alteration took them. I saw their Captain
coming toward me, with a cheerful countenance and much milder speeches then
before: carefully trudging up and down through all the troops, to find out my
goods again, which as he found all scattred he forced every man to restore
them unto me; and even my box came to my hands again. To conclude, the most
precious jewel they presented me, was my liberty; as for my other things, I
cared not greatly at that time. What the true cause of so unlocked for a change
and so sudden an alteration was, without any apparent impulsion, and of so
wonderful repentance, at such a time, in such an opportunity and such an
enterprise, fore-meditated, consulted and effected without controlement, and
which through custom and the impiety of times was now become lawful, (for at
the first brunt I plainly confessed, and genuinly told them what side I was
of, where my way lay, and whither I was riding) I verily know not yet, nor can
I give any reason for it. The chiefest amongst them unmasked himself, told me
his name and repeated diverse times unto me, that I should acknowledge my
deliverance to my countenance, to my boldness and constancy of speech, and be
beholding to them for it, insomuch as they made me unworthy of such a
misfortune; and demanded assurance of me for the like courtesy. It may be, that
the inscrutable goodness of God would use this vain instrument for my
preservation: For, the next morrow it also shielded me from worse mischief or
amboscadoes, whereof themselves gently forewarned me, The last is yet living,
able to report the whole succese himself; the other was slain not long since.
If my countenance had not answered for me, if the ingenuity of mine inward
intent might not plainly have been disciphered in mine eyes and voice, surely
I could never have continued so long, without quarrels or offenses: with this
indiscreete liberty, to speak freely (be it right or wrong) what ever comes
to my mind, and rashly to judge of things. This fashion may in some sort, (and
that with reason) seem uncivil and ill accomodated in our customary manners:
but outrageous or malicious, I could never meet with any, would so judge it,
or that was ever distasted at my liberty if he received the same from my mouth.
Words reported again have, as another sound, so another sense. And to say
true, I hate no body; And am so remiss to offend, or slow to wrong any, that
for the service of reason itself, I cannot do it. And if occasions have at
any time urged me in criminal condemnations to do as others, I have rather
been content to be amearced then to appear. Vt magis peccari nolim, quam
satis animi, ad vindicanda peccata habeam. So as I had rather men should not
offend, then that I should have courage enough to punish their offenses. Some
report, that Aristotle being vpbraided by some of his friends, that he had
been over merciful toward a wicked man: I have indeed (quoth he) been
merciful toward the man, but not toward his wickedness. Ordinary judgments
are exasperated unto punishment by the horror of the crime. And that enmildens
me. The horror of the first murder, makes me fear a second. And the ugliness
of one cruelty, induces me to detest all manner of imitation of it. To me, that
am but a plain fellow and see no higher then a steeple, may that concern,
which was reported of Charillus King of Sparta: He cannot be good, since he is
not bad to the wicked. Or thus; for Plutarke presents it two ways, as he does
a thousand other things diversely and contrary; He must needs be good, since
he is so to the wicked. Even as in lawful actions, it grieves me to take any
pains about them, when it is with such as are therewith displeased. So, to say
truth, in unlawful, I make no great conscience, to employ my self or take
pains about them, being with such as consent unto them.

The thirteenth Chapter.
Of Experience.

THere is no desire more natural, then that of knowledge. We attempt all
means that may bring us unto it. When reason fails us, we employ experience.

Per varios vsus artem experientia fecit,
Exemplo monstr ante viam. Manil. lib. 1. a^^. 61.

By diverse proofs experience art has bred,
Whilst one by one the way examples led.
Which is a mean by much more, weak and vile. But truth is of so great
consequence, that we ought not disdain any induction, that may bring us unto
it. Reason has so many shapes, that we know not which to take hold of.
Experience has as many. The consequence we seek to draw from the conference
of events, is unsure, because they are ever dissemblable. No quality is so
universal in this surface of things, as variety and diversity. The Greeks,
the Latins, and we use for the most express examples of similitude, that of
eggs. Some have nevertheless been found, especially one in Delphos, that knew
marks of difference between eggs, and never took one for another. And
having diverse Hens, could rightly judge which had laid the egg.
dissimilitude does of it self insinuate into our works, no art can come
near unto similitude. Neither Perozet nor any other carde-maker can so
industriously smoothe or whiten the backeside of his cards, but some cunning
gamster will distinguish them, only by seeing some other player handle or
shuffle them. Resemblance does not so much make one, as difference makes
another. Nature has bound herself to make nothing that may not be
dissemblable- Yet does not the opinion of that man greatly please me, that
supposed by the multitude of laws, to curb the authority of judges, in
entting out their morsells. He perceived not, that there is as much liberty and
extension in the interpretation of laws, as in their fashion. And those but
mock themselves, who think to diminish our debates and stay them, by calling
us to the express word of sacred Bible. Because our spirit finds not the
field less spacious, to control and check the sense of others, then to
represent his own: and as if there were as little courage and sharpness to
gloseas to invent. We see how far he was deceived. For we have in France
more laws then all the world besides; yea more then were needful to govern
all the worlds imagined by Epicurus: Vt olim flagitijs, sic nunc legibus labor
amus. As in times past we were sick of offenses, so now are we of laws. As
we have given our judges so large a scope to moote, to opinionate, to suppose
and decide, that there was never so powerful and so licentious a liberty. What
have our lawmakers gained with choosing a hundred thousand kinds of particular
cases, and add as many laws unto them? That number has no proportion, with
the infinite diversity of humane accidents. The multiplying of our inventions
shall never come to the variation of examples. Add a hundred times as many
unto them, yet shall it not follow, that of events to come, there be any one
found, that in all this infinite number of selected and enregistred events,
shall meet with one, to which he may so exactly join and match it, but some
circumstance and diversity will remain, that may require a diverse
consideration of judgment. There is but little relation between our actions,
that are in perpetual mutation, and the fixed and vnmooveable laws. The most
to be desired, are the rarest, the simplest and most general. And yet I
believe, it were better to have none at all, then so infinite a number as we
have. Nature gives them ever more happy, then those we give our selves.
Witness the image of the golden age that Poets feign; and the state wherein
we see diverse nations to live, which have no other. Some there are, who to
decide any controversy, that may rise amongst them, will choose for judge the
first man that by chance shall travel alongest their mountains: Others, that
upon a market day will name some one amongst themselves, who in the place
without more wrangling shall determine all their questions. What danger would
ensue, if the wisest should so decide ours, according to occurrences and at
first sight; without being tied to examples and consequences? Let every foot
have his own shoe. Ferdinando King of Spain sending certain Collonies into
the Indies, provided wisely, that no lawyers or students of the laws should
be carried thither, for fear lest controversies, suits or processes should
people that newfound world. As a Science that of her own nature engenders
altercation and division, judging with Plato that Lawyers and Physicians are an
ill provision for any country. Wherefore is it, that our common language so
easy to be understood in all other matters, becomes so obscure so harsh and
so hard to be understood in law-cases, bills, contracts, indentures citations,
wills and testaments? And that he who so plainly expresses himself, what
ever he spoke or write of any other subject, inlaw matters finds no manner or
way to declare himself or his meaning, that admits not some doubt or
contradiction: Unless it be, that the Princes of this art applying themselves
with a particular attention, to invent and choose strange, choice and solemn
words, and frame artificial cunning clauses, have so plodded and poized every
syllable; canvased and sifted so exquisitely every seame and quidity, that they
are now so entangled and so confounded in the infinity of figures and so
severall-small partitions, that they can no more come within the compass of
any order, or prescription or certain understanding. Confusum est quidquid
vsque in pulverem sectum est. Whatsoever is slicedinto very powder is confused.

Whosoever has seen children, laboring to reduce a mass of quicke-silver to
a certain number, the more they press and work the same, and strive to force
it to their will, so much more they provoke the liberty of that generous
metal, which scorneth their art, and scatteringly disperseth it self beyond
all imagination. Even so of lawyers, who in subdividing their suttleties or
quiddities, teach men to multiply doubts: and by extending and diversifying
difficulties; they lengthen and amplify, they scatter and disperse them. In
sowing and retailing of questions, they make the World to fructify and abound
in uncertainty, in quarrels, in suits and in controversies. As the ground the
more it is crumbled, broken and deeply remooved or grubbed up, becomes so
much more fertile. Difficultatem facit doctrina. Learning breeds difficulty.
We found many doubts in Vlpian, we find more in Bartolus and Baldus. The
trace of this innumerable diversity of opinious should never have been used to
adorn posterity, and have it put in her head, but rather have been utterly
razed out. I know not what to say to it; but this is seen by experience, that
so many interpretations, dissipate and confound all truth. Aristotle has
written to be understood: Which if he could not, much less shall another not
so learned as he was; and a third, than he who treats his own imagination.
We open the matter, and spill it in distempering it. Of one subject we make a
thousand: And in multiplying and subdividing we fall again into the infinity
of Epicurus his Atoms. It was never seen, that two men judged alike of one
samething. And it is impossible to see two opinions exactly semblable: not
only in diverse men, but in any one same man, at several hours. I commonly
find something to doubt-of, where the commentary happily never deigned to
touch, as deeming it so plain. I stumble sometimes as much in an even smooth
path; as some horses that I know, who oftener trip in a fair plain way, than
in a rough and stony. Who would not say, that glosses increase doubts and
ignorance, since no book is to be seen, whether divine or profane, commonly
read of all men, whose interpretation dimmes or tarnisheth not the difficulty?
The hundred commentary sends him to his succeeder, more thorny and more
crabbed, than the first found him. When agreed we amongst our selves, to say,
this book is perfect, there is now nothing to be said against it? This is best
seen in our French-pedling Law. Authority of Law is given to infinite
Doctors, to infinite arrests, and to as many interpretations. Find we for all
that any end of need of interpretors? Is there any advauncement or progress
toward tranquillity seen therein? Have we now less need of Advocates and
Judges, then when this huge mass of Law was yet in her first infancy? Clean
contrary, we obscure and bury understanding. We discover it no more but at the
mercy of so many Courts, Bars, or Plea-benches. Men mis-acknowledge the
natural infirmity of their mind. She does but quest and firret, and
incessantly goes turning, winding, building and entangling her self in her
own work; as do our silke-wormes, and therein stiffleth her self. Mus in
pice. A Mouse in pitch, He supposes to note a farre-off I wot not what
appearance of cleerenesse and immaginary truth; but whilst he runs unto it,
so many lets and difficulties cross his way, so many empeachments and new
questings start up, that they stray loose and besot him. Not much otherwise
than it fortuned to Aesops Dogs, who farre-off discovering some show of a
dead body to flote upon the Sea, and being unable to approach the same,
undertook to drink up all the Water, that so they might drie-vp the passage;
and were all stifeled. To which answers that, which one Crates said of
Heraclitus his compositions, that they needed a Reader, who should be a cunning
swimmer, lest the depth and weight of his learning should drown and swallow
him up. It is nothing but a particular weakness, that makes us contend with
that which others or we our selves have found in this pursuit of knowledge. A
more sufficient man will not be pleased therewith. There is place for a
follower, yea and for ourselves, and More ways to the Wood than one. There is
no end in our inquisitions. Our end is in the other World. It is a sign his
wits grow short, when he is pleased; or a sign of weariness. No generous
spirit stays and relies upon himself. He ever pretends and goes beyond
his strength. He has some vagaries beyond his effects. If he advaunce not
himself, press, settle, shocke, turn, wind and front himself, he is but
half alive; His pursuites are termelesse and formelesse. His nourishment is
admiration, questing and ambiguitie: Which Apollo declared sufficiently,
always speaking ambiguously, obscurely and obliquely vntovs; not feeding, but
busying and ammusing us. It is an irregular uncertain motion, perpetual,
patternelesse and without end. His inventions inflame, follow and enter produce
one another.

Ainsi voit-on en un ruisseau coulant,
San fin l'vne eau, apres l'outre roulant,
Et tout de rang, d'vn et ernel conduict,
L'vne suit l'autre, and l'vne l'autre fuit.
Par cette-cy, celle-la est poussee,
Et cette-cy, par l'autre est devancee:
Tousiours l'eau va dans l'eau, and tousiours est ^e
Mesme ruisseau, and tousiours eau diverse.
As in a running river we behold
How one wave after the other still is rold,
And all along as it does endless rise,
The One the other follows, the one from the other flies.
By this Wave, that is driven, and this again,
By the other is set forward all amain.
Water in Water still, one river still,
Yet diverse Waters still that river fill.
There Is more a do to enterprete interpretations, than to interpret things:
and more books upon books, then upon any other subject. We do but
enter-glose our selves. All swarmeth with commentaries: Of Authors their is
great penury. Is not the chiefest and most famous knowledge of our ages, to
know how to understand the wise? Is it not the common and last scope of our
study? Our opinions are grafted one upon an other. The first serves as a
stock to the second; the second to the third. Thus we ascend from step to
step. Whence it follows, that the highest-mounted has often more honor,
than merit. For, he is got-vp but one inch above the shoulders of the last
save one. How often and peradventure foolishly, hove I enlarged my Book to
speak of himself? Foolishly if it were but for this reason: That I should
have remembered, that what I speak of others, they do the like of me. That
those so frequent glances on their works, witness their heart shivereth with
their love they bear them; and that the disdainful churlishness wherewith
they beat them, are but mignardizes and affectations of a motherly favor.
Following Aristotle, in whom, both esteeming and dis-esteeming himself, arise
often of an equal air of arrogance. For mine excuse; That in this I ought to
have more liberty than others, for so much as of purpose, I write both of my
self and of my writings, as of my other actions: that my theme does turn
into it self: I wot not whether every man will take it. I have seen in
Germany, that Luther has left as many divisions and altercations, concerning
the doubt of his opinions, yea and more, than himself mooveth about the Holy
Scriptures. Our contestation is verbal. I demand what Nature voluptuousness,
circle and substitution is? The question is of words, and with words it is
answered. A stone is a body: but he that should insist and urge; And what is a
body? A substance: And what a substance? And so goe-on: Should at last bring
the respondent to his Calepine or wits end. One word is changed for another
word, and often more unknown. I know better what Homo is, then I know what
Animal is, either mortal or reasonable. To answer one doubt, they give me
three: It is Hidraes head. Socrates demanded of Memnon what virtue was; There
is answered Memnon, the virtue of a Man, of a Woman, of a Magistrate, of a
private Man, of a Child, of an old Man: What virtue mean you? Yea marry,
this is very well, quoth Socrates; we were in search of one virtue, and thou
bring me a whole swarm. We propose one question, and we have a whole
huddle of them made unto us again. As no event or form does wholly resemble
another, so does it not altogether differ one from another. Oh ingenious
mixture of Nature. If our faces were not like, we could not discern a man
from a beast: If they were not unlike, we could not distinguish one man from
another man. Al things hold by some similitude: Every example limpeth. And the
relation, which is drawn from experience, is ever defective and imperfect.
Comparisons are nevertheless joined together by some end. So serve the Laws,
and so are they sorted and fitted to all our suits or affairs; by some
wire-drawen, forced and collateral interpretation. Since the moral Laws
which respect the particular duty of every man in himself, are so hard to be
taught and observed, as we see they are: It is no wonder, if those which
govern so many particulars, are more hard. Consider the form of this Law, by
which we are ruled: It is a lively testimony of humane imbecility; so much
contradiction and so many errors are therein contained. That which we think
favor or rigor in Law (wherein is so much of either, that I wot not well
whether we shall so often find indifferency in them, are crazed-infected parts
and unjust members of the very body and essence of Law. Certain poor
Countrymen came even now to tell me in a great haste, that but now in a
forest of mine, they have left a man wounded to death, with a hundred hurts
about him, yet breathing, and who for Gods sake has begged a little water and
some help to raise himself at their hands. But that they durst not come
near him and ran all away, for fear some officers belonging to the Law should
meet and catch them; and as they do with such as they find near unto a
murdered body, so they should be compelled to give an account of this
mischance, to their utter undoing; having neither friends nor money to defend
their innocence. What should I have said unto them? It is most certain, that
this Office of humanity had brought them to much trouble. How many innocent and
guilt-lesse men have we seen punished? I say without the Judges fault; and
how many more that were never discovered? This has happened in my time. Certain
men are condemned to death for a murder committed; the sentence, if not
pronounced, at least concluded and determined. This done, The Judges are
advertised by the Officers of a sub-alternall Court, not far-off, that they
have certain prisoners in hold, that have directly confessed the foresaid
murder, and thereof bring most evident marks and tokens. The question and
consultation is now in the former Court, whether for all this, they might
interrupt, or should defer the execution of the sentence pronounced against
the first. They consider the novelty of the example and consequence thereof,
and how to reconcile the judgment. They conclude, that the condemnation has
passed according unto Law, and therefore the Judges are not subject to
repentance. To be short, these miserable Wretches are consecrated to the
prescriptions of the Law. Philip, or some other, provided for such an
inconvenience, in this manner. He had by an irrevocable sentence condemned one
to pay another a round sum of money for a fine. A while after, the truth
being discovered, it was found, he had wrongfully condemned him. On one side
was the right of the cause, on the other the right of judiciary forms. He is
in some sort to satisfy both parties, suffering the sentence to stand in full
power: and with his own purse recompensed the interest of the condemned. But
he was to deal with a reparable accident, my poor slaves were hanged
irreparably. How many condemnations have I seen more criminal, than the crime
it self? All this put me in mind of those ancient opinions; That He who
will do right in gross, must needs do wrong by retaile; and iniustly in
small things, that will come to do justice in great matters; That humane
justice is framed according to the model of physic, according to which,
whatsoever is profitable is also just and honest: And of that the Stoickes
hold, that Nature her self in most of her works, proceeds against justice:
And of that which the Cyreniaques hold, that there is nothing just of it self:
That customs and laws frame justice. And the Theodorians, who in a wise man
allow as just, all manner of theft, sacrilege and paillardise, so he think it
profitable for him. There is no remedy: I am in that case, as Alcibiades was,
and if I can otherwise choose, will never put my self unto a man that shall
determine of my head; or consent that my honor or life, shall depend on the
industry or care of mine attorney, more then mine innocence. I could willingly
adventure my self, and stand to that Law, that should as well recompense me
for a good deed, as punish me for a mis-deede: and where I might have a just
cause to hope, as reason to fear. Indemnitie is no sufficient coin for him,
who does better than not to trespass. Our Law presents us but one of her
hands, and that is her left hand. Whosoever goes to Law, does in the end but
loose by it. In China, the policy, arts and government of which kingdom,
having neither knowledge or commerce with ours; exceed our examples in diverse
parts of excellency; and whose Histories teach me, how much more ample and
diverse the World is, than either we or our forefathers could ever enter into.
The Officers appointed by the Prince to visit the state of his Provinces, as
they punish such as abuse their charge, so with great liberality they reward
such as have uprightly and honestly behaved themselves in them, or have done
any thing more then ordinary, and besides the necessity of their duty: There,
all present themselves, not only to warrant themselves, but also to get
something: Not simply to be paid, but liberally to be rewarded. No judge has
yet, God be thanked, spoken to me as a judge, in any cause whatsoever either
mine or another man's; criminal or civil. No prison did ever receive me, no
not so much as for recreation to walk in. The very imagination of one, makes
the sight of their outside seem irksome and loathsome to me. I am so
besotted unto liberty, that should any man forbid me the access unto any one
corner of the Indiaes I should in some sort live much discontented. And so long
as I shall find land or open air elsewhere, I shall never lurk in any place,
where I must hide my self. Oh God, how hardly could I endure the miserable
condition of so many men, confined and immured in some corners of this
kingdom, barred from entering the chiefest Cities, from access into Courts,
from conuersing with men, and interdicted the use of common ways, only
because they have offended our laws. If those under which I live, should but
threaten my fingers end, I would presently go find out some others,
wheresoever it were. All my small wisdom, in these civil and tumultuous
wars, wherein we now live, does wholly employ it self, that they may not
interrupt my liberty, to go and come where ever I list. Laws are now
maintained in credit, not because they are essentially just, but because they
are laws. It is the mystical foundation of their authority; they have none
other; which availes them much: They are often made by fools. More often by
men, who in hatred of equality, have want of equity; But ever by men, who are
vain and irresolute Authors. There is nothing so grossly and largely
offending, nor so ordinarily wronging as the Laws. Whosoever obeys them
because they are just, obeyes them not justly the way as he ought. Our French
Laws do in some sort, by their irregularity and deformity, lend an helping
hand unto the disorder and corruption, that is seen in their dispensation and
execution. Their behest is so confused, and their command so inconstant, that
it in some sort excuses, both the disobedience and the vice of the
interpretation, of the administration and of the observation. Whatsoever then
the fruit is we may have of Experience, the same which we draw from foreign
examples, will hardly stead our institution much; if we reap so small profit
from that we have of our selves, which is most familiar unto us: and truly
sufficient to instruct us of what we want. I study my self more than any
other subject. It is my supernatural Metaphisike, it is my natural Philosophy.

Qua Deus hanc mundi temperet art domum, Propert^^ 3. ^^. 4. 26.

Qua venit exoriens, qua deficit, vnde coact is
Cornibus in plenum menstrua luna redit:
Vnde salo superant venti, quid flamine capt^t
Eurus, and in nubes vnde perennis aequa.
Sit ventura dies mundi quae subruat arces,
This Worlds great house by what art God does guide.
From whence the monthly Moon does rising ride,
How wane, how with closed horns return to pride.
How winds on seas bear sway, what th'Easterne wind
Would have* how still in clouds we water find;
If this worlds Towers to raze a day be signde.
Quaerite quos agitat mundi labor:
All this do you enquire
Whom this worlds travailes tire.
In this universality I suffer my self ignorantly and negligently to be
managed by the general law of the world. I shall sufficiently know it when I
shall feel it. My learning cannot make her change her course: she will not
diversifie herself for me; it were folly to hope it: And greater folly for a
man to trouble himself about it; since it is necessarily semblable public
and common. The governors capacity and goodness, should thoroughly discharge
us of the governments care. Philosophical inquisitions and contemplations serve
but as a nourishment unto our curiosity. With great reason do Philosophers
address us unto natures rules: But they have naught to do with so sublime a
knowledge: They falsify them, and present her to us with a painted face,
too-high in color and overmuch sophisticated; whence arise so many different
pourtraits of so uniform a subject. As she has given us feet to go
withal, so has she endowed us with wisdom to direct our life. A wisdom
not so ingenious, sturdie and pompous, as that of their invention, but yet
easy, quiet and salutarie. And that in him who has the hap to know how to
employ it orderly and sincerely, effects very well what the other says:
that is to say naturally. For a man to commit himself most simply unto nature,
is to do it most wisely. Oh how soft, how gentle, and how sound a pillow is
ignorance and incuriositie to rest a well composed head upon. I had rather
understand my self well in my self, then in Cicero. Out of the experience I
have of my self, I find sufficient ground to make my self wise, were I but a
good proficient scholar. Whosoever shall commit to memory the excess or
inconvenience of his rage or anger past, and how far that fit transported
him, may see the deformity of that passion, better then in Aristotle, and
conceive a more just hatred against it. Whosoever calls to mind, the dangers
he has escaped, those which have threatened him, and the light occasions that
have remooved him from one to another state, does thereby the better prepare
himself to future alterations, and knowledge of his condition. Caesar's life
has no more examples for us, then our own; Both imperial and popular; it is
ever a life that all humane accidents regard. Let us but give ear unto it, we
record all that to us, that we principally stand in need of. He that shall
call to mind how often and how several times he has been deceived, and
misaccompted his own judgment: is he not a simple gull, if he do not for
ever afterward distrust the same? When by others reason, I find my self
convicted of a false opinion, I learn not so much, what new thing he has told
me; and this particular ignorance; which were but a small purchase; as in
general I learn mine own imbecilitie and weakness, and the treason of my
understanding: whence I draw the reformation of all the mass. The like I do
in all my other errors: by which rule I apprehend and feel great profit for,
and unto my life. I regard not the species or individuum, as a stone whereon I
have stumbled. I learn every where to fear my going, and endeavor to order
the same. To learn that another has either spoken a foolish jest, or
committed a sottish act, is a thing of nothing. A man must learn, that he is
but a fool: A much more ample and important instruction. The false steps my
memory has so often put upon me, at what time she stood most upon her self,
have not idly been lost: she may swear and warrant me long enough; I shake
mine ears at her: the first opposition made in witness of her, makes me
suspect. And I durst not trust her in a matter of consequence; nor warrant her
touching others affairs. And were it not, that what I do for want of memory,
others more often do the same for lack of faith, I would ever in a matter of
fact rather take the truth from another mouth, then from mine own. Would
every man pry into the effects and circumstances of the passions that sway
him, as I have done of that whereunto I was allotted; he should see them
coming; and would somewhat hinder their course and abate their impetuositie:
They do not always surprise and take hold of us at the first brunt, there are
certain forethreatnings and degrees as forerunners.

Fluctus vti p^imo coepit cum albescereponto,
Paulatim sese tollit mare, and altius vndas
Erigit, inde imo consurgit ad aethera fundo.
As when at sea, floods first in whiteness rise,
Sea surgeth softly, and then higher plies
In waves, then from the ground mounts up to skies.
Judgment holds in me a presidentiall seat, at least he carefully endeavors
to hold it: He suffers my appetites to keep their course: both hatred and love,
yea and that I bear unto my self; without feeling alteration or corruption.
If he can not reform other parts according to himself, at least he will not
be deformed by them: he keeps his court apart. That warning-lesson given to
all men, to know themselves, must necessarily be of important effect, since
that God of wisdom, knowledge and light, caused the same to be fixed on the
frontispice of his temple: as containing whatsoever he was to counsel us.
Plato says also, that wisdom is nothing but the execution of that
ordinance: And Socrates does distinctly verify the same in Zenophon.
Difficulties and obscurity are not perceived in every science, but by such as
have entrance into them: For, some degree of intelligence is required, to be
able to mark that one is ignorant: and we must knock at a gate, to know
whether it be shut. Whence ensues this Platonicall subtlety, that neither
those which know have no further to enquire, for so much as they know already:
nor they that know not, because to enquire, it is necessary they know what
they enquire after. Even so in this, for a man to know himself: that every man
is seen so resolute and satisfied, and thinks himself sufficiently instructed
or skillful, does plainly signify that no man understands any thing, as
Socrates teaches Euthydemus. My self, who profess nothing else, find
therein so bottomless a depth, andinfinit a variety, that my apprentisage
has no other fruit, than to make me perceive how much more there remains for
me to learn. To mine own weakness so often acknowledged, I owe this
inclination which I bear unto modesty; to the obedience of beliefes
prescribed unto me; to a constant coldenesse and moderation of opinions; and
hatred of this importunate and quarellous arrogancy, wholly believing and
trusting it self, a capital ennemie to discipline and verity. Do but hear
them sway and talk. The first fopperies they propose, are in the style, that
Religions and Laws are composed in. Nihil est turpius quam cognitioni Ci^
Acad. qu^. ^^b. 1. f.
and praeceptioni, assertionem app^^^ationem^ praecurrere. Nothing is more
absurd, than that avowching and allowance should run before knowledge and
precept. Aristarchus said, that in ancient times, there were scarce seven wise
men found in the world: and in his time, hardly seven ignorant. Have not we
more reason to say it in our days, than he had? Affirmation and self-conceit,
are manifest signs of foolishness. Some one, who a hundred times a day has
had the canvase and been made a stark coxcombe, shall notwithstanding be
seen to stand upon his Ergoes, and as presumptuously-resolute as before. You
would say, he has since some new mind and vigor of understanding infused into
him. And that it betides him, as to that ancient child of the Earth, who by
his falling to the ground and touching his Mother, still gathered new strength
and fresh courage.

-- cui cum tetigere parentem, A^t^^^.

I am defect a vigent renovato robore membra.
Whose failing limbs with strength renewed regrow,
When they once touch his mother Earth below.
Does not this indocile, blocke-headed ass, think to reassume a new spirit,
by undertaking a new disputation? It is by my experience I accuse humane
ignorance, which (in mine opinion) is the surest part of the Worlds school.
Those that will not conclude it in themselves, by so vain an example as mine,
or theirs, let them acknowledge it by Socrates, the Master of Masters. For
the Philosopher Antisthenes, was wont to say to his Disciples: Come on my
Masters, let you and me go to hear Socrates. There shall I be a fellow
Disciple with you. And upholding this Doctrine, of the Stoickes Sect, that only
virtue sufficed to make a life absolutely-happy; and having no need of any
thing, but of Socrates his force and resolution, he added moreover: This long
attention, I employ in considering my self enableth me also to judge
indifferently of others: And there are few things whereof I speak more happily
and excusably. It often fortuneth me to see and distinguish more exactly the
conditions of my friends, than themselves do. I have astonished some by the
pertinencie of mine own description, and have warned him of himself. Because
I have from mine infancy enured my self to view mine own life in others
lives; I have thereby acquired a studious complexion therein. And when I think
on it, I suffer few things to escape about me, that may in any sort fit the
same; whether countenances, humor or discourses. I studiously consider all I
am to eschew and all I ought to follow. So by my friends productions I discover
their inward inclinations. Not to marshall or range this infinite variety of
so diverse and so distracted actions to certain Genders or Chapters, and
distinctly to distribute my parcels and divisions into forms and known
regions.

Sed neque quam mult^ species, and nomina qu^ sint. Virg. Georg lib. 1. 103.

Est numerus.
But nor how many kinds, nor what their names:
There is a number of them (and their frames.)
The wiser sort speak and declare their fancies more specially and distinctly:
But I, who have no further insight then I get from common use, without rule or
method, generally present mine own, but gropingly. As in this: I pronounce my
sentence by articles, loose and disioynted: it is a thing cannot be spoken at
once and at full. Relation and conformity are not easily found in such base and
common minds as ours. Wisdom is a solid and complete frame; every several
piece whereof keeps his due place and bears his mark. Sola sapientia in se
tota conversa est. Only wisdom is wholly turned into it self. I leave it to
Artists, and I wot not whether in a matter so confused, so several and so
casual, they shall come to an end, to range into sides, this infinite
diversity of visages; and settle our inconstancy and place it in order. I do
not only find it difficult to combine our actions one unto another; but take
every one aparte, it is hard, by any principal quality to desseigne the same
properly: so double, so ambiguous and party-colored are they to diverse
lusters. Which in Pers^us the Macedonian King was noted for a rare matter, that
his spirit fastening it self to no kind of condition; wont wandering through
every kind of life: and representing so newfangled and gadding manners, that
he was neither known of himself nor of others, what kind of man he was:
me thinks may well-nigh agree and suit with all the world. And above all, I
have seen some other of his coat or humor, to whom (as I suppose) this
conclusion might also more properly be applide. No state of mediocrity being
ever transported from one extreme to another, by indivinable occasions: no
manner of course without crosses, and strange contrarieties: no faculty simple:
so that the likeliest a man may one day conclude of him, shall be, that he
affected and labored to make himself known by being not to be known. A man
had need of long-tough ears, to hear himself freely judged. And because
there be few that can endure to hear it without tingling: those which
adventure to undertake it with us, show us a singular effect of true
friendship. For, that is a truely-perfect love, which, to profit and do good,
fears not to hurt or offend. I deem it absurd, to censure him, in whom bad
qualities exceed good conditions. Plato requires three parts in him that will
examine another mind: Learning, goodwill, and boldness. I was once demanded,
what I would have thought my self fit-for, had any been disposed to make use
of me, when my years would have fitted service:

Dum melior vires sanguis dabat, aemula necdum Virg. A^^. lib. 5 415.

Temporibus geminis canebat sparsa senectus.
While better blood gave strength, nor envious old years
Ore-laid with wrinckled temples grew to hoary hairs.
I answered, for nothing. And I willingly excuse my self that I can do
nothing which may enthrall me to others. But had my fortune made me a servant,
I would have told my master all truths; and, had he so wild it, controled his
manners: Not in gross, by scholastical lessons, which I cannot do: besides, I
see no true reformation to ensue in such as know them: but fair and softly and
with every opportunity observing them; and simply and naturally judging them
distinctly by the eye. Making him directly to perceive, how and in what degree
he is in the common opinion; opposing my self against his flatterers and
sycophants. There is none of us, but would be worse then Kings, if as they are,
he were continually corrupted with that rascally kind of people. But what? if
Alexander that mighty King and great Philosopher, could not beware of them? I
should have had sufficient fidelity, judgment and liberty for that. It would
be a namelesse office, otherwise it should lose both effect and grace; And is a
part, which cannot indifferently belong to all. For, truth it self, has not
the privilege to be employed at all times, and in every kind* Be her use
never so noble, it has his circumscriptions and limits. It often comes to
pass, the world standing as it does, that truth is whispered into Princes
ears, not only without fruit, but hurtfully and therewithal unjustly. And no
man shall make me believe, but that an hallowed admonition may be viciously
applied, and abusively employed: and that the interest of the substance should
not sometimes yield to the interest of the form. For such a purpose and
mystery I would have an vnrepining man and one contented with his own fortune*

Quod sit, esse velit, nihilque malit: Mart. lib. 10. epigr. 47. 12

Willing to be as him you see,
Or rather nothing else to be:
and borne of mean degree: For So Much as on the one side, he should not have
cause to fear, lively and nearly to touch his masters heart, thereby not to
lose the course of his preferment: And on the other side, being of a low
condition, he should have more easy communication with all sorts of people.
Which I would have in one man alone; for, to empart the privilege of such
liberty and familiarity unto many, would beget an hurtful irreverence. Yea, and
of that man, I would above all things require trusty and assured silence. A
King is not to be credited, when for his glory, he boasts of his constancy,
in attending his enemies encounter: if for his good amendment and profit, he
cannot endure the liberty of his friends words, which have no other working
power, then to pinch his learning: the rest of their effect remaining in his
own hands. Now, there is not any condition of men, that has more need of
true, sincerly-free and open-hearted advertisements, then Princes. They
undergo a public life, and must applaude the opinion of so many spectators,
that if they be once enured, to have that concealed from them, which diverteth
them from their course, they at unawares and insensibly find themselves
deeply engaged in the hatred and detestation of their subjects; many times for
occasions, which had they been forewarned, and in time gently reformed, they
might no doubt have eschewed, to no interest or prejudice of their private
delights. Favorites do commonly respect themselves more then their masters.
And surely it touches their freehold, for so much as i^good truth, the greatest
part of true friendship^-offices, are toward their soveragne in a crabbed and
dangerous Essay. So that, there is not only required much affection and
liberty, but also an undaunted courage. To conclude, all this gal^emafrie which
I huddle-vp here, is but a register of my lives-Essayes: which in regard of the
internal health are sufficiently exemplare to take the instruction against the
hair. But concerning bodily health, no man is able to bring more profitable
experience, then my self; who present the same pure, sincere and in no sort
corrupted or altered, either by art or selfewill'd opinion. Experience in her
own precinct, may justly be compared to Physic, unto which, reason gives
place. Tiberius was wont to say, that whatsoever had lived twenty years,
should be able to answer himself of all such things as were either wholesome
or hurtful for him; and know how to live and order his body without Physic.
Which he peradventure had learned of Socrates; who industriously advising his
disciples (as a study of chief consequence) to study their health, told them
moreover, that it was very hard, if a man of understanding, heedefully
observing his exercises, his eating and drinking, should not better then any
Physician discern and distinguish such things as were either good or bad or
indifferent for him. Yet does Physic make open profession always to have
experience for the touchstone of her operation. And Plato had reason to say,
that to be a good Physician, it were requisite, that he who should undertake
that profession, had past through all such diseases as he will adventure to
cure, and known or felt all the accidents and cricumstances he is to judge
of. It is reason, themselves should first have the pox, if they will know how
to cure them in others. I should surely trust such a one better then any else.
Others but guide us, as one who sitting in his chair paints seas, rocks,
shelves and havens upon a boarde, and makes the model of a tale ship, to sail
in all safety: But put him to it in earnest, he knows not what to do, nor
where to begin. They make even such a description of our infimities as does a
towne-crier, who cries a lost horse, or dog, and describes his hair, his
stature, his ears, with other marks and tokens, but bring either unto him, he
knows him not. Oh God, that physic would one day afford mesome good and
preceptible help, how earnestly would I exclaim.

Tandem efficaci do manus scient^^,
I yield, I yield at length,
To knowledge of chief strength.
The Arts that promise to keep our body and mind in good health, promise
much unto us; but therewith there is none performs less what they promise.
And in our days, such as make profession of these Arts amongst us, do less
then all others show their effects. The most may be said of them, is, that they
sell medicinable drugs; but that they are Physicians, no man can truly say it.,
I have lived long enough, to yield an accoont of the usage that has brough me
to this day. If any be disposed to taste of it, as his taster I have given him
an assay. Lo here some articles, digested as memory shall store me with them.
I have no fashion but has varied according to accidents: I only register
those I have most been acquainted with; and hitherto possess me most. My
form of life is ever alike, both in sickness and in health: one same bed,
the same hours, the same meat, the same drink does serve me. I add nothing
to them but the moderation of more or less, according to my strength or
appetite. My health is to keep my accustomed state free from care and trouble.
I see that sickness does on the one side in some sort divert me from it, and
if I believe Physicians, they on the other side will turn me from it: So that
both by fortune and by art I am clean out of my right bias. I believe nothing
more certainly then this; that I cannot be offended by the use of things,
which I have so long accustomed. It is in the hands of cuctome to give our life
what form it pleases: in that it can do all in all. It is the drink of
Circes, diversifieth our nature as she thinks good. How many nations near
bordering upon us imagine the fear of the sereine or night-calme to be but a
jest, which s^o apparently does blast and hurt us? and whereof our Mariners our
watermen, and our countriemen make but a laughing-stocke? You make a Germane
sick, if you lay him upon a matteras, as you distemper an Italian upon a
fetherbed, and a Frenchman to lay him in a bed without curtains, or lodge him
in a chamber without a fire. A Spaniard can not well brook to feed after our
fashion, no^ we endure to drink as the Swizzers. A Germane pleased me well at
Augusta to rail against the commodity of our chimnies, using the same reasons
or arguments, that we ordinarily employ in condemning their stoves. For, to
say truth, the same close-smothered heat, and the smell of that oft-heated
matter, whereof they are composed, fumeth in the heads of such as are not
accustomed unto them; no^ so with me. But on the other side, that heat being
equaly dispersed, constant and universal, without flame or blazing, without
smoke, and without that wind which the tonnells of our chimnies bring us, may
many ways be compared unto ours. Why do we not imitate the Romans
architecture?

It is reported that in ancient times they made no fire in their houses, but
without and at the foot of them: Whence by tonnells, which were convaide
through their thickest walls, and contrived near and about all such places as
they would have warmed; so that the hear was convaied into every part of the
house. Which I have seen manifestly described in some place of Seneca, though
I can not well remember where. This Germane, hearing me commend the beauties
and commodities of his City (which truly deserves great commendation)
began to pity me, because I was shortly to go from it. And the first
inconvenience he urged me withal, was the heaviness in the head, which
Chimnies in other places would cause me. He had heard some other body
complain of it, and therefore all eadged the same against me, being wont by
custom to perceive it in such as came to him. All heat coming from fire does
weaken and dull me: Yet said Evenus, that fire was the best sauce of life. I
rather allow and embrace any other manner or way to escape cold. We fear our
Wines when they are low; whereas in Portugal, the fume of it is counted
delicious, and is the drink of Princes. To conclude, each several Nation has
diverse customs, fashions and vsages; which, to some others, are not only
unknown and strange, but savage, barbarous and wondrous. What shall we do
unto that people, that admit no witness, except printed; that will not believe
men, if not printed in Books, nor credit truth, unless it be of competent
age? We dignifie our ^opperies, when we put them to the press. It is another
manner of weight for him, to say, I have seen it, then if you say, I have
heard it reported. But I, who mis-believe no more the mouth, than the hand of
men; and know that men write as indiscreetly, as they speak unadvisedly; and
esteem of this present age, as of another past; allege as willingly a friend
of mine as Aulus Gellius or Macrobius, and what my self have seen, as that
they have written. And as they accoumpt virtue to be nothing greater by being
longer, so deem I truth to be nothing wiser ^y being more aged. I often say it
is mere folly that makes us run after strange and scholasticall examples.
The fertility of them is now equal unto that of Homer and Platoes times. But
is it not, that we rather seek the honor of allegations, than the truth of
discourses? As if it were more to borrow our proofs from out the shope of
Vascosan or Plantin, than from that we daily see in our village. Or verily that
we have not the wit to blanch, sift out or make that to prevail, which
passes before us, and forcibly judge of it, to draw the same into example.
For, if we say, that authority fails us, to add credit unto our testimony,
we speak from the purpose. For So Much as in my conceit, could we but find out
their true light Natures greatest miracles and the most wonderful examples,
namely upon the subject of humane actions, may be drawn and formed from most
ordinary, most common and most known things. Now concerning my subject,
omitting the examples I know by books; And that which Aristotle speaks of
Andron of Argos, that he would travel all over the scorching sands of Lybia,
without drinking: A Gentleman, who has worthily acquitted himself of many
honorable charges, reported where I was, that in the parching heat of Summer,
hes had traveled from Madrill to Lisb^ne, without ever drinking. His age
respected, he is in very good and healthy plight, and has nothing
extraordinary in the course or custom of his life, saving (as himself has
told me,) that he can very well continue two or three months, yea a whole
year, without any manner of beverage. He sometimes finds himself thirsty, but
let us it pass; and holds, that it is an appetite, which will easily and of it
self languish away: and if he drink at any time, it is more for a caprice or
humor, than for any need or pleasure. Lo here one of another key. It is not
long since, that I found one of the wisest men of France, (among those of so
mean fortune) studying hard in the corner of a great Hall, which for that
purpose was hung about with tapistrie, and round about him a disordered rabble
of his servaunts, grooms and lackeys; prattling, playing and hoyting: who told
me (as Seneca in a manner says of himself) that he learned and profited much
by that hurly-burly or tintimare: as if beaten with that confused noise, he did
so much the better recall and close himself into himself, for serious
contemplation; and that the said tempestuous rumors did strike and repercusse
his thoughts inward. Whilst he was a scholar in Padua, his study was ever
placed so near the jangling of bells, the rattling of coaches and rumbling
tumults of the market place, that for the service of his study, he was fame,
not only to frame and enure himself to contemn, but to make good use of that
turbulentnoise. Socrates answered Alcibiades, who wondered how he could endure
the continual tittletattle and incessant scoulding of his Wife: even as those
who are accustomed to hear the ordinary creaking of the squeaking wheels of
wells. My self am clean contrary, for I have a tender brain, and easy to
take snuff in the nose, or to be transported. If my mind be busy alone, the
least stirring, yea the buzzing of a ^^ie does trouble and distemper the same.
Seneca in his youth, having ernestly undertaken to follow the example of
Sext^us, to feed on nothing that were taken dead: could with pleasure (as
himself averreth) live so a whole year. And left it, only because he would
not be suspected to borrow this rule from some new religions, that instituted
the same. He therewithal followed some precepts of Attalus, not to lie upon
any kind of carpets or bedding that would yield under one; and until he grew
very aged, he never used but such as were very hard and vn-yeelding to the
body. What the custom of his days makes him accoumpt rudeness, ours makes us
esteem wantonness. Behold the difference between my varlets life and mine:
The Indians have nothing further from my form and strength. Well I wot, that I
have heretofore taken boys from begging and that went roaguing up and down,
to serve me; hoping to do some good upon them, who have within a little while
after left me, my fare and my livery; only that they might without control
or check follow their former idle loytring life. One of which I found not long
since gathering of muskles in a common sincke, for his dinner; whom (do what I
could) I was never able, neither with entreaty to reclaim, no^ by threatening
to withdraw, from the sweetness he found in want, and delight he felt in
roaguing laziness. Even vagabonding roagues, as well as rich men, have their
magnificences and voluptuousness, and (as some say) their dignities,
preheminences and politic orders. They are effects of custom and use: and
what is bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh. Both which have power to
enure and fashion us, not only to what form they please (therefore, say the
wise, ought we to be addressed to the best, and it will immediately seem easy
unto us) but also to change and variation: Which is the noblest and most
profitable of their apprentisages. The best of my corporal complexions, is,
that I am flexible and little opiniative. I have certain inclinations, more
proper and ordinary, and more pleasing than others. But with small ado and
without compulsion, I can easily leave them and embrace the contrary. A young
man should trouble his rules, to stirre-vp his vigor; and take heed he suffer
not the same to grow faint, sluggish or teasty: For, there is no course of life
so weak and sottish, as that which is managed by Order, Method and
Discipline.

Ad primum lapidem vectari cum placet, hora Iuven. Sat. 6. 477.

Sumi^ur ex libro, si prurit frictus ocell^
Anguibus, inspecta genesi collyria qu^rit.
List he to ride in coach but to Mile-end,
By th'Almanacke he does the hour attend:
If his eye-corner itch, the remedy,
He ^et's from calculation of nativity.
If he believe me, he shall often give himself unto all manner of excess:
otherwise the least disorder will utterly overthrow him; and so make him unfit
and un velcome in all conversations. The most contrary quality in an honest
man, is nice-delicateuesse, and to be tied to one certain particular fashion.
It is parcular, if it be not supple and pliable. It is a kind of reproach,
through impuissance not to do or not to dare, what one sees his other
companions do or dare. Let such men keep their kitchen. It is indecent in all
other men, but vicious and intolerable in one professing Arms: who (as
Philopoemen said) should fashion himself to all manner of inequality and
diversity of life. Although I have (as much as might be) been enured to
liberty and fashioned to indifferency, yet in growing aged, I have through
carelessness relied more upon certain forms (my age is now exempted from
institution, and has not any thing else to look unto, but to maintain it
self) which custom has already, without thinking on it, in certain things
so well imprinted her character in me, that I deem it a kind of excess to
leave them. And without long practice, I can neither sleep by day; nor eat
between meals; nor break my fast; nor go to bed without some entermission;
as of three hours after supper) nor get children, but before I fall asleep,
and that never standing; nor bear mine own sweat; nor quench my thirst,
either with clear water or wine alone; nor continue long bare-headed; nor have
mine hair cut after dinner. And I could as hardly spare my gloves as my shirt:
or forbear washing of my hands, both in the morning and rising from the
table; or lie in a bed without a testerne and curtains about it, as of most
necessary things: I could dine without a table-cloth, but hardly without a
clean napkin, as Germans commonly do. I foul and fully them more than either
they or the Italians: and I seldom use either spoone or forke. I am sorry we
follow not a custom, which according to the example of Kings I have seen
begun by some; that upon every course or change of dish, as we have shift of
clean trenchers, so we might have change of clean napkins. We read that that
laborious soldier Marius, growing old, grew more nicely delicate in his
drinking, and would taste no drink, except in a peculiar cup of his. As for
me, I observe a kind of like method in glasses, and of one certain form,
and drink not willingly in a commonglasse: no more than of one ordinary hand:
I mislike all manner of metal in regard of a bright transparent matter: let
mine eyes also have test of what I drink according to their capacity. I am
beholding to custom for many (...) nicenesses and singularities. Nature has
also on the other side bestowed this upon me, that I can not well brook two
full meals in one day, without surcharging my stomach; nor the mere
abstinence of one, without filling my self with wind, drying my mouth and
dulling my appetite: And I do find great offense by a long sereine or
night-calme. For some years since, in the out-roades or nightservices that
happen in times of wars, which many times continue all night, five or six
hours after my stomach begins to qualme, my head feels a violent aching,
so that I can hardly hold-out till morning without vomiting. When others go to
breakefast* I go to sleep: and within a while after I shall be as fresh and
jolly as before. I ever thought that the serein never fell, but in the shutting
in of night, but having in these latter years long time frequented very
familiarly the conversation of a Gentleman, possessed with this opinion, that
it is more sharp and dangerous about the declination of the Sun, an hour or
two before it set, which he carefully escheweth, and despises that which
falls at night: he has gone about to persuade and imprint into me, not only
his discourse but also his conceit. What if the very doubt and inquisition,
wounds our imagination and changes us? Such as altogether yield to these
bendings, draw the whole ruin upon themselves. And I bewail diverse
Gentlemen, who being young and in perfect health, have by the ignorant
foolishnes of their Physicians brought themselves into consumptions and other
lingering diseases; and as it were in Physickes fetters. Were it not much
better to be troubled with a a rheum, than for ever through discustome, in an
action of so great use and consequence, loose the commerce and conversation of
common life? Oh yrkesome learning! Oh Science full of molestation; that wastes
us the sweetest hours of the day. Let us extend our possession unto the utmost
means. A man shall at last, in opinionating himself, harden and enure
himself for it, and so correct his complexion: as did Caesar's the falling
sickness, with contemning and corrupting the same. A man should apply himself
to the best rules, but not subject himself unto them: except to such (if any
there be) that duty and thraldom unto them, be profitable. Both Kings and
Philosophers obey nature, and go to the stool, and so do Ladies: Public
lives are due unto ceremony: mine which is obscure and private, enjoys all
natural dispensations. To be a Soldier and a Gascoyne, are qualities somewhat
subject to indiscretion. And I am both. Therefore will I say thus much of this
action; that it is requisite we should remit the same unto certain prescribed
night-houres; and by custom (as I have done) force and subject our selves unto
it: But not (as I have done) growing in years, strictly tie him self to the
care of a particular convenient place, and of a commodious Ajax or easy
close-stoole for that purpose: and make it troublesome with long sitting and
nice observation. Nevertheless in homeliest matters and fowlest offices, is it
not in some sort excusable, to require more care and cleanelinesse? Nature
homo mundum and elegans Sen epist. 92.
animal est. By nature man is a cleanely and neat creature.

Of all natural actions, there is none wherein I am more loath to be troubled
or interrupted, when I am at it. I have seen diverse great men and soldiers,
much troubled and vexed with their bellies vntune and disorder, when at
untimely hours it calls upon them: whilst mine and my self never miss to
call one upon another at our appointment: which is, as soon as I get out of my
bed, except some urgent business or violent sickness trouble me. Therefore
(as I said) I judge no place where sick men may better seat themselves in
security, then quietly and wished to hold themselves in that course of life,
wherein the have been brought up and habituated. Any change or variation
soever, astonieth and distempereth. Will any believe, that Chestnuttes can hurt
a Perigordin or a Luquo^s, or that milk* or whitmeates are hurtful unto a
mountain dwelling people? whom if one seek to divert from their natural
diet, he shall not only prescribe them a new, but a contrary form of life: A
change which a healthy man can hardly endure. Appoint a Bretton of three score
years of age to drink water; put a Seaman or Mariner into a Stove; forbid a
lackey of Baske to walk: you bring them out of their element, you deprive them
of all motion, and in the end, of air, of light and life.

-- an vivere tanti est? Cor. Gal. el. 1. 155.

Do we reckon it so dear,
Only living to be here?
Cogimur a suet is animum suspendere rebus.
Atque vt vivamus, vivere desinimus:
From things erst used we must suspend our mind,
We leave to live that we may live by kind.
Hos superesse reor quibus and spirabilis a^r,
Et lux quaregimur, redditur ipsa gravis.
Do I think they live longer, whom does grieve
Both air they breathe, and light whereby they live.
If they do no other good, at least they do this, that betimes they prepare
their patients unto death, by little undermining and cutting-off the use of
life. Both in health and in sickness, I have willingly seconded and given my
self over to those appetites that pressed me. I allow great authority to my
desires and propensions. I love not to cure one evil by another mischief. I
hate those remedies, that importune more then sickness. To be subject to the
cholike, and to be tied to abstain from the pleasure I have in eating of
oysters, are two mischiefs for one. The disease pincheth us on the one side,
the rule on the other. Since we are ever in danger to misdoe, let us rather
hazard our selves to follow pleasure. Most men do contrary and think nothing
profitable, that is not painful: Facility is by them suspected. Mine appetite
has in diverse things very happily accommodated and ranged it self to the
health of my stomach. Being young, acrimony and tartness in sawces did greatly
delight me, but my stomach being since glutted therewith, my taste has
likewise seconded the same. Wine hurts the sick; it is the first thing that
with an invincible distaste, brings my mouth out of taste. Whatsoever I receive
unwillingly or distastefully hurts me, whereas nothing does it whereon I feed
with hunger and relish. I never received harm by any action that was very
pleasing unto me. And yet I have made al medicinal conclusions, largely to
yield to my pleasures. And when I was young.

Quem circumcursans huc atque huc saepe Cupido
Fulgebat crocina splendidus in tunica, C^t^l. el. 4. 131.

About whom Cupid running here and there,
Shinde in the saffron coat which he did wear.
I have as licentiously and inconsiderately as any other, furthred al such
desires as possessed me;

Et militavi non sine gloria.
A Soldier of loves host, Hor. c^r. l. 3. ^d. 26. 2.

I was not without boast.
More notwithstanding in continuation and holding out, then by snatches or by
stealth.

Sex me vix memini sustinuesse vices,
I scarce remember past
Six courses I could last.
It is surely a wonder accompanied with unhappiness, to confess how young and
weak I was brought under it is subjection. Nay, shall I not blush to tell it?
It was long before the age of choice or years of discretion: I was so young,
as I remember nothing before. And fitly may my fortune be compared to that of
Quartilla, who remembered not her mayden-head.

Inde tragus celeresque pili, mirandaque matri Barba me^.
Thence goatishnesse, hairs over-soone, a beard
To make my mother wonder, and afear'd.
Physicians commonly enfold and join their rules unto profit, according to the
violence of sharp desires or earnest longings, that incidently follow the
sick, No longing desire can be imagined so strange and vicious, but nature
will apply herself unto it. And then how easy is it to content ones fantasy?
In mine opinion, this part imports all in all; at least more and beyond all
other. The most grievous and ordinary evils are those, which fancy charge us
withal. That Spanish saying does every way please me: Deffienda me Dios de my.
God defend me from my self. Being sick, I am sorry I have not some desire may
give me the contentment to satiate and cloy the same: Scarsly would a medicine
divert me from it, So do I when I am in health: I hardly see any thing left to
be hoped or wished-for. It is pity a man should be so weakened and
enlanguished, that he has nothing left him but wishing. The art of Physic
is not so resolute, that whatsoever we do, we shall be void of all
authority to do it. She changes and she varieth according to climates;
according to the Moons; according to Fernelius; and according to Scala. If
your Physician think it not good that you sleep, that you drink wine, or
eat such and such meats: Care not you for that; I will find you another that
shall not be of his opinion. The diversity of physical arguments and
medicinal opinions, embraces all manner of forms. I saw a miserable sick
man, for the infinite desire he had to recover, ready to burst, yea and to die
with thirst; whom not long since another Physician mocked, utterly condemning
the others counsel, as hurtful for him. Had not he bestowed his labor well?
A man of that coat is lately dead of the stone, who during the time of his
sickness used extreme abstinence to withstand his evil; his fellows
affirm that contrary, his long fasting had withered and dried him up, and so
concocted the gravel in his kidneys. I have found, that in my hurts and other
sickenesses, earnest talking distempers and hurts me as much as any disorder I
commit. My voice costs me dear, and wearieth me; for I have it loud, shrill
and forced: So that, when I have had occasion to entertain the ears of great
men, about weighty affairs, I have often troubled them with care how to
moderate my voice, This story deserves to be remembered and to divert me. A
certain man, in one of the Greek schools spoke very loud, as I do; the
master of the ceremonies sent him word, he should speak lower: let him
(quoth he) send me the tune or key in which he would have me speak. The other
replied, that he should take his tune from his ears to whom he spoke. It was
well said, so he understood himself: Speak according as you have to do with
your auditory. For if one say, let it suffice that he hears you; or, govern
your self by him: I do not think he had reason to say so. The tune or motion
of the voice, has some expression or signification of my meaning: It is in me
to direct the same, that so I may the better represent my self. There is a
voice to instruct one to flatter, and another to chide. I will not only have
my voice come to him, but peradventure to wound and pierce him. When I brawle
and rate my lackey, with a sharp and piercing tune; were it fit he should come
to me and say, Master speak softly, I understand and hear you very well? Est
quaedam vox ad auditum accomod^ta non magnitudine sed proprietat^. There is a
kind of voice well applied to the hearing, not by the greatness of it, but by
the propri^tie. The word is half his that speakeh, and half his that
harkoneth unto it. The hea^er ought to prepare himself to the motion or bound
it takes. As between those that play at tennis, he who keeps the hazard,
does prepare, stand, stir and march, according as he perceives him who stands
at the house, to look, stand, remoove and strike the ball, and according to
the stroke. Experience has also taught me this, that we lose our selves
with impatience. Evils have their life, their limits; their diseases and
their health, The constitution of diseases is framed by the pattern of the
constitution of living creatures. They have their fortune limited even at their
birth, and their days allotted them. He that shall imperiously go about, or
by compulsion (contrary to their courses) to abridge them, does lengthen and
multiply them; and instead of appealing, does harsell and wring them. I am of
Crantors opinion, that a man must neither obstinately nor frantikely oppose
himself against evils; nor through demissenesse of courage faintingly yield
unto them, but according to their condition and ours, naturally incline to
them. A man must give sickenesses their passage: And I find that they stay
least with me, because I allow them their swinge, and let them do what they
list. And contrary to common-received rules, I have without aid or art r^dde
my self of some, that are deemed the most obstinately lingering, and
vnremoovably-obstinate. Let nature work: Let her have her will: She knows
what snee has to do, and understands her self better then we do. But such
a one died of it, will you say; So shall you doubtless; if not of that, yet of
some other disease. And how many have we seen die, when they have had a whole
College of Physicians round about their bed, and looking in their excrements?
Example is a bright looking-glass, universal and for all shapes to
looke-into. If it be a lushious or taste-pleasing potion, take it hardly; it is
ever so much present ease. So it be delicious and sweetly tasting, I will
never stand much upon the name or color of it. Pleasure is one of the chiefest
kinds of profit. I have suffered rheumes, gowty defluxions, relaxions,
pantings of the heart, megreimes and other suchlike accidents, to grow old in
me, and die their natural death; all which have left me, when I half enured
and framed my self to foster them. They are better conjured by courtesy, then
by bragging or threats, We must gently obey and endure the laws of our
condition: We are subject to grow aged, to become weak and to fall sick, in
spite of all physic. It is the first lesson the Mexicans give their
children; When they come out of their mothers wombes, they thus salute them: My
child, thou art come into the world to suffer; Therefore suffer and hold thy
peace. It is injustice for one to grieve, that any thing has befallen to any
one, which may happen to all men. Indignare si quid in te inique proprie
constitutum est. Then take it ill, if any thing be decreed unjustly against
thee alone. Look on an aged man, who sueth unto God to maintain him in
perfect, full an vigrous health, that is to say, he will be pleased to make him
young again:

Stulte quid haec frustra votis puerilibus opt as? Orid. Trist. l. 3. el. 8. 11.

Fool why do thou in vain desire,
With childish prayers thus t'aspire?
Is it not folly? his condition will not bear it. The gowt, the stone, the
gravel and indigestion are symptoms or effects of long continued years; as
heates, raines and winds, are incident to long voyages. Plato cannot believe,
that Aescu^apius troubled himself with good rules and diet to provide for the
preservarion of life, in a weak, wasted and corrupted body: being unprofitable
for his country, inconvenient for his vocation. and unfit to get sound and
sturdy Children: and deem not that care inconvenient unto divine justice and
heavenly Wisdom, which is to direct all things unto profit. My good sir, the
matter is at an end: You cannot be recovered; for the most, you can be but
tampered withal, and somewhat vnder-propt, and for some hours have your
misery prolonged.

Non secus instantem cupiens fulcire ruinam Corn. Gal. el. 173.

Diversis contra nititur obicibus,
Donec certa dies omni compage soluta
Ipsum cum rebus subruat auxilium.
So he that would an instant ruin stay,
With diverse props strives it to underlay,
Till all the frame dissolvd a certain day,
The props with th'edifice does oversway.
A man must learn to endure that patiently, which he cannot avoyde
conveniently. Our life is composed, as is the harmony of the World, of contrary
things; so of diverse tunes, some pleasant, some harsh, some sharp, some flat,
some low and some high: What would that Mu^^tition say, that should love but
some one of them? He ought to know how to use them severally and how to
entermingle them. So should we both of goods and evils, which are
consubstantiall to our life. Our being cannot subsist without this commixture.
whereto one side is no less necessary than the other. To go about to kick
against natural necessity, were to represent the folly of C^esiphon, who
undertook to strike or wince with his ^ule. I consult but little about the
alterations which I feel: For these kind of men are advantageous, when they
hold you at their mercy. They glut your ears with their Prognostications, and
surprising me heretofore, when by my sickness I was brought very low and
weak, they have injuriously handled me with their Doctrines, positions,
prescriptions, magistrall fopperies and prosopopeyall gravity; sometimes
threatening me with great pain and smart, and othertimes menacing me with near
and unavoidable death: All which did indeed move, stir and touch me near,
but could not dismay, or remoove me from my place or resolution: If my
judgment be thereby neither changed nor troubled, it was at least hindered: It
is ever in agitation and combating. Now I entreat my imagination as gently as
I can, and were it in my power I would clean discharge it of all pain and
contestation. A man must further, help, flatter and (if he can) cozen and
deceive it. My spirit is fit for that office. There is no want of apparances
every where. Did he persuade, as he preaches, he should successefully aid me.
Shall I give you an example? He tells me, it is for my good, that I am troubled
with the gravel: That the compositions of my age, must naturally suffer some
leake or flaw: It is time they begin to relent and gainsay themselves: It
is a common necessity: And it had been no new wonder for me. That way I pay
the reward due unto age, and I could have no better reckoning of it. That such
company ought to comfort me, being fallen into the most ordinary accident
incident to men of my days. I every where see some afflicted with the same
kind of evil; whosesociety is honorable unto me, for so much as it commonly
possesses the better sort of men: and whose essence has a certain nobility
and dignity connexed unto it: That of men tormented therewith, few are better
cheap quit of it: and yet, it costs them the pain of a troublesome diet,
tedious regiment, and daily loath some taking of medicinal drugges and
physical potions: Whereas I merely owe it to my good fortune. For, some
ordinary broths made of Eringos or Sea-Holme, and Burstwort, which twice or
thrice I have swallowed down, at the request of some Ladies, who more kindly
then my disease is unkind, offered me the moity of theirs, have equally seemed
unto me as easy to take, as unprofitable in operation. They must pay a
thousand vows unto Aesculapius, and as many crowns to their Physician, for an
easy profluvion or abundant running of gravel, which I often receive by the
benefit of Nature. Let me be in any company, the decency of my countenance
is thereby nothing troubled; and I can hold my water full ten hours, and if
need be, as long as any man that is in perfect health: The fear of this
evil (says he) did heretofore affright thee, when yet it was unknown to
thee. The cries and despair of those, who through their impatience exasperate
the same; bred a horror of it in thee. It is an evil that comes and falls
into those limbs, by, and with which thou have most offended: Thou art a man
of conscience:

Quae venit indigne paena, dolenda venit. Orid. e^ist. 5. 8.

The pain that comes without desert,
Comes to us with more grief and smart.
Consider but how mild the punishment is, in respect of others, and how
favorable. Consider his slowenesse in coming: he only incommodeth that
state and encombreth that season of thy life, which (all things considered) is
now become barren and lost, having as it were by way of composition given place
unto the sensual licenciousnesse and want on pleasures of thy youth. The fear
and pity, men have of this evil, may serve thee as a cause of glory. A
quality, whereof, if thy judgment be purified and thy discourse perfectly
sound, thy friends do notwithstanding discover some sparks in thy complexion.
It is some plea^ure for a man to hear others say of him: Lo there a pattern
of true fortitude; lo there a mirror of matchless patience. Thou art seen
to sweat with labor, to grow pale and wanne, to wax red, to quake and
tremble, to cast and vomit blood, to endure strange contractions, to brook
convulsions, to trill down brackish and great tears, to make thick, muddie
black, bloody and fearful urine, or to have it stopped by some sharp or
rugged stone, which pricketh and cruelly wringeth the neck of the yard:
entertaining in the mean while the bystanders with an ordinary and undaunted
countenance, by pawses jesting and by entermissions dallying with thy servants:
keeping a part in a continued discourse; with words now and then excusing thy
grief, and abating thy painful sufferance. Do thou remember those men of
former ages, who to keep their virtue in breath and exercise, did with such
greediness seek after evils? Suppose Nature drives and brings thee unto
that glorious School, into which thou had never come of thine own accord
and freewill. If thou tell me, it is a dangerous and mortal evil,: what others
are not so? For, it is a kind of physical cousenage, to except any, and so
they go directly unto death: what matter is it, whether they go by accident
unto it; and easily slide on either hand, toward the way that leads us
thereunto? But thou die not because thou art sick; thou die because thou
art living. Death is able to kill thee without the help of any sickness.
Sickenesses have to some prolonged their death; who have lived the longer,
inasmuch as they imagined they were still dying. Seeing it is of wounds, as of
diseases, that some are medicinal and wholesome. The chollike is often no
less long-lived than you. Many are seen, in whom it has continued even from
their infancy unto their extremest age, who had they not forsaken her company;
she was like to have assisted them further. You oftener kill her, than she does
you. And if she did present thee with the image of neer-imminent death, were it
not a kind office for a man of that age, to reduce it unto the cogitations of
his end? And which is worse, thou have no longer cause to be cured: Thus and
howsoever, common necessity calls for thee against the first day. Consider but
how artificially and how mildely she brings thee in distaste with life, and out
of liking with the world; not forcing thee with a tyrannical subjection, as
infinite other diseases do, wherewith thou see old men possessed. which
continually hold them fettered and ensnared, and without release of weakness
nor intemission of pains but by advertisements and instructions, reprised by
intervalles: entermixing certain pawses of rest, as if it were: to give thee
mean, at thy ease, to meditate and repeat her lesson. To give thee leisure
and ability to judge soundly, and like a man of a courage to take a resolution,
she presents thee with the state of thy condition perfect, both in good and
evil, and in one same day, sometimes a most pleasing, sometimes a most
intolerable life. If thou embrace not death, at least thou shakest her by the
hand once a month. Whereby thou have more cause to hope, that she will one day
surprise thee without threatening. And that being so often brought into the
haven; supposing to be still in thy accustomed state, one morning at unawares,
both thy self and thy confidence shall be transported over. A man has no
reason to complain against those diseases, which so equally divide time with
health. I am beholding to Fortune, that she so often assailes me with one
same kind of weapon: she by long use does fashion and enure me unto it,
harden and habituate me thereunto: I now know within a little which way and
how I shall be quit. For want of natural memory I frame some of paper. And
when some new symptom or accident comes to my evil, I set it down in
writing: whence it proceeds, that having now (in a manner) passed over and
through all sorts of examples, if any astonishment threaten me; running and
turning over these my loose memorialles (as Sybillaes leaves) Imisse no more to
find to comfort me with some favorable prognostication in my former past
experience. Custom does also serve me, to hope the better hereafter. For,
the conduct of this distribution, having so long been constituted, it is to be
supposed that Nature will not change this course, and no other worse accident
shall follow, then that I feel. Moreover, the condition of this disease is not
ill seeming to my ready and sudden complexion. When it but faintly assailes
me, it makes me afraid, because it is like to continue long: But naturally it
has certain vigorous and violent excesses. It does violently shake me for one
or two days. My reins have continued a whole age without alteration, an other
is now well-nigh come, that they have changed state. Evilles as well as goods
have their periodes: this accident is happily come to his last. Age weakeneth
the heat of my stomach: his digestion being thereby less perfect, heesendeth
this crude matter to my reins. Why may not, at a certain revolution, the heat
of my reins be likewise infeobled: so that they may no longer petrifie my
fleagme; and Nature address her self to find some other course of purgation?
Years have evidently made me dry up certain rheumes: And why not these
excrements, that minister matter to the stone or gravel? But is there any
thing so pleasant, in respect of this sudden change, when by an extreme
pain, I come by the voyding of my stone, to recover, as from a lightning, the
fair Sunshine of health; so free and full, as it happens in our sudden
and most violent cholliks? Is there any thing in this pain suffered, that may
be counterpoised to the sweet pleasure of so ready an amendment? By how much
more health seems fairer unto me after sickness, so near and so contiguous,
that I may know them in presence one of another, in their richest ornaments;
wherein they attire themselves avy, as it were confront and counterchecke one
another: Even as the Stoickessay, that Vices were profitablie brought in; to
give esteem and make head unto virtue; So may we with better reason and bold
conjecture, affirm, that Nature has lent us grief and pain, for the honor
of pleasure and service of indolency. When Socrates (after he had his yrons or
fetters taken from him) felt the pleasure or tickling of that itching, which
their weight and rubbing had caused in his legs; he rejoiced, to consider the
near affinity that was between pain and pleasure: how they combined together
by a necessary bond; so that at turns they enter-engender and succeed one an
other: And cry out to good Aesope, that he should from that consideration have
taken a proper body unto a quaint fable. The worst I see in other deseases, is,
that they are not so grievous in their effect, as in their issue. A man is
whole year to recover himself; ever full of weakness, always full of fear.

There is so much hazard and so many degrees before one can be brought to
safety, that heee is never at an end. Before you can leave off your
cover-chiefe and then your nightcappe; before you can the air again, or have
leave to drink Wine, or lie with your Wife, or eat melons, it is much, if you
fall not into some relapse or new misery. The gravel has this privilege,
that it is clean carried away. Whereas other maladies, leave ever some
impression and alteration, which leaves the body susceptible or undertaking of
some new infirmity; and they lend one an other their hands. Such are to be
excused, as are contented with the possession they have over us, without
extending the same, and without introducing their sequel: But courteous, kind
and gracious are those, whose passage brings us some profitable consequence.
Since I have had the stone-chollike, I find my self discharged of other
accidents: more (as me thinks) then I was before, and never had ague since. I
argue, that the extreme and frequent vomites I endure, purge me; and on the
other side, the distastes and strange abstinences I tolerate, digest my
offending humors: and Nature voydeth in these stones and gravel, whatsoever
is superfluous and hurtefull in her. Let no man tell me, that it is a medicine
too dear sold. For, what avail so many loathsome pills, stinking potions,
cauterizings, incisions, sweatings, setons, dyets and so diverse fashions of
curing, which, because we are not able to undergo their violence and brook
their importunity, do often bring us unto our graves? And therefore, when I am
surprised, I take it as physic: and when I am free, I take it as a constant
and full deliverance. Lo here an other particular favor of my disease, which
is, that he in a manner, keeps his play apart, and let us me keep mine own;
or else I want but courage to do it: In his greatest emotion, I have held out
ten hours on Horseback with him. Do but endure, you need no other rule
or regiment: Play, dally, dyne, run, be gamesome, do this, and if you can,
do the other thing, your disorder and debauching will rather avail than hurt
it. Say thus much to one that has the pox, or to one that has the gowt, or to
one that is belly-broken or codburst. Other infirmites have more universal
bonds, torment farre-otherwise our actions, pervert al our order, and engage
all the state of man's life unto their consideration: Whereas this does only
twitch and pinch the skin, it neither medleth with your understanding, nor
with your will, tongue, feet nor hands, but leaves them all in your
disposition; it rather rouzeth and awaketh you, then deter and drouzie you.
The mind is wounded by the burning of a fever suppressed by an Epilepsie,
confounded by a migrane, and in conclusion, astonished and dismayed by all the
diseases that touch or wound the whole mass of his body, and it is noblest
parts: This never medleth with it. If therefore it go ill with it, his be the
blame: she bewrays, she forsakes and she displaceth herself. None but fools
will be persuaded, that this hard, gretty and massy body, which is concocted
and petrified in our kidneis, may be dissolved by drinks. And therefore after
it is stirred, there is no way, but to give it passage* For if you do not, he
will take it himself. This other peculiar commodity I observe, that it is an
infirmity, wherein we have but little to divine. We are dispensed from the
trouble, whereinto other maladies cast us, by the uncertainty of their causes,
conditions and progresses. A trouble infinitely painful. We have no need of
doctorall consultations, or collegiall interpretations. Our senses tell us
where it is, and what it is. By, and with such arguments, forcible or weak (as
Cicero does the infirmity of his old age) I endeavor to lull asleep, and study
to ammuse my imagination, and supple or annoint her sores. If they grow worse
to morrow; to morrow we shall provide for new remedies or escapes. That this is
true: lo afterward again, happly the lightest motion wrings pure blood out of
my reins. And what of that? I omit not to stir as before, and with a
youthful and insolent heat ride after my hound. And find that I have great
reason of so important an accident, which costs me but a deaf heaviness and
dombe alteration in that part. It is some great stone that wastes and
consumes the substance of my kidneis and my life, which I avoyde by little and
little: not without some natural pleasure, as an excrement now superfluous and
troublesome. And feel I something to shake? Except not that I ammuse my self
to feel my pulse or look into my urine, thereby to find or take some tedious
prevention. I shall come time enough to feel the smart, without lengthening
the same with the pain of fear. Who fears to suffer, suffers already,
because he fears.

Seeing the doubt and ignorance of those, who will and do meddle with
expounding the drifts and shifts of nature, with her internal progress; and
so many false prognostications of their art should make us understand her
means infinitely unknown. There is great uncertainty, variety and obscurity,
in that she promises and menaceth us. Except oldage, which is an undoubted
sign, of deaths approaching: of all other accidents, I see few signs of future
things, whereon we may ground our divination. I only judge my self by
true-feeling sense and not by discourse: To what end? since I will add nothing
thereunto except attention and patience. Will you know what I gain by it?
Behold those who do otherwise, and who depend on so many diverse persuasions
and counselles; how often imagination presses them without the body. I have
diverse times being in safety and free from all dangerous accidents, taken
pleasure to communicate them unto Physicians, as but then coming upon me. I
endured the arrest or doom of their horrible conclusions, and remained so much
the more bounden unto God for his grace, and better instructed of the vanity of
this art. Nothing ought so much be recommended unto youth, as activitie and
vigilancie. Our life is nothing but motion, I am hardly shaken, and am slow in
all things, be it to rise, to go to bed, or to my meals. Seven of the
clock in the morning is to me an early hour: And where I may command, I
neither dine before eleven, norsup till after six. I have heretofore imputed
the cause of agues or maladies, whereinto I have fallen, to the lumpish
heaviness or drowzy dullness, which my long sleeping had caused me. And ever
repented me to fall asleep again in the morning. Plato condemns more the
excess of sleeping, then the surfeit of drinking. I love to lie hard and alone,
yea and without a woman by me: after the kingly manner: some what well and
warm covered. I never have my bed warmed; but since I came to be an old man,
if need require, I have clothes given me to warm my feet my stomach. Great
Scipio was taxed to be a sluggard or heavy sleeper (in my conceit) for no
oother cause, but that men were offended, he only should be the man, in whom
no fault might justly be found. If there be any curiosity in my behavior or
manner of life, it is rather about my going to bed, then any thing else; but if
need be, I generally yield and accommodate my self unto necessity, as well
and as quietly, and any other whosoever. Sleeping has possessed a great part
of my life: and as old as I am, I can sleep eight or nine hours together. I
do with profit withdraw my self from this sluggish propension, and evidently
find my self better by it. Indeed I somewhat feel the stroke of alteration,
but in three days it is past. And I see few that live with less (when need
is) and that more constantly exercise themselves, nor whom toyling and labor
offend less. My body is capable of a firm agitation, so it be not vehement
and sudden. I avoid violent exercises, and which induce me to sweat: my
limbs will sooner be wearied, then heated. I can stand a whole day long, and am
seldom weary with walking. Since my first age, I ever loved rather to ride
then walk upon paved streets. Going a foot, I shall durty my self up to the
waste: and little men, going along our streets, are subject (for want of
presentiall appearance) to be justled or elbowed. I love to take my rest, be it
sitting or lying-along, with my legs as high or higher then my seat. No
profession or occupation is more pleasing then the military; A profession or
exercise, both noble in execution (for, the strongest, most generous and
prowdest of all virtues, is true valor) and noble in it is cause. No utility,
is either more just or universal then the protection of the repose, or defense
of the greatness of ones country, The company and daily conversation of so
many noble, young and active men, cannot but be well-pleasing to you: the daily
and ordinary sight of so diverse tragical spectacles: the liberty and
uncontrolled freedom of that artelesse and unaffected conversation, masculine
and ceremonilesse manner of life: the hourly variety of a thousand ever
changing and differing actions: the courageous and mind stirring harmony of
warlike music, which at once entertaineth with delight and enflameth with
longing, both your ears and your mind: the iminent and matchless honor of
that exercise: yea the very sharpness and difficulty of it, which Plato
esteems so little, that in his imaginary commonwealth, he imparteth the same
both to women and to children. As a voluntary Soldier, or adventurous knight
you enter the lists, the bands or particular hazards, according as your self
judge of their successes or importance: and you see when your life may therein
be excusably employed,

pulchrumque morisuccurrit in armis. Virg. Aen. lib 3 317.

And nobly it does come in mind,
To die in arms may honor find.
Basely to fear common dangers, that concerneso numberless a multitude, and
not to dare, whatso many sorts of men dare, yea whole nations together, is
only incident to base, craven and milke-sop-hearts. Company and good
fellowship does harten and encourage children. If some chance to exceed and
outgoe you in knowledge, in experience, in grace, in strength, in fortune, you
have third and collateral causes to blame and take hold-of; but to yield to
them in constancy of mind, and resolution of courage, you have none but
yourselfe to find fault with. Death is much more abject, languishing, grisly
and painful in a downe-bed, then in a field-combate; and agues, catarres or
apoplexies, as painful and mortal, as an harquebusado. He that should be
made vndantedly to bear the accidents of common life, should not need to
bumbast his courage, to become a man at arms. Vivere, mi Lucilli, milis are
est. Friend mine, Se^. epist. 96. f.
to live is to go onwarre-fare. I can not remember that ever I was scabbed:
yet is itching one of natures sweetest gratifications, and as ready at hand.
But repentance does over-importunately attend on it. I exercise the same in
mine ears (and by fits) which within do often itch. I was borne with all my
senses sound, almost in perfection. My stomach is commodiously good; and so is
my head: both which, together with my wind, maintain them selves athwart my
agues. I have outlived that age, to which some nations have not without some
reason prescribed for a just end unto life, that they allowed not a man to
exceed the same. I have notwithstanding some remyses or intermissions yet:
though unconstant and short, so sound and neat, that there is little
difference between them and the health and indolencie of my youth. I speak
not of youthly vigor and cheerful blithnesse; there is noreason they should
follow me beyond their limits:

Non haec amplius est liminis, aut aquae Hor. car. lib. 3. ^d. 10. 15.

Coelestis, patiens latus.
These sides cannot still sustain,
Lying without doors, showring rain.
My visage and eyes do presently discover me. Thence begin all my changes,
and somewhat sharper then they are in effect. I often moove my friends to
pity, ere I feel the cause of it. My looking glass does not amaze me: for
even in my youth it has diverse times befalne me, so to put-on a duskie look,
a wanne color, a troubled behavior and of ill presage, without any great
accident; so that Physicians perceiving no inward cause to answer this outward
alteration, ascribed the same to the secret mind or some concealed passion,
which inwardly gnawed and consumed me. They were deceived, were my body
directly by me, as is my mind, we should march a little more at our ease. I
had it then, not only exempted from all trouble, but also full of satisfaction
and blithenesse, as it is most commonly, partly by it is own complexion, and
partly by it is own desseigne:

Nec vitiant art us aegrae contagia mentis. Ov^d. Triss. l. 3. ^^. 8. 25.

Nor does sick minds infection,
Pollute strong joints complexion.
I am of opinion, that this her temperature has often raised my body from his
fallings: he is often suppressed, whereas she, if not lasciviously wanton, at
least in quiet and reposed estate. I had a quartan ague which held me four or
five months, and had altogether disvisaged and altered my countenance, yet my
mind held ever out, not only peaceably but pleasantly. So I feel no pain ot
smarte; weakness and languishing do not greatly perplex me. I see diverse
corporal defailances, the only naming of which breed a kind of horror, and
which I would fear less then a thousand passions and agitations of the mind,
which I see in use. I resolve to run no more: it suffices me to goe-on fair
and softly; nor do I complain of their natural decadence or empairing that
possesses me,

Quis tumidum guttur miratur in Alpibus? I^^^n. sat. 13. 152.

Who wonders a swollen throat to see,
In those about the Alps that be?
No more, then I grieve that my continuance is not as long and sound, as that
of an oske. I have no cause to find fault with my imagination. I have in my
life had very few thoughts or cares, that have so much as interrupted the
course of my sleep, except of desire, to awaken without dismay or afflicting
me. I seldom dream, and when I do, it is of extravagant things and chymeras;
commonly produced of pleasant conceits, rather ridiculous then sorrowful. And
think it true, that dreams are the true interpretors of our inclinations: but
great skill is required to sort and understand them.

Res quae in vit a vsurpant homines, cogitant, curant, vident,
Quaeque agunt vigilantes, agitant que ea sicut insomno accidunt
Minus mirandum est.
It is no wonder if the things, which we
Care-for, use, think, do often, or waking see.
Unto us sleeping represented be.
Plato says moreover, that is the office of wisdom to draw divining
instructions from them, against future times. Wherein I see nothing but the
wonderful experience, that Socrates, Xenophon and Aristotle relate of them:
men of vnreproovable authority. Histories report, that the inhabitants of the
Atlantique Isles never dream: who feed on nothing that has been slain.
Which I add, because it is peradventure the occasion the dream not.
Pythagoras ordained therefore a certain method of feeding, that dreams might
be sorted of some purpose. Mine are tender, and cause no agitation of body or
expression of voice in me. I have in my days seen many strangely stirred
with them. Theon the Philosopher walked in dreaming; and Pericles his boy went
upon the tiles and top of houses. I stand not much on nice choice of meats at
the table: and commonly begin with the first and nearest dish: and leap not
willingly from one taste to another. Multitude of dishes, and variety of
services displease me as much as any other throng. I am easily pleased with
few messes and hate the opinion of Favorinus, that at a banquet you must have
that dish whereon you feed hungerly taken from you, and ever have a new one
set in the place: And that it is a niggardly supper, if all the guests be not
glutted with pinions and rumps of diverse kinds of foul: and that only the
dainty bird heccafico or snapfig deserves to be eaten whole at one morsel.
I feed much upon salt cates and love to have my bread somewhat fresh: And
mine own Baker makes none other for my board; against the fashion of my
country. In my youth, my overseers had much ado to reform the refusal I
made of such meats as youth does commonly love best, as sweete-meates, confets
and marchpanes. My Tutor was wont to find great fault with my lothing of such
dainties, as a kind of squeamish delicacie. And to say truth, it is nothing
but a difficulty of taste, where it once is applied. Whosoever remooveth from
a child a certain particular or obstinate affection to brown bread, to
bakon, or to garlike, takes friandize from him. There are some, that make it a
labor, and think it a patience to regret a good piece of powdered beef, or a
good gammon of bakon, amongst partridges. Are not they wise men in the mean
time? It is the chief dainty of all dainties: It is the taste of nice
effeminate fortune, that will be distasted with ordinary and usual things.
Per quae luxuria divitiarum taedio ludit. Whereby the lavistinesse of plenty;
plays with tedious pleasure. To forbear to make good cheer, because another
does it; for one to have care of his feeding, is the essence of that vice.

Si modica caenare times olus omne patella. H^rd. 1. ep^. 5. 2

If in a sorry dish to sup
You brook not all th'hearbe pottage up.
Indeed there is this difference, that it is better for one to tie his desires
unto things easiest to be gotten, yet is it a vice to tie himself to any
stricktnesse. I was heretofore wont to name a kinsman of mine over delicate,
because, whilst he lived in our Galleys, he had vnlearn't and left to lie
upon a bed, and to strippe himself to go to bed. Had I any malechildren,
I should willingly wish them my fortune. That good Father, it pleased God to
allot me (who has nothing of me but thankfulness for his goodness, which
indeed, is as great as great may be) even from my cradle sent me to be
brough-vp in a poor village of his, where he kept me so long as I sucked, and
somewhat longer: breeding me after the meanest and simplest-common fashion:
Magna pars libertatis est been moratus venture. A mannerly Sen epist. 123.
belly is a great part of a man's liberty. Never take unto your self, and much
less never give your wives the charge of your childrens breeding or education.
Let fortune frame them under the popular and natural Laws: Let custom enure
them to frugality, and breed them to hardness: That they may rather descend
from sharpness, than ascend unto it: His conceit aimed also at another end;
To acquaint and re-aly me, with that people and condition of men that have most
need of us: And thought I was rather bound to respect those which extend their
arms unto me, than such as turn their back toward me. And that was the
reason he chose no other gossips to hold me at the so^, than men of abject and
base fortune, that so I might the more be bound and tied unto them. His purpose
has not altogeher succeeded ill. I willingly give and accost my self unto the
meaner sort; whether it be because there is more glory gotten by them, or
through some natural compassion, which in me is infinitely powerful. The
faction which I condemn in our civil wars, I shall more sharply condemn
when it prospers and flourishes. I shall in some sort be reconciled unto it,
when I see it miserably-depressed and over whelmed. Oh how willingly do I
remember that worthy humor of Chelonis, daughter and wife to Kings of Sparta.
Whilst Cleombrotus her husband, in the tumultuous disorders of his City, had
the upper hand of Leonidas her father, she played the part of a good daughter:
alliyng her self with her father, in his exile and in his misery, mainely
opposing her self against the Conqueror: Did fortune turn? So changed she
her mind, couragionsly taking her husbands part: Whom she never forsook,
whether-soever his ruin or distress carried him. Having (in my seeming) no
other choice, than to follow that side, where she might do most good, where
she was most wanted, and where she might show her self most truly pitiful.
I do more naturally incline toward the example of Flamineus, who more and
rather yielded to such as had need of him, than to those who might do him
good: than I bend unto that of Pyrrhus, who was ever wont, demissely to stoop
and yield to the mighty, and insolently to grow proud over the weak. Long
sitting at meals does much weary and distemper me: for, be it for want of
better countenance and entertainment, or that I used my self unto it when I
was a child, I seed as long as I sit at the table. And therefore, being in
mine own house, though my board be but short, and that we use not to sit
long, I do not commonly sit down with the first, but a pretty while after
others: According to the form of Augustus: yet I imitate him not in his rising
before others. Contrary, I love to sit a great while after, and to hear some
discourse or table-talke. Always provided I bear not a part my self, for, if
my belly be full, I shall soon be weary, and hurt my self with talking: and
I find the exercise of lowde-speaking and contesting before meat very
pleasant and wholesome. The ancient Graecians and Romans had better reason
than we, allotting unto feeding, which is a principal action of man's life (if
any other extraordinary business did not let or divert them from it) diverse
hours, and the best part of the night: eating and drinking more leisurely than
we do, who pass and run over all our actions in post-haste: and extending
this natural pleasure unto more leisure and use: entermixing therewith diverse
profitable and mind-pleasing offices of civil conversation. Such as have care
of me, may easily steal from me what soever they imagine may be hurtful for
me: inasmuch as about my feeding, I never desire or find fault with that I see
not: That Proverb is verified in me; What eye sees not, the heart rueth not.
But if a dish or any thing else be once set before me, they loose their labor,
that goabout to tell me of abstinence: so that, when I am disposed to fast I
must be sequestered from eaters, and have no more set before me, than may serve
for a stinted and regular collation: for if I but ^itte down at a set table,
I forget my resolution. If I chance to bid my cook change the dressing of
some kind of meat or dish, all my men know, I infer my appetite is
wallowish and my stomach out of ordeer, and I shall hardly touch it. I love
all manner of flesh or soul but green roasted and raw sodden, namely, such as
may bear it without danger; and love to have them thoroughly mortified; and in
diverse of them the very alteration of their smell. Only hardness or
toughness of meat does generally molest me (of all other qualities. I am as
careless, and can as well brook them, as any man that ever I knew) so that
(contrary to received opinion) even amongst fishes, I shall find some, both
too new and over-hard and firm, It is not the fault or want of teeth, which I
ever had as perfectly-sound and complete as any other man: and which but now,
being so old, begin to threaten me. I have from my infancy learnd to rub
them with my napkin, both in the morning when I rise, and sitting down and
rising from the table. God does them a grace, from whom by little and little he
does substract their life. It is the only benefit of old age. Their last
death shall be so much the less full, languishing and painful: it shall then
kill but one half or quarter of a man. Even now I lost one of my teeth, which
of it self fell out, without struggling or pain: it was the natural term of
it is continuance. That part of my being, with diverse others, are already dead
and mortified in me, others of the most active, half dead, and which, during
the vigor of my age held the first rank. Thus I sink and escape from my self.
What foolishnes will it be in my understanding, to feel the start of that
fall, already so advaunced, as if it were perfectly whole? I hope it not;
verily I receive a special comfort in thinking on my death, and that it shall
be of the most just and natural: and cannot now require or hope other favor of
destiny, concerning that, then unlawful. Men persuade themselves, that as
heretofore they have had a higher stature, so their lives were longer; But they
are deceived: for Solon, of those ancient times, though he were of an exceeding
high stature, his life continued but 70. years. Shall I, that have so much and
so universally adored, that (...), a mean is best, of former times; and have
ever taken a mean measure for the most perfect, therefore pretend a most
prodigious and unmeasurable life? whatsoever comes contrary to Natures
course, may be combersome, but what comes according to her, should ever please.
Omnia quae secundum naturam fiunt, sunt habenda in bonis. All things are to be
accounted good, that are done according to nature. And therefore (says Plato)
is that death violent, which is caused either by wounds or sicknesses; but
that of all others the easiest and in some sort delitious, which surprizeth us
by means of age. Vitam adolescentibus vis aufert, senibus maturitas. A
forcible violence takes their life from the young, but a ripe maturitie from
the old. Death entermedleth, and every where confounds it self with our life:
declination does preoccupate her hour, and insinuate it self in the very
course of our advauncement: I have pictures of mine own, that were drawn when
I was five and twenty, and others being thirty years of age, which I often
compare with such as were made by me, as I am now at this instant. How many
times do I say, I am no more my self; how much is my present image further
from those, then from that of my decease? It is an overgreat abuse unto nature
to dragge and hurry her so far, that she must be forced to give us over;
and abandon our conduct, our eyes, our teeth, our legs and the rest, to the
mercy of a foreign help and begged assistance: and to put our selves into the
hands of art, weary to follow us. I am not overmuch or greedily desirous of
sallets or of fruits, except melons. My father hated all manner of sawces; I
love them all. Overmuch eating does hurt and distemper me: but for the
quality I have yet no certain knowledge that any meat offends me: I never
observe either a full or wained Moon, nor make a difference between the
Spring time or Autumn. There are certain inconstant and unknown motions in
us. For (by way of example) I have heretofore found redish-rootes to be very
good for me, then very hurtful, and now again very well agreeing with my
stomach. In diverse other things, I feel my appetite to change, and my
stomach to diversifie from time to time. I have altered my course of drinking,
sometimes from white to claret wine, and then from claret to white again.

I am very friand and gluttonous of fish; and keep my shroving days upon fish
days; and my seasts upon fasting-dayes. I believe as some others do, that
fish is of lighter disgestion than flesh. As I make it a conscience to eat
flesh upon a fish day, so does my taste to eat fish and flesh together. The
diversity between them, seems to me over-distant. Even from my youth I was
wont now and then to steal some repast, either that I might sharpen my stomach
against the next day; for, (as Epicurus was wont to fast, and made but sparing
meals, thereby to accustom his voluptuousness, to neglect plenty: I,
contrary to him to enure my sensuality to speed the better, and more merrily
to make use of plenty) or else I fasted, the better to maintain my vigor for
the service or performaunce of some bodily or mental action: for both are
strangely dulled and ideled ^^ me, through overmuch fullness and
repleatenesse. (And above all, I hate that foolish combination, of so sound and
bucksome a Goddess, with that indigested and belching God all puffed with the
^ume of his liquor) or to recover my crazed stomach, or because I wanted some
good company. And I say as Epicuria said, that A man should not so much
respect* what he eats, as with whom he eats. And commend Chilon; that he
would not promise to come to Periander's feast, before he knew certainly who
were the other bidden g^^sts. No viends are so sweetly pleasing, nor no sauce
so tastefull, as that which is drawn from conversable and mutual society. I
think it wholesome to eat more leisurely, and less in quantity, and to feed
oftener: But I will have appetite and hunger to be endeared: I should find no
pleasure, after a physical manner, to swallow three or four forced and spare
meals a day. Who can assure me, if I have a good taste or stomach in the
morning, that I shall have it again at supper? Let us old men; let us, I say,
take the first convenient time that comes: Let us leave hopes and
prognostikes unto Almanacke-makers. The extreme fruit of my health, is
pleasure: Let us hold fast on the present, and to us known. I eschew
constancy in these Laws of fasting. Who so will have a form to serve him,
let him avoid continuance of it: but we harden our selves unto it, and
thereunto wholly apply our forces: six months after, you shall find your
stomach so enured unto it, that you shall have gotten nothing but this, to have
lost the liberty to use it otherwise without damage. I use to go with my
legs and thighs no more covered in Summer than in Winter; for I never wear
but one pair of single like-stockins. For the easing of my rheum and help of
my chollike, I have of late used to keep my head and belly warm. My
infirmities did in few days habituate themselves thereunto, and disdained my
ordinary provisions. From a single night-cappe, I came to a double coverchef,
and from a bonnet, to a lined and quilted hat. The bum basting of my doublet,
serves me now for no more use then a stomacher: it is a thing of nothing,
unless I add a hare or a vultures skin to it; and some warm wrapping about
my head. Follow this gradation and you shall go a fair pace, I will do no
such thing. If I durst I could find in my hare to revoke the beginning I have
given unto it. Fall you into any new inconvenience? This reformation will no
longer avail you. You are so accustomed unto it, that you are driven to seek
some new one. So are they overthrown, that suffer themselves with forced
formalities or strict rules, to be entangled, and do supersticiously constrain
themselves unto them: they have need of more, and of more after that: they
never come to an end. It is much more commodious both for our business and for
our pleasure (as did our forefathers) to loose our dinner, and defer making
of good cheer, unto the hour of withdrawing and of rest, without interrupting
the day: So was I wont to do heretofore. I have for my health found out since
by experience, that on the contrary, it is better to dine, and that one shall
digest better being awake. Whether I be in health or in sickness, I am not
much subject to be thirsty: indeed my mouth is somewhat dry, but without
thirst. And commonly I use not to drink, but when with eating I am forced to
desire it, and that is when I have eaten well. For a man of an ordinary stature
I drink indifferent much. In Summer, and at an hungry meal, I not only
exceed the limits of Augustus, who drunk but precisely three times: but, not
to offend the rule of Democritus, who forbade us to stay at four, as an
unlucky number; if need be, I come to five: Three demisextiers, or there
abouts. I like little glasses best; and I love to empty my glass: which some
others dislike, as a thing unseemly. Sometimes, and that very often, I temper
my wine one half, and many times three parts with water. And when I am in
mine own house, from an ancient custom, which my fathers physician ordained
both for him, and himself, look what quantity of Wine is thought will serve
me a meal, the same is commonly tempered two or three hours before it be
served in, and so kept in the seller. It is reported, that Cranaus King of the
Athenians, was the first, that invented the mingling of Wine with Water.
Whether it were profitable or no, I will not now dispute or stand upon. I
think it more decent and more wholesome, that children should drink no Wine,
until they be past the age of sixteen or eighteen years. The most usual
and common form of life, is the best: Each particularity, does in mine opinion
impugn it. And I should as much detest a Germane, that should put Water in his
Wine, as a Frenchman, that should drink it pure. Public custom gives Law
unto such things. I fear a foggy and thick air, and ^hunne smoke more than
death; (the first thing I began to repair when I came to be master of mine
own house, was the chimnies and privies, which, in most of our buildings, is a
general and intolerable fault) and mischiefs and difficulties attending on
War, there is none I hate more, than in hot-sweltring wether, to ride up and
down all the day-long in smokie dust, as many times our Soldiers are feign to
do. I have a free and easy respiration, and do most commonly passover my
murres and colds without offense to my lungs, or without coughing. The soultry
heat of summer is more offensive to me, than the sharpness of Winter: for,
Besides the incommodity of heat, which is less to be remedied, than the
inconvenience of cold; and besides the force of the Suns beams, which strike
into the head, mine eyes are much offended with any kind of glittring or
sparkling light; so that I cannot well sit at dinner over against a
cleare-burning fire. To allay or dim the whiteness of paper, when I was most
given to reading, I was wont to lay a piece of green glass upon my book, and
was thereby much eased. Hitherto I never used spectakles, nor know not what
they mean; and can yet see as far as ever I could, and as any other man;
true it is, that when night comes, I begin to perceive a dimnes and weakness
in reading; the continual exercise whereof, and specially by night, was ever
somewhat troublesome unto mine eyes. Loe-heere a steppe-backe, and that very
sensible. I shall recoyle no more, from a second to a third, and from a third
to a fourth, so gently, that before I feel the declination and age of my
sight, I must be stark blind. So artificial do the Fates untwist our
lives-threede. Yet am I in doubt, that my hearing is about to become thick:
and you shall see, that I shall have lost it half, when yet I shall find fault
with their voices that speak unto me. The mind must be strained to a high
pitch, to make it perceive how it declineth. My going is yet very nimble,
quick and stout; and I wot not which of the two I can more hardly stay at
one instant, either my mind or my body. I must like that preacher well, that
can tie mine attention to a whole sermon. In places of ceremonies, where every
man does so nicely stand upon countenance, where I have seen Ladies hold their
eyes so steady, I could never so hold out, but some part of mine would ever be
gadding: although I be sitting there, I am not well settled. As Chrysippus the
Philosophers chamber-maide, said of her Master, that he was never drunk but
in his legs; for whersoever he sat, he was ever accustomed to be wagging
with them: and this she said at what time store of Wine had made his
companions cuppe-shotten, and yet he felt no alteration but continued sober in
mind. It might likewise have been said of me, that even from mine infancy,
I had either folly or quicke-silver in my feet, so much stirring and natural
inconstancy have I in them, where ever I place them. It is unmannerliness, and
prejudicial unto health, yea and to pleasure also, to feed grosely and
greedily, as I do. I shall sometimes through haste bite my tongue and fingers
ends. Diogenes meeting with a child, that did eat so, gave his tutor a
whirret on the ear. There were men in Rome, that as others teach youth to go
with a good grace, so they taught men to chew, with decency, I do sometimes
loose the leisure to speak, which is so pleasing an entertainment at the
table, provided they be discourses short, witty and pleasant. There is a kind
of jelosie and envy between our pleasures, and they often shocke and hinder
one an other. Alcibiades, a man very exquisitely-skilfull in making good
cheer, inhibited all manner of music at tables, because it should not hinder
the delight of discourses, for the reason which Plato affords him: that it is a
custom of populare or base men to call for minstrels or singers at feasts, and
an argument, they want witty or good discourses, and pleasing entertainment,
wherewith men of conceit and understanding know how to enterfeast and
entertain themselves. Varro requires this at a bancket: an assembly of
persons, fair, goodly and handsome of presence, affable and delightful in
conversation, which must not be dumb nor dull, sullaine nor slovenly:
cleanliness and neatness in meats: and fair wether. A good minde-pleasing
table-entertainement, is not a little voluptuous feast, nor a meanly
artificial banquet. Neither great or stern commanders in Wars, nor famous
or strict Philosophers have disdained the use or knowledge of it. My
imagination has bequeathed three of them to the keeping of my memory, only
which* fortune did at several times, yield exceedingly delightsome unto me. My
present state does now exclude me from them. For, every one, according to the
good temper of body or mind, wherein he finds himself, adds either
principal grace or taste unto them. My self, who but grovell on the ground,
hate that kind of inhumane wisdom, which would make us disdainefull and
enemies of the bodies reformation. I deem it an equal injustice, either to
take natural sensualities against the heart, or to take them too near the
heart. Xerxes was a ninny-hammer, who enwrapped and given to all humane
voluptuousness, proposed rewards for those, that should devise such as he had
never heard-of. And he is not much behind him in sottishness, that goes about
to abridge those, which nature has divised for him. One should neither follow
nor avoyde them: but receive them. I receive them somewhat more amply and
graciously, and rather am contented to follow natural inclination. We need
not exaggerate their inanity: it will sufficiently be felt, and does
sufficiently produce it self. Godamercy our weak, crazed and joy-diminishing
spirit, which makes us distaste both them and himself. He treats both
himself and whatsoever he receives sometimes forward and othertimes backward,
according as himself is either insaciate, vagabond, newfangled or variable.

Sincerum est nisi vas, quod cunque infundis, accescit. Hor l. 1. epist. 2 54.

In no sweet vessel all you pour,
In such a vessel soon will sour.
My self, who brag so curiously to embrace and particularly to allow the
commodities of life; whenever I look precisely into it. I find nothing
therein but wind. But what? we are nothing but wind. And the very wind also,
more wisely then we, loves to bluster and to be in agitation: And is pleased
with his own offices: without desiring stability or solidity; qualities that
be not his own. The mere pleasures of imagination, as well as dis pleasure
(say some) are the greatest: as the balance of Critolaus did express. It is
no wonder, she composeth them at her pleasure, and cuts them out of the whole
cloth. I see daily some notable presidents of it, and peradventure to be
desired. But I, that am of a commixt condition, homely and plain, cannot so
thoroughly bite on that only and so simple object: but shall grosely and
carelessly give my self over to the present delights, of the general and
humane law. Intellectualy sensible, and sensiby-intellectuall. The Cyrenaique
Philosophers are of opihion, that as griefs, so corporal pleasures are more
powerful; and as double, so, more just. There are some (as Aristotle says)
who with a savage kind of stupidity, will seem distastefull or squemish of
them. Some others I know, that do it out of ambition. Why renounce they not
also breathing? why live they not of their own, and refuse light, because it
comes of gratuitie; and costs them neither invention nor vigor? That Mars, or
Pallas, or Mercury, should nourish them to see, insteade of Ceres, Venus, or
Bacchus. Will they not seek for the quadrature of the circle, even upon their
wives? I hate that we should be commanded to have our minds in the clouds,
whilst our bodies are sitting at the table: yet would I not have the mind to
be fastened thereunto, nor wallow upon it, nor lie along thereon, but to apply
it self and sit at it. Aristippus defended but the body, as if we had no
soul: Zeno embraced but the soul, as if we had no body. Both viciously,
Pythagoras (say they) has followed a Philosophy, all in contemplation:
Socrates altogether in manners and in action: Plato has found a mediocritie
between both. But they say so by way of discourse. For, the true temperature
is found in Socrates; and Plato is more Socraticall then Pythagorica^, and it
becomes him best. When I dance, I dance; and when I sleep, I sleep. And when
I am solitary walking in a fair orchard, if my thoughts have a while
entertained themselves with strange occurrences, I do another while bring them
to walk with me in the orchard, and to be partakers of the pleasure of that
solitariness and of my self. Nature has like a kind mother observed this,
that such actions as she for our necessityes has enjoined unto us, should
also be voluptuous unto us. And does not only by reason but also by appetite
envite us unto them: it were injustice to corrupt her rules. When I behold
Caesar and Alexander in the thickest of their wondrous great labors, so
absolutely to enjoy humane and corporal pleasures, I say not, that they
release thereby their mind, but rather strengthen the same; submitting by
vigor of courage their violent occupation, and laborious thoughts to the
customary use of ordinary life. Wise had they been, had they believed, that
that was their ordinary vocation, and this their extraordinary. What egregious
fools are we ^ He has past his life in idleness, say we; alas I have done
nothing this day. What? have you not lived? It is not only the fundamental,
but the noblest of your occupation. Had I been placed or thought fit for the
managing of great affairs, I would have showed what I could have performed.
Have you known how to meditate and manage your life? you have accomplished the
greatest work of all. For a man to show and exploite himself, nature has no
need of fortune, she equally shows herself upon all grounds, in all suits,
before and behind, as it were without curtines, welt or guarde. Have you
known how to compose your manners? you have done more than he who has
composed books. Have you known how to take rest? you have done more then he,
who has taken Empires and Cities. The glorious master piece of man, is, to
live to the purpose. All other things, as to reign, to govern, to hoard up
treasure, to thrive and to build, are for the most part but appendixes and
supportes thereunto. It is to me a great pleasure, to see a General of an
army at the foot of a breach, which he ere long intends, to charge or
enter; all whole, vndistracted and carelessly to prepare himself, whilst he
sits at dinner with his friends about him, to talk of any matter. And I am
delighted to see Brutus, having both heaven and earth conspired against him and
the liberty of Rome, by stealth to take some hours of the night from his other
cares and walking of the round, in all security to read, to note and to
abbreviate Polibius. It is for base and petty minds, dulled and overwhelmed
with the weight of affairs, to be ignorant how to leave them, and not to know
how to free themselves from them; nor how to leave and take them again.

O fortes peior aque passi, Hor. ^^^ l 1. ^^. 7. 30.

Mecum s^pe viri, nunc vino pellite curas,
Cras ingens iterabimus aequor.
Valiant compeeres, who often have worse endured
With me, let now with wine your cares be cured:
To morrow we again
Will launch into the maine.
Whether it be in jest or earnest, that the Sorbo^icall or theological wine,
and their feasts or gaudy days are now come to be proverbially jested-at: I
think there is some reason, that by how much more profitably and seriously
they have bestowed the morning in the exercise of their schools, so much more
commodiously and pleasantly should they dine at noone. A clear conscience to
have well employed and industriously spent the other hours, is a perfect
seasoning and savory condiment of tables. So have wise men lived. And that
inimitable contention unto virtue, which so amazeth us, in both Catoes, their
so strictly-severe humor, even unto importunity, has thus mildely submitted
my self, and taken pleasure in the laws of humane condition, and in Venus and
Bacchus. According to their Sects-precepts, which require a perfectly wise man,
to be fully-expert and skillful in the true use of sensualities, as in all
other duties or devoires belonging to life. Cui cor sapiat, ei and sapiat
palatus. Cic fin. l. b. 2.
Let his palate be savory, whose heart is savory. Easie-yeelding and facility
does in my conceit, greatly honor, and is best befitting a magnanimous and
noble mind. Epaminondas thought it no scorn, to thrust himself amongst the
boys of his city, and dance with them, yea and to sing and play, and with
attention busy himself, were it in things that might derogate from the honor
and reputation of his glorious victories, and from the perfect reformation of
manners, that was in him. And amongst so infinite admirable actions of Scipio
the grandfather, a man worthy to be esteemed of heavenly race, nothing adds
so much grace unto him, as to see him carelessly to dally and childishly to
trifle, in gathering and choosing of cockle-shells, and play at cost castle
along the sea-shoare with his friend L^lius. And if it were foul whether,
ammusing and solacing himself, to represent in writing and commedies the most
popular and base actions of men. And having his head continually busied with
that wonderful enterprise against Hanniball and Affricke, yet he still
visited the schools in Cicilie, and frequented the lectures of Philosophy,
arming his enemies teeth at Rome with envy and spite. Nor any thing more
remarkable in Socrates, then, when being old and crazed, he would spare so
much time as to be instructed in the art of dancing and playing upon
instruments; and thought the time well bestowed. Who notwithstanding has been
seen to continue a whole day and night in an ecstasy or trance, yea ever
standing on his feet, in presence of all the Greek army, as it were
surprised and ravished by some deed and minde-distracting thought. He has
been noted to be the first, amongst so infinite valiant men in the army,
headlong to rush out, to help and bring-of Alcibiades, engaged and enthronged
by his enemies: to cover him with his body, and by maine force of arms and
courage, bring him off from the rout: And in the Deliane battle, to save and
disingage Xenophon, who was beaten from his horse. And in the midst of all the
Athenian people, wounded, as it were with so unworthy a spectacle, headlong
present himself to the first man, to recover Theramenes, from out the hands of
the officers and satelites, of the thirty tyrants of A^hens, who were leading
him to his death; and never desisted from his bold attempt, until he met with
Theramenes himself, though he were followed and assisted with two more. He
has been seen (provoked thereunto by a matchless beauty, wherewith he was
richly endowed by nature) at any time of need to maintain severe continency.
He has continually been noted to march to the wars on foot; to break the
ice with his bare feet; to wear one same garment in summer and winter, to
exceed all his companions in patience of any labor or travel; to eat no
more, or otherwise at any banquet, then at his ordinary: He has been seen
seven and twenty years together with one same vndismaide countenance,
patiently to bear and endure hunger, poverty, the indocilitie and stubbernesse
of his children, the frowardnes and scratchings of his wife; and in the end
malicious detraction, tyranny, emprisonment, shakles and poison. But was that
man envited to drink to him by duty of civility? he was also the man of the
army, to whom the advantage thereof remained. And yet he refused not, nor
disdained to play for nuts with children, nor to run with them upon a hob
by-horse, wherein he had a very good grace: For, all actions (says Philosophy)
do equally beseem well, and honor a wise man. We have good ground and
reason, and should never be weary to present the image of this incomparable
man, unto all patterns and form of perfections. There are very few examples of
life, absolutely full and pure. And our instruction, is greatly wronged, in
that it has certain weak, defective and imperfect forms proposed unto it,
scarcely good for any good use, which divert and draw us back; and may rather
be termed Corrupters then Correctors. Man is easily deceived. One may more
easily go by the sides, where extremity serves as a bound, as a stay and as
a guide, then by the midway, which is open and wide; and more according unto
art, then according unto nature: but therewithal less nobly and with less
commendation. The greatness of the mind is not so much, to draw up and hale
forward, as to know how to range, direct and circumscribe it self. It holds
for great whatever is sufficient. And shows her height, in loving mean
things better then eminent. There is nothing so goodly, so fair and so lawful
as to play the man well and duly: Nor Science so hard and difficult, as to
know how to live this life well. And of all the infirmities we have, the most
savage, is to despise our being. Whosoever will sequester or distract his mind,
le^ him hardily do it, if he can, at what time his body is not well at ease,
thereby to discharge it from that contagion: And elsewhere contrary; that she
may assist and favor him, and not refuse to be partaker of his natural
pleasures, and conjugally be pleased with them: adding thereunto, if she be
the wiser, moderation, least through indiscretion, they might be confounded
with displeasure. Intemperance is the plague of sensuality; and temperance is
not her scourge, but rather her seasoning. Eudoxus, who thereon established his
chief fecility, and his companions, that raised the same to so high a pitch,
by means of temperance, which in them was very singular and exemplar, savoured
the same in her most gracious sweetenes. I enjoyne my mind, with a look
equally regular, to behold both sorrow and voluptuousness: Eodem enim vitio
est effusio animi in laeri^^a, quo in dolor^ contractio. Cic. Tusc. qu. l. ^
As faulty is the enlarging of the mind in mirth, as the contracting it in
grief; and equally constant: But the one merrily, and the other severely: And
according to that she may bring unto it, to be as careful to extinguish the
one, as diligent to quench the other. To have a perfect insight into good,
draws with it an absolute insight into evil. And sorrow has in her tender
beginning something that is unavoidable: and voluptuousness in her excessive
end, something that is evitable. Plato coupleth them together, and would have
it to be the equal office of fortitude, to combat against sorrows, and
fight against the immoderate and charming blan^ishments of sensuality. They are
two fountains, at which whosoever draws, whence, when and as much as he
needs, be it a city, be it a man, be it a beast, he is very happy. The
first must be taken for physic and necessity, and more sparingly: The second
for thirst, but not unto drunkenness. Pain, voluptuousness, love and hate,
are the first passions a child feels: if reason approach, and they apply
themselves unto it; that is virtue. I have a Dictionary severally and wholly to
my self: I pass the time when it is foul and incommodious; when it is fair
and good, I will not pass it: I run it over again, and take hold of it. A
man should run the badde, and settle himself in the good. This vulgar phrase
of pass time, and, to pass the time, represents the custom of those wise
men, who think to have no better account of their life, then to pass it over
and escape it: to pass it over and bawke it, and so much as in them lies, to
ignore and avoyde it, as a thing of an yrkesome, tedious, and to be disdained
quality. But I know it to be otherwise; and find it to be both priseable and
commodious, yea in her last declination; where I hold it. And Nature has put
the same into our hands, furnished with such and so favorable circumstances,
that if it press and molest us, or if unprofitably it escape us, we must blame
our selves. S^^lti vita ingrata est, trepida est, tota in suturum fertur. A
^ooles life is all pleasant, all fea^^f^^l* all fond of the future. I therefore
prepare and compose my self, to forgo and lose it without S^^* ep^st* 15*
grudging; but as a thing that is loseable and transitory by it is own
condition: not as troublesome and importunate* Nor beseemes it a man not to be
grieved when he dies, except they be such as please themselves to live still.
There is a kind of husbandry in knowing ^^ow to enjoy it: I enjoy it double to
others. For, the measure in ^ovissance depends more or less (...) the
application we lend it. Especially at this instant, that I perceive mine to be
^^ort in time, I will extend it in weight: I still stay the readiness of her
flight, by the promptitude of my holefast by it: and by the vigor of custom
recompense the haste of her fleeting. According a^ the possession of life is
more short, I must endeavor to make it ^ore profound and full. Other men feel
the swe^tnesse of a contentment and prosperity. I feel it as well as they; but
it is not in passing and gliding: yet should it be studied, tasted and
ruminated, thereby to yield him condign thanks, that it pleased to grant the
same unto us. They enjoy other pleasures, as that of sleep, without knowing
them. To the end that sleep should not dully and vnfeelingly escape me, and
that I might better taste and be acquainted with it, I have heretofore found
it good, to be troubled and interrupted in the same. I have a kind of
contentment to consult with my self: which consultation I do superficially
run over, but considerately sound the same, and apply my reason to entertain
and receive it, which ^^ now become froward, peevish and distasted. Do I find
my self in some quiet mood? is there any sensuality that tickles me? I do
not suffer the same to bu^^e it self or dally about senses, bet associate my
mind unto it: Not to engage or plunge it self therein, but therein to take
delight: not to lose, but therein to find it self. And for her part I employ
her, to view her self in that prosperous estate, to ponder and esteem the
good fortune she has, and to amplify the same. She measures how much she is
beholding unto God, for that the is at rest with her conscience, and free from
other intestine passions, and has her in body hernatural disposition: orderly
and competently enjoying certain flattering and effeminate functions, with
which it pleases him of his grace to recompense the griefs, wherewith his
justice at his pleasure smites us. Oh how availful is it unto her, to be so
seated, that whatever she casts her eyes, the heavens are calm round about
her; and no desire no fear or doubt troubles the air before her: there is no
difficulty, either past, or present, or to come, over which her imagination
passes not without offense. This consideration takes a great luster from the
comparison of different conditions. Thus do I in a thousand shapes propose
unto my self, those whom either fortune, or their own error does transport
and torment. And these nearer, who so slackely and incuriously receive their
good fortune. They are men which indeed pass their time: they overpasse the
present and that which they possess, thereby to serve their hopes with
shadows and vain images, which fancy sets before them,

Morte oblit a quales fama est volit are figur as Virg. ^^p. l. 10. 641.

Aut quae sopitos deludunt somnia sensus.
Such walking shapes we say, when men are dead,
Dreams, whereby sleeping senses are misse-led.
Which hasten and prolong their flight, according as they are followed. The
fruit and scope of their pursuit, is to pursue: As Alexander said, that The end
of his travel, was to travel.

Nilactum credens cum quid superesset agendum. ^ucan. l. ^. 656.

Who thought that naught was done,
When ought remained undone.
As for me then, I love my self and cherish it, such as it has pleased God
to grant it us. I desire not he should speak of the necessity of eating and
drinking. And I would Se^. epist. 119.
think to offend no less excusably, in desiring it should have it double.
Sapiens divi^iarum naturalium quaesitor acerrimus. A wise man is a most eager
and earnest searcher of those things which are natural. Nor that we should
sustain our selves by only putting a little of that drugge into our mouth,
wherewith Epimenides was wont to alay hunger, and yet maintained himself. Nor
that we should insensibly produce children at our fingers ends or at our
heels, but rather (speaking with reverence) that we might with pleasure and
voluptuousness produce them both at our heels and fingers ends. Nor that the
body should be void of desire, and without tick-ling delight. They are
ungrateful and impious complaints. I cheerfully and thankefully, and with a
good heart, accept what nature has created for me; and am therewith well
pleased, and am proud of it. Great wrong is offered unto that great and
all-puissant Giver, to refuse his gift, which is so absolutely good; and
disanull or disfigure the same, since he made perfectly good. Omnia quae
secundum naturam Cie. sin* ^on. l.
sunt; estimatione dignasunt. All things that are according to nature, are
wothy to be esteemed. Of Philosophies opinions, I more willingly embrace
those, which are the most solid: and that is to say, such as are most humane
and most ours: My discourses are suitable to my manners; low and humble. She
then brings forth a child well pleasing me, when she betakes herself to her
Quiddities and Ergoes, to persuade us, that it is a barbarous aliance, to marry
what is divine with that which is terrestrial; wedde reasonable with
unreasonable; combine severe with indulgent, and couple honest with dishonest:
that voluptuousness is a brutall quality, unworthy the taste of a wiseman. The
only pleasure he draws from the enjoying of a fair young bride, is the
delight of his conscience, by performing an action according unto order; As to
put on his boots for a profitable riding. Oh that his followers had no more
right, or sinuewes, o^ pithe, or juice, at the dis-maydening of their wives,
than they have in his Lesson. It is not that, which Socrates, both his and our
Master, says; He valueth rightly as he ought corporal voluptuousness: but
he prefers that of the mind, as having more force, more constancy,
facility, variety and dignity. This according to him, goes nothing alone, he
not so fantastical; but only first. For him, tempe^ance is a moderatrix, and
not an adversary of sensualities. Nature is a gentle guide: Yet not more Ibid.
l. 5.
gentle, then prudent and just. Intrandum est in rerum nauram, and penitus quid
ea postulet, pervidendum. We must enter into the nature of things, and
thoroughly see what she inwardly requiers. I quest after her track; we have
confounded her with artificial traces. And that Academicall and Peripateticall
summum bonum or sovereign felicity, which is, to live according to her rules:
by this reason becomes diff^cult to be limited, and hard to be expounded.
And that of the Stoickes, couzin germane to the other, which is, to yield unto
nature. Is it not an error, to esteem some actions less worthy, for so much
as they are necessary? ^et shall they never remove out of my head, that it is
not a most convenient marriage, to wedde Pleasure unto Necessity. With which
(says an ancient Writer) the Gods do ever complot and consent.

To what end do we by a divorce dismember a frame contexted with so mutual,
coherent and brotherly correspondency? Contrariwise, let us repair and renew
the same by enterchangeable offices: that the spirit may awake and quicken the
dull heaviness of the body, and the body stay the lightness of the spirit, and
settle and fix the same. Qui v^lut summum Aug. verb* apostol. ser. 13. c. 6
bonum, laudet animae naturam, and tanquam malum, naturam carnis accusat,
profecto and animam carnaliter appetit, and carne^ incarnaliter fugit, quoniam
id vanitate sentit humana, non veritate divina. He that prai^eth the nature of
the soul, as his principal good, and accuses nature of the flesh as evil,
assuredly he both carnal^y affects the soul and carnally escheweth the
flesh, since he is of this mind not by divine verity, but humane vanity.
There is no part or parcel unworthy of our care in that present, which God
has bestowed upon us: We are accoumptable even for the least hair of it. And
it is no commission for fashion sake for any man, to direct man according to
her condition: it is express, natural and principal: And the Creator has
seriously and severely given the same unto us. Only authority is of force with
men of common reach and understanding; and is of more weight in a strange
language. But here let us charge again. Stul^i^iae proprium quis non dixerit,
ignave and contumaciter facere quaefacienda sunt: and alio c^rpus impellere,
alio animum, distrahique inter diversissimos motus? Who will not call it a
property of folly to do sloathfully and frowardly, what is to be done, and one
way to drive the body and another way the mind, and himself to be distracted
into most diverse motions? Which, the better to see, le^such a man one day tell
you the ammusements and imaginations, which he puts into his own head, and for
which he diverteth his thoughts from a good repast, and bewaileth the hour, he
employeth in feeding himself: you shall find there is nothing so wallowish in
all the messes of your table, as is that goodly entertainment of his mind ( It
were often better for us to be sound ^sleepe, than awake unto that we do)
and you shall find, that his discourses and intentions are not worth your
meanest dish. Suppose they were the entrancings of Archimedes himself: and
what of that? I here touch not, nor do I blend with that rabble or raskality
of men, as we are, nor with that vanity of desires and cogitations, which
divert us, only those venerable minds, which through a feruency of devotion
and earnestness of religion, elevated to a constant and conscientious
meditation of heavenlydivine things, and which by the violence of a lively and
virtue of a vehement hope, preoccupating the use of eternal soule-saving
nourishment; the final end, only stay and last scope of Christian desires; the
only constant delight and incorruptible pleasure; disdain to rely on our
necessitous, fleeting and ambiguous commodities: and easily resign, the care
and use of sensual and temporal feeding unto the body. It is a privileged
study. Super-celestiall opinions, and vnder-terrestriall manners, are things,
that amongst us, I have ever seen to be of singular accord. Aesope that famous
man, saw his Master piss as he was walking: What (said he) must we not etc.
when we are running? Let us husband time as well as we can. Yet shall we
employ much of it, both idely and ill. As if our mind had not other hours
enough to do her business, without disassociating hirselfe from the body in
that little space which she needs for her necessity. They will be exempted
from them and escape man. It is mere folly: insteade of transforming
themselves into Angels, they transchange themselves into beasts: in lieu of
advauncing, they abase themselves. Such transcending humor^ affright me as
much, as steepy, high and inaccessible places. And I find nothing so hard to
be disgested in Socrates his life, as his ecstasies and communication with
Daemones. Nothing so humane in Plato, as that which they say, he is called
divine. And of our sciences those which are raised and extolled for the
highest, seem to me, the most basest and terrestrial. I find nothing so
humble and mortal in Alexanders life, as his concepts about his
immortalization. Philotas by his answer quipped at him very pleasantly and
wittily. He had by a letter congratulated with him, and rejoiced that the
Oracle of Jupiter Hammon had placed him amongst the Gods; to whom he answered,
that in respect and consideration of him, he was very glad; but yet there was
some cause those men should be pittyed, that were to live with a man and obey
him, who outwent others, and would not be contented with the state and
condition of a mortal man.

-- Dijs te minorem quod geris, imperas. Her. car. l. 3 ^d. 6.

Since thou less then the Gods
Bear thee, thou rul'st with ods.
The quaint inscription, wherewith the Athenians honored the coming of Pompey
into their City, agrees well, and is conformable to my meaning.

D'autant es tu Dieu, comme ^lut. ^it. Po^ p

Tuter^cognois homme.
So far a God thou mai'st accounted be
As thou a man do re-acknowledge thee.
It is an absolute perfection, and as it were divine for a man to know how to
enjoy his being loyally. We seek for other conditions because we understand
and not the use of ours: and go out of our selves, for so much as we know not
what abiding thereis. We may long enough get upon stilis, for be we upon
them, yet must we go with our own legs. And sit we upon the highest throne
of the World, yet fit we upon our own tail. The best and most commendable
lives, and best pleasing me are (in my conceit) those which with order are
fitted, and with decorum are ranged to the common mould and humane model: but
without wonder or extravagancy. Now has old age need to be handled more
tenderly. Let us recommend it unto that God, who is the protector of health,
and fountain all wisdom: but blithe and sociall:

Frui paratis and valido mihi H^^. car. l. 1. ^d. 31. 17.

Latoe dones, and precor i^tegra
Cum mente, nec turpem senectam,
Degere, nec Cythara carentem.
Apollo grant, enjoy health I may
That I have got, and with sound mind, I pray:
Nor that I may with shame spend my old years,
Nor wanting music to delight mine ears.
The end of the third and last Book.

