An exposicion upon the song of the blessed virgin Mary, called Magnificat.

Where unto are* added the songs of Salve regina, Benedictus and Nu^c dimittis.

Translated out of latin into Englysh by Ihon Hollybush.

1538.

To the renowned and most noble prince and lord Ihon Frederyke, duke of
Saxony, county of During and marquis of Mysen my gracious lord and defender.
I Have (most doughty prince) received your graces letters at the last, the
which (according to my deutye) I have humbly taken in my hands, and
chearefully and with entyer consyderacyon thought upon their argument and
meaning. But seeing I have long sense promised unto your highness the
declaracion of the virgins song of praise called Magnificat, (from yt which
purpose of mine, the wicked enterpryses of many mine adversaries have often
wythdrawe^ me,) I have thought now at the last to answer your highness
letters with this treatise, (fearing lest the farther delay thereof might be
to my reprofe, and that farther ex^usacio^ should be of no value) that your
hyghnesses noble young courage were steared to the love of scripture, and by
farther exercise in the same might be more feruenter and stablyshed, to the
which thing I pray God to send his grace and to help, for it is greatly
necessary: seeing that in the person of so great a prince, the which being
wythdrawen from himself, is governed by Gods grace, ye salvation of many one
co^systeth: and again ye perdicio^ and damnacion of many one if he being
permitted to himself, is gyded with out grace. For though it be said of al
men's hearts: that the kings heart is in ye hand of God, which can wend it
where it pleases him: yet is it not for naught said of kings and princes*
Where by God will beat his fear in the superiors, that so they may learn
and be sure, that they can not once think ought in their mind, without God do
give it severally in their minds. The deed of other men does either hurt or
profit only them, or a few beside: but princes and superiors only be set in
that rowme, that they either profit or hinder so many more, as their dominion
does reach farther. For the which cause does scripture call the godly and
fearing God princes, angels of God, ye gods also, as in the.vii. chap. of
Exo: I have made the a God over Pharao. And in the.xxii. Chapter: Thou shalt
not speak evil of the Gods. And again, ye wicked and ungodly princes she
calls Lions, Draggo^s and furious beasts: whom God also calls one of
his.iiii. plages when he rehearses them, namely: pestilence, derth, war and
furious beasts. Because then that the heart of man, being natural, flesh and
blood does presume every thing lyghtely, and coueteth thereby dominion, riches
and honor, he is steared out of reason by such occasion to a rash
tranquillite and rest, so that he forgets God, and cares nothing for his
subjects, and using the bridle to his pleasure in synnynge, he becomes a
wodde and furious beast. It chances also, that a prince taking his pleasure
only, and using his affeccio^s, by name he is a lord, but in deed he is a
beast, so that it was well said of Bias one of the seven sages of Greece:
Magistratus uirum ostendit, that is: Authorite or rule of a co^munalte
declares what a man is. For dominion does utter a man what he is, seeing also
that the commune people darre not wythstande for fear of punishment the
commandments of their heads, though they were wicked and ungodly. For this
cause ought the superiors greatly to dread God, seeing they need to fear men
so little, and to know him and his works perfectly, and with great care and
diligence to walk and exercise himself therein, as Paul does exhort in
the.xii. chapter to the Romans, saying: Let him that rules, be diligent.

Moreover there is nothing in all the scripture that does so greatly concern
the superiorite, as this most holy song of the blessed virgyne and mother of
God, the which ought to be well learned and exercysed of all them that will
rule well and be good governors. For the mother of God syngeth here most
pleasauntly of the fear of God, what LORD our God be, and what his works be
in high and low estates. Let other give ear to their paramours, syngyng some
wanton worldly song: but unto this so manered virgin becomes a prince and
lord to give ear, yt which syngeth a spiritual, chaste and wholesome song.
Another is it a costume reprouable, that in all churches this song is daily
song at euensonge, and that with a sundery and honest tune (if ye
understanding thereof were also so earnestly declared) Now would God ye sprete
of the same beawtyfull mother of God were given me, which may so pythfully and
profytably declare her song, that your princely grace, and all we may suck
therout a healthful understanding, a lawdable life, and after this life, to
sing the everlasting Magnificat in the life to come. Ame^

The song of Mary called Magnificat.
My soul magnifyeth the LORD.
And my sprete rejoices in God my Saueoure.
For he has looked upon the low degree of his handmayden.
Behold, from hence forth shall al generacions call me blessed.
For he that is mighty has done great things unto me, and Holy is his name.
And his mercy endures thorovv out all generacio^s, upon them that fear him.
He shows strength with his arm, and scatters them that be proud in the
imaginacion of their heart.
He puts down the mighty from the seat, and exalts them of low degree.
He fylleth the hungry with good things, and lets the rych go empty.
He reme^breth mercy, and helps up his servant Israel.
Even as he promised unto our fathers, Abraham, and to his sede for ever.
The prologe.
THat we may the better understand this song of praise, it is to be marked
that ye laudable virgin Mary speaks by her own experience, where by she is
taught and illumined of the holy ghost. For no man may perfectly understand
the word of God, without he have it of the holy ghost without any means. And
no man ca^ have it of the holy ghost, without he prove and search it: and in
the same tryenge and searchynge does the holy ghost teach, as in his scoole.
Without the which there is naught taught save only a shadow, words and
multiplyenge of words. Even so likewise (when the blessed virgin had proved
by herself that God had wrought so great things in her, which not
wythstandynge was vile, poor and despised,) did the holy ghost teach her this
rich doctrine and wisdom, namely: that God is such a LORD which has naught
to do save to exalte it that is low, to depresse and to put down that is
exalted, to break it that is made, and to make it that is broken. For as in
the beginning of all creatures God did create the world of naught: (whereof he
is called a creatoure and almyghtye) eue^ so abides the same nature in him
still unchanged. And all his works have been, and shall be done so unto the
worlds end, that he shall make of ye which is nothing, vile, despised, small,
miserable and dead in comparison, some special, costly, honorable, healthful
and living thing. And again all that is so^what, costly, honorable, lively,
to make it naught, small despised, miserable, mortal and transitory. After
which fashion and manner no creature can nor may work, that is, of naught to
make ought, so that his eyes are toward the depth, and not to the heyght as
the.iii. children said, Daniel the third Chapter. Blessed be thou that lokest
through the deep, and syttest upon the Cherubins. And also David Psalm.
C.xxxvii. Though the LORD be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly: as
for the proud he beholds him afar of. Item Psalm. C.xi. Who is like unto
the LORD our God, that has his dwelling so high, which humbles himself
to behold that is in heaven and earth? For seeing he is the supreme and most
highest of all, and nothing above him, therefore may he not look above him:
another may he look besides him, seeing none is to be compared with him. Thus
must he needs behold himself, and look under him. And eue^ so ye deper a man
looks under him, ye better he seyeth himself.

But the world and man's eyes do the contrary, they look only above themselves,
they will mount on high as Solomon says: Pro. xxx. There are people which have
high lokes, and cast up their eyelyddes. Thus we se daily that every one looks
only upward to riches, honor, authorite, science, easy life and to all that
is great and high in this world. And where such are, to the^ does every man
cleue, to the^ runs every man, the^ is every man glad to please and to
serve, with them will every man join himself and be partaker of their
exaltacion and high estate: so that it is not said for naught in ye scripture
that few kings and princes have been good and virtuous.

Again noma^ will look downward, where are pouerte, despysyng, anguysh, mysery
and sorrow, from thence does every man wend his eyes. And where such people
is, from thence does every man run, they be shuned, another does any man
assyste nor help the^, and provide so for the^, that they may be able also:
but must abide still in the depth and low estate. For there will noman be such a
creatoure among men, that will make any thing of that nothing, according to
ye lesson of S. Paul To. xii. saying: Be of one mind among your selves. Be
not proud in your own conceates, but make your selves equal with them of the
low sort.

And for this cause does ye sight of God continue of one fashion, which
beholds ye depth, need, and mysery, and is near unto all such as are in that
depth and anguysh, and (as says S. Peter) wythstandeth the hyghmynded, but
gives mercy unto the lowly.

Out of this ground now spryngeth love and ye praise of God: for noma^ ca^
thank and praise God, without he first love him: another may any man love him
without he confess and knowledge him in the best and syncerest manner he can.
Another may he so be confessed and uttered, save by his work, which is
remembered, felt and tried in us. Wherefore now when he proves and knows God
to be such one which looks toward the depth, and helps only the poor,
despised, wretched, miserable, forsaken and them that are nothing, than is he
so inflamed in love, that his heart even flows over in joy, leapeth and for
delight that he has gotten in God. And even there is than the holy ghost that
teaches such unspeakable conning and lust at the twynklynge of an eye, when
a man is so tried.

For this cause also has God charged us all with death, and the cross of
Christ, and with innumerable pains and sufferynges, charged his right
well-beloved chylderen the Christians, sufferynge them sometime to fall in sin,
that he may se so much the deper, that he may help many, work much,
showing himself a true creatoure thereby, that he may know himself
thereby, and may cause himself to be loving and most laudable. Where
contrary wise the world (God amend it) with his high and ouerseynge eyes is
always repynynge without ceassynge, and lets the syghte, works, help,
knowledge, love and praise of God, robbynge it self of such honor, fruit,
joy and salvation. After this manner has he also thrown his only beloved
son Jesus Christ in the depth of all myserye, and euydently declared his
seeing, work, help, nature, counsel and will, that it might (...) to what
intent he suffers it to (...). Therefore remains in Christ such notable
proving, full knowledge, love and praise of God forever, as says the.xv.
Psalm: Thou shall make me full of joy with thy countenance. (that is,) That
he seyth and knowlegeth the. Of this speaks David also in the.xliiii. Psalm,
saying: that all saints shall do nothing but praise God in heaven, for
lokynge upon the^ in their depth, and has made the^ thankful, loving and
praysynge in the same.

Likewise also does here the beloved mother of Christ, which with the ensample
of her proving, and with her words, teaches us how we should knowledge, love
and praise God. For seeing she rejoices and thanketh God here with a joyful
and leaping sprete, that he has looked upon her, though she were lowlye and
nothing in her own and men's syghte: therefore is it to be believed that she
has had simple friends poor, and rather of the lowest sort. And this will we
now so say, because of them that be simple and of the lowest sort themselves.
At Jerusalem doutlesse were the daughters of the high prestes, and of the
counselors, fair, young and bewtyfull virgins taught and brought up after ye
most honest manner before all the contry, as now are also the daughters of
many kings princes and other noble and rych me^. Nothersemeth she to have been
the daughter of the chief ruler of Nazareth her natyfe co^try, but rather of a
mean poor cytesins, where unto was not given great head or force. Ye she
was rekened among her neghboures and their children for none other save a
seruyng maid, unto whom the charge of houswyfery and the cattle was
committed: as poor maidens do, whom like charge is commit to be faithfully
executed.

For thus prophesied Esaye in his.xi. chapter: There shall a rod come forth of
ye kynred of Iesse, and a blossom out of his rod, and the sprete of the LORD
shall light upon it. The stock and root of the kynred of Iesse or David is the
virgin Mary, the rod and blossom is Christ. Now like as it is not seen,
ye incredible that out of a seere and rotten stock or root should grow a
fair rod or blossom: even so was it not to be looked for nor lykely, that
Mary the virgin should be ye mother of such a child. For I think Mary was
not called a stock and a root therefore only, because that above nature and
unstained flore of her maydenheade she became a mother, as it is also above
nature ye a rod should spring of a dead block: But also because that she was
of a kynglye stock and of David's kynred, which was sometime buddynge,
florysshyng, honorable, puyssaunte, rych and happy, both in his and Salomons
time, and a thing greatly set by among men. But at the last, when Christ
should come, did the high prestes usurp and take to themselves that dignite,
having the rule alone, and the kyngly progeny or kynred was fallen to extreme
prouerte, and despised as a dead block, so that there was no hope nor lokynge
for more, that any king of great worship and renown should spring of it. And
wha^ it was in this state, and eue^ come to ye lowest, tha^ does Christ come
of a small stock, borne of a simple and poor virgin, and so the rod and
blossom of such a person, as the daughters of my lord Annas and Caiphas
would not have wytesafe to have done the vylest service of their handmayde^.
Thus go the works of God and his syghte in the depthes, and the works and
lokes of men only in the heyghte. And this is the cause of her loud song of
praise, which we will now hear from verse to verse.

My soul magnifieth the LORD.
That word brusteth out of a vehemente heat and ouerflowynge joy, wherewyth
her mind and conversation heave it self wholly in sprite inwardly: Wherefore
she says not: I do magnifye the LORD, but my soul. As if she would say: My
life and all my thoughts drive, compelle and ouerflowe in the love and praise
of God and exceadynge gladness, so that I (even besides my selves) ame rather
heaued than do heave to praise God. Even as it chances also unto them that be
endued with godly sweetness and sprete: so that they feel more, than they can
utter and express with words. For it not man's work to give thanks unto God
with joy. It is rather a joyful mind, and the only work of God, the which
is not perceived by vtteraunce, but by experience, as says David in
the.xxxiii. Psalm: Tayste and se how good the LORD is, happy is the man that
trusts in him. He says first: Tayste, and than se, because he can not be
known without a man's own experience: where unto nevertheless noman comes,
without he do wholye and fullye trust in God, when he is into the depthe and
anguyshe: and for this cause does he add continently and says: Happy is the
man that trusts in him. For such one shall perceive ye work of God in
himself, and by this way he shall come to the perceaueable sweetness, and
thereby come to all understanding, and knowledge.

Now let us mark and weye every word in order: The first is, My soul.
Scripture deals man in three parts, as Paul the first to the Tessalonians
the last Chapter says: The very God of peace, sanctifye you through out. And I
pray God that your whole sprete, soul and body be kept blameless unto the
coming of our LORD. And every one of these three, with all the man, is again
dealte another way in two, namely: the flesh, and the sprete. The which
particion is not of the nature, but of the being or propernesse. That is to
say: Nature path.iii. parts, namely: the sprete, the soul, and the body, and
all three may altogether, be either good or bad, and is than called the sprete
and the flesh, whereof we will not speak at this time.

The first part (that is) the sprete, is the most excellent, the depest and
the most noblest part of man, wherewyth he is apt to understand
incomprehensible, invisible and eternal things: and to be short, it is the
house wherein faith and ye word of God are contained, whereof David speaks in
ye L. psalm saying: LORD renew a right sprete in mine intrayles, that is, a
straight and not bowed faith. And again in ye.lxxvii. psalm. speaking of the
unfaithful, he says: A froward and overthwart generacio^, a generation that
set not their heart aryght, and whose sprete was not true toward God.

The second part, the soul; is even the same sprete after the nature, but
after another operacio^. Namely, in that it quyckeneth the body and works by
the same, and is oftentimes taken in scripture for life. For the sprete may
live well enough without the body, but so may not the body. This part se we
also that even as we sleep it does live and work without any ceassynge. And
his condition or properte is not to perceive things that be incomprehensible,
but such, as reason can have knowledge of and measure: And reason is the chief
light in this house. Ye without the sprete being lyghtened with faith, or a
greater light do rule and gyde this light of reason, it can not be without
error: for it is to vile, to bear any swing in godly business. Unto these
two parts does scripture attribute much: but chefelye wisdom and knowledge:
wisdom unto ye sprete, and knowledge unto the soul. Besides these attributes
it also, hate, love, pleasure, lothsomnes, and such like.

The third is the body with his members, whose works are mere exercise and
use of such things as the soul knows, and ye sprete does believe. And to
confirm this by a witness of the scripture: Moses made a Tabernacle with a
threfolde and several mansion: The first was called Sanctu^ sanctorum, in the
which God dwelled, and this had no light. The second was called Sanctum, wherein
was the candelsticke with the seven shaftes and lamps. The third was called
the forecourte, which was under the open sky, and bare to the Son beams. In
this figure is every Christen man featly described: For his sprete is ye
Sanctu^ sa^ctoru^, ye is, the most holy, ye dwelling of God in a secret and
(as a man might say) in a dark faith: for he believes it yt he ca^ not
perceive with his eyesyght, another feleth, nor yet does comprehend. The Soul
is the Sanctum, (that is ye holy) there be the.vii. lamps, that is, all manner
of understanding, ye difference and knowledge of corporal and visible things.
The body is the forecourte, which is bare to every man, so that they may se
what he does, and how he lives.

Therefore now prays Paul and says: The very God of peace sanctifye you
thorowout. Not only in one part; but through out, that the sprete, soul,
body, and altogether be holy. Here were many things to be spoken, of the
cause of this prayer, but I will brefely rehearse some of them: If the sprete be
not holy, there shall nothing else be holy. Than is the most ieoperdy and
business in the holiness of the sprete, which consysteth only in a pure
faith: that is, if ye sprete be not combred with comprehensible things, as it
is said. In the mean time than come false teachers, which entyse the sprete
forth of it, when the one seeks to be ryghteous by these works, another by
that way and manner. If the sprete be not here well provided and wise, then
falls it out and follows, and comes to lean upon outward works and
costumes, whereby it imagines to be saved. Lo so soon is faith lost, and the
sprete dead before God.

Upon this grew sects and orders, so that ye one becomes a Charterhouse
monk, another a Grayfrere: the one endeavors to be saved with fasting, ye
other with prayenge, and another by this manner and fashion: one by this and
another by ye work procure to fly everlasting damnacion. And yet are they
all even but men's inue^cions, eue^ such as one man's choosing has founded.
Read thereof ye treatise of orders and sects. Another are they commanded by
God, but invented by me^: about the which the vain ianglers have no respect
of faith, but teach always the confidence of works, so long till they be at
variaunce within themselves: Every man will be nearest the mark, and despise
the other, as our obseruau^tes do now a days swell and heave themselves.
Against these workers and good men in sight, or rather hypocrites does Paul
pray, saying: that God is ye God of peace, of whom these varienge hypocrites,
and haters of peace are not partakers, nor having him, can hold ye same,
without they bid farewell their statutes, rules and ceremonies, and be all one
minded in faith and sprete, knowlegynge that works cause variaunce, sin and
dissencion, and only faith makes honest, one minded and peaceable me^, as
witnesses the.lxvii. Psalm, saying: He is the God yt makes me^ to be of one
mind in ye house. And again in ye.C.xxxii. Psalm: Behold (...) Even so
shows Mary whereof her song of praise shall sing and treat, namely: of the
renowned and excellent works of God, the comfort of our faith, to comfort ye
lowly and to fraye all the highest of the earth. And to these three uses or
commodities is it necessary for me to direct this virgyns song of praise,
that she have not song it only to herself, but to us all, that we should
cou^terfayt her. Another is it possible that any man either should be afraid, or
receive consolacio^ out of so great works of God, without he not only believe
that God can and knows to do great things, but also he must believe that he
will do them, and has pleasure in doing them. Another is it enough to believe yt
God will do great things with other, and not with you, and by this means to
avoid your selves from the works of God. Even as they do, which being in
prosperity or set in authorite, fear not God: and they that be feblemynded
tremble and be abashed of him in their aduersyte. For such faith is no thing
and even dead, like unto an opinion conceived of some tale. But ye must set his
will surely and steadfastly before your eyes, thynkyng within your mind yt he
both will now and hereafter also do great things with you. This faith is
lively, growing, pearsynge through and chaungynge a man, and making him even
a new creature: and co^pelleth him to fear, if he be high: and conceive
consolacion, if he be lowly. Ye the higher he is, the more ought he to fear:
and the lower he is, to have the more consolacion, the which none other faith
does. But what must he do in extreme necessite, or danger of death? Surely
than must he not only believe that God can, and knows how to help him, but
also that he will help him: where a strange and an unspeakable thing must be
done, namelye, that he delivered from the death everlasting, do beco^me the
child of salvation, and the son and heir of God. This faith (as witnesses
Christ himself) is able to do all things. This faith does abide, and comes
to the knowledge of the godly works, from thence into the love of God, and
forth from thence into the praysynge and thanking of God: so that a man does
than make much of God, and conceive a good opinion of him.

For God in his nature is not magnifyed of us, seeing he is immutable, but in
our knowledge and mind: that is, if we hold much of him, or set much by
him, specially for his godnesse and mercy. For this cause does not the blessed
mother say: My voice, my mouth, mine hands, my thoughts, nor my reason and
will do magnifye the LORD, (for there are many one, that praise God with loud
voice, praysynge and preaching him with preciouse and godly words,
speaking, disputynge, writing and payntynge much of him, and also many that
have great meditacions, and by the gyde of reason have great searchynges of
him: finally there are some that with feigned religion and intent make much of
him.) but she says of this wise: My soul magnifyeth God, (that is) my whole
life, senses, and powers have a great opinion of God: so that as though she
were rauyshed up to him, she felt some raysynge and rauyshynge in his
goodness, the which the verse followynge does declare. Of this wise se we
also, that if any man does us good, that even all our wits be moved and
bended to him, so that we say Oh how great and good opinion do I conceive of
this man? And even this is the very sygnifycacion of the saying: My soul
magnifyeth the Lord. How much more shall such lyuelye stearynge be caused,
what time as we perceive the goodness of God, the which is very great in
his works, so that even words and thoughts shall fail, and the whole life
and soul shall be necessarelye steared, and even as though all that is quycke
and lively in us would sing and praise God.

Now are there two false spretes, which can not sing the Magnificat aryght:
The first that praise not God before he have first done them good, as David
says: They shall praise the when than have done good unto them. These seem to
praise God very earnestly, but seeing they never will suffer the depth, the
making low,, and subduynge, they can never feel and perceive ye right ways
of the LORD, and so consequently another love nor praise God truly. Hereby
comes it that the world now a days is full of divine services (as they call
them) and lauds, with singing, preaching, playenge on the organes and other
instruments of music: Ye and this song of praise called Magnificat also.
But this is to be pytyed, namely, that so precious a song is handled so
vnfrutefully and without pyth of us, the which we do not sing, without all
things go well with us: for if any myschaunce do happen unto us, than has
our singing an end, another is there any regard or estimacion more of God,
thinking that another he can nor will work with us, and therefore have both
singing, and the Magnificat also done with us.

The other be yet more peryllous, which lean to the other side, the which be
proud of the gifts of God, and do not thank the pure will of God for it,
wyllyng part both of the praise and high estimacion to be ascribed unto
themselves. Such will be seen above other, and beholding the great good that
God has done with them, stomble thereat, using it as their own, auau^cyng
and heauynge themselves above such as have not those gifts, as though they
were some strange or peculiare thing. This verily is a brykle and yeoperdous
haven for ships, it is a dangerous estate. The gifts of God be such that
they make men proud and to stand in their own conceate and opinion: and
therefore it is required that the last word be considered, namely, the Lord.
For Mary sayethe not: My soul magnifyeth herself, or sets great price by
hersefe, ye she would have nothing to be holden of her: but she does exalte and
lift up God only, unto him she gives glory, robbynge herself thereof, and
ascribes and refers all things unto him. And though she perceived the
most plenteous works of God in herself, yet was she of that mind and abode
therein, that she did not exalte herself above the most vylest and pooreste
man on earth: and if she had done so, than had she fallen with Lucifer into
the lowest bottom of hell.

Another has she thought otherwise than if such goodness of God had
happened unto another handmayden, she would have been even as well content, and
wysh it her so well, as herself: ye she has counted herself unworthy, and
al other worthy of such honor, another would she finally have been miscontent if
God taking again from her such gifts, had given them unto another in her
presence. So little did she draw all this to herself, and left Gods gifts
fre, whole and proper to himself, using herself as a glad hospital and a
glad oostesse of such a geste: and therefore has she also kept it forever.
Lo this is said to magnifye God, of this wise to have a great opinion and
high estimacion of him, and of us nothing.

Hereby now is it evident in what great yeopardy of falling and synnynge she
was, so that it is no less maruayll how she did so refrain herself that she
did not pride and swell for the exceadynge plentye of goods, another did
ascribe ought to herself: than that she did receive them. Thynkest thou not
that to be a wondrous heart? She seyeth herself a mother of God, excited
far above all men: yet nevertheless does she remain in that lowlynesse,
simplicite, vpryghtnesse and courteousy that she has not counted the leest
handmayden to be under her. O we most wretches, whom if a few goods, a
little authorite or honor, or a little more bewty than another do befall can
not count us equal with them of the lower sort: another ca^ we make an end of
such opinion and standing in our own conceate: what would we do if we had
great and high gifts?

Wherefore God lets us remain still in pouerte and wantynge, because we keep
not his bewtyfull goods undefiled, and can use us as we did before we did
receive them. But we let our minds increase or decrease, as the goods either
grow or minysh. But the heart of the virgin Mary remains ever steadfast in
one mind and equalite, she lets God work in her according to his will and
pleasure, taking thereby no more save an earnest consolacion, joy and trust to
Godwarde, and even so ought we to do also: for that were truly to sing the
Magnificat.

And my sprete rejoices in God my Saueoure.
What the sprete be, have we showed a little before, namely, it that perceaueth
things incomprehensible by faith. And therefore she calls God her Saueoure or
saving health, the which faith she had conceived by the work that God
declared to her. And verily she begins after a comely order in that she
calls God first her LORD, and than her Saueoure, and first her Saueoure
before she rehearse his works. Where with she teaches us, how after a right
order we ought to love and to thank God only and purely, another seek ought
of our own. Now does he love and thank God purely, syncerelye and truly,
which prayseth him for none other cause, save that he is good: either beholds
naught in him, but only his bare goodness, and in the same only he has his
joy and delight. And this is the highest and most fairest manner to love and
praise God, which agrees very well unto such an excellent and demure sprete,
as the holy virgins is.

The unclean and froward lovers, which are nothing but usurers, seeking in
God that is their own, such another love nor praise his bare goodness. For
they do behold themselves, countynge only how good God be to them, that is,
how much he does declare his goodness toward the^ and does well by them,
eue^ that they do feel it: the which do also conceive great and high things
in their minds of him, and joyfully do sing of him and praise him, as long
as they feel the benefits of God. But when God does hyde himself, or
withdraws a little the beams of his goodness, so that they seem bare and
banyshed, than has the love and praise an end, another can they love or praise
the bare and vnfeleable goodness hid in God: whereby they declare, yt their
sprete did not rejoice in God their Saueoure, and that there was no true love,
no praise of the bare goodness of God, but that they delyted more in the
saving health, than in the Saueoure, in the gifts tha^ in the geuer, in ye
creatures more then in the creatoure. Another can they remain of one mind in
plentyfulnesse and in scarsenesse, in abundaunce of goods and in wantynge the
same, in riches and pouerte: contrary to saint Paul, which said to the
Philippians the.iiii. Chapter: I have learned in whatsoever estate I am,
therewith to be content. I can be low and I can be high. Every where and in
all things I am mete, both to be full, and to be hungry: to have plenty, and
to suffer need. I can do al things through Christ, which strengtheth me. Of
this thing speaks the.xlviii. Psalm on this wise: He shall speak good of
the, so long as thou do him good. As though he would say: He seeks his,
and not thine. If they had received pleasure and riches of thine hand, thou
should be little set by of them, they would make little of the. As Christ also
said Ioh. vi. unto them that sought him Verily, verily I say unto you: Ye seek
me not because ye saw the tokens, but because ye did eat of the loaves and
were filled. Such unclean false spretes stayne and defyle all Gods gifts,
lettynge him to give more, and to work more luckelye with them. Whereof let us
hear a proper ensample:

A certain honest woman and fearyng God did se.iii. virgins syttyng by an
altar, and at massynge time, a goodly boy lepte from the altar unto ye first
virgyne, using her very friendly, claspynge her about the neck, and smiling
upon her. After that went he to the second, but he did not behave himself so
familiarly to her, nevertheless he lift up her veil, and smyled upon her.
Unto the third he showed no sign of love at al, but bet her on the face,
haled her by the here, trod her with his fete, and used her very
discourteously: and suddenly lepte again upon the altar, and vanyshed away.

Then was the interpretacion of that sight showed unto the woman. The first
virgyne signifies the uncleanly spretes, seeking their own, unto whom God
must give many good things, and rather accomplysh their mind and will, then
his own, which will want nothing, and ever have comfort and pleasure of
God, not being suffised with the goodness of God. The second sygnifieth those
spretes, which have begone to serve God, and can suffer some scarceness, yet
nevertheless are not without love of themselves and their profit. Unto them
must he sometime show a smiling countenance, lettynge them assaye his
goodness, that thereby they might learn to love his bare goodness, and
hyghly to praise it. The third virgin, poor, wretched and clean forsaken
has nothing but mysery and smarte, she seeks no profyt she is content
therwyth yt God is good, though she should never assaye it (the which
nevertheless can not be) the same abides of one fashion and of both the
sides, either to love or to praise ye goodness of God, as well wha^ it is felt,
as wha^ it is not felt: another does she fall upon ye goods wha^ they fall to
her, nor falls from the^ wha^ they fail. And this is ye true spouse of
Christ, which says to him: I will not it that thine is, but thyselfe: I love
the no better while all things go prosperously, than I do hate the while it
goes contrary with me.

With such manner of spretes is it fulfilled that is written: Thou shalt not
turn from the right way of God, another to the right, nor to the left hand.
That is, Ye shall love and praise god aryght and straightly, another bended to
your selves, nor your profytes. Such sprete had David, when he being driven
from Jerusalem by his son Absalon, was of that mind* that he being cast
away for ever, would never look for to come again, another in the kingdom,
nor in the favor of God, so that he said (as it is written in the second
book of Samuel the fyftenth Chapter:) If I shall find grace before the LORD,
he shall fetch me again, and let me se it (meaning the Arc) and the house of
it. But if he say thus: I have no pleasure to the, behold, here am I, let him
do with me as it pleases him. O what a pure sprete was that, which did not
cease to love, praise and to obey the pleasure of God, no not in extreme
necessite. Such sprete also does the holy mother and virgin Marye show, when
she ebbynge and flowynge in the myddest of al ouerflowynge and excellent goods
did not stomble nor fall at them, another seeks her own, but keeps her sprete
pure and without blame in the love and praise of the mere goodness of God,
glad and willing to take in good worth, if God will spoil her of the same
again, and leave her a poor, naked and faylynge sprete.

Moreover as it is more ieopardous to refrain himself in wealth, riches and
great worships, than in pouerte, shame and wretchedness, seeing riches
mynistre great occasion to wickedness: even so is this pure and wonderful
sprete of Mary so much more to be allowed, that she being endued with so
exceadyng high honors, does not for all them set up her comb, behauyng her
self as though she saw it not, remaining straight and right in the high
way, leaning to the goodness of God only, the which she another feleth nor
seyth, setting little store by such goods as she feleth, nor taking pleasure
in them, another seeking it that is her own, so that out of a true and right
fundament she does sing: My sprete rejoices in God my Saueour. It is truly a
spret that spryngeth of faith only, and rejoices not for the goods of God
which the blessed virgin did feel, but for God only, whom she felt not, and
is glad of her salvation, which she now knew by faith. These lo are the true,
lowly, empty, and hungry spretes, of ye which we shall shortly speak.

By this now may we know and judge how full this present world is of false
preachers, and saints, which do beat in much of good works unto the simple
people. And though there be few that preach earnestlye the very thing, namely,
how good works ought to be done, (for many one do preach man's tradicions and
works, that they themselves have invented and set up) yet are many of the^
(and that alas of ye best of them) so far wide out of the straight and right
way, that they drive the commune people always upon the right hand. For they
teach good works and the wholesome living, not for the mere goodness of God,
but for their advantage. For if there were no heaven nor no hell, and if they
looked for no grace of the goodness of God, they should soon leave the goods
of God vnloued and vnpraysed. Those are sekers of themselves, hyrelinges,
bondmen, strangers and not heirs, which make an Idol of themselves, and ask
love and praise of God, wyllyng God to do that unto them, that they
necessarylye should do unto him. They have no sprete. Another is God their
Saueoure, but Gods gifts save them, where with he must serve them as a
servant. They be the chylderen of Israel, unto whom it suffised not to be
fed with heavenly Manna, but lusted also after flesh, onyons and garlyke:
and as they peryshed, and attained not the land of promise, so shall such
false spretes do also.

Now (God amend it) is all the world, all cloisters and temples full of such
kind of men, which all through false, wicked and crooked spretes do walk,
drive, chase and heave good works so high, that finally they imagyn to deserve
heaven by them: where before all things the goodness of God should have been
declared. And it became us to know, that like as God saved us and made us
happy, without any of our merit or workynge: so likewise should we seek to
work without respect of all profit or reward, workynge good only for the
goodness of God, seeking nothing but that is pleasynge to him: not having an
eye to the reward, which of his own swing shall befall unto us, though we
do not seek nor look for it. For it can not be but the reward must follow us
if we do work of pure and vpryghte sprete, without lokynge for reward or
profit. God refuses a sprete that seeks his own profit, another will he
ever give him any reward. Moreover, as a child serves his father gladly and
freely as an heir, only for ye fathers will: (for if he serves him only for the
goods and heretage, he is unkind, and worthy to be dishereted:) even so
must they do that knowledge Christ to be their father and brother.

For he has looked upon the low degree of his handmayden. Behold, from hence
forth shall all generacions call me blessed.
The word low degree have some drawn to humilite, as though the holy virgin
had referred ought to herself, of her honest behaueoure, justice and work,
and did rejoice therein: Whereby it is come that some prelates, and specially
the Antichrists do call themselves humiles or lowly, which is far wide from
the truth. For in the syghte of God can no man boast of any good thing without
sin and damnacion. Before him must a man rejoice only of his pure goodness
and grace showed unto us unworthy, that not ours, but Gods love and praise
remain in us, and keep us: which thing Solomon does also teach Pro. xxv.
saying: Put not forth thyselfe in ye presence of ye king, and preasse not in
the place of great me^. Better it is that it be said unto the: Come up hither,
tha^ thou to be set down in the presence of the prince. How should than such
boast and presumpcion be ascribed unto this chaste virgin, that she should
auaunce her humylite in the sight of God, which is the most worthyest of all
virtue? Another does onye man think or boaste himself to be lowly, without he
be the most proudest. Only God does know, judge and open the low degree or
lowlynesse, so that man never knows less of it, than when he is most lowly.

The use of scripture is to call Humiliare to cast down, to preasse down and
to bring to naught: wherefore Christen men also in some place of the scripture
are called poor, vile and brought low, as in the.C.xiiii. Psalm: I was
brought down, and he helped me. Humilite than is nothing save a despised,
vile, depressed or cast down thing or estate: of the which kind are the nedy,
sick, hongry, thyrsty, presoners, troubled and dyenge creatures: as Job wha^
he was proved, David as he was chaced and driven out of his realm, and Christ
with all the true Christians in their need. And this is the depth, whereof we
have spoken before, namely: that the eyes of the LORD behold the depthes, but
man's eyes look only in the heyghte: that is, the outward appearaunce and
shynynge estate or condition. And for this cause is Jerusalem called a city
where upon Gods eyes do behold. After this manner lies the Christen
congregation or church in the depth, and is of no reputation before the world:
wherefore God does look upon it, and wendeth his syghte always upon the same, as
David witnesses in the xxxi. Psalm, speaking in the person of God: I will
enfourme the and show the the way wherein thou shall go, I will fasten mine
eyes upon the.

Of like fashion speaks. Paul.i. Corin. i. saying: That folysh is before
the world has God chosen, that he might confound the wise: and that weak is
before ye world has God chosen, that he might confound the mighty: and the
vile and despised before the world has God chosen, ye and that which is
nothing, that he might destroy that, which is ought, that no flesh should
rejoice in his presence. By this means makes God the world folysh, with all
his wisdom and strength, and gives another wisdom and power. Seeing than
that this is the mind of God, to look downwarde, and to the things that are
nothing therefore have I englyshed ye word Humilitas for a thing of no price or
regard, so that this be the mind of Mary: God has wended his eyes upon me
that ame a poor, vile and a maiden of no regard, which might easyly have
found rich, renowned, noble queen's and of great lynage, either might he have
chosen ye daughters of princes and great estates, ye he might have chosen ye
daughters of Annas or Cayphas rulers of this co^try: But he has fastened upon
me the eyes of his mere goodness, and used me that ame so vile and despised an
handmayden, because none should boaste herself to have been worthy of such an
office: and I also must needs grant that it is only of pure grace and
goodness that such does happen unto me and not for my merits or worthynesse,
whereof I am bare.

Thus have we now sufficiently showed here above, how ye holy virgin unlooked
for is come to this honor, out of a despised estate: and how God has so
graciously looked upon her. And for this chance she does not boast and auaunce
her worthynesse or unworthiness: but only she rejoices of ye sight of God,
which is so bounteous and gracious, yt he has looked upon so slender a mayde^,
and that so greatly, honorously and worshypfully. Wherefore they that say she
did not auau^ce her virginite, but her lowlynesse, do her injury. For she
another did auaunce her virginite, nor lowlynesse, but the only, the godly and
gracious syghte of God. Wherefore there is no pyth or wayghte in the word low
degree, but in the word he has looked. For her surrendrynge is not to be
praised and commended, but the lokyng of God upon her. Even as if a noble
prince should reach his hand unto a wretched beggar, ye beggars hand is not
to be allowed therefore, but the princes gentlynesse and familiarite.

But that the wrong opinion may be avoided, and the true lowlynesse may be
known from the feigned, we will make a little digression, and treat of humilite
or lowlynesse: for many one have erred not a little therein.

Humilite do we call communely a will to small and despised things. Now are there
many that bring water to the well, namely they, that always co^bre their minds
with vile clothyng, persons outward gestures, towns, words and places, upon
them do they think, in them is their conversation, but to that intent, that
by the same they might be counted and estimed great, rych, learned, holy, ye
also God, as such that love to be conuersaunte in lowly things. But if they
knew, me^ did not set thereby, they would right soon leave them. This is a
feigned lowlynesse, for their wicked eye beholds naught save the reward,
avail and praise of humilite. Another behold they the vile things, not
lokynge for reward and profit, no more than a kooke does to roost meat that
does not drop: wherefore when the reward and praise do no more appear, than
has humilite done with the^. Such have no affection to the vileness, because
they be not of one heart and mind in vile things, they have only the
thoughts, hands, mouth, clothing and outward behaueoure in vileness, but
their heart looks to high things, to the which they do imagine to come: and
such are they that count themselves lowly holy saints.

They that be lowly in deed, turn not their eyes to the reward and praise of
humilite, but with a simpel heart do they behold the vile things, being glad to
be occupied in the same, another do they at any time perceive their lowlynesse.
Here spryngeth the water out of the fountain, here follows it of his own
swing, wherefore they do use vile vestures, gestures, words, places and
persons, though they do every where shone gorgious and high things: which
thing David also witnesses in the.C.xxix. Psalm. saying: LORD I am not high
minded, I have no proud lokes. etc. And Job in the.xxii. chapter: Whosoever
humbles himself, shall be set up: and whosoever looks mekely, shall be healed.
Hereby comes that unto such does honor befall unawares, and their heauynge up
without foreknowlege or deliberacion. For they were content with their low
estate and simple condition, another thought they once upon high things. But ye
feigned lowly maruayle greatly that their exaltacion and honor taryeth so
long, another is their false and feigned pride content with their vile
condition, but secretly co^sydereth higher estates in their minds.

Therefore did I say that true humilite or lowlynes does not at any time
perceive that she is lowly, (for if she did know it, she would be proud with
the syghte of so great a virtue) but with heart, mind and all her wits is
she pyght upon sleghte and lowly things, which always present themselves to
her syghte. These are her images, wherein she has her conversation and
pastyme: and as long as she has them in syghte, so long can not she behold
herself nor be combred with herself: much less be rauyshed and have pleasure
in the contemplacion and syghte of high and great things, or give her mind
thereto. For this cause than must the honor and dignite be fall unto her
unawares, and find her in thoughts cleue contrary to honors and dignityes:
for after this manner does Luke say, that the Angels gretynge was strange unto
the virgin, for it came suddenly and unlooked for. If the same gretynge had
chanced unto Cayphas daughter, she would not have thought: What manner of
gretynge is this, but would soon have accepted it, and would have said within
herself: Ah how well and happily does this befall?

And again feigned lowlynesse does never know that she is proud: for if she
did, she should quickly be refrayned with the sight of the heinous fault, but
she fasteneth her heart, mind and thought upon high things, the which she
has in sight without ceassynge. These are her images, wherewyth she is always
combred, and as long as she sets her mind on the^, she ca^ another behold
nor consydre herself. Wherefore the honor comes another unawares nor
unthought upon, for it fyndeth thoughts thereto agreynge: but shame and
enpoueryshynge come unlooked for unto such: for they were minded to sail with
another and more luckelyer wind.

For this cause is it not good to learn lowlynesse after this manner, that he
have in syghte and imagine vile and despised things or persons. Another
contrarywyse waxes any man proud because he seyeth high and great things.
The images are not to be avoided, but the eye^* must be weened therefrom. As
long as we live upon earth, we must live both with the high and low things
or estates: but (as Christ says) the eye must be put out. Genesis the.iii
chapter says not Moses, that Adam and Eve saw other things after the
preuaricacion, tha^ they did se before it, but yt their eyes were opened, that
they might se their nakedness, where as they were naked before also, and yet
did not consider it. The queen Hester did wear a very costlye crown upon her
head, yet did it seem but a stained cloth in her sight. Here were not the high
images taken away from her, but rather were set before her, as unto a most
puissaunt queen, and no sleyght or vile things were before her: but the sight
was wended therfrom, and her heart and mind did not behold the hye things
and gloriouse: Wherefore God wroughte also straungely with her. After this
fashion must not ye outward things be altered, but we must be altered in our
mind and wits: for tha^ shall we easily learn to despise and fly high
things, to set much by and to seek sleyght and lowly things. For there is
humilite or lowlynesse found and steadfast for all chau^ces, and yet never are
ware of it. This is done with delight and the heart remains always one and of
one fashion, howsoever other things do befall or change, either to the heyghte
or depth.

But ( LORD God) what pride skoulketh under the vileness of clothing, words
and behaueoure? whereof the world now a days is full. The which visures and
dissemblers do so submytte themselves, yt they will be despised of no man: they
do so fly honors, that they notwithstanding will be chaced therwyth: they do
so shone high things, yt nevertheless they be not myspraised, nor their
possessions mynished, ye which they covet always to have of the best and
pycked out. But this virgin utters nothing but her vileness, wherein she
lived and abode wyllynglye, she never coueted nor thought upon honor and
heyght, another did she consider and behold her lowlynesse. This humilite is so
fair and precious, that she can not abide her own countenance but that image
is reserved unto the face of God, as witnesses the.C.xii. Psalm, saying: Who
is like unto the LORD our God that has his dwelling so high, which humbles
himself to behold that is heaven and earth. For he that can behold his
lowlynesse, the same can judge himself worthy of eternal bless, and so were
Gods judgment at an end, seeing we know surely that God does save the
lowlyones. Therefore must God reserve and keep the same for himself to know
and to judge, and hyde them from us with the fence of exercise in lowly
things, by beholdynge of the which we also do forget ourselves. To this now
serve many persecucions, deaths and al kind of trouble on earth, in ye which
is travail and pain, ye with the^we may put out ye false and deceatful eye.

Thus is it evident unto us by this word humilite or lowlynesse, that Mary the
virgyne was a despised, vile, and a maiden of no estimacion, and in this low
degree to have served God, and not to have known, that her low estate was much
worth before God Whereby we are taught and comforted, that though we ought
wyllyngly be despised and brought low, yet should we not despair therefore, as
though God did hate us: but rather trust that he shall be mercyful unto us. Only
this shall we beware, lest we be not wyllyng enough in this subduyng and castyng
down, lest our wicked eye be to much open, and so deceive us with preuy
lokynge upon high things, or searchynge out of our pleasures, wherwyth the
humilite or lowlynesse do perysh. For what helps it ye damned to be cast
down to the nedermost and lowest, seeing they do not suffer ye aduersite gladly
and with a good will? And again what hurts it the angels to be hyghly
exalted, seeing they conceive no false lust and presumpcion thereby?

Finally, to be short, this verse does teach us to know God truly, seeing it
witnesses that God does behold lowly things and persons. And he knows God
aryghte, that knows yt he be^deth his eyes to ye lowly, as we have
sufficiently declared: and of the same knowledge follows the love and trust to
Godwarde, so that a man do yield himself and follow him wyllyngly. Of this
have we a goodly place in the.ix. Chapter of Jeremy, saying: Let not the
wyseman rejoice in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, another
the rych man in his riches: But who so will rejoice, let him rejoice in this,
that he knows and understands me. This does Paul confirm in the.ii.
epistle to the Corinthians the.xi. Chapter, saying: Let him that rejoices,
rejoice in ye LORD

After than that the mother of God had in such wise praised her God and Saueour
with a bare pure sprete, and ascribed none of the goods to herself, and
therefore had so^ge truly unto him of his goodness: now does she finally and
orderlye go to the praise of his works and goods. For (as we have said
before) we ought not to ru^ne headlynges to ye goods of God, another ought we
to ascribe and draw them to us: but by the^ as by steps we must pearse unto
the author and cause of all goodness, we must cleue unto him only, and make
much of him. And after that praise and thank him in his works, wherein he has
showed us such goodness, that we may trust, love and praise him: so that
his works are nothing save a great occasion to love and to thank ye mere
goodness that raygneth over us.

She begins first with her self, and syngeth what God has done for her,
wherein she teaches us two things: First, must every man mark diligently
what God works with him, more than all the works yt he does with other. For
thy bless consysteth not in that he works with other, but with the. As (Ihon
the.xxi. Chapter) when Peter said of S. Ihon: LORD, but what shall he do?
Christ said unto him: If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to the?
Follow thou me. As though he would say: Ihons works shall not avail ye,
thou must go to thy self, and take heed what I will do with the. Neuerthlesse a
great mysuse of selling good works does raygne in ye world now a days. For
some presumptuous spretes will help other, chefely such as live and dye without
Gods own workynge: eue^ as though they had to many good works. Where Paul.i.
Corin. iii. says: that every man shall be rewarded according to his works:
ergo not after another man's works.

It might be suffered if they did pray for other, or brought their works as
means and intercessio^s to god. But seeing they come to God therwyth, as with
some gift or present it is a wicked and heinous intent. And (that most
abominable is) they deal and give their works unto other, the which
nevertheless they know not how acceptable they be unto God. For God does not
behold the works, but the heart and faith, by the which he works with us.
Whereof they do not force, leaning upon ye works only, with the which they do
deceive themselves and other also. And so far is ye matter come, that they
persuade men that be at the point of death, to put on a freres raiment,
saying: that if any man dye in so holy an habyte, al his sins shall be
forgiven him, and get eternal bless. Thus do they not only save men with
strange good works, but also with strange garments. I think (if there were
no head taken thereto) that the deuell would bring such men so far, yt they
would think to bring the people to heaven with religious meats, dwelling,
and buryenge. Good LORD how feleable is this darkness, namely: that a cool
or religious abyte may justify and save a man? for what needs faith than? Let
us tha^ become al freres, let us all dye in frerely abites: and by that means
shall cloth want to make freres. Beware, bewar of wolves, walkyng in such
shepes clothyng, for they do begyle the and tear the, and think that God does
work with the, and thy salvation, and that by the work yt he works in the:
another put thy trust in any other as thou seyst ye holy virgin Mary do here.
And though thou do use to this the intercession of other, thou do not
evil: for we all ought to pray the one for the other. And no man shall trust
unto other men's works, without the own and proper works of God: but with
great diligence take heed to thyselfe and Gods works, even as though God and
thou were one in heaven and earth, and though God did work with noman but with
the, and so forth look upon other men's works also.

The second that Mary teaches, is, that every man will be ye first in the
praysynge of God, and to recyte the works done to him, and after ye yrayse him
also in other works. After this manner do we read ye Paul and Barnabas did
show unto the apostles the acts that God wrought by the^: and again ye
apostles showed the^ what God had wroughte by the^ also. Like unto this did
they (in the last Chap. of Luke) showing each other of ye resurrection of ye
LORD and appearyng to the^. Even there does finally begin a common joy and
praise of God, where every one prayseth the grace of another, and his most of
al, though he be vyler than another: another does he couete to be the chief in
the goods, but in the love and praise of God. For every man has enough of
God, and his mere goodness, how slender that ever his gift be, so simple an
heart has he. But the hypocrites, seeking their own avail look a squynte and
play the luskes: which when they se they be not the chefest nor best in the
goods, they murmr in stead of praise, and say: that they be either like or
under other, like as they did whereof we read Math. xx. that murmured against
the husbandman, not that he did the^ wrong, but that he counted the last like
worthy of the days hyre with them.

After this manner are there many found that do not praise the goodness of God,
if they se that they have not received so much as Peter, or any of the other
saints, either this or that holy man alive on earth: thinking that if God had
given them so many good gifts also as he has given to other, they would
praise and laud him likewise, setting it light to be endued of God with such
goods, as they do not perceive, as be: the body, life, reason, substance,
honors, friends, the service of the Son, with al other creatures. The which
persons, if they had all the goods that Mary had, yet would not they knowledge
nor praise God in them, For as says Christ Luke.xvi. He that is faithful in
ye leest, is faithful also in much: and he that is unrighteous in the leest, is
unrighteous also in much. Therefore are not they worthy of the great and much,
because they despise the small or little. If they did praise God in the leest,
they should have abundauntly the great: whereof the cause is they have their
syghte above them, and not under them. For if they had their sight bowed
downwarde, they should se some, which perchance have not half so many goods
and gifts, and yet be at rest and co^tente, praysynge God. A bird hoppeth for
joy and syngeth if it can, being content with it that it possesses, and
murmureth not because it can not speak. A dog leapeth and waggeth his tail,
showing a joyful countenance, another is he myscontente that he wants
reason. All manner of beasts are content with their goods, and serve God with
their endeavor and praise. But the only wicked and loving it self eye of
man is insatiable, another does it endeavor itself to be saciate by reason of
his unkindness and pride, seeing it coueteth ever to be the chefest and best,
preferred above other: another will it praise and glorify God but rather look
for honor of him.

Of this manner do we read that in the time of the council holden at
Constaunce in Germany, two Cardinals riding upon costlye mules over the feldes
by the way, did se a shepeherde stand weeping. The one of them a more meker
man and moved with pytie, would not pass by him that was so sorrowful,
approached to comfort him, and asked first what him ayled. The shepeherde after
he had wept bytterly, and holden his peace a great while, so that the
Cardinal was grieved and sorrowful also. At the last he showed him a tode and
said: For this cause do I weep, namely, that God has shapen and created me so
fair a creature, and not like this evil favored worm, and that I did never
consydre this by myself, nor thanked him therefore. Of this was the Cardinal
so abashed, that he fell from his mule, and was boren in the council house,
where he cried and said: O Austine how truly was it said of the: The
unlearned rise up and take in the kingdom of heaven, but we with our
learning do wander in flesh and blood. Now do I think that the shepeherd was
not so rych nor fair, yet did he so hyghly and earnestly consider the gifts
of God in him, and render thanks therefore, that he did find more in himself,
tha^ he could well attain and perceive with his syghte.

The first work of God toward the holy virgin does she confess to be the
lokynge upon her, the which also is the chefest, of the which all the rest
hang and flow. For if it be come so far that God wend his sight to any man
to behold him, that is nothing but grace and mercy, and there must needs
follow all gifts and works. As we read Gene. iiii. that God did look upon
Abell and his gifts, and not so upon Cayn nor his offering. Of this come the
prayers co^munely in the psalter, that God will lyghten his countenance upon
us, and not hyde his syghte, but direct it upon us, and such like. And that
she does think this to be the chefest, she does sufficientlye show, saying:
Lo, for this beholding of me shall al chyldes children call me blessed.

Mark the words, she says not ye her praises shall be spread abroad, ye her
virtues shall be commended, that her virginite or humilite shall be extolled, or
that her excellent deeds shall be song and uttered with some song or ballade,
but she does only often repete and say: that God has looked upon her, and that
thereby she shall be called blessed. And that is to give the honor and praise
to God so holyly and purely, that there is no thing more holy nor pure. And
therefore poyntynge upon the beholdynge or lokynge upon of God, as with a
finger she says: Behold from hence forth now shall they call me blessed.
That is, from the time that God has beholden my vileness, I shall be called
happy. Wherein not she, but ye grace of God in her is praised: ye she is made
little, and makes herself little, when she says that her vileness is looked
upon of God. And for this cause does she first auau^ce her salvation, before
she recyte the works of God declared toward her, and attributes the lokynge
upon her vileness al together unto the sight of God.

By this now is it evident, and we may guess by this which be the true
honor, wherewyth she must be honored, if she per chance has need of it.
But how shall we say to her* Look upon her words, and they shall teach the
to say thus: O thou blessed virgin and mother of God, how vile and despised
werest thou? yet not wythstandynge God did wend so mercyfullye and rychely his
syghte toward the, and has wrought great things in the, whereof thou werest
never one worthy: and the ouerflowynge grace of God in the is far above thy
deservings. Happy art thou and blessed art thou from that time forth for
ever, the which have found such a God. Another needs any man to think that
she will not be pleased, if she be said to be unworthy of so great favor:
verily she failed not, when she granted of her own mind yt she was vile and
unworthy, that God did look upon her for none of her merits or deseruynge, but
of his mere and only grace.

She has no delight to hear such vain ianglers, as both preach and write
many things of her merytes, wherewyth they crake and auaunce their great
learning: not consyderyng how greatly they derogate the Magnificat accuse the
mother of God of lyenge, and minysh the grace of God. For so much worthy merit
as is given unto Mary, so much is the grace of God robbed of, and the virginis
song is robbed of truth. The angel did only great her on the grace of Gods
behalf, and that the LORD was with her, wherefore she is blessed among women.
Wherefore they that attribute her so many praises and honors, and let them so
styck and cleue upon her, they be not far from making an idol of her: eue^
as though she ought be worthily worshypped and trusted unto, where as she does
reiecte and render all unto God, and will have God to be praised in her,
labourynge and endeuourynge finally to cause every man to have trust and
confidence in Gods favor by her ensample.

Whosoever therefore will honor the virgin Mary aryght, the same must not set
her next his heart, and by God, but far beneth him, making her bare and
naked, and so (as she says herself) behold her nakedness. After that must
he maruayle of the unspeakable and abundaunte grace of God, which so rychely
and bountyfully both look upon, love, and bless so vile, unworthy and despised
a person: that so beholdynge he be moved to praise and love God in like
gifts, and so he be occasioned ever to trust and to hope some great goodness
of God, and that of such a God, as does not despise the poor, despised and
vile, but wyteth them safe of his own syghte, that so his heart be stablyshed
in faith, hope and charity. What more acceptable thing suppose ye can befall
unto her, than that ye come to God by her after this manner, and learn to
trust and hope in God by her ensample, when ye likewise are despised and set
at naught, what manner of way that ever it be, either in life or death: She will
not have the to come to her, but by her to God.

Again, that ye learn to eschew al high east and condition, the which every
man enuyronneth to obtain, seeing that God another fande nor did will the same
in his mother. But those paynters and counterfayters, the which do so paynte
and set out the blessed virgin unto us, that there be no vile thing seen in
her, but all excellent things, what do they else but teach us to set our sight
on the mother of God, and not her in the sight of God: Whereby they do fraye
us, and neareha^de do cause us to despair, and darken unto us the image full
of consolacion, even as they do stop the saints in Lent. For seeing she is
drawn above all ensa^ples and patrones, there is nothing left whereof we may
take any coosolacion or cmnforte, where she ought and with a good will would be
a principal ensample of grace, to steare all the world to the grace, love and
praise of God, that the hearts of all men might conceive such an opinion of her
toward God, which with all confidence might say: Ah blessed virgin and
mother of God, what great comfort did God give us by the, because he did with
so gracious a countenance behold thyn unworthiness and low degree, whereby
we are admonyshed henceforth to trust, that after thyn ensample he will also
look upon us wretches.

Thynkest thou not that if David, S. Peter, Paul, Mary Magdalene and such like
for the great grace that they unworthily did obtain, are become ensamples to
comfirme the Godly faith and hope, that ye blessed mother of God does not covet
likewise gladly and worthily to be an ensample and patron unto all the world?
But now can not that be for the superfluous blowers out of her praise and vain
ianglers, which do not declare by this verse how the abundaunte riches of God
were united and made one with her slender pouerte, ye godly worship with her
humilite, the Godly worthynesse with her vileness, the Godly power with her
feblenesse, the Godly goodness, with her merit of no value, the Godly favor
with her unworthiness: where of lust, delight and love toward God with all
confydence do grow. To the which intent the lives and sayenges of all saints
be written also. But there are now a days some that seek help and comfort at
her, as at some God, so that I fear me there raygne more Idolatry in the world
in our days, than ever did. Let this suffice at this time.

These two words: All generacions do signifye as much as: Chyldes chylderen,
and it is so darkly spoken, and so profoundly, that some have busely combred
themselves, thinking which way this should be true, seeing that the Jews,
Turks, Saracens, and other Heythen, beside no small nombre of false Christians
do not only refuse to call her blessed, but despise and curse her. The cause of
this is that they understand the word Generacions of the congregation of men,
where as it stretches farther in this place. As namelye: the degrees or members
of the natural issue, where the one ever follows or succedeth another: the
father, the son, the cosyn, and so forth, whereof every membre is called a
Generacyon. So that the mind of the holy virgin, wha^ se says that her
praise shall last from generacio^ to generacio^, is, that there shall be no time,
wherein her praises shall not be publyshed. And that does she mean when she
says: Lo from henceforth shall all generacions, that is, it begins now and
shall endure in all generacions or kynreds that shall succeed hereafter.

Moreover ye word to call blessed has a larger sygnificacion in the Greek
tha^ that it can so be expressed. For it sygnifyeth also to make happy or
blessed, so that it is not done with tunge only, or words, or making courtesy,
or bowynge of the head, or vaylynge of the bonet, or setting up of images or
pictures, with building of temples or chapels, the which wicked men can do
also: but with all thy strength, truly and heartily. And that is done, when the
heart (as it said before) with beholdynge of her lowlynesse, and lokynge of
the Godly grace upon her does conceive an inward joy and delight toward God,
and say or think thus from the very entrayles and bottom of the heart: O how
happy is this virgin? Such blessing is her true honor and worship, as we
have said before.

For he that is Mighty has done great things unto me, and Holy is his name.
Here does the blessed virgin sing atonce and in a semely order all the
works that God has wrought in her. In the last verse has she song of the
lokynge graciously of God and his bounteous and merciful will toward her: the
which is the chief and principal part of mercy and grace (as is said:) and
here she syngeth of gifts and works. For God though he give many one great
gifts, and strowe his goods in common, yet does not he therefore straight way
look upon and behold them. The worldly and temporal goods are good: but the
grace, favor and syghte of God, are the heretage that does last ever: as
says Paul To. vi. The gift of God is everlasting life in our LORD Jesus
Christ. In the goods gives he that is his, but in the sight and grace does
he give himself. In the goods is his hand received, but in the sight of
grace upon ye heart, his sprete, mind and will are received there in. Wherefore
the holy virgin does give the most thanks unto the syghte of God. Another
says she first: All chyldes children shall call me blessed, because he has
done so great things unto me, whereof this verse makes mention: But because he
has looked upon me that am vile and of no reputacion, and to my low degree,
whereof the first verse does specifye. Where a gracious beholdynge is, there are
gifts also, but not contrary wise is there a gracious sight, where gifts are.
For this cause does this verse or part of this song duly follow the first
verse. After this manner do we read Genesis.xxv. that Abraham gave gifts unto
the chylderen of the concubines, but unto Isaac his true and lawful son by
Sara his lawful wife, he gave the whole heretage. After this manner is it the
mind of God, that his children take no consolacion of the gifts, either
spiritual or temporal, be they never so great, but of him and his goods, yet
not despysynge the gifts.

Another does ye mother of God rehearse any goodness severally, but with one
word does she comprehend them all, saying: He has done great things unto
me, that is, all that he has done unto me is great. Whereby she teaches us,
that the higher the contemplacio^ in sprete be, the less words ought we to
make. For she feleth well enough that she can not utter with words the thing,
that she thinks in her mind, and would feign express. Wherefore such few
words of the sprete are sometime so weyghtye and profounde, that no man can
understand them, without he somdeale feel the same sprete. But unto them that
be void of the spret do such words seem very sleght and clean without
swetnesse or tayst, which dispatch their tax with many words and great
noise. Christ in the.vi. Chapter of Matthew, teaches us to eschew the
multiplyenge of words in our prayer, seeing the Heythen men do even the same,
which thereby do think to be herd. As now a days also in many churches there
is plenty of ryngynge of bells, playenge on organes and other instruments of
musyke, of singing, cryenge, and readinge: but scarceness of praysynge of
God, the which is to worship God in sprete and truth. Ioh. iiii.

Salomo^ says in the.xxvii. chap. of ye Pro. He that is to haysty to praise
his neighbor above measure, shall be taken as one that gives him an evil
report. For he causes ye matter to be suspect, so that every man does think
it a feigned matter, which he busyeth so earnestlye to stuff with his gorgious
praises, and makes nevertheless the matter worse therewyth. And contrarywyse
he that lacks his neighbor, and ryseth early, (that is, is not slack, and
spedely does ryd the matter) the same is to be taken for a prayser. For men do
think: it is not as he does say, and he does it of an hatynge and
euelwyllynge heart, so that he does make his cause worse, and his neghboures
better. On this wise do they that endeavor to praise God with multiplyenge of
words, with cryenge and jangling. They do as though he were deaf, or knew
nothing, and that we must wake or teach him. Such opinion of God is rather a
dispraysynge of him, than a praysynge. But he that thinks upon the works of
God aryght even from the botto^ of his heart, and beholds the same with
wonderyng and geuynge of thanks, so that for very feruentnesse he bruste out,
and sygh rather tha^ speak, and the words that flow by themselves, not
feigned nor connynglye devised do so roll out, that even the sprete do also
comme out: Ye that the words have even hands, fete and life, so that
finally the whole body, the whole life and all the members do long to speak,
that is, to praise God truly in sprete and verite. There are the words very
fire, light and life, as witnesses David in the.C.xviii. Psalm, saying:
LORD thy words are fyry. And again: My lyppes shall set forth thy praise:
even as water in a seething pot runs over and fometh, so that it can not
retain it self therein, for the vehemente heat in the pot. Of this kind
be all the words of the virgin Mary in this song, the which be few, yet
both great and high. Such praysers of God does saint Paul unto the Romans
the.xii. chapter call: Feruente of sprete, the which chafe and burn in sprete,
teaching us to be of the same sort: and such were ye fyry tunges, that the
holy gooste descended in upon the disciples.

The great things be nothing else save that she is become the mother of God,
by the which thing so great goods and so excellent are given unto her, that
pass all the understanding of any man. For from hence flows all honor and
bless, so that among all mankind she be even one person, exceeding all
other and perelesse: because she has only the heavenly father with the son
common with her. And hereby comes that she herself can not name these
great things, for the abundau^te excellency of them: but must rest there, and
breast out in praysynge with a fervent affeccion, saying: He that is mighty,
has done great things unto me. For this cause is all her honor comprehended
in one word, namely if she be called the mother of God: for no man can say
greater things by her, nor to her, though he had as many tunges, as the earth
has herbs and flowers, the sky has stars, or the sea sondes. Moreover it
must be co^sydered with a deep heart, what it means to be the mother of God.

She does also featly ascrybe and attrybute this thing unto the grace of God,
and not her merit. For though she was without sin, yet was that grace so
great, that she was in no wise worthy of it. For how could a creature be
worthy to be the mother of God? Although some vain ia^glers, and not writers,
do babble very much of her worthynesse and deseruynge of this office. But I give
more credence unto the blessed virgin, than unto those vain writers and
bablers. She says that her low degree was looked upon, and that God has not
rewarded her therefore, but that he has done great and mighty things unto
her. He has done great things unto me (says she) not for my deservings:
For such a thing did the holy virgin never think upon, much less than did
she prepare herself to it, that she might be the mother of God. The message
came suddenly and vnwars unto her, (as says Luke the euangeliste.) As for a
deseruyng abides and looks not for the reward to come suddenly, but of a
redynesse and set purpose.

Now it that is in the song called, Regina coeli letare. etc. (namely: Whom
thou deseruedest to bear. And in another song: Whom thou vverest worthy to
bear) is nothing to purpose. For ye same words are also song of the holy
cross, the which not wythstandynge was a tree, and could deserve nothing.
And even so is this also to be understand. If it than of necessite must have been the mother of God it was required again, that it should have been a woman
kynne, a virgin, of the tribe or kynred of Judah, and to believe the message of
the angel, that judged her apt to the same, as the scripture had wytnessed of
her. The preciousnesse or worthynesse of the wood was none other, save that it
was mete to be a cross, and was ordyned of God to the same use: Eue^ so had the
holy virgin none other worthynesse to be the mother of God, save that she was
comely and ordyned thereto: that so it might be a mere grace and no deseruynge or
duty, that in no case it were prejudicial and mynysshynge either the favor
or the glory of God. It is more semely to abayte to much from her, than from
the glory of God. Ye there ca^ not be abayted to much from her, seeing that she
(as all other creatures) is created of naught. But unto the grace of God is to
much derogated, the which is dangerous, another is the mother well apayed
therewyth. It is needful also, that we pass not the marks that Gods glory
does admit, in vsurpyng of calling her: as when we great her a queen of
heaven, yet is she not an idol thereby, that either she may give or help, as
they do, which call upon her, desire her to be gracious, and finally fly unto
her rather than unto ye rych treasures of God. She gives nothing, only God
gives all as it follows: He that is mighty, wherwt she robs all creatures
of their strength and power. O what great hardynesse is this, and what spoils
of so tender and young maiden? which can make destistute all mighty and
strong men of their strength, al puyssaunt men of their power, all wise men
of their wit, and all boastynge and glorious men can she bring to shame,
attributyng al strength, noble acts, wisdom and glory unto God only. For the
saying: He that is mighty, is so much to say, as there is noman that can do
ought, save only God, as witnesses S. Paul saying in the.i. chapter to the
Ephesians: that God works all things after the counsel of his own will,
and that the works of all creatures, are the works of God: the which thing
we also acknowledge in our Creed, saying that we believe in God almyghtye. He
is so Almighty, that in all things, by all things, and above all things,
nothing does work, save only his strength and puyssaunce. After this manner
said Anna the mother of Samuel, in the.i. book of Regum, the.ii. chapter: There
is noman that can do ought of his own power. And Paul says also in the.ii.
Epistle to the Corinth. the.iii. chapter: Such trust have we through Christ to
Godwarde, not that we are able of our selves to think any thing, as of
ourselves, but our ableness comes of God. This is an high and worthy
article, co^teynynge very much, alayenge ato^ce al pride, curiosite,
presu^pcio^, rashness, boastyng, false co^fide^ce, and exalts only God: ye
and shows the cause also why he ought to be exalted, even because he works
all things. It is easy to be spoken, but to refourme and redress our life
according to it, that is laborious, and full of pain. For they that lead
their life in such things, are lovers of peace, given to God, and simple men,
attributyng nothing to themselves, certifyed that God has all things, and
they nothing.

This is than the meaning of Gods mother in these words: Of all these great
goods is nothing mine, but he that works all things alone, and whose power
alone works in all things, he it is that has done so great things unto
me. For the word Mighty sygnifyeth not a workelesse, idle, and resting power,
(as we say of a worldly king that he is mighty, which nevertheless is still,
and works not) but a workyng power and continually doing, which without
intermission does proceed and work. For God does not hold up, but proceeds
in workynge, as witnesses Christ Ioh. v. My father works hitherto, and I
work also. Of this wise also says Paul Ephesians. iii. that God is able to do
exceadyng abundauntly, above all that we axe or understand according to the
power that works in us. That is: He ever gives greater things than we
require, as his nature is to do, so does his power work. For this cause did I
say, that Mary would be no Idol, and that God does all, and she nothing.

For this cause does she add and say: And holy is his name. That is: As I do
not take the work to me, even so do not I ascribe the honor thereof unto me
another. For he only ought to have ye praise and name, that fulfylleth ye work.
It is unseemly ye one shall do the work, and another shall draw the name and
praise thereof unto himself. As for me, I am the workehouse only, where in he
works, and therefore is no praise nor honor due unto me, that I am the
mother of God, but God and his excellent work are to be praised and honored
in me. It is enough for me that I rejoice with him, and say: Happy ame I, that
God has separate me, in whom it has plased him to accomplysh such his works.

Lo how purely does she wend all to Godwarde, how wholye does she draw no
honor, no work, no glory to herself, and behaueth herself as before when
no such thing had happened unto her, setting no more ^^^are, or making more
search for honor, than she did before: another does she swell, auaunce, or
cry out that she is become the mother of God: another does she finally require
any worship therefore, but goes her way, and does her business as before,
mylketh the kyen, dyghteth the meat, washes the dyshes, swepeth the house, and
does all that a handmayden or huswyfe becomes to do in such vile works, as
though such plenteous gifts of grace did not pertayne unto her Among women
and her neghbures was she estymed no greater, than she was before, she required
no more another, and remained a poor cytesin among the commune people. O what a
simple and poor heart is that? O what wonderful virgin? what great things
are hyd under a lowly behaueoure? How many have felt her, spoken to her, eaten
and dronken with her, which perchance have counted her to be despised, of the
commune sort, a poor and simple cytesin, which would have be nabasshed and
maruayled, if they had been aware of such in estimable gifts in her: and that
is his name to be holy. For holy is it called, that is sundered and appropriate
to God, which noman may touch nor defyle, but worship it. And name is called a
good fame or renown, glory, praise and worship. Now must every man than
abstain from the name of God, so that he another touch it, nor draw it to
himself, the which is also meant Exodus xxx: where Moses was commanded by God
to make precious oyntme^t, and it was straytelye forbidden onye man to anoynte
his body therewyth. That is: Noman shall be so hardye as to appropriate the
name of God to himself, for that is said to vnhalow and to despise it, if we
rejoice in oureselues, or take onye honor upon us, either have pleasure in
oureselues, or auaunce our goods or works, as the world does vnhalowe and
defyle the name of God with out ceassynge. For as the works are only Gods, so
is the name left him only also. Moreover as many as hallowe so his name
making themselves void of praise and honor, worship it aryght, wherefore
they also be hallowed of it: which the precious ointment that is spoken of in
the thyrtyeth chapter of Exodus does signify with the which all that was touched,
was cleansed. This ointment is ye word of God, hallowed of us. For wha^ we do
attribut unto us no works, no ^oastynge, nor love of ourselves thereof, tha^
is it honored aryghte, tha^ does it touch and hallow us.

For this cause ought we to beware, seeing that we can not be on earth without
the goods, name and honor of God, that if we be praised of any man, or get a
name, that than we use this example of the mother of God, being ready to
answer them with this verse, using the honor and praise aryghte, confessing
openly, or at the least thinking thus in our mind: LORD God, it is thy
work that is praised and auau^ced, I beseke the let it be thine name also. Not
I LORD, but thou have wrought it, which workest all things myghtely, and holy
is thy name. After this manner ought noman to refuse the praise and honor as
wrong, nor to disprayse them as nothing worth: but he ought not to ascribe it
to him self, as a thing to percious and noble, referrynge them to him, whose
they be truly in heaven. This lo teaches this noble verse, wherewith he is
answered also that demands, whether one do not owe reverence unto another.
Ye Paul says, To. xii. In geuyng honor let one go before another.
Nevertheless noma^ shall take ye honor upon him, as though it did befall unto
him: another shall he suffer it to remain upon him self. But he shall hallowe
and restore it unto God, unto whom it belongs, with all the good and work,
from whence ye honor flows. Another shall any man lead an dishonest life. If
he live honestly, than must honor be there. But as an honest life is the
gift and work of God, so let his name also be holy and undefiled from
delytynge and having delectacion in himself. This do we also desire in ye
pater noster, when we say: Hallowed be thy name*

And his mercy endures thorovvout al generacions, upon them that fear him.
It is needful for us to know the manner of the scripture, which calls the
natural lineage or issue a progeny or generation by the which one man is ever
successiuelye borne of another. Wherefore this english word generation or
progeny does not suffyse to express the meaning thereof, yet do I know none
better than it. For a progeny do we call the company that belongs unto us,
either by reason of blood or marriage. But in this place it signifies the
natural issue and succession from father, till chyldes child, and every
membre of the same is called a progeny, and I think it be not wrong Englyshed
of this fasshion: namely, and his mercy endures from child to child upon
them that fear him. And this phrase of the scripture is very ryfe, having his
beginning and original of the words that God spoke unto Moses and all the
people upon mount Syna, saying Exo. xx. I the LORD thy God ame a gelous God,
visitynge the sin of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation, of them that hate me: and do mercy upon many thousands,
that love me, and keep my commandments.

After that Mary the mother of God had fynished the praise of God, and of his
goodness toward her, she wandreth now al among the works, which God
works generally in all men, and syngeth of them also, teaching us featly to
know the works, kind, nature and will of God. Many ingenious and wytty
philosophers have attempted the same also, that they might know what God were,
writing much of the same, the one thus, another so. But they were all blind
in that behalf, and could not perceive the true shynynge. And verily ye
greatest thing, both in heaven and earth, is to know God aryghte, if it do
befall unto any man. And that does the blessed virgin teach very properly by
her own ensample, as is showed above. But how can he be known more easyer or
better than by his works? for he that perceaueth this duly, the same must
needs know his nature, will, heart and mind: Wherefore it is conning to know
his works. And that we might mark it the better, she rehearses orderlye in
these four verses six godly works in six kinds of men, and parts the
world in two, setting on each side three manner of works, and three kinds of
men so, that a continual debate does remain among ye parties, by reason of
the feate opposition one against ye other: whereby she does descrybe him so
goodly, as can not be amended.

Moreover, this particion is duly and orderly comprehended in sundery places
of the scripture, as namely Ieremye the nynth Chapter, where he says: Let not
ye wise man rejoice in his wisdom, nor ye strong man in his strength, another
the rich man in his riches: But who so will rejoice, let him rejoice in this,
that he understands and knows me: for I am the LORD which do mercy, equite
and righteousness upon earth: Therefore have I pleasure in such things, says
the LORD. This is a noble text, and agreeable to this song of the blessed
virgin. By this place also do we se that the spirit of the prophet deals
the world in three, as namely: in Vvysedom Power and Riches, the which he does
overthrow when he says that noma^ should rejoice in them: for God is not
found in them, another can he have pleasure in them. Moreover he sets three
other against these, namely: Mercy, Judgment and Righteousness. In these is
mine endeavor (says he,) ye^ I myself do all these. So near ame I, that I
do these things, not in heaven, but upon earth, there ame I found. He that
knows me of this manner, the same may rejoice truly and make his boaste
boldly thereof. For if he be not wise, but poor spreted, than is my mercy
with him: If he be not mighty, but vile and lowlye, than is my judgment ready
for him: If he be not rich, but poor and nedy, than is my righteousness so
much the more raygnyng with him.

By wisdom he understands al high spiritual goods, whereby man may get a
delight, reioycynge and a good opinion, (as the verse followynge does specifye,)
as be: understanding, reason, prudence, knowledge, vertuousnesse, an honest
conversation: finally, all that is called in the soul holy or spiritual, how
great gifts that ever they be, so that none of them be God himself.

By power he understands all power, noblynesse of birth, friends, dignityes,
worship, whether they concern temporal or spiritual goods or men (though
in scripture there be no spiritual superiorite, but only a service and
occupyenge of a low rowme) with all his right, lyberte and privilege. etc

By riches are ^^^^te health, bewtye, pleasure and all that may chance unto
the body outwardly. Against these are three other set of the prophet, namely:
the poorespreted, the oppressed, and the nedy. But we will look orderly upon
the six works and parts.

The first work of God is Mercy.
Of this work speaks this present verse, saying: His mercy endures from
child to chyldes child, or from progeny to progeny upon them that fear him.

She begins at the greatest, namely, at the spiritual or inward goods,
which make men here upon earth the most proudest, hyghmynded and hardnecked.
There is no rych man, no mighty lord so proud or high minded, that is not
overcome of such a wise man: the which perceaueth and douteth not at all that
he does pleate or defend a just cause, understand the matter well, and that
he is wyser than other folk. Specially, when it is come so far yt either he
must avoid, or else knowledge his cause to be unjust, than becomes he so rash
and void of the fear of God, that he will not be ashamed to boast and say,
that he can not err, that God is with him, and other be accursed, ye he is
not ashamed to call the judgment and day of dome to witness: and if occasion
be joined to his power, than breaks he forth with his malepartnesse where it
pleases him, he persueth, judges, vexes, slays, dryueth away and waisteth
all them that wythstande him, and this affirms he to be done to the praise,
glory and service of God. And is so sure of a great deseruynge and plenteous
grace by God, that the angels of heaven be scarce so sure. O what a great
burble is this? O how much does ye scripture treat of such kind of me^? how
dreadful things does she threaten the^? but they feel it less than the anuylt
does the hammer strokes. And this thing is ryfe and plenteous of matter.

Of such speaks Christ in the.xvi. of Ihon, saying: The time comes, that
who so ever puts you to death, shall think that he has done service to God.
And David says likewise of such on this wise: He does prevail against all
his enemies, saying: There shall no evil aproche me. As though he would say:
I defend a right quarrel, I do well, God shall reward me hyghly Such do Esaias
in the.xvi. Chapter, and Ieremye in the.xlvii. say^ that the Moabites were,
writing on this wise: As for Moabs pride, we have herd of it, she is very
high minded. I know her stoutnesse, her boastynge, her arrogance, and the pride
of her stomach, says the LORD. For her furiousness may another uphold her
with strength, nor deed. We se such me^ take things upon them passing their
power, for the great pride. Such were the Jews against Christ and his
apostles. Such were Jobs friends, which reasoned above measure wisely
against him, and commended and praised God vehemently. But such kind of men
hear no man, they can be persuaded of no man, another can onye man bring them
thereto, that if their cause be wrong, they will grant it, or to give place,
but styck to it that they have begone and proceed therein, though the world
should perysh therefore. Another can the scripture sufficiently reprehende such
naughty packes, calling them sometime an adder, stoppynge his ear, lest he
hear the charmers voice, sometime a roarynge lion, sometime an immovable rock,
sometime a draggon, and so forth other names.

But this kind of men is no where better set forth in his colors, than in
the.xl. and.xli. chapters of Job, where they be called Behemoth. Now Behema in
Hebrew is as much to say as a beast, and Behemoth the plural nombre
sygnifyeth beasts, that is: a vmbremente or multitude of men, leadynge a
beastly life, and not permittynge themselves to be guyded by the sprete of God.
This kind does God in the same place say to have eyes like the morning
shine: for there is no end of his wisdom. His skin also is so hard, that no
wapen can pearse through it, either shot or stycked at, that is: if the word of
God be preached against the^ to their reprofe, they laugh it to scorn: for
they judge their matter sure enough: The skales also do shycke so fast
together, that the leest air can not enter, that is: they agree so, and be so
one minded, that they will not admit the leeste breath of Gods sprete. As for
his heart (sayethe God) is hardened like an anuylte. It is the Deuels body, and
therefore does he in this place attribute it all unto the same. Such a people
above all other is the Bishop of Rome, with all his vmbremente, and has been
a great season. For they do likewise, and that of such a fashion, as is
euidente that never was seen: they hear no body, there is no redressynge and
amendynge of life: No persuadynge, no prayenge, no threatenynge will help.
Shortelye, they another say nor sing, save: We defend a good quarrel, thus
must it be, auaunte they whom this does not please, ye though it were the
whole world.

Here might some body say: How shall this agree? shall we not keep the laws?
shall we let go the truth? Is it not commanded us even to dye in the truths
quarrel and righteousness? have not the holy martyrs of God suffered much for
ye Gospel? Would not Christ himself have right? For it chau^ceth oftymes, that
such men defend a just quarrel, (ye and before God also, as they do boaste,)
and that they handle themselves ryghteously and truly. I Answer: Here is it
due to have the eyes opened, and also necessary, here is the knot: It rests
only in that, that a man have the true learning in the law. It is true verily
that we must suffer much for the truth and righteousness, and not to deny
the same, how slender soever she be. Moreover, it may be that the other part
have right, but they do amysse in that they execute the law unjustly, and
handle not the matter with fear, another have they God before their eyes, but
think it to be enough that the matter is right, and therefore he both will and
must proceed by his power, and make an end of the game: where by they make of
their right, wrong, though it were true in deed and unblameable. But it is
most perrillous, when they think themselves to be in the right way, and yet
be not sure what ought to be done in matters that concern God and his
judgments. But we will first speak grossly and set forth a commune and blonte
ensample:

Are not money, goods, the body, honor, a wife, chylderen, friends and such
like good creatures, created and given of God* Now that they are the gifts of
God, and not thine, and God will prove the, whether thou canste find in thine
heart to lose the^ to auaunce his glory, and hang more upon him only, than
upon these creatures: and therefore should raise one that either should take
part of them from the, or altogether, either hurt the or by bodylye death
would cause the to lose them: Thynkes thou not here were a just cause to be
wytlesse, to rage, to recover the same again by force and strong hand, or to
be vnpaciente until thou had recovered the^ again, layenge for the that
they be good creatures of god? And because yt all the scripture judges the
things to be good, therefore thou also wylt keep the word of God, and defend
or require again the same goods both with body and life, orels to forbear
them or let them go against thy will: Were not this a ioly visure? If thou
wylt therefore do well in this behalf, thou may not run headlynges after
thine own brain. But how shall I do than? ye shall fear God, and say on
this wise: LORD they be good things and thy gifts, as thine own word and ye
scripture do witness. Nevertheless I dove whether thou do envy me them.
If I knew I should not use them, I would not bestow one hear upon the
having again of them: but if I knew thou would them to be in my power, I
would (obeynge thy will) bestow both body and goods to have them again. But
seeing now I stand in doubt of either of these thy wylles, and I se what now
is don, namely, that thou suffrest them to be taken from me, I commytte the
matter unto the, and will wait upon thy pleasure in this behalf, ready either
to keep them, or to forgo them.

This (lo) is a faithful soul, and fearing God, by whom is mercy, as the
mother of God syngeth of. And here by may it be evident, of what fundament and
sprete Abraham, David, and all Israel did war and slaye so many in times
past. For they took the matter in hand at the commandment and will of God,
and with fear: not fighting for riches, but because God did require it of
them, showing otherwhyles the commandment of God in that behalf, as the
holy scripture makes mention sometime. Now may ye se that the truth is not
denied, which says yt these be good creatures: Ye the same truth also does
say and teach that thou do forsake, and ready at all time to forgo the same
goods, if it please God, and so hang only upon God, The truth does not
compel the to require the goods again, in that she says they be good:
another does she constrayne the to say they be not good, but renouncing the
same say that they be not evil.

Likewise must be done with the law, and all manner of goods either of wit or
reason. Justice is a good thing, given of God, who douteth therein? Gods word
it self does confess that the law is good. Another may any man say that his
ryghteous cause is evil, but shall rather dye the death, and forgo all that is
not God. For that were to deny God and his word, the which testifyeth that
the law is not evil, but good. Will thou therefore cry out, rage, play ye
mad man, and kill all the world, because such right or law is taken from
the? As some do which lift up their voice until heaven, causynge great
mysery, waystyng people and contryes, fyllynge ye world with war and
bloudsheddynge. What know thou whether God will leave those gifts and right
to thy governance? they be his, he can take them from the, either to day or to
morrow, he ca^ deprive the of them, and restore the to the same again when it
shall please him by friends or enemies, even as it pleases him. He does prove,
whether thou will lose thy right for his love, suffer wrong and iniurye,
suffer rebuke for his name, and cleue only to him. If thou than art dredynge
God, and sayeste thus within the: LORD, it is thine, I will not have it in my
power and subjection, without I know that thou do wysh it me, than shall this
verse have rowme: And his mercy endures thorovv out all generacions, upon them
that fear him, which will work naught, but it be according to his will.

Here (lo) is the word of God kept on both parts: first, that thou
grauntest thy right, reason, understanding, wysdom, and all thine opinion to
be good and just, the which even the word of God does also say. Secondlye,
that thou art content to forbear such gift for the love of God, to be
wrongefully condemned, ye to be a mockage and a gasynge stock to the world,
the which Gods word also does teach. There be.ii. things: to confess the
thing that is just and good, and to obtain or overcome. It is enough for the
to knowledge and confess that thou have a good cause. If thou canste not
overcome, commit the matter unto God. It is thy part to knowledge, to
overcome has God reserved unto himself. If he will have the to overcome, he
shall do it, either shall he so bring the thing to pas, without thy counsel
or thought, that thou must needs take the matter in hand and overcome, and
that after such fashion, as thou never woldeste have thought or desired. If he
will not, let his mercy suffyse the. If the victory of thy righteousness be
taken from the, yet can not the knowlegynge of the same be taken from the. Lo,
here must we stand back, not from the goods of God, but from the wicked and
evil geuynge of to much mind to the same, that we can right well both use and
forgo them, so that in all chances that befall, we cleue only to God. Would
God all princes and powers (as their duty is) were not ignorau^te of this,
which be not content to confess that they have right, but will needs
overcome and win, setting aside all fear of God, and fyllynge the world
with blood and mysery thinking they do right therein seeing they have a
ryghtfull cause, a true matter and a ryghteous quarrel, or at the leest suppose
it to be so. What is that else save the proud and hyghmynded Moab? which
counts and makes himself worthy of the noble and bewtyfull possession of
Gods gift, namely, the Law: where as he (if he behold himself well in the
syghte of God) is not worthy that the ground do bear him, and that he do eat
the crustes of bread, because of the uncleaness of his sins. O blyndnesse,
blyndnesse, who is worthy of the leeste creature of God? yet will we not only
have the chief creatures, as justice and wisdom and their honor, but also
with outrageous sheddyng of blood and with all misfortune do procure and
endeavor to keep the same: and forthwyth we go pray, fast hear mass,
found churches, with so bloody and ragynge mind, that it were no wonder
though the stones should leap in our faces.

Her^ ryseth now again a question, namely: Shall not a prince than defend his
land and people from injury? Shall he sitting still and resting, suffer all
things be taken from him? What should become in the world of this at the
last? Here upon will I brefely show my mind: The power of the swearde or
superiorite must and needs to defend his subjects, as I have oftymes said.
For that cause bears he the swearde, that such as receive the word and
admonicion of God, and do not obey the same, be retained in fear, that so they
may let other be in rest and peace. And here in ought he not to seek his own
auau^tage, but of other, and the honor of God, being content to be at rest,
and to lay up the sweard, had not God ordined the same to the punyshynge of the
wicked, and defense of ye good: so that such proteccyon and defense be not
done with farther damage, as namely, for taking up a spowne, a platter be
broken. It is but a slender proteccion, if an whole city be brought in danger
for one person: or if for one vyllage or castle, all the province be
disquieted: without God does command it severally, as sometime he was was
wont to do. A souldyer does rob some cytesyn, and for to aue^ge the same,
thou raysest an host, and gatherest a tax of ye whole contry: who has the
most harm, the lord or the souldyer? David did wynke oftymes, when he could
not punysh without ye great damage and harm of other. Eue^ so must all powers
order themselves, and again the indweller must forbear and suffer somewhat for
ye co^munite, and not wysh, that for his sake, all other suffer great loss and
hurt. Equalite can not be had always. Christ would not that the taxes should be
plucked up, lest the wheat were plucked up also. If men should war for
every assault, and wynke at nothing, there should never be peace, but continual
waistyng. Therefore is righteousness or unrighteousness never a sufficient
cause to punysh or to war without discrecio^: neuertheresse it is cause
sufficient to punyshe in season, without the undoing of another For a lord or
prince must specially se what is expedient rather unto a co^munalte, than unto
one or other. To speak of war is here no convenient time.

Of this wise must be done in godly matters, namely: Faith and the Gospel,
which are ye best goods, another may any man leave them. But ye righteousness,
favor, and honor befallyng and belo^gynge to ye same must be weyed, and
committed to God. The care is to be taken not for ye victory, but for ye
co^fessynge and knowlegynge, and to suffer wyllyngly though a man were reuyled
as a wicked deceauer, an heretyke, an erroneous or rash fellow, though a man
were persecuted, dryue^ away, burnt or killed, or any other means: for the
mercy of God is nigh unto such. For the faith and truth can not be taken from
him, though he be deprived of his life. Yet nevertheless ought noma^ to ru^ne
of his own accord, and to bring or keep such right of the gospel by force
or unlawful means: but to submytte himself in ye sight of God, as one ye
perchance is unworthy, ye such exceadynge goodness should happen through him,
and with complaining and prayenge to commend the matter unto his mercy.

Behold this is ye first work of God, namely: yt he is merciful unto the^,
yt with a good will forgo their intent, righteousness, wysedom and what soever
spiritual goods there be and gladly remain poor of sprete. Those are ye true
fearers of God, that judge themselves worthy of nothing, be it never so little,
and be naked with a good will both before God and me^. And ye goods, which they
have unworthily received of ye pure grace, do they use with praise,
tha^kesgeuyng and fear, eue^ as though they were other folks go^des, not
seeking their own will, pleasure, praise, or glory but his whose they be. Whereof
ye blessed virgin takes occasion to show how God delyteth more in exercisyng
this his bewtyful work, namely mercy, tha^ strength: wha^ she says, that this
work of God shall last continually, from child to chyldes child, upon the^
that fear him, where as the other work lasts only until the third or
fourth generation, and in this verse followynge is another stent nor time set.

The second spiritual work, is to subdue the proud.
He shows strength with his arm and scatters them that are proud in the
ymaginacion of their heart.
Let no man be moved with this my true translacion, in that I have translated
above works myghtely, but here I say: he shows strength. For the cause
why I so do, is that the words might be the playner and easyer to understand,
which ought not to be bound either to time or place: but that ye nature and
works may be more frelyer uttered, the which he always has done, does, and
shall do, so that it is as much as though I had said: God does so play the
LORD, that his works prospere so myghtely, that he scatters the proud, and
gives mercy unto them that fear him.

The arm of God is taken in scripture for his own power, by ye which he
works without any mean of the creatures: the which is done priuelye and
unlooked for, so that noman is ware of it, before it be dispatched: and that no
man can know the same arm or power, save only by faith. Wherefore, few do
give faith thereunto, as Esaye does compain in the.liii. Chapter, saying:
Who gives credence unto our preaching? Or to who^ is the arm of the LORD
known? Al this is done (as it follows in ye same place) because ye al
things ar wrought pryuely under an unequal appearau^ce of such power. Abac.
the prophet says also in his.iii. Chapter that God has horns in his hands,
meaning thereby his great strength: yet notwythstandynge does he say that the
same power is hyd. But how is this done? namely after this manner:

When God works by the mean of creatures, than is it euidentlye seen where
strength or feblenesse is: whereof is ryse^ this proverb: God does aid the
stronger part. Whatso ever prince therefore vanquysheth the other, the same is
he, through whom God does stryke the other. If a wolf tear any man, or he get
any damage otherwise, that same is done by ye creatures. Of this wise does God
make or destroy one creature by another. He that overcomes, overcomes: he
that abides, abides. But where as he himself works with his arm, there
goes it otherwise to work: for there is ye matter destroyed or made again,
contrary to our opinion, no man perceiving it. This kind of workynge does he
use in two sorts of men, namely good and wicked: for ye good he suffers to be
so feeble, strengthlesse and oppressed, that every man would think it were all
done with them, and that they were at their latter meace, and at the very same
time is he strongly by them, and that so secretly, that they themselves that
suffer can not tell thereof, but believe it. There is ye full strength and arm of
God. For when the strength of man fails, than comes the power of God in: if
faith only be there, waiting for the same. Now when the trouble is come to an
end, then does it appear what strength lay hyd under the feblenesse. Of this
wise (lo) was Christ destitute of strength on ye cross and even than wrought
he exceadyng great things, vanquyssyng sin, death, ye world, hell and all
evil. After this manner were all martyrs strong and overcame: and after this
manner do all such as be troubled now a days ouerco^me. For the which cause
Joel says in the.iii. Chap. Let the weak man say, I am strong, but in
faith, not in felyng, until it be nearehande come to an end.

Again, the other part suffers God to heave and exalte it self,
wythdrawynge his power from them, and lets them be puffed up by reason of
their own strength. For when man's power comes in, than goes the power of
God out. But when the bladder is full, and every man thinks to have the
better hand, then comes God suddenly, and prycketh the bladder, whereby all
is dashed. Those fools know not, that even when they rise and prospere, they
are forsaken of God, and that Gods arm is not with them. Therefore does their
endeavor last an appointed season, and after that does it said and vanysh,
like a burble, and becomes as though it never had been, whereof David
(maruaylynge in the.lxxvii. Psalm how it happened that the wicked and ungodly
became so rych, careless and mighty) at the last does say: I could not know
this, until I went into ye Sa^ctuary of God, and consydred ye end of these
me^, namely: how you have set the^ in a slyppery place, that thou may cast
them down headlynges, and destroy the^ O how suddenly do they consume, perysh,
and come to a fearful end? Ye even as a dream when one awaketh, so make
thou their image to vanysh out of ye city. And again in the.xxxvi. Psalm. he
says: I my self have seen ye ungodly in great power, and floryshyng like a
grene Baye tree: but wha^ I went by, lo, he was gone: I sought him, but he
could no where be found.

Lack of faith is only the cause that we can not also abide a little, or else
should we se seatly how the mercy of God is with them that fear him, and the
arm of God also against the proud with all force and strength. We faythlesse
grope blyndfeld with our fyst after the mercy of God and his arm. The which if
we do not continently feel, tha^ do we even think all be lost of our part,
and our enemies to have gotten the field: as though both Gods mercy and grace
were wythdrawen from us, and his arm to be against us. And that comes
thereby, because we know not his works, wherefore we know not him, his mercy,
nor his arm. It is necessary, and he will be known by faith Therefore must ye
wit and reason be shut up, their eye offends us, we must therefore pluck
it out, and cast it away.

Lo these are the two works of God repugnau^t each to other, wherein we are
taught that to be the mind of God, that he be far from the wise and
prudente, but be near unto the foolysh, which must suffer wrong. This
makes God to be loved and praised, and conforteth the soul, body and all
powers.

Now consydre the words: He scatters them that are proud in the imaginacion
of their heart. This scatterynge or waystynge is done (as it is said) when
they are wyseste of all, and most fullest of their own wisdom, for than
surely is the wisdom of God gone. But what way can he scatter them better,
than with depriuynge them of his eternal wisdom? and by permittynge them to
be filled with worldly and transitory wisdom. It is pythy that she says:
them that are proud in the imaginacion of their heart, that is, such as their
own mind, understanding (the which not God, but their heart does ministre)
does greatly playse, as though they only were the most iustest, wysest and
best: whereby they auaunce themselves above such as fear God, myspraysynge
their opinion and right, reuylynge and persecutynge them to the vtermooste, so
that their cause only must be just and abide. The which when they have
optayned, they heave them selves unto the clouds, as the Jews (...), that
wythstode Christ, and yet perceived not that their matter came to naught
thereby, and was despised, and Christ contrarywyse to be exalted and set up
unto an exceadynge glory. Thus do we se than that this verse speaks of
spiritual goods, and teaches by what means the works of God are known on
both parts, and teaches us also to embrace wyllyngly the pouerte of sprete,
and to suffer injury, to permit unto our adversaries their request, for they
shall not long rejoice. Herein is a strong and sure promise that the proud
shall not escape Gods arm, they must be thrown down, though they heave
themselves never so sore, if we at the leest be fully so persuaded. For where
such faith is not, there does God not work such great works, but leaving
the^ he works openly by creatures as is declared before. But these are not
true works whereby he may be known, for the powers of the creatures are
joined to them also: Another are they the bare works of God, which ought be to
such, as he works alone, without any foren help, which is done when we are
oppressed for our opinion and right, and suffer ye power of God to use her
will in us. These are his noble works.

Moreover, Mary does connyngly check the ungodly hypocrites here, and looks
another to their hands nor eyes, but to the heart, and says: them that are
proud in the imaginacion of their heart, where with she does specially mean
the enemies of the truth, even as the Jews were sometime against Christ, and
as some are now a days like unto them. For such holy and learned men are not
proud in clothing and behaueoure, they pray, fast, preach, study, say
mass often, they go doukynge with their heads, and think noma^ to be a greater
enemy unto pride, covetousness, or hypocrisy than themselves, and that noman
be a greater friend of God than they themselves. How could they hinder and
hurt the truth, were not they so holy, honest and learned me^? For such their
utter apperau^ce, glystereth, shyneth and bleareth the eyes of the common
people. Good LORD how well are they persuaded, calling upon God, and take pytie
upon poor Jesus that does so evil, is proud, and finally not like unto the^
in righteousness and honesty* Of them says Christ in the.xi. of Matthew: that
wisdom is justified of her children, that is, they are wyser and more
ryghteous than I myself, which ame the godly wisdom. Whatsoever I do that
is naught, and must be checked and correct of them.

These are the most wicked and poysonest men on earth, whose pride of heart is
so deep and deuellysh, that she can brouke no medecyne nor wholesome counsel.
For they hear not what is said, ye they reken it not to be spoken unto them,
but unto the wretched sinner, which has need of it, they need it not. Ihon
baptiste does call them the generation of vipers Matthew.iii. and Luke the
third: and even so does Christ also Matthew the.xii. and.xvi. These are they
that do not truly fear God, do and serve to be destroyed of God with their
pride and arroga^cy. But seeing there is noman that so persueth ye truth and
ryghteousnes as these do, (though they think it be ongods behalf as we have
said before) therefore among the three enemies of God must they go before and
bear the standarde, the second and leest are the rych, whom the great men
and rulers, the third enemies do pass in executynge power. But these learned
men excel either of the other far beyond the nocke, for they do hurt on
both parties with their bloody entysynge. The rych men quench ye truth by
themselves only: The men of authorite chase her from other: But these learned
men quench her clean out in themselves, and in stead thereof they bring
forth ye imaginacion of their own heart, so that she can never rise again.
Now as the truth is better in herself than men, in whom she has her
dwelling, so much are the learned men worse than the great men, or rych me^.
O how does God abhor and hate such, as they be worthy?

The third work is to subdue the proud.
He puts down the mighty from the seat.
This work with the other followynge may easily be perceived by the two
works above rehearsed. For like as he destroys the wise and suttyll in their
imaginacions and good meanynges: (where unto they stick, and use their pride
against such as fear God, which must suffer wrong, and their wit and
righteousness must be condemned, the which all is chefely done for ye love of
Gods word.) Even so he destroys and puts down the mighty and great men
with all their power and dominion, where upon they leaning, used their
crueltye and pride upon their inferiors, and on the good lowlyones, the
which must suffer punyshmente, death and all evil of them. And as he
comfort the^ that must suffer wrong and shame for righteousness, the
truth, and his words sake, even so strengtheth he the^, that suffer hurt and
wrong: but the more he comforts those that must suffer wrong, so much the
more frayeth he the other. But this all must be perceived and looked for in
faith. For he destroys not the mighty, as soon as they have deserved it,
sufferyng them sometime until their power or authorite be fynisshed: for than
does God keep the^ no more, another can they keep themselves, but do vanyshe and
fayde of their own swyng without any rumoure or sedicion: and than such as are
oppressed comeforth and rejoice without any vprour or noise. For the power of
God is in them, which only abides.

Mark that she says not, he destoyeth the syes or trones, but he puts the
mighty down out of the seats: another says she, that he leaves the
oppressed under foot, but sets them up. For as long as this world does
endure, so long must Superiorite, Rule, Power and the Trones continue. But
that they are evil used, contrary to the will of God, in doing iniurye and
wrong unto such as are good, and that they do also delight therein, and exalte
themselves therein, and use it not with the fear of God, to his praise, and
defense of justice: that can he not suffer long. As experience here of may be
seen in all stories, how that God sets up one kingdom and puts down
another: how he rayseth one province, and puts down another how he
multiplyeth one nation, and destroys another: as may be seen in the
Assyrians, Babylonians, Perses, Greeks and Romans, which nevertheless
imagined their raygnes to endure ever. Even so likewise does he not destroy
reason, wisdom and laws, for they must be had, if ye world shall be
mayntayned: but pride, and the hyghmynded, which serve themselves with these
gifts, fear not God, persecute ye good and gods law, and abuse such bewtyful
gifts of god against hi^.

Gods business is in that case now, that the wise and proud meaners, (if I
may so call them) do most communely join themselves with me^ of authorite,
and steare them against the truth, as David witnesses in the.ii. Psalm,
saying: The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers are come together,
against the LORD and against his anointed. Because the law and right have
always the wise, mighty and rich against them, that is: the world, with his
great and valeaunt powers: therefore does the holy gooste conforte them by the
mouth of his mother, that they be not abashed nor doubt, but let these wise,
mighty and rich alone, seeing they shall not long endure. If the holyones and
learned, taking to the^ the mighty, wise, rulers, governors and ye rych
should all not stand against the truth, but be of her side, where should
unrighteous remain? who should suffer wrong or euel? Not so. For the
holyones, mighty, superious, the rich and the best of the world, must
fight against God and his righteousness, and be the Deuels darlings, as
witnesses the prophet Abacuc in the first chapter, saying: His meat is
pycked and deynty. That is: the wicked sprete has a denty touth, he loves to
eat of the swetest, most deyntyeste and costlyest dyshes, as ye Beer also
does honey. Therefore are the learned, the holy pharisees, the Herodes and the
rych even the deuels deynties. Again what so ever the world does refuse, as
the poor, lowly, simple, vile, and despised, that does God chose, (as
witnesses S. Paul.i. Cor. i.) that he may suffer the vylest of ye world to
be mysha^dled of the best of the same: that so it be evidently known, that our
salvation does not stand in man's power, but only in the power and hands of
God, as Paul does also testify. Hereof comes that these by words are
co^munely used: They that be learned, are perverted. And a ruler is venyson in
heaven. And here rych, there poor. For the learned alaye not their hearts
pride: the mighty their oppressynge: another do the rych despise their
pleasures, and finally is it done that may be done.

The fourth work, is to exalte the^ of low degree.
And exalts them of low degree.
They of low degree are not to be taken here for those that be lowly, but such
as be underlings, and of no reputacyon before the world. For it is even the
same word ye she meant, when she said: For he has looked upon the low degree of
his handmayden. Nevertheless, they that of their fre will are naught and
abiecte of heart, not sekyng high things, they are lowly in deed. Moreover
this exalting is not to be understand, as that he should set them in the
thrones and places of them that be put down, as he does not set them that
fear him in the rowme of the learned that is proud, another wha^ he shows
mercy upon them: but he gives the^ such gifts as do far pass those,
namely: yt they being exalted in God spiritually, are set as judges above all
thrones, powers and knowledge, both here in this world, and in the world to
come: for they are better learned than all the learned and rulers. But how this
comes to pass have I showed above in the first work of God, another needs
it to be rehearsed here. But it is al said to the comfort of them that suffer,
and to ye frayenge of the tyrau^tes, if we had so much faith as to consider it
well.

The fyft and syxte works.
He fylleth the hongry with good things, and lets the rych go empty.
It is said above that they of low degree are not to be called those that are
of a vile and lowly estate, but such as are content to be so taken, specially
when they are compelled thereto for mayntaynynge the word, right, and law of
God. Even so ought to be called hongry, not they that have little or no meat,
but they that wyllyngly do want it, specially if they be compelled thereto of
other for Gods or his truths sake. What is more abiecte, vile, vain or
miserable then the deue^l, them that be damned, or them ye be racked, famyshed
and hanged for their misdeeds, or what so ever they be ye are brought low
against their will? Yet does not God help them, but rather augmenteth their
mysery. Of such does not the mother of God speak, but of them that agree with
God, which are one with God, and God is one with them.

Again, what hyndered Abraham, Isaac and Jacob ye they were rich? What
hyndered David his kyngly seat? either Daniel ye power of Babilo^? or who
soever was or is in high degree and wealth, if their heart does not set store by
the^, or stands in his own conceate? Salomo^ says in ye.xvi. Chap. of the
Proverbs: It is the LORD that weyeth ye spretes or minds, that is: he judges
not after ye utter appearau^ce, whether he be rych, poor, in authorite or
abiecte: but after the sprete and his behaueoure in the aforesaid estates. The
difference of states, manners and persons must remain in earth, as long as
we live: but the heart may not cleue unto nor fly: not cleue unto them of high
estate and rych, nor fly the abiecte* despised and nedy. After this manner
says David also in the.vii. psalm: Maynteyne the just thou ryghteous God,
that tryest ye very hearts and the reins. But me^ judge after the utter
appearaunce, wherefore they err often.

And these works are wrought secretly also (as is said above of other) so yt
no man feleth them until they be ended. The rych man does not perceive his
vanite and mysery before he dye, or perysh otherwise, as testifyeth the.lxxv.
psalm. on this wise: The proud shall be robbed and sleep their sleep, and the
mighty shall be able to do nothing with their hands. Contrarywyse yt hongry can
not tell how full they be, before they come unto ye end of honger, for tha^ do
they find the word of Christ in ye.vi. of Luke: Blessed are ye yt ho^ger here
for ye shall be satisfied, and this comfortable promise of Gods mother: He
fylleth the hongry with good things. It is so impossible that God should
suffer any hongry man to perysh by famine which trusts in him, that even ye
angels must come and feed him. Helias the prophet did a raven feed, and with so
much meele as could be holden in one hand was he sustained a great while by
ye wedowe of Sarepta. For he can not forsake them that put their trust in him,
as witnesses David in the.xxxvi. psalm. saying: I was young, and now am old:
yet saw I never the ryghteous forsaken, nor his sede to seek their bread. Who
so trusts in God, is ryghteous. And in the.xxxiii. psalm. says David also:
The rych shall want and suffer honger: but they which seek the LORD, shall
want no manner of thing that is good. Likewise also said Anna the mother of
the prophet Samuel. i. Reg. ii. They that were filled before, are sold for
bread: and they that were hongry, are satisfied.

But the cursed infidelite does always wythstand and let, yt God can not work
these things in us, and that we can not perceive and have experience of it. We
will be full and have plenty of al, before honger and necessite do co^strayne us,
prouydynge us aforehande, yt we be not grieved with the need and pouerte to come
that so we need none of Gods works or grace. What faith is yt whereby thou
trustest in God, when you felest and know stoare enough, wherwyth you may
help thyselfe? Infidelite is ye cause yt we se ye word of God, the truth, and
right to lie under, and injury to have ye vpperha^de, and yt in the mean
season we keep our peace, punyshe nothing, say nothing to it, nor forbid
ought: but let every man have ye brydel and ru^ne at large, suffryng him to do
as it pleases him. But what is the cause: Even because we fear to be attached
also, and brought to pouerte, and so finally dye for ho^ger, and remain ever
an vnderlyng And yt is said to set more by temporal goods, then by ye fear of
God, and to worship the^ as Idols in his stead: whereby we are unworthy to
hear or to understand this promise of God, full of comfort, namely: that he
exalts the oppressed and of low degree, and puts down the proud: that
he fylleth the poor with good things, and lets the rych go empty. And so
come never to yt knowledge of his works, without ye which nevertheless there
is no bless, but must be damned for ever, as ye.xxvii psalm. does testifye,
saying: For they regard not ye works of ye LORD, nor ye operacio^ of his
hands: therefore shall he break the^ down, and not buyld the^ up. And yt
ryghtfully, for they believe not his so many promyses, cou^tynge him a light and
faylyng God, upon whose word they darre begin naught: so little feeling have
they of his truth. Ye must adventure and put your selves in hasarde upon his
word. For he says not: He has filled the full, and set up the high: but he
has filled the ho^gry, and has exalted the lowly and underlings. Ye must
first come by honger in the mids of need, and know what ho^ger and need do
mean, so yt ye have naught to trust unto, or yt ye may use hereafter, or
whereby ye may be helped hereafter, another by yourselfe, nor of other, but only
of God: so that the work yt is impossible unto other, be only Gods. Thus must
ye not only think and speak of lowlynesse, but also come thereto, stick fast
therein, be helpelesse and destitute and forsaken of every man, that God only
may work there: or at the leest to desire such and not sho^e it if we can
attain it with the deed. And for this cause are we called Christians, and have
the Gospel (which the deuel and me^ can not bear) that thereby we being
come to anguyshe and lowlynesse, God may enter in to his works. Think ye by
your selves, if he should fyl you, before ye were ho^gry or exalte you before ye
were brought low, he should be feign to play the iuggler, not being able to
fulfill his promise, and so should his work be nothing save a mockage, wha^ the
(...) nevertheless does say in the.C.x. Psalm* The works of his hands are
verite and judgment, al his commandments are true If he should be feign to
help you at the intrau^ce of your anguysh and lowlynesse, either in every small
suppression and need, than should his works be slenderer tha^ becomes his
majesty: Where as it is said in ye same psalm. that the works of the LORD are
great, sought out of al them ye have pleasure therein

Let us now look upon ye contrary part also. If he should destroy and put down
the high and rych before they became high and rych how should he behave himself
therein? They must first come so high and so passing in riches, that every man,
and they themselves also must be persuaded, (ye and yt it be so in deed) that
no man ca^ destroy, wtstande, or root the^ out, and be so sure of their cause,
ye they say it ye Esaye did prophecy in his.xlvii. chap. of the Babilonians,
saying: Hear now therefore thou wylfyl, that syttest so careless, and speak
thus in thyn heart: I am alone, and with out me is there none: I shall never be
wedow nor desolate again, (that is without strength and aid.) And yet both
these things shall come unto the in one day, in the the twynckelynge of an
eye. etc. There has God than an occasion to work his work. Of this wise did
he suffer Pharao to heave himself above the children of Israel, and to
oppres^e them, as God does testifye of him in the.ix. chapter of Exodus,
saying: I have ^^ered the up for this cause, even to show my power upon the,
and that my name might be declared in all lands. Of such ensamples is the
Bible even full, which teach nothing else save God wor^es and works, and
refuse both the works and doctrines of men.

Behold now this strong comfort, that is, that not man, but God himself,
gives not only somewhat, but fylleth and satisfyeth. And in that she adds
vvithgood things, she signifies that such fyllyng shall not be hurtefull, but
profitable and wholesome, so that it shall do good both to body and soul. By
this is showed moreover that they were empty, and full of all need. For (as is
said before) by riches are understand all faydyng and transitory things,
that concern the body, wherewyth the soul is also rejoiced. Even so also by
honger ought to be understand in this place, not only wa^te of meat but of
all transitory things: for sometime may a man forbear al things save meat
so that for the most part all transitory go^des and occupyenges are for
the same. With out meat can noman live, though they may live without
clothing, house, money goods and men, therefore does scripture here comprehend
the temporal goods for the most necessaryest, profitablest and most
vsuallest, that can leest be forbore^, insomuch that she calls covetous me^
and them that be so gredy upon the unstable riches, belly servants, and Paul
does call ye belly their God. How could than any body entyce us so earnestly
and with more comfort to will full honger and pouerte, than these vehement
words of Gods mother, namely that God will feed every hongry soul with good
things? Whom such comfortable words, such honor and praise of pouerte does
not persuade and entyce thereto, he is surely without faith and confidence as an
Heythen.

Again, how can any man blame riches more, and fraye the rych more, than with
this one clause, that God lets the rych go empty? O what great and
plentiful things are these both: the fyllynge of God and the lettyng go
empty? how little ca^ any creature help or give counsel therein? A man is
abashed when he hears his fathers defiaunce, or his masters displeasure,
and we high and rych are not dismade when God does defy us. And not only
proclameth war, but threateneth also destruction, abiection and rootynge out:
Contrary wise is it a joy when the father is meke, and the master mylde, so
that many adventure their life and all that they have there upon. And we having
such promise, and such strong co^solacion, cannot use and brook it, we can
not give thanks for it, nor yet rejoice therein. O thou lamentable unbelief,
which passest the serenesse of a block, and the hardness of a stone, that thou
can not perceive such great things. Let this now be sufficiently spoken of
the six works of God.

He reme^breth mercy, and helps up his servant Israel.
After the rehearsynge of Gods works both in her and in other, does Mary now
come again to the beginning and first, and closes the Magnificat with ye
greatest and chief of all the godly works, which is ye incarnacion of the
son of God, and confesses here freely that she is a handmayde^ and servant
of all the world, seeing the work is acco^plyshed in her, the which is
profitable not only to her, but unto all Israel. Yet deals she Israel in
two, and brings that part only that serves God. Another does any man serve
God, save he that lets him be his God, and suffers him to work his work
in him whereof we have spoken before: Although that word Gods service (alas for
pytie) is brought into so strange understanding and use, that whosoever hears
it, does think nothing, upon such works, but rather upon ryngynge, upon the
stone work and timber of the temple, upon the censoure, upon the burning of
the lyghtes, upon the blarynge, the gold, the silver, the white clothes, the
pearls, the vestimentes and surplyses, the chalice, the pyre, the organes and
tables, the procession and stations, and that most of all is, upon the bablyng
and talyng with God upon beede stones. Foo (alas) Gods service is come
hitherto, whereof he knows nothing. And we also know none other save this.
We sing the Magnificat daily, and ye with great solemnite and loud, and yet
keep secret the true understanding thereof more and more. But yet does this
text stand styfly: If we do not learn these works of God, and suffer them in
us, than shall there be no Gods service, no Israel, no grace, no mercy, nor no
God, though we cry out in temples, and ring till we brust and gave thereto all
the goods of ye world. For God has given no commandment concerning that,
and therefore doutelesse can he have no pleasure therein.

The incarnacion therefore of Christ does avail unto such an Israel, that
serves God. Such one is his own and beloved people, for whose sake also he is
become man, to deliver them from the thraldom of the Deuell, sin, death and
hell, and to bring them unto righteousness and everlasting life and bliss:
that is the helpyng up that she syngeth of here. And Paul does also proclaim
this, saying in the.ii. chapter unto Titus, that Christ gave himself for us,
to redeem us from all unrighteousness and to purge us, to be a peculiar people
unto himself. And Peter also in his first epistle the.ii. chapter, says: Ye
are that chosen generation, that kyngly prestholde, that holy nation, that
peculiar people. etc. These are the godly riches, and the great mercyes of
God, the which we have optayned by none of our deseruynge, but of the only
mercy and grace. Wherefore she says also: He remembers mercy. She says not:
He remebreth our merit and worthynesse, for we were in necessite and
unworthy. Of this tha^ does his praise and honor spring, and our boaste and
presumption is suaged. He had nothing at whose syghte he might be moved, save
only his own mercy, the which also was therefore to be showed on all nations.

But wherefore says she more: He remembers mercy, than he looked upon his
mercy? Even because he had promised the same, as the verse followynge does
declare. Moreover, he wytheld ye same mercy so long, that he seemed nearehande
to have forgotten it: (even as all his works do seem to have no care for us)
nevertheless wha^ he came, it was evidently known that he had not forgotten
us, but that he was ever minded to fulfill his promyses.

Truth it is, that by Israel the Jews only are meant, and not the Gentiles:
but seeing they refused him, he chose a few of them, and satisfied the name of
Israel therewith, and made a spiritual Israel. This is figured Genesis xxxvii.
by the patriarch Jacob wrastlynge with the angel, whose thygh the angel
touched, and made him to halte. For thereby was signified that the chylderen of
Israel should not from thenceforth boaste their carnal birth, (as the Jews
do) where he also obtained the name Israel, that he thenceforth should so be
called, as a Patriarch, which were not only Jacob, the father of carnal
children, but also Israel the father of spiritual chylderen. To this does agree
also the name Israel, the which is as much to say, as, the LORD of God. That
is surely a very holy and high name, co^teynynge in it self that great
mirakle, that a man by the Godly favor, has in a manner brought God in his
power, so that God do acco^plysh all man's requests: as we se also that the
church is made one with God through Christ, eue^ as a bryde unto the brydegrome,
which has power of her brydegromes body and all that he has. All this is done
by faith, whereby a man obeys the will of God, and God again agrees unto
man's will, so that Israel be so conformable to God, and of such power over
him, yt in God, with God and by God he do all things, and be able to do all
things

This (lo) signifies Israel. For Schar in Hebrew is as much to say, as a
lord or a prince, and El signifies God, and ioynynge them together, makes
Israel. Such an Israel will God have, wherefore when Jacob had wrestled with
the angel and overcome him, ye angel said: Thou shall no more be called Jacob,
but Israel: for thou have stryue^ with God and with men, and have prevailed.
Many things more were to be said hereof, for Israel is a high mystery.

Even as he promised unto our fathers, Abraham and to his sede for ever.
Here are all merits and presumpcion overthrown, and the grace and mercy of
God are lift up. For God has not helped up Israel for his own merits, but
for his own promise. Of only and mere grace has he promised, and of mere
grace also has he fulfilled it. Therefore says Paul in the.iii. chapter to
the Galathians that God did bind himself to Abraham four hundredth year
before he gave the law by Moses, lest any man might say or boast that he had
deserved or obtained so great grace and promise by the law or the works of
the same: This same promise does the mother of God laud and praise above all
things, attributynge the most clear work of the incarnacion unto the pure,
undeserved, godly and fre promise made unto Abraham.

This promise of God unto Abraham is specially written in the.xii. and.xxii.
chapters of Genesis, and diverse other plades, soundynge on this manner: In thy
sede shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. The which words of God, S.
Paull and al Prophets (as they be worthy) lift up unto the clouds, for in
those words both Abraham and all his posterite are saved, because that Christ
is comprehended in the same, and promised to be the Saueoure of all the world.
Moreover this is Abraham's bosom, wherein all they that were saved before
Christ's natiuite, did remain. Another was any man ever saved without these
words, though he had done all the good deeds that ever were done, the which we
will look upon continently.

First does it fellow by these words, that all the world, except Christ,
was in thraldom and danger of sin, damnacion and curse with all his works
and conning. For when he says, that not some, but all nations shall be blessed
in Abraham's sede, it is manifest, that without the same sede; there shall be no
bless. What neded God to promise the bless with so earneste, so great and so
preciouse, an oath, if the bless and not rather the curse had been in the
world? Out of this place have the Prophets sucked and concluded many things
as namely: that all men are evil, vain, liars, fayners, blind and brefely
Godless or without Godliness: so that it be no worship in scripture to be
called a man. For that name is no more worth by God, than if a man were called
before the world a liar or perjured. So wholly did he perysh by Adams fall, yt
the curse being borne with him, was neareha^de become one nature with him.

Secondely it follows, that that sede of Abraham neded not to be borne by
natural sede of man and wife: For such birth is cursed, and brings forth
cursed fruits, as is said even now. If now all the world was to be delivered
from this curse by Abraham's sede and to be blessed, it was required that ye
sede were blessed before, and untouched or undefiled of such a curse, and to
be a mere bless, full of grace and truth. Again, if God that is no liar does
promise (and that with an oath) a natural sede unto Abraham, that is a natural
and lawful child, which shall be borne of his flesh and blood: it was
necessary that such one should be a true natural man, borne of the flesh and
blood of Abraham. Now do these two things strive together: To be the natural
flesh and blood of Abraham, and yet not to be borne by man and wife after the
course of nature. And therefore uses he this word, thy sede, and not thy
child or thy son: that so it were clear and evident, that it must be his
natural flesh and blood, as it is also his sede.

Who will now here attain a mean, that the word and oath of God be true,
wherein things so contrary do mete? That shall God surely do, which can
accomplysh that he has promised, though noman covet it before it be done.
Therefore do his words and deeds require no natural wit, but a fre and pure
faith. Lo how he has united these two things: He gives unto Abraham a
natural sede, of one of his daughters, the pure and chaste virgin Mary, by
the holy gooste, without the workynge of man. There was not the natural
concepcio^ and generation with her curse, another could it stayne the sede: and
yet nevertheless is this the natural sede of Abraham as well, as all other
Abraham's issue. Behold than, this is the blessed sede of Abraham, whereby all
the world is delivered of his curse. For from him that believes on this sede,
calls upon it, confesses it, and cleueth there unto, is the curse taken
away and forgeuen as a crime, and al bless is given him, for the sound of
the word and oath of God, namely: In thy sede shall all nations be blessed. That
is, Look what is to be blessed, that shall be blessed, by this sede and none
other. Lo this is ye sede of Abraham, the which is borne of none of his
chylderen, (as the Jews have always looked for to have been) but of his only
daughter the virgin Mary.

That same means here the bewtyful mother of God when she says that God
has taken up Israel, according to the promise made unto Abraham: unto
Abraham (I say) and all his sede. Verily she saw that the promise was than
fulfilled in her, and therefore said she: It is now fulfilled, he has now taken
him up, he has acco^plyshed his word by the only calling to mind his mercy.
Here do we behold the fundamente of the gospel, wherefore all doctrines and
preachynges of him do drive unto Christ's faith and Abraham's bosom. For there
is no counsel, nor help if this faith is wantynge, whereby ye blessed sede
may be understand. And verily all the scripture hangs upon this oath. For all
that is written in ye whole Bible, does behold and concern Christ. Besides
this do we se that all the fathers of the old testamente, and all Prophets
also had the same faith, and the same gospel that we have, as Paul does
testifye.i. Corinth. x. For in this testamente of God and Abraha^s bosom did
they all remain by steadfast faith, and therefore are saved: saving that they
believed in the sede that was promised and for to come, but we believe in ye sede
that has appeared and is given. Nevertheless the truth of the promise
remains on both parts, it is all one faith, one sprete, one Christ, one
LORD that was at that time and is now, and shall be for ever, as the.xiii.
chapter to the Hebrews does bear witness.

But that the Jews had a law given them afterward, that is not like unto
this promise, for it was done therefore, that by ye light of the law they
might know their cursed nature, and that they should more fervently and with
more whoter desire sygh and long for this promised sede of blessyng in the
which they had a prerogative before all nations on earth. But they have turned
the prerogative into hurt and damage, and have thought to accomplysh and
fulfill the law by their own strength, and therefore have not they seen their
wretched mysery. And after this manner have they shut ye door to themselves, so
that ye sede promised must needs go by them, in ye which opinion they remain
yet, God give it be not long. Ame^. This has been the debate that all the
Prophets have had with them, for seeing the Prophets knew well enough the
meaning of the law, namely: that thereby the wickedness of our nature should
be known, and to learn how Christ should be called upon, therefore refused
they all the works and lives of the Jews, that went not in that way: for
the which cause the Jews conceived an anger against the^, and slew the^, as
those that refused ye gods service, good works, and the good living, as ye
hypocrytes and graceles saints d^ sometime. Of whom there were not a little to
be spoken.

That she says: and to his sede forever, is to be understand, ye such grace
shall last in Abraham's blood (which are ye Jews) from that time forth, through
all times, until the last day. For though ye most part be hardened, yet
are there sometime part of them (though but a few) that turn unto Christ, and
believe in him, seeing this promise of God both not fail, namely: ye the
promise was made unto Abraham and his sede, not for one, nor for a thousand
years, but for ever, that is: from one ma^s time until another without
ceassynge. And for this cause ought not we to entreat ye Jews so
discourteously, for among the^ are yet some that shall be Christians and daily do
some of the^ turn to Christ. Moreover, they only, and not we Gentiles have the
promise made unto the^, that there shall be ever some Christians in ye sede of
Abraham, that shall knowledge ye blessed sede. Our matter is founded upon the
mere grace with out the promise of God, who knows how and when? If we lived
godly and Christenly, and with meekness brought them to Christ, that verily
were the best manner and way.

Who would become a Christian, wha^ he seyeth Christen men deal so cruelly with
me^? Not so ye well-beloved Christians. Let ye truth be showed them after a good
manner, ye which if they refuse, leave the^ alone. How many Christians are there
now adays, that regard not Christ, another hear his word? being worse tha^
ye Gentiles or Jews, whom nevertheless they do let be in rest, ye do the^
reverence, making nearehand an Idol of the^.

Here will we rest at this time, prayng god for ye true understanding of this
virgins so^g of praise called Magnificat, ye which not only do shine and
speak, but also inflame and live in the body and soul: the which our
Saueoure Christ grant us. Amen.

Now do I return unto you most bou^teous prince, desiring your highness to
take my boldness in worth. Though I know that your goodnesses youth has many
instructers and daily admonicions, yet could I not repress the care of my
subjection and due faythfulnesse, and besides this the charge of my conscience,
and the exhortacion of your highness. Seeing we all do hope, that in times to
come, the rule of the commune wealth (the which our merciful god give to
prosper) shall come to your highness hands: the which is a great thing, if
it do well befall: and again a peryllous and miserable thing, if it do befall
otherwise. But unto us it becomes to look and pray for the best,
nevertheless carefully to fear is the worst of all.

Let your highness call this to mind, namely: That God never suffered one
Gentile king or prince in all the scripture to be commended, no not sense ye
world was created, but caused them always to be rebuked: the which is a
dredefull ensample unto all superiorites. Another did he find moreover any
laudable and blameless king among his peculyare people of Israel. Besides all
this among the Jews, which were ye chief and head of all mankind, lyfted up
and beloved above all creatures, were but a few, another above six kings
praised. Finally that dear part and precious prince David, which left none
another behind nor by him that was like him in worldly polycye: the which
though he being full of the fear and wisdom of God, did rule and judge all
things by the only commandment of God, and not by his reason, yet
nevertheless sto^bled sometime. So ye scripture also, because she could not
blame his governance, and yet must recyte ye hurt of the people, where by
David was cloyde, did not impute it unto David, but unto ye people, saying:
That God was wroth with ye people, and suffered David the holy man to be steared
of Satan, which gave him in his mind to no^bre ye people, for the which
deed.lxx. thousand me^ did dye of the pestilence.

All this has God so brought to pass to fraye the superiorite, to retain
the^ in fear and to admonysh them of their dangers. For great riches, great
honors, great power, great favor, and beside this many flatterers, (from
whom no lord is fre) do so of all parts besege and assault the heart of a
prince, and drive him so to pride, to the forgetfulness of God, to not carynge
either for the people or commune wealth, to pleasure, to rashness, to
curiosite, to ydelnesse: brefely to all unrighteous things and vices, that no
city nor strong hold can so be beseged and assaulted. Now he that being
warned by the aforesaid ensamples will not anoyde, and use the fear of God for
a bank or fence, where (I pray you) shall he become? For if any lord or
superioure do not love his people, and do not apply thereto his mind, not how
he live deyntely, but how by his ensample his subjects may be steared to
goodness, all is done with him, and ye state of his dominion shall thence
forth be only to the loss of his soul: another shall it avail him that he
does found great moneth-means, trentals, diriges, and year tides, build
great monasteryes, altares, or this or that. God shall require of him an
account of his estate and office, another shall he care for any thing else.

Wherefore most bou^teous lord and prince I commend this Magnificat unto your
highness, but specially ye fyfte and syxte verses, about ye which I have
comprehended it, prayenge and requyrynge your highness to dread nothing so
sore all your life time on earth, (no not hell) as it that ye blessed mother of
God callth here the imaginacyo^ of the mind. For ye same is ye greatest, ye
fearcest, the myghtyest and the most hurtfullest enemy of all kind of men,
specially of superiors. His names are: Reason, good opinion or intent, whereof
must come all counsels and gouernaunces. Another can your highness be in
sauegarde, if ye have not this always suspecte, and with the fear of God
follow not only the reasons, not only of your peers and senators, but also of
all them that be of your highness counsel. No man's counsel is to be despised,
another again is it only to be trusted unto.

But what must be done than? This verily: that your highness do not send away
your prayer in cloisters under monks, chanons and freres cooles, either under
chalices as it is a wicked manner now a days to do, to buyld upon other men's
prayers and to trust therein, and to set little store by their own. But your
hyghnes must take a fre, hardy and a merry courage, and setting aside ye feeble
mind call upon God, either in your heart or else where secretlye, layenge at his
fete the keys, and constraynynge him with his own ordinance, on this wise:
Behold my God and father, this is thy work, this is thine ordinance that I
should be borne and gendred to rule in this state, the which noman will deny,
and thou thyselfe know whether I be worthy or unworthy of it, nevertheless
here am I ready as thou seyst, and as every man knows. Grant therefore my
father and LORD, that I may rule this people to thy praise and their wealth:
and I beseke the suffer me not to stand in mine own conceate and to mine own
reason, but be thou my reason and appointed mark.

Let him begin upon like sentence and proceed in what thing so ever he have in
hand, co^me^dyng it to God. Moreover, how well God be appayed with such a
prayer and mind, does Salomo^, (yt in like manner did pray) declare: yt which
prayer I have also joined hereto, the your highness may be steared gladly to
trust in the grace of God, that both his fear and mercy may bide with you.
And herwyth I commend me unto your highness, the which I pray God to
preserve unto a lucky governance. Amen.

The prayer that king Solomon prayed, a patron for all princes, taken out of
the.iii. chapter of the iii. book of the kings.
THe LORD appeared unto Solomon at Gibeon in a dream of the night, and God
said: Are what I shall give the. Solomon said: Thou have done great mercy
unto my father David thy servant, so that he walked before the in
faythfulnesse and righteousness, and in a true heart with the, and this mercy
have thou laid up for him, and given him a son to sit upon his seat, as it
is now come to pass.

Now LORD my God, thou haste made thy servant king in my father David's
stead: As for me, I am but a small yo^ge man, knowing another mine outgoyng nor
ingoynge. And thy servant is among the people whom thou have chosen, which
is so great, that no man can nombre them nor describe the^ for multitude. Give
thy seruau^te therefore an obediente heart, that he may judge thy people, and
understand that what is good or bad: for who is able to judge this thy mighty
people?

This pleased the LORD well, that Solomon axed such a peticion. And God said
unto Solomon: For so much as thou axest this, and desyrest not long life,
another riches, another the souls of thine enemies, but understanding to hear
judgment, behold therefore have I done according to thy words. Behold I have
given the an heart of wisdom and understanding, so yt such one as thou,
has not ben before the, another shall rise up after the. Ye and that thou have
not prayed for, have I given the also, namely: riches and honor, so that
among the kings of thy time there is not such one as thou. And if thou wylt
walk in my ways, so that thou keep mine ordinances and laws, as David thy
father has walked, than will I give the a long life.

FINIS.
A confutacio^ of the song called Salve Regina, prouyng by scriptures laid
thereto, that it is rather Idolatry, than lawful to be song of true Christen
men.
Grace, mercy and strength of sprete that comes of God the father and our
LORD Jesus Christ do I wysh unto the gentle reader.
Seeing well-beloved brethren and systers that now by the bou^teous goodness
and mercy of God, the most clear and shyninge light of the Gospel is declared
unto us again in this present world, therefore may we right well thank and
praise God that he has wytsafe us to come unto the right understanding and
knowledge by ye power of his living word: Namely, that we know perfectlye now
how and after what fashion we ought to praise and to thank God, and how to
utter and declare thankfully our faith, (which another can, nor ought be
sloggysh) not only inwardly, but also outwardly, (as David ye prophet did)
thanking and praysynge the LORD Jesus with songs and melody: as Paul
exhorts his Coll. iii. to do. For if a man believe from the heart, he shall be
made ryghteous: and if a man knowledge with the mouth, he shall be saved. Romans x.

By this is it lykely that the songs which are now used in churches every
where were first institute of the fathers for this intent: namely, so to
declare and boldlye to exercise openly the inward faith. For it is manifest
that we have no commandment concerning this in all the new testament. And
for this cause ought we Christians to have such songs and ballades now also,
wherewyth the name of God be auaunced and magnifyed, and not dishonored nor
blasphemed.

But alas this costume is not only come to such mysuse, that Christ's honor
is not uttered therein, but also that Lucifer ye prince of this world has
thereby confirmed and fortifyed his kingdom: so yt there is naught used therein
now save only the bishop of Romes fayres: and the thing wherein the service
and honor of God was supposed to have consysted, have been occupied with
nothing save byenge and selling, choppynge and chaungynge, ye plain usury.
Even as Esaias does featly prophecy of them, speaking in the person of almyghtye
God on this wise: It is ye that have burnte up my vyneyard, the robbery of ye
poor is in your house etc. upon whom Christ also gives a fearful sentence
full of dredful curses, saying: Woe unto you scrybes and pharisees, ye
hypocrites, that devour wedowes houses, and that under the color of prayenge
long prayers: therefore shall ye receive the greater damnacyon. As though he
would say: with your great howlynge do ye deceive the poor innocents, of
whose sweat and blood ye fill your paunches, so full that one would think ye
had eaten even the poor innocents houses also. But seeing they study nothing
so earnestly as to serve their God ye belly, therefore do not they care for ye
word of God, but do ruffle it upon an heap: ye and sell Christ and his
word, as it may be well perceived of them that take diligent head unto it. But
what need more words hereof, seeing we se daily one bayte* after the other put
at the angle to catch and to seduce the simple people the more, which now is
partly delivered from the Babilonicall captivity. For the pardons (where by
they were wont to scrape a good sum of pens) that once were refused begin
now to preasse in again in an other hue and vysoure, namely that they shall be
had freely. Nevertheless the end will declare to what intent this be
institute.

I counsel therefore every Christen brother and sister, that desires to be a
membre of Christ, to abide by their head Jesus Christ lokynge for the true
pardons of his merits, suckynge the pardonynge and forgeuynge of their sins
out of his passion and wou^des only. I will pass over to speak of this matter
at this time, for it is not now mine ^ntent so to do, lest I go to far fro my
purpose: that is, ye I would have every man to give diligent head unto the
songs that be usually song in our churches or temples, and specially of one,
the which by the inspiracyon of the deuel is so ryfe and so corrupped, ye God
is thereby depryued of his honor, (contrary to the first commandment) and it
is given unto a creature. This may be proved in the song of praise that is
song to the blessed virgin Mary the mother of Christ, wherein we imagine to do
her high service and worship, which notwythstandynge is pytefully dishonored
and mocked therewyth: for therein is great ydolatry, so that no greater spyte
can be done to her, than to sing such songs of praise unto her, wherein her
son Jesus Christ, by whom she received all mercy* grace, virtue, goodness
and holiness, according to her own confession Luke in the first chapter,
saying* My soul magnifyeth the LORD.
And my sprete rejoices in God my Saueoure.
For he has looked upon the low degree of his handmayden.
Behold, from hence forth shall al generacions call me blessed.
For he that is mighty has done great things unto me, and Holy is his name.
etc.

In the which words she confesses God to be her Saueoure, which must save us
all also, or else we shall be damned for ever. We ought therefore to go to him
asking mercy and grace of him, for he is our hope, advocate and salvation.

Will ye therefore worship Mary aryght, worship her in Jesus Christ her son,
thanking and praysynge him for workynge so wonderful power (which he tofore
had promised unto the fathers) in that vessel. Now if thy contemplacion or
inward devotion does chance upon the mayde^, (which through her constaunte
faith did bring forth our Saueoure the son of God, with out any spot of
nature, only by the ouershadowynge of the holy ghost, remaynyng pure virgyn and
mother as the scripture does plainly bear witness) than may ye salute her
with the same salutacion, that the angel Gabriel saluted her: but ye shall
worship God only in the trine of persons, namely ye father ye son and holy
ghost. This doing, ye shall do the highest worship unto Mary yt can be done,
according to the judgment of the scripture.

And that we may be the more assured and certifyed of this, we will confer
this song of Salve regina with the scripture, and se how they accord. But if
it does not agree with Gods word, I require you for the honor of God to leave
it, and cleue unto the word of God: and so doing ye shall be the brethren and
systers of Christ, according to his own witness. Luke.viii. And what so
ever is not his, that is against him, and venyme of the soul, for the which
we ought earnestly to beware, lest after this transitory life we be robbed of
the eternal glory, the which God omnipotent raygnynge for ever grant us all.
Amen.

A refutacion of the song called Salve regina.
BLessed be God and the father of our LORD, Jesus Christ, which according to
his great mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the rysynge
again of Jesus Christ from the dead unto an incorruptible and undefiled
enheritaunce, which never shall fayde away. etc. Thus writes Peter in his
first canonical epistle the first chapter, willing us to thank, praise and
bless God always, for delyuerynge us from death everlasting through his only
son Jesus Christ. This high and most laudable benefyte as no tunge can
express it, so can no tunge also praise it enough. And therefore does Paul
exhort and warn us of the abuse of this benefit, saying.i. Corin. vii. Ye
are dearly bought (namely, with the blood of Jesus Christ) be not ye
servants of me^. etc. Now to sing, cense, pray and to do like reverence
unto a creature, or an image of wood or stone, and unto that image to attribute
such praise, thank and worship as belongs unto God only, what is that else
save a service of men, whereby God and his word are blasphemed, denied and set
at naught? as it shall be brefely declared hereafter.

First we sing Salve regina misericordiae, that is to say: Hayle queen of
mercy.
Here is first denied the saying of Esaias recyted of S. Paul Romans xiiii. As
truly as I live (says the LORD) all knees shall bow unto me, and al tunges
shall knowledge unto God. And again the saying of Moses Deuteronomy the.vi.
Chapter. Hear O Israel, the LORD our God is one LORD only. And thou shalt
love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, with all thy
might. The saying also of the prophet Esaye in the.xlii. Chapter is here
denied, where God says: I my self, whose name is the LORD, which give my
power to none other, another mine honor to the gods. etc.

Mark now earnestly how featly and well these sayenges agree with this salutacio^
or gretyng of Mary: verily as well as day and night Mark how our carnal
devotion and good meaning accords with God and his word: even so well, that
God says by the prophet Esaias in the.lv. chapter: My thoughts are not your
thoughts, and your ways are not my ways: But as far as the heavens are
higher than the earth, so far do my ways excede youres, and my thoughts,
youres. Hereby may it be seen what this salvation is, namely that God does not
give his honor to none of the gods. Now consysteth his honor in nothing
so greatly, as in thankfulness and praysynge him for his infinite mercy and
goodness showed unto us in suffrynge for us that were in thraldom and the
deuels danger, and so delivered us therout: which another the blessed virgin
Mary, Peter, nor Paul, nor none of all the saints has done. It follows than
that she is not the queen of mercy.

Secondarely we sing: Vita, dulcedo et spes nostra salve* that is: Hay^e our
life, our swetnesse and our hope.
The contrary to this witnesses Christ himself Ioh. xiiii. saying: I am ye
way, the truth and the life. etc. And Esaye says like wise in the.xlv.
Chapter in the person of God: Turn you unto me all ye ends of ye world, and
ye shall be saved: for I am God, and there is else none. To this agrees also
Paul.i. Cor. iii. saying: Other foundame^t can no man lay, than that which
is laid already, which is Christ Jesus. These confortable words do we another
keep nor believe, seeing we confess with our mouths, and with the deed seek
another life or salvation tha^ the true and only life and salvation, namely
Jesus Christ. Ye thus doing we make not God true in his promise, that he
either can not or will not do for us as he says every where in the scripture:
or else do not we believe ye saying of ye book of wisdom the.xv. Chapter,
where it is thus written: Thou (our God) art sweet, long sufferynge, and
true, and in mercy ordrest thou al things, and so forth. And Christ speaking
of him self Ioh. vi. says: Who so comes unto me, him will not I cast out.
And again in the x. chapter he says: My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me, and I give them everlasting life, and they shall
never perysh. Where is any such word of comfort, life, hope or swetnesse
spoken of in the scriptures of God of the blessed virgin Mary or any creature?
and if there be not, what madness is it of us either to call or to take them for
our hope and refuge, which do so lowly always submit themselves both to God
and his creatures? If we would a little ponder these words of the salutation of
Mary, conferring them with the saying of David Psalm. C.ii. where he says:
Like as a father pytyeth his own chylderen, eue^ so is the LORD merciful
unto them that fear him: we should easyly se how far and abtrunnynge we be
both from God and his true word. We se than well-beloved brethren and systers,
that if we believed these foresaid words aryghte, we should need none other
salvation, hope nor live save only Christ, which is given us of the father to
be a mediator between him and us, as ye shall hear hereafter. But alas it is
come to ye point with us, that we ask life of them, that do not live
themselves, as Solomon says in his book called the book of Wisdom,
the.xiii. Chapter.

God says in the.li. chapter of Esaias: I am he that in all things gives you
consolation. What art thou than that feareste a mortal man, the child of
man, which goes away as does the flore? and forgettest the LORD that made
the? In the book of wisdom the xvi. chapter it is thus written: It is thou O
LORD that haste the power of life and death, thou leadeste unto deaths door,
and bryngest up again. This is he in whom only ye ought to hope, and to have
confidence, him only shall ye fear, to him only must ye sygh and sobbe: for
there is but one only that is most highest creatoure of all things, most
puyssau^t and mighty, that is greatly to be feared and dradde, as Jesus Sirak
exhorts us to do, in the first chapter of Ecclesiasticus, saying: There is
one, even the Highest, the maker of all things, the Almighty, the king of
power (of whom men ought to stand greatly in awe,) which sytteth upon his
trone, being a God of dominion, and so forth. Thank therefore and praise him
only, fear and dread him, and tha^ shall not ye be deceived. For if ye trust
in men, or any creature, calling upon them, than verily shall ye be deceived,
unhappy and accursed as testifye both Jeremy in the.xvii. chap. and David in
the.C.xiii. Psalm saying: Cursed be the man, that puts his trust in man.
Let therefore the^ that fear the LORD, put their trust in him: for he is their
succoure and defense, and think, ye be assured, this kind of worship to be
naught but a deuyce and imaginacion of men only, the which are idle and vain
as says Jeremy in the.x. chapter. And Christ also says Mathe. xv. that he
is worshypped in vain, while they teach such doctrines as are nothing but
the commandments of men. Though they approach near unto me with the Pater
noster, calling me father, LORD and God: yet do they run to other fathers,
gods and saueoures in this vale of tears. Draw therefore backegood brethren
and systers your strayenge steps and wend them in the ways of the LORD,
yeldyng you rather to him and his word: for ye have more assurance to be
herd when ye call to him, if ye so do, than ye have of followynge man's voice.
David says Psalm. xlix. in the person of God: Call upon me in the time of
trouble, so will I hear the, that thou shall thank me. Where is there any such
promise or comfortable word in all ye scripture of the blessed virgin, or any
other (...) name, he shall give it you. If ye therefore believe these words
stedfastlye, than need ye none other mean. Or thynk ye that he will lie either
for you, or for your sins, which only is the truth himself, and has taken
a way the sins of the world, as Esaye does expressly write of him in
the.liii. chapter, and Ihon baptiste does by mouth?

Syxtly it follows in the song Et Iesum benedictum fructum uentris tui nobis
post hoc exilium ostende. that is: And show us Jesus ye blessed fruit of thy
womb after this exilyng and bannyshynge.
If you will have her to show you Jesus, than must ye first let him show you
her in this mysery and hear what she said Luke in the first chapter, where it
is written: He remembers mercy, and helps up his servant Israel. Even as
he promised unto our fathers, Abraham and to his sede for ever. Here says
Mary that unto Abraham and his sede was promised salvation through Christ
Jesus, which thing is plainly declared in Genesis the.xxii. Chap. where God
said to Abraham: In thy sede shall all nations be blessed: and Abraham
beleuynge this was saved thereby. And Genesis. xvii. was Isaac promised unto
Abraham and Abraham beleuynge the same likewise was saved thereby. Unto David
was like promise made.ii. Regum the.vii. chapter on this wise: When the time is
fulfilled that thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will raise thy sede after
the. I will be his father, and he shall be my son, and will stablysh ye seat
of his kingdom for ever. This did David believe, and was also saved. Behold,
thus has now Abraham received his child says Mary, as it was promised unto
Abraham and his posterite. Will ye now therefore be also saved, then must ye let
Jesus be showed unto you, as Mary does show him here in the Magnificat: namely
that he is the blessing of all nacyons, and so to believe and faithfully to
trust in Jesus Christ only: for by this faith only shall ye be saved. Ye must
have this faith only in him in this veil of tears, and so se him here: and
not let him be showed unto you by other means after this miserable exilynge,
as it is sunge in this song of praise. Thus must we have him showed unto us in
this veil of tears, as he was showed unto ye patriarchs, and prophets, that
we may know him in this mortal life and believe in him, as they have done:
and than surely shall he show himself well enough after this exilynge and
banyshme^t. If else his words be true that he has spoken. Ioh. xi. I am the
resurreccion and ye life. He that believes on me, shall live, though he were
dead already. And Ioh. iii. He that believes on me shall not be condemned. Thus
must thou than know Jesus Christ as one that takes away thy sins, dyenge
ye bitter death for them. But if ye know him not here, than may he not be
showed you after this partynge of body and soul, another of Mary, nor of any
body else.

Seventhly we sing in this song, O clemens, O pia, O dulcis uirgo Maria, that
is: O bounteous, O good, O sweet virgin Mary.
These words were wont to be cried out loud, but Baals prestes cried out
louder, whereof it is written in the third book of the kings the.xviii.
Chapter of this manner: And they cried loud and provoked the^ selves with
knyues and ^otkens (as their manner was) till the blood followed, but no
answer was herd. Wherefore the prophet Elias mockyng them said: Cry loud.
For he is a God, peradventure he is musing, or has so^what to do, or is gone
some journey, or happly he slepeth, so that he would be waked up. etc. They
cried farther yet: ye that even their throat seemed to have brasten asu^der,
but what they optayned thereby, that may ye read there. And much less shall
ye obtain with your loud blaryng. For God gives no ear to loud cryenge,
but to love and mercy. Besides this ascrybest thou sweetness, goodness, and
righteousness unto a creature which is to be referred unto none but unto God
only. Of this sweetness says scripture in the book of wisdom the.xii.
Chap. on this wise: O LORD how gracious and sweet is thy sprete in all
things. And Joel in the.ii. Chapter: Turn you unto the LORD your God, for
he is gracious and merciful long sufferynge and of great compassion, and
ready to pardon wickedness and to forgive sins. etc. David does likewise
exhort us in the.xxxiii. Psalm, saying: Tayste and se how frendely the LORD
is, happy is the man that trusts in him. Mark well now that ye must seek
and look for all goodness, sweetness, mercy and virtue at him only, if ye
shall obtain ought, and that ye can do naught without him. This confirms the
prayer of Anna the wife of Helcana in the first doke of the kings, the
second chapter, where she says: There is no man holy as the LORD, for
without the is nothing and there is no comfort like unto our God. And even so
noman can, nor may be holy or come to the father, but through the son Christ
Jesus as he witnesses himself.

To conclude good brethren and systers I beseke you for the unspeakable mercy
of God to remember and to think that God is wyser than ye: and so doing give
your wit and wysedom captive unto the word of God, and than shall happen
unto you both health and salvation. But alas it is happened unto us (God amend
it) that is spoken of in the.xiiii. Chapter of the book of wisdom, namely
that through the bewty of the work, the commune people was deceived,
insomuche, that they took him now for God which a little before was but honored
as man. Like unto this may ye read Deuteronomy the.vi. Baruch the last, and
in the book of wysedom the.xiii. and.xiiii. chapters besides other places
innumerable mo in the bible. If ye look upon these places, ye shall easily se
what Idolatrye is used daily in Christendom before the painted blocks and
stocks. Which I trust shall once be redressed by the power of the word of
God, though to some it seem to be impossible by the reason of the deep rootynge
of it in some supersticious hearts. But let such call to mind the power of
God specifyed in these words of God by his prophet Esaye in the.l. chapter
Why would no man receive me when I came? and when I called, no man gave
answer. Was my hand clean smytten of, that it might not help? Or had I not
power to deliver? Send therefore the pure and plain understanding of thy
Godly word into our hearts, that the light of the clear understanding of thy
word may drive out the darkness of Idolatry and so thine honor be
restored unto the again. AMEN.

The true Salve Regina, grounded upon the scripture.
HAyle Jesus Christ king of mercy, our life, our sweetness and our hope,
hayle. Unto the do we call the wretched children of Eua: unto the do we call
and syghe, weeping and waylynge in this valley of tears. Turn therefore thy
merciful eyes to us ward thou spechman and advocate of ours, and show us
the visage of thy blessed father in the everlasting glory, as thou have
promised us, O gracious, O sweet Christ and son of the virgin Mary.

The song of Zachary called Benedictus, usually song at Mattins, brefely
declared.
Blessed be the LORD God of Israel, for he has redeemed and visited his people.
And has set up an horn of salvation in the house of his servant David.
Even as he promised before time by the mouth of his holy prophets.
That he would deliver us from our enemies, and from the hand of all such as
hate us.
And that he would shevve mercy unto our fathers, and think upon his holy
conuenaunte.
Even the oath that he swore unto our father Abraham, for to give us.
That we delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might serve him without
fear all the days of our life, in such holiness and righteousness as is
accept before him.
And thou child shalt be called a prophet of the highest: for thou shall go
before the LORD to prepare his vvayes.
And to give knowledge of salvation unto his people, for the remission of
sins.
Thorovv the tender mercy of our God whereby the day spring from on high
has visited us.
That he might give light unto them that sit in darkness and shadovve of
death, and to gyde our fete in to the way of peace.
This song of Zacharye the prophet, the father of Ihon baptiste wash
occasioned to sing for joy that he was restored again to his speech, the which
he lost, because he did not believe the angel showing him of his son Ihon
baptiste that should be borne of him: so that (as the angel said unto him)
the token whereby he should be assured there of was, that he should be domme,
until the time of the chyldes natiuite. Wherefore at his natiuite being
restored again unto his speech, he is forthwyth filled also with the holy
gooste, and prophecyeth: not that he was not filled before with the sprete of
Gods children, whereby he walked unblameably in the commandments and
ryghteousnesses of God: but that than he was eue^ rauyshed and specially filled
with the sprete, so that Luke the Evangelist (who does describe these words in
his.i. chapter) says: that he was filled with ye holy gooste and prophesied.
Now is to prophecy, to utter things, either to come, or that he paste already,
or else to open the scriptures and prophecyes, the which all this song does
conteyne, and is divided in.xii. verses and two parts. In the first does
Zachary commend and praise the truth of Gods promyses, that God does keep and
fulfill those things, which he did promise by his prophets of Christ. In the
second does he declare the office and service of Ihon baptiste. Let us
therefore keep and handle this song of Zachary, not only as a rehearsal and
abrygmente of all such promyses as are spoken of Christ, but also as a large
commentary and vtteraunce of ye gospel of Jesus Christ. But alas this song is
haynously abused, even as is also ye song of praise that Mary the blessed
virgin did sing, called Magnificat, seeing it is roared out daily rather than
song without faith or devotion. God avenge his word from the blasphemies of
the wicked. Now let us go to the song:

Blessed be the LORD God of Israel. Zachary does bless and thank God, which
(according to the promise made unto the holy me^ in old time) did send Christ
the Saueoure of Israel, whereby he does also strenghten the weaklynges in faith
and feeble hearted. And with this singing and openly confessing of his name is
he wellapayed if the heart and mouth do accord. Though he do call God the God
of Israel, it is not therefore to be understand that he is not the God of the
Ge^tyles, but he is so called, first because of the promise made unto Abraham
in the.xvii. chapter of Genesis, where God said unto him: I will make wy
co^uenaunt between me and the, and thy sede after the, through out their
posterites, that it may be an everlasting conuenaunte, so that I will be the
God of ye, and of thy sede after the. etc. Secondly, because he gave them,
Patriarchs, Prophets, the law, the Gods service, and the promyses of Christ
that was tocome. Thyrdly, because that of this people should Christ be borne
after the flesh: But after that Christ was come, he was no more called Israel
truly, that was borne of that kynred, and of the flesh of Israel: but he that
is borne by the faith of Jesus Christ. Wherefore, though the LORD by his power
and rule be the LORD of all nations yet is he properly called the God of the^
that believe in Jesus Christ, because that them only be knowlegeth for ye
heirs of his kingdom.

Blessed is than the God of Israel. But wherefore? Eue^ because he has visited
and redimed his people.

And has set up an horn of salvation in the house of his servant David.
Even as he promised before time by the mouth of his holy prophets.
This pertayneth unto the first part of the song, wherein God is commended
for his faythfulnesse and fulfyllynge of his promise. He has visited and
redimed his people, says Zachary, the which be both one thing, and be as
much to say as: he is come unto us, to bring and to set before us the wholesome
word, whereby we are saved For to visit is, to be myndefull, to care for, or
to make an end of trauyll and thraldom, as God did wha^ he delivered ye
children of Israel out of Egipte, though it be sometime taken for evil, as to
punysh or to chastise. Now is there is no visitacion to be compared unto this
that Zachary speaks of here. For by it he has redeemed us from the danger of
ye Deuell, Death and Hell, and made us fre Israelites and a peculiare people to
himself and has set up an horn of salvation in the house of his servant
David.

A horn in scripture is taken for victory, doughtynesse, a rod, a kingdom,
greatness, power, majesty or excellencye, either because that fourefooted
beasts have their chief strength in their horns, orels be cause that kings
being consecrate in old time were anointed with the oil that the prophets
had in horns, as we read of Samuel.i. Reg. xvi. Therefore says Zachary, that
God has raised and set up an horn, that is, a saving power, namely by Jesus
Christ, the Saueoure of all the^ that believe in him, unto whom is given power
of all things, both in heaven and earth. If I should bring sorth the
scriptures bearing witness of this, I fear me to be cloyde with ye
abundaunce of the same. The horn than is set up in the house of David, for
Christ is borne of the posterite of David, not only after the sprete, (as the
swaruynge spretes of the Anabaptists do say) but also after the flesh, the
which he took of the virgin Mary. If this David (of whose flesh and blood
Christ was borne after the manhood) had been no man, than had not Zachary me^t
him when he said: In the house of David his servant. For Christ is equal
with his father after the Godheade, and the sede or posterite of David after ye
manheade which he took of the virgin Mary, that was of David's kynred, and that
by the ouershadowynge of the holy ghost. If they therefore will swage their
rashness and malepartnesse, and confess the truth according to the
scriptures, than surely shall they se, that scripture uses sometime to speak
mystically of him, and so is he the true Solomon, that is: the king of peace,
whose dominion shall be augmented, and there shall be no end of his peace. Esa. ix.
And sometime after the flesh, as we may se in the.lii. and.liii. chapters of
Esaias. More over, If they will understand the prophecy of Jeremy in his.xxii.
chapter, where he promyseth to raise up the ryghteous brau^che of David only
spritualy, than must they deny the article of our belefe that we confess in,
that he is borne of the virgin Mary, and again that his manhood glorified is
not in heaven, the which God forsende any man should believe, seeing the whole
scripture is contrary to it, though all the world did affirm it. This is than
the very Christ God and man, (of whom the prophets and the euangelystes have
spoken) that Zachary or the holy gooste in him means when he calls him the
horn of salvation in the house of David his servant. How bewtyfull are these
fete of Zachary, bringing so good tydynge, preaching so peaceable Christ by
whose horn of salvation all they that sat in ye region of Deaths shadow were
delivered. But though Zachary in the three first verses did comprehend the
sum of those promyses that were fulfilled in Christ Jesus, yet is he not
content to have brefely run over them, but of a fervent sprete he does now
dilate and declare them more largelyer in the other fore verses followynge, and
says: That he would deliver us from our enemies and from the hand of all
such as hate us.

And that he would show mercy unto our fathers, and think upon his holy
conuenaunte.

Even the oath that he swore unto our father Abraham, for to give us.

That we delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might serve him with
out fear all the days of our life, in such holiness and righteousness as
is accept before him.



What time as the chylderen of Israel were come into the land of promise, and
had taken possession of it, they had no kings, but were ruled by rulers. Now
as they forsook the LORD their God, and fell to Idolatry God did punyshe them,
and sent strange nations upon them, the which vexed them: wherefore they
called upon God, and he delivered them, sendynge them a ruler or captain that
disco^fited the enemies, as the book of judges does specyfy. On like manner
prophecyeth here Zachary that God will do, in sendynge his son Jesus Christ,
of the sede of David, to deliver the true Israelites and to rydde them from the
hand of such enemies, as oppressed them. Lo (says he) how true is God, and
how well abides he by his promyses. For he keeps not only these promyses that
he made by the prophets, but also the testamentes and co^uenauntes that he
made unto the Patriarchs, namelye: Abraham and David, ye which he did bind
with an oath. The oath that he made with Abraham is this: I will bless the^ that
bless the, and curse them that curse the: and in the shall all generacions of
the earth be blessed. And again: Thy sede shall possess the gates of his
enemies, and in thy sede shall all nations on earth be blessed. Gene. xxii. And
of David is written in the.lxxxviii. psalm: I have sworn once by my
holiness, that I will not fail David. His sede shall endure for ever, and his
seat also like as the Son before me. etc. These and such like promyses made
unto Abraham and David of the victory of their enemies, of the surenesse and
quietness of their life, of the continuance of their happy kingdom, sound to
be spoken only of outward blessings, and should be fulfilled after the
meaning of this world: But by this song of Zachary, which is an vtteraunce
of the promyses made unto Abraham and David, it is euidente, that these
blessings concern most chefely the spiritual blessings. For he says that
the promyses made unto the Patriarchs, and confirmed with an oath concerning the
victory of their enemies, of ye peceablenesse of life, of the happy state of
the kingdom, are to be understand of these enemies, which are vanquyshed by
Jesus Christ, and of ye tranquillite, of that happy and peaceable life, ye
which is purchased for us by Christ. Christ has not subdued or overcome the
Egipcians, or Babilonia^s, or ye Romans, (though the Jews had been partly
oppressed, and partly were yet so oppressed of them, that they could not
quietly use the service of God commanded in the law in their own land,
although they should not have obtained the true health nor righteousness
thereby, had they ben delivered of their enemies,) but he overcame and
delivered his people from these enemies, whereof Paul speaks Ephesians. vi. saying:
We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against rule, against power,
namely: against the rulers of the world, of the darkness of this world,
against the spretes of wickedness under ye heaven. Among these enemies is the
chefest of al Satan, ye which as he is a murthurer* eue^ so goes he ever
about roarynge like a Lion, seeking whom he may devour. The second is
Sin, wherein Adam, by the enticynge of the deuel did fall, the which is cropen
in all mankind from Adam, whereby also they be provoked unto all manner of
wickedness. The third enemy are: Affliccions, Death, and Hell. These are the
most haynouse enemies yt can be. Another is it to be thought that these
enemies although they do envy me^ in deed, yet are they far from them, but it
is to be marked that these enemies have me^ wholly in their claws. For
naturally are we the children of wrath, that is, the deuels own, borne in
sin, and by reason of sin, we be in danger of troubles of this world,
bodyly death and also hell. These enemies has Christ so overcome (though they
sometime do repyne and gnash, threatnynge men many things) that they can in no
wise hurt them that believe in Christ Jesus. Moreover Christ has not restored
his people unto such surenesse and tranquillite, wherein they might use at
Jerusalem their service, prescribed unto them in the third book of Moses
called Leuiticus, (for that service, as it was to be observed and kept for a
season only, as the law witnesses: even so was it only an introduccion and
civil holiness to Christwarde,) but he forgave them their sins. By the
which knowledge, the conscience is so quieted by faith, that she now fears
another the deuell, death, nor hell. And because that the holy ghost is given by
faith, therefore, whosoever has the forgiveness of sins by faith, the same
serves the LORD quyetly at all times in such holiness and righteousness as
he can, without any fear of the cruel enemies death or hell. Wherefore as the
promyses made unto Abraham and David are to be understand of the spiritual
enemies, and of the true and spiritual holiness, the which we have by Christ:
even so is this song of Zachary also to be understand spiritually, and of the
inward victory by the faith of Jesus Christ our LORD. For to possess the
gates of the enemies, is, to be lord of all things with Christ, the which
shall begin by faith, and shall finysh when Christ's kingdom shall end, the
which shall never be, for seeing Christ's kingdom is everlasting, and he
eternal, therefore shall we raygne and rejoice euerlastyngly with him in his
kingdom.

That God than did promise unto Abraham and David, that he did confirm and
stablyshe with an oath, namely: to remember his co^uenau^t, to show ye mercy
promised unto the fathers, ye we should be delivered of our enemies, and from
the hand of all such as hate us, and so we delivered from the hands of our
enemies, may serve him without fear: that says Zachary that God has done
very well, when he sent Christ his son in the flesh. The which as he shall
cleanse us from all our sins, and reconcyle us again to God the father, eue^
so shall he also command that we do becomme holy and ryghteous before God by
the faith in him, and be endued with the holy ghost, that so we do obey his
calling by faith, with great rest and peace of conscience.

Holiness signifies the clennesse from al sin, righteousness, a co^lynesse
of all ye life, and a seruiable love unto all men. With these is God truly
served, so doing, we do him an high pleasure, representyng his image and
likeness, the which is most cleanest from all evil, and the most
beneficial and weldoynge unto all things. This service and worship only does
he allow, therefore says he: As is accept before him. For he did require it of
his people, wha^ he brought the^ out of Egipte: saying: Be ye holy, for I am
holy. Moreover, because it is not truly good that takes an end, therefore
says he also: All the days of our life. For it is no godliness ye has an
end. God is eternal and is not changed, whom who so knows truly can never
be drawn from his service: for he shall find nothing better than him. This
is now the first part of the song, wherein the truth of God is commended,
whereby the promyses of Christ are kept, where by also we be admonished of
those benefytes that are happened unto us by Christ. Now follows the other
part: And thou child shall be called a prophet of the Highest: for thou
shalt go before the LORD to prepare his vvayes

And to give knowledge of salvation unto his people, for the remission of their
sins.

Thorovv the tender mercy of our God, vvherby the day spring from on high
has visited us.

That he might give light unto them that sytte in darkness and shadovve of
death, and to gyde our fete in to the way of peace.



In this other part of the song is declared and set forth the office of Ihon
baptiste. Another is it declared with vain dreams, but with the words that
the prophet Malachy, and the angel that appeared unto Zachary did testifye of
him. Thou (says he) child shalt be called a prophet of the Highest? That
is, thou shalt be the chief preacher in Gods church or congregation, for of
the has Malachy prophesied on this wise: Behold, I send my messaunger before
thy face, which shall prepare thy way before the. And again: He shall turn
ye hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the heart of the children unto
the fathers: and for this cause shall thou go before the LORD, that is, before
that Christ do openly begin his office, thou shalt do thine appointed
business. For what intent? First, that thou prepare the way unto Christ. Now
has Ihon prepared the way unto Christ, as is said above, not only in that he
rebuked the people of their sins, but rather because he declared openly that
this is the true Christ, and sent his disciples unto the same Christ,
saying: Behold the lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world.
Secondely, that thou give knowledge of salvation unto his people, for the
remission of their sins. That is, that thou with thy doctrine show unto the
people the true way and manner, where by they may obtain salvation, the which
consysteth not in the delyueraunce from the tyranny of the Romans, another in
the felicite or happiness of this world, but in the remyssion of sins.
Though thou warest rydde of all tyrauntes and enemies in this world, and have
obtained all the felicite of this world: yet art thou in the deuels danger,
an enemy most cruel, and not only his, but also of Death and Hell, which
are utter destructions: Thou art in danger of them by reason of sin, for
Paul says unto the Romans the.v. Chapter: that by one man sin entered in
to ye world and death by the means of sin: even so went death also over all
men, in so much as they all have sinned. Wherefore, that we may be delivered
from the cruelte of the deuel, and from the power of death and hell, it is
required that we be delivered first of all from sin. Ihon was the first that
preached Jesus Christ, that we for him only have the forgiveness of sins,
by the faith in him. Another is there any other way to obtain the true
salvation, tha^ by the faith in Christ Jesus, nor yet also is there given unto
men any other name, where in we be saved. Actu. iiii. For the glory of God is to
save as many as are ordined there to, and that glory gives he to none other
Seeing than Ihon did open, show, and declare Jesus Christ, the doer away of
our sins* he is ryghtfully said to have given or to have taught the people
such knowledge, whereby they obtain the remission of their sins, that is,
righteousness and life everlasting. But for what deservings or merits sake
has ye people obtained such benefits, that they should learn the way of
salvation, and get the remission of their sins? Verily, not for the
circumcision, nor sacrifices, nor civil honesty, the which though they have a
worthynesse in their kind, yet were they not such things before God, that
therefore he should bestow on us the benefyte of forgiveness of sin. What
are then the things wherefore we have such benefyte bestowed on us? Thorovv the
the tender mercy (says he) of our God. He says not only by the mercy* but
by the tender mercy, that is through the great and unsearchable mercy: for
through the same, and for none of ma^s merits did the day spring from on high
visit us. For as the remission of sins happened unto us for none of our
merits, but only of the mere grace and tender mercy of God, even so does this
faith also. The day spring does Zachary call here Christ, as though he were
buddynge and spryngynge, like a branch of a tree, alludynge to the saying of
Jeremy in his.xxiii. chap. saying: I will raise up the ryghteous branch of
David, which shall bear rule, and discuss matters with wysedom, and shall set
up equite and righteousness again in the earth. And also to the prophecy of
Zachary in his.vi. chap. saying: Behold, the man whose name is ye branch,
and he that shall spring after him, shall build up the temple of the LORD.

This branch than or day spring is risen from above, and has visited us,
wha^ Jesus Christ came into this world, and sent Iho^ baptiste before, to
bear open wytnes of him. To what intent? That he might give light unto the^
that sit in darkness, and shadovve of death, and to gyde our fete into the
way of peace. These words of Zachary concern the prophecy of Esaye in
his.ix. chap. saying. The people that have dwelte in darkness, shall se a
great light: and to the^ that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, to
the^ shall the light shine. And again in ye.lx. chap. And therefore get ye up
by times, for thy light comes, and the glory of the LORD shall rise upon ye.
In the darkness and shadovv of death do they sit, which are so wrapped in
wretchednesses, yt they se naught save eue^ everlasting da^nacio^. That is done
when the sins are uttered, and ye conscience knows the judgment of sin.
Therefore when Ihon did show Christ taking away the sins of the world,
surely he showed us such a light, whereby we may not only avoid the
darkness of infelicite or wretchedness and the shadow of death, but also to
gyde our fete into ye way of peace, so to obtain ye true salvation and
felicite For there is none other way of peace or felicite, save Jesus Christ our
LORD, by whose faith we being justified have peace to Godwarde.

A foot in scripture is taken oftymes for ye affection, desire and will of the
heart, as in ye.xxxv. Psalm. Let not the foot of pride overtake me. That is,
the affections and thoughts of pride, lest I conceive a proud opinion of
meselfe in my mind, of my righteousness, wysdom, strength and will: lest I
count meselfe somewhat, where I am nothing, seeing I find no good thing in
my flesh.

The clause wherewith Zachary does end his song is verily a pythy one, namely:
into the way of peace. For if we walk not in the ways of God, in his
commandments, in the life that is blessed and happy because of the
assurance of Gods goodness, whereby such tranquillite and rest of conscience
is procured, yt we take all things in worth, and (as near as we can) have
peace with al men: than verily do we wander in darkness going astraye as sheep
having no sheperd. He does worthily call the ignorance of god the shadow of
death, wherewith are holde^ all those, into whose hearts Christ the true Son
of righteousness has not spread his beams, seeing ye true knowledge of God is
life everlasting. What tunge ca^ express ye misery of the^ that want ye
knowledge of God? For in this life they have a conscience captiuate, restless
and marked with a whote iron, seeking now this way to be saved, tha^ putting
ye body to such pain to deserve heaven so yt it can no more rest, tha^ Euripus
the river, which ebbeth and flows.vii. times in a day and night. And again
what tunge can utter the felicite and happiness of such as have this knowledge,
that Ihon is come to give? for they being suffysed ye God is their God, that
he cares for the^, that he forgeueth the^ their sins through the tender mercy
of their God, wherewyth the day spring [or brau^ch] from on high has visited
us, they keep an everlasting Sabbat, co^myttyng al ye care either of lyuelode,
of clothyng, or of ryddau^ce and delyuerynge from al their enemies, both bodyly
and goostly, to him only that has created and governs all things, trustyng
in him, that as he is only good, so ca^ not he do other wise but good unto
them. This verily is a peace passing the peace of ye world. This peace may
be felt inwardly, but can be uttered sufficiently with no tunge outwardly: Ye
noman can sing another this nor like songs worthily and frutefully, without he
be contrite of heart, and endued with the holy ghost. Therefore is it a heinous
injury unto God, to sing this and like wholesome songs only for advantage,
without any consyderacio^ of the benefits that God has showed us, as it
testifyeth. God grant that abuses may be redressed by the breath of his holy
word. This is the song of praise that Zachary did sing at his chyldes
natiuite, whereby (seeing the truth and mercy of God and the benefits, which
we have gotten through Christ whom Ihon by by his preaching and testimony does
auau^ce, are chefely praised,) let us stablysh our faith, and declare our
thankfulness toward God, that we may keep and retain with thankfulness ye
godly benefits, which of liberalite we have received by Jesus Christ. AMEN.

The song of the aunciente father Simeon, called: Nunc dimittis, the which he
did sing when Mary was puryfyed.
LORD, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
promise.
For mine eyes have seen thy Saueoure, whom thou have prepared before all
people.
A light for the lightening of the Heythen, and for the praise of the people
of Israel.
THis song has.iii. verses, and it was song what time Christ was borne, to
the consolacio^ of Mary and Joseph, with diverse other elect. Moreover, like
as Zachary and Mary, and before them Moses, Debora, Anna the mother of Samuel,
David and diverse other did utter their thankefulnes toward God with songs,
nor could find more pleasynge thing to thank him for his benefits, than
such open praises, wherein the glory of Gods name is recyted: Eue^ so does here
Simeon by the holy ghost bruste out in a song, wherewyth he declares his
thank full mind toward the goodness of God. He sets forth Christ in this
song, and decketh him with great praises goodly tytels. He teaches also by
his own ensample whereof the true peace of conscience doh come, and whereby it
comes that we look readely and gladly for death, ye even ouerco^me death.
Now (says he) LORD let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to
thy promise. That is, I have naught in me, whereof I may boast at thy judgment,
save only this, that thou art my LORD, and I thy servant: not such one that
have done all thy will, but such one, as seeing I have not done thy will, and
ought therefore worthily to have been condemned, yet nevertheless am graciously
saved of the. It was verily a fervent prayer and desire that the ryghteous and
dredynge God sage Simeon praised God with as he saw the LORD in the temple,
and took him in his arms. The heart of ye aged man rejoiced so sore at that
time, yt he could keep the praise of God no longer hyd in his heart: ye if it
had been possible, ye heart would have brusten for joy, saying: LORD, now
let thy servant depart in peace according to thy promise. As though he
would say: Let me now depart, I am now glad to dye, death shall be now
acceptable unto me for it is fulfilled, yt was promised unto me. It might also
be understand, yt Simeons desire was not only to be delivered of ye bodyly
death, but also from all pynyng and unquietness of conscience, the which can
be apeaced with no works, before we have seen the anointed of the LORD, that
is: before that our conscience knows Christ aryght. For tha^ waxes a man
first merry, tha^ dies a man gladly, and than dryueth ye holy ghost away all
grefe of conscience also, which makes a man restless. God gives some men a
great peace inwardly at the first, as Mary brought forth her son with great
joy But such must suffer greatly afterward as Mary did also afterward. Some
suffers God to have grefe and pynyng of conscience until their bodily death,
as he did this Simeon, but than are they contented with advantage for all that
they did forgo so long: ye which is a paynful life, but very precious. Another
were it possible for a man to endure (if Gods word did not sustain him,
whereupon he wayteth) until that time, that God has chosen to the same. Now
when God veryfyeth the promise, than is it above measure sweet unto man, and so
thanketh and prayseth God for it. For he learneth than by true experience, that
God does veryfy his pro, myses, how long so ever he differreth it. Than is
the goodness of the LORD, (ye the LORD himself) very sweet, and he
himself is very willing to dye. In that Simeon calls himself the servant
of the LORD, he first prayseth ye goodness of God, that seeing he might have
destroyed him for his wyckednesses, yet has he wit safe to spare him
mercyfully. Secondly he confesses his extreme vileness and lowlynesse, so
that he have naught in himself that is ought worth in the sight of God, but
that God has all power over him, either to slay or save, and that he be
unworthy to be counted for a man before God. There is nothing more stronger to
steare God to mercy, than so to knowledge before God, and to submit themselves
to him, calling upon him by faith. Wherefore David stearynge God to show mercy,
does so often repete the name servant: as though he would say: Like as he that
is taken in battayll or in time of war, and so being sold is a bondsman and
servant unto him, that bought him: Even so I also being redymed by thy
precious blood from the danger of the deuel, death and hell, am even
altogether thine own, thy servant, thy bondsman, having no right to my self.

Moreover that Simeon says: according to thy promise, therein does he praise
and commend the truth of Gods promyses. For the word or promise made unto
Simeon was, that he should not se death, before he had seen the LORDS Christ.
Now though there appeared many things contrary to this word or promise, and
though it seemed to have been a vain and feigned tail nevertheless, seeing all
men are liars, but thou LORD my God art true, thou fulfyllest it at the
fullest that thou have promised, and let me now go in peace. Hither to have
I carefully abyden thy coming, and that this many years, and what
mystrustynge did not the flesh in the mean season steare me unto? What
infidelite did not Satan inspire me with? And because thou dyddest differ thy
promise of seeing Christ, therefore was I nearehande caused to think that all
thy promyses were vain. And (good LORD) what rumoure or vproure did than rise
in my conscience? With what engines did Satan assault my mind? layenge now my
sins before me, than she wynge me an hougle image of death, sometime kyndlynge
the horrible fire of hell in mine entrayles, wherewyth I was so dismade, that I
was nearha^de in despair. But now thou makeste me an happy aged man LORD,
and let thy servant depart in peace, according to thy promise. Now do
thou set my conscience at rest, now shall I careless wait for the bodyly
death, I will now dye gladly.

But what is happened unto the good father, that thou art so suddenly changed,
and where before thou werest so sorrowful, that thou art now eue^ filled with
so great joy? For what cause do thou now so leap for joy, as though thou
werest reuyued, which before semedest to have been more than dead? Surely his
joy is not for naught. Let us therefore hear himself. For this says he to
be the cause of his mirth, and gladness, namely: For mine eyes have seen thy
Saueoure, whom thou have prepared before all people.

This is the treasure ye rejoices me and makes death acceptable to me,
namely: That I se him yt was under the law, and know him for such one as
helps me, it can not be, but I must rejoice and not be afeared for death
Behold now what is hyd in the heart of the old grayheaded father, that he will
now dye, and will depart in peace. To depart with joy or dye in peace is a
goodly word in ye ears of him that can so do. But where of has he such a
pleasant death? Even of the child. Who has ever seen such like death? But
all they that put their trust in any other save in this child the Saueoure
when they shall dye, they tremble and quake and are very sorrowful at the
heart, and change their color, their wit, reason, understanding and all
their strength faydeth even away, death overcomes them: Ye though all the
kings, princes and powers of ye world were by with their horses and arms to
help them, and the fear of death came upon the^, they should stand as styffe
as a stake before death. But the good Simeon rejoices yt he will depart in
peace, as though there were no death. He calls not ye passing a death, he
disdayneth to honor it so much. He says: LORD now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, and not, thou let me dye. He calls the
passing a sweet and easy sleep.

From whence has he the connyng that he fears not death, but counts it a
sweet sleep, for the which not wythstandynge all the world is afraid? Even
from thence that sin, the law and death were banyshed out of his heart, he
did not regard them. For where the law is, there is also a conscience of
sin: but where she is not, there is nothing save righteousness, and Moses
is exiled, and so wholly out of syghte, that his sepulture is not seen nor
known where it is. Where Moses is gone, from thence is sin taken away also,
and so becomes death a lovely sleep.

But whereby gets he that? Verily not by his deservings and works, but
only by the beholdynge of the saueoure. For he says: Mine eyes have seen thy
Saueour He makes no mention, nor is once thinking that he has done or
procured it with his hands, but has seen it with his eyes, though the
outward sight without the inward do avail so little as the hands.

They are two points, to se and the Saueoure. To se Christ perteyneth unto a
quiet and peaceable death. If we se him, than can we dye merely: but if we se
him not, tha^ is he there in vain unto us. Many have seen him in the temple,
but not aryght. Joseph, Marye, Anna, and Simeon have seen him aryghte, but all
the other that beheld him not likewise, they have not seen Christ nor the
Saueoure. Caiphas, Annas, Pilate and Herod, did behold him in deed, but they
saw not that he was the Saueoure. But where in is the fault, that they can not
se him? In the eyes of the heart, they must be clear, that they may behold ye
young LORD that is entered in to the wynepresse for us, and has suffered wrong
for us, setting us at lyberte, not for our merytes or deservings, but for his
truth and loves sake. Who so beholds him after this manner, the same has
overcome the law, sin, and death, despysynge all their assaults.

The true seeing consists not in the bodily eyes, for many have seen him
after that manner, which were never the better for it: but in faith in the
heart. It may well be that they have seen him with bodyly eyes, but yet not
believed that he was the Saueoure, thinking on this wise: Should this child be
he? it is scarce six wekes old, another can it lift up the head. The true
Saueoure (thought they) shall come with an army, with horses and al manner of
weapens. But the good Simeon has seen him other wise. He was warned in his
heart and a word was given him, saying: The same is he* He had another light
and another syghte. Even so must we also not only hear at Christ's mouth,
but also believe in the heart through the holy ghost, and so must ye heart be
illumined by the holy ghost: for it is naturally stony, hardened and darkened
so sore, that it can not knowledge such salvation and se such light. Another is
it enough that Mary, Joseph, Simeo^ and other have seen him, I must se him
also, I must knowledge him also, I must know also that he is the true Messiah.

Simeon might with few words have uttered the cause of his joy, and said:
Therefore let thou me depart in peace, because I have seen Christ. But that
he might declare the majesty of Christ more clearelye, he leaves the name of
Christ, and in stead thereof he sets three tytles, wherewyth Christ is set
forth most plainly, and his use is showed most manyfestly. The first title
that Christ is declared with, is, Saueoure, saying: Mine eyes have seen thy
Saueoure, whom thou have prepared before all people. This saying seems
Simeon to have taken out of the.lii. Chapter of Esaye where he says: The
LORD will make bare his holy arm, and show it forth in the sight of all the
Gentyles, and all the ends of the earth shall se the saving health of our
God. That Esaye does prophecy for to come, that says Simeon to be now
fulfyllynge. That is, that our LORD Christ which as the true Saueoure is
showed in ye flesh, and set up therefore, that he might be showed unto al
nations, both the Jews and Gentyles. If the sins do rack our consciences,
and cast them to the everlasting damnacyon, than is Christ our Saueoure, the
wholesome plaster, which laid to the sores of our sins, does so dry up,
cleanse and heal the etter of them, that although he feel himself grieved with
sins, and yet do believe in Christ, yeldynge himself wholly to his cure, yet
is he for all that rekened clean from all sin, ryghteous and holy. And if
Christ be wholesome to cleanse and heal sins, it follows also that he is
wholesome in all aduersites, troubles, grefes and pains of death and hell. For
if any man be payned, or grieved, than is Christ wholesome unto him. For in
forgeuynge sins, he makes the same grefe to be no instrument or accasion of
misery unto him. If any man be cast before death and hell in his conscience,
Christ is a Seueoure unto him, the which seeing he has satisfied his father
for our sins, he changes the fear of death and hell in a way, not unto
perdition, but unto life and ever lasting salvation. Let us therefore embrace
this Saueoure of God, the which Simeon did bear in his arms, and let us
likewise bear him by faith, that we may be letten go in peace likewise.

The second title that Simeo^ decketh Christ with, is, the light. For he
says: A light for the lightening of the Heythe^, he shall not only be a
Saueoure, but also a light to lyghten the Heythen, that is: He is a light that
shall not only shine among the Jews, but also, among the Gentyles, and
lyghten them, that they also may come to the eternal bless out of the
darkness of death and hell. This part of ye song seems to be taken out of
the.xlii. Chapter of Esaias, where he prophecieth of Christ on this wise I will
give the for a conuenaunt of the people, and to be the light of the Gentyles,
that thou may open the eyes of the blind, and let out the presoners, and
them that sit in darkness out of the doungeon house. And Christ says thus
of himself, in the viii. chapter of Ihon: I am the light of the world, He
that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life. What are than those darknesses that Christ the light does drive out? The
darkness are first all man's power, wysdom, and righteousness, the which,
though they glyster and shine before men, yet to obtain the grace of God
thereby, to apeace gods wrath to make satisfaccion for our sins, and to get
the true bless with them, they are but even darkness. Secondly are the
darkness all doctrines of philosophers, all laws, either of the Heythen, or of
Moses. For those though they be profitable, and be necessary to redress
manners by them, and to repress the wicked, yet to put away sin with the^
and to get the true righteousness before God, they are even darkness. Only
Christ is the light, because that whosoever believes his gospel, has the
clensynge and remission of sins through him, the which is our
righteousness, consistynge in the judgment of God. Finally are our sins,
death and hell darkness, but Christ is the true light, (...) For if God has
not spared the natural branches, let us beware, lest he spare not us also.
God refused the Jews for their wickedness, how much more shall he refuse us
Gentiles, if we be like unto the^ in wickedness? He refused the Jews, not
because they crucified Christ, but because they believed not in him who^ they
crucified, another repented at the preaching of the gospel of Jesus Christ:
Even so shall not God refuse us, because we have sinned, (orels had we ben
long sense refused,) but we shall be refused, because we will not believe his
Gospel against whom we have sinned, another have done penance by faith, but
partly persecute the gospel with tyranny, partly with despysynge and
lothsomnesse. Therefore let us be diligent by obedience unto the gospel, that
the same glory of Christ that is come and translated unto us, do abide with us
for ever, and not be sklaundered by our misbehaueoure and ungodly living. For
better were it that a millstone were hanged about our necks and we cast into
the sea, than any sklaunder unto God and his holy word should come by us.

Here is now (good reader) the song of the sage grayheaded Simeon, the which
he being full of the holy ghost did sing, to declare his mind to Godwarde.
Wherein first by his own ensample he shows where by the true peace and
tranquillite of conscience does come, and whereby we become willing to dye,
namely thereby, that we know Christ to be the ouercommer and vanquisher of
sin and Death. For if we do behold the Death in us and in herself, there is
nothing more heinous or dredeful. But if we take Christ in our arms of
says, and behold the death in him, than do we so little despair with
beholdynge the death, that we rather do say, either with Simeon: LORD, Now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: Orels
with Paul: I desire to be lowsed and to be with Christ.

Moreover does Simeon set forth Christ with three goodly titles, calling him
the Saueoure of all people, the light of the Gentyles, and the glory of Israel:
that with these titles he might so set forth the majesty of Christ, that either
he might provoke the unbelieving to the faith, or stablyshe the weak in faith,
or keep them that be strong


