THE Right, and prerogative of Kings, Against Cardinal Bellarmine and other
Jesuits.

Written in French by John Bid, Advocate in the Court of Parliament of Paris,
and published by Authority.

PROVE. 24. 24. My son fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that
are seditious.

ECCLES. 8. 4. In whatsoever place the word of the King is, there is power: And
who shall say unto him, What do thou?

Translated by Robert Sherwood.

LONDON, Printed by N. O. for William Bladon, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Bible. 1612.

TO THE MOST PIOUS, PRVDENT and Potent Monarch, JAMES, by the grace of God,
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Dread Sovereign,
OF all the creatures of this Universe, none draws nearer to the Creator the^
man; neither any degree of men, so much as does the King, whether we consider
his person or his Office. As the face of Moses descending the Mount from God,
shone bright and glorious: so the Maiesticke look of a King (reflecting divine
beams, received from the King of Kings) daunteth the most proud and sauadge
hearts of Inferiors. Therefore Kings are in holy Writ called Lights, for their
glory; Gods for their power; and the Lords anointed, to testify their graces,
and the dignity of their Office. And surely your Majesty is a light, and a
light of Israel, (Gods people) not only for glory, but for example of piety,
religion, and virtue: your Majesty is Gods Lieutenant, executing his power,
which consists chiefly in ordering and directing, in protecting and
defending, in rewarding and punishing: in a word, your Majesty is truly the
Lords anointed, furnished with all Royal and Princely graces, and namely of a
wise and understanding heart, to judge and rule this geat and mighty people,
over which the Lord has placed you.

Wherefore I have presumed (being but a Translator) to present this small
Treatise to your Majesty, not as a thing worthy so judicious view; but for that
it treats of the Authority of Kings, and for that it was by the Author
dedicated to a King his Master, entitled Most Christian; and therefore for
none more meet, the^ your Majesty, being truly styled Defender of the fath.
Wherein I beseech your Majesty to pardon the boldness, and pass by the
infirmities of him, that is bound (with all true subjects) unfeignedly to pray
to the King of Kings, for your Majesty's long and prosperous reign in this
world, and an immortal Crown of eternal felicity in the world to come.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient subject. ROBERT SHERVVOOD.

The Translator to the Reader.
OUR blessed Saviors rule, Math. 7.20
Ye shall know them by their fruits, is an infallible and perpetual way to
unmask hypocrites, among which none are more dangerous to the State wherein
they live, then such as under pretense of Religion, do politickely underhand
practice, all for the good of a foreign power, to whom they have vowed
themselves. Of which we need no farther instance then the vpstart sect of
Ignatians, who blasphemously term themselves Of the society of Jesus. Yet none
do more abhor from the holinsse of that name, which they so arrogantly
usurp, or less resemble and imitate Jesus, the pattern of all holiness. To
omit their intolerable pride and aspiring ambition, their insatiable
coueteousnesse, their cunning hypocrisy, their subtle sophistry, their
matchless Machiauelisme, their equiuocating perjury, their compassing sea and
land, to seduce and pervert, and the like, wherein they are directly opposite
to Jesus; who was humble and lowly, lived poorly, is the truth it self, and
taught the way of God plainly. Are not these their sublimest fruits? to
intermedle with matters of State, to oblige themselves by their blind vow to a
foreign Lord; to co^ceale high Treason, tending to the danger of Princes
persons, and euersion of States, reueiled to the^ in auricular confession,
(that I may not say, to animate, rather then deter, the Traitors, to put
their Treason in execution:) to publish their devilish and pernicious
doctrines, ascribing to one man, the Pope, (even over Kings) both the powers
Ecclesiastical and Civil, which Christ Jesus has separated the one from the
other, Nich. 1. ad Michael. Imp.
actibus proprijs and dignitatibus distinctis, as Pope Nicholas the first
affirms. Look nearly into their doings, and you shall perceive them armed
with rage and cruelty, not with tears, which (as Saint Ambrose wittnesseth)
are, and only ought to be, In orat. co^tra Auxentium 23. quest. 8.
conuenientior.
munimenta sacerdotis: You shall see them bring forth fruits dangerous to the
persons and states of Kings, and contrary to them of the ancient Christians,
Tertul. 30. Apologetici.
who as Tertullian testifies did pray for all their Emperors, that they might
have Vitam prolixam, Imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum
fidelem, populum probum, orbe^ quietum, and quaecunque hominis and Caesaris
vota sunt. Yea, to every indifferent man they will appear to be so far off,
from the innocence of holy David; who had a touch of heart, 1. Sam. 24.6.
for having but cut off the lap of Saul's garment; that by writings they rather
approve the murder of Princes, the Lords anointed; a doctrine not only
opposite to the doctrine and practice of JESUS, but which (I am assured) all
true subjects in all lands (not only of such as are taught in JESUS School,
but even of them that have never so little spark of humanity or light of
nature) do detest and abhor. And how be it they labor to cover these things,
and to persuade their adorers, that these are but slanderous imputations
wrongfully cast upon them. Yet they stick not to publish, to the eye of the
world, many things derogatory from the authority of Sovereign powers, ordained
of God; affirming it to be a merely humane institution. Which new, strange,
and dangerous paradox, our Author, in this small Treatise, does, both by
divine and humane testimonies learnedly confute: the soundness of whose
reasons, and faithfulness of allegations, will to every indifferent Reader
plainly appear. Whereby not only the best Christians and most loyal
subjects may be confirmed, the mouth of the adversary stopped, and the honest
minded, though blinded Papist, be preserved as by a sovereign antidote against
the pestilent doctrines of such as mislead the^. At least, if any of them dare
cast an eye on this book; for that their bondage is so great, as they are
forbidden to read any thing written by men of our side, yea, the holy Bible,
for fear (forsooth) of heretical infection. A policy which as it shows the
unsoundness of their cause, so does it not a little uphold their tottering
Kingdom, by retaining the people still in ignorance.

But let me entreat thee (good Reader) not to censure a piece, but read the
whole, with an impartial eye: and friendly to accept my pains in good part
undertaken for thy good.

Robert Sherwood.

The Authors Epistle to the French King.
SACRED Majesty, Plin. l. 11. cap. 16.
natural History teaches us, that Bees appear at their beginning, like a
little white worm, all except him that is to be their King: which comes
forth with wings, and is of yellow color, because he is formed of the most
exquisite flowers. And if the Monarch of all the world has given such
privilege to the King of so small creatures: what are we to believe of him,
whom he has established to command over men, and honored with the title of
Most Christian? To confirm which belief in the hearts of your subjects, and to
destroy the opinion of the doctors of lies, which falsely maintain, that the
Kingly power is not absolute, and that it is an invention of me^; I have
adventured to frame this little discourse, and to present it to your Majesty,
to the end that by the reading of the same, they may learn no more to
blaspheme against the powers established of God alone, and that they may know,
that it is not the antiquity and greatness of your house, the Nobility of the
Princes which your Majesty commands; the wisdom of your Sovereign Courts;
the order Ecclesiastical: the large extent of your Provinces: the strength of
your places; the affection of your peoples: the faithfulness of the
confederates of your Crown: the experience of your Captains: the valor of
your Nobity: the thunders of your Arsenall; the greatness of your treasury,
that mainteineth your Crown. But that divine character, graven by the finger
of God in the face of the King, Prou. 20.8
who sitting upon the throne, chaseth away all evil with his eyes. He having
given to your Majesty in these tender years, wings to fly over peoples, which
are but as creeping worms of the earth, in comparison of the degree he has
given your Majesty: every good subject, by the yoke imposed of God to his own
conscience, Romans 13.
acknowledges himself bound (as I do) to make a vow to remain for ever,
without dispensation from such a duty.

Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject, and
servant. JOHN BID.

Vltima talis erat quae mea prima fides. Propert. 20 20.



Errata.
Page 1. in marg. read Hieron. p. 2. l. 15. read Micrarchie. p. 16. l. 16. for
they, read the: p. 21. l. 11. read Papinian. p. 36. l. 4. read, depose him: p.
38. l. 10. for of, read over: p. 49. l. 17. read Remy: p. 89. l. 14. for these,
read their: p. 90. l. 7. read in the Church: p. 102 l. 18. for man, read name:
p. 117. l. 19. read Luxemburg. p. 121. l. 21. read by a Council: p. 141. l. 2.
for out of, read not in: p. 149. l. 18. read, these flattrers: p. 163. l. 2.
for have, read having.

What other litterall faults occur, I entreat the Reader, either himself to
amend, or of courtesy to pass over.

The Right and Prerogative of Kings.
CHAP. I. That the Authority of the Prince is from God.
THE Ancients do witness that France has a long time ben free from monsters,
Heiron. contra Vigilant. statim initio.
having nothing disordered in her inhabitants, nor in their manners: whereas on
the contrary in Africa arises ever ordinaily some nouelty. But if we seek
whence the disproportioned propositions, handled in these days do proceed,
we shall find them to be bred in foreign parts, and not fruits of
home-grouth. Such an one is this same maintained by Cardinal Bellarmine (whose
actions have Bellum, arma, minae, that is: war, arms, and threats. Bell.
lib. 1. de pont. c. 7. and de clericis ca. 28.
reference to his name) that the authority of Kings is but of a humane
institution. Wherein he does like those malefactors, who going about to excuse
their fact, diminish the dignity of the person against whom they offended: or
like men of war, who first batter down the defenses of a place, before they
give the assault. For if this Doctor said true, the attempt of murdering Kings
were not so heinous a crime, simply transgressing the laws of men; as indeed
it is, being committed against the commandment of God. The falsehood of which
doctrine that I may the better show, I will use four kind of arguments, of
which the first is taken from nature, created of God, and considered in her
purity, wherein are observed the traces of respect, which all creatures bear
unto man, to obey him as a Monarch. Which natural instinct, notwithstanding
the corruption brought in by sin, remains still in some creatures, which
acknowledge a King of their kind, and follow him. Secondly, seeing that the
excellency of man consists in this, that he was created after the image of
his Creator, who will doubt, but that Empire or rule formed on the pattern of
the Sovereign God, is above all other kind of command? Thirdly, the form of
the reasonable individual man, whose head alone commands all the members,
and who in this regard is called Mycrocosmos, that is to say a little world, is
it not a Michrarchie? that is to say a little Kingdom well policied? And every
one of our households, commanded and governed by one alone, does it not put us
in mind of this order instituted by God? Surely none, but such as will have no
lawful family at home, dare deny it. For as the father of a family is in his
house, so is the King in his Kingdom; and for this cause Princes are called by
the Prophet, Esa. 49.23.
The nursing Fathers of Gods Church.

The second order of Arguments is taken from the common sense of al men,
against which, such Doctors do trespass: for the law of superiority is borne
with man, and continued from the Creation of the world even unto us. God having
graven in man's heart, as, to acknowledge a Godhead, for respect of religion,
so also to submit himself to the King, to maintain society, according to that
which the people of God said: 1. Sam. 8.20.
Our King shall judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles. Also
Adam was chief head of all the men which lived during the 930 years that he
lived after his creation. The Empire of Noah was divided between three; Iaphet
reigned in Europe, Sem in Asia, and Cham in Africa. And Nimrod, called the
mighty Hunter, reigned in Babylon from the year 130, after the flood. For this
effect were Moses and Ioshuah established of God; who had all the marks of
Sovereignty; for though the word King be not in so many letters found, why
shall we not call them Princes, Dukes, and Kings, seeing they executed the
whole function, and bare the marks of such. And after the creation of the
Judges, God condemns not the form of Monarchical command, as the
Adversaries of Royalty falsely calumniate, seeing that he says, Romans 13.1.
There is no power but from God: But he blames the lightness of his people
in the change of the order by him established. But if the people be made so
faulty for having obtained of God a royal command in matters of policy; with
what authority will this Cardinal Jesuit maintain the mixed power which he
brings into the Church, without any commandment, or ratification from God?
Now not only the Orthodoxall people, but also Pagans have had this instinct of
Nature, thus far, Cappadoces Just. lib. 38.
that being left to their choice by the Romans, who had vanquished them; they
instantly requested them to give them a King, protesting that they were not
otherwise able to maintain themselves, and esteeming true that which Herodian
says, Herod. 4.
that as Jupiter has command over all the Gods, so in imitation of him, it is
his pleasure that the Empire of men should be Monarchical. From this sense,
common to all men, it comes that the warlike Nation of Macedonia, having been
foiled in war, Just. 7.
before they returned again to the battle went to fetch the cradle wherein
their young King lay, and set him in the midst of the Camp, supposing that
their former misfortune proceeded from this, that they had not with the^ the
good augure of the Kings presence. And although ambition carry men thus far,
either to command, or not to obey any but men of quality and merit, yet we
read that the Sicilians did bear so great a respect to the last will of their
deceased King, Just. 4.
that they disdained not to obey a slave, whom King Anaxillaus had appointed
Regent, during his sons minority: And Xerxes flying from Greece in a vessel,
so full of men of war, that it was impossible for him to save himself,
without casting away some part of them; said unto them: O ye men of Persia,
Herod. 8.
let some among you testify that he has care of his King: for my safety is
in your disposition. And then, the Nobility, which accompanied him, having
adored him, cast themselves into the sea, till the vessel was unburdened.

The third order of reasons is taken from Gods institution, practiced in Adam,
Noah, Nimrod, Moses, Ioshuah, yea in express terms for Saul, speaking thus
to Samuel. 1. Sam. 8.22.

Ratificatio retrotrahitur and mandato aequiparatur.


Hearken unto their voice, and make them a King. And if with men ratification
be equal to a commandment, by much stronger reason with God, who is not
induced to change his purpose, by any persuasion, nor forced to do that which
displeases him by any violence. Now that his will was to establish a King,
appears, not only by his decree and counsel, as then hidden and since
revealed, but by his will manifested long time before in these words. Deu. 17.14.
When thou shall come to the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, and shall
possess it, and dwell therein, if thou say (mark that he forbids them not
to say it) I will set a King over me, like as all the Nations that are about
me: then thou shall make him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall chose.
Note these words against the new heresy of our Jesuit, who in his third book
Recognitionum, quaest. de Laicis, upon this false ground: that Kings have not
their authority immediately from God, but from the people, maintains, that
they are Kings, no further then it pleases the subjects. For by this Text it
appears that God chose Saul: 1. Sam. 10.20.24.
Also it is written, That after Samuel had gathered together all the Tribes,
(to wit for to cast lots) that the Tribe of Benjamin was taken; and it
follows after, Not any among all the people is like unto him whom the Lord
has chosen: And if the Lot governed by God alone be not an immediate vocation
from God, these Doctors, with their blasphemy may as well reject Mathias from
the Apostle-ship, and make him an Apostle of men, as the King of great
Britain has iudicially and to purpose observed: out of whose writings I have
borrowed many arguments inserted in this Treatise. Seeing then that this high
charge is given of God, where is the man so presumptuously rash, that dares
blame this order, and will depose him whom God has established? It is
therefore God which creates and degradeth Kings, Dan. 4.22. and 5.18.21. Prou.
21.1. Deuteronomy. 2.
and none other, which holds their hearts in his hand, for to bow them as he
did the heart of Darius, and of Nebuchadnesar, or hardens them, as he did
Pharoahs and the Kings of Syon. For it is written, Exodus 6.7.8. Wised. 6.3.
Power is given you of the Lord, and Principality by the most high. And JESUS
said to Pilate. Ioh. 19.11.
Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above. Pro. 8.15.
Also in the Proverbs it is said, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice. The obedience therefore which is due unto them, is grounded on this
Law, written with the finger of God: Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy father and thy mother: For the name (Father) is attributed unto
them, not only because they contain particular persons in their duty, but
also for the body Ecclesiastical, for they are called, Esa. 49.
Nursing fathers of Gods Church, for to contain it within the discipline of
the Law; and are not themselves children of the same, to be under the rod and
chastised by privation from their kingdoms. Yea rather the Apostle says to
the Romans; Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, Romans 13.1.5.
for there is no power but of God. And he adds, wherefore ye must be
subject, not because of wrath only; that is to say, for punishment, but also
for conscience sake; Whence it follows that the authority of the Prince is of
Divine right, seeing it binds the soul and conscience, which has only God
for superior Lawgiver. And for to take away all ambiguity from equiuocating
Doctors, who distribute of powers temporal and spiritual over some subjects.
the Apostle expounds what these powers ordained of God, are, 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
Whether it be to the King, as unto the Superior (he excepteth no person) or
unto Governors, as unto the^ which are sent of him. Therefore under the name of
powers are comprehended the kinds of lawful government, namely Monarchical,
Democraticall and Aristocraticall. And to manifest it more clearly, the
Apostle designeth these powers, saying: that the Prince bears not the sword
for naught. Romans 13.3.4.
It is then the power of Princes which bear the sword, whereof he speaks,
and not of them which bear the Crosier staff, for they are subject to the
temporal Magistrate, as it is written, 1. Pet. 2.17.
Fear God and honor the King: comprehending in two words the doctrine of the
first and second Table, as the Wiseman also does in his Proverbs, My son,
Pro. 24.21.
fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that are seditious, or
(according to the natural translation) with men which innouate or transform
themselves. Now the reason of this prohibition is, that they which are desirous
of nouelty, which trouble the present state, which transform themselves,
Iesuita omnis homo, as the proverb is, and do that which our Savior blames
in the Gospel, compass sea and land to make a proselite, these I say are not
fit men to instruct our children in the fear of God and service of the King.

The fourth means to convince this new opinion is taken from the practice of
the orthodoxall: (for by such works we may know the workmen;) whereby we shall
see, that no particular faithful persons have ever resisted the King,
otherwise then by patience; witnesses of this are the Israelites captive in
Egypt, and the answer and behavior of the Jews, when Petronius would bring
the Emperors Image into their Temple. So that Zedechias, Eze. 17.16.
the last king of the house of David, was punished of God, for not keeping his
oath of a tributarie King. As for the example of Constantine against Maxentius,
it cannot be drawn into any consequence, for it was a fact of one Sovereign
against another Sovereign. And as touching the subalternal Magistrates, called
the officers of the Crown, though the defensive right be grounded on the law
of nature, constant and unchangeable, yet they never came to that point, but in
case of all extremity. So David is said by Abigall, 1. Sam. 25.28.
that he fought the battles of the Lord, he fortified himself with men and
arms, enquired if the Inhabitants of Keilah would deliver him to Saul; 1. Sam.
23.11.
for there can none other thing be gathered therefrom, but that he would have
opposed the walls of the City against his enemy, if he had been the stronger
in the City. With like modesty did the Priests behave themselves toward King
Ioram, against whom they resisted, and shut the gates of Libnah, only for that
he would have forced them commit idolatry, for it is written, that he had not
only forsaken the Lord God of his fathers, 2. Chron. 21.10.11.
but caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and compelled
Judah thereto. Examples far from attempting against the person and state of
Kings, whose servants they were: the Hebrews in the time of Pharaoh, the
Apostles in the time of Nero, the first Christians under Julian the Apostata;
our Savior himself, the pattern for all the faithful to imitate, was
enregistred from the womb of the holy Virgin, paid tribute, answered before
Pilate, and his Apostles before Nero, appealed unto Caesar, without shunning
the Royal jurisdiction. And if it had been lawful to attempt against the life
of natural Princes, among so many constant Martyrs which have suffered
persecution, would there not have been found some, that would have tried this
means for the deliverance of their brethren? Was there not zeal enough in the
Apostles to stir up their Disciples thereto? or eloquence enough in the
Evangelists to persuade unto murders? Let then these new Doctors be confounded
with shame, by the doctrine which even they teach whom they call Heretics,
Art. 39. and 40. of the confession of the Reformed Churches of France, Printed
in the end of the book of the Psalms.
who in the midst of fires and massakers have published their confession, in
the two last Articles, of which are contained these words. For this cause he
(to wit God) has put the sword into the Magistrates hand, that he may repress
the sins committed, not only against the second Table of Gods commandments;
but also against the first: we must therefore for his sake not only endure
that Superiors rule over us, but also honor and esteem of them in all
reverence, holding them for his Liefetenants and Officers, to whom he has
given in commission to execute a lawful and an holy function. We therefore
hold that we must obey their laws and statutes, pay tributs, imposts, and
other duties, and bear the yoke of subjection with a good and free will;
although they were Infidels, This condition ought not to be calu^niated; for it
is better to obey God then men, as is treated in the next Chapter.
so that the Sovereign Empire of God, remain in his entire. May it therefore
please your Majesty to judge, that if your Protestant subjects have been so
firm in their duty toward your Predecessors, of whom they have been so
severely entreated, that in the midst of torments they have blessed the King;
What your Majesty may expect of them, being at this day their Benefactor and
Protector, and by this degree to acknowledge what your Majesty is to believe
concerning their Religion toward their Creator and eternal Redeemer. And
according to the doctrine of contraries your Majesty may clearly see that they
ungrateful of benefits received from the Kings your Predecessors, which
attempt daily by word, writing and by damnable effects, against the state and
person of the Sovereign, armed with such a power as he is: that those same
without doubt have before-time enterprised very far against the service of
their Sovereign King, whose Administrators they have too longtime been,
without rendering account.

CHAP. II. Wherein the Authority of the Prince consists.
FORASMVCH as in this last age of the world the malice of men is so great, that
they dispute the cleerest principles, bring in new Maxims and call into
question things most assured: We must deal with them as our Savior did with
the Pharisees, Mat. 19.4.8.
to convince whose error in matter of divorce, he sends them back to that
which was practiced in the beginning: teaching us by his example to seek out
the truth in Antiquity, and in her original. So doing, for the question in
hand, we shall find that God the Creator of heaven and earth, King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords; Genesis 1. Mat. 28. Apoc. 19.
reserving to himself the Empire over Spirits, for to sound the thoughts,
dispose the wills, and give law to his creatures, has constituted under him a
dignity, depending of his only grace, which he has established on earth, for
to put in excution his ordinances, 1. Tim. 2.2.
To the end that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and
honesty. To the observation of which ordinances, this Sovereign power is so
much the more obliged, for that the Prince sins not by transgression only,
but also by example, whereunto subjects usually conform themselves. For this
cause is he commanded to observe the Law in these words, Deuteronomy. 17.
He shall write for him a Copy of this Law in a book, and after, He shall
take heed to all the words of this Law, and to these statutes for to do them.
Now this commandment is given to the King, not as to a private person, to whom
it suffices to subject himself to it, but as to a king, for to reduce others
to obedience thereto. By virtue whereof he ought to chastise those
Ecclesiastical persons that be corrupters of true Religion, Deuteronomy. 13.
according as it is written. When there shall arise in the midst of thee any
Prophet or dreamer of dreams (such as are the practitioners of the chamber of
meditations) and shall give thee a sign or wonder, etc. saying, Let us go
after other Gods, etc. That Prophet or dreamer of dreams shall be slain,
because he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, etc. 2. King.
11.15.17.
So King Ioash and all the people swear, to keep the Law Politic and
Ecclesiastical. And if the observation of this Law is prescribed unto Princes
themselves, where is that subject that dare dispense therewith? And if the
worke-man-ship do borrow his dignity from the worke-man, who is he can accuse
it of superfluity or defect? Iren. lib. 2. cap. 47.
We know (says Saint Iraeneus) that the Scriptures are perfect, for they are
indicted by the word of God, and by his Spirit. For these causes the Kings power
is limited unto this only ordinance, which contains in two Tables the rules
of piety and justice: the most solid and fundamental pillars of State, which
at all times, those men have kept inuiolate, which in all things else obeyed
the Prince. So Daniel and his companions refused to prostrate themselves before
the image of Nebuchadnesar. Dan. 3.
And the holy Apostles Peter and John, in the execution of their charge, Act.
4.19. Ioh. 9.22.
said, that it is better to obey God then men. In like manner, the Mid-wiues
are praised for that they would not execute the decree of Pharaoh, Exo. 1.17.21.
and put the Hebrew children to death, for that was against the second Table of
the Law of God, Thou shall not kill, Therefore it is written: Mat. 5.21.
And because the Midwiues feared God, therefore he made them houses: So said
that constant Martyr, 2. Maccab. 7.30.
I will not obey the Kings commandment, but I will obey the commandment of
the Law that was given unto our fathers by Moses. So for obeying man (although
he was a Prophet) rather then God, 1. King. 13.
the man of God was torn in pieces of a Lion. The impiety and wickedness of
Iezabels commandment, who had ordained that the Prophets should be slain,
hindered Abdias from executing it. For seeing that the king in his kingdom, is
as a Father of a family in his house, and God will have us to love him more
then our own blood: it suffices the king that we render unto him the service
that children owe to their most dear parents, seeing that the honor due unto
him is comprehended under the name of Father and Mother. Which is a thing so
imprinted in the hearts of good men, that the light of Lawyers, Papipinian,
though he were not instructed in the Law of God, refused the Emperor Caracalla
to excuse the murder that he had committed in the person of his brother,
saying, that it is not so easy to excuse an homicide, as to commit it. By which
answer he shows, that they do falsely call themselves Christians, which
canonize murderers, and easily approve the Parricides which they have hardly
executed. And forasmuch as such bounds are set by him, which gives and takes
away Kingdoms, on such conditions as pleases him, good Princes which have
desired the preservation of their estates, have not hindered the course of
justice, nor bound the hands of the Magistrates established by them, when they
would execute their charges; Have also taken in good part the admonitions, that
the Pastors of the Church have given them for the observation of piety: for as
it is said of the great City Troy, that it could not be destroyed till first
they had lost their Tutelary Gods. Peritura Troia perdidit primum Deos.
So may we as well and with more suerty say, that it is a most assured token of
the subversion of a State at hand, when Religion is ill observed, and justice
not well administered. The Prince then is not above the Law of God, for it
comes from his Superior: neither above the law of nature, which cannot be
abolished but with the abolishing of nature it self. But that which is said in
the Civil Law, L. Princeps de ^^gibus (...) aequo. (...) ad Trebel.
that the Prince is free from the observation of the Law, is meant from the
solemnities of the Law, and from constraint, which things are denied to every
particular or private person, l. pen. de l^^^^ptis. 3 c. de ^estam l. ex
imperf. de leg. 3.
in whose mouth only rests humble supplication, and who are armed only with
a Placet. This may also be understood of the privileges granted by Kings,
which can never be extended against the Prince, who has the right to revoke
them when they are abused, and may abrogate the laws of which himself is the
author; L. digna vox de leg.
living himself in the mean time after the laws, so long as they continue
for the subjects; buying according as the price goes, and exposing his
treasury according to the statute. And that place of Samuel makes not to the
purpose, hoc erit ius Regis, which speaks of the right of rigor, which is
extreme injury: and is of the customary right of ill and way-ward, and not of
good Kings. So said the Emperor Theodosius, to submit the Empire to the Law,
is something more then to cause it to be observed by others; L. digna vox de
leg.
for there is no commandment higher then to command the Prince, nor any more
difficult, then to command a man's self. For this reason good Princes, the
better to contain their subjects in their duties, have brought themselves to
live according to the Laws, principally according to them which are of the
State, and fundamental of their sovereignty; as said the Emperor Traian,
girding the sword on his high Constable, Draw it forth (says he) for me, if I
command according to the Laws: but if I do the contrary, employ it against
me. But although such subalternall Magistrates, are as well Officers of the
Empire, as of the Emperor, yet it is not therewith permitted them to control
the actions of their Sovereign; especially when they are personal vices,
which pass not into habitude, and which bring not ruin to the whole state;
and such as Princes render an account of to God alone. Tibi soli, Psalm. 51.
said David, though he had caused his servant Vrias to be slain, and
committed adultery with Bathsheba: No Officer of the Crown spoke to depose
him, neither any particular person to bring him to judgment, much less
strangers, in any degree whatsoever in another territory, who in these times,
being very liberal of the rights of others, abuse that place of Saint Paul,
Romans 13.
which enioyneth obedience to the Prince for conscience sake, to cause the
first Table of the Law to be transgressed, and dispense subjects of their oath
of Allegiance due unto Caesar, and so cause the second Table of the Law to be
violated for their hurt: being carried away, according to the nature of the
error, to the vice of two extremities, the mean of which consists in five
royal prerogatives. The first is a power to make Laws, L. 55. v. C. de leg.
Tit. c. de ve^stig.
without the consent of any subject necessary thereto: and consequently to
coin money, to give it value, to stamp his arms upon it, and to impose taxes
according to the necessity of the State: Secondly, to make peace or war, be
it to succor his allies, or to revenge an injury, L. vt Armorum Auth. de armis
l. 1. ad l. Iul. de Ambitu l. ius gladij de reg. iu. Doct. in l. 3. de iurisd.
omnium.
whosoever have committed it: Thirdly, to create Magistrates, and to establish
or suppress them: Fourthly, to take knowledge of, and to judge appeals
definitiuely. And lastly, to have power of life and death over all sorts of
inhabitants in his kingdom, over all persons resident within his Dominions,
and generally to dispose according to the laws of their goods, life, and
reputation. Of which points whosoever prete^deth himself to be exempt,
resists the ordinance of God, and are guilty of high Treason, what pretext
soever they bring.

CHAP. III. That Ecclesiastical persons were subject to Princes, before the
coming of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
THAT is not new which is from the beginning of the world, 1. Ioh. 2.7. 2. Ioh.
5.
says Saint John. Teneaut Sa. Jesuit in his Aphorisms Printed at Antwerp. v.
Princeps v. Clericis.
Wherefore we cannot sufficiently detest the new opinion of the Jesuits, who
teach that Ecclesiastical persons cannot be condemned for high Treason, because
they are not the Kings subjects. To convince which heresy, and to hinder that
none (following this doctrine) do any more attempt against our Kings, let us
lead these Pharisees to that which was at the beginning. We have no Hystorian
more ancient then Moses, who from the creation of the world until his death in
the year of the world 1493. tells us of no other superior power, but of the
Prince, over all the inhabitants of his Territory. And accordingly hereunto,
Exodus 20. to the 25. Chapter.
the Law was given of God to Moses the Duke and King of the people, and not
unto Aaron: acording as it is written, Ex. 24.7.8.
that Moses took the book of the Covenant, and read it in the hearing of the
people, etc. Took the blood of the covenant and sprinkled it upon the people.
And when the chief Priest with all the visible Church had committed idolatry
about the golden Calfe, Moses reproved him, saying to Aaron. Ex. 32.21.
What did this people unto thee, that thou have brought so great a sin upon
them. To which reproof Aaron answered him not, that he could not err, nor his
Church, nor that he judged the whole world, and was not to be judged of any:
but acknowledged himself to be in the State, and consequently the Princes
subject, asks him pardon, saying: Let not the wrath of my Lord wax fierce:
The like reprehension Eleazer the chief Priest, did take in good part, when
Moses said unto him, Leuit. 20.
Ye should have eaten it in the holy place as I had commanded. In the same
manner also as touching the jurisdiction, for it was wholly in the hands of
Moses, Exodus 18.13. etc.
as being the Prince of the people; judging in person, as in times past the
Kings of France have done, or ordeining Judges to take knowledge of causes,
which respect either the Church, or process between man, and man: Afterward
also there was references and appeals in cases of difficulty, which returned
to Jerusalem. 2. Chron. 19.8. Deuteronomy. 17.8.
And to himself was given of God, the direction of the service and order
Ecclesiastical, and not to the Priests. Against which truth, it will not serve
the turn to say, that Moses was of the family of Leui, for seeing he reproved
the chief Priests themselves, it was not in quality of a Leuite, who had been
inferior to the least of the Priests, if he had not further had the quality
of Duke. So David a man after Gods own heart (who took not upon him above his
charge) having named Solomon his son for successor, gathered a Council, 1.
Chro. 23
numbered and distributed to the Priests, their charges and offices, described
in that place, which consisted not in commanding but in their administering
before the Lord: For to purify all holy things, for the shewbread, and for
the fine flower, for the meat offering, and for the vnleueaned cakes, and to
offer burnt-offerings, 2. Chro. 6.
etc. Solomon likewise dedicated the Temple, and consecrated it to God, in
presence of all the Church: And himself conceived prayer and blessed the
people, the Priests being present. Iosaphat also having broken down the groves
and banished the service of images, 2. Chron. 19.3.8.11.
He established in Jerusalem (namely) for the judgment of the Lord, Amariah
the Priest, and Zebadiah a ruler of the house of Judah, for all the Kings
affairs: 2. Chron. 17.6.
and in the third year of his reign he sent of his principal Governors, and
the Levites with them, for to teach the people. And of Josias it is written: 2.
King. 23.
And the King stood by the pillar, and made a covenant before the Lord, etc.
and it is added, then the King commanded Helkijah the high Priest, etc. Who
said not that the King had nothing to do to command him in matters which
concerned the service of God, but fulfilled the Kings commandment: Likewise it
is said of King Ezechias, 2. Chro. 29
He opened the doors of the house of the Lord, in the first year, and in the
first month of his reign, and repaired them, etc. called for the Priests and
Levites, and said unto them. Here me ye Levites, sanctify now your selves,
and sanctify the house of the Lord. Again, Now I purpose to make a covenant
with the Lord God of Israel, etc. Then he said to the Priests, the sons of
Aaron, that they should offer upon the Altar: he appointed the Levites in the
house of the Lord, etc. Then Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering
upon the Altar. Also he says, Now ye have consecrate your selves to the Lord
come near and offer the sacrifices and praises, etc. Again, 2. King. 18.4.
He took away the high places, brake the images, and cut down the groves,
and brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made. And he gathered
together the whole Church, and wrote letters to Ephraim, and Manasses, 2. Chro.
30
that they should come to Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover, etc. For the
King (mark it) and his principal Officers with all the congregation had held
a counsel in Jerusalem, to celebrate the Passover in the second month: 2.
Chron. 31.3. 2. Chro. 35 1. King. 2.27. Nehe. 8.8.13.
the Posts therefore went (note it) by commission from the King. Also he
provided for the sacrifices as did Josias, who established the Priests in their
charge; yea Solomon deposed the Priest Abiathar. And Nehemias restored the
service of God, caused the Law to be read and enterpreted, making the people to
understand it by reading. And if the Spirit of God taught Nehemiah this form
of enterpreting the Law, by the holy Scripture, which contained then but the
books of Moses, and a few others of the old Testament; how dare men tax the
Scripture of obscurity, now that it is illustrate with the Commentaries of the
Gospel of the Son of God, and with the gloses of the Apostles and
Evangelists? Certain it is, that this form of enterpreting the Scripture by
it self will not be rejected, unless it be of such as the Apostle speaks of,
2. Cor. 4.3.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish; in whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds Now all those Princes were not Priests, and
therefore did nothing but in the quality of Kings, exercising the charges
depending of the Crown: True it is, that sometimes one and the same man was
both King and Priest, as Melchizedec, but it was in as much as he figured the
only King, Priest, and eternal Prophet of his Church, to wit, our Savior.
And if Cardinal Bellarmine will at this day bring in a mixed power into the
Church, either he will make us still in expectation of the Messiah by such
figures, or will manifest unto us under the Gospel, that which Pope Nycholas
speaks of in these terms: Nichol. Epist. 8.
Before the coming of CHRIST some have been typically Priests and Kings, as
Melchizedec: which the Devil would imitate in his members. Out of which words
may be gathered, that if there be found, since the publication of the Gospel,
any person exercising both the functions, that he is a member of the Devil,
according to the opinion of Pope Nicholas, who favors not in that, the
Bishops that be Lords Temporal and Spiritual. And as Kings fully discharging
their office, were blessed of God, so they took not upon them any thing
pertaining to the office of the Priests and Levites, neither intermedled they
with making unleavened cakes, sacrificing of Calves, or sprinkling of the blood
upon the Altar: for in this case it was permitted the Priests to reprove, and
God did punish them for it. So Azariah the chief Priest said to Vzziah, 2.
Chron. 26.18.
It pertains not to thee to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests
the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated for to offer incense. And not only the
chief Priest, but the least, having charge in the Church, may admonish in
conscience and in godly manner, all Kings, and Emperors, after the example of
Nathan, and Saint Ambrose Bishop of Milan, who shut the Temple against the
Emperor Theodosius. For it is not a case reserved to the Bishop of the first
sea, to put Kings in mind of their conscience, and to make known unto them
their sins; it is the Law of God that speaks and not man, whose person or
degree is not considerable, but his Divine commission. After this manner under
the Law, yea from Adam until our Saviors coming in the flesh, Kings have
behaved themselves with the Priests, Christ was borne in the year of the
world. 3963.
and all the Church, for the space of four thousand years.

CHAP. IIII. That since the coming of our Lord JESUS in the flesh, the
authority of Kings over Ecclesiastical persons, is not diminished.
THERE is nothing truer, then this Proposition of our Savior: Mat. 5.17.
I am not come to abolish the Law but to fulfill it: Also, Ioh. 18.13.
My Kingdom is not of this world. Whence it follows, that the Justice, which
is Patrimoniall to all Princes, is not taken away from them, over one part of
their Subjects. That JESUS has not established any other power above their
Estate, for to dispense their servants of their allegiance due unto them: that
he has not taken away from them the command that they had in time of the Law,
over the Church to reform it; over the Doctors of the Church, to assemble
them, and over the chief Priest to depose: And therefore Saint Paul says,
that Kings are established as well to maintain piety and religion, as honesty
and policy, 1. Tim. 2.
To the end (says he) that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life, in all
godliness and honesty. For why should the yoke of the Gospel, which CHRIST
calls light to all that will undergo it, be heavy on the neck of Kings, to
whom God gives titles and prerogatives above all other men, calling them the
CHRIST'S, Ier. 4.20.
or anointed of the Lord, And as our Savior is called the light of the
Gentiles, 2. Sam. 21. 1. King. 14. 1. Sam. 13.1^. (...).
in the song of Simeon, so also is the King called the Lamp of Israel, and
Moses and David, Men of God; And in the Psalm speaking of this authority, I
have said ye are Gods, all children of the most High. Whence come then those
heresies that already take root in all the society of new Doctors. That Kings
are rather slaves their Lords: that Popes have degraded many Emperors: Bell. de
Pont. lib. 1. c. 5. and lib. 3. c. 16. and lib. 5. c. 8.

Emanuel Sa, Jesuit in his Aphorisms Printed at Antwerp. v. Princeps v.
Clericis.


but never any Emperor deposed one Pope, That Bishops may depose Kings, and
abrogate their Laws. That Ecclesiastical persons dwelling in a Kingdom, are
not the Princes subjects, and cannot be judged by them, though they judge
Princes. Now who is it that sees not the iugling deceit of the Jesuits
throughout the Chapters of this Treatise? neither can the Cardinal bring any
reason to the contrary: and although we agree in this, that Kings are ordained
of God for the people, yet we must discover the fallacy of these Doctors
equiuocating in the word for, which is applyable both ways, to serve and to
command. So we agree that Kings are for the people, but it is as the soul is
created for the body, and the head for the members: to wit, in a superior
degree, to command, and not to set the feet above the head. Thirdly, if this
Doctor will not attribute to himself more authority then CHRIST and the
Apostles have done, who in this world subjected themselves to it, he will not
hold Kings in the rank of slaves: And if it had been needful to abase them in
this estate, the Lord JESUS had power enough to make the proudest stoop: But
if neither he, nor his Apostles have enterprised any such thing, then when the
Church was in her purity, it follows, that the perfection of the State
Ecclesiastical, depends not on the superiority of Magistrates, Sovereign,
or subalternall, And seeing the Apostle commands his successors to be
imitators of him, 1. Cor. 11 1. Phil. 3.17.
as he is of CHRIST; they should say one to another, as Christ did of himself,
Ioh. 6.15.
My Kingdom is not of this world; they should content themselves with the
keys of heaven, without taking by force the keys of Cities; they should
avoid it, as did our Savior, Ioh. 18.36.
if men would make them Temporal Lords, and should not take upon them a civil
jurisdiction, no more then did our Savior, who when one said unto him, Luke
12.13.
Master, bid my brother divide the inheritance with me, answered; o man, who
made me a judge or diuider over you? Neither yet in criminal matters, after
his example, Ioh. 8.10.11.
Woman, has none condemned thee? she said, none Lord; and JESUS said, neither
do I condemn thee, go and sin no more. So our Savior rejected the office of
a Temporal Magistrate, exercising the charge of a true Spiritual Pastor, to
inuit sinners to repentance, yet without approving vice. But if these men will
persuade us that in process of time, to wit, after Constantine, the Church
should change her course of life, and leave the Ministry, to take upon it
command; I will stay to believe it, till they produce some Prophecy of this
future change: and will believe touching this pretended authority, that which
CHRIST says of the dwelling places in his fathers house, Ioh. 14.2.
If it were otherwise I would have told you. And passing further I say, that if
the Church in her most perfect form, has had no such superiority, we ought to
keep this perfection instituted of God, and if heathen Princes have been
ackowledged three hundred years for Superiors of the Church, which made a part
of their state, it were to do injury to Christian Kings to defer unto them
less honor then the Apostles and the Primitive Church have deferred to
heathen and Infidel Emperors. And the fable of the donation of Constantine
serves to no purpose, it being acknowledged false by the most learned
Iuris-consults, ancient and modern, as shall be handled in the ninth Chapter
hereafter. But though we should agree to them concerning the privileges that
Princes have given to Churchmen, Esdras chap. 7.
yet we must not thereby conclude that Kings have lost their authority to
reform the Church and to give laws unto it: For seeing it is a case royal to
make Laws in a State, ^. placet. l. de sacros. Eccl. Cas. r. li^, 6
it pertains only to the King to ordain them: and although he make them
not without taking advise of the expert in every Art or Science; yet for all
that it will not be said that they are statutes or ordinances of the
Iuris-consults or Divines, which have been called thereunto. Whence it
follows, that the Kings power is not lessened by the coming of our Savior,
who has limited the charge of the Apostles and of their lawful successors to
the Preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments: as he had
appointed Priests under the Law, for the unleavened bread, perfumigations, and
sacrifices. And indeed the Emperor Justinian extends no farther the
Christian Lyturgie and the office of Bishops, Nouel. 7. c. 11. de Ecclesiast.
bonis. Cuiac. tomo. 3. page 549.

Gal. 1.8.


in his seventh Nouel, upon which Doctor Cuias writes in the same sense.
Seeing the^, that to make Laws in a State is a case of Soueraignety, and that
neither the King, nor an Apostle, neither yet an Angel from heaven can add
to, or diminish the substance of Gods Laws, but only the circumstances which
respect comeliness and the execution of them: what inconvenience is there,
that the ordinary authority be interposed in Laws Ecclesiastical? Seeing also
that the Church is within the State, made a part of the same and is subject to
the Sovereign of the whole territory, being in France, (and England) one of
the three Estates of the Kingdom, whereof the King is head and Superior, as
well of the Clergy as of the Laity. Now that it is not lawful for any,
whosoever he be, to add or diminish the substance of the Law, or of the
Gospel of God, here is the prohibition, first as touching the Law. Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye
take ought therefrom, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your
God, etc. And in the Proverbs, Pro. 30.6.
Add nothing unto his words, least thou be found a liar. The like is said in
the Gospel, Though we, Gal. 1.8.
or an Angel from heaven preach unto you, otherwise then we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed. And both of the Law and of the Gospel it is
ordained. 1. Cor. 4.6.
That ye might learn by us, that no man presume above that which is written:
Reu. 22.18.19.
For (says Saint John) if any man shall add, etc. God shall add upon him the
plagues written in this book; and if he diminish, etc. God shall take away
his part out of the book of life. Wherefore Emperors have maintained them in
this possession conformable to their title. And beginning in the Constitutions
colected in the Code of Justinian, the thirteen first titles are all filled
with Laws for to rule the Church, in which first of all, the Adversaries of
Royal authority shall observe, De Episcopati audientia.
that there is one title which attributes simple audience to Bishops, and not
jurisdiction, for to show that they have not any portion of Empire, it
forbids Lib. 1. Tit. 5.
them to reiterate Baptism: to paint or grave on earth the Lib. 1. Tit. 7.
image of our Savior, And in the Nouels the Emperor ordains, of the
punishment of Ecclesiastical persons Nou. 123. ca. 20.
even by the whip. Of the creation and consecration of Bishops, That Synods
Nou. 123. ca. 10.
should be held every year. Forbids to celebrate the mysteries in private
Nou. 58.
houses. Item ordains, that Bishops Nou. 137. c. 6. Nou. 146. vt liceat
Hebraeis.
should speak aloud, when they celebrate Baptism and the Eucharist. Ordains
that the holy Bible should be translated into the vulgar tongue, that the
people might read therein their salvation. L. Constantinopol. 24. C. de
sacros. Eccles. his verbis. (...).
Yea when the Emperor had translated the seat of his Empire to
Constantinople, although there was then a Bishop of Rome, yet he declared, that
the Church of Constantinople was the Head, that is to say, the chiefest of all
others. To this is referred, that in Nou. 83. Menna is called Vniuersalis
Patriarcha, in favor of who^ the Emperors said he had granted that
privilege to the Clergy not to be conuented but before their Bishops, and
that in certain cases only. Now the cause why the Emperors translated their
seat from Rome, was, because they held but very little in the West parts:
Gaul and a good part of Germany were occupied by the Frankes or Frenchmen,
Spain by the Sarazines, Goths and Vandales; Italy in horrible confusion, by
the usurpation of the Goths and Vandales, Rome having been in a short time
thrice sacked: the year 414. under Honorius by Alaricke, in the year 459.
under Martian by Gensericke King of the Vandales, and lastly by Totilla King of
the Goths in the time of Justinian, who expelled the^ in the year 552. But
the King of Lombardes dispossessed him, and held Italy two hundred years
after, till he was expulsed by Charles the Great. During which hurliburlies,
there remained to the Emperor the Exarchate of Rauenna, of which place the
Bishop in the year 558. would have attributed to himself the name of
Universal Bishop, because he alone in Italy acknowledged the Emperor. On the
contray, the Bishop of Constantinople pretended this authority, because of the
seat of the Empire. Which ambition, Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome, a
learned and good man, blamed in many of his writings, saying, Greg. 16.
Epistol. Indict. 15. Epist. 194. and 288. etc.
That he should be the Antichrist which would seem God over all men; but that
he was his forerunner, which exalted himself above Priests. Whence it
follows; that the first degree of Antichristian ambition, was to exalt
himself above his fellow-officers in the Church, and that the accomplishment
of this mystery is to exalt himself above all that is called God, 2. These. 2.
or which is adored. Notwithstanding Boniface the third, successor of Gregory,
was not of this opinion, but received the title of Universal Bishop by means
of Phocas, who having slain the Emperor Mauritius and his family, usurped the
Empire, and made himself Lord of Constantinople.

CHAP. V. The Christian Kings are grounded in title and possession of the
rights and authority above declared.
PHARAMOND the first King of Frenchmen began to reign in the year four
hundred and seventeen. Three of his successors were Pagans, Du Haillan in the
end of the reign of Clouis.
Clouis was the first Christian; he came to the Crown in the year 484 and
continued in possession of the Royal authority, before spoken of. For he
assembled a counsel at Orleans, in which were many Prelates, namely 32.
Bishops: and caused two Monks, guilty of high Treason to be executed. In the
same manner continued his Successors, until Boniface the third, which may be
said to have been the first Pope. For as touching the name it was before common
to other Prelates, as Saint Hierome in many of his Epistles, calls Saint
Augustine, Hier. Epist. ad August. to. 2.
and Alipius by the name of Popes; as the name of Priests and Bishops were
taken in the same signification: for said Saint Hierome, Hier. Euagrio. Vbique
fuerit Episcopus, sieve Romae, etc. sieve Regij, eusdem est meriti and
sacerdotij, etc.
What is the Bishop more then the Priest, except the ordination, etc. Every
Bishop, whether he be of Rome, or of Alexandria, has like merit and the
same Priesthood; richesse nor poverty do neither exalt nor debase the Bishop,
etc. Notwithstanding after six hundred years, the said Boniface the third,
then Bishop of Rome, together with the name, took upon him the effect. And as
Adam gave the name according to the nature of the thing, and as in truth it
was; Boniface the third, and his successors, challenged to themselves the
things, after the abuse of the name. Whence it is observed by Historians, Beda.
Sigibert, etc. Durand. 4. rational. Ado. Onufrius.
that he was the first that used in his Decretals these terms: We will, we
ordain, we command, and enjoin. Now that which has very much advanced such
usurpations, has been the confusions of the wars of Italy, and the
negligence of our last Kings of the first race: out of which King Pepin, taking
occasion to assume the Crown and to trans-ferre it into his family, made
himself be crowned by the Pope in the year seven hundred fifty and five; to
the end he might make use of the credit, that from those times the Pope had
in the Christian Churches: and that he might the more oblige him to maintain
his cause, he gave to the Pope the Exarchate of Rauenna, and that which he
holds in Romania. And by this means these two Lords obliged themselves each
to other, without disbursing penny: for the least Bishop in France could have
crowned Pepin as valuably, as Pope Zachary, and the Exarchate pertained not to
the King, but to the Emperor, Paul. Emil. du Tillet and others.
to mittigate whose indignation the King made that donation in the name of
Constantine, who was dead more then three hundred years before. Which I
report, for to show that the greatness of Popes proceeds from the liberality
of our Kings, and that they should be very ungrateful if they did not
acknowledge it toward them. Moreover Pepin changed the ceremonies observed in
the Gallicane Church, and brought in the Roman ceremonies by the mediation of
Renny Archbishop of Reins. About the same time arose the controversy about
Images, which the Greek Churches would not receive into their Temples.
Epiphanius Bishop of Salamina tare in pieces a picture set up in the Temple,
and Serenus Bishop of Marseille beat down an image. The Emperor Phillipicus
surnamed Bardanes maintained himself in the right of Kings, and in the year
713. made a decree concerning Images, which dured till Constantine the second;
who confirmed it in the year 782. whereat his mother Irena being provoked (as
superstition easily inciteth weak minds) she assembled a Council at
Constantinople, during the Emperors minority, for to establish her Images, but
the people opposed themselves thereunto and chased away the Prelates: which
afterward were assembled again by this woman at Nice; but when she could not
install her Images, she put out the eyes of the Emperor her son, and sent
him into exile, in which he died. Mean time, in the year 776. King Charles
the Great passed into Italy subdued Didier King of the Lumbardes, took him
prisoner and brought him to Lions; and soon after being requested by Pope Leo,
to deliver him from the hand of Campul, and Syluester his enemies, he went
thither and by the same means made himself be crowned Emperor: and
confirmed to the Pope the donation of King Pepin his father, and from that time
forth, by trans-action, between the King and the Emperor, the Empire was
divided, and the western part remained to Charlemaigne, who approved not the
decisions of the Greekish Synod, but wrote a book entitled, a Treatise of
Charlemaigne against the Greekish Synod, touching images, which book is
extant to this day. But that which serves to our purpose is, that the King by
this means maintained himself in possession to make Laws for the Church, of
which there are many in a book called the Capitularie decrees of Charles the
Great. And as Pepin his predecessor had done in the City of Bourges, so did
he also assemble many Councels in diverse places of his kingdom, as at
Mayence, at Tours, at Reins, at Chaalons, at Arles, and the sixth most famous
of all at Francfort, in which he himself was present in person, and there
condemned the error of Felician, and the Council of Nice, falsely called the
seventh general Council. Sigeb. in the year 773.
Now in this place it is worth the observing, that the election of Bishops and
Archbishops, yea of the Bishop of Rome, was subject to the confirmation of the
Emperor, and for want of inuestiture made by him, they should not have been
consecrate, as the Canons do witness, Can. Vota. can. Agatho. 63. did.
where we read the confirmation of Saint Ambrose by the Emperor Valentinian.
From this ancient prerogative, common to the Emperors, it comes, that
Charlemagine having parted the Empire, and agreed with the Emperor of the
East, assembled a Council at Rome, that he might make pass a new title in
his person, and an acknowledgement by the Clergy, touching this authority to
confirm Bishops, which from all antiquity belonged to the Emperors his
predecessors. Whence it is manifest that the Popes have absurdly termed this
declaration and acknowledgement a privilege and favor of Rome, or
gratification to King Charles the Great; for it is a right and prerogative,
common, ancient and Divine. And at that time was made the Cannon Hadrianus,
Can. Hadrianus. Can. in Synodo. 63. distinct.
and after th^^ which begins In Synodo: which truth is far from the
doctrine of the Cardinal Jesuit, who would feign persuade the people, that
the authority of Emperors and Kings is grounded on the good liking and favor
of the Pope, and that they cannot use the same longer then it pleases him.

Now a while after crept in the question, that so much troubles the world,
about the interpretation of these words of our Savior. This is my body.

For the clearing of which point, and to know the means whereby a Christian
man Communicates in the merit of the death and Passion of our Lord and
Savior; King Charles the Balde, who began to reign in the year eight
hundred forty and one, went not out of his own kingdom to seek the
understanding of those words of the Gospel in the Court of Rome, but
consulted with one of the most learned Clegy-men of his subjects named
Bertram a Priest, whose discourse we have yet, worthy to be preserved; for by
it we may learn that the opinion pretended to be new in these days, was as
then esteemed most ancient. And if it would please the Disciples of Loyola, to
refer themselves to this good Priest, there would be no more disputing in
France about the Sacramental words, neither should we debate so much about hoc
est, yea if they were sent for the peace of the Church. Thus we have showed,
how our Kings have maintained their right and authority during the two first
races; in which time was preached none other doctrine then that of the ancient
Canons, which have these words, It is a general paction Can. quae contra 8.
did. 93. and in summa 94. did. c. qui culpatur 23. q. 3. textus and gl. cap.
Si Episc. 18. did.
of humane society to obey the Prince. Which was confirmed by the example of
the King of Israel, who commanded Hilkijah the high Priest, and by the
testimony of Saint Hierome, saying: We must Cap. principibus 23. q. 5.
be faithful to Princes and Superior powers, otherwise none can hope for
reward at Gods hands. Now among other Kings, the Canonists themselves say, that
the King of France is the Cardin. Clem. 1. pr. de immunit. Eccl.
King of Kings, that he shines among others as the morning star Bard. ca.
1.. 1. de prohi. feud. alien. Idem. Consil. 415. part. 1.
Notwithstanding the great extent of countries that the King of Spain
possesses at this present, by the means in history declared. For yet at this
day he is your Majesty's Leige-man, both for Maiorca, Petrus Iac. in pract.
sub. rubr. de success. regnum verse. item no^ aduertunt. De Grassalio 1. iure.
li. 1. Regaliar.
a Fiefe of Magalon, a Church of Gaul Narbonnois; and for the Earldom of
Flanders, which belongs Gaguin. li. 4. and 5. c. 1. Bald. Anth. statuimus, v.
iuxta hoc. C. de Episc. and Cler.
to the jurisdiction of the Parliament of Paris, and is chiefest of the three
Earledomes numbered among the Peeredomes of France. Neither can the Kings
renunciation being prisoner make to the contrary, forasmuch as the fear of
being still detained, hindered it to be a full consent, and makes the
pretended ratification; for the Kings children were then prisoners in Spain,
Itaque semper suberat metus causa. Imo per filios pater plerumque magis
torquetur; and the Cardin. consilio 137. incipiens Redemptor. Mar. soz.
consilio 53.
example of the King of Cyprus serves well to this purpose. Secondly, the King
of Spain cannot prevail with this consent, because the right and jurisdiction
thereof being a royal Lucas de Penna l. quicunque 11. lib. Cod. de omni agro
de sero.
demaine belonging to the Crown, cannot be alienated. This royal dignity so
high advanced in every kingdom was the cause that the Canonists made no
difficulty (as in these days the Jesuits do) to acknowledge the King for the
Vicar of JESUS CHRIST in his own Felinus ca. cum non liceat de praescr. Bal.
cap. significantibus de off. delegati.
Kingdom, yea they entitled him corporal God, and Gods Bald. de loco and
prohibit feud. alien. and de pace Constantiae.
delegate upon earth, these are their terms. We have had also many kings in
such reputation with the Clergy, that no Prelate adventured to approve
parricides, or to absolve their subjects from their obedience, but have
Canonized them, and enrolled them in heaven. Such do Hystories report to be
king Dagobert, Charles the Great, and Saint Lewis; unto which number, mauger
the enemies of the State, we will add Henry the Great, your Maiestes father,
an excellent and most valiant Prince and Martyr. In like number is acknowledged
in this kingdom certain marks and testimonies of a special favor of God
granted to our Kings; the gift of healing the Kings-euil, the oil of unction,
the Flower-deluces, and the Oriflambe or holy-standerd of France, whereas all
antiquity, fabulous or true, have given but one Palladium to great Troy, but
one Buckler to stately Rome, and but one sign of the Cross in heaven for a
presage of victory to the good Emperor Constantine. Which prerogatives
acknowledged by Popes, caused Innocent the fourth to grant ten days of
indulgence Thom. 4. sent. q. 19. art 3. in sol. vlt. arg. gl. in. v. teneretur
in proem. prag. sanct.
to them that should pray for the King, and Clement added an hundred more. Now
for as much as the King of France is so absolute, thence it comes that his
kingdom is not reckoned among the Fiefes* for he does homage to none but to
God of whom he holds his Crown: and because all other fealty Cap. cu^ olim
ext. de priui. leg. Bald. l. quoties C. de suis and legis.
presupposes servitude contrary to such soueraignety and liberty. Wherefore
the King holds not in any fashion whatsoever of the Emperor nor of the
Roman Empire, which never any King of France acknowledged, since Pharamond the
first King of the Frankes or Frenchmen; our Kings having all the marks of
Sovereign Pan. ca. tua. 2. de decimis. ca. quae in Ecclesiarum de constitut.
Bald. l. exemplo. C. de probat. 1. de off. praes. proet. Clemens. 5. extrauag.
meruit.
Empire in their Kingdom. Which the Pope himself confesses in his
Extrauagant, saying, that Boniface the eight could do no prejudice to the
King, who acknowledges not any Cap. per venerabile Qui fili. sint legit.
Superior. Which must be understood (contrary to the interpretation of the
gloss) thus; that iuris and facti the King has no Superior, seeing that the
text bears these words, He might do it L. ex facto de vulgari. l. sin. c.
de militari testam. Pen. d. loco.
as being King and Prince: for this word, Prince, is a name authorized of right
by law, and not an attribute to a violent usurper, to the advantage of whom the
Canonists will never confess, that the Pope authoriseth any such action and
way Facti co^tra ius.
of custom against right; these words then, he might, is expounded, the Prince
is grounded in it by law or right: And as the good Citizen prefers the
safety of his country before his own life, and the life of them that be
nearest and dearest to him; so they hold that we must obey the King rather
then our natural Father, because he is the Lucan Pater vrbique maritus.
Plutar. in institut. Traiani. Luc. de Penna. l. quicunque col. 3. Cod. de omni
agro lib. 11. nemini. lib. 12. de Coss.
husband and father of the country, which is the common mother of the
inhabitants. Whence it follows that Cardinal Bellarmine establishing another
Temporal power then that of the King over his kingdom, makes the Pope a
Temporal Bellar. l. 1. de Pontif. cap. 9.
adulterer, as also he figureth him a Spiritual fornicator, making him the
Spouse of the Catholic Church, Etiam Christo secluso, for the King is alone
the Father and Husband of his people, and CHRIST is the only Head of his
Church, Papa secluso. Now from this fundamental reason, ancient and natural,
comes this decision, that if a Prelate be called by his superior, and by the
King at one and the same time, he must rather obey Can. Si Episc. 18. did. c.
de reb. 12. q. 2. c. pastoralis ducto argumento ab ordine literae. cum. a. de
off. deleg.
the King then the Prelate. The same is said of a Bishop holding a Manor in
fee of the King, he owes unto him obedience rather Gl. cau. reprehensibili
23. q. 8. Inn. and Panu. cap. cum parati de Appellation.
then unto the Pope himself, as the ancient Doctors do teach, against the new
opinion. And because the Law is defined to be an ordinance of the Bal. c. 1. de
Constitu. c. constitut. 2. did.
Sovereign, it pertains only to the King to make and to abrogate them
throughout his kingdom. For who is it L. 1. 2. 3. de officio praes. vigil.
has most interest to watch for all the members, but he which is the head?
And although the violence of some Popes has been such, that they have C. Tibi
Domine did. 63.
constrained some Kings, yea Emperors to bear the yoke, that the prophecy
of Saint John in the Revelation might be accomplished. The Popes nevertheless
have never usurped nor yet pretended that authority over the King of France,
witness the extrauagant Can. Ego Ludouicus 63. did.
Meruit. Neither makes that against it which is in the Cannon, Ego Lodouicus,
and that the custom of Kings is to send to the Pope to promise him a
friendship of spiritual filiation. For that gratification is by reason of his
charge of Pastor, which every other Bishop exercises with as great power as
he. But as for the Pope he is bound, presently after his election, to send
the articles of his confession to the King who has the authority to make them
be examined by the Sorbonnists, and be considered Du Till. tit. of the
liberties of the Gallicane Church. and ca. satagendum 25. q. 1. vinc. Sigau.
tract. de factis princ. c. 2. Regal, and cap. 3.
whether they be orthodoxall, according to that which was practiced by the
Popes Pelagius and Boniface the eighth, in the reigns of Childericke and
Phillip the Fair. From this Sovereign power grounded on right humane, divine,
and ancient, it proceeds that Kings may of their own authority, without the
consent of the Pope, Bonif. in Bulla inserta in lib. liliol. de qua Io. Feral.
and Guliel. Bened. ca. Rainutius v. vxorem nu. 103. detestamentis.
impose tribute on Ecclesiastical persons, although the Pope pretend Cap. non
minus c. aduersus de immunit. Eccl.
that the King of France alone has this right, which he calls privilege.
But if so be it were a privilege yet he can never revoke it, Bald. 1.
vectigalia C. de vectigal.
it being a thing granted to the commonwealth and not to the person. Moreover
this imposition is laid by the king, not only on the Te^porality, subjects of
their own nature, for the Bald. ca. cum venissent de eo qui mittiuit.
defense of the co^mon-weale, but also on the rest of the revenue
Ecclesiastical: as king Lewis the twelfth levied the tenth of the fruits of
Benefices in the time of Alexander the sixth, in the year 1498. The like did
Francis the first in the year 1530. in the time of Clement the seventh.
Wherefore the gloss of Clem. Si beneficiorum.
Clement says, that the same is ordinarily practiced in France. Contrariewise
the Pope cannot Decretu^ de annatis, statuit sancta synodus v. exigatur.
impose nor raise subsidies upon benefices. Therefore the gloss of the decree
of Annats, or first fruits, reports that king Lewis the twelfth and others
have forbidden such raising of subsidies. Item. king Charles the fifth caused
sentence to be given against Pope Benedict the thirteenth, for that matter.
And the kings Attorney general obtained the like judgment Anno 1463. in the
reign of Guag. l. 9. c. 3. and li. 7. cap. 3.
Lewis the 11 who had assembled many Prelates. Which was also practiced in the
reign of Phillip the fair. And although, according to the Popes opinion, no
lay-person can dispose of spiritual things, Cap. quae in Ecclesiarum ca.
Ecclesiae de constit. c. 2. quanto de iudicijs.
no though it be in favor of the Church, so far is he from Cap. si quis 17.
cap. de iure patron.
granting them the right to possess them: yet notwithstanding the king may do
both the one and the other, as is confessed in the Guag. lib. 7. c. 3.
Council of Basil, in the title of Annates. Also after the opion of Gaguin,
this right to confer Benefices is a prerogative so royal, that there is not
any thing in a kingdom that does more belong unto the king. And that not by
virtue of his being anointed, for notwithstanding the same, he remains still
a mere lay-person Cap. tua de decimis.
according to the doctrine of the Canons. Wherefore the kings consent is
requisite Specul. tit. de legate. Sect. nunc ca. dilectus 3. de praeb. can. cum
inter de consuetud. tit. de Annatis. Sect. Item quod dicta in prag. sanct.
in the elections of Prelates, before they be consecrated: According
whereunto, the kings Attorney ought to be called in the election of the Abbot
of of Man's, but if any did the contrary the Can. Hadrianus c^en synodo can.
hinc est 16. q. 1. Guag. lib. 4. cap. 1.
King might punish him. Upon this right, common, ancient, and Divine, proper to
al Kings, are grounded the sentences of the Courts of Parliament. Moreover
besides the conference of benefices, the king may hold and Panor. in repetite
Sect. quia v. 10. col. 3. cap. extirpand. de praehendis
possess them, and indeed he the has Canonry of S. Hillarie at Poitiers, of
Saint Martin at Tours, Angers, and Man's. And although the King receive not any
order, the Gl. cap. Valentinianus 63. did.
Canonists nevertheless do hold that the most Christian king, may exercise
the office of a Subdeane, and that Charles the 8. did use the same whilst the
Pope celebrated. Also the king precedeth all his Pan. c. verum de soco compet.
Innoc. c. Nouerunt de sententia excommun.
prelates, as Panormita^ and Innocent do hold, yea the prelates do owe unto him
liege homage, which C. minus and ibi Pan. de iuretur idem super. c. ve^ens in
secundo notab. dicens Regem esse fundatum de iure communi.
imports fealty toward him, and against all without exception: And to show
that it is in quality of Bishops that they submit themselves, in making their
oath, they have the Gl. v. corporali c. vt circa de Elect. lib. 6. secundum
Pan. c. laudabilem de frigidis.
stole about their neck, their hand upon the stomach, and the book of the
Gospel before them. But Laymen render homage kneeling, and their hands joined
together. Also they Can. si in morte 23. q. 8.
ought to assist the King in his wars, and so by sentence given, it has been
judged Io. Gall. anni 1280. in fin. fol. 116. c. ex multa de voto. ibique Panor.
against the Bishop of Limoges. And they may be deprived of their livings for
Guide. q. 39. Bened. c. Rainutius 2. decis. number. 459. Guag. lib. 6. c. 4.
felony: further it appertains to the King alone Aufrer. in repet. Clem. 1.
in 4. reg. fall. 2. de off. ordin. Guido q. 62. v. circa. Bened. v. vxorem 2.
decis. number. 445. Fract. arest. art. 211.
to give pardon to them in case of crime, and to reform the Church, C. 1. Ne
sede vacant Bart. 5. part. cath. consider 17.
assembling for this effect his Princes Cygaut. tr. de factis princ. in regali.
and Prelates, without requiring therein the Popes authority, as reports
Vinc. Cygaut, saying: that he had received letters and commandment from the
King to reform the Franciscan Friars, and so is it practiced ordinarily Cap.
Filijs 17. q. 7.
in cases of notorious abuse. And finally, the King is alone Lord of all the
Territory L. pupillus. Teritorium de verb. sinif. l. 3. c. donatur lib. Cui. ad
53. C. de deretur. l. Nulli C. de episc. and Cler.
of his kingdom Now territory is defined in the Civil Law, a space of land
which boundeth the extent of every City. So called because the Magistrate of
the same gives terror, and can expel whom he pleases, out of his
jurisdiction. Hence it comes that if a Bishop take any one out of the
enclosure of his Court, such taking shall be Bal. and flor. l. sicuti. Aristo
Si seco, vindi.
void, and therefore they are to Can. romana Sect. contrahentes de foro
compet. l. 6. Can Episcopus in casus posit. D. foro compet. l. qui seruus Sect.
Idem de Aedil. Ed.
crave aid of the Judges royal. Whereby may be gathered the malice and folly
of those men that entitle a Bishop my Lord of Paris, my Lord of Chartres, etc.
For there is none but the king Lord of those places: yet true it is, that in
some Provinces, there are Bishops Can Episcopus. Ne clerici vel mo. l. 6.
Lords of the Territory, as is the Bishop of Rome, and some Bishops of Germany,
against whom makes the saying of Pope Nicholas in his eighth Epistle, that
they which are both Kings and Priests under the Gospel, are members of the
Devil. Now whatsoever the Prelates pretend Can. cu^ Episcopus de off. ordin.
lib. 6. Cui in (...) de Episcoand.
it is certain that they have neither Territory nor jurisdiction, by
disposition of Law, neither any portion of Empire pure or mixed, such as is
jurisdiction, witness the title De Episcopali audientia, different from the
title De jurisdiction omnium Iudicum; upon which the learned Cuias writing
says: Episcopi iurisdictionem non habent, nec forum, nec apparitionem, nec
executionem: And therefore there wholly remains to Kings all marks of
Soueraignety. Yea, as the Doctors Carol. de Grassalio e nouo iure. lib. 2.
Regal. allegat can. propter and gl. v. ducibus 33. did. and gl. Adigere de
iure pat^*
Canonists do observe, (of whom we borrow that which follows) the King alone
and none other is Gods Vicar and Lieutenant general in his Kingdom, and habet
vim Apostoli, and they hold that he has authority to excommunicate. And as
touching his person and the persons of his subjects, the Pope has no power
Extrauag. Meruit and in bulla ad aeternam Io. 2. Extrauag. frequentes in fin.
de iudicijs.
to excommunicate or curse them, as the Popes Clement the fifth, and John the
twentieth two themselves do confess: of which Cygaut Cygaut. tract. de factis
princ. c. sententiae excommun. in fin.
pretends to render a reason taken out of Hostiensis. And forasmuch as the
family enjoys the same rights Cap. Ecclesia. l. 2. q. 2. gl. c. Clericum 11.
q. 1.
as the Lord of the same, thence it comes, that the Kings Officers cannot be
anathematized by the curses that the Pope thundreth forth. And by sentence of
Court it has been said that in the general monition, Sentence of Court, given
the 17. of April 1507. reported by John Ferrant in his Treatise of the rights
of the Kingdom of France.
the (e) Register of Chastelet was not comprised; for the matters that he knew
in the office of Kings Register. Wherefore Charles the fifth in the year 1369
by letters pattents enjoined all Prelates and Officials that they should not
make or pronounce any censure, or excommunication coming from Rome into the
Cities and places of his Dominions. And Charles the seventh by other letters
pattents dated the second of September 1440. commanded the same thing to the
Court, to the Provost, or Governor of Paris and other Judges. By these
testimonies it does clearly appear, that all royal rights and prerogatives
(used by the King of France at this present) belong, and are due unto Kings by
right Divine, and common, practiced by the Patriarchs, and by the Kings of
Jerusalem, and in the Primitive Church, and by Constantine, Justinian,
Charlemaigne, and their successors, from time to time to this day.
Consequently that such prerogatives be absurdly called privileges of the
Gallicane Church, or privileged cases for they are not favors of Rome, but
gifts of God; it is not an affranchisement, but a natural ingenuity of the
Christian Church, before their was either Pope or Bishop of Rome: And thus much
may suffice for that which respects the Kings title. Now we must speak of
the possession, which has been controuerted in the third race of our Kings,
but yet not interrupted, but always retained by the^, who have maintained the
same in act, as they were grounded therein by right.

CHAP. VI. That the first attempts of Popes, against the authority Royal,
began in the third race of our Kings, who have nevertheless maintained
themselves in their rights until this present.
HISTORY teaches us, that Hugh Capet, being chosen and acknowledged King by
the States, and laws of the kingdom, in the year 987. required not any
approbation of the Pope, but went straight to Reins to be crowned; and though
in those days John the twelfth, having attained the Pope-dome by horrible
means (as Hystories report) assailed the king, Platina and others.
yet could he win nothing, though the King at this new coming to the Crown,
would exasperate nothing against him. But the Emperor Henry handled him more
roughly, for he came to Rome, deposed him* and created Leo the eighth in his
place, and having assembled a Council, he thereby made use of the rights due
to the Emperor according to the Canons. Can. Adrianus c. vota can. Agatho c.
lectis c. in synodo 63. did.
But forasmuch as my drift is principally to speak of the possession of the
rights of the King, I will pass over the confusions that the ambition of Popes
and Anti-popes did in those times bring into the rest of Christendom, from the
year 1000 of CHRIST, and about the reign of king Phillip the first, when the
Empire was dismembered from the Crown of France. Of which disorders one of the
principal authors was that Gregory the seventh, whom Cardinal Bellarmine
calls Saint, though his name at Baptism (which Popes renounce after their
election) was Hildebrand, which the Germans say signifies in their language
Firebrand of hell. With like fury were moved the Popes his successors, Vrbane
the second, and Paschal, for they covered Germany and Italy with blood and
slaughter, and thence proceeded the divisions in States and Commonwealths: So
that there were at Rome the Vrsius against the Colonna's; at Florence the
Medicis against the Strozzi; at Genoa, the Elisques, against the Spinola's; In
a word the Guelfes for the Pope, and the Gibelins for the Emperor: Which
division spread it self all over Christendom, except in France, which
maintained it self in her liberty and in the obedience of her King: As also
did the wise and mighty Commonwealth of Venice, which (now of late) has
expulsed the proclamers and procurers of this division, and leven of civil
wars, stirred up, or entertained and strengthened by the Popes in
Christendom, ever since these five hundredth years. O that I fear there is
the like designs at this present in hand in the Court of Rome! But Christians
have patience, Heb. 10.37
Yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry; The Lamb shall overcome. There was then in those times for the space of
33. years together a horrible slaughter, procured by the popes Innocent the
third, Honorius, Celestine, Innocent the fourth, and Gregory the ninth against
the Emperor Frederick the second. During which, Mahomet the open enemy of
the Church, advanced himself in the East, Whom the Emperor going about to
repulse, the pope took occasion to make war against him in Italy, to seize
upon Naples and other places of Frederick, who was constrained to return
speedily, and to leave Greece as a prey to the Turk, and yet the Pope could
not be appeased without giving him eleven thousand marks of Gold. With like
zeal were moved pope Innocent, and others his successors, who kept prisoner
Zemin Ottoman, brother of Bajazet the second; for which he received yearly
forty thousand Ducats. And when King Charles the eighth would have made use of
the prisoner for to make war against the enemy of Christians, pope Alexander
the sixth, advertised the Turk thereof, and caused Zemin Ottoman to be
poisoned, for which he had two hundred thousand crowns in recompense, which
were delivered him by George of Antia the bearer of the advice. Hereby we may
plainly discern of what spirit these men are, and that we must not believe
all things that comes from the Popes, neither imitate their works: although
their flatterers say, that Popes have all sorts of laws within the casket of
their own breast: Platina.
which is a sentence invented by one of the most ignorant Popes that ever was,
namely Paul the second, who had been a Merchants Factor; and was so great an
enemy of learning and learned men, that he declared all them to be Heretics
that should pronounce this word University or Academy, Is it not for this
occasion that the Jesuits hate so much the University of Paris? Io. Auent li.
3. Annal.
With like reason Pope Zachary caused a certain German Mathematician named
Virgil to be cited to Rome, because he judged him an Heretic, in that he
taught that there were Antipodes, that is, people that inhabited the earth
underneath our Hemisphere. We must not then hold the ordinances of Popes, as
if they were Articles of faith, for so should the Creed be much defectuous; and
yet the Pope would have all his decrees be esteemed Articles of faith, Can.
nulla and gl. v. did. 19.
and condemns for a Heretic whosoever resists them. Gl. v. multorum can.
vidua did. 34.
For by that account, we must believe the gloss which defines her only to
be a whore, that has had to do with more then twenty and three thousand men;
and that he that marries such a beast, meriteth remission of sins. Cap.
inter opera charitatis de spons. lib. 4. decretal.
We ordain (says the pope) that for all such men as shall take common women
out of the stews, and marry them; that same shall profit them for remission
of their sins, And how dare pope Gregory couple that abomination with the
merit of the holy passion? It pertaitaineth only to the mother of whoredoms,
to enhanse her wares so high, and to give course to such tresure. Now such and
the like impostures of the Court of Rome, being known by the Christian
Churches, caused men to appeal for some clauses and abuses in such decrees,
and the King maintained himself and his people in the Christian liberty,
without contradiction, till the year one thousand one hundred thirty seven, in
the reign of Charles the Young, whose constancy the pope would try, about the
provision of the Arch-bishopricke of Bourges: as likewise of Phillip his
successor, Anno one thousand one hundred eighty, against whom, pope Innocent
stirred up the King of England, and caused wars between them: And as for Lewis
the ninth called also Saint Lewis because of his piety and justice, who was
king in the year one thousand two hundred twenty seven, he gave peace to the
Albigenses, perceiving (as Hailla^ says) that they were hated of the pope,
principally for that they cried out against the dissolute lives of Churchmen:
he also took away the sale of Offices. To this holy Prince Histories ascribe
these qualities, that he was a guardian of the Laws, a protector of the
Church, the head of the Nobility, and Father of the People: He caused also the
Bible to be published in the French tongue. My Lord, your Majesty is descended
from this great prince, between his and your coming to the Crown is so great
a resemblance, that your subjects do hope for the same graces under your
authority, name, descent, age, place of Coronation, nature, instruction,
regency, publication of your Edict of peace, all agree: He began to reign
at twelve years of age, was crowned at Reins, remained under the regency of
his mother, though she was a stranger, and a Spaniard. For the Regency.
For Frenchmen are ashamed to refer less to the last will of their King,
then did the Sicilians unto theirs named Anaxillaus, Justin. 4.
who gave for Regent to his son a slave, that had been faithful unto him:
But in case of such a government in whom else can there be found a more tender
affection, then of the mother? or nearer, then taken out of the bowels? To come
again to our deliuerers, above whom appears most Phillip the fourth,
surnamed the Fair, who in the year 1320. had to do with a a prodigious
monster of a man, pope Boniface the eighth, who wrote to the king in these
terms. Annals Nicholas Giles.
We will that thou know, that thou art our subject, both in Spiritual and in
Temporal things. To which the King answered, beginning thus: Sciat fatuitas
vestra, etc.
Let your sottishness and fond temerity know, that in Temporal things, we
have none but God for superior, etc. And the King not content with this,
commanded a Lord of Languedoc, an Albigeois, of the house of Nogaret, to seize
upon this pope: Which he did, and having cuffed him on the mouth with his
gauntlet, cast him into prison, where he died, leaving behind him this Elogium
or praise in diverse hystories, Io. Andr. and Bald. c. 1. de feud. gl. ad 6.
Decretal.
He entered into the Popedom as a Fox, reigned as a Lion, and died as a Dog:
For he entered into such a frenzy, that he gnawed off his own hands with
rage. O that the deceased King your Majesty's father were alive, and that he
saw the letter of that ambitious prelate, commented on by a Cardinal Jesuit,
who durst publish a book of it; would he not have commanded that
arch-hereticke to be brought to him bound hand and foot, and cast into the
prison of his palace, for to be condemned and suffer the like execution, that
the Legates of pope Benedict did before the palace, after they had seen their
Bulls torn in pieces, the 29 of July, Papon. Arrest. lib. tit. 5. Arrest. 27.
anno 1408 in the reign of Charles the sixth, And what? do such men think they
have to do with children? Yea rather with a flourishing State, warlike,
allied, peaceable, fortified with money and furniture for the wars? With God
himself, protector of the most desolate widow, and poorest Orphan? and
therefore of the Regent of the children of his Anointed, and of the State,
which by his grace has now so long time subsisted: I return to Boniface, and
pass under silence that his Bull was in the presence of the King cast into the
fire, by the Earl of Artois, that his Nuncio's were committed to prison, and
prohibition made, that no man should carry money to Rome, nor provide any for
dispatch of Benefices: that the King transferred the popes seat to Auignon,
which remained there three score and fourteen years after; that in those
times were six Anti-popes, yea three at one time, all three deposed by the
Emperor Sigismond: especially John the 23 convicted of horrible crimes, So was
Clement the seventh, who had sowed up five Cardinals in sackes and cast them
into the sea: and three more he beheaded, and burnt their bodies to ashes,
which he carried every where with him in chests, with Cardinal hats set on the
same, that it might be known what they were. And we must not omit, that John
the twentieth two was deposed for having unadvisedly excommunicated the
Emperor Lewis of Bauiere. Since in the reign of Lewis the eleventh, pope
Eugenius found himself agrieued at the pragmaticall sanction or confirmation
of the decree made in the Council of Basil for the election of Prelates,
collation of Benefices, etc. But the King used a Sovereign remedy, and which
was ordinary with his predecessors: for he forbad that any money should be
carried to Rome, neither was that a light punishment, for it was found that the
Pope drew out of France yearly a million of Gold, Suet. in vita Iulij Caesaris.
which was the tribute that the Romans raised out of all the Gauls. Which
might very profitably be employed on Hospitals, Colleges, and Spittles in
France, without passing any further. Against all these disorders many good
Doctors have exclamed, among others Saint Bernard and his scholars. Also
Sauonarola a great and learned man among the Clergy, who was held to have had
the gift of prophecy, said to King Charles the eighth, that God called him
into Italy for to reform the Church: and in deed being before Rome, the walls
of the City fell down. Then having entered the City and brought forth his
Cannon out of Saint Marks, for to plant it against the Castle, the breach was
made without shooting against it: but for all that Sananorola was not believed,
because (says the History) part of the Counsel were corrupted with money, and
for that the Cardinal of Saint Malo governed the Kings treasury. These
delays called to the Crown King Lewis the twelfth, who sent the Cardinal of
Amboyse to Trent to the Emperor Maximilian, and to Ferdinand King of Arragon,
to consult about the reformation of the Church; not in the members only, but
also in the head. Which caused Pope Julius, who had a contrary intention, to
solicit the King of England, to divert Ferdinand from this purpose by giving
him the inuestiture of the Kingdom of Naples, and besides to allie himself
with the Switzers, by means of a thousand Florins given to each Canton. The
King notwithstanding lost not courage, but assembled the Prelates of his own
Kingdom in the City of Tours, about an hundred years ago in September last,
See Du Till. in the end of his Chronicle.
and in the same were given Catholic dicisions against the Pope, which stands
for Law against such as would at this day persuade Frenchmen, that they must
not succor their confederates, nor make war otherwise then it pleases Rome.
The King did more with the Emperor: for he published a Council at Pisa, which
the Pope (that he might auert the same) assigned at Saint John's of Latran. In
those times was invaded the Kingdom of Navarre, by Ferdinand of Arragon
against King John de Albret, whom the Pope had excommunicated, in hatred of the
succors he gave to the King. And at that time Ignatius Loyola a Spaniard,
being hurt and maimed within Pampelune, which the King besieged, devised to
erect a society of Jesuits, that should uphold from thence-forth, both the
usurpations of his Master, and the title upon which they are grounded, to wit
the power of the Pope, which they extol above the goods, life and honor of
Kings: and for this effect they have a vow, which no other religious men take:
It is a blind vow, which makes them move subjects against their Princes. Now
the Popes continuing their proceedings in the reign of Francis the Great, the
King had for enemies the Emperor, the King of England, the Duke of Milan and
others; notwithstanding he let not to say boldly. That if he were
constrained to go into Italy, to get his absolution, he would go so well
accompanied, that they should send to meet him. Since, the Popes making use of
religion for to trouble the States of Christendom, to hinder from any more
speaking of reforming the Head, as the Emperor Maximilian, and King Lewis the
twelfth had determined to do, France being very much weakened: Pope Sixtus the
fifth made a league, excommunicated the deceased king, then King of Navarre,
and my Lord the Prince of Conde, who the sixth of November 1585. fixed up their
oppositions with an appeal as in case of abuse, and gave the lie to Sixtus the
fifth, calling himself Pope, in that he termed the King and the Prince
Heretics. Which proceedings Gregory the foureteenth continued against King
Henry the third and all his servants, whom he excommunicated by his Nuncio
Landriano sent into the Capital City of the Kingdom. Here was the time that
Frenchmen should have feared, if this scarcrow had been to be feared by the
servants of their King. The capital Cities were revolted, such as remained
still under the name of the King were in many places retained in their duty by
force; there were few soldiers, and no money. But an excellent counsel, a
grave Senate of faithful servants to the King: The sentences of Tours and of
Chaalo^s.
one expers terroris Achilles, it is therefore said by sentence of Court, that
this Bull shall be burnt in the public place by the hands of the common
executioner; decreed against Landriano Nuncio: Inhibitions are made, that no
man shall carry money to Rome, or provide any for the dispatch of Benefices:
Gregory the foureteenth entituling himself Pope, declared enemy of the peace,
of the Catholic union of the King and of the State, and adherent to the
conspiracy of Spain, the fautor of rebels guilty of the most destable
parricide committed in the person of King Henry the third. Since that King
Henry the Great, having maintained with his authority the liberty of the
Gallican Church, the fautors of the Popes power, contrary to the ordinance of
God, ceased not till they had murdered him, as they had before done his
predecessor. And immediately after have published their manifestation, touching
the pretended Temporal power of the Pope, under the name of Cardinal
Bellarmine Jesuit. Which Treatise, the Court of Parliament at Paris having
seen, gave their solemn sentence (the most Sovereign Courts of the great or
gilt chamber of the Tournelle, and of the Chamber of the Edict, or mixed Court,
being assembled) which contains these words.

The Court does prohibit and forbid all persons of what quality or condition
soever they be, Sentence of Parliament of Paris on the 26. of November 1610.
upon pain of being held guilty of high Treason; that they shall not receive,
keep, communicate, Imprint, cause to be Imprinted, or expose to sale the said
book, containing a false and detestable Proposition, tending to the euersion
of Sovereign powers, ordained and established of God; to the raising of the
subjects against their Princes, withdrawing of their obedience, inducing to
attempt against their persons, and States, and to trouble the rest and quiet of
the Common wealth. Enioyneth, etc. Behold how and by what means the
State-royall has been maintained against the proceedings of Popes: But if
there be at this day any that would bring into France new matters, more
pleasing to the adversaries (that is to say to the Jesuits) those new
counselors are bound to produce like proofs for their opinions, as we have
done for ours taken out of History. But it shall be to purpose in a matter of
such importance, that they present themselves in public, the halter about
their necks after the manner as in old time the new Law-giuers did, that they
may presently be cut short, in case they persuade not their auditors. This
course will assure the Kingdom, and deliver your Majesty from many
importunities.

CHAP. VII. What is the power of Ecclesiastical persons, And that the Pope is
not grounded in the pretentions of Cardinal Bellarmine, neither on Divine, nor
humane law, or right.
AS they that incroach upon the rights of Kings, imitate that Emperor, who
said, if the Law be to be broken, it must be done for a Kingdom: so we have
observed that another head of the same Commonwealth, lead an army into
Africa, for to withdraw the enemy out of Italy. According to which
stratageme, we will pass over the Alps, descend upon the place, and examine
the power of the adverse parties, and will see if it was so at the beginning.
Nevertheless before I enter into this discourse, I will most humbly entreat
your Majesty, to believe, that in the same, I intend not to comprehend the good
and holy Bishops and Priests which have kept themselves in their duty, as
lawful successors of the Apostles: in favor of whom it is written: He which
receives you, receives me, and whose feet are blessed bringing the glad
tidings of the Gospel of peace. These words we borrow of purpose, that we
may show on the one side, that we bring nothing of our own: and on the other
side, that from time to time the truth has not remained without witness, and
that this gangreene which we cut off had not gotten over all the members: of
whom also good Clergymen being the successors at this present, will not take
it ill if we reprove the actions of some Siluesters, John's, Gregory's,
Bonifaces, Julius, Alexanders and Sixtus, who have oftentimes set all
Christendom on fire and in blood, knowing that such spots respect not them, no
more then the Apostle-ship receives blame by the treason of Judas. For the
faithful Pastors sighed in their time, to see such a disorder in Church,
wherein vice carried away the most part of the world. Also from time to time
not only the Kings Officers, but the best among the Clergy also, have opposed
themselves; that they might restrain such usurpations: Although on the other
side the Pope set up new orders, depending on him in such sort, that they durst
Preach none otherwise then he listed; and them that flattered him most were
the best Beneficed. So disobedience to parents was followed, with rebellion
against the Magistrate, yea against the Prince; so far as to say, that it was
necessary to salvation to believe that the Pope is God on earth: To take away
which false opinion, and to hinder least in consequence of the same any attempt
against our Kings, I have reported some actions of Popes, which show that they
be very far off from that holiness they pretend. This is the only end of
this Treatise, and not the desire to blame any of that order: would to God they
had been the true successors of the Apostles, so much would I have honored
them in their charge, as I detest the vicious. But seeing we are in process
between the King and this new power, we must agree upon a Judge superior to
them both, for to ground their rights. And as the King has here above verified
his right by the Law and by the Gospel, by the Law of Nature, the Law of
Nations, and the Civil Law, not making use of the Sentences of his Sovereign
Courts, and of his Statutes. So also I think that every man of sound judgment
will believe, that Bellarmine ought not to ground his mixed power upon the Canon
Law, for that were to be judge in his own cause, and to allege usurpations
for good titles. The same judgment must we give of the allegations of all the
domesticke witnesses and pensionaries of the Pope, infected with the new
maxims of the Canon Law, brought in since five hundred years, whose
testimony he produces in the beginning of his book. Which may serve for
answer in a word, against all such depositions of reproachable witnesses. And
hereby is clearly manifested, that the Pope has not whereon to ground his
pretensions, neither in divine nor humane law, or right, seeing that his own
is not authentical to his profit. But if he will be obeyed, let him imitate
our Savior, who grounded his authority on an irrefragable proof, saying in
Saint John, I seek not the witness of men. Search the Scriptures, for in them
ye think to have eternal life; and they are they which testify of me.
According to which rule Paul and Sylas were examined in Berea: Act. 17.10.11.
for it is said that the men of that place, searched the Scriptures daily, to
see whether those things were so. In imitation of whom we will see if it be
so, and will confer the holy Scriptures and the Jesuits imposture together,
and if he refuse this trial, we shall know that he is one of them that
Tertullian speaks of in these words: Tert. lib. de resurrect.
Constrain Heretics to prove all their questions, by the holy Scriptures,
and they cannot subsist: And if the King for to prove the authority of his
Temporal right, contented himself with the Law of God, which is Spiritual,
how should the Cardinal dare to accuse it of insufficiency, for to sustain a
right which he pretends Ecclesiastical? And if it be sufficient, whence
comes it, that till our Saviors coming in the flesh, that is, for the space
of four thousand years, his pretended authority was never heard of? And after
CHRIST till the Emperor Constantine were nothing but horrible persecutions,
for the space of about three hundred years; yet there was no speech of
dispossessing Augustus, nor Nero, or their successors. Also our Cardinal
makes only Hildebrand to be the chief, whose testimony he alleges in the
beginning of his book: now he was Pope in the year 1073. Neither will the
blasphemous answer of the Jesuits serve: who say, that the Church had not
power enough to make it self to be acknowledged. For I pray you, could not
the Lord JESUS, armed with the rod of iron, spoken of in the second Psalm,
have beaten to pieces such Emperors? Saint Peter, whose shadow healed the
sick, Act. 5. and 8. cha. and 13.11.
who confounded Simon Magus, struck with death Ananias and Saphira; and Saint
Paul, who smote Elymas, that resisted him, with blindness; would they not have
subiugated the persecutors, if it had been lawful for them to exalt themselves
above the powers that bear the sword? But contrariwise, they knew that it was
written: Eccles. 8.2.4. He answers not there, That shall be the Pope.
Take heed to the mouth of the King, and to the word of the oath of God. Item.
Where the word of the King is, there is power, and who shall say unto him, what
do thou? They knew also that from the beginning, our Savior had beaten down
that presumption, saying, Mar. 10.43
Whosoever will be great among you, shall be your servant. Again, Mat. 20.26
The Kings of the Nations have domination over them, etc. Luke 22.25
but it shall not be so among you, etc. Mat. 22.8.
Be not ye called our Master, for one is your Master, to wit CHRIST, and
all ye are brethren. Also when Saint Paul reckons up the Offices of the
Church, he says: God has ordained some in the Church, as: First Apostles:
secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. And if that power, so much spoken of,
had been established of God, Saint Paul would not have forgotten it, for seeing
he treats there of the degrees of Pastors, it had been a fit place to speak
of it, and instead of putting all the Apostles in one rank, saying; first
Apostles; if that had been of divine institution, he would have said: first a
Pope, armed with two swords, Temporal and Spiritual: secondly, Cardinals, and
so forward from Principallity, to Principallity Hierarchicall. But contrariwise
Saint Peter forbids his true successors all domination, saying: 1. Pet.
5.2.3.5.
Feed the flock of God, etc. not as having domination over Gods heritage, but
as being ensamples to the flock, which he so ordains, that (says he) ye
submit your selves every man one to another, 2. Cor. 11.5. and 12.11. Gal.
2.9.11.14.
And Saint Paul witnesses that he was nothing inferior to the very chief
Apostles: that James, Peter and John, who were counted to be pillars, had
given him the right hand of fellowship: And indeed, when Peter was come to
Antiochia, he withstood him to his face, for he was to be reproved, in
constraining the Gentiles to do like the Jews. And if Saint Peter was reproved
by one of his companions, by a stronger reason was he bound to render an
account to the whole Council assembled in the capital Church, in which James
sat, Act. 8.14.
namely in Jerusalem, as we read in the Acts, He also obeyed the other
Apostles, who sent him with Saint John into Samaria. Now note that Saint Paul
says not, that James (whom he names first) Peter, and John were pillars: but
says they were counted so, noting the opinion of the vulgar, for the holy
building of the Church, is not a justice set upon three pillars, much less
upon one only fantasy of man, for to turn every way, but on twelve pillars,
that is to say, the twelve Apostles, as is said in the Revelation. Revel. 21.
And Saint Hierome in the middle of the discourse against Iouinian, has these
words. The fi^menesse of the Church is equally found^d upon all the Apostles:
Note, he says equally Who also have all of them for solid Basis, that
cornerstone of many refused: the stone out of which springs forth the water
of life; the stone besides which, none can lay any other fo^ndation. 1. Cor. 3.
Upon which also both the doctrine and discipline of the Apostles have been
builded, to wit, JESUS CHRIST. We read also, that the Apostles were assembled
in the Church of Jerusalem, Acts 17.
a Church privileged above all others, because that out of it have come the
Prophets and Apostles, it was taught by the Master himself, sprinkled with
his blood, honored with his passion, and marked with his sepulcher: and of the
same was the Apostle Saint James, called by the Ancients, Clem. Epist. 1.
the Bishop of the Apostles, who removed not thence, though the other Apostles
were ambulatory: who was a Prince of the blood royal, cousin germane to our
Savior, and was president in the first Council, Act. 17.23.
in which he gave his opinion last, and collected the voices, as we read in
the Acts, nevertheless he took not upon him for that any principallity. For
the letter written by advice of this company; bears not the title of his
name, but of the name of all. The Apostles and the Elders, etc. greeting.
Within the bounds of like modesty, have the holy Bishops of all Christendom,
contained themselves, till the year six hundred and seuent and for proof
hereof, we need but the Canon it self, taken out of Saint Chrysostom, which
has these words, Whosoever desires Primacy on earth, Can. mult.. quicunque
did. 4.
shall find confusion in heaven, amd shall not be found in the number of the
servants of God, etc. This Aristocraticall form then of governing the Church,
by a common council of Pastors and Deacons, dured a long time in the Church:
so long as the persecutions banished the ambition of Priests: which were in
nothing different from Bishops. For as for the place of Saint Hierome above
alleged, Hier. Euagrio.
he speaks as having regard to his times, wherein already the Bishop was
distinguished from the Priest, in that he conferred orders, which the simple
Priest did not. But it was not so from the beginning, nor a long time after the
Apostles. Hier. 3. ad Titum.
And witness Saint Hierome himself, upon the Epistle to Titus, saying, that
there was no difference of power and charge the one from the other, and that it
is by custom, and not by truth of divine disposition: that such a degree is
invented. And to prove that the Priest, and the Bishop were one and the same
person in the Church, he alleges the 20 of the Acts, Act. 20.17.
where it is said, that Saint Paul sent from Miletum to Ephesus for the Priests
of the Church. Item that of the Phillipians, where Saint Paul saluteth the
Saints which are in Phillipi, Phillip. 1.1.
with the Bishops and Deacons. For seeing he names many Bishops, he
intends to speak of Priests, because by the new order of such superiority,
there is but one Bishop in every City. Secondly, if there had been there
Priests, others then them he calls Bishops, he would not have forgotten
them, seeing he omitted not Deacons. 1. Pet. 5.1.
Lastly, Saint Peter not only calls them Priests or Elders to whom he
wrote, but also calls himself a Priest or Elder with them, and a companion
in the Presbitery. Saint Paul also ascribes ordina ion to the assembly of
Priests, and enioyneth the Hebrews to obey not one sole Bishop, but their
ouer-seers. And if among the Apostles there had been some greater then others,
it would not have been said, I am of Cephas, and I of Apollos, for either they
would have reclaimed the greatest, or he that had an inferior Pastor, would
have been still. But this Aristocraticall form having displeased some, passed
to the great Cities, who would attribute to themselves some second prerogative
above Bishops, and to have Patriarchs of equal authority, namely in
Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria and Rome. Which the Synod, Nic. syn. c. 6.
held about the year 400 of our Savior, winked at. Soon after, the Emperors
having translated their seat to Constantinople by reason of the wars of
Italy, this dignity was communicated to the Bishop of the place, Zeno in l.
decreuimus 16. l. priuilegia 17. C. de sacros. Eccl. Just. Nou. 123. c. 9. de
sacros. Episcopis l. 24. Constinopolitana. C. de sacros. Ecclesijs l.
Certissime 34. C. de Episc. and.
yea greater by measure as ambition grew. Thence came a law of Zeno their
Emperor in the year 476. another of Anastasius, by which the Church of
Constantinople is exalted and privileged above others, As Mother of the
Orthodoxall Churches. And Justinian ordains that all Bishops of what Province
soever they be, should repair to the Bishop of Constantinople and in the Law
24. That the Church of Constantinople is the head of all others And not only
the said Church is called Mother, but the Patriarch of Constantinople is called
Oecumenicall (that is to say universal and superior to all others) in two
diverse Laws. L. Cum velimus 7. C. de summa trinit. Con. Oecum. 5.
Yea the Patriarch of Rome Hadrianus greeted Tharasius Patriarch of
Constantinople with the name of Universal Patriarch, as also that name was
granted unto him by the Council held in the year six hundred. Nic. 2. Ac. 2.
Notwithstanding many holy Bishops were a grieved at this title. So Gregory the
Great, Greg. 4. Epist. 118. 19. and 7. li. 3. 74. 79. 80.
Bishop of Rome writes to Mauritius Emperor of Constantinople, letters worthy
to be read of Princes, observed of Bishops, and graven in letters of gold in
Churches, wherein among other things he says, Idem lib. 16. Ep. 30. Paul.
Diac. lib. 18. in Phoc.
that such a man agrees only to Antichrist, or his forerunner.
Notwithstanding soon after, the successor of great Gregory succeeded him not
in opinion, receiving from Phocas, the murderer of Mauritius and usurper of
the Empire, the name of Universal Bishop, in the year of our Lord 607, and of
the world 4558. And at the same time, to wit, anno 613. Mahomet declared
himself Prophet and Captain of the Arabians. So ambition as a secret enemy
sat within the Church: and the open enemy, to wit Mahomet, made war upon it
without, according to the Prophecy of Daniell. Whence tragical effects have
followed, whereof we have quoted some, in all Christendom: all through want of
having kept the modesty of the Apostles and the Christian charity recommended
by the holy Doctors of the Church, and written in the Canons: Can. 1. sedis
did. 99. and duobus seq.
Let not the Bishop of the first seat be called Prince of Bishops, or chief
Priest or the like, but simply Bishop of the first seat, and let not the
Roman Bishop be called Universal Bishop. The reason is in the two Canons
following. For such names puff up vanity, and hurt charity. The conclusion of
this Chapter shall be, that as under the Law, the offices of Priests and
Levites was limited to perfumigations, unleavened cakes, sacrifices, and
interpretation of the Law of God: In like manner under the Gospel, our Lord
gave none other commission to to his Apostles and their lawful successors,
but to Preach the Gospel and administer the Sacraments to such as they found
fit to receive them, and to refuse them to the profane, and to shut the out of
the Temple: and not to confiscate, proscribe, or give away the goods of other
men, or entermeddle with affairs of State, L. repetita 41. in l. placet and
authen. seque c. de Episcopis and clericis l. consuta. 23. c. de testamentis.
against the Co^stitution of justinian; Clerici ne militent, Let not Clergymen
meddle with public actions; For (says the Emperor) it is a shameful thing, for
a Church-ma^ to show himself skillful in affairs of the Palace.

CHAP. VIII. That Cardinal Bellarmine and other Jesuits, set the Pope above
that which is called God in Spiritual things.
THe name were a small matter, if this Primacy in order were not degenerated
into Primacy in degree, and that which went side by side as companion were not
set above as Master, imitating that evil servant, Mat. 24.
who seeing his Master from home defer his coming would make good cheer to
the Masters cost, beat and outrage his fellows. Which S. Bernard found fault
withal in his time, writing to Pope Eugenius. Know that thou art not Lord of
Bishops, but one of them, Bern. Ep. ad Eugen.
and that the Church of Rome it^ Mother, but not Lady. Notwithstanding there be
some Court-doctors at this day, which would teach the Gall ca^e Church to speak
big and in steed of saying Mother, make her be called Madam^; and would make
us forget to say Abba Father, speaking to God* and Abimelec, my father the
King, speaking of the Prince. But let our Churches remember what was at the
beginning, and that Salomo^: knew as much as such men. Item that the Church of
Rome has no more privilege above the Gallicane Church the^ that of ^erusale^
above the Gentiles: and therefore she might content herself with the name of
sister, as did the Jewish speaking of the Church of the Gentiles in these words.
We have a little sister and she has no breasts, Cant. 8.8.
says she in the Ca^ticles. Notwithstanding the Romish Church passing further
calls her self, Cap. Antiqui. lib. 5. decret. tit. 33. de priuilegijs and
excessibus.
Mother, and Mistress of all the faithful, not considering that she
attributes to herself the qualities that Saint John gives to spiritual
Babylon, which speaks thus in the Revelation, Reu. 18.7.
I sit being Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning. But all
particular and visible Churches are sisters of blood, begotten of one same
incorruptible seed, brought up in the same Catholic family, members of one
and the same head, branches of the same Vine, co-heires of the same succession,
children of the Mistress Sara, and not of the servant Agar. Bern. Epist. 20.
Wherefore the same Saint Bernard not being able any longer to endure that
pride, cries out. Already long ago, against the doctrine of Saint Peter, ye
have enterprised domination over the Clergy, and against the doctrine of Saint
Paul, ye bear rule over the faith of the whole world; but at this present ye
add something more, attempting above Religion: what remains more, but that
ye command the Angels?

And in another place, They go adorned with the goods of the Lord, Bern. cant.
sermon. 33.
without doing him honor: thence is that glittering of a Harlot, that apparel
of Stage Players, that Royal furniture, gold on bridles, Take heed least they
that say, they are the Sun, and Kings the Moon (duo Luminaria) be not
designed by S. Bernard.
saddles, spurs, etc. That same is the Antichrist, which will falsely call
himself not only the day but the midday, and will exalt himself, above that
which is called God, or that is worshipped, whom the Lord JESUS will consume
with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy by the brightness of his coming:
For it is he which is the true and Eternal midday, the Spouse and Advocate of
his Church: God above all blessed for ever and ever, Amen. Cap. solitae 1.
decretal. tit. 33. de Maioritate.


Now that which moved this holy man to give this name to the ambitious, is that
which is written in the Epistle to the Thessalonians. That day shall not come,
These. 2.3.4.8.
except there come a departing first, and that that man of sin be reueiled,
that son of perdition, which opposes himself, and exalts himself against
all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that heedeth sit as God in
the Temple of God, behauing himself as if he were God. Out of which truth it
follows that Cardinal Bellarmine by his writings figureth forth that man of
sin, for there is nothing in heaven nor in earth, which he submits not to
him.

1 First of all, all Bishops considedered either Can. si Papa. did. 40. can.
nemo causa. 9. q. 3. Gal. 2. Act. 11.
assembled together, or separately, who dare not say to him, why do thou,
whatsoever seems him good? Against the practice of S. Peter, who received the
reproof of S. Paul, and rendered a reason to the Church of Jerusalem, for that
he had Preached the Gospel to the Gentiles. Wherefore Gregory the Great,
Bishop of Rome, in the year of our Lord six hundred and four, compared such
a Greg. li. 4. Epist. 82. ad Johan. ^e^unatore Pa riarch. Constantinopolit.
Idem. lib. 6. c. 194. and registro ad Mauriti^.
man to Lucifer, who said in the 14 of Esaias, that he would mount above the
stars, For (says he) what else are the Bishops of the Universal Church, thy
brethren, but stars of heaven, before whom thou would prefer thy self
by a high name (to wit, Bishop of Bi^hop) what other thing say thou, but
(that which Lucifer said) I will ascend up to heaven, and will exalt my throne
above the stars of heaven. For this great Gregory knew that which Saint Peter
from the Lord JESUS had commanded in his Catholic Epistle, 1. Pet. 5.
Be ye subject one to the other, and enioineth Pastors to feed their flocks,
not as having domination over the Churches: 1. Cor. 14.12.
and Saint Paul declares, that the Spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the
Spirit of the Prophets. But these Doctors of nouelty puff up the pride of a
man and hurt charity, saying: Can. si. Papa did. 40.
Let no man presume to reprove him, though he le^de infinite companies of
souls with him, for to suffer etern^ll pains, with the first sl^^e of hell.
These are the very words of the Cannon. Because, says Bellarmine. Bell. de
Pont. l. 4. c. 2.
God permits not that the Pope should define any thing without reason:
insomuch that they hold, that if the Emp rour, the Kings, Can. Nemo iudicabit
Can. 9. q. 3.
the Clergy, and all the people were together, they should not have the power to
judge such a man.

2 The second degree is to set himself above the Counsel, and above the clergy
in body: for seeing God promises to be present in the midst of them which are
assembled in his name. Mat 18.20 Moscon. de maiestat. milit. Eccl. l. 1. c. 1.
p. 27 Ioh. Selua li. de Beneficijs part. 4. page 8. in 28. tract. tomo. 15.
part. 1. fol. Iacobatius. de Council. lib. 1. art. 1. number. 36.
That man which sets himself above this company, whereof the holy Ghost is
president and moderator, exalts himself above that which is called God. So
Mosconius holds that the popes opinion must rather be stuck unto, then to
the opinion of all the rest of the world besides, contrary thereto. And that
one may appeal from the Council to the pope, but not from the decree of the
pope to the decision of the Council, this is said by Johannes Selua a Spaniard.

Baron. in paraenet.
3 Angels are said to be of God, and his messengers: of these same writes
Cardinal. Baronius against the Venetians. Know ye not that we shall judge
the Angels? Abusing the place, which speaks of all the faithful (and not of
Churchmen only) which faithful, as assistants of the Judge JESUS, shall sit
at his right hand in the day of judgment, shall assist at the condemnation,
which our Savior shall pronounce against the wicked, and against the evil
Angels, saying: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels.

4 The Apostles are also said to be of God, he which receives you* receives
me; Nevertheless they exalt this power above the Apostles, saying, that
according Cap. pro pasuit. 4. li. 3. decreta. tit. 8. de co^cession. praeb. and
gl. verbo. dispensare, etc.
to the fullness of power, of right he may dispense above the Law, yea that he
may dispense Gl. verbo fiat. Can. lector. 34. did.
against the Apostle: Item against the Canons of the Apostles Can. Presbyter
did. 82.
Although (says that Canon) according to them same, a Priest that is a
fornicator ought to be deposed, nevertheless not without the authority of
Syluester. Neither can that evasion serve their turn, which say, that the pope
Vide and gl. cap. authoritatem cau. 15. q. 6.
dispenses of the Gospel in interpreting it. For first of all, who ever heard
dispensation called an interpretation of the Text? Secondly, if it be by way of
interpretation, why is it rather deferred to the pope, then to Sorbonists of
Paris, who have better skill then he. But I deny that such interpretation as
he gives by dispensation is lawful, neither yet for the whole Church in body,
seeing it is God alone that commands, and the Churches part is to obey, to
hear the voice of the Bridegroom, and to learn of him in silence: and this
the Iuris-consults can tell, It pertains unto him alone to enterpret the Law,
which has the L. 12. Si Impe^tis c. de legibus Si enim in praesenti leges
condere soli Imperatori concessum est, and leges interpretari solodignum
Imperio esse oportet. Nehem. 8.
right to make it. The reason is, because he that enterpreteth it, makes
himself above the Law: for after he has given his opinion, he will be
followed rather then the Letter, which shall no more be enquired after.
Wherefore Nehemias made the people understand the Scripture, not after his own
fantasy, but by reading the same, that is to say, by the Scripture it self.

5 The Law likewise is of God, being written with his own finger, and
forbidden to add to, or diminish it, as touching the substance and matter:
nevertheless the second commandment is cut off in many Masse-bookes and
Popish Psalters, Synod. Ausburg. anno. 1548.
and that by the decree which the Pope caused to be made in the Synod of
Ausburg quite racing out this commandment. Thou shall make thee no graven
image, neither any similitude of things that are in heaven above, etc.

6 The Gospel likewise is of God, For it is the power of God unto salvation to
every one that believes: Romans 1.16.
Nevertheless these seducers hold that against Can. Ideo permittente can. 25.
q. 1. v. glos. capitis proposuit de concess. praeb. tit. 8. lib. 3. decret. in
verbo dispensare.
the general Law the Pope may give privileges. They also esteem it a greater
crime, and they punish him more severely, that transgresses the Popes decree
in eating flesh without dispensation in time of Lent, then if he were a
theife, murderer, and adulterer altogether. Wherefore these words are inserted
in the Canon Cap. Honoratus 74. did.
not making account of the commandments of God, but even despising our
letters: And that because they make so great estimation of the Canons and
doctrines of the Pope, that such as dare voluntarily transgress the same, Can.
violatores Canonum 25. q. 1.
in deed or word: are said by the Pope to be damned, and to blaspheme against
the Holy Ghost. Although he take leave to himself to transgress the Law and
the Gospel of God; and to show it, these blasphemous words are in the Canon,
Can. sors no^ est causa 26. q. 2.
Before that the Gospel was explaned many things were permitted, which in time
of a more perfect discipline have been altogether banished: for the marriage of
Priests, or of cousin germans, is not forbidden neither by the Law, nor by the
authority of the Gospel, nor of the Apostles: Notwithstanding by the
discipline of the Church, it is wholly forbidden. O what perfection to
transgress the Law and the Gospel! is not this to fulfill that which is
foretold should come? 1. Tim. 4.
In the last times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to spirits of
error and doctrines of devils, teaching lies through hypocrisy, and having
their consciences seared with an hot iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding
to abstain from meats, which God has created to be used with thanksgiving
of them which believe and know the truth: for every creature of God is good,
and nothing to be refused, being taken with thanksgiving. For it is
sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. If thou be put in mind of these
things, thou shall be a faithful servant of JESUS CHRIST, etc. And that which
S. Ignatius wrote to the Philadelphians (...).
If any man confess not these things, but says that the generation of
children, and lawful marriage is pollution, or that certain meats are
execrable, that same man has for familiar the Apostata Dragon. Of the same
opinion is Saint Augustine, blaming them Ad Ian. Epist. 119. c. 19.20.
that do so deprive themselves of the use of meats, that they esteem such
impure as use them. The like opinion has he concerning marriage, and alleges
for ground of his saying, that place of S. Paul. Now the reason may be taken
from this, that Genesis 2.
God has instituted marriage. That Aaron the chief Priest was not the less
apt for the sacrifices: that his sons succeeded him in the Priesthood: That
God says, It is not good for man to be alone: That our Lord honored marriage
with his presence in Cana of Galilee: That he would be borne under the veil of
marriage, although the holy Virgin remained without the company of man: In a
word, in the state of Holiness Adam and Eve were conioined by marriage. Genesis
2.24.


7 The Sacraments are also of God, called his body and blood, the use of which
in matter and form as he has prescribed ought to be practiced in the
Church. Such men nevertheless teach that the Church (that is to say the Pope)
has power to change in them whatsoever it thinks meet, Conc. Trident sess.
21. c. 1. etc. 22. act. 23.
although our Lord have instituted it under two kinds. And by this authority
they have added and cut off from the form, Con. Constable. sess. 13.
matter, and number of Sacraments. And forasmuch as the Host among the Romish
Catholics, is said to be of God, Monluc. li. de relig. ad Regin. matrem.
De Monluc Bishop of Valentia, complains by writing to the Queen mother,
that the Pope going forth of the City, made the same be carried upon a little
curtall among his carriage and the Courtesans, and then come back to meet the
Pope accompanied with the pomp of the Court of Rome.

This same Host was much more despised by Hildebrand, Gregory the seventh,
whom Bellarmine calls Saint, The Abbot of Vespurg in the life of the Emperor
Henry 3. Benno Cardinal in the life of Hildebra^d.
for he caused Pope Victor the second to be impoisoned in the wine of the
Eucharist. The same Pope cast into the fire the consecrated Host, in presence
of many Cardinals, because it gave him no answer touching the event of the
war that he made against the Emperor Henry the fourth. As for Gregory the
ninth, Baleus li. 5. of the lives of Popes.
he refused the Gospel, and in stead thereof substituted a Legend, compiled
by a Monk named Cyrill. It is notorious the base account that Boniface the
eighth had of the same Host, Platina.
being prisoner of the Gibelins in the City of Agnania. Another caused the
Emperor Henry the seventh, surnamed of Luxemburke, to be poisoned, and that
in the consecrated bread, given him by a Monk at Florence. Pope Julius the
second, after he had lost the battle near to Rauenna, against the Earl of
Foix, cast the consecrated Host away, and made it be trodden under feet, as
the history of his time reports.

8 The Church is of God, for it is the body of CHRIST, and is the only spouse
of her only head: God having given to this head the solid Lordship (...) of
all the inheritance, Act. 3.16.
as it is written: for JESUS is both of the triumphant and militant Church, yea
of every particular Church, Epes. 1.22. Romans 8.9.
and of the least individual Christian, both the head and salvation
incommunicably to any other, according as it written for the whole; 2. Cor. 11.2
It is he whom the Father has appointed head of his Church, both of the
militant, visible and particular, I have prepared you for one husband, to
present you as a pure virgin to CHRIST, speaking to the Church of Corinth; and
to every Christan he says, CHRIST is the head of every man. 1. Cor. 11.3. Cap.
quoia^ lib. 3. decretal. de Eccl. in 6. cap. vnico extrauag. Nes. de vacant.
Nevertheless these men with audacious boldness speak thus: Not being
willing to neglect our justice, and the justice of the Church our Spouse. And
Bellarmine passes farther, saying: that the Pope is the head of the Church,
CHRIST excluded, etiam Christo secluso; Bellar. li. 1. de Pon. c. 9.
which is against the Gospel, I am with you always, until the end of the world;
and contrary to the gloss of the Canon, where it is said that CHRIST is
always the governor and head of his body which is the Church, Gl. v. non.
consonam Clem. Ne Romani l. 1. de Elect. tit. 3.
and although the Vicar fail, yet he does never fail it.

And how should he fail in the guidance of his Spouse, since he took upon
him our nature, seeing he guided her four thousand years before, as being her
only Bridegroom for ever, as says Origin, Orig. Cant. hom. 2.
Think not that the Church has been called Spouse only from the coming of
Christ in the flesh, she was so from the creation of Mankind; and from the
beginning of the world. Why then does Bellarmine put JESUS apart and in
default? shall he be less the Spouse of his body, since his Incarnation,
then he was before the same? Moreover these same blasphemers attribute to the
man of sin, the things that pertain personally and soly to our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, excluding all others: for behold how a Bishop of the Council of
Lateran speaks, directing his speech to the Church, and comforting it, and
promising deliverance from Pope Leo the tenth: Oration per Simonem Begnium
Episcopum Modrusien in sess. 6. Lateran Concilij.
Weep not daughter Syon, for here comes the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the
root of David, God has raised thee up a Savior, who shall save thee from the
hands of them that wast thee, and shall deliver the people of God from the hand
of persecutors. O Lion most holy, we have expected thee for Savior, we have
hoped that thou should come to deliver us, we sigh after thee for the
calamities and things that have been ill done, we cry unto thee, that thou
may finish our miseries, rejoicing in the hope of future victory: and abusing
the words of the Psalm, which speaks to God. Psalm. 34.
Fight for us against our adversaries, take the sword and the buckler, rise up
to help us, judge our persecutors, and deliver the Tabernacle of thy Spouse,
which the hands of the wicked have polluted.

Gl. can. Non nos beatu^ did. 40.
Thus high exalted, they say that this man sins not, not that he has license
given him to sin, but because such infirmity of sin is taken away from him,
and that Saint Peter has transported over unto him his innocence and his
merits; Gl. verbo quis enim d. can. nou. nos did. 40.
that it is a great sacrilege to dispute of his power, and that the crimes he
commits are excused, as the theft of the Hebrews, the manslaughter of
Sampson, and the adultery of Jacob, etc. thence it comes that they call his
decrees, Per tuas tit. 32. extrac de maioritate and obedientia.
Oracles and Divine answers: his decrees are numbered, among the holy and
Canonical Scriptures.

Which new proposition is wholly contrary to the ancient disposition of the
Canons, In Canonicis did. 19.
taken out of Saint Augustine, which says, Can. qui nefriat and duobus seque
did. 9. c. Ego solis did. 10.
that we must distinguish of the authority of the Canons (that is to say of the
old and new Testament) from the writings of men, how holy or learned soever
they be, which may be corrected by one more skifull, or by the Council; but
the holy Scripture cannot. And yet the Pope challenges like authority to his
letters, as to the Canonical Scripture. With like boldness proceeds that
which is said in the Canon, that the Sheep ought not presume to reprove the
Pastor, Can. Oues cau. 6. q. 1.
nor the people accuse their Bishop: Notwithstanding Saint Paul admits the
witness of two or three of the flock. Can. sors no^ est cau. 26. q. 2.
By these decreees the writings of Popes are judged more perfect then the Law
of God, or then the Gospel. Wherefore against the saying of our Savior, My
yoke is easy, Math. 11.
and my burden light: these men say, that the Popes yoke must Can. In memoriam
distinc. 19.
be borne, though it be heavy.

And forasmuch as the succession of Saint Peter seems burdensome to the Pope,
his flatterers attribute to him the Vicar-ship of the son of God, excluding
all other Bishops and Patriarchs, Cap. quanto li. 1. decretal. tit. 7. de
translatione Episcopi vide gl. v. very dei cap. vnico de iureiur. gl. v.
vicarium in Clement.
saying: That he executes not on earth the function of a mere man, but of a
true God: They say further, that the Pope is able to change the nature of
things: that he has his authority heavenly: that of nothing he makes
something: that his will suffices for all reason: that none may be so bold as
to say unto him, why do thou so? that he can dispense above the Law; that of
injustice, he can make justice; that he has fullness of power. And for his
abominations, are quoted the texts of the Canon Law. And elsewhere it is
said, That every creature is subject to him, Can. omnes did. 22. cap. vnico.
Ne sede vacant in extra. c. 1. de constit. c. 2. de translat. c. fundahmenta
17. de Elect. in 6. Clem. dudu^ gl. in verbo vndecunque de iudicjs in Clem. c.
1.
that he has the rights of Empire, heavenly and earthly, being Gods Vicar, to
whom the fullness of heaven and earth appertains.

From this ambition proceeds that which is of the interpretation of the word
Pope, as who should say Gl. verbo Papa in proemio Clement.
Papae, by admiration; so they say he is wonderful, which is the name that
the Prophet Esaias gives to JESUS alone, Esaias 9.
His name shall be wonderful; and he also calls himself, the wonder and
astonishment of the world. In consequence of which imaginary All-mightinesse,
he shuts heaven, opens hell, deposes Kings and Princes as it pleases
him. So he falsely boasts of having dispossessed King Childericke the third,
the Predecessor of Pepin. Not Can. Alius 15. q. 6. gl. v. iudicio can. duo
did. 99.
so much for his sins, as because (says he) he was unprofitable for such a
government. As falsely do they say, that he translated the Empire of the L.
gl. v. diuinitus c. semper did. 69. and alibi Can. venerabile extra de Elect.
East into the West, that he can dispense soldiers and subjects of the oath of
fidelity due to Can. nos sanctorum Can. iuratos milites c. 15. q. 6.
their Sovereigns. To be short, he wears a triple Crown to represent the
Trinity Can. satis 69. did. Can. cuncta per mundu. Can si Papa did. 20. Can.
Nemo iudicabit Can. 9. q. 3. Sect. 4. de ceremon c. 6. and lib. 1. tit. 7.
for he calls himself God: and to show that it is not in the sense, that
other men are called Gods, this is added, That he cannot be bound nor loosed
by secular power, nor of all the Clergy together, because being God he cannot
be judged of men.

To testify this all-mightinesse, he blesses a sword on Christmasse night,
which he gives to some Prince his favorite. But he never sends them the
Law, or Gospel of God; and it is to be thought, considering the exploits of
arms have been done in Bohemia and in the country of Vaux, that the blessed
swords of the two last midnights have been distributed to the Generals of
those sacred wars. And as our Savior called God his Father, Ioh. 17. Mat.
19.16.
Holy Father: so these men give the superlatiue to the Pope, Most holy Father:
Yea in abstracto, Your Holiness, Divine Majesty, Our Lord, Vice-God. And what
would our Savior say to this, who said, when he was in the world. Why calst
thou me good, there is none good but God. Whereby he would teach the man he
spoke to, that he should first confess him to be God, before he gave him the
title of good.

But what should we say, if in the Kings chamber of presence some great man
did cause himself to be styled Your Majesty, Would he be excused of crime by
such as have authority? And who is it perceives not by this, the mystery and
name of blasphemy foretold of by Saint John, Revel. 13.
which should be written upon the forehead of such a head? For whereas the
chief Priest did wear upon his Miter this inscription, Exodus 28.
Holiness to the Lord: This man of sin will be entitled, Holiness of the
Prelate of Rome.

Now seeing these Tiara's, and ornaments more stately, do publish abomination
against the honor of the most High. Let us be rather of those lesser
vtensiles, of which Zachary speaks, on which is graven openly, Holiness
pertains to the Lord, Zechar. 14.
excluding all creatures.

9 Yet this is not all, for Kings also must be submitted unto him. Wherefore
they say, that the spiritual and temporal sword are in his disposition, the
one for to execute it personally by excommunications and Anathema's, the other
to cause it be borne by his subjects, Lib. Extrauag. communium c. Vnam sanctam
de maiori and obedientia. See all that is alleged by the gloss of the chapter.
Nouit verbo iurisdictionem li. 2. decretal. tit. 1. de iudicijs.
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, and be drawn forth or sheathed ad nutum vel
patientiam Pontificis, according as the Pope will suffer it, or make sign with
the head; for says he, We declare and define, that it is necessary to
salvation in all things and in all places, for all creatures to be under the
Bishop of Rome.

How? is there any Article necessary to Salvation omitted in the Apostles
Creed? And nevertheless hence it is, has crept in the adoration of him,
rejected by Saint Peter, who said to the Centurion Act. 10.26.
rise up, for I am a man also as thou art, and by Saint Paul and Barnabas, who
rent their garments, seeing that the inhabitants of Lystra in Lycaonia, would
have given them an honor due to God alone Act. 14.
We are men as ye are. And by the Angel who says to Saint John, Revel.
19.10.
See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant: Worship God. And it serves not
to say, that there is two kinds of worship, and that men kiss the hands, and
garments, and bow the knee before Princes, for this kind of worship is civil,
by reason of the homage due unto them. But Kings, or Emperors do not owe
worship to the Pope; for why more to a strange Bishop then to their own
Pastors, which administer the Sacraments unto them? Yea, why to either of them
both, seeing that ciuilly Kings and Emperors are greater then they all? And as
for religious worship, that is alone referred to God, even by the Angels
themselves.

Now to take away all equivocation, these new Doctors have sufficiently
expounded themselves, one of the Popes Clerks saying in an oration he made to
Leo the tenth, incerted in the ninth Council of Lateran, in these words: Your
feet have received voluntary kisses, from them whose terrible hurts were
feared; that as before, so again is fulfilled in you (the only true and
lawful Vicar of CHRIST, and of God) this Prophecy. All the Kings of the earth
shall worship him, and all nations shall serve him. As if the Prophesies,
concerning our Lord JESUS only, should have any other accomplishment then in
his person, or that religious worship ought to be conferred to man: seeing we
know that the humanity even of our Savior is not adored of Christians, but in
as much as it is one same person with the Godhead. Wherefore the Creed of
Ephesus, translated out of Greek into Latin, by the Jesuit Peltanus, has
these express terms: Symbol. Ephesians.
We confess that JESUS CHRIST our Lord ought to be worshipped wholly, yea
with his body, but that he ought not to be worshipped according to his body.
For the Arrians for this occasion, were called idolaters by Athanasius, Cyrill,
and Theoderet, for that they worshipped a God which they said was created. So
says Ireneus. Iren. de incarnat. cap. 25.
CHRIST has worshipped with us, yet he must be also worshipped, for every knee
ought to bow before him, but that is in regard of one of the natures. And Saint
Augustine gives an example of it, Aug. de verbo diu. sermo 58.
of the Kings Crown, being on the ground, or upon his head. Now if religious
worship, ought to be denied to all other humanity, then to that which is
personally united with the Godhead; who is he dares challenge it, but the
God-man JESUS CHRIST? Unless it be that man of sin, of whom it is written,
that he should sit as God in the Temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
behauing himself as if he were God. This is he of whom Saint Hierome says,
Hier. ad 11. c. Zachar.
that the sword is upon his right eye, and he boasts that he sees more
clearly in matter of the Sacraments, then all the Prophets, that have gone
before him. For who is it vaunteth to see more clearly, but they which take
away the cup, (as superfluous) from the lay people: change the form and matter
of the Sacraments, Can. Romanus de consecrat. did. 4. c. praeter in fine did.
32.
and add unto them twice so much, as the son of God has ordained, suffering
Baptism to be performed by a silly nurce, keeper, or midwife, and approving
that which is conferred by a Pagan; but the Sacraments that he has ordained,
are reserved to the highest in dignity among his Prelates, and although this
man, armed with two swords, sits in the Temple of God, yet the faithful are
not bound to submit themselves unto him: but as soon as they perceive the
abuse, they ought to imitate holy men in the like occurrence, namely Moses and
Josias, of whom one brake in pieces the Golden Calfe, the other the brazen
Serpent. So the Prince and Magistrate may destroy idols, and reform abuses,
that they may save the bodies and souls of idolaters. The same did our
Savior, driving the money changers out of the Temple. And if the tirranny, and
violence, or hardness of the Apostasy be such, that one cannot be in it
without transgressing the Law of God, and that admonition will not serve the
turn, the examples of Elias, Micheas, Isay, and Jeremy, under the Law, and of
the Apostles who turned to the Gentiles, and the testimonies of the Doctors of
the Church, do show what must be done.

So cries Jeremy, Iere. 51.9.
We would have cured Babell, but she could not be healed, forsake her, and
let us go every man to his own country. And we need not fear the being
schismatickes for such a separation: for they are schismatickes which are the
cause of separating. Secondly, in that the synagogue of this man of sin
retains still the name of the Church of God, it is in regard of that it was,
when he first thrust himself into it, for every corruption has his degrees,
nemo repent fuit turpissimus; like as when a house is set on fire, so long as
the floores, roofes, and walls do stand, it is called a house, both in name
and effect, and when it is al^ burnt to ashes, it has no more but the bare
name, when we say there is a house burnt: therefore no man will be so unwise
to be persuaded he should dwell in it, which has neither walls to defend,
nor roof to cover him, though all men should tell him it was called the house
of such a one; no, not though some part of the same yet stood, because he
could not be in safety. Also there is not any Judge so unjust, will be so
rigorous to a husband, that accuses his wife of adultery, as to condemn him
to live with her, only because in pleading he calls her his wife. For seeing
that adultery is cause of the dissolution of marriage, in that the husband
gives the name of wife to her he pleads against, it is to show what she was
that he might ground his action, and deprive her of her matrimonial covenants.

This causes us boldly to point out such a man, and to maintain, that it is
necessary to salvation, to separate our selves from him and his Church, without
fear of being thereby separated from the true Church of God. I say from such a
one of whom we are forewarned, not as of an open enemy, such as the Turk is,
who ruinateth from his first rising, and therefore sits not in the Church.
But it is he that is entered as a Fox, and reigns as a Lion: who comes in
sheeps clothing, and within is a ravening wolf: who has horns like the
Lamb, but utters blasphemy out of his mouth, to wit, I am God, I cannot
err, I am the spouse of the Church, I rule in heaven and in earth.

Who will doubt then, but that we ought to refuse such a head, seeing the
Cardinal establishes him over the militant Church etiam Christo secluso, Bell.
lib. 1. de Pontifi c. 9.
CHRIST JESUS excluded or separated from it: although the union of him and his
Church is ever to remain, and has been from the foundaion of the world: and
seeing also the Cardinal creates him Monarch Temporal and Spiritual.

And for such a separation, no Christian is separate from the Church, as I have
handled at large in the discourse of Catholic Unity; Chap. 3. of the Church,
and in chap. 7. tit. of Schime.
where may be observed (among other) three significations of the Church:
first, the material building: secondly, the visible assembly of every Parish;
and thirdly, the invisible company of all the faithful, which is the
Catholic Church, believed by faith, and not seen with the corporal senses:
for universal things are not the object of the senses, and being one of the
Articles of faith, there is none but God, that knows who are his: seeing it
may so fall out, that a whole company of men, making profession to serve God,
may be composed of hypocrites in every particular man thereof.

Chrysostom. hom. 46. in Mat.
Hither is referred these testimonies, first of Saint Chrysostom: He goes not
out of the Church, that goes out bodily: but he that in mind forsakes the
grounds of Ecclesiastical truth. We have left with them the foundations of
walls, they have left with us the foundations of the Scriptures. Hierom. in
Psalm. 33.


And Saint Hierome, The Church consists not in walls, but in truth of
doctrine; there where is the true doctrine, there is the true Church.

And Saint Hillary, Hilar. contra Auxentium.
The love of walls has taken you, in vain ye reverence the Church in houses
and buildings, do ye doubt whether Antichrist shall sit there? mountains,
forests, lakes, gulfes, prisons are more safe unto me. Psalm. 2.10.
Be wise now therefore ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the
Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling.

And I will let you see an extract of one or two orations pronounced in the
Council of Lateran, by the Popes Clerks, and by Modern Canonist Doctors,
seen, allowed and Printed by the commandment of Pope Leo the tenth, as may
be seen in his Bull in the beginning of the said Council, the fifth of May
1515. Yea the words of him, Oration Antonij Puccij Clerici Apostoli 3. Non Maiae
1515. sess. 10.
that spoke to the Pope in presence of the whole Council. Although the aspect
of your divine Majesty, by the resplendent glory whereof the weakness of my
eyes is dazaled. Here is God robbed of his Majesty; we must come to the King
saying; And as the chief Bishop Leo by divine providence has been
en-registred in the royal race of chief Bishops.

Item. As before, in thee alone the true and lawful Vicar of CHRIST and of
God, this prophecy to be again fulfilled. All the Kings of the earth shall
worship him, Psalm. 71.
and all nations shall serve him.

Then usurping the title of JESUS, a jealous God, he says: Before and now the
universal body (to wit, the Church) is acknowledged subject to one only head,
namely unto thee.

Item. Knowing that to thee alone from the Lord has been given all power in
heaven and in earth, that thou may give law and judge, not only Spiritual
men, but also the earthly powers of this world.

But that which is most admirable is, that any truth should proceed out of the
blasphemous mouth of this man, in that he acknowledges Rome to be Spiritual
Babylon, in these words. After we have examined all the decrees of the Church,
and that I come to the City it self, which the Prince of Apostles inspired
with the holy Ghost calls Babilo^, 1. Pet. 5.
etc. Behold this heavenly Jerusalem, divine Spouse, etc. clad in mourning,
etc. which seems to be full of tears and discheueled, prostrate at the most
sacred feet of the chief Bishop. Is it so, most sweet Bridegroom, that thy
only, thy fair, thy wel-beloued Spouse, which cannot say, look not upon me,
for I am brown? etc. Where are the Pastors of the flock, which rule rather
then profile, which scatter and not gather, which kill in steed of saving? etc.
Then in the end this excreable flaterer says to Leo. Make have, arise,
compass about Syon, our mother thy Spouse, embrace her, etc. Instruct and
frame the hearts of the faithful: And the City (to wit of Rome) first of all,
that judgment may begin at the house of the Lord, afterward restore the
whole earth by the censure of thy discipline, into the purity of the ancient
faith, hope, and charity.

Is not this to exalt himself above that which is called God, there is divine
Majesty, Royal race, spouse and head of the Church, that has all power in
heaven and earth, Bulla Iulij 3. sess. Latran. Non Decembris 1512.
gives Law to Temporal powers, in Temporal things; for there is read a Bull
in this same Council, whereby Julius the second forbids faires to be kept
at Lions, and will have them be kept in another City, (ad Gebenensem
ciuitatem.) To conclude he sets himself above the Church, which he
prostrateth disheuelled at his feet, and calls his seat Babylon, of which
speaks Saint Peter in his first Catholic Epistle. 1. Pet. 5.


And to the end that in the mouth of two witnesses this truth may be
confirmed, I will bring forth yet another Parasite, that was General of the
order of Preachers, 2. Sess. in Orationem Caietani.
and had for recompense of his blasphemies, a Cardinals hat: his words may be
thus enterpreted, speaking of the Church: It shall obtain if you will and
command it, if you imitate the power, perfection and wisdom of God Almighty,
whose place on earth you ought to hold, not only in honor of dignity, but in
affection of will. Gird your swords, for you have two; one which is unto you
common with other Princes of this world, the other which belongs in such sort
unto you, that none can have it but from you, etc. Set forwards, set forwards
happily, destroy the nations that desire war, seeing you reign Priest and
King, etc. And speaking of the mercy of the Pope, the same will make you most
excellent above all the Kings of the earth (ergo, the Popes mercy is divine) it
will make you worthy to be worshipped, gracious, a friend and most-like unto
God. And because we suppose many of quality will come to this Synod, by the
mercy of God, and yours, etc.

Magne regnator Deum tam lentus audis scelera! Senec.

Tam lentus vides! ec quando saeua fulmen emittes manu!

CHAP. IX. That the Pope exalting himself above Kings in the manner as
Cardinal Bellarmine will have it, exalts himself also above all that is
called God in Temporal things.
THE Teachers of novelties, submitting peace and war, obedience and rebellion
of subjects, to the wills of Popes, remember not what was in the beginning, and
that which we have above proved. For when the Magistrate has been a believer,
he has ever been above the Church, to reform it both in head and members,
being the Guardian, to whose trust is committed the Law of God, whereof he is
to have a Copy, which is clear in points necessary to salvation, and if there
be obscurity in any place, it is cleared by the reading of the same, Neh. 8.
according as Nehemiah practiced, and of this form of enterpreting we need
none other witness then Pope Clement, who says, that we must not take a sense
out of the Scriptures, Clem. epist. 5. ad discipulos Can. relatum did. 37.
etc. but must take the sense of truth from the Scriptures; and he yields the
reason of it, because all men may take from them a full and firm rule of truth.

And if some Christian Emperors would not take knowledge of Ecclesiastical
causes, it follows not but that they had the authority and right to do it.
Deuteronomy. 17.
For not only the Priests and Levites, which did their duty, took knowledge
of the^, but also the Judge established by the Sovereign Magistrate.

So when Ruben and Gad, Josh. 22.
with the half Tribe of Manasses, had builded an Altar near Jordan, it is
said that all Israel gathered together in Sylo to examine the matter, and sent
ten of the principal of every tribe unto the^. So Gedeo^ being established
Judge, destroyed the Altar of Baal, etc. Cyrus, Esd. 1.16. Neh. 1.
Darius, Artaxerxes, ordain that the Temple shall be builded again, Esdras and
Nehemias take commission from the^.

In like manner under the Gospel, Constantine, Valentinian, Theodosius assemble
Councels. We will say they be present in the Council, after the example of
Constantine, not to make show of our power, but to confirm the faith, etc. and
it is chiefly said that they which were of the Senate made decrees.

Cyrill.
Also Saint Cyrill reports that the Council of Ephesus sent to Theodosius and
Valentinian, for to render them a reason of what was passed, touching the
condemnation of Nestorius. And the Councels of Aix and of Arles, Art. 3. In
praef. Conc. Cub.
wrote to Charlemaigne, praying him to confirm their decrees, yea they did
beseech him by his wisdom.

Ca. 45. no^ in f. praef. mag. Can. vtina^ 96. distinct.
Also Pope Nicholas writing to the Emperor Michael acknowledges, that when
there was debating concerning the Articles of faith, Emperors were wont to be
present in Ecclesiastical Assemblies.

According to this power of Emperors, under the Law of Moses, the Church has
been reformed, not in the members only, but also in the head; Solomon deposed
Abiathar, and Moses reproved Aaron and Eleazer: Constantius also the son of
Constantine the great deposed Liberius, though without cause. The Emperor Otho
deposed Pope John the twelfth: Plat. in vita Greg. 6. Abbas Vesp. an. 1406.
Sigismond deposed three together at one time, and Henry the third as many,
namely Bennet the ninth, Siluester the third, and Gregory the sixth.

The French Kings have also deposed and created many, specially Boniface the
eight was displaced by Phillip the Fair, who translated the seat to Auignon,
where it continued 74. years, and there were resident in that place six
Popes, one succeeding the other, by the appointment of the King. And this right
of deposing Popes is treated of by a certain Chancellor of the University of
Paris, Gerson.
one of the most learned Sorbonists of those times, in his book de
Auferibilitate Papae. That is far from being absolute Lords in Spiritual and
Temporal things. For if even in Spiritual things, lawful Councels have
required the approbation and authorization of Emperors, it follows that the
authority and Soueraignety is wholly theirs, velitis iubeatis, as in the people
of Rome, so far is it off that the Pope or his College can determine any
thing soueraignely.

Also the Kings of France and the Gallicane Church have preserved to themselves
appeals, as in case of abuse, from such decrees: yea so often as Rome abuses
her pretended jurisdiction, the Lord Chancellor gives Can. filijs 17. q. 7.
can. boni principes 96. did. can. Tributum 22. q. 8.
letters in case of abuse.

Now we must know, that we call notorious abuse L. ob qua. Idem l. 1..
sciendum de Aedil. edicto.
when the act that is made is void, when it is against the nature of the act,
or else made by a man that has no power Inn. Pan. and dd Can. Cum olim de
causa possessionis.
to do it, so as that not only by the authority of the Prince, but of private
L. prohibitum l. defensionis and doct. de iu. fi. li. 10. etc. si quando de
rescrip.
authority, it is permitted to resist the same.

Whence comes it, that if the Pope, or his Legates would legitimate a bastard,
in the Kingdom of France, to the end he might succeed (it is another thing,
when it is to make the marriage Cap. Tuam de ordin. cognit.
of validity whence he is issued) or in some fashion trouble the royal
justice, the obtainer of such legitimation etc. Guil. Bened. 2. part. c.
Rainutius; verse. si absq libertis 2. etc. in materia nu. 47. Phil. Decius Cons.
307. Coll. 2.
shall be amerced and the abuse rejected by the Kings Officers.

So by sentence of the Parliament of Toulouse, anno 1400. was pronounced, that
it had been ill and abusiuely proceeded by the Popes delegates, who had
absolved Master Giles de Bellemere, Archidiaconus Micapicen, without calling
the party and the Kings Attorney.

Now William Benedict says, there are three general cases in France, in which
notorious abuse may be committed: namely when the Pope and Ecclesiastical
persons attempt against the decrees of the anicient Councels, against the Kings
statutes, or against the liberties of the Gallicane Church.

Seeing then there is appeal from the Pope, who is it can endure him to be a
Sovereign; no not in spiritual things: Note this.
for it is the argument wherewith Seneca concludes, that the first Kings of
the Romans were not Sovereigns, Cic. 2. de repub.
because there was appeal made from them to the people. Thus Horace the
murderer of his sister was absolved, who had been condemned by King Tullus
Hostilius.

Therefore this pretended Soueraignety, Spiritual and Temporal, rests
vain, according to the opinion of Saint Gregory, and Saint Bernard, and the
practice of the Gallicane Church: For to feed the sheep is meant after
another manner, Mat. 18.18.
and that delivering of keys is not excluding the other Apostles, seeing that
the same promise was made to all, otherwise they could not have executed their
charge, and besides Peter could not receive them but in the name of all, Ioh.
20.22.
according to the opinion of Saint Augustine written into the Canons. Which is
conformable to the disposition of the civil Law; Can. quodcunque 24. q. 1.
which says, that the delivery of a key, and of a ring by a father to his
eldest daughter brings to her no privilege above her fellow heirs, but is
taken as done in common as well for the rest: L. cum pater 79. Sect. pater
pluribus delegat. 2.
which decision is obseruable in the Civil Law: as likewise that which is
written in the Law tenth, C. de Incendio, which speaks of certain fishers of
men, like unto him that Cardinal Bellarmine figureth forth; against whom are
these words: Let not Fishermen deceive Mariners, in causing a light to be seen
in the night in dangerous places* as if it were a safe haven, to the end they
might advantage themselves by the ship-wracke.

There is therefore no ground for this power in the Law of God, nor in the Law
of man: for as no Prince gives any privilege against himself, so never any
King nor Emperor resigned such a right to the Pope, which cannot be alienated.

It remains to speak of the Canon Law, De Elect. lib. 1. tit. 3. Clem. Ne
Romani.
which cannot derogate from the Law of God, as says the Clementine, that the
Law of the Superior cannot be abrogated by the inferior. Neither can it also
derogate from the Law of Kings, because it is a writing framed for advantage of
them that wrote it, Conc. Agathens. sub Alaciaco rege, anno 506. can. 32.
Clericu^ can. 11. q. 1. and can. 3. ibidem l. in fraudem. quoties de iure fisci.
without hearing or calling the party interessed, and held for private, in this
consideration are observed therein many falsifications, specially one notable
one upon this subject, for in steed of saying, Clericus nullum praesumat, as
the Council has it, it is written nullus Clericum, changing the prohibition
made to the Clergy, to prescribe it to the Laity.

Now he that produces false proofs is to loose his cause, though otherwise
it were a good one. Lastly, this Canon Law (I mean that from which are taken
the maxims of the Jesuits upon this subject) is new and but of late, for the
ancientest part of it, which is the Decree was co^piled by Gratian in the year
1093. the Decretals in the year 1211. The Sextus by Boniface the eighth in the
year 1298. and the Clementines in the year 1310. Wherefore judging well, the
authors of this new power, are not grounded on divine nor humane Law, seeing
our Savior himself witnesses, the Son of man came not to be served, Math.
20.
but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many; neither on the example
of the Apostles, 1. Cor. 4.1.
whose charge consisted in administration, and not in commanding, and who said,
1. Pet. 2. Psalm. 2. and 72.
Let men esteem of us as the Ministers of CHRIST, and disposers of the secrets
of God. These men have set themselves in place of the Master are V. gl. in
verbo non consonam Clem. Ne Romani sponsus vester and rector est Christus and
caput Ecclesiae, quae est ipsius corpus Hebr. 7. etc.
styled Princes of Bishops, and King of Kings. Though the true King of Kings be
risen again and lives for ever, having no heir nor successor in his
offices, being eternally both King, and Priest, and Prophet of the Catholic
Church, after the order of Melchizedec.

The flatterers nevertheless will substitute a mortal and sinful man in
his steed, and ascribe unto him power in heaven and in earth, and make him Lord
of two swords, and Sovereign of all demeans, so that he may confiscate or give
them away: whence a blasphemous parasite says, Cap. vnam sanctam extra
communia^ de maioritate Petr. Bertrandus in gl. illius exarauag.
Our Lord should have been indiscreet, if he had not left a man after him,
having the like power as he had: as if such a head could be separate from his
body, and this Bridegroom CHRIST, being a jealous God, could endure any
corriuall, or as though such a supposition were not directly contrary to the
words of our Savior, Ioh. 16. v. 7. and 14. v. 16. and 15. v. 26.
saying: Verily I say unto you, it is expedient for you that I go my way, for
if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you. For he knew that his
presence and the exhortation of his carnal mouth so often reiterated, hindered
them not from sleeping in the garden, or from denying him thrice, at the words
of a silly maide-seruant. But he knew that his holy Spirit, the Moderator of
the Church, working inwardly and accompanying them after his Ascension, would
make them confess the Savior, in the midst of the most cruel torments.
Against which truth the new Doctors belie the Gospel, and hold it expedient
that the humanity of our Savior be on earth, but not to govern the Church:
and make a sinful and partial man to govern it, who sheddeth the blood of
them for whom JESUS CHRIST shed his blood; and will not have men believe the
truth which teaches, that the corporal presence of CHRIST, the most perfect
head of all men, and his carnal governance, is taken away from us into heaven;
that so they might establish Liuetenants in a charge, which no mortal man can,
or ought to have, after the Ascension of the General. And as new Pharisees,
who expected a Messiah triumphing over Temporal powers, and subduing nations
by material arms: these picture forth a successor with mixed power, who is
ashamed of the simplicity of the Gospel, and is an enemy to the cross of
CHRIST, which he cannot endure, but graven or painted.

And since the Ascension of our Lord JESUS, 1. Cor. 3.16.
whom we know no more according to the flesh, these men will have governors
that are carried on men's shoulders, succeding herein the opinion of the
Israelites, when Moses was so long in the Mount, saying: to the Priests, Exodus
32.23.
make us Gods to go before us, for as for this man we know not what is become
of him.

These are likewise those same, which the parable of our Savior denotes, Luke
19.12.
saying: A certain nobleman, went into a far country, to receive for
himself a Kingdom, and so to come again, etc. but his Citizens sent an
Ambassador after him saying, we will not have this man reign over us, but
the Lord being returned says: Verse. 27.
Bring hither those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over
them, and slay them before me. So let it be done to all such as will not
continue servants till the Kings return, who is gone to take possession of the
Kingdom of heaven, and to prepare a place there for us; that they may know,
that as the Jews do in vain expect a Messiah, triumphing in that manner as
they would have it: so with as little ground they have hoped for another
Antichrist then him whom the Jesuits paint forth with his double sword.

See more of this in a Treatise I have made of Catholic Unity. Chap. of the
Church sect. 6. Mat. 20.26 Mar. 10.43 Can. Constan. and seque did.
And they in all the succession of the Apostles finding but one key of heaven,
would get the key of earthly Empire; and as our Savior had said, Thou art
Peter, these men add, Thou art Constantine, Pepin and Lewis. And because our
Savior had forbidden superiority among the Apostles, these men insert a Canon
in these words.

The Emperor Constantine gave this privilege to the Bishop of the Roman
Church, to be the head of all Bishops, as the King is the head of Judges. And
the following Cannons add, that he gave him also his Palace, his Crown, and
Imperial Ornaments, because it was not Idem habetur ca. 17. fundamenta li. 1.
6. decretal. De Electione See the abominations of this Cano^
reasonable that the Emperor should reside in the same City, where the Pope
is; and then to show their thankfulness, they forged that the Emperor was a
leaper, against the records of all Histories. Eusebius. 5. libris de vita
Constantini Plin. li. 21. cap. 1. Mantuan lib. de patientia c. 30. cap. 1.
Nesede vacant, cap. extra d e consuet. Clem. pastorali can. 2. de re iudic.
And upon this supposition, or forgery they build, that the Pope is appointed
over Kings and Kingdoms, and succeeds the Empire vacant, and may transport
Empires from one nation to another, and depose Emperors, having the exercise
of two swords. Behold how of one absurdity many do arise.

For first, that same Donation is false, as the learned Hottom. brutum fulmen
cap. 12. Crimen. falsi.
Hottoman verifieth by twenty six reasons. And Bartol. Proemio digest. nu. 14.
videte nos sumus in terris Eccl. and ideo quod illa donatio valuit.
Bartoll himself says it is true, for no other reason but because he wrote
in the territory of Rome, and therefore durst not write the contrary. The best
proof against this falsehood is, that Constantius the son of Constantine
never forsook Rome and the dominions thereof, but deposed Liberius Bishop of
Rome, who became for this occasion an Arrian, and subscribed against
Athanasius, as Saint Hierome Hieron. in cap. Fortunatianus, Catalogo scriptorum
Ecclesiastic. and Athanasius in Epistola ad solitarium vitam age^tes.
witnesses.

But these Doctors must confess that the great goods that Popes possess have
proceeded from the liberality of the Kings, Pepin, Charles, and Lewis. Also in
the confirmation Ego Ludouicus 63. did. volater l. Geor. 3.
that begins, Ego Ludouicus, there is no mention made of Constantine, but
only of Pepin and Charles, the grandfather and father of Lewis.

Now the reason why this donation was published in the name of Constantine, Du.
Tillet.
was for that the Emperor took it ill as then, that the King gave away that
which he pretended to belong unto him. So this augmentation of titles, has
caused the diverse enterpretation of the word to feed, either as a King in
commanding, or as a Bishop in preaching, Aug. de verbo domini ser. 20. and
tract. 10. and 124. in Joan. Cyril. li. 4. dial. de Trinit.
as Saint Augustine and Saint Cyrill enterprete it.

But Cardinal Baronius passes further, for he makes to feed the flock, to
be as horses feed on grass, saying: against the Signory of Venice, Holy Father
kill and eat.

I know the word Feed signifies three things, to command as a King, to
exercise the Ecclesiastical Ministry, and the last to eat: but the
distinction is known, according to the subject whereto it is applied. As
therefore it were impertinent to conclude for a King, that he is to Preach the
Law of God and administer the Sacraments, because the Lord said to David, 1.
Kin. 2.11. 2. Sam. 5.2
Thou shall feed my people Israel, so as wide from the purpose will the
Jesuits conclude, that the Pope is to command over the Temporallity of Kings,
because our Savior says to S. Peter: John 21.
Feed my sheep: for that is meant only of the feeding, for which he had
commission. Otherwise it would follow by such equivocations and abusing of
words of many significatio^s, that an ass, turned out to feed in the third
signification, should be furnished with a Miter and a Crosier staff. But to
return to our discourse: with what audaciousnesse do they vaunt, that the
grounds of the Romish Bishops superiority over others, is taken from the law of
God, or divine right, seeing that it is the gift of the Emperor. For if he
gave it, it follows that he had it before he granted it, and if the Pope
received it from him, he had not that pre-eminence over other Bishops, before
it was given to him by the Emperor: for as no man can give that which he has
not, so none receives that of gift, which by right pertains to him.

Thirdly, it being but an humane privilege, it follows that it is not a
right, common, nor divine; consequently, subject to confirmation and
reuocation, in case of abuse, especially being Guido pp. q. 239. Decius Cons.
191. 1 part. Lucas de Penna l. quicunque de omni agro deserto l. 11. etc. Can.
Intelecto de iureiur gl. verbo, depereunt, in proemio prag. sanct. l. 1. and 2.
Cod. Theod. de Epis. and cler. lib. 6. Nouel. vt Cler. 83.. Si tamen coll. 6.
a domaniall right, it could not be alienated by the Emperor.

And therefore Popes ought not be unthankful toward the Kings that have
advanced them: Phocas gave the^ the name, and Pepin gave them the revenue.
Constantine granted nothing at first to Bishops but an exemption from tutelle
and gatherings of moneys, and Constantius his son added unto them that they
should not be criminally proceeded against before the Judges royal, that
their faults might not be published. And Justinian extended the privilege to
all Ecclesiastical persons, not to withdraw the^ from under his obedience,
but that he might do them speedier justice, and with less scandale.

Which privileges have been confirmed by Christian Kings, not without
exception, neither in all sorts of crimes, for Princes, from whom as from the
fountain, all inferior Justices are derived, and who are perpetual
moderatours of subalternall justices, do never grant any privilege against
themselves: for these causes have they excepted certain cases, properly called
Cases Royal, and improperly called privileged Cases: for they be cases
excepted from the privilege, granted to Ecclesiastical subjects or others, of
which Justice is done by the Kings Officers, because they very notably concern
the King. As when any matter of high treason is in hand, or of bearing arms,
of the Kings safeguard infringed, of injury done to one of the Kings Officers
performing his Office: Item If a Priest in some office for the King behave
himself ill, and many others.

For as much therefore as the King is himself privileged above the privilege
that he grants: it is manifest the error which these men publish for the
advantage of their head, that it was a privilege granted to the King by the
Pope, having no other ground then the equiuoke of the word Privileged Case.

But since, they have passed further, and if Kings and their servants any
longer wink at it, they will effect that they teach; and already they are
about it; they attribute to themselves a double power, the keys, and the
sword, heaven and earth, Spiritual and Temporal, even to the deposing of
Kings and Sovereign Can. Alius 15. q. 6.
Princes, dispensing their Can. Engeltrudam cau. 3. q. 4.
subjects from their obedience; and not only proceeding to excommunicate and
anathematize them (which is the most rigorous censure, cutting off from the
communion of charity and faith) but also to cut them off, out of the world, to
give them over to the first murderer that will attempt against them, who shall
not be judged Can. Excommunicatorum 23. q. 5.
a murderer by the doctrine of the Popes new Canons.

Thus after they have said, that whatsoever thing Princes ordain in
Ecclesiastical matters, Can. 1. did. 96.
they ought to have no authority: they pass upon their lives and states, a
doctrine contrary to the discipline of the Apostles, and humility of Saint
Gregory, writing to the Emperor Mauritius, Lib. 2. Epist. 61. in dict. 11.
I the unworthy servant of your piety, etc. and he concludes, I have therefore
caused your commandment to be published: but because the same is not
comformable to the Law of God, I have therefore advertised your Majesty, and so
have acquitted my self of my duty, in obeying the Emperor, and yet not being
silent in Gods cause. And we must not think that he says one thing and
means another, for in those days there was no school of equivocation, and
speaking in humility, he also spoke the truth; for as says Saint Augustine,
Sermon. 29. de verbo Apostoli tom. 10.
When thou lie by humility, though peradventure thou were not a sinner
before, yet in lying thou becommest one.

Now they not only refuse to be subject, but also change the censure ordained
for a spiritual remedy of the soul, into a perpetual confiscation of goods,
and mortal bane of men's bodies. And the pretended temporal Lord is more
rigorous then any other; for let the seized do the best endeavor he possible
can, yet the seizure abides still, and the effect of the proscription to the
profit of the usurper. And indeed, was it ever spoken of at Rome, to cause
Navarre to be restored, and to excommunicate the usurper?

But with what importunity do they bring in the Heralds of such power, to
make us allow both the title and the possession, against the Kings right? From
the same ground proceed the irreverent behauiours of the members belonging to
this mixed authority, of some against the Princes of blood, others against
Courts of Parliament, and by degrees against the Kings Officers.

And least any more speech should be made (as in time past was by the Emperor
Ferdinand and Lewis the twelfth) to reform both the head and members: These
vpstart busybodies, have come to help, by entertaining our divisions in
religion, in steed of quenching them; faining that they come to reform abuses
among them, replying against others which require a Council, that their
opinions have been already sufficiently condemned, and that there needs no
more Councels, as if unjust judgments against lawful proceeding, were a Law
against a third which has not been heard nor called. If this maxim were
true, there would have been no Councels holden of very many years, and places
of Justice should be shut up.

CHAP. X. That it is one of the most pernicious heresies, to despise the King.
THIS title will not be held a paradox by good men, who know that the service
we render to the King, proceeds from the ordinance of God. For though many
heathen nations have performed this duty, yet not having the knowledge of Gods
commandment, nor an intention to obey the same, they have respected only their
own particular, that they might preserve their policies; and therefore such
virtues merely, moral, are not allowable before the throne of Gods justice; For
whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14.13.


So we may say that the equal division of spoil among thieves, is not a true
execution of justice, but a shadow thereof, that there society may the longer
continue, which if contention should arise among the^ could not long endure.
And therefore as the final cause is vicious, so the means whereby they attain
the same, ought not to be held lawful: In like manner, all friendship and
co^binations practiced among me^, that is not done with consideration of the
ordinance of God, is a conspiracy, private complotment and confederacy, and
not a legal society nor religious charity, 1. Cor. 13.5.
which seeks not her own particular profit, but executes her effects
outward. For there is no union, neither in faith, nor in charity, saving in
JESUS CHRIST alone, who is the center and perpetual end of all good; to which
purpose says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10.31.
whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God:
And S. Peter recommending subjection toward the Prince, refers it to his
use: 1. Pet. 2.13.14. etc.
Be ye subject for the Lords sake.

Now as the moral virtues of the heathen are sins before God, in as much as
they are not done, with having regard to his commandment, which they know not:
So the contempt of the King, who has right over the subject by the law of God,
arises only in the mind of him that contemns the author of the Law: And
by the same reason it necessarily follows that such a man has first violated
his faith toward God, before he fail in the service of the King; for so long
as he remains faithful in the first Table, he will not pass to the
transgression of the second; which is not well observed, but in the
consideration of the first, of which it is a sequel and necessary dependancy.

Wherefore we see ordinarily that idolaters do easily rebel, yea boldly
attempt against the person of their King: on the contrary, Religous souls
serve them, though they be froward, yea Infidels, as we have noted some
examples; but after the transgression of the honor due to God, the contempt of
the King follows soon after.

Thus is Samuel comforted by God: They have not cast thee away, 1. Sam. 8.7.8.
but they have cast me away, that I should not reign over them: And as they
have forsaken me, serving strange Gods, even so they forsake thee. And
Zedechias being tributary King, before he came to despise the King, hardened
himself against God. 2. Chron. 36.12.13.
Zedechias did evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and humbled not himself
for Jeremiah the Prophet speaking in the name of the Lord, and also rebelled
against King Nebuchadnezar, which had caused him to swear by the name of God.

Also in another place, the Holy Ghost interprets rebellion to be an evil as
dangerous as to go to sorcerers and witches, Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and idolatry. 1. Sam. 15.


Thence it comes, that of late, some of them that labor to weaken the
authority of the King, and have fostered rebellion in this Kingdom of France,
have also questioned the Pythonisse woman possessed, and examined the Devil:
Wherefore we need not wonder if they that like not the right way directing to
Holy Abba Father which art in heaven, swerue from the obedience of our
Abimelec, that is to say, our Father the King, which is on earth.

And as the Jesuits substitute to God our Holy Father, another God on earth,
whom they call Most holy Father, and separate JESUS CHRIST from his Body and
Spouse the Church, for to create unto him a Vicar and Liuetenant general in
all his Kingdoms, Bell. lib. 1. de Pontif. cap. 9.
etiam Christo secluso: So these same Spirits will at this present erect a
Monarke above Kings, which are the fathers and husbands of their people and
country: to the end they should not enjoy their Soueraigneties, but so long as
they shall please him.

Thus having begun with disobedience toward God they end with rebellion
against the King his Liuetenant on earth. Wherefore none will ever defend the
Kings rights and prerogatives as they ought, except he first begin with the
Laws of God: and if he be a preuaricator in the first Table he will easiy be
persuaded to lay such grounds as overthrow the Kings right: for he that
grants the greater, will not stick to give the lesser.

This is the cunning devise Jeroboam used, who as it is written, retained the
people to himself, 1. King. 12.26.27. etc.
and hindered them from returning to the house of David, in causing them commit
idolatry. And for as much as the Article of confession of the reformed
Churches, above rehearsed, conteyneth a submission of all the inhabitants of
the Kingdom, without excepting the Ministers; and in as much as the Modern
Clergymen, when a Priest is converted to their Religion, make him renounce
among other things, that pretended privilege of Clericature: Lastly, for as
much as the honor which we owe unto the King is for conscience sake, Romans 13.
as says S. Paul, and for Gods sake, as S. Peter speaks. 1. Pet. 2.13


It follows, that the Cardinal Jesuit maintains a formal heresy,
Bellar. li. 3. recognit. de Laicis.
in making some Christians subject to the King, not for conscience sake, but
for servile fear, obeying for no other cause but for that they are not the
strongest, and for fear of punishment, not for love of God. For if the
conscience be bound by the Law of God, to the obedience of the King, who is the
subject capable to attempt against the laws, rights, or prerogatives of the
King, but he that falsifieth his faith unto God?

Of this Saint Jude, writing to his beloved, of the common salvation, says:
that certain men crept in, Iud. v. 3.4.
which were before of old ordained to this condemnation, men without piety,
turning the grace of God into wantonness, and renouncing the only Dominator
JESUS CHRIST our God and Lord.

Then he passes to the second Table, affirming that such men break it in
consequence of that former renunciation; And likewise these dreamers, defile
their flesh, and despise Government, Verse. 8.
and speak evil of authorities. And propounds a terrible example for them
that curse Sovereign Princes: Yet Michael the Arch-angell, when he strove and
disputed with the Devil about the body of Moses, Verse. 9.
durst not (mark) blame him with cursed speaking, but said only, the Lord
rebuke thee Satan. And in the 11. verse speaking of Core, that gainesaied Moses
with these words. Is it a small thing that thou have brought us out of a land,
Number. 16.13.
which flows with milk and honey, etc. except thou make thy self Lord and
ruler over us? pronounces a woe against such like men, For (says he) they
perish in following the gainesaying of Core. And note, that this Core and his
fellows Dathan and Abiram, Number. 16.2.
and two hundred and fifty were of the principal men of the Synagogue, to show
that it is not of late years that these Doctors of the Synagogue resist the
King, and that God has chastized them.

Now if this holy Angel of God, who had express charge to do that which he
did, and being therein thwarted by the Devil, durst not curse him, but left the
whole judgment thereof to God, in consideration that the evil Spirit is
called in Scripture, the Power of the air, Prince of darkness and of the world.

What Holiness can they imagine to be in a man transported with passion, to
thunder out against the Lords anointed, against Princes and all Principallity,
wrapping up together withut knowledge of cause, the old and the young, the
quick and dead, the guilty and the innocent? Yea rather such men as despise
dignities are doubtless without piety, ordained of old to condemnation, having
renounced the only Lord and ruler CHRIST JESUS; the respect of whom should
have hindered them from passing so far: for it is written; 1. Pet. 2.13
Be ye subject to all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

Neither is it to purpose to say that S. Jude speaks against them of his
time; for the Epistle is Catholic, directed to the whole Church, and speaks
of a real vice which destroys and peruerteth the person whosoever he be,
that is spotted therewith. Thence it comes; that they which exalt a sinful
man above that which is called God, do also exalt him above that which is
called King, comparing this man to the Sun, and the King to the Moon; and by
this reason the spendor of the King should be borrowed from that Sun so often
Eclypsed, abolished, and become heretic, C. sollicitae 6. de Maiorit. and
obeentia Can. si Papa did. 40.
as the Canon confesses, and the deposings from his office of Bishop does
justify.

Nevertheless, that chapter says, that look how great the difference is
between the Sun and the Moon, so great is it betweeene Popes and Kings: is
not this to entitle himself the mid day, Sermon. 33. Cant. Cant.
whereof S. Bernard speaks as above is showed?

And what need there any more, seeing that is the argument of Cardinal
Baronius against the Venetians: for that he might set himself over them, he
sets himself above the Angels: blaming the Signory in these words; Baron.
in his admonition against the Venetians, Page 47.
The Venetians doing the contrary, are as monsters and prodigies of the Devil;
adding this for a strong reason, Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels?
And what man of conscience, or faithful servant to his Prince can endure such
presumption? who would not inuit all his countrymen to give heed to that which
is foretold of this man exalted above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2
blaming dignities, and enterprising to dispossess Kings? And seeing it is
clearly verified that our Savior CHRIST had not a foot of land in propriety,
Luke 9.58.
to rest his head on, and that his Apostles said to the poor, Silver and gold
have I none; Act. 3.6.
said to the places where they came, Peace be in this house, and denounced not
war: shook the dust of their feet, but invaded not Kingdoms: How then dare
these men appear, who in these days proclaim themselves Lords of two swords,
Spiritual and Temporal, with power to confiscate the earth, open hell, and
shut heaven, having no other reason then the will of a sinful man, full of
passions, which makes more account of Temporal goods then of Spiritual,
saying in his Bull in May, anno 1515. read and authorized in the Council of
Lateran. 10. session, conceived in these words: Least Cathedral Churches,
being destitute of Te^porall goods, (without which Spiritual goods cannot
subsist) etc. As if Mammo^, the riches of iniquity, were the support of Christ,
and of his saving graces.

Yea rather such a man calling himself Lord Spiritual and Temporal, above
Principallities, declares himself to be the true successor of Simon Magus,
Act. 8.
who made himself be called the great power of God: And takes his Lieutenancy
not from Jesus Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this world; but he has it from
the Tempter, who vaunteth to give Kingdoms; for he is called in Scripture,
Ephesians. 2.2. Ioh. 12.31. and 14.30. Heb. 2.14. Mat. 12.29. Reu. 13.14. 2. Cor.
4.4.
Prince of the air, Prince of this world, Emperor of death, is compared to a
strong man armed, is worshipped of Infidels, as being God on earth, or the God
of this world. By virtue of which qualities, he says to our Savior to who^ he
showed the kingdoms of the world, when he tempted him, Luke 4.6.7.
All this power will I give thee, and the glory of those Kingdoms: for that is
delivered to me; and to whomsoever I will, I give it.

Now we are assured that the God of peace, by whom only Kings do reign,
will finish this work, will destroy that pride by the Spirit of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
will abolish that power by the brightness of his coming, will maintain the
authority of Kings and powers ordained by him, will preserve the Widow and the
Orphants of his Anointed, amidst the flames of this furnace, Dan. 3.
as he did the companions of Daniell.

It is not the first time that such presumption has been reformed in the
Church, it being the cause of the reiection of the Jews in the first coming
of our Savior: and now is the subject of the plagues reueiled in the
Apocalypse. And as the threatenings of the Prophet Zachary, who prophesied of
both these disorders, have been executed on the Pharisees, who^ he calls the
Pride of Jordan, Zach. 11.5.
who in steed of feeding their flocks, expose them to slaughter, and yet are
not held guilty; and they that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am
enriched, and their own shepeheards spare them not.

By reason of which abuse it is added, Verse. 3.6.
that there shall be a voice of the howling of the Shepeheards, because their
magnificence is destroyed. And behold (says the Lord) I will deliver the w^^^
every man into his neighbors hand, a^^ into the hand of his King; and they
shall smite the land, and I will not deliver them out of their hand. So (my
Lord) doubt not but that in the second coming of our Lord and Savior, which
is at hand, and wherein the pride of Babylon and the foolish sheepeheard of
whom this Prophet speaks, which exalts himself by a Cardinal Jesuit,
above that which is called God; This God, strong and jealous will put into the
hand of his King his Anointed, and Lieutenant, and of his Officers, means to
bridle this arrogant presumption, and for certainety of this truth I have
adventured to present to your Majesty the text of the Prophet, who foretells
the creation and ruin of this second foolish Shepherd, as Saint Hierome
interprets it, here are the words: I will raise up a Shepherd in the Land,
which shall not look for the sheep that are lost, nor seek the tender
lambs, nor heal them that are hurt, nor bear them that stand still: but
shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear ^^eir claws in pieces. Woe be to
the Idol ^hepeheard, that leaves the flock, the sword is upon his arm (see
here the Temporal sword) and upon his right eye: his arm shall be dried up
for certain, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened. For, if for the
first man's offense in having tasted the forbidden fruit, and believed the
saying of the Serpent, Ye shall be as Gods, Genesis 3.
knowing good and evil; the father of all mercy spared not the innocence of
his dearly beloved son our suerty, but says by the same Prophet, Arise,
Zach. 13.7.
o sword, upon my Shepherd, and upon the man that is my fellow, says the
Lord of Hoasts.

What torments attend the Apostasy of a re-lapsed man without promise of
restoring, which does not simply believe himself to be God, but exalts
himself above all that bear that name! O sword which did not spare the good
Shepeheard for the offenses of others; awake, rise up against the foolish
Shepherd, destroy that man of sin for his own transgression, who in the
Masters absence behaueth himself not as a fellow servant, but as Master;
Math. 24.
to the end that in this last time, as sometime did his predecessor Herod, who
gave not glory to God, when the people cried the voice of God, ctA. 12.12.
and not of men; he may learn to his condemnation, that it is the most High,
Dan. 4.25.
the everlasting God blessed for ever, and none other, bears rule over the
Kingdom of men, and gives it to whom soever he will.

Iuu. 1. Sat. 3.
-- procul ab Jesus
It, quibus grata est picta lupa barbara mitra.

The Conclusion directed by the Author to the French King Lewis the 13.
THE most ancient author of profane History (mighty Sovereign) reports that
Croesus being in danger to be slain in the war, his son, who had till that
time been dumb seeing his father in that estate, cried out, O man kill not
Croesus: which represents unto us the effect of a natural affection, forcing
natures defect, and causing a man discharge the duty by his birth imposed upon
him. Hitherto, though according to my small ability, I have omitted no occasion
by word and deed to testify the service I owe your Majesty; Yet have I ever
remained dumb, not daring to represent unto your Majesty by mouth the true
feeling I have had of my duty: And I should for ever have been silent, had I
not feared to be reputed to give consent to the pernicious effects of a
certain damnable error, Canonized of late; which would still remain under
the ashes of such decrees, if it had not been discovered by some incendiaries
come forth thence, who with the firebrands and bellows of some controversies
in religion, have caused the fires that have since fifty years been seen in
France. And whilst good Frenchmen were busied, wearied, and weakened in
quenching these flames, these men have taken opportunity, and endeavored to
seize upon the State; and done all they could to root out the Royal race, and
to trans-ferre the Crown unto strangers: Unto which not being able to attain
by maine force, having so powerful an enemy as King Henry the great and his
Princes, they have advised themselves of the most unnatural and abominable
means that ever was practiced amongst the most barbarous and Infidel Nations,
having blow upon blow, after infinite attempts, laid violent hands upon the
sons of the most high the Lords annoinced.

These detestable acts make me cry out, O man of sin kill no more our
Kings. If I should be silent I were worthy to be condemned to dye: for if the
subject that hears in words some complot against the safety of his Prince,
makes himself guilty if he declare it not unto him: how could he excuse
himself which by reading of books, and discourse of reason perceives whence
such unnatural attempts do proceed, if he contribute not his speech, his
industry and the peril of his life, to auert and prevent such outrages in time
to come?

But seeing it is lost labor to cry unto this evil spirit; who is not ruled
by the military discipline of Cyrus, to give over the slaughter at the sound of
retraite; I will turn my self to your Majesty, aduising to take heed to your
self; for our our peace depends on yours, we will have no other Temporal
King, but Lewis: suffer him not to publish in your Kingdom, that there is a
power above yours, that your command is limited by the will of a stranger, that
the fidelity of the oath of your subjects may be slacked by his dispensation,
and your life at his word given over to murderous attempts. Use again the
remedies, which your Predecessor Phillip, Lewis, and Henry have done, before
these new garrisons of strangers were brought into the land, who take an oath
of blind obedience to a foreign power out of the Kingdom, a fourth vow
unknown to other orders: who creep in and insinuate themselves with a
wonderful violence into the capital Cities and best families, yea even into
the Metropolitan City of the Realm, who augment and make greater the
presumptuous boldness of them that would precede Princes, be equal with
Parliaments, and despise the function whereunto they are called. Whence comes
it else, that in former ages in the time of Phillip the Fair, and other
succeding Kings, no Frenchman revolted from the obedience of his Prince, for
fear of a frivolous excommunication? and that in this latter age, that
illusion has retained so long time in obstinacy so many peoples? And how is
it, that King Francis the Great, threatened Charles the fifth, with the number
and fidelity of his Scholars? and that in the time of the barricadoes there
was whole companies of them set forth to besiege the King in the Louvre?

And who was it instructed and fashioned Barriere but Varade a Priest of the
new society, ministering to him the holy Communion for salvation? And who was it
but a Scholar of these new Doctors, that thrust his parricide knife into the
mouth of King Henry the Great your father? Yea, who was it murdered him? My
Lord, I cannot hold my peace, I have horror of what is past, and fear yet
more what may come, I will not be a preuaricator in the cause of my King
neither will I live after him. O! it has been, it has been those unclean
Spirits whereof Saint John speaks in his Revelation, Apoc. 16.12. and 9.16.
which repent not of their murders, of their witch-crafts, of their
fornications, nor of their thefts: which work miracles, and go unto the Kings
of the earth, to assemble them to the battle of that great day. etc. These he
terms also Frogs, Amphibia creatures that live as well in water as on land,
in the State and in the Church, and can use both the sword and the pen. These
are they that imprinted in the mind of that monstrous parracide, These
blasphemies are read in the arraignement of Rauillac, and in his confrontation
with D'Aubinie the Jesuit.
that the King intended to make war against the Pope, and that to make war
against him was to make war against God; for says that prodigious murderer;
God is the Pope, and the Pope is God. Further there was found about him a
Character, with a heart of Cotton hung about his neck; he showed to the
Jesuit D'Aubinie, (who confessed him and heard his visions of Hosties) a knife
whereon was graven a Heart and a Cross: and with what sort of me^ were the
prisons filled after this fact, but with such as were infected with heresies
preiudiciable to the State and to the Church? I beseech your Majesty pardon my
zeal grounded upon that I know, as one of your faithful servants; pardon the
just grief of a subject, passioned against the parricide committed on two of
his Kings. Give me leave my Lord to shed true tears for the death of your
Royal Father; suffer me to lament for my Abimelec, Ier. 4.20.
of whom I said in my heart, I will live amidst the nations under his shadow,
under his Edict; by whose benefit seeing I have permission to speak and write
the truth, I have presented it to your own hands, not to renew sorrows
passed, but to prevent them that are to come. For judge (I beseech you) how
much it imports to make apparent unto your Majesty that Popes are not Gods:
that they may err: that they forget themselves against God and the King, to
the end that in discovering the cause of this evil, I may leave unto your
Majesty's wisdom to remedy the same, when time and age shall inuit you
thereto. Mean while, till that time of perfect cure does come, these two
preservatives seem necessary, for the two members, which this disease would
seize on and corrupt; namely Piety, and Justice, the Pillars of State. For to
what end would they cause the prudent Counsel of the Senate to be despised,
but because they think to overthrow the State, after the example of Rehoboams
new Counselors? What arrogant presumption, to censure the Sentences of that
great Senate, Judge of the Empire, and sometime Arbiter of Europe? and to what
other end do they procure, with so great importunity, delays of so holy
judgments? And wherefore else hinder they the en-registring of the decrees of
the Sorbonne, so Canonical? Why do they terrify and amerce the Preachers that
speak the truth? Courage ye good and loyal servants that hide not but use
your Talent; Serve God and the King, Mat. 15.14. Luke 19.
and you shall enter into the joy of your Lord; For my part (which is all I can
do for you) I would engraue you in this memorial, if your modesty did suffer
it, and that the hatred to which I expose my self, were not communicated to
you. For as for us, 2. Tim. 1.7.
God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of strength, and of love, and
of a settled mind.

And if a Soldier for being praised of his Captain, will run against the
points of pikes, cast himself into the trench, and despise the fury of Canons:
what would a Frenchman, Burgess of the capital City do, on so high a stage
of Europe, fighting for the honor of God and the service of his King? Abeant
questus, discede timor, vitae est auidus, quisquis non vult mundo secum
pereunte mori.

Now, my Lord, letting justice be administered, as you do, according to her
ordinary course, your Majesty shall be the better served, and shall not
incur envy in your person, not being of age to employ your private authority,
in giving extraordinary commandments: and the Queen shall ever be better
obeyed, governing herself, as she does, by the ancient Laws of the State and
ordinary course of justice; whereas if she let herself be carried away with
importunities, many inconveniences would ensue. For these men get ground of us,
and go by degrees, having been first refused of all the orders and estates:
after that, received with modification; and now would drive out them that
oppose themselves to their designs. And if for the installing of these new
Doctors, this reason be found good, not to displease him that sends them:
what will not be done upon this ground? must we renounce the most faithful
confederates of France, who have expelled and cast them off, never to receive
them more into their States and Commonwealths? must we renew war, against
them that acknowledge not this new power; and not keep our faith with them any
longer, then it shall please that Spirit of discord? And if it be thought
unfit to bring us to such a misery, wherefore do some counsel to repeal the
causes? Yea rather we should resist the beginning: And because that under
pretense of maintaining Religion, such men slily infect weak souls, with
maxims against the State.

The second remedy is taken from the other pillar of the State, to wit, The
University.
Piety, that must be aided and strengthened in the body of the University,
which is not destitute of learned men, as some calumniate.

This University has been ever called in France, Du Tillet of the liberties of
the Church.
the keeper of the key of Christianity: And it was the same that appealed from
the Bull of Pope Pius the second, and caused their protestations to be
en-registred in the Court of the Chastelet: And Master John de S. Romain, the
Kings Attorney general, did the same actions, as your Majesty sees done by
your Advocate general, Master Sernin, a man both learned, courageous, and
incorruptible in justice, and in the service of his Prince.

Out of this University King Lewis the twelfth took six Doctors for
Counselors of Estate: It was this University that ceased the massaker stirred
up by the Duke of Burgundy, proclaimed through the streets, peace good people,
under the reign of King Charles the sixth. Out of this body were taken the six
Doctors, that decided the question (now again brought to be discussed of in
Court) Whether it be just, to assist the confederates of France, against the
will of the Pope, when Pope Julius excommunicated Alfonsus Duke of Ferrara,
whom King Lewis the twelfth assisted, by the advice of the Gallicane Church,
assembled in Council at Tours, in the month of September, Anno. 1510.

And although King Henry the Great followed only the steps of his
Predecessors, and the decisions of Catholic Doctors, nevertheless we have
perceived with an extreme mischief, the effects of a pernicious doctrine, and
the obstacles they would have brought against the succor promised to the
confederates of the Crown: for remedy whereof, it seems that the exhortation
of the Curates your Majesty's servants, and of the Doctors of Sorbonne, will
be very necessary, together with the writings of the most learned, whom your
Majesty shall please to choose: for although arms be seemly near about your
Majesty; yet is it no less profitable, to prepare the affections of the
subjects in such sort, that arms may be more for ornament, then necessary for
the safety of the Prince: and that such men may be employed herein, as have in
their minds an Antidote against this modern poison. For not only great and
learned Captains, as Alexander, and Caesar, have attained to the Empires of
the world: but also Generals of war have profitably used the Counsel of
learned men, for to execute great designs: To this purpose Pyrrus said, he
wanne more Cities by the industry of his Orator Cineas, Plutar. in Pyrrhus.
then he took by force of arms. Yea a silly Scholar following Regilianus,
profited him to obtain the Empire, by means of his declining Rex Regis,
making allusion to the name of Regilianus: Trebel. Pollio in Regill.
for the Soldiers which were in the Camp, taking that for good presage,
proclaimed him Emperor.

Such men Alphonsus, the Phoenix of the Spanish Kings, used; calling unlearned
Princes, Golden Flecees, and added that the dumb were his best Counselors,
meaning books, that flattered not Kings, but told them the truth: and
reproving the opinion of one of his Predecessors, who thought it unbeseeming a
noble and generous mind, to have learning, says: It was the voice of a brute
beast, rather then a man.

The want of which register, has caused that the most generous actions of our
ancient Gauls, have remained buried in oblivion, or have been much lessened by
the writings of such as envied their greatness. For military actions are
renowned to posterity, according as the pen of hystory has extolled the
same: thus are Achilles and Aeneas made famous by Homer and Virgil, and Caesar
himself by his true testimony. And contrariwise they that have had learning
for adversary, remain in opprobry to posterity.

Thus the injury that the University of the Athenians received by the cruel
imposition of fourteen children, sent to the King of Creta, though otherwise
he were in such reputation of justice, that antiquity made him a Judge in the
Elysium; yet could he not obtain against pen and ink, weak instruments in
appearance, Quaesitor Minos vnam mouet.
but that he was dishonored in his bed, and his children Icarus and
Minotaure: the one an example of vanity, the other a prodigious monster, and
himself taxed in his person, as perishing miserably.

It is a work worthy your Majesty to establish the Kings College, the
building up whereof, God has reserved unto your Majesty, as he did the
building of the Temple to wise Solomon: and doubt not, my Lord, but that there
will be found Regents sufficiently capable, honor nourishes Arts, they have
not hitherto appeared, because the Muses could not be heard during the noise
of the Trumpet, and sound of the Drum. The nurse-children of the Muses, shut
up themselves in the caves of Parnassus, and come not at the Court unless they
be sent for: But, my Lord, seeing it is a matter of peopling a royal
College, there should not be any Doctors not royal, or not for the King, nor
any that have taken oath of blind vow to any out of the Kingdom: for (says
the Gospel) No man can serve two Masters.

And why should the King maintain at his charge, Professors that will corrupt
the syncerity of the affections of his subjects, by the poison of the new
Canons, of which we have quoted some.

By these two means, evermore profitable for the State, the State shall be
preserved, till it please God to increase your Majesty in age, and in all sorts
of Spiritual and Temporal blessings, that you may govern the same in person,
and remove away the cause of this evil, which I hope for (by Gods grace) so
much the more assuredly, as your Majesty is a lively purtraiture of those great
Kings, that have commanded the people of God; succeeding as a young Josias, to a
father murdered by the disloyalty of some of his subjects; as a Solomon to
triumphing David his father; as a Saint Lewis under the Regency of his mother:
God grant that your Majesty may accomplish the posie of King Lewis the twelth
your predecessor, Perdam Babylonis nomen, That is I will destroy the name of
Babylon.
seeing that they now renew the like attempts, as they did then under his
reign. To the end that as the most high Monarch of heaven and earth, would not
employ to such a work, the mighty arm of flesh, Henry the Great your father,
no more then he did that of David, whom he had destinated unto battles; your
Majesty as a Solomon his son, by the works of peace may restore the
Gallicane Church; by the common voice of which, with bended knees, hands lifted
up to heaven, and heart to God, your Majesty hears the like blessing as the
Queen of Sheba gave to Solomon. 2. Chron. 9.8.
Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loved thee, to set thee on his throne as
King, to execute judgment and justice.

And let the Prophesy of Nathan, in the highest heaven, be ratified in your
Majesty: 2. Sam. 7.13.14.
I will stablish the throne of his Kingdom for ever: I will be unto him a
father, and he shall be my son, Amen.

Mart. 9.104.
Prima tuo gerito pro Jove bella puer.
FINIS.

