A Thousand Notable things, of sundry sorts. Whereof some are wonderful, some
strange, some pleasant, diverse necessary, a great sort profitable and many
very precious.

This Book bewrayes that some had rather hide,
which who so buys, their money is not lost:
For many a thing therein, if truly tried,
will gain much more, the^ twenty such will cost.
And diverse else great secrets will detect,
and other more of rare or strange effect.
It is not made to please some one degree,
no, no, nor yet to bring a gain to few:
For each thereby, how rich or poor they be,
may reap much good, and mischiefs great eschew.
The pains and travel hethertoo is mine:
the gain and pleasure hence forth will be thine.
Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, for Hughe Spooner, dwelling in
Lumbardstreete at the sign of the Cradle.

To the Right Honorable, virtuous and affable Lady Margaret Countess of Darby.
AS I have taken some pains and travel (Right Honorable) to pleasure and
profit many, by the publishing such rare, straung and excellent things, as
many could have been content to hide and keep secret: Even so I have been
careful, to dedicate the same to some worthy and meet Personage, that would
take the same th^^kfullye, peruse the same willingly, and embrace it
accordingly. And though I am acquainted with some, know diverse, and hear of
many, to whom I might well and worthily present the same: yet amongst all
other, I have chosen your good Ladishippe of goodwill and zeal (pardon my rude
rashness I beseech you) to have the first smell of these sweet, pleasant,
straung, beautiful and precious Flowers, not growing in one Garden: but in
sundry Soyles, not quickly found, but long agathering, and not all of one
property, but of diverse quallities. Whose Affabillitie has allurde me: whose
Courtesy has compelde me, and whose Fame has inforst me, thus boldly or
rather presumptuously to offer you the same. And though at the first it may
seem too simple for you, yet I am certain, that diverse things therein will
delight you, some will also satisfy you, part thereof will peasure you, sundry
from harms may shield you, plenty of them may preserve you, and a number
besides needful for you. Beseeching your Honor not to respect the Geuer, but
the Gift: not the Man, but the Matter: not the Skill, but the Will. Which if
you accept as willinglye, as I offerre faithfully: I shall think my long
pains and travel therein fully recompenst. Thus ceasing herein any further to
trouble your Honor, do commit you to the custody of him, whose wisdom first
framd us, whose favor does feed us, whose might does maintain us, whose
goodness does guide us, and whose power does protect us.

Your Honorable L. most humble to command Thomas Lupton.

The Preface of the Author to the Reader.
IF some think no shame to displeasure many, for the pleasuring of a few
(gentle Reader) then I need not blush nor fear to profit many by hurting of
none: Which I hope I have done by the publishing of this my Book abroad, not
pend without pain, nor drawn without diligence, not ended with ease. Wherein
are such and so many notable, rare, pleasant, profitable and precious things
(meaning one with an other) as never were yet set forth in any volume in our
vulgar or English tongue, nay diverse of of them were never hitherto printed,
nor written, that ever I knew: but only that I writ them at such time as I
heard them credibly reported. Thinking them such rare things, as was worthy
to be regestred. Marry I must confess, I have selected and pycked a great
sort out of Latin Writers, the Authors or Writers whereof, I have named most
commonly at the end of the same. And some notable and precious things I
gathered out of some old English written books, and some also not long since
printed, unworthy to be hyd, and great pity but they should be known: which
purposesly I have placed herein, whereby I think verelye, many will read
them, hear them and have profit by them, that otherwise should never have
known them. For many (I suppose) will buy this Book for things whereto they
are affectioned, that never could or would have bought, or looked on the
books, wherein all they are. So that by this means, they are like to win
against their wills. Perhaps you will meruell, that I have not placed them
in better order, and that things of like matter are not ioygned together.
Truly there are so many of so diverse and sundry sorts and contrary effects,
that it could not be altogether observed. And in my judgment through the
strangeness and variety of matter, it will be more desirously and
delightfully read: knowing we are made of such a moulde, that delicate
Daintiness delights us much: but we loathe to be fed too long with one
food: And that long wandering in strange, peasant and contrary places, will
less weary us, then short travel in often trodden ground.

This work might have been framed with finer Phrases (more dilectable to
some, though not so meet for many) but that it is better to profit a great
sort, then to feed the fancies of a few, well assured, that the learned and
eloquent can better perceive plain speeches: then the slenderlye learned and
common sort can understand eloquent Discourses. Therefore as I have written it
to all indifferently, so wish I to manifest the meaning thereof accordingly:
especially of such as are to be conceived. Not ignorant, that there are
diuierse and sundry Astrologicall Aphorisms, and some other practices besides
in this book, that many both wise, learned and eloquent, cannot attain to the
understanding thereof, (much less the common sort:) the meaning whereof I
commit to the learned therein. But because the Planeticall power and effect in
their hours, (whereof I have noted some marvelous matters in this woork)
should not be hid or unknown, I hope shortly there will be set forth such a
Rule or Platform, that they may be thought simple witted, or slenderly
learned, that thereby cannot find out and know quickly, what hour or time any
planet does reign or bear rule, and at what instant the same begins, and how
long the force thereof does last: which once known, the things that I have
written herein concerning the same (well marked and observed) will not only
avoid much mischief and harm: but also will procure great pleasure and
profit. Untyll the publishing whereof, I refer you to a little Book,
entitled or called, A brief Treatise concerning many proper Tables etc.
Wherein is the Computacion of years with the reigns of the Kings of England:
in which little Book, is a brief and exact Table and Rule, whereby any may
find justly and truly, when and how long any Planet does reign, especially
such as be of good capacity and have pregnant wits. As for the duller sort,
I think it is too brief and too busy.

I have divided this into ten books, every one whereof, contains a hundredth of
the entitled Notable things: which are in all a thousand. Wishing that they
may be accepted as thankfully and willingly, as I have bestowed them friendly
and freely. Being bold to affirm this much, that a great deal of gold
cannot counteruaile this Gift: if but some twenty of the said thousand, be
dilligently marked, faythfullye followed, and perfectlye practiced. And thus in
few words, I bid you farewell.

Thomas Lupton.

The first Book of Notable things.
IN the first beginning hereof, a rare and strange matter shall appear, worthy
to be marked, especially of such as loves or use Sage. A certain man being in
a Garden with his Lover, did take (as he was walking) a few leaves of Sage, who
rubbing his teeth and gums therewith, immediately fell down and dyed: whereupon
his said Lover being examined how he dyed, she said: she knew nothing that he
ayled, but that he rubbed his teeth with Sage: and she went with the Judge and
other into the same Garden and place, where the same thing happened: and then she
took of the said Sage to show them how he did, and likewise rubbed her teeth
and gums therewith, and presently she dyed also, to the great maruayle of all
them that stood by: whereupon the Judge suspecting the cause of their deaths
to be in the Sage, caused the said bed of Sage to be plucked and dug up,
and to be burned, least other might have the like harm thereby. And at the
roots, or under the said Sage, there was a great Tode found, which had
infected the same Sage with his venomous breath. Anthonius Myzaldus has
written of this marvelous matter. This may be a warning to such as rashly use
to eat raw and unwashed Sage: Therefore it is good to plant Rue round about
Sage, for Todes by no means will come nigh unto Rue, (as it is thought of some.)

A Certain Poet by the report of Mizaldus, did wear leaden Soles under his
shoes, least the wind should ouerblow him, his body was so light and so little.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus wrytes of the experyment of a certain Spaniarde.





WHen Unfortunate Planets be in Angles, and the Sun or Moon applies unto
them corporallye, or by opposition, it sygnifyes that the party then borne
will be either croackbackt, or will halte, or it sygnifyes the destruction or
loss of some member, especially: if the Moon be with the Dragons tail in
these signs, Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Scorpius, or Capricornus, or in the
beginning or end of the Sign. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.



ANthonius Beneuenius an excellent Phisytion, does glory, that he with the
water wherein

Myzaldus wrytes this of the report of an Englysh man.

Iacobus Hollerius.

Leuinius Lemnius by Mizaldus report.

Saturn: Saturn then being under the beams of the Sun combust. Likewise if
the syxt house, and the Lord thereof be unfortunate of Saturn without the
aspect of a good planet. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.



Hebenus, especially such as be hard, as Box and Pear tree and such like, do
as follows: lay the wood you mean to color in Allam water, so that it be
covered with the laid water, and let it rest so three days: then lay the
said wood against the hot Sun, or the fire, that it may only wax warm:
then seethe the same wood in common oil, wherein put as much of Uytryol Roman,
and Brimstone, as a Hasel nutte, let it be dyssolued, the longer you sees it,
the blacker the wood will be, so that you keep a measure therein, and it will be
fair and elegant. Mizaldus had this of an Italian, a professor of many
experimentes.

Mizaldus had this of one that proved it, and I also have tried it to be
excellent.

Mizaldus writes it upon the report of an Italian. Alexis also affirms it.

A Barren Uine will bear grapes, if you cast old and sour urine thereon, or
if you bury the leefe of Wine at the roots thereof: but you must take heed
that you cast not soot that is swept from chymneys, or Lyme, to the root of
the said barren Uine, which with their burning heat kyls the Uine, and makes
the same to wyther before his time. Mizaldus.



Xenophon is the author, and Myzaldus the reporter thereof.

Leuinus Leminus. But the whelpe ought to be cut out, or cloven in two parts
through the myds of the back: and the one half with the inner side hot, to be
laid unto ye grieved place: and this I know to be an excellent thing.

Castorum, Galbanu^, Sagapenu^, Brimstone, (all which are to be had at the
Apothecaries) the smoke of burned Lether, and of Horns, and especially the
smell of Gonpowder. For says Lemnius, the whole City of Tornace enfected with
the plague, the Rulars of the Tower or Castle there, caused their Gons to be
laid and leuelled at the City charged with Gunpowder, without pellets or
shot: and then morning and evening in the twye light, they shot of the
laid peeses or Gons, so that through the stynking smell of the said smoke* and
the great and violent noise of the Gons, the infectious and contagious air was
quite put away, and the City delivered from the plague.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Mizal.

Gilbertus Anglicus.

A Certain Citizen of Padua, having Cautharides, that is to say: French
Flees, applied to one of his knees, did pysse above five ounces of blood, the
like happened to one, to whose great toe of the foot, the same was applied.
Bartholomeus Montegnanus, a notable Phisitio^ affirms this: therefore
Cautharides is perilous to be taken both inward and outward.

Mizaldus writes.



Mizaldus.

Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.



Hippocrates.

Mizaldus.

Plynie reports.



A Robbyn read breast, fynding the dead body of a Man or Woman, will cover the
face of the same with Moss. And as some holds opinion, he will cover also the
whole body.

Iacobus Hollerius a learned Physician, affirms it for truth. Take heed
therefore ye smellers of Basyll.



A Flayne Mouse roasted, or made in powder, and drunk at one time, does
perfectly help such as can not hold or keep their water: especially, if it
be used three days in this order. This is very true and often proved.



Mathias Cornace, an excellent Physician.

Saturn, the third face of Aquary then asce^ding or rising with Saturn, and
for the Gowte, the Seal of Pisces, and also for the helping or bettering of
memory, they made a Ring of pure gold: wherein was closed a Diamonde, under
the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Aries. Hermes.

EGidius Herthoge wrytes a strange marvel of a woman which carried a dead
child in her womb thirtene years, which was perceived of many, that handled
her bellye: but he wrytes not what success she had therewith, for whiles he
wrote the same, the woman was well, and did her busynes with her husband
abroad and also at home.

Myzaldus.

Columella reports this as Mizaldus affirms.

Vuula, or the flap in the throat. M. Cato by the report of Mizaldus.

it after it have leyne therein a whole day, and the same juice then given to
one that is sick of ye plague, with a little Wine, and the powder of the root
of Angelica, or of the decoction of the same root: it is maruayle to be told
what help it bringes them, yea, though they be past all hope, or thought past
recovery. This Mizaldus wrytes as proved.



A Little baye Salt stamped small, myxt with the yolke of an egg and applied to
a Fellon, and so used diverse times, does not only perfectly heal the same
with speed: but also draws out all the pain out of the arm and ceases the
swelling thereof, if any such be by the means of the same. This is perfectly
proved.

Helides, which did begette a Daughter of an Ethiopian, which Daughter was not
of the color of her Mother: but after, the said Daughter had a Son, which
was black and like to his grandmother. So Niceus the Poet did degenerate in
color from his Father and his Mother, and was like his grandfather being an
Ethyopian. Which thing ought well to be considered of such that suspectes their
Wives when they bring forth children unlike to either of them: for it happens
many times that the child is like to the Grandfather, or great Grandfather,
and neither like the father nor mother. Mizaldus.

A Tode stone (called Crapandina) touching any part be venomed, hurt or stung
with Ratte, Spider, Waspe, or any other venomous Beast, ceases the pain or
swelling thereof. Lemnius.



Mizaldus.

Galbanum made sofe, and shall lay it to the mouth of the Matrix all a night,
(the head of that woman) having then no foul nor stinking clothes upon it:
but only covered with a Caul, and a clean or thyn Keyrchyffe, without any
kind of Odors) in the morning when the same are losed from her head, if the
crown of her head smell of Galbanum, it is a sure token that, that woman is
apt to have children. Hyppocrates.

Hematist, wherein a man is graven with bended knees, gyrded about with a
Serpent, holding the Serpents head in his right hand, and his tail in the
left hand: be set in a gold ryng with one leaf of an herb called Draggons
put under the said stone, it does make the bearer thereof safe from all poison
and plague. Hollerius a notable Physician wrytes it.

Mizaldus.

Gallenus et Plin.

John Baptist: there is found under the root of Mugwoort a cole, which
preserues or keeps them safe from Plague, the Carbuncle, lightning, the
Quarteyn ague, and from burning, that bears the same upon them. And Mizaldus,
the writer hereof says, that he does hear that it is to be found the same
day under the root of Planten. Which I know to be of a truth, for I have
found them the same day under the root of Pla^ten. Which is especially and
chiefly to be found and had, at noone.

for the feeding of Beasts, and if you shall let a handful or two thereof
styepe a while in rain water, and therewith wash your hands, it will not only
amend the spots or other deformity of the skin: but also you shall thereby
perceive that the same and other members, if they be likewise washed therewith,
will be made much fayrer and more clean. Mizaldus says that this is proved.

Mizaldus affirms this.



with the powder of Lyqueris and of white Sugar candy, if it be oftentimes used
and eaten a spoonefull at one time. Which I have often proved.

Sciatica, or pains in ye joints, in whose Nativity Saturn or Mars is in the
syxt house, or in the twelfth house infortunating the Lord of the sixth house.
Especially, if the sign of the sixth house be Capricorn, Aquari, or Pisces.
Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

Georg. Fabricius.

Consummatu^ est. A thing proved with many. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Squynancie, (which is a pain or swelling in the throat,) if the grieved
place be touched with the end of a fether or pen, smeared with the same
mixture. Mizald.

on the arters, does mytigate and amend the feuerly heat of the heart.
Auicenna. et Arnold. de Villa noua.

Plynius.

A Medicine made of a little honey and of a cole made of a Uine, which never bare
grapes. If the teeth be often rubbed therewith, does so cleanse them, and makes
them so white, that they will be judged to be of Iuory. Mizaldus.

Myzaldus had this of a certain Italyan.

CAutharides wrapped in a spyders web, and hanged over one that has the
Quarteyn ague, it is said it cures or delyuers him or her thereof perfectly.
Mizaldus.



A Plaster made of ye powder of burned Swalowes and of their nest: does help
effectually the swelling of the throat or the Sqinancie.

bar^y corns) be given to a woman in a draught of wine: it will make her loath
to have to do with a man. (As Basis wrytes.) And the same powder given in
meet medicines to a man, does contrary stir and make him have lust therein.
Marcellus Empericus.

Cardanus.

Mizaldus had this out of an old written book.



Hermes, to be the herb of Mars, and therefore good against the diseases and
pains of the head: because that ye sign Aries which is one of the houses of
Mars, does govern the head. And also Planten is very good against the grief
and diseases of the stones, and the Ulcers of the bladder: and also Gonorrha
passio, and Hemerods, because Scorpio the other house of Mars, does rule that
part of the body. Like judgment may be had of other herbs of the planets.
Myzaldus.

Mizaldus.

Guilel. Varignana, and Arnoldus de villa noua affyrmes the same.



A Candle burning, holden or put to a hole or place wherein a piece of
Saltpeter is put, the said Candle will soddenly be blown out. And the same
Candle immediately put to another place wherein is Brimstone, will be light and
burn again, to the great maruayle of them that stands by, if they be
ignorant of the secret. Mizaldus. But the snuff of the Candle must not be
clean out.

that write what you list on the same paper, and then cast the same writing
into the fire, and you shall see it leap out of the fire without burning. This
Mizaldus had out of an old book.





A Little piece of the tongue of a Fox, being moystned and made soft in
vinegar, (if it be dry) draws out a thorn or any other thing deep in the
flesh, if it be laid upon the place where it is. It is an excellent and true
thing.

Libra, and Mars in the same house: it sygnifies grief and pains of the eyes.
Iatromathematica. Guat. Ryff.

IVlius Vyator a Knight of Rome, ( Plynie being the Author) who in his
chyldhoode had the Dropsy, therefore then forbidden of the Phisicions to use
moist things: did so overcome Nature through continuance or long use, that
all the time of his life after he lived without drinking of any thing.

Mizaldus also affyrmes it.

Mizaldus.

Lemnius.

mending of their sight. So Goats by a certain property of Nature, do hate
or can not abide man's spytle, nor they will eat any thing whereof man has first
tasted. But the nature of Lyserdes is contrary: for they lycke up the same
greedily. Plynius. Theophrast.

ANnyball, made a passage for him and his Soldiers through the hard rocks of
the Alps to pass into Italy. For by heating and burning the stones with fire,
and sprinckling vinegar thereon, he made them so soft, that they might fall
easily in pieces, and that they might be sooner broken a sunder. Titus Liuius.
Plutarchus, with other reports it.

Olybanum, which is a kind of Fra^kencense, of all a like quantity: let them
be stamped and mixed with the whytes of eggs, then (the wou^d being first
washed, and the lyppes thereof well joined together) lay the same mixture on a
lynnen cloth, and apply it to the wound, and tie the same fast on with
clothes, or broad bands: and let it lie so certain days unremoved. A
marvelous thing, and proved says Mizaldus.

Florentinus has taught: if warely and dilygently you open the clyfts of the
roots, and fill the same with any read color: and so then set the same in a
fat du^ged earth. Mizaldus.

Rasis writes this.

Neopolytane disease (commonly called the French pocks) if he hold in his mouth
a Ryng of gold, or else an other piece of gold, and rowles the same about in
his mouth with his tongue, the quicksyluer that is in his body by the means of
the ointment, is drawn of ye said gold, and is so wrapped about the said Ryng,
or gold: that when the same is taken out of his mouth, it shall seem as
though it were all Silver. And the same Ring or other gold will not be
restored to his former brightness or color, except it be put into the fire.
Lemnius wrytes this.

Jacob. Hollerius.

FINIS. Lib. 1.
The second Book of Notable things.
WHen the Moon is in conjunction with the Sun, or in any evil aspecte with
him, and in any Angle, and beholden of evil planets with an evil aspect, in
any bodies Nativity. It sygnifies that the Child that is then borne, shall
have inseparable diseases, or griefs in the eyes. Iatromath. Guat. H. Ryff.
Argent.

Mizaldus.

ERastratus a Physician, did perceive by ye feeling of the pulse, that
Antiochus the son of king Seleucus, did so pyne for the love of Stratonices,
his mother in law, that unless he might have his desire, with the good will
or pardon of his Father, he would dye. These are Authors thereof. Valerius
Maximus, and Galenus. Which also by the like, did know that Iusta the Wife of
Boethius, a councellor of Rome, did languish for the love of one Pilas daunsing
in the Theater. Mizaldus.

CElendine with the heart of a Wont, or a Mouldwarpe, laid under the head of
one that is grieuouslye sick, if he be in danger of death. Immediately he will
cry with a loud voice, or sing: if not, he will weep. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Hermes. Trismegistus. Ptolomeus, and Claudius Galenus. Authors.

Mizaldus.

A Flynt stone lying in Uineger the space of seven days: may be resolved into
powder by rubbing between the fyngers. Therefore it is no maruayle though
Annybal did dissolve the stones of the Alps with vinegar. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Sciatica. It is said, that (it helps marvelously) because this herb
belonges to Jupiter, which is only Lord of Sagitarie, which gouernes the
huckle bone. And of Pisces which chal^ngeth the feet. Mizaldus had this out of
an old book of secreetes.



Myzaldus. As thus for example (I may say by ye way.) He yt is apt to Martial
feats, or Warlyke affairs, has undoubtedly Mars strong in his birth. And
whosoever is apt or inclined to planting, drawing, writing, syphering, or to
the science of Arithmatike, or to any wyttie or notable inuencions, without all
doubt has Mercury very strong in his birth. Which by daily proof is
infallyble. And so you may know of the rest.

Mizaldus.

Actius does say.

Mars and Saturn are in the sixth house, or in the twelfth house, infortunating
the Moon, or the Lord of the Ascendent. Especially if the sign of the syxt
house be Cancer. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

with other nine Snayles, and do as before is declared in all points. I had
this out of an old Book wherein was many excellent Secrets, and I heard one
affirm it to be a true and tried thing.

Cardanus.



Mizaldus, in a plate of brass or copper, or of Tyn, make the image of a Fly,
of a Spyder, and of a Serpent, the second face of Pisces then ascending. And
whiles you are making or grauing of them, say: This is the Image which does
clean ryd all Flies for ever. Then bury the same in the myds of the house, or
hang it in any place of the house, (but if thou have four such plates, and
bury or hang them in four corners of the house, or hyde them within the
walls, that no body take them away, it were far better.) But this laying of
them must be when the first face of Taurus does asce^d. And so no Fly will come
in there, nor tarry there. Ptolomie says, that he saw the trial hereof in the
house of King Adebarus: who was very wise, and was marvelous expert in
natural Magic, in whose Palace or Place, there was neither Fly, nor any
other hurting worm. and that I might search it out, says he: I brought in
thither live Flies, which presently dyed. Mizaldus.



Gemini, dyed without any remedy thereof. And I knew a tall man and a stowt,
that in fighting had a little cut with a sword under the ancle: (as it seemd
to me, seeing the same, a thing of small harm:) yet notwithstanding, he dyed
within half an hour after the stroke was given. This may be verified by many
examples. So that by this, and by many other things it is manifest that the
Moon and other Celestial bodies, have marvelous power in our earthly bodies.
As in this book and in diverse and many places, the same is manifest.

on whose body the same did chance,) wipe with her hand suddenly the part or
member therewith touched, and lay her said hand on some other part further
of. Lemnius. There are few women but knows this to be true, and many have
found it to true. As two or three strange examples in this book does show
most wonderfully.



Theophrastus. But Plynie does ascribe it to the Ash tree. But the lykelyhood
and neerenes of the words might deceive him. For the Ash tree in the Greek
tongue is, Milean, and the Ywe tree is Milon. Mizaldus.

A Marvelous matter, and a thing worthy to be remembered, is written by Aelinus:
that a great mighty Woolfe did come to a school, and did snatche the writing
Tables out of the hands of a Boy called Gelon of Syracusa. Whereat the said
child Gelon rising from his seat, did dillygently and sharply without any
fear follow the said wild Beast earnestly to pluck the said Tables from
his mouth. But after that Gelon was out of ye school, the same with a sudden
ruin fell upon ye rest of the schoollers, and killed, and oppressed with the
Schoolmaster, above a hundredth Boys. Only Gelon by Gods providence of all his
fellows remaining alive. And because he was not killed of the Woolfe, but
rather reserved: it cannot be without great admiration, partly by foreshewing
his kingdom and rule, and partly that he was preserved from so imminent a
peril.

Mizaldus.

Leo, the Lion is governor, which is the house of the Sun. And it is very
good against ye great griefs of the back, the Stone and the Collicke, by
drinking of it, or by infection. It was affyrmed to Mizaldus, that it was
found true by experience.

Albertus.

tolerable. Whereupon it is seen that they that eats much, do loose or
vnbutton their dublettes, and loose their garters. Phauorinus.

Pyrhus to return and go backwarde. And so the Romans obtained a worthy
victory. Mizaldus.



A Certain Priest having a loving Dog, was killed for his money, and thrown
among bushes Whereupon being suspected, he was examined, who forthwith
confessed his wicked fact: and therefore was executed. Saint Austine affyrmes
this (as I do remember.)

Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.



Columella.

among all the rest (which was credibly told me) was marvelous strange, and
almost incredible. Which was: that two men lying in bed together, the one of
them being fast a sleep, took the keys and unlocked the doors and the gate
of the house, and so took his Bow and Arrows, and went to a wood or chase
above a mile from thence, and killed a Bucke or a Do, and then did cover and
hyde the same in the wood: and then came home again vnlocking and locking the
gates and doors again, and laid the keys where he had them, and so went to
bed. The other man that lay with him being awake, followed him and did see all
that he did. But he would not go to bed, but stayde a while in another place,
to see the end thereof. And as soon as the other was in his bed, he took
his dagger, stabbing and thrusting therewith in the bed, where the other man
did lie, and by and by after awaking, said: alas what have I done, I have
killed him. The other answered, nay, I am not killed yet, thanks be to God.
Then said he: for I was a dreamed that I killed a Bucke in such a place, and
that thou did see me where I did kyl him, and hyd him: and thinking thou would
bewray me, I thought to kill thee. But I am glad said he, that it was but a
dream. Then the other said: if it were a Dream, thy Dream is then true. For
thou have performed all the Dream: except the kylling of me. Which he would
not believe until the next day: when, he that lay with him, carried him to the
place where he him self told that he did hyde the said Bucke. Where in deed
they found the Bucke killed, as he before told in his Dream. A marvelous
matter if it were true.

Austine say: who gave chafe such a cold strength to keep and preserve
snow, or such a hot strength, to heat and rypen unripe Aples.

Mizaldus.

Jupiter is Lord of the sixth house, being evil aspected of an Unfortunate
planet. Iatromath.



Mizaldus had of a Physician that was cunning in that art.

STinking and corrupt Wine will be marueylouslie mended, if according to the
bygnes of the vessel, a Pistorius.

Mizaldus.

Varro. The same will happen, if you do styepe seeds three days in sweet
smelling water. Mizaldus.



Columella.

GAlene says, that he knew certain men in his time* yt gave the powder of man's
bones burned, to them that had the falling sycknesse: they not knowing of it,
least their mind should stand against the medicine, and many was cured with
the same. Gesuerus has proved it with the scull.





AEtites, called the Eagles stone, tied to the left arm or side: it bringes
this benefit to Women with child, that they shall not be delivered before
their time. Besides that, it bringes love between the man and the wife. And if
a woman hane a painful travail in the birth of her child, this Stone tied
to her thygh, bringes an easy and light birth: but you must take it away
quickly after the birth. The same Stone as the Caldeans reports, if it be
mixed with meats enuenomed: it forbids or lets that the same meat be swalowed
down. Euax. et Alb.

Astomores (as Plynie reports) have no mouth: and are clad with a woolly moss
growing in India, and lives only with smelling of Odours at their nose, of
Roots* and of Flowers, and of Aples that grows in the woods: which they
carry with them in their long iourneys to sustain and nourish them withal,
least they should want whereof to smell.



Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

THree Nails made in the vigyll of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, called
Midsomer Eve, and Mizaldus wrytes of the report of one that proved it.

Mizaldus.

and an unhoped help. Which is Venus herb, that has power of the neck:
because of Taurus the Bull, being her house. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus cum alijs.

Plynie says: that the linell of Crabbes will kill Bees, especially: if one
seethe them nigh unto their Hiues. For they abhor stinking smells. Therefore
they follow them fiercely that smelles of stynking oyntmentes.



same may be made in powder, and some of the same given with Pepper and Myrre,
to them that are tormented with the Colic, in good wine: it will help them
marvelously of the same disease. Scribonius Largus.



Saturn. Or if the Lord of the Ascendent be Unfortunate in the seventh house:
or if Saturn be Lord of the Ascendent, and Unfortunate of Mars: or if Saturn
be Unfortunate by any means under the earth. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

Mizaldus.

Alphons King of Castile, gave to certain Mathematicians a hundredth thousand
pieces of gold: which were called or sent for out of Araby, Affricke, and
other places for the making and framing of the Astronomical Tables (which
shows the continual course and place of the Stars and Planets) which work
is to be had every where through his great lyberality, to his perpetual praise.

GAlbanum made softer, and spread upon a lynnen cloth, and so applied and
laid upon a plague sore: if the disease be curable, it will so stick and
cleave to ye same, that it cannot be plucked away: unless it bring away the
root of the sore with it. But if the disease be incurable, it will cleave to
it. Arnold. de villa noua.

Actius, and Paulus Egeneta. Mizaldus.



AElianus wrytes, that the quylles or pens of an Eagle, myxt with the quylles
or pens of other fowls or birds, does consume or waste them with their
odor, smell or air.



Mizaldus had this as proved, of one of the King of Nauarres stable.

Johan. Baptista porta, de Magia Naturali. As Mizaldus wrytes.

Lemnius.

Plinius, as Mizaldus affyrmes.

Mizaldus had this of a cunning Goldsmith.

A Green Jasper stone hanged at ye neck, does help and strengthen the
stomach, and the mouth of the stomach very well. Which Galen affirms by ye
report of Mizaldus. If they behangd like a cheyne about the neck: so that the
same stones do touch the mouth of the stomach.

Rasis et Albertus.

Mars or Saturn, or is Unfortunate by them. And like wise if Venus be the Lady
of the sixth house, and Unfortunate in a fiery sign. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.



A Precious and a proved medicine for the Stone. Seethe in white wine, Time and
Parcely very well, then streyne it, and into a good draught thereof, shave a
spoonefull of white soap, and give it to them that are grieved with the Stone:
and it will make them make water with speed.

Mizaldus.

Austria, that if they did set ye sides of their bodies toward gates or doors
that were locked, the locks would then open. Johannes Langius.

CArduus benedictus stamped, and then well sodden with snet or Swynes grease,
wine and wheat Arnoldus.

SAint Austine reports that he did hear whiles he traveled in Italy, that
certain women was transformed into young Beasts of certain trauellors, by the
the eating of cheese, that they might carry their burdens.

Mizaldus.

Plinius, et Lemnius.

Mizaldus.

Arnoldus de villa nou^.

Baldus of Trydent, Doctor of both Laws, as he was playing with a little
Whelpe of his own, the same did byte him a little in the nether lyp, who being
ignorant that his said Dog was infect with madness: he himself within
four months after, became mad, and at the last being past remedy did dye
miserably. Andreas Matheolus, in diascoridem. Which let them mark and consider
that have such pleasure in little Puppyts. Mizaldus.

Whosoever is tormented with the Sciatica, or the gowte: Let them take an herb
called Speregrasse

BOetins after Oppianum does affirm, that Belles covered with the skin of a
Woolfe, do drownde the sound of other Belles that are covered with the skin
of a Lamb.

the fire, as though they should come to help their poor imprisoned friends
or neighbors. The cause whereof Mizaldus ascribes to the smoke of the Ash
wood.

M. Varro, and Cato.

Haly Abenragel.







Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.



FINIS. Lib. 2.
The third Book of Notable things.
Five Eggs laid in the evening, in strong and tarte Uineger, and taken out of
the same the next morning: so that you perceive their shells therewith to be
something sost, else let them lie longer therein: and then put or thrust them
down into the throat of a Horse that has the coughe, his tongue being
holden all that while out of his mouth: will help him perfectly of the same.

Aristot.

the Cuspe of the seventh house, to the beginning of the fowrth house, is for
the West part: and from the Cuspe, or beginning of the fowrth house, to the
Cuspe of the Ascendent, is for the North part. Haly Abenragel. And as these
quarters and parts are good to remove unto, where the good Planets are placed:
even so those quarters where evil Planets are placed, are evil to dwell in.

A Certain woman, a Florentine, was so pulled and gryped in her stomach with
such torments, that no Physicians could help: which woman of a sudden, did
vomytte long and crooked nails, needles of brass, with wax, and lumpes of
heair: and at last she avoided out of her mouth, a great fleshie piece, such a
one as a Gyaunt could not swalowe. The Author hereof is Beniuenius de
admirandis morborum causis. But he says, that the said woman was possessed of
a wicked spyrite. Mizaldus. (Which I believe was done by the devil.)

PLynie reports, that men in ancient time, did fasten upon the gates of their
Towns, the heads

A Mowle or a Wont enclosed in an earthen pot: If you set then the powder of
Brymstone on fire, Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Aphor. Hippocr.





THe white of an egg wall be^ten and mixed with the powder of Masticke, helps
chapt hands: if

Herba clauorum, the herb of nails. Mizaldus.

Seruius.

GAlen says, that he has found by experiences, (following the opinions of
many) when any shall Johannes. Taysnier.



GAniuetus says, that in the year of our Lord. 1418 the.xxiiii. day of
August, before four a clock at after noone, in the hour of Saturn: A
certain priest called Johannes Morterius* did ask him for a certain brother
of his, which was sick: what should be the end of his disease, death or
health? Who after he had erected the celestial fyg^re therefore, espying Mars
within one degree of the Ascendent in a moveable sign, beholding also the
part fortune of a quartyle aspect, with diverse other testymonies and evil
signs. And also Mercury being the Lord of the house of the Moon, in the
eight house, both Retrograde and Combust. Iudgde that the party would be
mad, and so dye within a day after: which the messenger did declare unto his
friends, and to the Master of him that was sick, being his brother. Which
happened so. For about four of the clock the next morning, he was so
frantic, that he had like to have killed his Master and others. But they
were preserved through Gods special gift. And after being close in a chamber,
did break a post, and so cast him self headlong down, and dyed.





Simeon Sethi.

Rasis.

ALbertus makes mention of a Well, that whatsoever is thrown into the same: is
turned into a Frederick the first, who: because he would not be deceived, he
threw into the same one of his gloves, whereto first: he put wax and sealed it
with his own Ring, and the one half of the glove which was under the water,
became stone: the other part above the water remained as it was before.

Haly Abenragel. Which is true, so that the party does go to his Wife, or to
his enemy, or to any other common person, But according to Guido Bonatus: if
he go to a king, or to his master: then you must take the tenth house, and the
Lord thereof: if to a Priest, a Prelate, or a Bishop: then you must consider
of the ninth house, as Haly byddes you. Do by the seventh house: if to your
son or daughter, then the first house: if to your Father, the fowrth house:
if to your brother, then you must judge as before, by the third house. And so
of the rest, according to ye significations of every house. Wherefore the
learned in Astrology are not ignorant: and this is a very true rule
thoroughly* and many times observed. And if the Lord of the seventh house, or
the house, that the party travels unto, does signify, be in a Cadent house:
then the party is far from home, so that he is not like to speak with him.

Rasis, et Albertus. And other.

Lang.

Cardanus.

TYberius Caesar, (who was Emperor of Rome when Christ suffered,) when he
awaked out of sleep: did see in the dark as Cats do. Suetonius.

Antidote King Mithridates had used so much, that when he drunk poison
purposely to kill him self: it could not hurt him. Plynius.

Mizaldus.

Gellius, and Plynie has left it wytnessed by Mutianus that was thryse
Consul, as also Plutarch: that an Elephant did write the Greek Letters. And
Aelianus says, that an Elepha^t did write all the Latten Letters in order,
with other things incredible*

Petrus Hispanus.

A Most notable and proved Water, to claryfie the dymnes of the eyes, or sight,
does follow. Take the juice of Fennel, of Celendyne, of Rewe, and of
Eybright, of each two ounces: Honny one ounce and a half, Aloes, Tutie, and
Sarcacol, of each half an ounce: the gall of a Capon, Chickin, or Cock, two
drams: Nutmegs, Cloves, and Saffern, of each one dram, Sugar candy, six
drams: Put all into a Lymbeck of glass, and dystyll it: and put of this water
into your eyes once in the day, two or three drops at a time: And there can not
be a more precious thing for the eyes then this. I know it by proof, and
therefore I am the bolder both to praise it, and publysh it abroad to the
great comfort of other.

Augustus Caesar, (as Gellius reports) was marvelous glad, that he had
escaped that year of his age. The cause may be, that the seventh year, and
the nynthe year (being Anni climacterici et critici, which are Judicial
years) multyplyed together: makes the said number of.63. This Mizaldus
describes.



Venus is impedite or Unfortunate of Saturn: Are like to have pains or
griefs in their stones, especially, if she be in the Ascendent. And likewise,
if Venus be with Mars in the eight house: or if the Moon Venus and Mars be
coniunct, or in the evil aspect of Saturn. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.



Mars in the Horoscope, or the Ascendent, at the time of his birth: certainly,
he will have a special scarre or mark in his face. Pro. Which I have tried in
many, and yet never have found it false.

Plynius, Aelianus et alij.

Didimus does say.)

Rasis et Alb.

Aphor. Hippocratis.



Plynie by Mizaldus report. And I know that it has been proved true.

TO make the counterfeat Mandrag, which has been sold by deceyuers, for much
money: Do thus Mizaldus. Another trym way for the like, is in the natural and
artificial conclusions, Englished by Thomas Hill.

Mizaldus.

Five leaued grass, through Jupiters force, does resyst venym or poison.
Whereof, if one leaf twyse Marcilius Ficinus.

Ascendent and the Moon, be in the fowrth or eight house, Combust or Cadent,
or conuinct with ye Lord of the eight house: they give a certain testimony of
death. And if one of them only, that is the Lord of the Ascendent or the
Moon be so, it is a testimony of death: as is before said. Johan. Ganiuet.

Trotula de passionibus mulierum. And Gysbertus affyrmes the like, if it be
drunk with water.

A Strange medicine and a rare secret, for consuming the web in the eye:
oftentimes proved. Take nine little woormes with many feet, of some called
Swyne lyse, (if they be touched, they become round as a button, they are to be
found between the bark and the woodde of old timber or trees:) stamp them
with a little juice of Woodbynde, or Betony, then streyne the same well: and let
the party that has the web in his eye, drink it in a morning something
warmed. Do thus three mornings together, and it will cure it perfectly, (God
wylling.) This was told me for a very truth, by one that had proved it diverse
times.

fair water, till half the water be consumed: then take away the herbs,
and put to the said water a good pynt of Honny, and then skymme it well, and
then put thereto an ounce of Stycados, tide in a fair lynnen cloth, and let
it seethe a little while, and then take it out of the said water, and then put
thereto one ounce of Synamon, three quarters of an ounce of Nutmegges, and as
much of Gynger in powder: And use to drink a good draught thereof twyse every
day something warm, first and last: for the space of six or seven days: And
then it helps perfectly.

THat Child will be deaffe, that is borne when Mercury is Lord of the syxt
house, and Unfortunate Saturn, chiefly: if he be in the syxt house. Likewise,
they will have great impediment in their hearing: in whose Nativity, Jupiter
and Saturn be both impedite or Unfortunate above the earth. That is: if they
be Retrograde, or Combust in evil places. Iatro.



A Strange matter, and a thing follows worthy of memory. Whosoever has the
Kings Evil, and looks upon a certain Bird, called Galgulus, of a marvelous
shape and quick sight, by and by the same bird does draw to her the yallow
vapors of choler, and heales the party perfectly through a certain great
benefit of nature. But where as through a secret gift of Nature she does
perceive or smell the diseased party to come toward her, she will close her
eyes, and hyde her head under her wings, not that she does envy the parties
health, or loathe to help him of his disease: But because she does greatly
fear the sharpnes of the humor, which the nearer the party infected comes to
her, the more it will pain her, and he ye more eased. Therefore they were wont to
sell this Byrd to such as had this disease, in some close thing, or covered:
least the party should be healed for nothing. The Authors hereof are Hilodorus,
Plutarchus, Aelianus, Suidas, and Plynie, with other. And Kirannides, and after
him Albertus reports: that if this Bird refuse to look upon the diseased
party, it is a token that he shall dye thereof. But if he look even upon him,
she draws the disease to her self, and then by and by or soon after, (she
flying against the Sun,) does vomit it out of her. And thus she does both
cure the sick party, and deliver her self from the same, through a certain
marvelous benefit of Nature. But learned men do much dyscent in taking of this
Bird. Plynie contends that it is Icterus, some do think that it is Chloreus,
or Chlorio, which the French men calls Lorion and Loriot. The best part of the
Physicians defends that it is Charadrius: some affyrmes that it is Oriolus:
others say that it is Galbulus, or Galbula, or Chloris: which Gesner lykes not.
And Mizaldus leaves it to the judgment of ye Doctors or learned until
experience shall try the truth th^r^of. Mizaldus in (...) Mirabilibus seu
arcanis.

ORpheus and Archelaus (...), by the report of Plynie: that if the (...) of
them be smeared with man's blood, that are fallen of the falling sycknes, by and
by they will be delivered from the trance or ^yt: or if their great todes be
then next pulled or pincht.



Mizaldus affyrmes that he had this out of an old written book.

Mizaldus says, that this is proved.



thereof: mark and consider the Lord or Almuten of the Ascendent, whom if
thou do find pure and safe from infortunes, and he be holding the Ascendent,
the fear is needeles. For no harm shall happen according to the fear. Haly
Abenragel.





by another Frogge, and so do still, and without doubt it will heal him: if
he use it. This was told me for a sure experiment: And it is also affyrmed by
Petrus Hispanus.

A Wonderful thing, passing all credit, chanced in the Byshopricke, or
Dyoces of they of Eistettence, in Germany: but that it was seen of diverse
credyble witnesses. A certain husbandman there called Vlricke Neucesser, being
tormented with cruel pains, in one of his sides, soddainly took hold of a
nail that was under the skin unhurt: which cut by a Surgion, he took out
the nail: yet for all that the pains did not cease. Wherefore the miserable
man suspectinge that there was no remedy to be had for his pain, but by
death: he took a knyfe and cut his throat. And the third day after he
being ^arryed to burying, there was three present, one Eucharius, Rosenbader,
of Wessemburge, and John of Ettenstet* Surgions, in the presence of many, which
did cut or open the bellye and Mawe of the said dead Husbandman. Wherein was
found (being maruaylous and prodigious) a long and round piece of woodde,
four knyues of Steel, partlye sharp, and partlye nyckte like a Saw, and two
sharp instruments of iron, that was longer then a spanne: and they had therein
also, heair rolled together as it were a round Bowl or Ball. This was laid or
put in his Mawe, by none other art, but only by the craft and subtyltye of
he Devil. This has Johannes Langius written in the first part, of his
medcinal Epistles. Epistol. 38. de prodigijs et prestigijs demonum in morbis.
Mizaldus reports it also.

Aristo. Plutarch. And other.

Aelianus.

Petrus Hisp.

Hippocrates in suis Aphor.

Mars, or Saturn: the sick must dye of that disease. Johannes Ganiuetus. (But
God can restore health past all hope.)

it has been often proved to their great ease and comfort that took the same.



Venus is joined with Saturn, especially in the tenth or eight house: or that
the Moon is joined with Saturn, in an evil aspect of Venus: or if Saturn be
in the syxt, or twelfth house, in a moist sign Infortunating Venus. Iatromath.
Guat. Ryff.



Leo: thereon will breed a Bird like an Owsell, or black Bird: the ashes
whereof being burned, and strowed or cast into a burning Lamp, will make the
house seem to be full of Serpents. Hermes.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Lemnius.

Mizaldus learned this of one that proved it.

A Ryshe dried, and put into Wine, if there be any water therein, it draws it
to it. The Wine left alone, or together:) Which is good and profitable for
trying of Wine. Mizaldus.

A Notable medicine to heal lame members, does follow. Take of oil Olyffe,
Aqua vite, ole of Exetor,

Mizaldus had this of a certain Alchemyst.

Mizaldus.

Pago, not far from Andernacus, a Town of the Bishop of Cullen: Desyring
or longing to eat, or to feed on her Husbands flesh, and although she loved
him entirely, she killed him in the night, and being satisfied with the half
of his flesh, she powdered ye rest with Salt: but after when her great longing
did cease, and that she did repent the deed: she did confess it to her
friends that sought for her husband. Johannes Langius, in his medcynall
Epistles. Therefore it is good for the husbands to take heed, whiles their
wives have such inordinate longyng upon them.

Conradus Gesnerus.

Mercury be Occidentall from the Sun, not under his light, or his beams:
(except in Aries, or Leo) nor Retrograde: being then in any of the four
Angles, strong, and well affected: does show that the child then borne, shall
be hye minded, strong, and famed for his strength, and lyberallity: and shows
also that he shall be an Astronomer. For Mercury Occidental in Leo, is wont to
make Astronomers. And Mercury Oriental of the Sun, and strong, does show,
great knowledge, wisdom of handy works, chiefly: if he be with the Moon,
or in the house of the Moon, that is Cancer: and if he be in a moveable sign:
it sygnifies inconstantnesse both of deed and mind. But in a fyxed sign,
inconstancy. Taisnier.





Epatcu^ four drams, Briony, Mastick, Myrre, Asarrabaccha, Scamony, of each a
dram: myxe ye same made in powder, with ye juice of Fe^nel, and a little
clarifyed Honny to preserve them: Take a dram thereof, which is ye weight
of.lxxii. barley corns at the most, early in the morning, and neither eat nor
drink of three or four hours after: If they be given nine days together,
they help maruelously: and they are very excellent for all manner of head ache,
approved (though never so long rooted.) They purge al humors, they bring
gladness, they are good for the eye sight, they preserve the mind, letting or
hyndring the horenes of heayrs, they help the swymming of the head, and the
migrim, and heales the sounding of the ears. But to the weaker persons* give
ye lesser quantity. Make it in five or six little round pyls or bals, and
swallowe them one after another at one time. They are proved to be very good. I
found this in a very old written book.

Mercury be impedite of Saturn in a chylds Nativity, it does hinder the
tongue. But it is worse when they be corporally coniunct together, especially,
in the Ascendent, or in the seventh house, and in the same sign with the Sun,
( Mercury being then occidentall:) or if Mercury be above the earth corporally
coniunct with Saturn, or else in an evil aspect of Saturn, and in a dum sign
called Signum mutum, and also is Unfortunate, that is to say: in an evil
place. Retrograde or combust, and peregrene: That party then borne, will have
great impediment in his tongue, or else will be dum, and cannot speak.
Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

Johannes Langius an excellent Physician says, that he heard it reported of
certain Horsemen of the country Palentine, that they did see in Austria, a
man, which with barking, and with swyft running, contended and stryued with
Dogs, and was hunted of them unhurt in the woods.





chafed with a hot cloth,) then when it is well bathed (which will be within
half an hour) wrappe and keep the member or place so bathed with a lamb
skin (the wool side inward,) and do thus every night before, or at his
going to bed, three weeks at the least, and he will be hole and sound
thereof. Doctor Owen helped one herewith, and with none other thing, that could
neither stand nor go: but was very lame. They that saw the proof thereof told
it to me: which was and is a man of good credit.

Diodorus tells a pretty story thereof, least it might be thought to be a
fable. In ye time of Ptolomie, a league or amity being begun between him and
the Romans: A certain Roman then against his will, had killed a Cat:
whereupon the Egiptians gathered together, and did beset the house where he was,
requyring to have him to be executed for his great offense, (no whit regarding
the power of the Romans, nor yet their lague or friendship with them:)
When, had not the King and Rulars been, they would have drawn him out of the
house, and killed him. Diodorus.



thou may know whereby ye riches will come. As if it be the Sun, it will come
to him by power, that is, the rytches will happen by help or favor of great
men: if Mars, then by wars, or by theft: if Saturn, of the enheritaunce of
the dead: if Jupiter, of faith (relygion) or of Masters of faith, (or of the
law, and such like) appertayning to Jupiter: if Venus, by women: if Mercury,
by learning, wisdom, or merchandise: if the Moon, by the works of hands, or
by iournyes* but if the Lord of the second house (so placed) be not
fortunate, and an evil planet beholding him, he shall lose all his goods.
Taisnier.

A Notable oil or medicine for the Gowte, and joint aches, very true and often
proved. Take the juice of Sage, of Aqua vite, of oil Debaye, of Uineger,
Mustarde, and of a Beasts gall, of each a like much: put them all together into
a great blather, and chafe it well up and down with your hands, for the space
of an hour and a half, and keep it then to your use, and annoint the grieved
place therewith, every morning and evening: and you shall find your self
healed within a short time. This is a sure and often proved thing.

Terre Lemnie, as much, and one scruple more, which i^ the weight of xxiiii.
barley corns. When you have made them in fine powder, mix them with Honny, and
keep it ^o your use in a clean vessel: give as much thereof at one time as a
Hasell nutte, in three ounces of Aqua Mulsa (which is made with water and
Honny, that is of one pound of Honny, and eight pound of water sodden and
skimmed over an easy fire: until the fowrth part be consumed.) This
excellent Antidote did King Necomedes use, when any did bid him to banquet, or
any other cheer, that he did suspect. If there be no poison taken before it,
it will remain quietly in the stomach: but if there be any poison, it will
procure vomit: so that thereby the poison and medicine will both come forth.
Myzaldus.

A Notable thing to cause one to sleep immediately. Take of the juice of
Henbane, of Lettes, of Planteyn, of Poppie, of the leaves of Mandrag, of Iuie
leaves, of Mulbery leaves, and of Humlocke, of each one dram, of Opium, and of
Iuie berries, of eather as much: stamp the Iuie berryes and the Opium
together, and myxe the iuyces and them well together: then dyp a sponge into
the same, and let it drink it all up, and then lay the same sponge in the Sun
to dry: after lay the said sponge to the parties nose whom you would have
to sleep, and he will sleep quickly. And when you will awake him, dip
another sponge in Vinegar, and hold it to his nose, and he will awake within
a while after. This is an excellent thing and true.







FINIS. Lib. 3.
The fowrth Book of Notable things.
MAke Dwale as follows, which makes one to sleep, whiles he be cut or
burned by Cawterizing, as follows. Take the gall of a Barrowe swyne, or the
gall of a Bore, the juice of Humlocks three spoonefull, of the juice of wild
Neppe, three spoonefull, of the juice of Lettys, of ye juice of Poppie, of the
juice of Henbane, and Asell, of each three spoonefull: myxe them all together,
and boil them well, and do them in a glasen vessel well stopped, and put
three spoonefulles thereof in a quart of good wine or Ale, and mix them well
together: And let him that shall be cut or Cawterized sit against a good fire,
and give him drink thereof till he fall a sleep. This I had also out of an
old written book. Use it warely, and prove it advisedly: if you begin with a
little quantity* you may increase it when you will: but if you give too much
at once, you can not dyminish it when you list.

Mars and Venus are impedite above the earth. Iatromath.

in a draught of white Wine something warm, and it will break the stone though
it be never so great, and that with speed. Use it every day until the stone
and gravel be all broken and consumed. A thing of small price and great virtue.

A Comb made of the right horn of a Ram, does take away the head ache, being
on the right side of the head: if the pained head be combed therewith. If the
pain be on the left side of ye head, then a comb made of the left horn of a
Ram, does take it away: if the pained head be combed therewith. This I had out
of an old book.

THebit the Philosopher, does teach that to get the virtue of any Star: you
must make a ryng when the Moon does behold happily by a Tryne or Sextyle
aspect (the same Star placed in the mids of the Heavens, or in the
Ascendent:) but the matter or substance of the Ryng must be made of that
metal, that belongs to that Star: and like wise an herb ascribed to the
said Star, must be included or put under that Ryng.



them both together, as small as can be: then put thereto a quantity of soote of
a chymney, and temper them with the milk of a Cow that has the heair of one
color: then take urine of a man that is fasting, and make a plaster thereof,
and boil al together, and as hot as the party can suffer it, lay it to the
place payned or grieved, and a day and a night without removing, and then lay
another plaster of the same to it, and let it lie thereto as long as the other.
And do thus nine times, and it will help him on warrantyes (God wylling.)
Proved.

Bap. Porta.

Simoneta Cardinalis.

Mizaldus had this of a cunning Armaror.

IF one come to give thee counsel, and thou would know whether he mean
well, or be a deceauer: Mark ye tenth house, and if a good and fortunate planet
be found there, his counsel is good, and true: But if there be an evil or an
unfortunate planet there, he is a deceyuer and a liar. Which I (says Haly, as
one yt have proved it) do confirm, and do say: if one come to cou^sayl thee,
and the Ascendent be of common signs, or the Lord of the Ascendent, and the
Moon be in common signs: do say, that he is then a deceiuer, and will deceive
thee. Therefore hearken not to him. Haly Abenragell.



Hippocrate^ in Aphor.

unto you in the ceasying of the pain of the plurysie: and in resolving of ye
matter of the impostume. This remedy will bring honor unto thee, and great
profit unto the sick person. And know that this remedy is good in any other
great pain, in all the body, from the head under. Emperica benedicti victorij.
And also I have seen this proved, which helped one of the plurisye without
letting of blood.



Anthonius Musa does praise it for the like effect.

Iatromath. Guat. Gryff.

CLeopatra, the last Queen of Egypt, and Wife to Marcus Antonius Consul of
Room, (a proud Princess, and too dainty a Dame) did drink one so voluptuous
draught, as never any did before, (nor I think will hereafter:) for she
dissolved in Tarte and strong Uineger, the greatest and beutifullest Pearl
that ever was seen in the East part of the world: and drunk the same at one
draught, to satisfye her proud presumptuous pleasure withal. Which Pearl was
worth two hundredth and fifty thousand crowns. Plinius, Macrob. And other.

Plut. And the like will be if the feathers be plucked off from Fowls or Byrds,
and the skyns pulled off from Beasts, and then laid or covered a day or two in
a heap of Wheat. It is confirmed by experience, says Mizaldus.

Aries, the Ram: and stamped with the seeds of Pyonie, and streyned with white
Wine and drunk: does maruelously heal them that have the falling sickness.
Oftentimes proved says Mizaldus. Which he had out of a very old book of the
seven herbs of the planets, written to Hermes.

be any borne before him, they will dye: and he shall hold the chief rule in
his fathers house. Taisnier.

Lemnius.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Leo, called the Lion: and the Moon increasing in light, (which is from her
change to the full,) delyuereth them of the falling sycknesse, that bears it
upon them. Marcilius Ficinus.

Mars, and good Planettes be Cadent: It is sign of death. Johannes Ganiuerus.

Trotula.

A Marvelous rare Secret, to draw out the oil of Cynamom after an easy
manner: which oil preserves the stomach from corruption, by taking of it by
the mouth, and applying of it to the stomach. Take of Cynamom one pound, which
stamp and beat finelye: then myxe and impast it with the oil of sweet
Almondes, unto the form of an ointment, then heat the same in an earthen
pan somewhat, which after let stand (close covered) for fowreteene days or
twelve at the least: At the end of which time, heat the whole again
sufficiently, (that is, until it be very hot:) then put it into a bag, and
wring out the oil in a press, until the whole Cynamom remain through dry
in the bags: and then that which is come forth, will be of the color,
savor, and taste of the Cynamom. A Secret, and known to few to be wrought
in this order.



Arnoldus.

Gandeut. Merula. And in the flesh Shamble of Toledo, a City in Spain, is
not seen but one Fly in all the whole year. As Leo Paptist. says And in
Westminster Hall, in the Timber work there, is not to be found one Spyder,
nor a Spyder web. Because (as it is thought) the Timber wherewith the rooffe
is builded, was brought out of Irelande, and did grow there. In all which
Country of Irelande, I have not only heard it credibly told, that there is
neither Spyder, Tode, nor any other venomous thing: but also that some of the
earth of that country has been brought hither, whereon a Tode being laid, she
has dyed presently. Though this be marvelous and strange: yet it is true.

Taisnier) if Jupiter be in the fifth or the twelfth house, whether he be
Oriental, or Occidentall, of the Sun, or whether he be in a Masculine sign
or Femynine sign) the first child of him or her then borne, will be a boy.





are under the earth. etc. Iatromath. M. Guat. H. Ryff. argent.

Lemnius.

Mizaldus, as a proved thing.

Hippocrates in Aphor.

Arnoldus de villa noua, in a little book of his, of the putting back of old
age: described of the five kinds of Myrabolanes, made for ye conceruing or
keeping of health, and prolonging of life. And it is a perfyt and approved
thing. For it does not only comfort, but also it does purge superfluous humors
remaining of nutriment past: And the use thereof does let or hinder graye
heairs, and it makes one come to the last old age: It strengthens the
stomach, and the use thereof makes a good color in all the body. And this is
the description thereof. Take of great Reysons cleansed of their stones and
stalks, two pound, Lycquerys made clean and beaten, one ounce: Let these be
put into two pound and a half of fair water, and let them seethe well, and
let them then be strayned well: And in that that is streined, let there be put
of Mirabolanes, Kebule, Citrine, and Indy, beaten in a Mortar, their stones
taken away, of each two ounces: of Embelyck, and Bellerick, of either of them
two drams: Let them be sodde, streined and pressed, or well wroong, then put
thereto white sugar, one pound: and seethe altogether to the thycknes of a
Syrup, and in the end add thereto of good Cynamom half an ounce, Cloves and
Galengaye, of each two drams, two Nutmugs, Maratrum, and Annes seed, of either
one ounce: and make thereof a Lectuary, and keep it in a pure vessel. In this
Electuary, be medicines of the principal members (that is to say:) of the
heart, head, stomach, Liver, Spe^n. And of the generatiue members: and it is
first hot, after moist, then cold: and the last dry. Johannes Ganiuetus
likewise describes it.

time, will be resolved into a lycquor: which being mixed with like portion of
quicksyluer, first cleansed and purged: (which wylbe with half a dosen times
washing in pure vinegar, myxt with bay salt, which after every washing and
rubbing, must be cast away, and then hot water put to the quicksyluer, and
therewith washed) and then put and closed in a fair bright and pure glass,
and so hanged up in the mids of a house, or other place, or rowme: will give
such a light in the dark, as the Moon does: when she shines in a bright
night. Johannes Baptist.

A Piece of a chyldes Navel string, borne in a ring, is good against the
falling sickness, the pains of the head, and of the collyck. Mizaldus.

BAptista Fulgosus reports, that nie to Sirminu^, a City of Pamony, sometimes
there has been Tendrals of Gold found in the Uines: whereof there has been
money coynd. Which many have seen says Gandeut. Meruba, in his time. And
Alexander Neapolitanus says: that he has found in Germany, within Daunby,
Uines, that did bear little nails, and leaves of pure gold: which was given
for presents to Kings and Dukes. Mizaldus.

him that his going is better then his tarying: But if you find the Moon
separate from a good or fortunate Planet, then it is better for him to tarry
there still: then to go from thence to dwell. And to be brief, if one shall ask
thee, saying thus: I must needs do a certain thing, (or I have certain
business to do,) whether may I do it or not: then mark thou the Lord of
the Ascendent, and the Moon, and if thou find them separate from evil
Planets, or evil fortunes, applying to good or fortunate Planets, bid him do
yt, that he is determined to do, and spare not. But if thou find them separate
from good Planets or fortunate, and applying to evil Planets: bid him that he
do it not, neither take it in hand. Haly Abenragell.

Venus being in barreyne signs, are Unfortunate of Mars and Saturn. Or if
Saturn be in the seventh or tenth house, Infortunating (...) and the Moon: or
if Venus be with Saturn, and the Moon then in the syxt, or twelfth house
Unfortunate. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

Mizaldus.

about the neck of a quick Eele, and the same Eele put into the water:
thereby the ague will be driven away. Geber et Alb.

Myzaldus.

Taisnier.

Macer.

Trotula de passionibus mulierum.

patient,) and lay him down and sweat upon the same, if the venyme has not
utterly overcome the heart: he shall undoubtedly recover. It has been lately
proved, that after drynking of the same medicine, when the patient made his
water in an vrinall, the glass has burst in pieces, by reason of ye venime
that it purged out. This is the making of the said Electuary. Take Cynamom
elect one ounce, Terra sigillata, six drams, five Myrre, three drams,
Unycornes horn, one dram, the seed and rynde of Cytron, roots of Dyptanny,
Burnet, Turmentyl, Zedoary, red Currall, of each two drams, yellow Saunders,
four scruples, red Saunders, two scruples, white Been and red, flowers of
Marygooldes, of each one dram, Yuery rased, Scabius, Veroincitunici, seed of
Basyll, the bone of a Stags heart, Saffron, of each two scruples: make a syne
powder, and ad unto it, of bole Armoniacke preparate, two ounces, white sugar
three pound, and with a syrrup of Acetositate citri: make a goodly Electuary,
and keep it in a glass. If the Pestilence comes with great excess of
heat, drink it in Rose water and Uineger: but if you feel it cold, take it
in a draught of Wine, and cover you with clothes, so that you may sweat as
long as is possible: for without doubt it is a present remedy, as I my self
have now of late proved. Thus much Thomas Phayre in his Treatise of the
Pestylence.

Dog. Diascorides, by the report of Mizaldus.

Carduus Benedictus stamped, and drunk, does help the grief, pains,
prickings, and stitches of the side: and the gryping in the guts, and the lower
part of the belly. This is proved for truth.

Aries, the Ram: he shall see terryble and fearful dreams. And if he shall
have it under the plant of his foot, he shall be acceptable before Magistrates
and Princes. Cardanus.

Venus: he shall have good and profit on the behalf of Women, or some such
like thing. Haly Abenragell.



Johannes Ganiuetus.

Benedictus victorius, had always good success, in passions and griefs of
the heart. Take of the juice of Buglosse, cleansed or putrified at the fire two
ounces, of white Sugar two drams, myxe them together, and let the pacient (or
diseased party) drink it every night going to bed: and there will not ten
days pass, but the patient will be cured of the passion or grief of the
heart.



Mizaldus.



A Ring made of an Ox, or Cowes horn, and worn or carried upon them that
have the crampe: It puts the same away. This is proved to be true of many. And
Mizaldus affyrmes it.

Ptolomeus.



strengthens, and preserves the sight, especially, in aged persons, and in
stematick complections. The herb dried, and brought to powder, and eaten
every day in a po^ched Egrere, for a certain time together: restores sight
lost, ye water mixed with half a dram of the powder, and drunk every evening,
for a month or forty days together: recouereth a weak sight.



conceaues not, but rather in the man. If otherwise, then the let of
conception is in her.

Mizaldus affyrmes it without the Goome water.





or dead in the morning after: then the sick party is like to dye of that
disease, if they be green still: then he is like to live.

A Certain wicked fellow that killed his Father, did sit in company with his
companions, eating and drinking: over whose heads, there was a swalowes nest,
with young swallows in the same: at which time the said swallows made a great
noise, and chittering: when, suddenly the said wicked fellow, got a long powle,
and brust the swallows nest: whereby the swallows fell down, and he trod on
them, and crushed them in pieces. Being asked of one of them, why he did so: I
have good cause so to do, said he: for did you not hear, said he, how they
told that I killed my Father. Whereupon he was suspected, examined, and so
confessed, and therefore executed. Plutarchus.

Galen affyrmes this.

Iatromathematica. M. Guat. Ryff.

all your teeth are blouddy, it sygnifies the death of ye dreamer: but, that
the teeth is drawn out, signifies the death of another: that byrds enters into
a house, sygnifies loss: to weep, betokens joy: to handle money, sygnifies
anger: to see dead horses, sygnifies a lucky event of things. Artemidorus.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Mercury (being Lord of the syxt house) be impedyte of Saturn, does threa^^n
to the child then borne, continual blyndnesse: and so much the more, if the
Moon behold the Sun and Saturn in that sort. Taisnier.

of humors out of your head, and it will help the rewine, within a little while
if you use it. This I had of a friend as an excellent secret.

Johannes Gan^uctus.

Afric, as Gellius says: Families of men, that if they chance exceedingly
to praise, fair Trees, pure seeds, goodly children, excellent horses, fair
and well lyking cattle: soon after they will wyther and pyne away, and so
dye. (No cause or hurt known of their withering or death.) Thereupon the
custom came, that when any do praise any thing, that we should say God bless
it or keep it. Aristot. in Probl. By the report of Mizaldus.



thunder, they are for the most part saint and fearful: in the time of the
change of the Moon, either they live not long, or else they be weak: And
oftentimes as Aristotle says, have Melancholicke diseases, or else are out of
measure Melancholicke: which makes the^ to be wayward, ^reating, and seldom
merry. Mizaldus.

Sperma ceti, for if it be pure and right: it will penetrate and go through the
boxes or things wherein it is kept, with a certain moisture or sweating drops.
Mizaldus.

Mercury be coniunct with Saturn, or in any evil aspect of him, and neither
Jupiter nor any other good Planet does behold Mercury. it does note, that they
then borne, shall have an impediment in their tongue, or shall stut: chiefly, if
he be found above the earth. Taisnier.



Hippocrates in Aphor.

or ease it maruelously. This was reported to me to be excellent therefore.

Flos vnguentoru^, is made as follows. Take of Rosen, and Perrosy^, of each
half a pound, Uirgin wax, and Olybanum, of either a quarter of a pound,
Masticke one ounce, Hearts tallowe, or else Sheep tallow, a quarter of a
pound, Camphere two drams: make your gooms in fine powder, and searce them:
then melt the wax and tallowe, and myxe the powders there with well, and boil
them well together, then streyne it through a canuas bag into a pottell of
white Wine: then let it keele until it be blood warm, then put thereto the
Camphere, and a quarter of a pound of Turpentyne, by little and little, evermore
styrring it well, till it be through cold: Then make it up in rowles, and
keep it to your use, for the best salve for all things following, that ever
was made, by the sufferaunce of God. Wherefore esteem of this salve above any
other, for it has been put in experience and substantially proved: It heales
wounds, old and new, it cleanses very well, and gathers good flesh: It
heal^th head ache, and impostume in the head, or in the body: Swollen ears or
cheeks, sawsfleame in the face, Synewes cut, stark or sprayned in travel:
It draws out iron and thorn: it helps venomous biting and pricking: it
heales all manner of botche: all swelling and ache in the coddes, and all other
members: it s^ases the flux of the Emrods, and it is special good to make a
sear cloth, for all manner of griefs. This was written and cast into the
Recluse or Anchor, at the Red hill in Almaine: wherewith he wrought many
maruels, and never used any other medicine but this. This I copied out of a
very old book: and I have proved it many times to be precious.

Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

Anth. Beneuenius.

Mizaldus.

grievous byles: destroys the same quite. Arnold. de villa noua.

Seuerinus Gebelius.

Mizaldus affyrmes that it is certainly proved.

are not in our wylles to have when welyst: but are Gods gyfts to bestow as he
will.

HErmes says, (if in the Nativity of the Husband,) Venus be Combust: the wife
shall dye before the husband. If in the Nativity of the wife, Mars be Combust:
the husband shall dye before the wife.





Lemnius.

FINIS. Lib. 4.
The fyfth Book of Notable things.
A Mare will bring forth a Fool of diverse colors: if she be covered with a
cloth of diverse colors, whiles she is taking the Horse. For such colors as
be before the eyes of of the Horse, whiles he does horse her: without doubt the
Fool will be of the same colors. The same may be proved with Dogs and other
Beasts. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

HOrus Apollo does say, that a Woolfe does fear greatly stones: therefore when
he is constrained, to go by stony places, he treades very demurely or softly.
For being hurt with a very little stroke of a stone: it breeds woormes, whereof
at length he is consumed, or brought to his death. Therefore he does fly from a
trauellor: that lays wait to stryke him with stones.

Venus be joined together, and both be Combust: He that is then borne, shall
lack a wife, (or never marry.) Ptolomeus.



Opium thebaicum, and Garlic heads pylled, of each two ounces: beat the
Garlic heads in a mortar with a wooden pestel, and put thereto the Opium
grinded: incorporate these well together: that it may be like a Sauce: Distyll
this in a Retorte, with a most soft and slow fire in ashes. With this water
distilled when need shall require, anoint the temples, the forehead, and
pulses of the wrestes. And beware you mynister nor use this, but upon a great
necessity, as in frantic persons, (as you shall think it good.)



luck: to dream to be dumme, foreshewes speedy gladness: to see Oxen plowe,
betokens gain: to enter into waters, betokens evil. Artemidorus.

Mizaldus.



Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

IVpiter and Venus, or the one of them in the eight house, not Combust, nor
Retrograde: does sygnifie the child then borne, shall dye a natural, (and no
violent death.) Taisnier.



MIrabolanes chebuli, preserved with his syrruppe, used daily, and eaten:
preserves youth excellently well.

in a little lynnen cloth, and tie the same fast with a threde, that it may be
round: then houlde the same in your mouth, and champe it softly between your
teeth: and it will bring forth water and fleame abundantly. Use this daily
until you think your head be well purged.

Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.



OL^banum (which is a kind of Frankencence) in powder mixte with as much of
Swines grease, and boiled together, wherewith if childrens heads that are full
of Lyce, or that are given to breed lyce, be anointed: they shall afterward
be free from Lyce. This is better and more safe, then to use ointments mixed
with quicksyluer, which is very dangerous: therefore let Mothers or Nursses,
rather use this.



Mars be in the eight house, and in a human sign, or in the second face of
Taurus, or in the first face of Leo: It does show the child then borne, shall
dye of iron. Taisnier.

Emperica bened.

Petrus Hispanus.

ANdreas Mattheolus, knew a Woman, that every day for a whole years space,
was grievously troubled with ye pains of the moother, which was helped very
well of that disease, by drinking once a week at her going to bed, o^ white
Wine, wherein an ounce of the root of Bryony was heated: and she using this
medicine a whole year in such sort, she felt no more harm thereof.

Johannes Baptista Porta. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

MArs in the eight house, with the head of the Dragon: betokens that the child
then borne, shall die of a roape, (or be hanged.) Taisnier.



an ague. And the darker color they have, the worse they be: but if these
signs come through a Purgation, they be more laudable. And although they be of
diverse colors, they be not evil. Hippocrates.



Mizaldus. And it has been proved with the brain of a Conie.

A Walnutte put fast into a Chycken, that it fall not out in the roastyng
thereof: It makes that the same Chycken will be the sooner roasted. Mizaldus.

of both equal porcions: and then the hole well stopped, that no air nor any
thing may go out, and so put into some standing water, or a little pit of water,
or into some cesterne full of water: it will keep the said water hot a long
time, or for many days. Proved of many, says Mizaldus. And I found the same
also in an old written book.

Mizaldus.

Plinius. As Mizaldus says.



Mars be in Gemini, and the Sun in Pisces, in a quartyle aspect, in the day
time: or the Moon in the night time: (it does sygnify that) the child then
borne will be hangde. Taisnier.

De succo citrino, made in powder, (which is to be had at the Apothecaries,)
and mixed with the juice of Colewoorts, of the bygnes of a bean: shall never be
troubled with pain in the head. Petr. Hisp.

A Strange medicine for the gowte. Take a good handful of Arsemart, and wrap
and tie the same

Mizaldus had this of one that proved it.

A Most excellent oil of Saint John's Woort, is made as follows. Infuse or
stiepe for the space of three days, the tops of Saint John's Woort, in pure
and excellent Wine, then in a double vessel let them (...) easily over the
fire, and then strain them easily: then again put as many of the tops of
Saint John's Woort in that strayned lycquor, as you had before: and let them
stiepe therein three days and three nights as before: then heat and strain
them as before, then add thereto three ounces of Turpentine, and six ounces
of old Oil, and of Safferue the weight of xxiiii. Barley corns: myxe all
together, and then sees all together in a double vessel, until the wine be
consumed: and that that remaynes put it into a glased or leaded vessel, and
keep it safely for your use. This Oil is of a marvelous virtue and property,
as well chieflye against venomous Ulcers, as many other diseases and cold
griefs: Well known to many women. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Mars be opposite to Jupiter, and the one of them be the Lord of the eight
house: (it is like) the child then borne, shall dye by the commandment of
the Judge. Taisnier.

Trotula.

let them stand so the space of a natural day: after that bury the glass
body wherein all the same is, in horse dung for fifteen days: and then take
it out and distyll a water thereof, according to art, two or three times over.
Keep this water as the Aple of your eye, for it is very precious and well
proved in all Melancholy sicknesses very effectuously: and in the pain and
trembling of the heart, the quantity to be given at one time is a dram. (Which
is the weight of.lxxii. barley corns.) If you prove it, you will praise it. And
this is in the new Iuell of Health: with many other mo excellent things.

Mercury, either by conjunction or by aspect. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff. Argent.

Johan. Baptist. Porta.

DIdimus wrytes, that Sheep are wont to follow them: that stoppes their ears
with their wool.

Ascendent, when the question is made: And if thou do find Saturn in the
Ascendent (or first house,) tell him that he did see in his dream Religious
persons: as Friars, Heremytes, or such like, or places of Prayer, etc. But if
thou find Mars in the Ascendent, say that he saw in his dream, Captains,
Knights, Murderers, Thieves, Harnes or Battelles, or such like. If the Sun
be in his first house: he did see Gardins, Trees, with fruits, Gold, or a
King. If Venus be in the Ascendent: he did see a fair Uirgin, or some eating
or drinking, or one lying with a Woman, or that have things wherein they are
delighted, or else to play, or to walk abroad, or white or red garments. If
Mercury be in the first house: then he did see handsome and eloquent men
reasoning, or Palaces decked with Curtens, and rytch hanginges or clothes,
books or wrytings of salutation, or of accoumpts. If the Moon be in the first
house: he did see ryuers, or water, or precious stones, or some that did eat
or drink, or his Mother, or his Awnt, or his Mothers Sister. This says Haly
Abenragel. But Messahala, and Alhayhat, and Abrier Farsal, have said: look in
the sign of the ninth house from the Ascendent, and if thou do find in the
same house, any of the seven Planettes, judge that the vision or dream was of
them, as is before, when they are found in the first house. And add to the
sygnification of the Sun, (that is, if the Sun be in the ninthe house,) that
he did see him self flying between heaven and earth, or that he did see a
great light: and if there be no Planets in the ninth house: then mark him that
is in the first house: if none be there: then mark who is in the third house:
if none be there: then look in the fowrth house: if none be there: look in
the seventh house: if none be there: then look in the tenth house. And judge
according to the sygnification of every Planet: and thou shall be certified,
God wylling. Haly Abenragell.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

A Lamen, or thyn plate of Gold, borne on the seame of the brain, does
strengthen the brain. The Mizaldus wysheth that the same plate be beaten and
made of pure and fine Gold, when the Sun is in Leo, called the Lion: And
Jupiter and the Moon beholding each other happily. Hermes. Arnoldus Villa
nouanus. etc. Alij.

Taisnier.

Emperica benedicti victorij. I know by proof, it helps the stomach
maruelously.

Fumanellus.

betokens gain or profyt. To be married: sygnifies that some of your
kynsfolkes is dead. To dream that you worship God: sygnifyes gladness. To look
in a glass: does portende some yssewe, or a child. To have oil powered upon
you: sygnifyes joy. Michael Scotus, et Artemidorus.

Mizaldus had this secret of an expert Italyan.

Florentinus Geoponicus, and Zoroaster.

Archibius did write to Antiochus King of Siria. Plinio Authore.

Taisnier.

two ounces, of Masticke, and Frankyncence, of either five drams, of Cassia
Fistula, two drams: and put thereto juice of Walwoort, and of the inner rynde of
Elderne, and myxe them all well together, and make thereof an ointment. This if
it be well made, is a very good thing.





LVdonicus Viues does write, that within the memory of his Ancestors, or
Fathers, there was a Sepulcher or Toombe plucked up: wherein a burning Candle was
found, made (as was wytnessed by writing) five hundredth years before. And
when it was touched or handled: by and by it was resolved into powder. Johannes
Langius.

Virgo, before the Autumnall equinoctial: (which is about the beginning of
September, or immediately after,) for then through the great heat, and drynes
of the Summer: the earth wants rain. Mizaldus had this of one that was
skylfull in such things. Which was a master Carpentar.

Aphri. reports it.

Haly Abenragel.



Hippocrates in suis Aphor.

A Sausfleame or read pympled face, is helped with this medicine following.
Take Enula Campana, four ounces, and seethe it with vinegar, till the vinegar
be sodden in: then stamp it small, and then put thereto quycksyluer and
brymstone, of either four drams, and Barrowes grease, four ounces: and beat
them all together, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it to the enfected or
spotted place in the face, all night: and on the morrow wash it of with warm
water. Do thus six or seven nights, and it will help it without doubt.

Oximel scillitick, which is to be had at the Apothecaries: and with the syrrup
of Sticados, and a little Nutmug: which Lemnius does wytnes for a very truth.

Mizaldus.

Aphri. as Mizaldus says.

Taisnier.

Deathea, every morning and evening. It is an excellent thing likewise.

Fallopius. Take of the purest and clearest Turpentine that can be gotten, one
pound and two ounces, of new yellowe wax that is odoriferous, twelve ounces,
of Nutmugges and Cloves, of either one ounce, of common ashes, six ounces:
beat all these well together, then put the same into a Retorte, fenced with
Lute of Wisdom, and set in ashes, and distyll it with a slow fire at the
first, and after increase the fire until all be distilled: which gathered,
distyll the second time in a glass body with an head and receauer, putting
unto it before the distylling four ounces of the powder of brycke or Tyles.
Which dyllygently luted in the joints, maynteyne fire under it, until no more
will come, then have you purchased an Oil of a rubyne color, which works
miracles in wounds, especially: where synnues be harmed. This also helps any
manner of rewme proceeded of a cold cause, it helps besides the cough, by
anointing the region of ye breast therewith: and it is also of great
importance unto many other griefs, invented and proved by the above said
Author many times. This excellent oil I had out of that worthy Book, called
ye new Jewel of Health: which many perhaps should never have read in this my
book, that never shall hear tell of that which makes me describe herein some
notable things therein uttered.

A Notable and often proved plaster, to destroy any impostume, swelling, and
stytche, in what place of the body soever it be: is now described as follows.
Take of the root of Hollyocke, (clean washed and cut in pieces,) two good
handful, and seethe the same in fair water, until the said root be
something tender. Then take out the said root, and put into the same water,
of Fenecreeke, and Lyn seed, of either one handful, (something stamped or
bruised,) and seethe them together until the water be ropeing like byrdlime:
then stamp the said root of Hollyock before sodde. And put it thereto with an
handful of Barley meal, and frye them together with Bores grease, or Barrowes
grease: (and if need be, you may take sheep suet,) then lay a plaster
thereof to the sore, or grieved place, as hot as the party may suffer it:
and let the same lie twelve hours unremoved at the least, and after apply
another plaster of the same thereto, in such order: and within nine plasters it
will work the full effect. It has helped and dyssolued the Pluresy, with the
applying of three or four plasters. A thing of small cost, and great virtue.

WHen the Lord of the Ascende^t is impedite or Unfortunate of the Lord of the
second house: It sygnifies Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.





A Certain Wench was borne within sixteen miles of London: who within a year
and a half after with her fyngers, and did eat it most greed^ly. She abhorred
then bread and butter, and other such natural food. Whereby she was maruelously
consumed with a flux, and she yet lives, having nothing on her but skyn and
bone. I saw her in June. 1577. She was borne in Chayrsey, within two or three
miles of Stanes, at which time she was full three years of age.

Mizaldus.

Pithagoras.

AEtius geues counsel, that that Dog be buried or put into the ground in
any wise, which is dead by taking his disease from a man: for it is certain,
(says he,) that dangerous and many effects, (the man being escaped,) are
turned, or ouerpowred into him.

Africanus Geopon. And this was proved at Paris, by the means of a Presydent
there, that therewith was troubled. Mizaldus.

Leucacanthus,) that is Whyt thorn: (even as the Bay tree,) is never stricken
nor touched with lyghtning, nor is not touched with any evil from heaven.
Mizaldus.

ZAel says, that he has proved in many Natiuities, where the Moon is in
Virgo, opposite with the Sun: that the child the^ borne, has been drowned.









Mercury do not behold the one the other. Or where neither of them do behold
the Ascendent: and whereas in the day time Saturn is the sygnifyer of the
qualyties of the mind: and being then in an Angle, and Mars in natiuityes of
the night.

Mizaldus.

Jupiter: it will help him. Take of Mase, the seeds of Pyony and the roots of
the same, half a dram, the leaves of Gelyuors, and of Prymroses, (which some
takes to be the Daysie) one dram: stamp them, and give it to drink with white
Wine. (The party being fasting.) Mizaldus.

Volateranus.

Petrus Hispanus.



Jupiter is rular, or Lord. Celi enarrant: The Author of which work is
unknown.

Trotula affyrmes it also for the like purpose.

Mizaldus.

FINIS. Lib. 5.
The syxt Book of Notable things.
IF you would have any Beast, or any part of the same, (of what color soever
he be) to be turned into white, shave of the heairs, and smoke the same that
is shaven, with the fume of Brymstone: and white heayres will grow there. You
may prove the same in flowers. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

or dream, is evil and to be feared, and is of an evil signification. Which
evil and harm shall be, according to the nature of the Planet, to whom the
same applies, and according to the nature of the house wherein he is in the
figure, and according to the nature of that evil Planet. But if he be separate
from a good Planet, and applies to an evil Planet: say that the vision or
dream was good and pleasant, but he has an evil sygnification. But if he be
separate from an evil Planet, and does apply to a good Planet: say that the
vision or dream was foul and evil, but it has a good sygnifycation, and the
profyt or success thereof, will be according to the nature of the Planet, to
whom he does apply, and according to the nature of the house wherein he is, in
the figure. (As we have said.) Therefore according to this way and rule,
consider the visions or dreams: and confer one to another, and thou shall be
certified, (God wylling.) Haly Abenra.

Emperici benedicti victorij.



Mizaldus.



Plinius.

Plinius.

Taisnier.



A Proved Oil which is very good for the dropsy, called Ascites, if all the
belly or paunche be anointed therewith. Take of Turpentine one pound, of
Frankynsence, Mastick, Myrre, of each two drams, Landanum, one dram, Nutmugs,
Cloves, Galenga, Zedoary, of each one dram and a half, of the juice of
Walwoort, and the juice of Cucumber, (called Cucumis asinimus) of either one
ounce: Let them be poudred that are to be powdered, and let the^ be all myxed
together, and put them in a Lymbeck, and let an Oil be distylled thereof, and
it is a most secret thing, not only to take away the swelling of the bellye
in the dropsy, called Ascites: but also any flegmatyke swelling of any other
member of man's body, and it is marvelous for the pains of joints and members,
of a cold cause. Emperica benedicti.

A Certain Butchers wife being with child, as she was sturring the blood of a
Beast newlye killed, a little thereof did chance to sprinckle or spurt on her
face: which, she with her hand suddenly wiped off, and then wyped the same
hand on her left thygh: Who after being brought to bed of a boy, the same
boy had and has the like mark, or blood spot on his left thygh. They that
knew both the Father, Mother, and the child, told this for a very truth.
Therefore it is not good to hit a woman suddenly, being with child, on the face
or otherwise: least the child she is with all, be so marked, as is declared in
other places of this book.

Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

Mizaldus.

Nux vomica, called the Spuing Nutte, (which is to be had at the Apothecaryes,)
the same pieces being strowed or laid in an open place, where Ravens or Crows
may resort thereto: the Crows or Ravens that eats thereof, can not fly
away: whereby you may take them easelye. This I know to be certain and true.

Linaria, begynnes to leave synging, and also to be sick, when the Star
called the little Dog, does rise, and will pluck off her feathers. Which
chances about the mids of July: as we have proved by one and other, (says
Mizaldus) the space of ten years. And thereupon have showed to many, that
then that Star did sur^ly rise. And in a Lark we have observed the same,
(says he:) in the rising of Arcture with the Sun. And it is not to be
doubted, but that other Birds, and living things, have their peculyar Star,
whereby they are moved to sing, or to hold their peace, to sadness or
gladness: which I desire the dillygent searchers of secrets to observe. Thus
much Mizaldus.

Taisnier affyrmes it.



Mizaldus.

and dypt in honny: and draw after your back, the dead carkas of a Catte, and
when the Fox following thee, comes near unto the steps: be sure to have a
man nigh thee with bow and shafts to shoot at him: or by some other means to
hit him. Mizaldus had this of an expert Hunter.

Cicero.

Mizaldus.

Taisnier.



of half the Honny, then put thereto of the powders of Cynamom, Cloves,
Nutmugs, Mace, black Pepper, of each two drams, mix them together, and let
them be put up in a clear vessel, and let the patient take and eat every
morning half an ounce of the said ryndes of the Radishes. Benedictus
victorius Fauentinus.



Mizaldus.

A Garlande made of Iuy leaves, and laid upon women's paps, or dugs, that hangs
flagging down: it gathers them together, and makes them round. Iuy leaves
stamped and applied thereto, works the like effect. Mizaldus.

A Tode being stricken of a Spyder, or of a Serpent: does help herself by
eating of Planten. Plinius. For confyrmation whereof, a Tode being on the
ground hard by a wall, a Spyder did suddenly strike the said Tode on the
back: Which when the Tode felt, beginning to swell, did eat of Planten nigh
unto the place. Whereof being well, the Spyder again, did poison the Tode, with
her venom as before. Which done, the Tode preserved her self with the said
Planten as before. But one that chaunst to behold the same, did then cut up
the said Planten, and took it away from that place. Which Tode the third
time being stricken, or rather poisoned of the spyder, as before: Immediately
searching for the said Planten, (for as it should seem there was no more
Planten nigh to that place:) which when she could not find, did swell so sore,
that soon after she did burst withal. The party that did take away the same
Planten, and did see this strange and marvelous matter, did tell me this for a
very truth. Whose credyte I knew to be such, that I am bold here to place
the same having such good occasion. And I heard that a noble man of this
Realm, did see the like.

Whosoever is sore grieved with the stone, and can not make water, let them
drink a spoonefull of the powder called Puluis duiriticus, in a draught of
white Wine: (which you may have made at the Apothecaries,) and use it three or
four morninges together, or something less, if you list. Give half so much
to a child, and without doubt, it will make them avoid the stone, and to make
water presently. I have proved it often times to be a souereyne thing in this
case. And there was one from whom I had it, that got therewith above an
hundredth pound by the year. If it be truly and well made. You will praise it
as well as I have done, and because it is such a notable thing, I would have it
better known, and more used.

Euonimus does praise it therefore.

Iatromathematica. Guat. Ryff.

A Spryte came nigh unto M. Brutus, leading an army of men from Asia: when,
Brutus asked him who he was: he answered, I am thy evil Angel, whom thou
shall see in the fields of Philoppis in Thessaly, and there Brutus dyed in
conflyct. Plutarchus.

A Grymony sodden in red wine, wherewith if wounds be washed, it cleanses
all fylths and corruption from them. And the leaves of Agremony beaten, or
stampte, and tied upon wounds that be evil joined, or knytte together: by
and by it does open them. A certain Spanyarde told this to Mizaldus.

Venus: he will spend the same with women, in pleasures and wantonness. Haly.



Hidpocrates Aphor.

Lithontripon, of the description of Nicholas: and also Iustinum, one dram:
myxe them with the said white Wine, wherein the Radish was infused, and let
him that is grieved with the stone, receive all the same at one time: and you
shall see a marvelous wo^ke thereof. If need be, let him receive the like
quantity thereof three or four days together. This is proved to be a sure
and an excellent thing, for breaking and avoiding the stone, and gravel. Be
sure that the Apothecaries make it of good stuff.

A Head of Garlycke, (the skyns pulled off, and a little bruised,) laid by
equal parts, to the hollow parts of the soles of their feet, that are
grievously tormented with the toothe ache: especially, if it come of a cold
cause, and be on the nether iawe: it will help them with speed, by drawing
the humors out of the soles of the feet. I have known them that have taken
this medicine, and have not ben troubled with the tooth ache of seven years
after.

Saturn is in the Ascendent, opposyte to Venus: or if Venus be in a barraine
sign, unfortunate of Saturn: or if Venus be in the house of Saturn,
especially, Unfortunate of him. Iatromathematica. Guat. Ryff.

Mizaldus.

Plinius.

Taisnier.



Benedictus victorius fauentinus, in his Book called Emperica.



then it will be blackish or rusty. It is proved as Mizaldus was informed.

Aclianus and Philes.

Mizaldus.

Diascorides.

Mars is to be abhord, in all things, both in the beginning, and when the
thing is done. Haly Abenragel. Therefore you were best to take heed, that you
take no notable thing, or great matter in hand, or begin any long journey,
in the hour of Mars: if you can by any means know when it is. But whosoever
puttes their whole trust in GOD, and guides their life by the rule of his holy
word: (be they never so simple and unlearned:) he will so guide them, and so
instruct them, that they shall avoid all such dangers, and p^rryllous times.
And contrary, the wicked, learned, (yea though they know the times, shall not
have power to avoid them. As I have seen in many: which afterward they did
well consider, though to late. And as I have said of Mars: so I say of
Saturn. For there is never a good of them both. Yet I do not think, that
Saturn or Mars shows such harm to them, in whose Natiuities they are
Sygnifyers, or bears rule in the Ascendent: but chiefly to such in whose
Nativity they are Lords of the.xii.vii.v. or.viii. house. But surely I have
marked it long, and yet I never saw any notable thing begun in the hour of
Mars or Saturn: that came to a good end. Which they shall well find, that
begins to set forward toward the Sea, in Saturnes hour. I speak by trial
as well as Haly does: which I should not have consydred so much, but by his
counsel and proof.

Absyrtus.

Mizaldus.

Fracastorius.

take of the wool of the same Sheep, or heair of that Beast, or some of the
heair of that Man or Woman, and hyde the same before the rising of the Sun,
under the bark of a tree, called Trembla, (which is a kind of black Popler
tree.) Do thus certain days, and thou shall see the woormes fall out of the
wound or sore myraculously: or else they will dye, or leave that place. There
be that ascribes the same to the Byrch tree, and also to the root of wild
Succorye hanged at the neck, in manner of a Cross. Which Mizaldus saw
observed in a Dog, one of whose ears was almost eaten off with woormes.

Taisnier.

Oculus christi, into your eye: and within a while after you shall not feel
them. Whereby you will think they are not there. But at the last they will
drop or fall out of them selves: compassed about with slymye matter, which
hynders the sight. Which if you use, thy will cleanse and clear your eyes
maruelously. This I know to be very true.

Wartes without doubt will demynish and wear away privily, and be clean gone
in short time. This was told me for an often tried and proved thing: yea, and
by such a one as had seen the experyence thereof. Also Wartes rubbed with a
piece af raw Beef, and the same Beef being buried within the ground: the
Wartes will wear and consume, as the Beef does rotte in the ground. Proved.

Mizaldus.

A Thing to be marueled at, and worthy to be remembered does follow, declared
by Iouianus Pontanus. A certain Caietane Woman, (says he) was married to a
Fysher, whom he did use as his Wife, according to the order of Marriage, many
years (as Anthonius Panthormita, being a friend of the same Fysher, was wont
to tell to the said Iouianus Pontanus, when he was young:) which Woman after
she had been married fowreteene years, did became to be a Man, and suddenly,
there sprung out the members of a Man, in the natural place of the Woman.
Which being so ashamed of her condition, as one that thought she should be
mocked or laughed to scorn both of Men and Women, became a Religious Woman, and
lived in a Monastary, where he kn^we her the rest of her life. And she was
buried at Rome, in the Temple of Marie to Minerua. And an other Woman called
Aemilia, was married to one Anthony a Citizen of Ebula, and after she was
married twelve years, she was changed into a Man, and was conuersaunt with
Men: using then the arts and trades of men, in that Countreye, and married a
Wife. This wrytes he in the tenth book De rebus celestibus. etc. Mizaldus.

Taisnier.





Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

ARystotle and Auycen do affirm, that of the round and short Egg, the Cock
chycken does come: of the long and sharp Egg, the Hen chycken. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus had this secret of a certain cunning Lapidary.

Marc. Gatinarica (an excellent Physician) does write, that the like did happen
to a certain man in his time: to whom when many medicines were given in vain,
the said man received ye smoke of old leather at his mouth by a funnell, (so
that it went into his body,) and as soon as the venomous thing in his body,
felt the said smoke: he came out at his fundament. Which was a marvelous great
Uyper, to the great maruayle and fear of all them that were present.

and let them that have the Stra^gury, drink a good draught thereof first and
last, for the space of eight or nine days together: and it will help them
certainly, for it never fayles. Therefore prove it, and praise it.

Saturn in the three first degrees of Scorpio: it betokens death. Johannes
Ganiuetus.

A Notable medicine for the Sciatica, does follow. Take Ox dung, and Pigions
dung, of either one pound, and myxe them well together with one pottell of
white Wine, and let them boil together until half the Wine be consumed, then
streyne it through a lynnen cloth, then put thereto half a pound of Honny,
and twelve yolks of Eggs, and half a pound of melted wax: and myxe all
together with as much barley meal as will suffice for the making of it in a
plaster, and put it hot to the paynfull place. This was proved by King Henry
the fyft, as the writing did wytnes, out of the which I had this. Besides, it
has been since proved.

Saturn, and Mars, if he come to him in the hour of Saturn: either the sick
will dye, or else the Physician shall have great labor, doubts, and slacknes
in the curing of him. Neither shall he help him, except it be even to
desperation, or out of all hope. And if he be sent for, or go to him first in
the hour of Mars: there will be ^hydinges and brawlings betwixt him and the
sick party, and small gain. The hours of Jupiter and Venus are much praised.
The hours of the other Planets are indyfferent. Iotromathematica. Guat. Ryff.

A Green Lyserd has a great delyght to behold a Man in the face, for he will
lovingly fawn upon him as a Dog, with the moving of his tail. And as much as
in him lies, will defend him from a Serpent, that lies lurking in the herbs
to hurt him. Lemnius.

Mizaldus.

Taisnier.

presently, or at the least within three or four several applications.



Sciatica, twyse or thryse a day, for eight or nine days together: and the
party grieved will be made hole. This I had out of an old written book,
wherein was many excellent things.



down, and to blate, or to make a noise, and also to quake and tremble, as
though their deuowring enemy the Woolfe were thert present. Neither will they
cease from doing thus, until they feel or perceive, that the said dung is
taken away. Mizaldus.



A Certain noble Matrone in the parts of Spain, had a strong Imagination of a
great Etheopyan, painted in her Chamber, with other, in the time of the act of
generation. Which Lady afterward was delivered of a Boy, like to that great
Etheopyan painted, before named. Which child being borne, every one believed,
that she had leyne with some one of the slaves of the Sarseyns. For that the
child was like none of his Parents. Whereupon the ministers of Justice, with
consent of her Husband, and other, did decree, that she should be burned
after the months end. But before the mynistration of this Justice or
execution: certain wise men were called, whereof one desired, that he might
see the place where the child was begotte: which when he had seen, he
consydred, that that generation was, by the strength of the Imagynatiue virtue.
And then he said, that that great Etheopyan was the father of the child.
Brynging forth for the confyrmation thereof, that place of the Bible, where
Jacob put speckled Rods before the Sheep: by which Imagination, the Ewes
brought forth speckled Lambs. Which when he had spoken, the Lady was delivered
from burning. Wherefore as I have written in other places of this Book, men
ought not rashly to mislyke their Wives, (having none other occasion,) because
their children are unlike to their Parents. For as you see here, and in Jacobs
Lambs, Imagination is of marvelous force in the time of generation. Which
does not only work in men, but in Beasts. Ganiuetus writes this Hystorye, who
as it should seem, has it out of Lyra.

Sponsus solis, the Spowse of the Sun. Because they sleep, and are awakened
with him. etc. Mizaldus. And the daily trial thereof, affyrmes it.

Andreas Matthiolus, (that learned Physician,) has written in his commentaries
upon Diascorides.

Barth.

Saturn or Mars, it is a suspicion rather to evil then to good. And chiefly,
if that evil Planet be any where impedyte, Retograde, or Combust, or in his
fall, or Cadent from an Angle. And this is to be understood likewise of the
coming of any on the behalf of any that is sick, or brynging the vryne of
the sick, or of any that does ask counsel, or enquire of the estate of the
sick, (though the vryne be not seen,) it is a suspicion of evil for the
sick: though it be not a full testimony thereof. Ganiuetus.



Larius, (which now is called Comensis,) certain Fyshers in the winter, did
draw with their nets to the dry land, a great sort of Seamewes, (seeming
to be dead,) which were ioynde together with their bylles or nebbes in another
tail or fundament: and being warmed with their guts, were found a live.
Garuas. Tibellesius.

Galen.

Tarentinus.

A Piece of raw Beef, (not too thyck nor too thin,) being laid or stieped all
the night before in good Aqua Composita, and applied to the temples or the
foreheade, without removing all the night: (and thus doing three or four
nyghtes,) does help the watring and pains of the eyes, and all distyllations
and rewmes that comes from the head or brain. One told me this which had
often proved it to be most true, as a great secret.

Mercury is in the tenth house not impedyte: the child then borne, will be
mighty, wise, and a great Philosopher. Celi enarrant.

them: wherewith the Dropsy will be cured. This I had out of a book of
Secrets.







Plin.

A Little piece of the Navel string of a Child, that is newly borne, enclosed
in a Ryng, and so borne that it may touch the flesh, or bare skin: is a most
sure help and remedy, against the great pains and torments of the collycke.
Mizaldus.

Johannes Indagnies says, he has observed in old Women being Wytches, which
were led to be burned, whose eye brows were such. As Thaddeus Hageccius has
also noted.

Saturn in the nynth house, does sygnifye fears in iourneyes: but more in the
Sea, chiefly, in a waterye sign: and in Cancer the house of the Moon.
Taisnier.

FINIS. Lib. 6.
The seventh Book of Notable things.
THe water wherein the leaves of Planten, (that grows close to the ground,
and near the root) is sodde, being droonke twyse every day, morning and
evening, first and last, half a pynt at a time, for ye space of four or five
days: helps perfectly all griefs and diseases of the bladder. A true
medicine and often proved.

A Notable water for breaking of the stone. Take of the juice of Saxifrage, two
pound, of the juice of Gromell, and of the juice of Pearslye, of either one
pound, of the juice of Bettony, of the juice of Nettelles, and of the juice of
Ramsens, of each half a pound, of strong white Vinegar, ten ounces, of the
flowers and seeds of Broom, and of the roots of Radish, of each two
handfulles, stamp the last rehearsed well: then myxe the same with all the
iuyces before mentioned, and thereof destyll a water, with a gentle fire: of
which water give to them that have the stone, one ounce at one time, with
Oxinell Diuretycke, (which you may have at the Apothecaries,) using the same
nine or ten days, (if need be:) and it will break and avoid the stone
wonderfully. There can not be a better medicine for the stone: prove it when
you will.

Mizaldus.

Johannes Weckerus.

Abablez filius Zaed.

Betony be eaten, it dries up the tears of the eyes. All this and more has
been proved of Betony.



A Marvelous cure of a Woman, that was swollen, done by one John Ardern, whose
words thereof were these. I John Ardern did see a certain Woman at Newarke,
whose whole body was suddenlye swollen, and also the face, neck, and legs,
who did lie, as though she were half dead: to whom I gave the roots of
Daffadyll stamped, and myxt with water and saffern, which being drunk, she was
quickly hole. I wrote this ^ut of an old written book.

Iatromathematica. Guat. Ryff.

A Wind rising in the North, in the beginning of the night, or in the twye
light, by and by he cease and leaves his place. Therefore it is, that the
Shypmen or Marryners (having just trial thereof,) will not set forth in that
wind, unless it has continued three days. The South wind is contrary,
which if it rise or begin in the beginning of the day, it bringes hope to the
Marryners that it will continue, and not quickly depart out of that place.
Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.



Johannes Ganiuetus wrytes, that in the year of the Lord.1431. the seventh
day of August (being Henricus Amici, a Doctor of Physic, borne at Bruxelles
in Brabant, did ask him for the Lord Deane of Viennens. then being sick,
whether he should dye or recover of that sycknes. In the figure of which
question, he found that the Moon was going in conjunction to the Sun, under
the beams of the Sun, which was a testimony of death. With diverse other
lykelyhoods of the same. But espying Mercury beginning to be Retrograde, within
one degree of the Ascendent, (corrupting the degree ascending,) did judge that
he would shortly fall into a frensye, at the furthest, within a natural day:
although he was a very wise man. And so it came to pass. For within less then
a natural day, he became frantic. And so dyed within two days after.



Bapt. porta.

coals, and then lay some of the same hot upon a cloth, and apply it so to
the hinder part of the head at night, and tie it fast thereto, that it fall
not away. And also lay an other plaster thereof hot thereto the next night,
and so do nine nights together, one after another: and it will not only help
the same, (perhaps within three or four times so doing:) but also it will
clear the sight, and draw the humors clean away, that runs out of the head
into the eyes, and dry up the same. This medicine never fayles. Therefore it is
a precious thing, and worthy to be esteemed.

A Good way to get the stone called Craupaudina, out of the Tode. Put a great
or ouergrowne Tode, (first bruised in diverse places) into an earthen pot, and
put the same in an Antes hyllocke, and cover the same with earth, which Tode at
length ye Antes will eat: So that the bones of the Tode and stone, will be
left in the pot. Which Mizaldus and many other (as he says) have often times
proved.

Galen. de Theriaca ad Pi^onem. You may see, they were a towardly kind of
people, that Christ called the ^eneration of Uypers.

Petrus Hispanus.



Mizaldus.

Cardanus has written.

so that the leaves be upward to the nose, and the heads of them downward. It
is good also to smell to Camphere dyssolued in vynegar, and also to put the
root of Pyony under the tongue. Iacobus Holleri^s.

Mizaldus.

MArs in the nynth house, does threate^ in long iourneyes, chiefly on the
land, fear (and evil hap or success:) but not in Capricorn, seeing it is
his exaltation. Taisnier.









Mizaldus has heard that it has been proved of many.

Pliny affyrmes. And Aristotle says, that it is more wicked to kill a Woman,
then a Man. etc. And the Poet says: Quod faeminea in pena nullum est
memorabile nomen: Which is true. A man also can get no praise nor honesty by
beating of a woman. Which let butcherly beaters, and cruel tormentors of their
wives, mark well and consider. Mizaldus.

A Spoonefull or more of the powder of the Nettell seed, droonke in good Wine:
does assuage all pains of the Matrix, and takes away the wyndenes thereof, or
the grief of the Moother. Petrus Hispan.







Mercury, with ye Moon in some aspect, if neither of them behold the
Ascendent. Which is the more certain, if Saturn be there in the Nativity of
the day, and if Mars be there in the nyghtly Nativity: and if either of them
be in an Angle, such is the nativity of Diuelles. Albohazen. And they are or
will be mad, that have Mercury and the Moon in this sort, except that Saturn
contrary must be in an angle in the Nativity of the night, and Mars in an
angle in a Nativity of the day. Iatromath.

Gratianapolis, which although it has not hot or warm water therein: yet
oftentimes there coms out of the same together with the water flames of fire.
Two contrary Elements at one time, out of one place flowing out together.
Mizaldus wrytes this of the report of the Inhabytaunts of that place.

Albertus. Praise it, as it proves.

Saturn: neither enter or begin then any journey on the Sea. Haly Abenragel.

White Wine, wherein Lapis Calaminaris is seven times quenched, (first made
very hot in the



Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Africanus.

Haly Aben.





A Special medicine to strengthen the back. Take a quart of white Wine, and
the pythe that runs in an Ox back, and half a quarter of a pound of
Dates, and of Marygooldes, Planten, Bettony, Pearsley roots, and Fennel
roots, of all two handfulles: boil all these together, until the Wine be
half wasted away: and then streyne them through a cloth, and drink nine or
ten spoonefull thereof every morning and euenyng, for the space of nine or
ten days: and it will strengthen the back maruelouslye.



Saturn is Lord of the place of the Moon, and the Moon then under the
beams of the Sun: or if Mars be Lord of the place of the Moon opposyte to
the Sun, especially in Sagitary. Haly Abenragel.

Mowse quick in chalk, which when it is hard, hang the same about the neck
of the Beast, that you would keep safe from such biting. And it is most
certain, that he shall not be touched nor bytten: as is before said. Vegetius.

I Hear (says Mizaldus,) that it is observed and proved, that a Cow, an Ewe,
a she Ass, a Bitche, a she Catte, and such other domestical and tame Beasts
of the Female kind, will cast their Calfe, Lamb, Colte, or that that they go
withal: if the Male, by whom they conceived, be killed, while they went with
the same. Such a strong and vehement concord or agreement, (of nature) is
between, or among them.

Saturn be found in the same, (except it be Aries, (they that be then borne,)
shall for the most part see true Dreams: but if in a moveable sign, his
Dreams will be without effect. etc. Taisnier.

A Notable ointment for the head ache, coming of any cause, wherewith you must
annoint the pulses of the temples, and all the forehead. Take of the juice of
new or fresh Camamyle, four ounces, of the juice of new and fresh Roses, two
ounces, of the iuyces of fresh Rue and Bettony, of either one ounce and a
half, of the juice of the roots of Hollyock, two ounces, of oil Rosate
Omphacine, one pound and a half, of the best and purest Alablaster, three
ounces, powder the Alablaster finely, and put it into the said oil, and let it
lie therein a day, and a night, then myxe them all together, and with
sufficient white wax, make it into an ointment: which ointment is good for any
pain of the head, proceeding of any matter, or cause. And it may be used at
any time of the fytte or pain, except the beginning. Emperica benedicti
victorij fauenti.



Cardanus and Mizaldus.

Hieronimus Gardanus.

HErmes does say, that an evil Planet in Gancer: does threaten short life,
and continual sycknes to the mother of the child then borne.

Isac.







Mizaldus.

Anthonius Musa an excellent Physician does witness, that he has proved with
most happy success on him self. Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Venus, he shall escape at the end of forty days: and in the hour of
Mercury, he shall have long imprisonment: and he that is taken prisoner in the
hour of ye Moon, his business and state shall be changed, according to ye
applicatio^s which ye moon has with fortunate and Unfortunate Planets:
whereby the easynes and slownes of his delyuering shall be esteemed. Also, he
that is taken prisoner in the hour of Saturn, he shall endure long
imprisonment: and he that is taken prisoner in the hour of Jupiter, he shall
be delivered quickly. And they that be taken prisoner in ye hour of Mars, many
sorrows and troubles shall happen to them during their imprisonment. For he
shall be put in setters, and shall be beaten, and he shall suffer great
sorrows and labors. Haly Abenragel.





FRaunces Marquis of Mantua, did so instruct or teach a Dog, that he used him
as a very good servant, in calling of such of the Court as he would. Blondus.

A Benzoar, an excellent Physician among the Arabians: declares that once there
was such a famyne in his country: that the people was driven to pluck out the
dead bodies out of their graves, and did suck the marrowe of their bones. A
thing horrible to be heard, but more horrible to be done: from which need or
hunger, I beseech God keep us.

Mizaldus had this of one that proved it.

Rogerius.









Mizaldus.

Crapaudina, be the right and perfect stone or not. Hold the stone before a
Tode, so that he may see it, and if it be a right and true stone: the Tode
will leap toward it, and make as though he would snatch it from you. (He
enuieth so much that man should have that stone.) This was credibly told
Mizaldus for truth, by one of the French Kings Phisitio^s, which affyrmed that
he did see the trial thereof.

Sotion Grecus. And Palladius reports, that Garlic will be made the sweeter:
if in the planting therrof, you do set the stones of Olyues round about it. Or
else if you set the Garlic bruised.

Petrus Hisp.

Johannes Ganiuetus. But you must beware, (if the said Planet be dyrect) that
he does apply to the degree ascending.

Cassia Lignea, fynely powdered, one dram, the juice of Sauine, two drammes, and
then myxe them, and let them all be beaten together, and then tie the same in a
fine lynnen cloth, that is thynne, and then join it to the neck of the
Matryx of a Woman that is in her travel, and in the hour of the birth: (which
else should bring forth her child with dyffycultie,) by and by she will be
brought to bed. It is a secret. Benedictus victorius fauent.

Venus is coniunct, or joined with Mercury, and they both being under the beams
of the Sun, shall be gelded. Iotromath. Guat. Ryff.

Sextus Platonicus, and Albertus.

Mizaldus had this out of an old book of Secrets, written with the hand of
one called Ianus, or Faunus.

A Bathe wherein Emets, or Antes and their Eggs, (being stamped) have been
sodden: does quycklye heal an old, and almost incurable joint sycknesse.
Proved.

Castoreum, Assafetida, of either half a dram* of the root of Pyony fynely
powdered, one dram, Aromaticum Rosatum, two drams, myxe them together with the
syrrup of Mynts, and make thereof seven pylles, (you may have all this at the
Apothecaries.) This is a proved secret. Emperica benedicti.

Mizald.





affected be anointed therewith, being first made warm. This is gotten out of
the secrets of Ianus.

Mizaldus did understand that this was proved.

Leo, does show or betoken short life, of the Father of that Child then borne.
Taisnier.



which waters myxed together, then put therein an edged iron knyfe, made read
hot: the same thus heated and quenched for three or four times by an equal
quantity, used at each time, and the knife tempred with an edge: then dyp it
read hot again into the said water, and then after you may cut any iron
safely, and easily therewith: and this water is also marvelous in Fystulaes.

Rasis et Albertus.

Simoneta Cardinalis.

A Water whereby the Physician does maruelles, and is reputed as a Prophet.
Take the fylinges of Silver, of Brass, of Iron, of Lead, of Steel, of Gold,
of Spume of Silver and Gold, of Storax, according to the rytches and poverty
of the patient: first of all let them be put in the vryne of a Boy that is a
virgin, the second day in warm white Wine, the third day in the juice of
Fennel, the fowrth day in the whytes of Eggs, the fyft day in Woman's milk,
that geues suck to a boy, the syxt day in red Wine, the seventh day in
seven whytes of Eggs, and put that only into a Still at an easy fire, and that
that shall distyll, keep in a vessel of Gold or Silver. Sylens is to be kept
of the praise of this water: because it may not be bought. For his virtue does
pallyfie leprous persons: it heales and destroys a pure leprie: it wypes away,
or takes away every spot, it conserues youth, it makes the eye fair. I cease
to speak of the secrets of this water: for because I fear, least they that
have it, should be puffed up with pride. Trotula de pass. Mulier.



FINIS. Lib. 7.
The eight Book of Notable things.
YOu shall make Vinegar by and by, if you power pure and good Wine half sodde,
into a new earthen vessel, then well covered and stopte: and so the same
Pot set in hot scalding water.

A Woolfe first seeing a Man, does lift up his voice, and as a vyctor, does
despise him. But if he perceive that the Man has espied him first, he lays
away his fiercenes, and can not run. D. Ambrosius. Virgil. Plato. Sextus.
Platon. And other.

Plynius.

Mizaldus.

HE that takes his journey on the Sea, in the hour of Saturn: he shall have
many waves, and diverse Haly Abenragel.

Sticados arabici, of each one dram: let them be dried in the shadow, and make
them in fine powder, then take good Turbyth, one dram, of the best Agarick, two
drams, Coloquyntyda, half a dram, Gynger, Salgem, of either ten graynes, good
and chosen Rewbarbe, one dram and a half, Spykenarde, seven grains, the
powder of Hiera simplex galeni. half an ounce, Scamony prepared, one dram: let
them all be made in fine powder, and with the juice of herb Iue, make a mass
of Pylles. The weight to be given at one time is, one Pyll of one scruple. And
mark, if he that has the palsy, take this ordinary Pylle, (not once every
day, but) twyse in the week at the least: you shall see a sudden help in the
palsy. These Pylles may worthily be called glorious Pylles in the palsy.
Emperica benedicti victorij fauentini.

A Certain man fynding or catching a Mowse, did hit his wife therewith on ye
left cheek, being with child, who after was delivered of a Wench: which Wench
had, and yet has, the mark of a Mowse on her left cheek. This was told by a
credible woman, who said moreover, that the name of this Wenches Father was,
Thomas Bucknam, dwelling at ye time in Northfolke, in a certain Town called
Dysse. This affyrmes my other writing hereof.

YOu may turn white Wine into red, without any hurt or detryment, by and by,
if the powder of Honny, (that is first sod unto a stony substance, and then
dried, and so made in powder,) be cast into white Wine, and myxing it well in
the same with rowlyng it up and down together. The roots of any kind of
Dockes, either new or dried, put into the Wine: will perform the same with
less busynes.



Taisnier.

Sugar candy, of either three drams, Aloes Hepatick, two drams: let al them be
beaten in fine powder that are to be powdered, and put them into the waters and
Wine, mixing all together, and let them remain and stand a whole day, then
streine them easily, and keep that lycquor in a fair glass, and use it as is
before said. This is a precious thing for the sight and the eyes.

A Marvelous medicine for wounds and sores. Take a handful of Arsmart, wette
in fair water: then lay it in the wound or sore. After burye the same
Arsemart in some moist ground: and the said wound or sore, will afterward
myraculously heal, as the same herb does rotte, and consume. This I had of
one that affyrmed it to be true. I think it is written by Paracellus.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus did get of an old Mydwyfe, which had need of his help otherwise.

Galenus.

Jupiter, it is for no harm: but rather for good. Therefore doubt it not, and
though it should seem to be some harm or loss at the first: yet at length it
will turn to good. The oftener one tryes it, the truer he shall find it: so
that he be not Retrograde or Combust.

Polipodium,) stamped and plastred upon the feet of the Woman traueling of
child: causes the birth of the child, either a live or dead. This was told
me for a great secret.



and in two or three days, he will be hole, and hear well. This is proved.



AElianus does report, that no sick person of the Locrenses, should upon
pain of death: drink any Wine without the consent and knowledge of the
Physician, or any other give it them, without the commandment of the
Physician.



Albertus, as Mizaldus does write.

Petrus Hispanus.

A Question was asked of ye state of a certain person being sick, and of what
condition the disease was, and whether they should recover thereof, or not. etc:
It seemed at the first sight, that the party was hole for whom the question
was made, because the Sun was in the tenth house, and the part Fortune in
the Ascendent, but many other testymonies showed the contrary: And also Mars
did corrupt Venus, Lady or Alumten of the Ascende^t, and Venus also was under
the beams of the Sun, and began to be Combust, distaunt from the Sun ten
degrees: for Venus was in the.xxviii. degree of Sagitary, and the Sun in
the.viii degree of Capricorn: which two degrees in Sagitary did sygnify two
months, (being a common sign,) and the.viii. degrees in Capricorn being a
moveable sign, did sygnify.viii. days: therefore it was to be doubted of the
death of the sick person, about two months and.viii. days after the
question was made: as God would ordain, and so it happened right by the
appointment of God, to whom it belonges only to cure, infyrmities and
griefs, to raise up the dead, and to moderate the earthly bodies, by the
heavenly bodies: and to dispose inferyor things by means: to whom be glory.
Amen. Guilelmus Anglicus in suo tractatu de vrina non visa.

Olibanum, (which is the fairest and the whitest of the Frankensence,) and so
lay a lynnen cloth upon the powder, and sow it fast, and so let it lie three
or four days, until it be well and whole. (Which will be by that time, God
wylling.) Proved.

ENuches, (that is, they that be gelded,) be never balde nor gowtye. Hippocr.

Lampridius wrytes of Heliogabalus, the Roman Emperor: who says, he had
four Hearts in his Charret that carried him: and so many Dogs, calling him
self Diana: and four Tigers, calling himself Bacchus: and four Lions,
calling him self Cibel: and he ioygned four Women to his Charret, as
Sesostris King of Egypt, did with four Kings. O proud, presumptuous Prince:
he might ride a good while in that Charret, ere it would bring him to heaven.

Lazarus dyed, ere Christ did raise him from death to life: least any should
falsely report, that Lazarus had had the Apoplexy, or the falling sycknes, or
such like, and therefore but in a trance, or not perfectly dead: whereby the
just merit of Christ's marvelous miracle thereof might be darkened. This is the
meaning of Lemnius in his second Book of the secret miracles of Nature.
Therefore it is very meet to know, whether any such be perfectly dead or not,
which you may do by holding a little burning candle at the parties nose, whose
mouth is open: or else by setting some little cup or glass full of water to
the brymme, upon the said parties belly or navel, for by the moving of the
flame of the candle, or of the vessel with water: you shall perceive his
secret breathing, and whether there be any life in him or not. Camillus.

Manna Granata, two ounces, the flower of Cassia newly drawn, half an ounce,
Penyedes three ounces, oil of sweet Almondes being new, one ounce, the Lyghts
or Lungs of a Fox, fynely beaten and powdered, two ounces, (make the rest in
powder that are to be powdered,) then myxe all together, and make thereof a
Lectuary with the syrrup of Hysop. Emperica benedicti victori^ fauent. You may
have it well made at the Apothecaryes. I have tried it to be an excellent thing
in this case.

Georgius valla placentinus, does teach.

a little Salt: it will defend the party therewith anointed, from the bytterest
cold that is. Mizaldus.

Dioscorides.



Cardamomum, Gynger, Fennel, Petroselyne, Hysop, Organy, Syler mountain, of
each one dram, Galinga, one ounce, Sugar, one ounce: Let a powder be made of
these, and let it be taken continually with meat, and the sight will be
restored and kept. This powder was ordained by Master Geralde: whose trial an
old man did prove, which used spectacles twelve years, so that without them
he could not see great letters: but after he had used this powder only one
forty days, he was free, in so much that all the time of his life, he did see,
and read the least letter that was. This Trotula has written in the later end
of his Book, De passionibus mul^erum.

tender: then let the party diseased, hold his leg that is swollen over the
vessel, that it may receive the fume or smoke of the sodde Otes, and cover
the party with some thing that it may go down round about the vessel, and
then blysters will come upon the leg or swollen place: out of which will run
much water and corruption, then after annoint the place with butter. Do thus
four or five several times if need be. This is well proved.



Mizaldus.

A Marvelous Water that soon and easily may be prepared, more precious then
Gold, is made as follows. Put fair and clear water into a vessel wherein
there was never before any lycquor, or before never occupied: and when the
water is very hot, power it to quick Lyme, being before in another new and
clean vessel: and let it remain, and rest so long, until you have taken all
the foul spume that fleetes above from the same: and that all the Lyme be
settled to the bottom, and the water very clear: then power out the water
very softlye, without moving the Lyme in the bottom, and keep the same water
in a fair clean glass, or some other clean vessel well covered, or stopped
until you use the same. It will scantly be believed, what a myraculous virtue
and power it has in all kind of Ulcers, and chiefly, such as springes of the
French Pockes: For the same being bathed or moystned with a lynnen cloth dypt
or wet in the said water something warm, a pretty while: and then a lynnen
cloth well wet in the same, and so laid upon the Ulcer or sore in manner of a
plaster, and after renewed again: it wypes clean away all the fylthe or
corruption: it cease the pains: it fylles the Ulcer with flesh: and it quyte
quenches the heat or inflammations in a small time. Not without a great
miracle, for otherwise quick Lyme does burn with vehemency of his heat.
Let them enjoy this most excellent secret: which for great prayer and pryse
to many, I have refused to utter. Thus much Mizaldus.

Petrus Hispanus.

within seven or eight days at the furthest. I wrote this out of an old
Book. I think it be also in the new Jewel of Health: which is a worthy book
and full of many strange and excellent things.

Anatolius.

Haly Abenragel.

A Piece of the root of Craw foot, either put into the hollow toothe (if
there be any,) or applied to the toothe that aketh: will help the same
presently. A sure proved, and often tried medicine.

Angina, and perhaps thereby does hardly draw his breath: let them apply this
following often times in a day, and it will soften it and resolve it. For it is
proved. Take of the roots of Hollyock cut in small pieces, and made clean,
Camamell, the flowers of Uyolets, the flowers of Mallows, with the roots, of
each one handful, let them boil all in a sufficient quantitye of water,
until the water be consumed: then put to the same, the flower of barley,
Lynseede, and Fenecreeke, well stamped and beaten, of each one handful, the
grease of a Hen, one ounce, oil of Camamell, and oil of sweet Almonds, of
either a like much: which will be enough to make the plaster ^atte. This I know
to be an excellent remedy in this case: which I learned of Benedictus victorius
^auentinus, in his book called Emperica benedicti.





Florentinus in suo Georgico.

Saturn, his infirmity or disease will be prolonged, (or he will be long
sick,) and after will dye: (of the same sycknes.) Haly Abenragel.

Petrus Hispanus.

GVido Bonatus, wrytes a strange thing, which he found out by the science of
Astrology, in the Revolution of Henry the Emprour: who had of the said Emprour
a yearly stypende, for that he was a man of famous knowledge: which Emprour
had many Astrologyans, as well Physicians, as other in his own house. Who for
a certain year did travel for the Calculation of the Revolution of the said
Nativity of the said Emprour. And every one of them did draw out a Figure
thereof a like, and they found Mars in the same Figure of the Revolution in the
Angle of the earth, which is the fowrth house under the earth: and they judged
Mars then to be of an evil influence, and thereby they judged that the Emprour
that year should have hot Fevers of the nature of Mars. And they agreed all
in that opinion to the Emprour. Guydo Bonatus being there, had drawn the
Emprours Reuolucion likewise, and he found Mars going toward ye fourth house,
being then of an evil influence: judged thereby ye poison should be mynistred
to the Emprour to kill him. Therefore he counsayled the Emprour, that if any did
whysper, or had any privy talk together, or were found meeting or having
conference together in his Court, they should be apprehended: Or if any should
come to the Kytchin not wont, or appointed, that some faithful man of his
Court should watch the same. Which charge, was committed to the Master of the
Emprours household: which being very dillygent therein, espied and found two
Knights of the Emprours Court, that were very busye in talk together, and had
not only mutual conference together, more then they were wont: but also
oftentimes required to come into the Kytchin. Whereupon the Master of the
household committed them to prison, and then one of them called Johannes
Franciscus, was sore tormented: but yet he would confess nothing. So that they
devised a letter in the name of the said Johannes Franciscus, confessing
therein the matter, and showed it to his fellow: which when he saw, strayte way
said, that the said Johannes Franciscus was the chief procurer thereof, and
entysed him to it. Which uttered, they had their desire: wherefore they were
secretly executed. Johannes Ganiuetus, likewise discribes it.

A Certain Woman that used Mizaldus for her Physician, had a belly did so
swell, that it seemed she was not able to carry her burden: from whom (about
the end of nine months,) there came an evil shapen mass or piece: whereunto
were two ears like the handles of a cup fastened, like arms, with feeling:
after that there did fall from her womb, a monster with a crooked byll or
beak, with a long and round neck, with brandishing eyes, a sharp tail,
marvelous quick of foot: and as soon as it saw any light, it filled the
Parlor or place with noise, and so it did run from place to place: but at the
last, the Women following it, did smoolder or chooke it to death with pyllowes.
After the woman almost werryed, not without great danger of her life, did
bring forth a Boy, which was so tormented of the Monster: that they had much
to do to christen it with life. Leuinus Lemnius is the Author.

Saturn be in the tenth house, in a watery sign, and has any dignity in the
Ascendent: the Child then borne will be a Shypman, or a Sayler, or else he
will abide gladly on the water, and will delyght in fyshing. Taisnier.

Petrus Hispanus.

and that which you find therein, keep it in some clean glass, and put some
thereof into the deaffe ear. Let him use it every evening at his going to
bed, until he hear clearly: which will be within a fortnyght at the
furthest, (God wylling.) And when you do it into his ear, let him lie in his
bed, that the lycquor may enter. This I had out of an old written book.
Praise it as it proves.





the sick body. The house is afflicted, if Saturn or Mars be therein, or being
beholden of their quartyle or opposyte Aspect: and contrary, if the seventh
house be well affected, as if Jupiter or Venus is there, take ye Physician to
whom you make the question, or whom you are determined to take: for he shall
profyt the syck much, and he will quickly cure the sick to his great praise.
Therefore mark ye first, or soddayne calling or sending for the Physician, for
if at yt time the seventh house, and the Lord thereof be evil affected, the
Physician then called, or sent for, will not profyt the sick: But it follows
not therefore that the sick shall dye. But the Physician if he take him in
hand, shall go away without honor. Therefore as soon as thou art called to
go to the sick, take counsel of thy Ephemerides, and the celestial Figure
being erected, mark where the seventh house be well or evil affected: and so
thou may either refuse, or take the sick in hand. Iatromath. Guat. Ryff.

Petr. Hisp.

each one dram, as much of the powder of Lignum Aloes: beat all these spyces
together, and seethe the Dates with the Sugar or Honny with an easy fire, and
let it seethe, and as it seethes, cast in thereto a little of the powder, by
little and little: and stir it with a Splatter of wood, and so do until it
come to an Electuary, and then eat every morning and evening thereof, one ounce
at one time, and it will renew and restore again his complexion: be he never
so low brought. This has been proved, and it has done good to many a man and
woman.

A Noble Receyte for the black Iaundise. Take a gallon of Ale, a pynt of
Honny, and two handful of read Nettelles, and take a penny worth or two of
Saffern, and boil it in the Ale, (the Ale being first skymmed,) and then boil
the Honny, and the Nettels therein altogether, and strain it well: and drink
every morning a good draught thereof, for the space of a fortnight. For in that
space (God wylling,) it will clean and perfectly cure the black Iaundyse.



lycking it by little and little: and he shall spyt out the Uyscus and tough humor
easily. A secret of a Parisian Physician.

Africanus.

Saturn be in the tenth house, in an earthy sign, and has power or dygnity
in the Ascendent, and is Oriental of the Sun: he that is then borne, will be
a Master Carpenter, or else he will delyght in Carpenter ship: but if he be
Occidentall, he will be a cleanser of Wells or pyts, or else a dygger.
Taisnier.

Opiu^, one dram, of Saffern, three drams, myngle them with four or five
yolks of Eggs, and plaster the same upon the grief: for it mightily asswageth
the pains, and restrayneth the corruption.

A Most approved medicine for ye Emrods or Pyles. Take two or three brycks, and
burn them read hot, and put them in some pan under a close stool, and
sprinckle them with vinegar, and let the party grieved sit upon the said
stool, that the fume thereof may ascend upward to his fundament. Do thus three
or four times if need be: and certainly it will help it.

straight ways they will be so gyddy, that you may take them with your hands.
I wrote this out of an old written book, wherein I know many true things was
written.

A Present help for a Woman yt trauelleth of child. Take Hysop, Uerueyn, and
Dyttany, of each one handful, stamp them small, and temper them with old
Ale, then strain it, and wring out the juice, and give a good draught thereof,
to her that trauelleth of child to drink: and she will be delivered with
speed, and the child saved and she both: so that the child be alive when she
drynkes it.

A True medicine for the gowte. Take the juice of ye flowers of Broom, and the
juice of Scali celi, and Honny, as much of one as of an other, and seethe it
all together, till it be of the thycknes of Honny, and annoint the gowty place
therewith. I knew (says the writer hereof,) a good Priest in London that healed
all men and women therewith: for the most part that came to him. And truly I
wist it never fail. This, for the great good lykelyhood of the medicine, and
for the faithful affyrming: I thought good to regester it among the rest.

Mizaldus.

A Ram will not put or run at one: if his horns be boorde through, nigh unto
his ears. Mizaldus.

Jupiter, he will recover his health quickly. Haly Abenragel. This have I
proved to be true many times: and the hour of Jupiter is an excellent hour to
do any thing, or to take any good thing in hand.

A Little Gunpowder put into a piece of fine lynnen cloth, and the same put
into the hollow toothe, or holden between the teethe, so that it touch the
aching toothe: It puts away the toothe ache presently. This is very true.



A Special medicine for all suddayne sycknes, and especial of the stomach or
breast. Take a spoonefull of Aqua vite, and put therein half a spoonefull of
the powder of Lycqueres, and let it remain therein three hours, and drink it
fasting, or at even when you go to bed. It is a sovereign thing for the
stomach, or breast.





Mizaldus.

Aristoteles, as Mizaldus wrytes.

Hieronimus Cardan.

Jupiter be in the eleventh house well affected, and not Retrograde, nor
Combust, nor in his fall, (as in Capricorn) but in Cancer, Sagitary, or
Pisces: it sygnifyes (the Child then borne,) shall be fortunate, happy, and
have a common love in all things, chiefly: if he have any dignity in the
Ascendent, or in the place of the Sun, in the Nativity of the day, or in the
place of the Moon in the Nativity of the night. Taisnier.

Constantine the Emprour received his sight. Take three drams of Tutie, made in
very small powder, as much of Aloe Epaticum in powder, two drams of fine Sugar,
six ounces of Rosewater, as much of pure white Wine, myxe all together, and
put it in some clean vessel of glass, and being well closed and stopped, set
it in the Sun a month together, sturring it together once every day: Then
take of the same water four or five drops in your eyes morning and evening,
and with thus continewing a certain space: it will cause the sight to come
again as fair as ever it was before. This I know is proved for an excellent
water for the eyes, for it clears them maruelously. I knew one that could
not threede a needle without spectacles, which put not past two or three drops
of the same into their eyes at night: and the next morning, the same party did
see well to threede a needle without spectacles.

the same shyning matter, and myngle it with some quycksyluer, and so put it
into a Uyall, and hang the same in a dark place: and it will give light. This
I had out of an old book, which is not much unlike to the description of
Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Echo, is thought to drive away Bees. Therefore their Hyues ought to be
plaste, where the Echo or the voice does not sound again. M. Varro.

Jupiter, he shall have good gain in his substance, and in his busynes: and
he shall have profyt and gladness in things unlooked for. Haly.



without any writing. But if you hold it against the fire, you may then
easilye read it, or perceive the letters.









Mizaldus had of a certain Italyan, which professed that it is true.



John Arderne, have often times applied it as well to Women as to Men, and have
taken away their great pains, with once applying it as well in the feet as in
the knees, and other joints. But take heed it be not perceived of the
patient, nor of any other: but it ought to be kept more secret, and dear: and
let it be revealed to none: but to thy son, or to thy well beloved friend. I
do think it preuailes above all other medicines for the gowte, and eases the
pain sooner: and it ought to lie five or six days without any moving of it:
if it can be so applied. It is made thus. Take of black soap as much as is
sufficient, whereunto add of the yolks of raw Eggs, half as much as the
Soap, and myxe them well together in a dyshe, until the Soap has lost his
proper color: which done, lay thereof upon fine flax, and spread it like a
plaster, and then apply it to the grieved place, then take the whytes of Eggs
myxed with Wheat flower, and wet a lynnen cloth well in the same, and lay the
same upon the said plaster, and tie it well upon it, that the plaster remove
not away of all the said time: unless there be some great occasion. This I
found in an old written book. Which since I have oftentimes proved true, for
aches.



Mars and Venus are corporally: or by any good Aspect coniunct. Even so if
Venus and Mercury be ioygned, or in conjunction together. Also he will be a
perfect Physician, in whose Nativity Mars and Venus are coniunct in the syxt
house. Iatromath.

A Uery little Bird called Aegithus, does maruelously dysagree with the Ass,
who in thorny places does scratche or rub his ulcers or sores: whereby he does
destroy or break the nestes of this Byrd: whereupon it comes, that as soon as
this Bird hears the voice of the Ass, she does not only cast the eggs out
of her nest: but also her young ones (if she have any,) do fall from the same,
astonyed with fear. So that the said Bird flies unto the ulcers or sores of
the Ass, and pryckes or thrust at them with her byll: that she may drive him
away from thence. Aristotil. Plin. et Oppianus.

Taisnier.

FINIS. Lib. 8.
The nynth Book of Notable things.
Fill an Egg shell full of the juice of Egremony, and give it unto ye patient
to drink, whom you suspecte to have droonken poison: and it will myghtely
purge upward all the poison, and with a wonder facilytie heals the biting of
Serpents, and other venomous Beasts. Petrus Hispanus.

Balneo Marie. After it is distylled, myxe therewith one ounce of the oil of
Bays, and one pound of good Turpentyne: then let the whole be distylled, and
separate the water from the oil, and keep the oil as a precious Balm. The
use of this is, that the patient vexed with the Palsy, conuulcons, the crampe
and trembling of members, be laid vpryght, and the oil temperatly hot, must
be powered upon the the belly, into the hollow and bottom of the Navel, and
you shall see after a marvelous working, that may rather be coumpted divine,
then natural, and very much helps the palsy, and strengthens the memory:
used as before. A certain Practysioner applied one drop of this Oil on the
patientes forehead that had the Palsy, and another on his Navel, and he
incontinent arose as amassed: and was after one hour delivered of the grievous
pain of a wound, in a certain place of his body, and the shrunken synewes he
anointed with this Oil, and the patient was suddaynly healed. etc. This Oil
helps deafenes, and any sycknes proceeding of a cold cause: and helps
besides the loss of smelling. Arnoldus de villa noua, I take to be the Author
hereof.

Alces, (which is a wyld Beast like a fallowe Dear, having no joints in his
legs,) has a marvelous virtue and strength against the Falling Evil: for a
little piece thereof enclosed in a Ryng, and so the same Ryng put upon the finger
next the little finger: so that the same piece of the Hoof be turned toward
the palm of the hand: it does recreate them marvelous much, that are fallen,
and immediately makes them rise up. A little piece of the same bare, and put in
the hand, by and by closed into a fyst, suddenly it dryues away the disease,
and rayseth the party that is fallen therewith. Which Lemnius says he proved
once or twyse. And Mizaldus says that he proved it: putting in a little piece
of the same in the left ear, (moving it, as scratching a little,) of one that
had the falling sycknes, and it had very good success, and it was coumpted for
a miracle. Johannes Agricola does say the like is done, if a little piece of
the same Hoof be hanged upon one that has the same disease: so that it may
touch the skyn. I do hear says Mizaldus, that the scrapings or fylings
thereof, is given in Polonia for the same disease. The Hoof of the right hinder
foot is to be chosen. But you must take heed of false deceyuers, which sels
the Hoofes of Oxen or Kyne, for the true Hoofes of Alces.

Emperica benedicti fauentini.



and if he wake much, being a young man: or ^^ing an old man sleep much.
These are most cer^ayne tokens of death.



A Serpente does so hate the Ash tree, that she will not come nigh the shadow
of them. And therefore she goes far from them, both morning and evening:
because then they give the longest shadows. And Pliny says, that he has
proved it, that if one compass a place about with ye branches of an Ash
tree, so that there be a fire, and a Serpent enclosed in the same, the Serpent
will rather go into the fire: then she will seek to escape over, or through the
said Ashen branches. etc. Mizaldus.

Taisnier.

Dioscorides says also, that they do help against poisons, and styngings of
Serpents. Petr. Hispanus.

same with Oil, and cast or strowe on the same, the powder of glass,
whereupon say qucke bu^ning coals, and then hold the stone that you would
try, a good while over the same coals: (that the stone may be hot, not
touching the fire) and then i^ the stone lose his color: he is not good or
pure. But if he keep his color: he is then perfect and right.





Albertus.









little boiled on the fire, being drunk: does presently help such as have
drunk poison before. And whosoever drinks the same in a morning fasting, no
poison taken after the same day, can hurt him. This is a proved and tried
medicine.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Jupiter: he shall receive it again well, with gain. Haly Abenragel.

Petrus Hispanus: for it kylleth the Fystula, in what place so ever it be, and
draws out the corrupt and broken bones. Take the roots and leaves of
Planten, Strawbery leaves, the leaves or seeds of Hemp, the leaves or seeds
of Mustarde, the tops of sharp Docke, red Colewoort leaves, and Tansey, let
them all seethe in a good quantity of white Wine: after strain all the whole,
and put into ye streyning, as much Honny as shall be thought meet: give thereof
unto the patient early and late, until such time as the clear pocyon or drink
come forth by the mouth of the Fystula: which must always be kept open with a
silver Pype put into it, and keep upon it always a red colewoort leaf. It
is of a wonderful operation. Petrus Hispanus. And I my self have proved it:
and it healed in such manner as is before declared. It is a precious thing.

Petrus Hispanus.







Plinius.

Taisnier.

Petrus Hispanus* The juice of Cinquefoyle, does heal the Fistula likewise: if
it be put into the same with a spowte.

over the fire, and with the same water, annoint the thing that is gylded, and
cast thereon a little of the powder of quick Brymstone: after put it into the
fire that it may be made red, then quench it in running water, and you shall
find the gold in the bottom of the vessel.





then apply the same upon the sore eyes, and it will draw the evil blood out
of them, and perfectly heal them. This medicine has been proved.

Aristotil. Plin. And other.

Expositor does say, the King of our City did call me, because one of his
Women had borne a Son, and the Asce^dent was ye eight degree of Libra, the
term of Mercury, and Jupiter was in the same, and also Venus, Mars and
Mercury: and the company of the Astrologyans did meet together there: and
every one of them did tell his opinion, and I heald my peace: The King said
unto me, say what thou can: why do thou not speak? To whom I answered,
give me respyte for three days, for if your Son shall pass the third day:
you shall see a great miracle of him. And after xxiiii. hours was ended, the
Child did rise up to sytte, and he spoke, and gave signs with his hand,
whereof the King was greatly afraid: And I said, that he would speak some
Prophecy, or some miracle. Then the King went to the Child, and we with him,
to hear what he would say. And the Infant said, I am the Unfortunate borne
Child, and I am borne to show the loss of ye kingdom of Azdexit: and the
destruction of the people of Almanaz. And straight way the Child fell down,
and dyed. Haly Abenragel.

Acorus, of each three drams, of pure Cynamom, Cloaues, black Pepper, of each
half a dram, Turpentyne washed with the water of herb Iue, three ounces,
Sugar dyssolued in the water of herb Iue, as much as does suffice: And thereof
make a Lectuary, according to art, and know that it is marvelous. Emperica
benedicti victorij fauentini.



Hippocrates.

ALexandrinus Iouianus Pontanus, does say: yt he saw a man was grievously stung
or stricken of a Scorpion, which presently was delivered and helped thereof,
with drynking of Frankensence, wherein was sealed the sign of Scorpij, or of a
Scorpion: being after made in powder. But it must be graven in the stone of a
Ryng, ( Scorpio ascending) the Moon then being there, and plaste in the
Angle,) and the Frankensence must be sealed with that seal when the Moon is
in Scorpio, and found in an Angle. And let it be given in powder as is before
said, either in water, or in white wine, or in any other meet lycquor.

Alkemy: for this greatly avayleth in fyxing the medicine Uolatyle, and serves
well to incorporate with all mettalles, and ceasneth such as be crude, and
likewise sweetneth when they beegar. This also dissolueth all pains and
swellings caused of gross and clammy humors, and heals in a manner all
sorts of wicked Ulcers. And in this (says the Author) I conceived a great
delight, as to work such a maistrie, to see so many strange fumes and
varyeties: but a more pleasure I took in the practyse, as to see how ye same
auayled in every matter whereto it was applied. By which I prove this to be a
divine substance, and an oil worthy of eternal memory. And this was the
greatest secret, with which that syngular Matheus the Hungaryan, did so many
great maruels in Padua: for he heald with it the gowte, the quarten ague, the
pain of the French disease, and the dry scab on the head, with sundry other
griefs, for which while he remained in Padua, he was highly esteemed and
wondered at. And at the last in his departure from Padua, he revealed it to me,
that the only medicine which he used to all the griefs, was this oil and
none other. The making of which, he fully uttered unto me at his departing:
which before he would not teach to any man. And the same I have many times
made, and have also seen such strange practices of it, that to repeat them,
I should scantly be believed. Hec de secretis Fallopij.



the more Liver: the meryar, or more pleasant, the greater Spleen: and the
greater voice, the more Lyghts. Much like to these verses following.

Cor ardet, Pulmo loquitur, Fell commouet Iras:
Splen ridere facit, cogit amare Iecur.
That is.

The Heart does burn, the Lungs do speak,
the Gall to ire does move:
The Spleen or Mylt does make us laugh,
the Liver makes us love.
Mizaldus. CAuda Draconis, in the second house, (called the house of
Substance:) sygnifyes the child then borne, shall wastfully consume and spend
his goods, or sygnifyes the loss thereof. And that he shall come to poverty
and open mysery. Haly Abenragel.

A Grymony is of wonderful profit in medicines, especially: against hollow
wounds and ulcers. Petr. Hispanus. And Trotula says, that though the Fystula
that penetrates to the eyes, is incurable: yet some do wytnes yt such a Fystula
may be cured, by Agremony alone, by often using it, either in drink, or in
powder. Filipendula is good for the same, and the grains (o^ little round
things,) that are found in the end of the root. Gordonius alleges Egremony
to be the best and surest medicine, for the curing of a Fystula.



Petrus Hispanus, in this case: whose mind thereof I have mentioned, in
another place of this book.

Haly Abenragel.

Emperica benedicti victorij Fauent.

A Perfect and most sure and proved remedy, and a rare secret, for the helping
of women's sore breasts that be swollen and full of pain: which was revealed unto
me by an old woman: who said yt the Lady Owen, Doctor Owens wife, used it to
women in this case very much, who kept it as a great secret. The medicine
follows. Stamp or bruise nine little woorms, of some called Swyne lyce, (which
commonly will be found between the bark and wood of old or dry trees,
which have many feet, and being touched, they become round as a button,) in
eight or nine spoonefuls of drink, let them remain therein all night, and the
next morning streyne the same drink, and let the diseased woman drink ye same
a little warmed, at one draught, and then let her lay to her breast, a two or
three foulde lynnen cloth warmed: the next morning, let her take eight of the
same little woormes in drink, in such order as before, and the third morning
seven, and the fowrth morning six, and so every morning following one less:
discreasing one every morning, until nine mornings be ended, on which nynth
morning she must take but one of them, as it will fall out by the discreasyng
one every day. And if she be not then thoroughly hole of her breast, let her
increase every morning one immediately following: until she has received nine
at one time, according to the order before appointed. A rare and notable thing,
if it be true: for I never proved it.







legs: and with the same skyn warm, rub Wartes three or four times or more,
and it will drive them away. Petrus Hispanus.



A Syngular oil and very rare, which causes a comely face, and makes the
person merry which uses it, yea, strong and hardy to fight: the making whereof
does follow. Take one pound or two of Hemp seed, which after the fynely
beating thereof, sprinckle and wet it with a little Wine, then put all the same
into a new earthen pan glased, and set it over the fire: heat it so long,
until you can not suffer your hand in it, after put the same substance hot
into square bags, which wring hard out, in a press, and an oil will come
forth very profitable: whereof if any drinks to the quantity of an ounce at a
time, it makes him pleasant and merry: and if a Souldior drink it, it will
make him both fierce and hardy to fight, without any fear or doubt of his
enemy. And also it is profitable to Women, in that it makes them merry, and
coomly to see too: and in this manner you may draw out an oil out of all
seeds. This is in the new Jewel of Health.

A Notable and often proved medicine for a Sciatica, ache, gowte, or other
pain or grief. Take a pynt of pure Aqua Composita, one Beasts gall, and one
ounce o^ ^epper beaten into powder, boil them all together ^nt^ll half the
Aqua vite be consumed: then lay so^e thereon on a cloth like a plaster, and
apply it something hot to the grieved place, and let it lie twelve hours
unremoved, and do thus four or five times if need be: for it is a present
help.

A Precious Water for eyes that be fair and clear, and yet are blind. Take
Smalladge, read Fennel, Rue, Uarueyn, Bettany, Egremony, five leaued Grass,
Pympernel, Eybright, Sage, Celendyne, of each one quarter of a pound, wash
them clean, and stamp them in a fair brazen mortar, or in a pan, then take
the powder of fyfteene Pepper corns fynely searced, and a pynt of good white
Wine, and do them to the herbs, and also take three spoonefull of life Honny,
and fyfteene spoonefull of the urine of a Boy that is an innocent: and mix
them all together, and boil them over the fire a little while: and strain all
through a cloth, and keep it in a glass well stopped, until you occupy it:
and with a fether do it into the sore eyes, and if it dry away, temper it
with white Wine again. This is a medicine for all manner of euylles of sore
eyes, to make a man see, if ever he shall see, within fyfteene days on
warrantyse: by the grace of God. This I took out of an ancient written book.

Planet, he shall dye a fair and good death. Haly Abenragell.

Petr. Hispanus.





A Notable secret for all incurable aches and pains in the joints where ever
they be. Take all the whole horn yt a Buck castes off (the later the better,)
cast away the scawpe, take nothing but the horn, cut the same in shyuers or
pieces, then seethe the same in a gallon of fair water, until all be comd to
a pynt, or some thing more: then cast away the pieces of the horn, and then
let that in the vessel stand until it be cold, which then will be like a
ielly. And when you will occupy thereof, warm some of it in a sawcer, or some
other convenient thing, and then anoint the grieved place therewith by the fire
morning and evening, and let it drynk in by the heat of ye fire: and it will
help and heal it thoroughly for ever, (God wylling,) within nine or ten
dressings. This is very true, and well proved: which a friend of mine told me,
that helped him self of such an ache therewith, that neither counsel of
Physicians, practice of Surgeons, nor yet the long using of the Bathes, could
ease: whereby he spent much money in vain, until a Wenche by chance told him
this excellent remedy. Which as she said a noble man of this Realm, did
learn beyond the Seas: who has revealed it since to the great commodity and
help of many.



be a water, then strain it, and keep it in a glass, and put some of it into
the hot eyes, four or five nights together: and it will cease the burning
and pricking thereof quickly. Often proved.

Haly Aben.

A Wonderful drink against brusings, and it helps such maruelously that
are bruised through falling. Take Egremony, Bettony, Sage, Planten, Iuy leaves,
Rosepearslie, stamp them together, and mix Wine thereto: give the patient it
often to drink, till he be hole. A true and tried medicine. I think that
Petrus Hispanus has the same.

Benedictus victorius Fauentinus.







Sciatica. Take a pound of good black Soap, one pint of good Aqua vite, half
a pynt of Sallet oil, and a quarter of a pynt of the juice of Rue, seethe them
and stir them all together over an easy fire, until it be something thycke,
and that it may be made in a plaster: then spread some thereof upon a piece of
lether, and apply it to the ache or payned place, and let it lie thereon
unremoved, three days and three nights: and if the pain be not then gone,
then apply such an other plaster thertoo, and remove it not of so long, and it
will help it certainly. This was told me by one that knew it often proved.

well. Especially, if you put afterward a little Rose water into the eye. This
I have proved diverse times to be true. Yea, and I think if it were used, it
would consume the web of the eye, at length.

HAly says, that he that begyns to set forewarde his journey in sailing, or
enters to go to the Sea in the hour of Saturn, he will be drowned: or else
will be lost by the invasion of Pirates or other: or else the fiercenes or
great raginge of the Sea will throw him to ye land, where he shall suffer
shipwreck. Or else into far Islands he shall be carried, (perhaps unknown to
him.) Which of truth has always happened to that Ship, (that then sets
forewarde,) as the book of Natures did contain: which as he has dillygently
proved, and read, which chiefly entreates of the judgments of hours. And the
said Haly says further, as follows: when a certain ship did set forth or
forward in the hour of Saturn, I said to one of my fellows, which
understood some thing in this Science: all these men are given to be lost, and
within a while after they all perished. Thus much says Haly. And in beginning
of long iourneys as well by Land as by Sea, in this hour I have known much
harm and mischief to follow: Which although many do not, nor will believe to
be true, because they know neither this excellent Science, neither the proof
of these things: yet many that be wise and learned, and that have paid full
dearly for the proving thereof: does think this no lie. But if some of them
did know the same hour, and should practice some such like thing therein: the
event thereof would teach them I think, not to be so incredulous. I know (I
thank God therefore) that no harm shall happen to the children of God: for he
will so guide them, that neither man nor devil, nor any other thing can
destroy them, though in this world they may seem to hurt them. And as he
does preserve them from harm, even so he appoynts them their times to walk
in, and the very beginning of their iourneyes: Assured and am fully satis^yed,
that he by his divine providence, makes them avoid that hour, and other evil
times: and the wicked and ungodly have happened of that time, to their
destruction. Therefore for my part, I attribute nothing to the time, but all
honor to God that made the time: whose glory and power is to be extolde, that
foreshewes such things to man, by such hours or time.



Cucubarum, Ginger, Nutmugs Cloves, Cynamom, of every one an ounce, fresh sage,
four ounces, water that is distilled six times out of pure and good Wine, ten
ounces: put them all together, and let them remain so in a close clean
vessel three days: then distyll the same, and keep that that is distylled in
a clean and close vessel. Whosoever drinks a nutte shell full of this water
every day: it will preserve their bodies maruelously, and keep them from many
diseases, and bring them to old age. It is said that M. Gallus, Physician to
Charles the Emprour, used this water, and lived a hundredth and four and twenty
years. Georg. Alapide devised this water.

Euonymus.

Rogerius seems to be the Author hereof. As appears in Euonymus.

Benedictus victorius Fauentinus wrytes for the same cause: but he appoynts the
juice to be given with Mellicrate.

A Proper practyse to make a Capon to bring up young Chickens. Take a Capon and
pull his belly bare of feathers, and after rub the naked place with Nettels,
then setting young Chyckens under him, he will maruelously cherish them then,
and bring them kyndly up. And the rather if you use him thus for a time: for by
yt means he is moved the more wyllingly, to cherysh, bring up, and feed: yea,
and to love them, as the Hen would do naturally. And the reason thereof is, for
yt by the pricking of the nettels, he is the rather desirous to coutch on the
soft down and feathers of the young Chickins, sytting under him. This I had
out of the natural and Artificial co^clusions of the Scholars of Padua.
Translated into English by Th. Hyl.

Aeschilus was foretold by an Astronomer, yt he should be killed by some
ruin, or something that should fall upon him, upon a certain day or time: who
(to prevent the same,) did walk abroad a certain space about the warned time,
and would by no means come into any house, thinking thereby to avoid that
danger, unless the heavens should chance to fall: but mark how hard it is to
avoid Fate or Gods determined appointment, about the same time foretold by the
Astronomer, an Eagle did fly over his head, from whom a stone did fall upon
Aeschilus head, and killed him. Whereby we may not only see ye man's wisdom and
policy is not able to frustrate Gods providence: but also yt there is a
marvelous certenty in ye Astrological foreshewing of events, especially, by
directions: which Ciprianus Leouitius seems to affirm by this and other
notable examples. And sure I am by many proofs and trials, that the events will
assuredly happen at the time promised by dyrections, that is: when the
Signifyer coms to the very place and minute of the Promissor, accou^pting for
every degree between the^ one year, and every minute, about six days, if the
Signifyer be to be dyrected by the dyrect Ascencions: but if the Signifier be
to be directed by the obliqu^ Asce^cions, (or else Intermixtim) which is not
very easily or soon done, then they sygnify sometimes more, sometimes less,
according to their swift or slow asce^ding. Which dyrectio^s to be infallible,
the learned and expert herein cannot choose but affirm. For yt they are found
as perfect by proof, and as true by trial: as the break of the day, does
assure us of the rising of the Sun.

Lamberge a Town of Schlesia, as Ioha^nes Langius wrytes, a certain Woman
great with child did follow a Priest that had newly washed or bathed his feet:
who being taken with such a lo^ging or lust with the sudden sight of his bare
feet, that she privily behind his back, did hold his leg with her hands,
and out of the same plucked a piece of flesh with her teethe: Nothing regarding
the cry of the poor Priest, which cried out both of God and man.

and the pain go away. This I have proved to be true diverse times. And it is
practiced of many, especially: for Oxen or Kyne. But the sudden swelling and
grief of my horse leg has been helped therewith, within two or three days,
and by none other means. Who lystes to prove it, shall find it true: although
it be far unlikely.



Cardanus,) and after put the Eggs again in the nest: for after the hatching,
the feathers will grow white. This is taken out of the natural and artificial
Conclucations of the Scholars of Padua. Translated in Englysh by Thomas Hill.

Leone, (that is the sign called the Lion:) So that the Moon behold not then
the syxt house, nor the Lord of the Ascendent behold Saturn or Mars, and the
Moon then separate or rather free from them: it does put away the intolerable
pains and torments of the back: if it hang at the raynes of the back, or
touch the same. And if (...) be made of the powder of pure Olibanu^ and Goats
blood, and after sealed with the same Lion, and after dried, and then being
dyssolued in white Wine and droonke fasting: it works a marvelous effect
against the stone of the reins and of the blather. Andreas Cordubensis to
Gregory ye Bishop of Rome.

Galen the Author hereof says, (belyke for the excellency thereof,) give not
this before thou have received a reward therefore, the making whereof does
follow. Take of Cynamom, Cassialignea opium, of each two drams, Myrre, both
Peppers, Galbanum, of each one dram: let them be stamped, and then myxed with a
little clarifyed Honny, and made in a lump or mass, give thereof at night two
round pyls, something bygger then peason, in the soft of a roasted apple, and
let not the party drink of two hours after, and if his grief and pains be
never so great, he will be in marvelous ease, and quietness within an hour or
two after, and so remain the most part of all the night: yea, and perhaps
sleep soundly and well. You may give it two or three nights together, if the
party be strong, but if he be very weak, give it every other night, three or
four times: and if the party be in extreme pain, then give it when you list.
But if the stomach be full of meat or fleame, it will show the less effect.
Who ever shall prove it, shall find it a worthy thing. I have proved it above a
hundredth times.

A Fine way to make Corral by art, which follows. Make ye horns of Goats
(first shaven or scraped) into powder, and let the same stiepe in strong Lee,
made of the Ashes of the wood of an Ash, fy^teene days together: afterward
take it out of the said Lee, and mix it with Cinabrium, dyssolued in water,
and hang it over an easy fire, until it be thycke, and if it have then the
color of right Corrall: make it in the form or fashion you think good, dry
it, and polysh it according to art. This does Mizaldus discribe.



Iac. Veckerus.



Coloquintida, and lay the same to stiepe in water, a whole night, and after
boil woormwood in that water: which water being cast about the chamber,
kylleth all the fleas therein. Also anoint a staff with the grease of a
Hedghogge, and lay the same in the mids of the chamber, and all the fleas
there will come and cleave to that staff.

A Certain young Gentlewoman or Lady, trymming and dressing her self, holding
then in her mouth, a few pyns, was suddenly and privily stricken between the
shoulders, by a certain Rular or Prince (being her Lover,) wherewith she was
so suddenly feared and amassed, that she swallowed the pyns which she did hold
in her mouth: which pyns she avoided in her urine within two days after
without an harm. Ioh. Langius a learned Physician, is ye reporter hereof.

Mizal.

Apisius got much money, with this most excellent Oil following, and was
maruelously esteemed therefore: after whose death the King of Spain did give
unto his wife, five hundredth Crowns, for ye uttering and disclosing the making
thereof, as is manifest in a book made of ye same at large by one George Baker,
in the English tongue: which has manifestly showed his honest heart and natural
love to his Country. The same Apisius in his life time, and his wife after his
death, did help all wounds, old ulcers, aches, pains of the back, and
emroddes therewith, and it is marvelous good for the gowte: the making of the
oil is thus. Take of the most purest and oldest white Wine, one quart, of the
oldest oil Olyffe, three pound, Carduus benedictus (called the blessed
Thistle,) Ualerian, and the lesser Sage, with the flowers if you can get them,
of each a quarter of a pound, of the leaves and flowers of S. John's Woort,
half a pound: let the herbs and flowers be infused or stieped in the said
Wine and oil xxiiii. hours: then the next day let all be put into an earthen
vessel leaded, or a vessel of brass upon an easy fire, until the Wine be
consumed, moving it still being over the fire, then being taken from the fire
and streyned, put thereto of Uenys Turpentine, a pound and a half: then let all
boil together a quarter of an hour, then put thereto Olibanu^, five ounces,
Myrre, three ounces, Sanguis Draconis, one ounce, and let all boil until the
Myrre be dyssolued: then put it into a vessel of glass stopped, and let it
stand in the hot Sun ten days: before you use this oil, you must wash the
sores or wounds with white Wine, wherein must be ye powder of Olibanu^. I have
written this here, because I think thereby many shall have knowledge of this
precious Oil: which otherwise should never have heard of it.

A Sweet water and an unknown, whereof one part mixed with ten quartes of pure
water, makes the whole most sweet. Take Nutmugs, Cloves, Galingale, Spiknard,
grains of Paradise, Mase, Cinamo^, of every one an ounce, pound or stamp the^
all, ad thereto twenty grains of Musk, or less, as you delyght in the smell
thereof, power into them a pound and a half of Rosewater: let them so remain
together in a close vessel four or five days, then put thereto thryse as much
Rosewater, and distyl all the same in a pot or kettel full of water, seething
as in Balneo marie, and keep the distylled water in a glass well stopped: to the
use before said. Euoni.

Thomas Hill out of the natural and Artificial conclusions of the Scholars
of Padua affyrmes this.

Albertus.

Mizal.

Matheolus upon Dioscorides, wrytes it.

FINIS. Lib. 9.
The tenth Book of Notable things.
THere is an evident familiarity between the Olive tree, and the Myrte tree,
for as Andronicus reports, the branches of the Myrt tree do pleasauntly
extend or spread by the Olyue tree, and the roots of them do mutuallye
embrace each other, nor any other plant: but the Myrt tree will grow well nigh
the Olyue tree. This also Mizaldus does affirm.

Bitumen raw, or the smoke thereof burned, received by the nose of such as
are grievously tormented with the pains of the moother, is a present help or
remedy. It is most certainly proved. Wherefore many Women which are grieved with
ye disease, do hang it about their necks in wool, that they may drive away
their fyt, by the often smelling thereof. Mizaldus wrytes this. And the learned
Doctor Monardus affyrmes the like thereof.

Johannes Baptista Porta has written this.

Mizal.

SToflerus an excellent Astronomer, knowing by his Nativity, that he should be
in danger to be hurt about a certain day or time: kept him self then within
his own house, assured that it was strong enough. The same day or very nigh unto
it, yt the event should hap, certain of his learned friends and he, as they
were reasoning together, did vary in some certain opynion, about the trial
whereof as it should seem, he reached to take down one of his books, (being
placed among diverse other,) when through the lack of a nail, the whole class
or shelfe where the book was, fell upon his head, and wounded his head very
sore. Which does not only show the worthynes and excellency of Astrology,
especially, in a learned and skylfull person therein: but also our folly in
flying from Fate for that, our wisdom does lead us into it, when most of all
we mean for to shun it. Therefore perfect prayer passes pollecie, in
preventing of peryls.

Iacobus Hollerus an excellent Physician affyrmes it.

or the party or parties that killed or murdered the^, or was the cause
thereof: Immediately blood will burst forth suddenly, either out of the wound, or
nose, or out of some other part of their body. I could aleadge here a great
sort of examples for the verifying thereof, but I omyt them: for it is a thing
found true by daily experience. Besides that Lucretius, Philip. Melancton.
Johannes Langius, and Lauinius Lemnius have written thereof.

Mizaldus. Besides that, it is proved to be true.

A Certain Woman went with a dead Child in her womb above four years,
which by the counsel of learned Physicians, and expert Surgeons, was drawn
from her peecemeale: and the mother did not only live, but also conceived an
other Child, as Mathy Cornace, a notable and learned Phisicio^ has affyrmed:
who was present when the said Woman was cut for the getting out of the said
dead Child. Mizaldus reports this.

in wine, works the like effect. Mizaldus.

Musaraneus, called a Shrew, (I take it to be the blind Mowse,) does chance
to go over any part of any Beast: that part of the Beast will after be lame.
This is known to be true.

Mizaldus.

Traiane the Emprour, a certain man having a disease, called the Dissury, did
pysse with much a do, a knotted Barley straw. Anthonius Mizaldus has written
this. And I knew a Gentleman that after his death being opened, had a Pygions
fether stycking in his heart: which fether was showed me by the Surgeon that
did cut and open him.



thereto, wherein there is a hoale bored, and a lowse put therein, and ye same
bean wrapped in a piece of sylk, and then hanged about the parties neck, as is
before said. Anthonius Mizaldus.

Rasis is the Author hereof, by the report of Mizaldus.

Mizaldus fathers this of Geber.

Hermes says. But Benedictus victorius Fauentinus in his practices, affirms
for truth: and says it is certainly proved, that five ounces of the vryne of
a Boy not polluted, and of a sanguyne complexion, myxt with hal^e an ounce of
good white Sugar, being droonke every morning early, ^asting for the space of
ten days: does help certainly the Iaundyse, and also so much droonk at once,
a month together in such order, does help the Dropsye perfectly.





Which matter or Stone is a thing most effectual against any venom or poison.
Many Physicians of great aucthority and antiquity, are witnesses hereof. Julius
Scaliger, and Amatus Lucitanus do boast, that they saw such a thing, and they
affirm that it may be given effectually with a little wine to them that are
infected with the plague: for by the strength and help thereof, so much sweat
will come forth of ye body, that you would think the whole body, will turn or
consume into moisture, with which once giving all the poison or venom is thrust
out of the body. The Arabyan Phisitio^s calls this Stone Besoard. And thereof
Alexipharmaca, a remedy against venoms, Bezoardica. This Anthonius Mizaldus
writes. These Besaar stones, being of a most excellent, notable and precious
virtue, are now gotten in Peru, in the west Indyans, and found about ten years
past, in certain kind of Beasts that goes in the mountains of that Country,
which are much like to Sheep or Kyds that are in the Portingal Indyas, by a
worthy Spanish Gentleman, called Peter de Osma, who killed some of those Beasts
purposely, for the said Besaar stones, which he thought to find in them: but
although he looked and searched therefore in the belly, and in other places of
one of the eldest and greatest of them: yet he could find none of them, neither
would ye Indyans tell him in what place of the Beast they were, saying they knew
no such Stones: being loath he should know that secret. But at the last an
Indian Boy, of twelve years of age, told him where to find them. Wherefore
the other Indyans would have killed the Boy, because the Indyans do much
esteem those Stones: for they do offer the^ unto their Gods, or before their
Idols, as one of the most precious things they have. So that by the said Boys
revealing, the said Gentleman found ye Stones in a certain little purse that
the mawe of the Beast has: wherein the herbs does lie when he chaweth the
cudde. The said Ge^tlman geues a marvelous commendation of them in a letter,
which he wrote to Doctor Monardus an excellent learned Phisitio^ of Civil in
Spain, saying: that they are marvelous good against all venom, and against all
sorts of poison, as well in meats as otherwise, and in euylles of the heart,
and to expel and kyl woormes, and that they have healed such diseases with
this Stone, that it is wonderful to be seen, both of Ladies, Gentlemen, and
many other: naming many of their names in that letter, saying further: That as
a new thing, all such takes it in powder, as have diseases which can not be
healed by medicine, and many do heal: and so with many other things he
prayseth God, for the great benefyts received by the virtues of this Besaar
Stone. And the said Doctor Monardus having received of the said Stones from
the said Gentleman, does maruelously praise and extol the said Stones in a
worthy work or book made by him of certain trees, oils, plants, and stones
of wonderful great and marvelous effects, whose very words thereof, (as much
as shall seem needful therefore:) I here do utter. If I would (says he) put
here the great effects, and the diseases which the Stones of Peru have healed,
that they which do com from thence do tell me, and that Gentleman does write
merit would make a great book. I will put that only which I have experymented,
and the effects that I have understood that they do, and these that have past
by my hands, whereby all credyte may be given unto it, and as a thing certain:
seeing that there is experience of it, with all assurance and trust, it may be
used. Our Occidental Besaar Stones have great virtues, principally they do
remedy many persons which be sick of the heart, for the which I have given
great quantity of them that have been brought me, and they have made
marvelous effects: so much that to many persons which did swounde, by taking
it away from them, they were delivered from death. It must be given when they
do swound, and before it come, taking it in the morning fasting with Rosewater,
if the party have great heat: if not, then with the water of flowers of
Orrenges, the quantity of four grains, every time made in powder. In all
kind of venom, it is the most principal remedy that we know now, and that
which has done best effect, in many that have been poysned, which have taken
it, as well by venom taken at the mouth, as by biting of venomous woormes,
which are full of poison. It does truly a marvelous and a manifest work, unto
them that have droonke water standing in a stinking lake: being infected with
Beasts or varment, which are full of poison, and being swollen immediately after
they had droonke it: by taking of this Stone two or three times, they were
remedyed, as I have seen them after. etc.

In pestilent Fevers I have given it many times, and surely it does extinguish
and kyl the mallyce of them* which is the principal thing yt the Physicians
should procure in the like diseases. And although he does take away the cause,
and does withdraw the putrefaction. And if he do not extinguish and take away
the mallyce, the cure is never at an end. For that is it which kylleth, and
does the principal hurt. And where there is certain spots in ye body like to
fle bytinges, which do appear in the like Fevers, the Besaar Stone of our
Indians, does make marvelous effects. Of those which they have brought me, I
have spent the most part, giving them in the like diseases, and surely it has
remedyed many with marvelous success, and in that which some of them have been
spent by me, has been in swoundings: and surely I have seen in these Stones
the effects so great, that it seems a thing of wonder. And especially, I
have seen these causes more remedyed in women, then in men: it is a marvelous
thing to be taken, and it has done manifest effects, where there is
melancholy humor, it does repair him much. And it does in him and in all
things which do result of him a great work, be it universal or particular,
in the head, or yt as they call Mirarchia, and also in them that have Leprosy:
of the Arabienssor, Elephanciacis, of the Greeks. It does profyt much in
Scabs, in Itchings, in Scuruines, and in all parts of the body yt is infected.
It makes a very good work: and does remedy the euyls manifestly. For that this
Stone has property, to heal them. I have given it in quarten agues, and
although it takes not away the quarten, it takes away the accidents of it,
the fayntnes and sadness, and the grief of the heart: which in these Fevers are
common. Surely they do feel with the use of it notable profyt, in all large
and importunate diseases. etc. It is good to cast into purges, some grains of
it, that if the purge do carry venomous medicines, it may rectify and amend
them. And if not, it gives force and strength to the heart, and they work the
better. In the Orye^tal Indyas, they have a custom to purge them selves two
times every year: and especially, ye noble people of estymation. And after
they have purged them selves, they take every morning fasting, four grains of
the Besaar Stone with Rosewater, or with water made for ye purpose, and they
say that this does concerue the youth, and does strengthen the members, and
does preserve them from diseases. And it is a good use, for it can not but do
them much good. I have given it to many people, and especially to children and
Boys that are tormented with Woorms: and I have seen such works as are not
to be believed: if they were not seen. This and more has Doctor Monardus
written in his said Book of this Stone, and other worthy and wonderful
things. Which book is dillygently and truly translated into our English
tongue, by one John Frampton Merchant. Which book is tytled and called,
Joyful News out of the new found World: who deserves great thanks, and
continual commendations for publishing such a common commodity to his Country.

A Water which certainly will heal the Fystulaes. Take two pound of water
that is distylled out of good white Wine, as you still Aqua vite: put thereto of
the water of Sage, and of the water of Rosemary, of either five pound, Sugar
two pound: distyl them all together, and when they are distylled, put too the
water distylled, one ounce of Sage, and as much of Rosemary, and when they are
stiept together eight days, strain it and use it in curing of Fystulaes.
Euonymus. In which book is many excellent things.



Mizaldus wrytes this by the report of an Italyan, which affyrmed to him that
he had proved it to be true.

place where they be laid, and so letting them lie there unremoved nine or
ten days: if at the ten days end, he shall take up the said turfes, and
untie or loose ye same, he shall find a great sort of young Eeles within the
same: although there be not one Eele in ye same water at the laying there, of
the said turfes. And then if he tie the said turfes with the young Eeles
together again, and lay them again in the same water, a great increase of
Eeles will after come thereof. This was credibly told me for a very truth, of
one that did try the same. I think they breed of the same dew.

Johan. Bap. Por.

Aries ascending, and Jupiter plaste in the same, not impedite by any evil
Star or Planet, so that the Moon and Venus behold him friendly: is a
marvelous help and remedy to them that have a continual headache, (if they
wear the same Image of gold.) Laurentius Miniatus, by the report of Iouianus
Pontanus, did with the same help a friend of his of a continual head ache.
Mizaldus.

and sodde in Allom water, let them be put whiles they be warm, in water
cullored with Saffern, if you will have them yallow: or in the juice of Elderne
or Walwoort berries, if you will have them of a blew color: or in water myxt
with Flos eris or Uergdygrease: if you will have them of a green color, and
so of other colors. You may prove the same with the feathers of Byrds.
Mizaldus.

Mizaldus.

Mizaldus affyrmes this.

Lemnius.

Thomas Hill.



Cardane writes, that if you take Oil, putting into it mowlten lead, seven
times together, and after quench Iron red hot in that Oil four or five
times together, it will make the same Iron soft to work upon.

A Certain Woman with Child, seeing a Bakers shoulder naked or bare, whiles he
did put bread into the Oven, did long or desire so much to eat of the said
Bakers shoulder, that she abhord or lothed all other meat. Her husband having
pity of his loving wife, did agree to give the Baker certain money for every
bytte that his said wife should byte of his shoulder, and the same Baker
suffered the said woman to have two byts at his shoulder: but when she began
to byte at it the third time, he was so grieved with pain, that he would
suffer her no more to byte at his shoulder. Immediately after the woman
traueyled, and brought forth three children, two of them a live, and the third
dead. Johannes Langius is the Author hereof.

A Notable distylled water as follows, worthy to be compared to gold. Take
one part of Gentyan, and two parts of Centory, stamp them together, then put
Wine to them, and let them sooke together fyues days, then distyll them, keep
the water distilled in a close clean vessel: this water droonke, morning and
evening, preserves the body from all kind of diseases, it puts away all
impostumations, it makes good color, it resysteth the plague, it heals the
sick of the Ptysicke, it auoydeth the stuffed stomach, it breaks the stones
in the reins, it seperateth and puts away the watrye humors of the Spleen,
it helps forward the flowers, if it be droonke nine days together in the
morning, and purges the belly: also it purges all chollor and all corrupt
blood, it heals all wounds within the belly, it clears the sight, it cures
poisoned bytings. To the healing of wounds, the powder of Centory ought to be
put to them. Lullius in his book of waters. Euonymus descrybes this, which is
a worthy work.





Pliny writes) passes the hardness of a stone: with which ioygne broken pots
or any thing together. Also take greek Pytch, Rose^, and the powder of little
stones, these myxe together, and when you will occupy of the same, then heat
it over the fire, and work therewith, (that is, ioygne any thing therewith,) and
it holds them together as hard as any nail. Also take of Spuma ferri, one
pound, of tyle shardes (in powder) two pound, of vnslackt Lyme, four pound,
of oil of Lynne seed, as much as shall suffice to prepare, myxe and work
them together: this Glewe is marvelous strong, which neither fears nor
yields to water nor fire. This is of the natural and Artificial conclusions
of ye Scholars of Padua. Translated into Englysh by Thomas Hill.

Furnerius by the report of Euonymus. Besides I have proved it in the like
case: therefore I am bold to say it is an excellent thing.

Xilobalsamum, the three Saunders, of each one dram, Mace, Nutmugge, Cynamom,
Galanga, Cloves, Cucubes, white and long Pepper, Saffern, Spyknarde, Graynes of
Paradise, Cardamomum, of each three drammes, Zedoarye, half an ounce,
Squynant, half a dram, the pylles or ryndes of Lymons, the seeds of Lymons,
Scicados Arabike, of each one dram, Calamus Aromaticus, half a dram, Carlinae
cardopacij, two ounces, Bistorte, two drams, the root of Flower Deluce, half
an ounce, Bay berryes, Ualeryan, Polypode, of each half an ounce, Licqueres,
Annes seeds, of either half a dram, of Radyshe, two ounces, of Coryander
correct, half an a^ ounce, Syler mounten, one dram, blaunched Almondes, half
a pound, small Reysens, half a pound, being washed with Wine. All these (being
beaten or strayned,) put into the said body of glass, to the Honny and other
things: and if there be not enough of Aqua vite, put thereto more, and let them
stand so seven days, well covered and stopped: then after distyll the same in
ashes with an easy fire, (all being well luted,) for the space of four hours,
(least the Honny boil,) and there will come out a clear water. Then increase
the fire, and when you see the water yallow, then put too another receyuer of
glass, which you must lute also with the beak of the Still: and keep ye
first water by it self, and increase the fire until there come no more yallowe
water, and when you see it come black, then take away the receyuer, and put an
other thertoo, and lute it likewise, and when you see a smoke come, then it is
enough, and keep all these three severally, and let the Still stand until it
be cold. In the first water put Folij Indi, five drams, Amber, half a dram,
Mosche, half a scruple, which is twelve graynes, and also fyfteene leaves of
Gold. If you will use it for the head, take one ounce of the water of Bettony,
and of the first water one spoonefull: myxe them together and drink it all
fasting. The virtue of this does strengthen all the members. Take one ounce of
Malmsey, or of other good Wine in a little glass, and put one spoonefull of
this first white water thertoo, myxe them together, and it will be white as
milk: which, drink with a fasting stomach, and neither eat nor drink of
two hours after: and it will preserve all thy members. For a cold Liver, take
a spoonefull of the white water, with an ounce of the water of Sage. For the
breast, and the cough of a cold Rewme, take it with the water of Isope,
Louathe, or Fennel. For the heart, with the water of Buglosse, Burrage or
Balm. For the stomach, with the water of Woormwood. For the Lyghts, with the
water of maiden heair, or Polypode. For the Splen, with the water of
Hartstongue. For the Vertigo (a gyddynes of the head) or the Apoplexy, with
the water of Pyony, of Fennel, or of S. John's Woort. For the Stone, with the
water of Radysh, or winter Cherries. For the retayning or holding of the water,
with the water of Cresses, some Pearsley, or Saxifrage. For the eyes, with the
water of Fennel, or Eybright. For the retayning or withholding of Menstrues,
with ye water of Mugwoort, or with water of Radysh. For the too much flux of
the Menstrues, with the water of Planteyn, or of Nightshade. For the Matrix
hurt by the mydwyle, or of any cold cause, whereby she does conceive no more:
let it be used with the water of Ualeryan or Bettony. Against the spots of
the face, take of the water of Pympernell, four parts, of this white or first
water, one part, myxe them together, and annoint the face morning and evening:
and drink it twyse or thryse in the week with Endyue water. It cures the
Cankar, being anointed therewith, and the Fystula: if a drop thereof many
times put into it. It helps a cold gowte: if it be anointed therewith. For
the pain of the Matryx, let this water be taken with the water of Mugwoort.
Also it is good against the quarten and quotidian Fevers. The Cytryne oil has
many virtues, as the oil of Balm: if any grief be anointed therewith. The
black Oil is of great virtue in the gowte: if it be anointed therewith, as
the moother of Balm being white, called the golden Water. Gratarolus.

fair spring or well water, and after in Rose or Planteyn water, three ounces,
the yolke of an Eg, Oil of Roses, an ounce and a half, Mercury sublymate made
in powder, half a dram, and let them all be myxed well together, and make
thereof an ointment, and wash the Ulcers or sores with white Wine: then spread
some of that ointment or salve upon flax, and apply it to the sore, and dress
it with new salve twice every day: but before every dressing, annoint with this
following, three or four fyngers breadth about the sore. Take of the oil of
Roses, two ounces, of Uineger, half an ounce, of the powder of bole Armoniack,
a little, myxe them together, and annoint it as is before said. And when all the
rotten or putrified flesh is eaten out: then annoint the Ulcer with butter, and
you shall see a wonderful effect. Proved.



A Notable and an excellent Balm. Take of Turpe^tine, one pound and a half,
Galbanum, two ounces, Aloes cicotrin, Mastick, Cloves, Galangale, Cynamo^,
Nutmugs, Cubebs, of every one of them an ounce, gum of Iuy, half an ounce:
when all is well beaten, myxe them together, and distyl them in glass, with a
slow fire first, and receive the first water by it self severally, then
increase the fire, and a water more reddyshe will come, then increase the fire
more, and an oil will come of a red color, receive that as long as any will
come: you must change the receyuer thryse. This oil has all the virtues of
true Balm, for it burns in the water, and curddeth milk by and by: for if
one drop of it warm, be put into a pynt of milk, it will forthwith become
curdded. The first lycquor is called the water of Balm, the second, oil of
Balm, the third, Balm artificial. The first is profitable against the
running of the ears, if two drops morning and evening be put into them: dropped
into the eyes, it amendeth the blearednes, and consumes the tears: it does
maruelously restrain superfluous humors in any part of the body: it takes
away the tooth ache, if they be washed therewith, and kylleth the woormes, if
there be any in them. The third lycquor will suffer no venom, it is an utter
enemy and destruction to Spiders and Serpents. Two or three drops thereof laid
upon any venomous biting, does make it whole straight. If thou draw a cyrcle
with this lycquor, and shut a venomous Beast therein, it will dye there, rather
then go out of it. To be short, it does all ye same things that Treacle does,
but all things more effectually: being powered or put upon any Impostume, within
nine days it heals them, and likewise a Fistula be it never so evil, and
also Noli me tangere. All diseases bred of fleame, and of cold humors, it
heals: if a lynnen cloth dypped in it, be laid upon the place, where the
grief is. It puts away utterly the Palsy, and all trembling of members: it
strengthens maruelously ye Sinews, it is hotter then the first, or the
second. If a man put a drop of it in his hand, it pierces straight without
grief. To conclude, it does many other things, and all diseases risen of a
cold cause it heals: if they use it right. Lullius in his book of waters.
But this is taken out of Euonymus.



A Most present remedy for them that are infect with the plague, for
Carbuncles, pestelenticall Puslles, holy Fire, and other of that kind. Take
the ripe berryes of Iuy, being dried in the shadow, then stamp them and make
them in powder, of which powder take half a dram in two or three ounces of the
water of Planteyn: and remain still in the bed, until you have sweat very well,
and after you have sweat, put on a clean shert well ayred at the fire: and if
you may conveniently, let the sheets and the clothes of the bed be shyfted.
There has been some healed with this order in one night. This is proved.
Alexis of Pyemount saw one helped with taking this powder twyse, that is: at
morning and evening, having two Sores appearing, which with this powder, broke
the next day after, and so recovered.

Monardus in his book before mentioned among other marvelous matters, has
declared at large of two woonderful and strange Stones, in these words
following. They do bring (says he) from the new Spain, two Stones of great
virtue, the one is called the Stone of the blood, and the other is a Stone for
the disease of the Stone in the kydneys and raynes. The blood Stone is a kind
of a Jasper of diverse colors, somewhat dark, full of sprinckles like to
blood, being of color red: of ye which Stones the Indyans do make certain
Hearts, both great and small. The use thereof, both here and there, is for all
flux of blood, of what parts so ever it be, of the Nose, or of the Menstrues,
or of the Pyles, and of wounds, or of that which is cast out of the mouth. The
Stone must be wette in cold water, and the sick man must take it in his right
hand, and from time to time wet it in cold water. In this sort ye Indyans do
use them. And as touching the Indyans, they have it for certain, that touching
the same Stone in some part where the blood runs, that it does restrain:
and in this they have great trust, for that the effect has been seen. It does
profit also, having it holden, hanged or tied in the same part, where the
blood runs, so that it touch on the flesh. Of this Stone we have seen
great effects, in staunching of blood. And some that do suffer the Hemeroidall
flux, have remedyed them selves with making Rings of this Stone, and wearing
them continually on their fyngers, and also in Menstruall flux of Women.

The other Stone which is for the disease of the Stone in the kydneys or
raynes, the fynest of them are like unto Plasina of Esmeraldes, which is
lykened to green, with a mylkishe color, the greatest is the best, they
bring them made in diverse fourmes and fashions: for so the Indyans had them in
old time, some like to Fyshes, other like to heads of Birds, other like to
bylles of Popageys, other like to round Beade stones: but all pierced through,
for that the Indyans did use to wear them hanging, for the effect of the
grief of the stone or stomach: for in these two sycknesses it does marvelous
effects.

The chief virtue that it has, is in the pain of the stone in the kydneys
and raynes, and in expellyng of sand and stone. Insomuch that a Gentleman
which had one of them here, the best of them that I have seen, having put it
to his arm, it does make him to expel and cast out much sand, that many
times he does take it away: for that he thinks that it does hurt him for to
put out so much, and in taking it away, he cease to cast any from him. When
he feels the pain of the Stone, and puttyng it too again, it does take
away incontinent, with expellyng of much Sand and small Stones. I have seen
it carried to persons, that have been grieved with great grief and pains of
the said disease, and puttyng it to them, they do forthwith expel the Sand
and the little Stones: and remain clear thereof. The Stone has a propertye
hydden, by the which means, he does great effects, to preserve that they
fall not into the pain of the said diseases.

And after it is come, it takes it away, or diminishes it. It does make the
sand to be expelled with great abundaunce, and likewise stones. It takes away
the heat from the raynes of the back: it profyteth in griefs of the
stomach, put to it, and above all it preserves from the said grief. My Lady
the Duchess (a Duchess in Spain) for that she had in short time, three times,
exceeding pains of the stone, she made a bracelet of them, and she used to
wear it at her arm, and sythence she put them to her arm, she never had more
pains of the stone. And so it has happened to many other that had the like
benefyte, for the which they are much esteemed, and now they be not so soon
had as at the beginning: for yt these Stones only the Gentlemen and Rich men
have them. And with reason: because they do such marvelous effects. Thus much
has the learned Doctor Monardus declared of the excellencies of ye two before
named Stones, which are brought from the West Indyas, with diverse other
precious Oils, Woods, Gooms, and other things, as are most plainly and largely
set forth in his said book with many credible proofs: lately Englished and
publyshed in print by the said John Frampton, therefore worthy of great
commendations, called, Joyful News out of the new found World. Which is of a
small price, but yet very precious: for in my judgment, whosoever does bye it,
does not pay therefore the hundredth part that it is worth.

two parts, let them all be made in very fine powder and searced, then tie the
same powder hard in a lynnen cloth, then put it into a Crucyble, and cover
the same with an other Crucyble, and wrap it fast with wyars, and close it well
with lute of wisdom, that nothing may respyer out, then let it be dried at
the Sun: which done, cast the same Crucybles into the fire of a bryck Kill,
until the matter be well burned, which taken out, you shall find a perfect
matter of the color of a Tyle: which if it be wet or moistened with a drop of
water, or with spettle, putting Brymstone to it, then it will burn: which with
blowing, or a blast is put out. Iacobus VVeckerus.

Jacob. VVeckerus.

you have done with it, for so it fastneth and byndeth the stronger: and in
such sort, that it fastneth pieces of glass together.





Abraham Auenezra affyrmes the same, writing De criticis diebus.

and good Stone.

Imipetigo or Serpigo, shyfting it twice every day with new, for the space of a
fortnyght: and it will quyte destroy and kill them. And also it will put away
any black spots with the like vsyng thereof, in what part of the body so ever
they be.

Thomas Hill.

Saturn (in the first beginning of sycknesse) does sygnify evil and long
sickness. But if Saturn be of a slow course, it augmenteth the evil. If of a
swyft course: then it dimynisheth of the evil. If he be Retrograde applying by
opposition to the Sun, after he is cured, he will fall sick again: but if he
be Retrograde, and separate by opposition from the Sun, the evil is
dimynished. Abraham Auenesra de criticis diebus.

A Uery good laxatiue Dredgepowder, whereof you may take a spooneful when you
need in your pottage, or broth: it will make you to go to ye stool. Take of
pure Turbyt, one ounce, Gynger, Cynamo^, Mastick, Annes seeds, Hermodactyls,
Diagredyon, of each half an ounce, of the leaves of Seen, two ounces, of Sugar,
four ounces, beat them al into powder, and let them be myxed together.
Leonardus Fuchsius.

Hermes et Ptolomeus: Therefore according to this rule of these ancient and
famous Authors, (whereto Guido Bonatus, Johannes Ganiuetus, Sconerus and
Taisnerus, notable and learned Astronomers, with diverse other, do consent and
agree.) Diverse Women, have diverse times, between the conception and birth of
their children: For the place of the moon at the time of the conception, and
her uncertain course after, does plainly manifest that some Women goes with
Child not above seven and thyrty weeks: some others eight and thyrty weeks
and under: some nine and thyrty weeks, and something less: some again goes
forty weeks and a few days less, and somtymes certain days more, yea: and
somtymes forty and one week, and one day, which is the longest time, as the
learned in the same Science, can perfectly find out. Wherefore they are much
deceived, that thinks every woman goes but just forty weeks with child:
which fond and false opinion, has made many an honest woman falsely
suspected, wrongfully slaundered, and without just cause from their husbands
separated. Therefore it were good and very meet for every one, not to give too
much credyte to this fond reckoning of just forty weeks: which is more common
then true. Which fore discrybed excellent rule, (according to the mind of the
worthy and learned Mizaldus,) is of no small weight, for the trial of the
fydelytie and honesty of women to their husbands, and to find out the very
right time of the Nativity or birth, so that the very day and hour of the
conception be certain.



will shortly after spryng out of the same. Which will bring forth new Beans,
and more plentyfully then before: and as good as the first. Whereby you may
have more then double increase, and two several gatherings of Beans in one
year. But in anywyse, take heed that the first gathering and cutting away of
the stalks be, when the said stalks be green. I have seen it proved,
therefore I write and publysh it for an undoubted truth. It is credibly told
me, that if you use Peason in the same order: the like effect will follow.
Which I believe to be true, as well in the one as in the other.



Lygnum Aloes, Mastycke, Cloves, Galynga, Cynamom, Mace, Quibybs, of each one
dram, all well powdered together, goom of a Fygge tree, six drammes, likewise
made in powder and all myxed together, and myxe them all with the said
Turpentyne made lyquyd as is before said, and when they be well incorporated
together, set on the head of the Lymbeck, and lute all the joints of the same
well, and set it in ashes, and put under it an easy fire. And when it begynnes
to distyl, let it drop away a little, for the first drops are little worth:
then put the receyuer to the nose of the Lymbecke, and close and lute them well
together that no air go forth: for then the virtue of it would go away. Then
know that at the first will come forth a white and clear water, which keep
by it self. Then will come forth the second water, which is better, of a
heavenly and ayrie color: which keep by it self. Then receive the third,
which is the best, which will be yallowe and thycke as Honny: keep this also
by it self. The first of these is called the water of Balm: the second, the
Oil of Balm: the third, is called Balm. His proof to all examynations is,
that you take one drop of the same, and let it be put in a vessel full of
water, as you do of natural Balm, for the said drop will go to the
bottom of the water: and it will stand their whole, as though it were pure
Balm. This is marvelous, and is of great virtues, which is called of some,
moother of Balm.

The first virtue thereof is, that it burns: the second is, that if thou
wash thy face and nose therewith, and that thryse in a day, it cures and
helps the rewme. It clears the sight, and it comfort the Synnewes: and if
thou wash therewith the hinder part of thy head, then it comfortes the
memory, and all the virtues of the mind.

This does purify both Fysh and Flesh, and if they be putrifyed or corrupt,
whatsoever thereof is corrupt or putrifyed: it takes and consumes it away. And
it keeps that that is good and sound: so that you may eat them as though
they were new and fresh. It bringes again an appetite, it comforts the
stomach, and if you take thereof morning and evening: it consumes the fleame in
the stomach. It helps or cures a stynking breath, as well coming of the
stomach as of the brain: if you take four or five drops thereof once a day
in a little Wine. No cold venomous thing may come near it, as Frogs, Todes,
Serpe^ts and Scorpions: if a cloth dypt in the same, and compass a Tode or
Serpent, compassed therewith, they will dye, although they touch it not, and so
it does in all kind of cold venoms: as the biting of a Tode, or of a Serpent.
For it heales it, if you wash oftentimes therewith the grieved place. And if you
seethe an Eg in it, it will sooner be sodde therein, then in any boiling water.
It heales and dryes up any kind of scabbe or Tetter quickly: if you wash it
therewith twyse in a day: and if you put three or four drops of this into the
ear, and suffers it there as long as you may: it helps and cures all noise
and soundings of ye ears. If you myxe with this equal portion of the juice of
Germa^der, and puts thereof into the ear three or four drops, four times in
the day, then it helps and cures all deafnes: of what cause soever it comes.
Watryng eyes and bleared eyes it does cure, clarify, restrain and comforts: if
you wash them therewith twyse or thryse. All Impostumes, Ulcers, and all other
superfluityes it does restrain, cure, and rectify. And it is a thing more
repercussyue and consumptiue against cold humors, the^ the Saphyre or
Planteyn. All pains of the teethe, or running humors, it does help, restrain,
fortify: and it makes the teethe white, if therewith you do wash the roots of
the teethe. All wounds of the head, though they be deep, are cured with this
same Oil: if therewith you wash it twyse or thryse a day. Yea, though the
brain pan be broken, so that Pia matter be not hurt. It heales and cures all
Fystulaes, Cancers, Noli me tangere, the Kings Evil, and every other eating
Sore: if you wash the same therewith twyse or thryse a day. It heales and cures
all kind of Gowtes, if you wash or annoint them therewith, so that they come of
a cold cause: and laying also a lynnen cloth dypt therein upon the grieved
place. It helps also all strokes with staves or other brusinges, either by
falls or otherwise, if you annoint the bruised or grieved place therewith, and
heales them perfectly and well. It helps the Emrodes and the fundament that
goes forth, and makes it tarry in his place: if you annoint the same therewith.
It helps the Palsy, and all weakness of the members, it does strengthen: if you
anoint the same therewith. Know that it is most hot, and is of such
penetration and heat, that if you put one drop thereof in your hand, by and by
it penetrates the hand without any hurt. And you shall not feel any swelling
of the feet or of the legs, or any pain of the joints: if you wash or
annoint the same therewith, and it will help it, if you dyp a lynnen cloth
therein and plaster it thereto. And briefly, if you will use it, it profits,
helps and cures all cold griefs, and all diseases coming of a cold cause,
of fleame, or of putrifyed or corrupt blood. It has yet many other virtues
here left out, and it is called the moother of Balm, because it is better then
Balm in many of his effects. And if you will prove that it be a true Balm:
take a Chycken (the feathers plucked off, and the guts taken away,) and see
that it be well washed and made as clean as can be, and dry the same at a soft
fire, so long as you may well hold it in your hand, then annoint the same
Chycken well both within and without, with the said Balm, twyse or thryse:
then afterward lay the said Chycken against the Sun, for the space of two
hours, suffering it a little to dry at the Sun, and afterward lay up the said
Chycken where you will: for it will never putrifye nor receive any corruption,
so long as the world shall endure. And know further that this Oil has
eyghteene other virtues, which are written: but not here. This notable Oil of
Balm, I coppied out of a very old written book, which came out of the Abbey
of Elsam in Lyncolnshyre. And now by me converted out of Latin into English, to
the profyt of many, I hope.

A Fly drowned in water, Wine, Ale, or Beer, and so thoroughly dead, being
laid in warm Ashes: (but they must not be burning or very hot,) the same
Fly will recover and live again. This is very true.



Tabaco (a notable herb) for to suffer the dreyth, and also for to suffer
hungar, and to pass days without, having need either to eat or drink, by
any desert or dyspeopled country, where they shall find neither water nor
meat. They do use of these little balls, which they do make of this Tabaco,
they take the leaves of it, and do chew it, and as they go chewing of them,
they myngle with them certain powder made of the shelles of Cockles burned,
and they myngle it in their mouth all together, until they make it like to
dowe, of the which they make certain little balls, little greater then Peason:
and they put them to dry in the shadow, and after they keep them and use
them, for the avoiding of hunger and thyrst, in their travel without any meat
and drink: for the space of three or four days. This Doctor Monardus has
written, with many other woonders and notable virtues thereof, in his book
before mentioned: entitled, Joyful News out of the new found World. This
Tabaco is a marvelous and wonderful herb, growing in the west Indyas,
called the new Spain: and through the brynging of the seeds thereof from
thence, it grows now both in Spain and France.

Rasis wrytes.

Mizaldus.

Peru, which helps the gowte with purging the cause thereof, if you put of it
as much as a Nut in distylled water, which water ought to be the quantity of
two ounces, and give the same to the patient, (the same party forbearing meat
until the myddest of the day.) This Monardus affyrmes to be proved,
manifesting the same at large in his said book called, the Joyful News out
of the new found World. The name of the Goom he names not.

Johan. Bap. Por.

Pictorius.

Peru, a boowe whereof, if one does hold fast in his left hand, a good while,
that would know whether one that is sick shall live or dye (of that disease,
or at that time,) if the sick shall live and escape: the party that holds the
same, shall show much gladness. If the sick shall dye, then the party that
holds the same shall be very sad. Monardus wrytes of this Tree in his said
book, and shows that the same was proved true by a Gentlewoman that was
marvelous sad, whiles she did hold the same, whose husband dyed soon after
accordingly.

A Rare and strange kind of fruit, as great as a Nutte, with marvelous
round and hard b^^cke stones in them, is brought out of the new Spain, by
the report of the said worthy Doctor Monardus, whereof two or three, with
hot water, does more effect for to wash and to make clean clothes, then one
pound of Soap does: whereof as well as of many other strange and most excellent
things you may read, discrybed at large in his said book, called the
Joyful News out of the new found World. A Book no doubt worthy of great
estymation, and commendation.



healed. And whosoever uses to drink the water of Strawberyes distylled: it
will certainly kill the root of any morphew that is within the body. All this
is well proved

Lignum Aloes, Mastick, Bole Armoniacke, of each half an ounce, myxe them all
together, and make thereof a very fine powder, whereof take early in the morning
with white Wine myxt with a little water: and by the grace of God, you shall be
preserved safe from the Plague. VVeckerus.





Iacobus VVeckerus also affyrmes the same.



A Quantity of Hemp seed stamped, and strayned through a cloth when it is
well sodden with running water, and a good draught thereof droonk last, going to
bed, and so used: will make one laxatiue and loose bellyed. This is a proved
thing therefore.

Alexander being desirous, that the long life of Hearts might be known to his
posterity: caused golden Chains to be made fast unto many Hearts (about their
necks I think:) the time when the same was done, being expressed or marked in
the same, and they which were taken of the same Hearts, an hundredth years
after: did not yet seem to be of the age of old Hearts. Mizaldus wrytes this:
who affyrmes that Pliny is the Author thereof.



Papauer erraticum, which grows among Corn, with a red flower, much like the
leaf of a Rose, it is called of some, red corn Rose. This have I tried to be
true.

Saturn is Lord of the seventh house, are not like to marry before they be
thyrty years of age: or else until Saturn (from that time,) has compassed
the whole Zodiac, (which differs not much.) This is proved true by long
experience, and I have seen many, whose seventh house is Capricorn or Aquary
(the houses of Saturn,) and yet I never knew any of them, but either dyed
unmarried, or else married after they were thyrtie years of age. And as I
remember Cardanus agrees herein.



signifies, that you or the party shall dye that year following. You may
prove this for many, or few, at one time, by putting in the water, for every
one a leaf of green Iuy, (so that every leaf be noted or marked to whom it
does belong.) This was crediblye told me to be very certain, who affyrmed to
me faithfully that it was diverse times proved for a very truth. But because I
never tried it: therefore I refer every one that shall read it to the trial
thereof.

BRusonious wryghtes, and Georgius Fabricus affyrmes the same, that the bones
of Hens, myxed with melted Gold: do consume the same Gold in to themself.



Petrus Hispanus.

head, esteeming it as a precious secret: but I never tried it, therefore as it
proves so praise it.

Hippocrates. Therefore this is worth the marking.



I Hard it told for a very truth by diverse persons, that in a plague time, in
the City of Cullen, there was a certain woman dyed, and was buried with a
Ring of gold on her finger, for the greedines whereof, a covetous fellow
within a while after she was buried: dug her Grave, and opened the coffyn
wherein she did lie, thinking thereby to take away the Ringe from her finger,
but immediately the said woman did soddainly stir and move, and began to sit
up: which when the said fellow saw, with great fear he did run away, and
then the woman by some means, did tear or unloose the sheet, wherein she was
wrapped, and then she went straight home to her Husband, and called upon him, to
let her into the house: whom, when he hard, he thought it had been a Sprite.

But at last, through her importunate calling, he received her into the house,
and thus woonderfully she recovered and lived: which Woman after that, had
three or four children, of whom it is said, there is a Monument at this
present, in the said City of Cullen. Therefore too has^y or quick buryall is
not to be used, as not only this rare example may sufficiently teach us: But
also for such causes as I have alleged in another place of this book.



A Little Bird called the Kings Fysher, being hanged up in the air by the
neck: his nebbe or byll will be always dyrect or straight against ye wind.
This was told me for a very truth, by one that knew it by proof: as he
said.

and likewise at both the ends: and in the myds thereof fasten a Pype like to a
Bagpype, wherewith blow the same gyrdle as full of wind as you can possible:
then under the nether end of the Pype, tie the lether very fast and sure, that
ioygnes the pype and the gyrdle together, with a strong packthred, or with some
other sure and strong thing, least the wind should come out of the gyrdle,
(whereof you must take great heed.) Also blow three Ox bladders full of
wind, and tie them hard that the wind go not forth of the same, and sew each of
them strongly and surely within good strong Neates lether, round like unto a
foot ball, and make three strong lowpes upon the said gyrdle, one against the
mids of the back, and against either of the sides one, and then tie fast and
surely one of the said bladders sewed in the lether, to every of the said
lowpes, and then tie the same gyrdle about your mydle very fast and sure. And
then you can not synke into the water. And so you may pass safely over: if
the water be not too broad and too rough. Nicholaus Michauel has written of
such a like gyrdle in his excellent Book of the Art of Wars: for the
saueing of Soldiers and Fyshers over waters. In which Book there are other
notable Engynes, and worthy matter beside, concerning wars.

A Ladle made of the wood of a Fygge tree, has a marvelous property, for if
Flesh in the seething thereof, be often sturred therewith, or if it be in the
Pot while it is seething: it makes the Flesh to be sooner sodden. Mizaldus.

A Partrych will cry alowde, and will tear or break the Cage or Coope where
she is fed, if there be any deadly medcyn or poison prepared within the same
house, which she does feel presentlye, and also has knowledge thereof,
through a wonderful special and rare gift of nature. Actius ex pisone.

GEllius wrytes that the Hedgehogge makes the mouth of her hoale, Cabban, or
Cave always contrary to the wind: for through a marvelous natural gift, she
has foreknowledge in what quarter the wind will be, and thereupon she
changes the mouth or entringe in of her hoale or cave, whereby Marryners have
learned aforehand, the place of the wind.

The end of the tenth and last Book.
FINIS.
A special Table for the finding out of any matter in this Book, whereof the
Table of the first Book does follow.
A Straung History of two lovers that were poisoned by eating of Sage. page 1
^ph. 1. A (...) Poct did wear leaden soles. page 2. ^ph. 2. A strange thing
of Mullen. page 2.3. To increase milk in Nurses. page 2.4. Aqua vite helps
synewes and muscles. page 2.5. To make rough or chapped lips smoth. page 2.6.
To know who shall be crook backed or halt. page 3.7. Earth worms help
deafenes. page 3.8. A notable cure of one that had the grief of the spleen
seven years. page 3.9. A rare thing to make a horse ^all, as dead, and after to
make him lively. page 3.10. To get a precious stone out of a snake. page 4.11.
A way to keep wine safe from thunder. page 4.12. To know who shall have the
palsy. page 4.13. To take away a Wen. page 4.14. To make wood of the color
of Hebenus. page 4.15. An excellent virtue of Mullen in helping of bruses and
sores. page 5.16. Ualerian will draw out any wood or iron out of the flesh.
page 5.17. To make a barren vine bear grapes. page 6.18. To preserve the teeth
from rotting. page 6.19. The teeth of a Bore newely killed will burn brys^ies
or hairs. page 6.20. A present cas^ for the gowte. page 6.21. The City of
Tornace was marvelously delivered from the plague, by the shooting o^f of
gunnes. page 6.22. To make common Azure. page 7.23. A Cock fears not a
Serpent, yet he is afraid of a glead. page 7.24. To ma^e amber clearer and
better. page 7.25. A ^are way to stay the flux of spa^^e. page 8.26.
Cantarides applied made one to pyss^ blood page 8.27. A strange virtue of y^
bu^ leaf. page 8.28. A salve made of ale helps sores and aches. page 8.29.
Docks makes toughe flesh to be tender. page 8.30. A way to know whether one
be sick in body or in mind, or in both. page 9.31. To know who is enfect with
the pluresye. page 9.32. They that have the quarteyn, shall not have the falling
sickness. page 9 33. To color bones with a green color. page 9.34. Oil
keeps wine from corrupting. pa. 10.35. The coals of a birch tree heals
wounds. page 10.36. A Robin red breast will cover the face of a dead body with
moss. page 10.37. A strange example of the heathe basyll. page 10.38. Great
heed ought to be taken of childrens nauels strings when they be cut. page
10.39 To help them that can not hold their water. page 10.40. An incredible
t^le of a loving dog. page 11.41. The member of generation does follow the
proportion of the navel string cut. page 11.42. A straung way for the
helping of the cods. page 11.43. A woman carried a dead child in her womb
thirteen years. page 12.44. To make a woman be speedilye delivered. page 12*
45. A straung effect of the love of Pigeons with the Castrell. page 12.46. A
rare secret of the woort leaf. page 12.47. A perfect and precious medecin for
the plague. page 12.48. A strange way to know, whether the next child of a
woman will be a boy or a wenche. page 13.49. A sure medcin to destroy a
fellon. pa. 13.50. A good proo^^ that children are not always like their
Parents. page 13.51. A Tode stone ceases the pains coming by ye biting of any
venomous beast. pa. 14.52. A try^^ way to kill Lyce. page 14.53. To make woman's
dugs round and hard. page 14.54. To know whether a woman ^e barren or not.
page 14.55. A Ryng which makes the bearer thereof safe from poison and plagu^.
page 14.56. The excellent virtues of fasting spe^^le. page 15.57. To keep
Cheese from putrefying. pa. 15.58 To ^nde a precious coal on Mydsommer even.
page 15.59. A good thing to feed Beasts, and to make the hands white. page
15.60. All things will swyne upon quicksyluer, except gold. page 16.61. An
excellent way to stay the growing of hea^^. page 16.62. A present remedy for
horsenes and the cough. page 16.63. To (...) who are like to have the gowte.
page 17.64. To take away the evil smell of the feet. page 17.65. A strange
way to cease the bleeding of the nose. page 17.66. Milk and exercise from the
cradle, makes tall and (...) persons. page 17.67. A present remedy for ye
S^uina^cy, pa. 17.68 Two contrary natures in ye netle. pa. 17.69 To know
whether a woman is like to have children or not. page 18.70. To make teeth as
white as Iuory. pa. 18.71 To take spots out of the face. page 18.71. A strange
way to help the qu^rteyn a^ue. page 18.73. A proved way to help the
Collyc^e and pains of the back. page 18.74. To help the swellings of the
throat. page 18.75. To make a woman loathe the company of man, and a man to
desire a woman. pa. 18.76 The strange nature of dogs. page 19.77. To know good
and pure (...). page 19.78. To ioygne broken glasses and broken cups. page
19.79. The great virtue of Planteyn, being the herb of Mars. page 19.80. To
cause a Bull unable to bull a Cow. page 20.81. A strange way to loose a man
that is enchaunted or bewytched, thereby unable to the act of generation. page
20.82. A strange way to put away the crampe. page 20.83. A pretty devise to
put out and light a ca^dle, to make them maruayle yt sees it. pa. 20.84 To make
a writing, being cast into the fire, to leap out of the same. page 20.85. To
get any quick thing out of the head. page 21.86. A rare help for the
crampe. page 21.87. A strange secret to pluck out a thorn out of the
flesh. page 21.88. Sygnifycations when the pains be in the eyes. page 21.89.
One through use did forbear drink all his life after. page 21.90 The three
corned bon^ of a Ca^p cease the bleeding of the nose. page 22.91. A strange
medicine for curing the web, and the blindness of the eye. page 22.92. Salt
will make women apt to have children. page 22.93. Diverse Beasts and Birds, do
dyuersly help their diseases according to their nature. page 22.94. Annyball
made a passage through the hard rocks of the Alps, with vinegar. pa. 23.95 A
notable remedy for all wounds. pa. 23.96 To make white ^yllies re^. page 23.97.
A hynderaunce for women to bring forth wenches. page 23.98. A notable way to
get quicksyluer out of such as are anointed with oyntmentes my^t with the
same. page 24.99. To draw out thorns, and to help the drops^e, a rare and
strange secret. page 24.100.
The Table of the second book.
FOr knowledge of griefs and diseases in in the eyes. page 25.1. A marvelous
virtue given to the s^u^th male Child. page 25.2. A learned Physician knew
^one was sick for love, by the feeling of his pulse. pa. 25.3 A strange way
to know whether one that is sick, be in danger of death, or not. page 25.4.
To gather Har^s together into one place. page 26.5. Why children have cloven
ouerlyps, called Hartlyps, a wonderful thing. page 26.6. What time the disease
taken will be dangerous, or not. page 26.7. To draw an Eg through a ring. pa.
26.8. To resolve Flynt stones into powder. page 27.9. To cause woorms come out
of the ground. page 27.10. To take spots and rustynes from Iron. page 27.11.
An excellent help for the gowte. pa. 27.12. That Ink shall never be frosen.
pa. 27.13. The Stars are strong in the birth, according to the aptnes of them
that be borne. page 27.14. A strange nature of the Sycamore tree. page 28.15.
A rare thing to procure sleep. page 28.16. To foreknow who shall have pains
in the stomach. page 28.17. A very strange way to help them that be broken
bellyed. page 28.18. To make Hens lay Eggs apace. pa. 29.19. To cleanse the face
from all spots and other deformities. page 29.20. To drive away Flies, that
never, there be seen any there after. page 29.21. To make troubled Wine, fair
and clear. page 30.22. What time is danger to wound or cut any body. page
30.23. A strange cause of the notable marks of children before they be borne.
page 30.24. To keep things from putrefying. pa. 31.25. Beasts of one kind, will
be hurt, and not hurt, with eating of one thing. page 31.26. A child
maruelously preserved by a woolf. page 31.27. A strange way to preserve
Chesnuttes. page 32.28. The great virtue of Knotgrasse. pa. 32.29. A strange
thing to make a Dog turn round about, and to fall down as dead. page 32.30.
A way whereby hungar was the less grievous to the Scithians. page 32.31. A
notable Policy whereby the Romans got a worthy victory. page 33.33. A loving
Dog to his master. page 33.34. A sygnification of blindness. page 34.35. A
present case for the gowte. page 34.36. Knotgrasse dangerous for sheep. pa.
34.37 An incredible matter done in ones sleep^. page 34.38. The strange nature
of chafe. page 36.39. To make wine pleasant in color and taste. page 36.40.
Who shall have pains in their Liver. p. 36.41 A proved medicine to cure the
black Iaundies. page 36.42. To make a sword, dagger, or knife to cut iron, as
though it were steel. page 36.43. An excellent way to purify wine. pa. 37.44.
To keep a dog from being mad. pa. 37.45. To make sweet and pleasant
Arthychokes. page 37.46. A sure medicine to help the stitch. pa. 37.47 What
ground will breed the fyne^^ wheat. page 37.48. A strange medicine wherewith
Galen cured the ^allyng sycknes. page 37.49. To keep Dogs from madness, and
from much barking. page 38.50. To make a Leeke have a mo^struous head. page
38.51. The marvelous properties of the stone A^tites. page 38.52. Certain
people without mouths, lives by smelling of Flowers, apples and roots. page
38.53. A special remedy for falling or bruses. page 39.54. Children borne at
some time will be blind. page 39.55. A strange cu^ing of the falling
sycknesse. page 39.56. To turn Wine into vinegar presently. page 39.57. A
rare helping of the Kings evil. pa. 39.58 A dangerous time to fall sick in. pa.
40.59 Birds helps their diseases diversely. page 40.60. Reysens will avoid
and kyl the woorms. page 40.^1. An excellent help for the colic. pa. 40.62.
To help the pains of the bladder. p. 41.63 Children borne at such a time will
have the deseas of the s^len. page 41.64. To make fruit^ grow with what form
you ly^t. page 41.65. The great liberalitye of Alphons for making of the
Astronomycall Tables. page 41.66. To know whether the plague be curable or not.
page 42.67. A marvelous proffitable use of sparrowes. page ^2.68. To make white
hands. page 43.69. A strange matter of the quilles, or pens of an Eagle.
page 43.70. To help the readnes of the face. pa. 43.71. To make vn^uly beasts
tame. page 43.72. To make stones soft. page 43.73. To make frosen Apples come
to there first nature. page 44.74. An excellent thing to be known by the
mulbery tree. page 44.75. To separate gold from silver. page 44.76. A notable
virtue of the Jasper stone. page 44.77. To keep Pigeons from being hurt of any
Cats Wesels or of any other v^rmen page 44.78. Who are like to have the
p^ysyck. p. 44.79 A notable medicine to help itchinges or scabbes. page 45.80.
A proved medicine for the stone. p. 45.81. A foreknowledge of the plague. pa.
45.82. Two strange brethren borne in (...). page 45.83. An excellent medicine
for all sores. p. 45.84 Women transformed into young beasts. page 45.85. To
cease quicklye the gr^efe of the gowte. page 46.86. A wonderful gift given to
Rats and dormice. page, 46.8^. To cease ye bleeding of the nose. page 46.83. To
preserve children from the falling sickness. page 46.8^. One becam mad by
play^^g with a whe^p. page 46.^0. To help the (...) or the gowte. page 47.91.
A strange matter of a Woolues skin. page 47.92. To make mice run into the
fire. page 47.93 To keep clothes from mothes. page 48.94 To know which part
of ones life is most fortunate. page 48.95. To stay hayres from growing. page
48.96 A strange secret to stop the bleeding of the nose. page 48.97. To know
whether a woman be with child or not. page 49.98. They shall be faint and given
to swounding being borne at such a time. page 49.99. To make them slender that
are gross. page 49.100.
The Table of the third book.
TO help a Horse of the Coughe. page 50.1. The loyal love of the Turtle Dowue.
page 50.2. To know in what quarter it is best for one to dwell in. page 50.3.
A wonderful thing of a woman tormented. page 51.4. Wytchery or Sorcery put
away. pa. 51.5. A strange thing of Moules or woontes. page 51.6. (...)
pre^^yge of wars scarsenes or plague. page 52.7. The sign of death of a sick
body. pa. 52.8. To help the Cough or shortness of breath. page 52.9. A sure
remedy for a fellon. page 52.10 To help chapt hands. page 53.11. That Horses
shall not be hurt with shooing. page 53.12. A strange thing of a Far tree.
pa. 53.13. A good time to fall syck in. page 53.14. To heal the sores or
postules of the head. page 53.15. One foreto^de the death of one that was s^ck
by Astrologye. page 53.16. To purge the head and gooms, and to fasten the
teeth. page 54.17. A strange medicine to help the blody flux. page 54.18. To
confyrme the memory. page 55.19. To make no woolues enter into any town page
55.20. Things thrown to a certain well, was converted into a stone. page
55.21 To know whether one shall find the party at home or not. page 55.22. An
excellent property of the sapher. page 56 23. To bewray whether a woman be
painted or not. page 56.24. Tokens of the murryan or death of catell. page
56.25. Tyberuis the Emperor did see as Cats do in the night. page 57.26. A
preservative from the plague. page 57.27. To make a marvelous hedge. page
57.28. A wonderful of the Elephauntes. page 57.29. To quicken forgetful
persons. page 58.30. A notable water for the eyes. page 58.31. The threescore
and third year of ones age a part dangerous time. page 58.32. An excellent
remedy for the tooth ache. page 59.33. They that are borne at a certain time,
shall have pains in their stones. page 59.34 A true medicine for la^enes. page
59.35 They shall have a special mark in there face, that are borne at a
certain time. page 59.36. Things that fears Lions. page 59.37 To keep
Pigions safe from Cattes. page 60.38. To make any place safe from woolues and
flies. page 60.39 Good and evil signs in a mad man. page 60.40. To procure
a good stomach. page 60.41. A strange way to let Fleas from breeding. page
60.42. To make the counterfeyte Mandrag. page 61.43. To keep hands from
feeling any cold. page 61.44. To resyst venom or poison. page 61.45.
Testemonies of death by the Planettes. page 62.46. To make a woman speedely to
be delivered. page 62.47. A rare secret for consuming the web in the eye.
page 62.48. A special medicyne for swounding. page 62.49. To^ens of deaf^es by
Astrologye. page 63.50. A precious thing for swelling of the throat. page
63.51. The Kings E^ell, helped by a wonderful mean. page 63.52. A strange
thing to r^yse them that have the falling sickness. page 65.53. To avoid the
stone or gravel. page 65.54. To make beyond sea Azure. page 65.55. To make
Pease leap out of the Pot. page 65.56. To ma^e Hens to lay great Eggs and
often. page 65.57. To know whether they fear needles or not. page 65.58. For
them that be much given to sleep. page 66.59. A pleasant oil of Cloves.
page 66.60. A strange curing of the falling sycknesse. page 66.61. A
wonderful thing passing all credyte. page 67.62. Eeles breeds in clea^sed
Ponds. page 68.63 To make a Bull tame. page 68.64. An excellent propertye of
the Nettle. page 68.65. Good and evil signs in a mudde man. page 68.66.
Astrologycall demonstrations of death. page 68.67. A notable medicine for
breaking the wind in the bellye. page 68.68. A special help for any ache.
page 69.69. They that be borne at a certain time, will be weak in the act of
generation. page 69.70. A notable remedy for the stone. page 69.71. A strange
thing like a black Bird, will breed of Sage. page 69.72. To make that ^a^s
shall not stray abroad. page 70.73. When and where to get Pearls. page 70.74.
Fleas and Lies leau^s sick persons before their death. page 70.75. An
excellent medicine for the gowt. pa. 70.76 ^o draw water from Wine. page 70.77.
A notable medicine to heal lame members. page 70.78. To still a most hot
water. page 71.79. The marvelous knowledge of Hearts. page 71.80 A Woman
longed to eat of her husbands flesh. page 71.81. Leprous faces cured. page
72.82. They shall be hy^ minded, strong, and fam^d for their strength and
lyberality, that are borne at a certain time. page 72.83. An cast way to
stynche blood. pa. 72.84. A sure remedy to put away ^etters or ringwoormes.
page 73.85. Excellent Pylles that helps the headache, brings gladness, and are
good for the eyesyght. (...). page 73.86. A Child borne at a certain time
shall be hyndred in his speech or tongue. pa. 73.87 A man did bark like
hounds. pa. 74.88. The eyes of young Swallows put out, will see again by a
marvelous means. page 74.89. To provoke sleep. page 74.90. A perfect way to
heal lame members. page 74.91. It was a marvelous offense with the Egiptians
to kill a Cat. page 75.92. To keep Harnes or Iron from rusting. page 75.93.
They shall have riches without labor, that are borne at a certain time. page
75.94. A notable oil for the gowte. page 75.95. An excellent thing to keep
one safe from p^yson. page 76.96. A thing to make one sleep presently. page
76.97. A rare secret to cease bleeding. page 76.98. To draw out a toothe with
ease and without any instrument. page 78.99. A sure medicine for them that be
costy (...). page 78.100.
The Table of the fourth book.
TO make Dwale that will cause one to sleep, whiles they are cut, whereby they
shall feel no pain all the while. page 79.1. They that be borne at a certain
time, will have grief^s in their noses. etc. page 79.2. A precious thing to
break the stone. page 79.3. To make a comb that will help head ache. page
80.4. A Ryng procuryng the virtue of st^rres. page 80.5. A strange help for
the pains of the throat. page 80.6. An excellent thing for the gowte. pa. 80.7.
To make Iron of the color of Brass. page 81.8. What Horses are deaf and
doom. pa. 81.9 To keep Harnes or Iron from rusting. page 81.10. To know
whether one com to deceive thee or mean well or not. page 82.11. To loose the
belly. page 82.12. The good effect of deafenes in an ague, and bleeding at the
nose. page 82.13. A divine medicine for the pluresie. pa. 82.14 A strange way
to keep a woman from having a child with a Hare lyp. pa. 83.15. To destroy any
Impostu^e. page 83.16. To know Astrologicallye where any disease is either in
the body or in the mind. page 83.17. A Queen^ droonke at one draught, the
value of two hundredth and fyftie thousand pound. page 84.18. The strange
propertye of a Fygge tree. page 84.19. The excellent virtue of Uarueyne in
helping the falling sycknes. pa. 84.20. A Child borne in a certain
constellation, will be chief of his brethren. page 84.21. A notable way to
put away the pains of s^aldng or burning with gunne powder. page 85.22. To
make silver Plate fair and white. page 85.23. A sure preservative from the
Plague. page 85.24. A notable virtue of Pyony, in curing the falling sycknes.
page 86.25. Astrologicalles tokens of death of the sick. page 86.26. A rare
way to make a woman be spedilye delivered. page 86.27. To draw out the Oil
of Cynamom. page 86.28. To pluck out a rotten or aching tooth with ease. page
87.29. An excellent proof whether one that has the plague shall escape or
not. page 87.30. The place where the Censors of Uenys syt^, is free from flies.
etc. page 87.31. The first Child borne at a certain time, will be a boy.
page 88.32. A sure medicine to take away the greatest and eldest pain of the
head yt is. page 88.33. A perfect medicine to kill woormes in the belly. page
88.34. A dangerous time for the syck. pa. 88.35. The excellent virtue of
gold. page 89.36. The nature of the water or goomme of the vine. page 89.37.
The signs of death of such as have a consumption. page 89.38. An excellent
Electuary preserving life, and hindering old age. page 89.39. A Lamp without
fire to give light in the night. page 90.40. Excellent virtues of the Navel
stryng. page 91.41. Gold found in vines. page 91.42. To know what place is
best to dwell in. page 91.43. Women like to be barren that are borne at a
certain time. page 92.44. To make barren trees fruitful. page 92.45. A
strange way to put away the quarten ague. page 92.46. That Gna^tes shall not
trouble them that sleeps. page 93.47. Troubles and debates what day they shall
happen. page 93.48. An excellent way to stay the Flux. page 93.49. To cause
a woman be spedilye delivered. page 93.50. A wonderful medicine in the time
of pestilence. page 93.51. To keep one from being bytten with a mad dog. page
94.52. To help the griefs or stitches in the side. page 95.53. To see
terrible and fearful Dreams. page 95.54. The hour of Uenus good to take
journey in. page 95.55. To draw out woormes out of the stomach. page 95.56. A
great token of death when the Moon is nigh the Sun. etc. page 95.57 An
excellent medicine for pains of the heart. page 96.58. For the gowte and
swellings of the joints. page 96.59. A strange helping of the Swyne pockes.
page 96.60. A perfect medicine for the bloody flux. page 97.61. A rare help
for the cr^mpe. page 97.62. They that are borne at a certain time, shall fall
from some hye place. etc. page 97.63. To cure the Dropsy. page 97.64. The
great virtues of Eybright. page 97.65 To pluck up a Cankar by the roots. page
98.66. To know whether a woman be barren or not. page 98.67. To make Letters
of the color of what metal you rub the same withal. pa. 99.68 To help the
red and pympled face. pa. 99.69. To know whether the dropsy be hot or
cold. page 99.70. To know whether the sick shall dye of that sickness or
not. page 99.71. An horible murder bewrayed by young Swallows. page 100.72.
For them that can not hold their water. page 100.73. A sign of recovery or
health. page 100.74. Significations of dreams. page 100.75. To make a Swoorde
have a sharp edge. page 101.76. To make that Antes go not up on trees. page
101.77. A child borne at a certain time, is like to be blind. page 101.78.
To help the Re^^me. page 101.79. To conserve youth. page 102.80. Things
prospers not after the words of some. page 102.81. To cease the Hyckop. page
102.82. Children borne in the earthquake. What follows. page 102.83. The
nature of Sperma ceti. page 103.84. They that are borne in a certain
constellation shall have impedun^e in their tongue. page 103.85. To cure the
dropsy. page 103.86. Signs when a woman with two children, is like to lose
one. page 103.87. To help or ease a hot or cold gowte. page 103.88. The
making of the flower of oyntmentes. page 104.89. Signs of death by Astrology.
pa. 105.90. A perfect way to cure ye Splen. pa. 105.91 Tokens of health in a
sick body. pa. 105.92. To destroy a Carbuncle. page 105.93. To make y^ blac^
sea coal soft. pa. 106.94. To help the stone. page 106.95. A strange example
of a child borne without a mouth. page 106.96. The Wife shall dye before the
Husband. page 107.97. To help the Dropsy. page 107.98. To know perfect
Bal^e. pa. 107.99. To help the falling sycknes. page 107.100.
The Table of the fyft book.
TO make a Mare bring forth a F^ale of diverse colors. page 108.1. To help
the stone and the Dropsy. page 108.2. A Woolfe fears to go in (...) ways.
page 108.3. They that are borne in a certain constellation, shall never marry.
page 108.4. A help for the head ache. page 109.5. A water to provoke sleep.
page 109.6. To destroy an Impostume in the head. page 109.7. Signifycations of
dreams. page 109.8. To cause soft heairs to grow on the chyn. page 110.9. A
strange medicine for the swellynges. page 110.10. To see true dreams. page
110.11. A help for the falling sycknes. pa. 110.12. One borne at a certain
time, shall dye a natural death. page 110.13. A precious help for the Re^^m.
pa. 111.14. To preserve youth. page 111.15. An excellent Garga^^^ne to cleanse
the head and the breast. page 111.16. The syck party shall escape death without
all hope. page 112.17. To cure perfectlye the black Iaundyes. page 112.18. To
keep Children from breeding of Lyce. page 112.19. The Cock rejoices contrary
to all other Byrds or Beasts. etc. page 113.20. A Child borne at a certain
time will die of iron. page 113.21. To forbid the engendring of the
Impostumation of the stomach. page 113.22. To restore sight to the blind. page
113.23. A Woman helped of the moother with the root of Bryony. page 113.24. A
strange way to put away Wartes. page 114.25. A marvelous thing of a Cocks
Egg. page 114.26. A Child borne at a certain time will be hanged. page
114.27. An excellent purginge of the head. page 114.28. Black s^eges an evil
sign. page 114.29. A notable medicine for the Collyck, Stra^gury and the
stone. page 115.30. To breed Childrens teeth ^as^ly. pa. 115.31 A strange
nature of the Walnut. pa. 115.32 To keep water hot without fire. page
115.33. To take madness from Dogs. page 116.34. To keep a Child safe until the
due time of the birth, a rare secret. page 116.35. A strange thing to put
away Wartes. page 116.36. Sygnification that a Child will be hanged. page
116.37. To preserve one from head ache. pa. 117.38 A strange medicine for the
gowte. page 117.39. To make a hot loaf leap. page 117.40. A notable oil of
Saint John's Woort. page 117.41. That no Flies shall touch any Beasts in the
hot wether. page 118.42. One borne at a certain time will dye by the
commandment of the Judge. page 118.43. To kill and heal any Can^er. page
118.44 A precious water for mad men. pa. 118.45. They shall never lose their
senses nor understanding, borne at a certain time. page 119.46. To make a
glass with water burn a thing nigh to it. page 119.47. To make a sheep follow
one. page 119.48. To know what one shall see in his dream. page 120.49. A
strange way to help the quarteyn ague. page 121.50. To see the Sun Eclipsed
without hurting of the eyes. page 121.51. Excellent virtues of plates of gold
worn. page 121.52. A Child borne at a certain time, is like to perish by the
hands of many. page 122.53. To preserve the stomach from any pain. page
122.54. A precious water that breaks the stone in the reins and in the
blader. page 122.55. Significations of dreams. page 122.56. To make Copper
melt quickly. pa. 123.57. To keep Goats from straying. page 123.58. To keep
Corn from hurtful storms. page 123.59. They will dye in captivity that are
borne at a certain time. page 123.60. An excellent ointment. page 123.61. A
marvelous way to help any pains of the throat. page 124.62. A precious
medicine for a red face. page 124.63. A burning candle found in an old
tomb. page 124.64. What time is best to dygge or make a well. page 125.65. A
notable virtue of Basyll. page 125.67. The great virtue of Coriandar. pa.
125.68. A sign that the sick will dye the next year after. page 125.69. To
help a red pympled face. page 126.70. For the falling sycknes. page 126.71. A
dangerous thing to suffer a venomous woorme or a mad Dog to live after one is
hurt by the fame. page 126.72. To make Scorpions come into one place. page
126.73. One borne at a certain time, will dye in prison. page 127.74. A
notable help for the Splen. page 127.75. A precious oil of Balm. page 127.76.
An excellent proved plaster, to destroy any Impostume, stytche, or swelling.
page 127.77. Astrologicall lykelyhoods when the sick cannot be cured, but with
great expenses. page 129.78. The great virtue of Egshels. page 129.79. The
great virtue of Sugar. page 129.80. A strange thing of a young Wenche. page
129.81. To deck a balde head with heairs. page 130.82. A Beast shall never
conceive. page 130.83. A Dog that takes his disease of a man ought to be
buried. page 130.84. To cease the noise of Frogs. page 130.85. The whyt thorn
is never touched with lyghtning. page 131.86. Children borne at a certain time
will be drownde. page 131.87. A present help for the stone. page 131.88. To
make one look young a great while. page 131.89. To let heair from growing.
page 131.90. To make one laxatiue. page 131.91. They are like to have the
falling sickness that are borne at a certain time. page 132.92. That Fetters
hurt not young Beasts. page 132.93. A notable medicine for the falling
sycknes. page 132.94. Garlic brought out a Serpent out of a man. page 132.95.
A stone found in a Swallowe, helps the falling sycknes. page 132.96. To know
if a woman be conceived. page 133.97. Who shall be poor. page 133.98. To
beawtify the face. page 133.99. To know whether the sick shall dye or live.
page 133.100.
The Table of the syxt book.
TO turn any beast into a white color. page 134.1. A precious thing to
expel the stone. page 134.2. To know whether a Dream be good or not. page
134.3. A quick cure for the Hyckop. page 135.4. To find out him that has doan
a murder. page 135.5. To know whether water be in Wine or not. page 136.6.
Planteyn is marvelous for the Plague. page 136.7. To know a lively or quick
house. pa. 136.8. Diverse beasts, hates diverse colloured garments. page 136.9.
They that be borne at a certain time will dye in the country. page 136.10. To
heal the web in the eye. page 136.11. A pro^ued oil which heals the
dropsye. page 136.12. A strange thing of a Butchers wife. page 137.13. They
that falls syck at a certain time are not like to escape. page 137.14. To
take the hair away, and that it grow no more. page 138.15. To catch easelye
Ravens or Crows. page 138.16. Birds leaves their singing or are syck,
according to the Stars. page 138.17. The child borne at a certain time
wylbe imprisoned. page 139.18. A sure and proved medicyne for the toothache.
page 139.19 To take away wrincles, and spots in the face. page 139.20 An
excellent way to take foxes. page 139.21 What women do hurt with their
looking. page 140.22. What dead bodies remain vncorrupt. page 140.23. They
shall dye among strangers, that are borne in a certain constellacion. pa.
140.24 To take the blood or readnes out of the eyes. page 140.25. They shall
never have the Colic, that uses a certain confection described. page
140.26. To make wood or bones red. page 141.27 Sygnifycations of Dreams. page
141.28. To make ^lagging or ha^ging paps round. page 141.29. A wonderful
thing of a Tode and a spider. page 141.30. A notable and approved powder for
breaking ^ consuming of the stone. pa. 142.31. A great virtue for the eyes, of
the Oil of Paper. page 143.32. Signifycations that the sick party will kyl him
self. page 143.33. A spreete came to M. Brutus. pa. 143.34. The great virtue
of Egremony for wounds page 143.35. Money received in Uenus, how it will be
spent. page 144.36. To ryd one of an ancient dymnes of sight. page 144.37.
Whether a woman be conceived or not. page 144.38. A notable medicine for the
stone. pa. 144.39 A rare and true medicine for the tooth ach. page 145.40. Who
shall have few children. page 145.41. To consume Wartes, a strange thing. page
145.42. Myce will make Elephantes refuse their meat. page 145.43. Who shall
dye in prison. page 145.44. A notable medicine for to heal the Strangury. page
146.45. To make a woman bring forth her child without pain. page 146.46. To
stop the bloody Flux. page 146.47. To prove whether a woman be with child or
not. page 146.48. A Crow will dye, if he eat of the meat whereof the Woolfe
has eaten before. page 147.49. The great power and virtue of a Baye tree. page
147.50. That Myce eat not written Papers. page 147.51. The hour of Mars is to
be abhorred. page 147.52. To make Cattle safe from diseases. page 147.53. A
strange matter of the skin of a Lion. page 148.54. Colewoortes and Rue ought
not to be sown nigh together. pa. 148.55. A myraculous thing for the
destroying of woorms in man or beast. pa 148.56. They that be borne at the
con^unction of the Sun and Moon. page 149.57. The marvelous virtue of the
seeds of Oculus Christi. page 149.58. A marvelous strange way to destroy
Wartes. page 149.59. To make the Letters of the color of paper. page 150.60.
A woonderful matter of a woman transformed into a man. page 150.61. What
children are like to have short life. page 151.62. A notable thing to heal
old sores. page 151.63. An excellent help for the yallowe Iaundyes. page
151.64. When the sick is to be feared. page 152.65. What kind of Chycken coms
of the Egg. page 152.66. To make Amber as soft as clay. pa. 152.67 The force
of old lether in expelling Serpents. page 152.68. A precious thing for the
Strangury. page 153.69. When the sick person is like to dye. page 153.70. A
notable medicine for the Sciatica. page 153.71. A good lesson for Physicians.
page 153.72. The love of a Lyzard to a man. pa. 153.73. A notable medicine to
break the stone. page 154.74. Who shall go far and long iourneyes. page
154.75. A strange thing for them that have lost their voice. page 154.76. An
excellent thing for the Palsy and the gowte. page 155.77. To heal the
Sciatica. page 155.78. To make a light to make the beholders yallowe. page
155.79. The strange nature of the dunge of a Woolfe. page 155.80. To pluck
out thorns, an excellent thing. page 156.81. A marvelous History of a Lady
that had by Imagination a Child like an Ethyopian. page 156.82. The strange
property of certain flowers. page 157.83. (...) thought to be dead with the
eating of He^locks. page 157.84. To take away the spotte in the eye in three
days. page 158.85. Things asked in the hours of Saturn or Mars, is a
suspicion of evil. pa. 158.86. A marvelous way to help women, weakened their
monthly disease. page 158.87. The strange breeding of Synnewes. page 158.88.
The great dyuersitye between the leaves and seeds of Docks. page 159.89. To
amend sowrenes or tartnes of Wine. page 159.90. A strange medicine to help
all Rewmes, distyllations and watrines of the eyes. page 159.91. A Child borne
in a certain constellation, will be mighty, wise, and a great Philosopher.
page 159.92. To get a stone that will cure the dropsy. page 159.93. A
marvelous medicine to kill the Cankar. page 160.94. To destroy Tetiers and
Ringwoormes. page 160.95. To break the stone. page 160.96. To drive away
Crows or Birds from Corn that is sown. page 160.97. A strange help for
the Colic. pa. 160.98. What people are evil. page 161.99. When bears shall
arise in iourneyes. page 161.100.
The Table of the seventh Book.
A Help for all griefs of the bladder. page 162.1. A notable water for
breaking of the stone. page 162.2. The strange breeding of Barnacles. page
163.3. To help them that are bewytched. page 163.4. Money delivered in ye hour
of the Moon. page 163.5. Great virtues of Bettony. page 163.6. To know whether
one that is sick, will live or dye. page 164.7. A great cure of one that was
swollen. page 164.8. A good warning for purginge or letting of blood. page
164.9. Good knowledge for the certaintye of the wind. page 165.10. A strange
help for the gowte. pa. 165.11. A strange thing of Harp stringes. page
165.12 To cease the swelling of the yard. page 165.13. One fortold by
Astrology, the speedy death of one that was sick. page 165.14. For the Stone
an easy medicine. page 166.15. That wrytinges shall not be read, unless the
same be put first in the water. page 166.16. A notable medicine for an old
pain in the head. page 166.17. To get the Tode stone. page 167.18. The
strange generating of U^pers. page 167.19. To provoke the Flowers and after
burden. page 168.20. An incredible help for the falling sycknes. page 168.21.
To cease the barking of Dogs. page 168.22 S^^oes that will never be worn. pa.
168.23 A strange thing to stop the blood. page 168.24. The fire shall not
burn a thing cast into it. page 169.25. Fear or danger in long iourneyes.
page 16^.26. A myraculous thing in Ireland. pa. 169.27 Whether the sick shall
escape or not. page 169.28. To make a green that will last pa. 170.29 To make
Letters of gold. pa. 170.30. To know when Wheat will be ch^ape or dear. page
170.31. The Lion is more fierce against men* then women. page 171.32. The great
virtue of nettle seed. pa. 171.33. To put a^ Egg into a narrow mouthed
g^asse. page 171 3^. To roast a dysh of B^tter. page 171.35. To put away the
tooth ache, a strange thing. page 172.36. They that are borne at a certain
time, will be possessed with Deuyls. page 172.37. A strange well. page 172.38. To
handle fire without harm. pa. 172.39. An excellent time to take medicine. page
173.40. An excellent thing to clear the sight. page 173.41. To bring Pigions
to a Doouehouse. page 173.42. To make an herb like Drago^s. pa. 174.43 To
keep Hens safe from Foxes. pa. 174.44 To help barrennes. page 174.45 To know
in what case a Ship with the men in her is, being absent. page 174.46. For
swellings in a sore breast. page 175.47. To help a wound in the hand. pa.
175.48 A special medicine to strengthen the back. page 175.49. For sore
throats. page 175.50. They are diuellishe that are borne at a certain time.
page 175.51. That Beasts be not bytten of the blind Mowse. page 175.52. A
good lesson to be observed in Beasts that are with young. page 176.53. Who are
like to see true dreams. page 176.54. A notable ointment for any pain in the
head. page 176.55. An excellent water for hearing. pa. 177.56. A Wren will
turn at the fire by it self. page 177.57. To make fine pictures and vessels
with small coast. page 177.58. When the mother shall be of short life. page
178.59. To take away the hardness of Women's p^ps. page 178.60. To help mad
^^en. page 178.61. A precious thing for burning. page 178.62. To cause one make
water. page 178.63. To hatche Chycke^s without a Hen. page 179.64. The strange
virtue of the Medler. page 179.65. That toasted or sodden flesh seem bloody.
page 179.66. Of quick and slow delivering out of prison. page 179.67. To
heal a scalde head. page 180.68. To destroy Wartes. page 180.69. A Dog
taught to do the office of a servant. page 180.70. A most extreme famine.
page 180.71. To drive forth sand out of the reins. page 181.72. To cause
speedy delyueraunce of a Child. page 181.73. That scalding be not seen. page
181.74 To draw out a tooth eas^ly. page 181.75. To put away freckles in the
face. page 182.76. To help the Elfe cake in the side. pa. 182.77. To help
shaking hands. page 182.78. To know a right Tode stone. pa. 182.79. To make
that Garlic shall not smell. page 182.80. An easy medicine for the gowte.
pa. 183.81. An argument of death. pa. 183.82. To make a Woman be speedely
delivered. page 183.83. To know who shall be gelded. page 184.84. To make that no
Dog bark at you. page 184.85. To put away the quarten ag^^. pa. 184.86 To
help ^^^olde and incurable gow^e. page 184.87. A notable medicine for the
falling sickness. page 184.88. An excellent ointment for the gowte. page 185.89.
To destroy an Itche. page 185.90. To make a candle that will not be put out.
page 185.91. An excellent oil for the Synewes and ach of the joints. page
185.92. To bring woormes and hurtful things in a garden, into one place. page
186.93. A token of the fathers short life. pa. 186.94. To help pains and
deafnes of the ears. page 186.95. A proved water to heal the Fystula. page
186.96. That horses be lively and quick. page 187.97. To make a horse pysse.
pa. 187.98. A marvelous and precious water. pa. 187.99. For wind or sounding
in the ears. page 188.100.
The Table of the eight book.
TO make vinegar presently. page 189.1. The strange property of the Woolfe.
page 189.2. Deadlye w^^re between the Hawke and the Eagle. page 189.3. To take
Birds that eats seeds that are sown. page 189.4. An evil hour to take
journey on the seas. page 189.5. Approved Pyls for the Palsy. pa. 190.6. A
strange thing of a woman with child. page 190.7. To turn white wine into
red. page 190.8. A rare medicine for the cough. page 191.9. Who shall possess
greater rytches and honors, then their Ancestors. pa. 191.10. To clear a dym
sight. page 191.11. A marvelous medicine for wounds and sores. page 192.12. A
strange diversity between dead men, and dead women. page 192.13. The great
virtue of Marygooldes. page 192.14. A rare thing to help the gowte. pa.
193.15. If one do come or send to thee in a good hour. page 193.16. To cause
a speedy birth of a Child. page 193.17. To know whether one that is sick,
will live or dye. page 193.18. To help them that be deaffe. page 193.19. To
draw out a toothe without any pain. page 194.20. A ^awe that no syck person
should drink Wine. page 194.21. Whether any water be myxt with Wine or not.
page 194.22. To increase Pigions in a Doouehouse. page 194.23. An excellent
thing for deafness. page 1^4.24. One did foretell of the time of the death of
one that was sick, by Astrology. page 194.25. For ache in the bones or in any
other place. page 195.26. They that be gelded are never gowtie. page 196.27. A
proud and vain glorious Emperor. page 196.28. It is not good to bury any
too hastelye. page 196.29. A notable medicine for shortness of breath. page
197.30. To break the great heat of Wine in the vessel. page 197.31. To keep
any part of the body from cold. page 197.32. To keep clothes and books
from moaths. page 198.33. To help a long continewed deafness. page 198.34. A
precious powder to concerue the sight. page 198.35. To get out the water out
of swollen legs. page 198.36. Aqua vite good for the eyes. page 199.37. To
ioygne or knyt wounds. page 199.38. A water more precious then gold. page
199.39. To cause a woman be speedily delivered. page 200.40. A blessed water
for the gowte. pa. 200.41. To drive away Backs or Rearemyce. page 201.42. To
know whether you shall obtain that thing you hope for, or not. page 201.43. A
present help for the toothache. page 201.44. To resolve the sorenes, and
swellings of the throat. page 201.45. For the weakness and pains in the back.
page 202.46. To make one sing clear, and to have a clear voice. page 202.47.
The strange property of mints. pa. 203.48 A dangerous hour to fall sick in.
page 203.49. To break a tooth and to take away the pain. page 203.50 ^uido
bonatus, learnedly foretold a great danger to the Emperor, by his reuolucion.
page 203.51 A marvelous matter of a woman with ch^^de. page 204.52. A child
borne in a certain time, will be a Shypman or a Sayler. page 205.53. A perfet
help for the Gowte. page 205.54. To restore the deaffe to hearing. pa. 205.55.
A notable thing to stop ye rewine. p. 206.56 To help the Pocks in the eyes. pa.
206.57 When the Phisitio^ shall not profit the sick. page 206.58. To make a
toothe to fall out by the root. page 207.59. To restore one that is brought
low page 207.60. A noble receate for the black Iaundyes. page 208.61. Bettonye
is marvelous good for the gowte. page 208.62. An excellent thing for the
pluresye and the stuffed stomach. page 208.63 To make gotes give much milk. p.
209.64 He that is borne at a certain time, will be a master Carpenter. page
209.65. To cease the outrageous pain of the gowt. page 209.66. A most
approved medicine for the Gowt. page 209.67. To catch Birds with your hands.
page 209.68. To make a woman be speedelye delivered. page 210.69. A true
medicine for the Gowte. pa. 210.70 To kindle a Candle and to burn in the
water. page 210.71. To make that a Ram shall not put. page 211.72. A good
hour to fall syck in. page 211.73. A present help for the tooth ache. pa.
211.74 A warranted medicine for the Gowte. page 211.75. A special medicine for
all sudden sickness. page 211.76. A strange medicine for the yellow
Iaundye^. page 211.77. To help the ^^ad ache and swymming of the head. page
212.78. To make a Cock stowte to fight. p. 212.79 A strange thing of Myce.
page 212.80. For the Kings Evil a rare thing. page 212.81. Who shall be
fortunate and happy. etc. page 212.82. A marvelous water to recover the sight.
page 213.83. To make ^ light that never shall fayl^. page 213.84. To make a
swine follow one. page 214.85. What thing dryues away Bees. page 214.86. A good
hour to take journey in, for getting of unlooked profit. page 214.87. To stay
the bleeding of the nose presently. page 214.88. That wrytinges appear of the
color of the paper, and not to be read unless it be holden against the
fire. page 214.89. To gylde Iron or Copper. page 215.90. To make an Eg very
hard. page 215.91. To make a red Rose white. page 215.92. To separate gold
from any thing gylded. page 215.93. To know whether the sick will live or
dye: a strange practice. pa. 216.94. To stay the bloody Flux. page 216.95. An
easy plaster for the gowte, but of great effect. page 216.96. To destroy any
Impostumation, and to avoid the same. page 217.97. He that is borne in a
certain constellation, will be a good Physician. page 217.98. A straung thing
of a little Bird. pa. 218.99. He will dye in prison, that is borne at a certain
time. page 218.100.
The Table of the nynth book.
THe wonderful virtue of Egremony, in helping them that be poisoned. etc.
page 219.1. A marvelous Oil of Balm for trembling and the Palsy, and for
helping the memory. page 219.2. The hoof of a certain Beast, will cure
perfectly the falling Evil, a marvelous thing. page 220.3. A proved thing for
the spytting of blood. page 221.4. A precious and an easy medicine for the
Ca^^uncle, Plague sore, Botch, Byle, etc. page 221.5. Tokens of death in the
sick person. page 221.6. Pottage that will help perfectly the yallow
Iaundies. page 222.7. Serpents hates maruelously the A^h tree. page 222.8. Who
will procure their own enemytie. page 222.9. Ienuper be^ryes marvelous against
poisons. page 222.10. To try whether precious stones be pure or not. page
222.11. A principal medicine for the bone ache. page 223.12. To help the
pains in the back. pa. 223.13 To catch Mowles or Woonts. pa. 223.14. To help
the Fystula outward or inward. page 224.15. For them that have surfeyted. page
224.16. To pluck away carnal and fleshly lust, a very strange thing. page
224.17. For them that cannot eat. page 224.18. A present help for such as
have droonken poison. page 224.19. To let heair from growing. page 225.20. The
Lapwing foreshowes the great plenty of Wine. page 225.21. A good hour to
deliver money in. page 225.22. A precious drink which cures the Fystula. page
225.23. To make a woman be delivered incontinent. page 226.24. To make a fair
color in the face. page 226.25. To make one hear again. pa. 227.26. To make
Copper or Brass of the color of Silver. page 227.27. That Serpents can not
go out of the place where they are. page 227.28. Anger or enemities will come
to them through money, that are borne at a certain time. page 227.29. To heal
a hollow Ulcer. page 227.30. To separate gold from any thing that is gylded.
page 227.31. For them that can not hear. page 228.32. For the fundament that
goes forth. page 228.33. For blea^ed eyes. page 228.34. A Heart can not abide
the sight of a Ram. page 229.35. A strange thing foretold by a Child newly
borne. page 229.36. A proved thing for the Palsy. page 230.37. To help s^olne
legs. page 230.38. What makes men be without the gowte. page 230.39. A straung
cure of one bitten with a Scorpion. page 230.40. A myraculous oil. page
231.41. To put a writing into an Eg. pa. 232.42 Beast^ are according to the
pr^porcion of the inward parts. page 232.^3. He that is borne at a certain
time shall consume his goods or come to poverty or miserye. page 233.44. The
great virtue of Egruno^y. page 233 45. For the web or spot in the eye. pa.
233.46 The great virtue of Tormentyll. page 234.47. Who shall be poor and a
wretch. page 234.48. A good medicine for them that are short breathed. page
235.49. A strange medicine for helping women's sore breasts. page 235.50, To
help swollen arms, legs or (...). page 236.51. To help a stinking breath, a
tried medicine. page 236.52. What day is unlucky to a child borne. page
236.53. To destroy Wartes. page 236.54 To put away or consume a W^n. page
237.55. A s^nguler oil to bewty^ye the face. page 237.56. A notable medicine
for ache or the Gowte. page 237.57. A precious water for eyes. page 238.58 Who
shall dye a foul or evil death. page 238.59. To take Wartes clean away. page
239.60 The coddes that are swollen. page 239.61 To break a Byle, Botch, or a
Fellon. page 239.62. A notable secret for all incurable aches. page 239.63. For
swollen or sore throats, a rare remedy. page 240.64. For a great heat and
pricking in the eyes. page 240.65. He that is borne at a certain time, shall
never dye an evil death. page 241.66 A wonderful drink for brusynges. page
241.67. To drive forth the stone in the bladder. page 241.68. To help the
Palsy. page 241.69. An excellent remedy for many deseases. page 242.70. For
the strangury, a strange medicine. page 242.71. A proved medicine for the
Sciatica. page 242.72. The great virtue of Sugar, for eyes. page 242.73. They
that sets forward to the Sea, in a certain hour are like to be drownde. page
243.74. For to help deafnes, a tried medicine. page 244.75. The making of an
excellent Aqua vite. page 244.76. To make sweet water forth with. page 245.77.
A precious oil for cold aches. pa. 245.78. To avoid the dropsye water. pa.
245.79. To make a Ca^on bring up young Chyckens. page 246.80. A learned
Astronomer foretold one of his death. page 246.81 A strange longing of a
woman with child. page 247.82. A marvelous strange help for swollen legs of
beasts or horses. page 247.83. To put away any spots or steyninges. page
248.84. To make any byrd to have white feathers. page 248.85. A marvelous
strange help for the stone. page 248.86. An excellent ^ryed secret for diverse
inward greefes. page 249.87. To make Corrall by art. page 250.88. An excellent
thing for deaf^es. page 250.89 To deliver a woman of a dead Child. page
250.90. To make an Apple move. page 250.91 To kill all the fleas in a chamber.
page 251.92. A Lady swallowed pins without harm. page 251.93. That Roses smell
more pleasantlye and grow the better. page 251.94. A notable oil wherewith one
got much money. page 251.95. An excellent sweet water. page 252.96 To make
that Chyckens be hatched of diverse culloures. page 253.97. To make that Horse
nor sheep shall go forward though you beat them. p. 253.98 The age of
certain Bea^^es and Birds. page 253.99. The great virtue of the water that
comes out of the Byrtch tree. page 253.100.
The Table of the tenth Book.
A Sraunge thing of the Myrt tree and the Olive tree. page 254.1. A sure help
for the moother pa. 254.2 Pygeons defended from the spar Hawke. their enemy.
page 254.3. An easy help for the Gowt. page 255.4 A learned prediction of an
Astronomer. page 255.5. The great virtue of the Adamant stone, ^ or the
Dropsy. page 255.6. A myraculous thing of them that be murdered. page 255.7.
The great virtue of Amber, for the w^trines of the eyes. page 256.8. A woman
went with a dead Child above four years. page 256.9. To make one loath wine.
page 256.10 How beasts chances to become ^ame. page 257.11. To make a white
and delicate ski^ne. page 257.12. One did pysse a knotted barlye straw. page
257.13. To help lame members. page 257.14 A strange th^^ge to help the tooth
ache. page 257.15. A notable help for the memory. pa. 258.16 A rare help for
the quarten ague. page 258.17. For the ^aund^se and the dropsye. page 258.18.
To part any glass a sunder. page 259.19. To help the dropsye, a tried thing.
page 259.20. A strange description of the Besaar stone. page 259.21. A water
which certainelye will heal the Fystul^. page 264.22 A Candle that will not be
put out with the wind. page 265.23. The getting of the stones out of young
Swallows, and of their excellent virtues. page 265.24. A marvelous strange
wa^e to breed Eeles. page 265.25. The Uine agrees not with the Baye tree. page
266.26. An Image of gold helps the head ache. page 266.27. To color
brystles. page 266.28. To make the teeth fall easily out. pa. 267.29 To destroy
the web in the eye. pa. 267.30 Aqua vite, with Sugar and pure white bread, is
good for grosie bodies. pa. 267.31 To make a Candle burn under the water* page
268.32. To make a Ring leap by it self. page 268.33. To make iron soft. page
268.34. A straung longing of a woman with child. page 268.35. A precious water
distylled of Centorye. page 269.39. To make a bladder ^^ape from place to
place. page 269.37. A notable water for bewtifying the face. page 270.38. To
faste^ things hard together. page 270.39 An Angelyke water for the eyes. page
271.40. An excellent water, called the golden water. page 27^.41. To heal
incurable ulcers. page 274.42. For the great heat of the vryne. page 275.43. A
notable and excellent Balm. pa. 275.44 To make steel as soft as paste. pa.
277.45 A present help for the plague. pa. 277.46. T^o woonderful Stones. page
278.47. To make a Stone that will ^urne, by moystning it with spettle. page
280.48. To make an Egg ascend into the air. page 281.49. A Glue that
fastneth glass together. page 281.50. To destroy Caterpyllers. page 283.51. To
make (...) in the (...). page 28^.5^. A dangerous time to fall (...) in. p.
282.53 To know a (...) stone. page 282.54 To destroy a (...) or Ringworme.
page 283.55. To make a Candle of Ise to burn. page 283.56. If (...) fall syck
at a certain time, it sygnyfyes (...) sycknesse. page 183.57. A good (...)
dredge powder. pa. 284.58 Every woman do not go a like tim^ with their
children. page 284.59 An excellent thing for any ache. pa. 285.60 To have
Bea^^^ ^^yse of once se^ting page 285.61. To help dim eyes. pa. 286.62. A most
excellent oil of balm, which will help all cold diseases. page 286.63 A
strange reviving of flies. page 290.64. To hau^ Roses twyse in one Summer.
page 290.65. A strange Herb that keeps one from hunger. page 291.66 Uenemous
be^sts driven away. p. 291.67 To kill mice. page 292.68. A (...) that helps
the gowt. pa. 292.69. To have y^llow Roses. page 292.70. That mice shall not
eat Cheese. p. 292.71. A (...) which will show whether the syck will live or
dye. page 292.72 (...) better to wash withal then soap. page 293.73. For
women's breasts swollen or sore. page 293.74. For the M^rphew and scumines of
the face. page 293.75. A preservative against the Plague. page 294.76. To
bring Antes out of the ground. page 294.77. To cause (...) to (...) Water, a
strange medicine. page 294.78. To keep (...) from We^elles or ^ice. page
295.79. When you (...) see the Cuc^^^, mark where your right foot does
stand. etc. page 295.80. To make one soluble. page 295.81 The great age of
Hearts. page 295.82 To glue fast together broken Glasses. page 296.83. For them
that have an extreme heat and burning Fever. page 296.84. Who are not like to
marry before they be thirtye years of age. page 296.85. To know when flesh
is sodde enough. page 297.86. A marvelous thing of Iuye (...). page 297.87.
The ^ones of Hens consumes gold. page 298.88. To make fair culloured h^yre.
pa. 298.89 A notable help for the gow^. pa. 298.90. ^ marvelous help for the
head. pa. 298.91. A thing worth the marking. pa. 299.92. To know how many days
old the (...) is, a very strange thing. page 299.93. A marvelous matter of a
woman that was burye^. page 299.94. To bring forth Medlers out of a Hawthorne.
page 300.95. A strange thing of the little bird called the Kings fysher.
page 300.96 A gyrdle that will keep one from drowning. page 300.97. A Lady
that makes flesh sooner to be sod. page 301.98. Poison is discribed by a
Partritche. page 302.99. To know where the wind will be. page 302.100.
FINIS.

