Palladis Tamia. WITS TREASVRY Being the Second part of Wits Common wealth.

BY Francis Meres Master of Arts of both Universities.

Viuitur ingenio, caetera mortis erunt. AT LONDON Printed by P. Short, for
Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at his shop at the Royal Exchange. 1598.

THE SECOND part of Wits Commonwealth.
Of God.
And of his unity, simplicity and perfection.
AS it was a less hurt for some not to see at al, then to see ill, as Hercules
did, who seeing his children slew them for enemies: so it is a lesser harm,
and a lighter sin, not to believe that there is a God at all, than to believe
that he is hurtful. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

As they think worse of man, that say he is wrathful, and dangerous, then they
that deny he lives: so they think less amiss of God, who deny him to be,
then they that say he is bitter, hurtful, wrathful, etc. Ibidem.

As of the Hircanian fishes neither good nor evil is expected: so the Epicures
would have us neither to be trobled with the fear of god, nor delighted with his
bounty ibid.

As an husbandman does not cut the thorn, before it has budded; and as the
men of Libia do not tread upon the branches, before they have gathered the
frankincense: so God does not cut off the pestilent race of kings, before
some fruit may arise thereof, idem de vindicta diuina.

As Schoolmasters and philosophers are said (after the common manner of
speaking) to descend to the capacity of their scholars and hearers, which is
not to be understood of any corporal descending: so when God in the holy
scripture is said to descend, it is to be understood after the common
custom of speaking. Origenes lib. 3. contra Celsum.

As a phisitia^ cures many diseases, which he is not partaker of: so God
purges many sinful souls, the stain of which he is not any way touched
with. Ibidem.

As in an army if there be many generals there grows confusion, but when one
does rule, the battle being united becomes the stronger: so except there
should be but one God to order this universe, all would come to ruin and
dissolution. Lactantius lib. 1. 3. and lib. de ira. cap. 2.

As there is but one Sun that inlighteneth the day (whereupon Cicero says,
that it is called the sun, because it having obscured all the stars, it
appears one and alone:) so there is but one God, that illuminateth the
world. ibidem. lib. 2 cap. 10.

As nothing makes to the perfection of unity, which is the beginning of
number (for when it was not the beginning of number, it was perfect, and being
made the beginning of number it is not increased:) so also GOD before the
creation was perfect, and after the creation was not augmented. Justinius Martyr
in responsionibus ad Orthodoxos, responsione ad quaest. 113.

As the Sun touches all things alike with his force and influence, yet all
things do not receive it alike: so although GOD (according to his essence be
present every where with every one) yet he is not alyke present to others,
as he is in his own temple. Idem de recta Confessione, sieve de Sancta and
coessentali Trinitate.

The Sun and the Moon carry a type of a great mystery. For the Sun after a
certain manner represents God, and the Moon man. As the Sun by many
degrees excels the Moon in power and glory: so God excels man. As the
sun is always perfectly seen, neither is at any time diminished: so GOD
does always continue perfect, full of power, wisdom, immortality, and all
other good things. The Moon changes every month, and her power dies,
showing the condition of man; and afterward is renewed and increased,
designing the future resurrection of mankind. Theophilus Antiochenus. Libro 2.
ad Antolycum.

As God is more then all humane reason: so it seems more then reason unto
me, that I know that all things are done of God. Saluianus lib. 3, de iudicio.

As God is unknown unto us according to his essence: so is he immeasurable
according to his majesty. Thalassius ad Paulinumpresbyterum.

As by the excellent structure of an house, we gather that there has been an
architect: so by the glorious frame of this world we conclude that there is a
God. Philo Iudaeus lib. 2. legis allegoriarum.

As the Sun enters into the dens of Lions, and into the cauernes of
creeping worms without harm or pollution: so God enters into the dwellings
of man without hurt, and penetrateth to the habitation of death without
corruption. Macarius. hom. 11.

That which the Sun is unto the senses, that is God unto the understanding. The
Sun illuminateth the visible world; God the invisible: the Sun illustrateth
the corporal sight, God makes glorious intellectual natures. And as the Sun
is profitable both to the seers, and to things seen, to the seers that they may
see, to the other that they may be seen, and is the most beautiful among
visible creatures: so God does help both the understanding, and things
understood, this, that it may understand, the other, that they may be
understood, and he is the highest among intelligible things. Greg. Nazian*
oratione sunebri in Athan.

As Moses serpent did eat up the serpents of the Incha^ters: so Gods power
deuoures and swallows up all the power and strength of man.

As a Painter, who guides the pencil in the hand of his scholar, and so
makes a perfect picture, deserves more praise then his scholar: so to God,
who works all good in us, and effects every good work belongs greater
honor and glory, then to man. Lodouicus Granatensis lib. 1. Ducis Peccatorum.

As a wife chaste and beautiful, who deserves to be loved alone, thinks an
injury to be done unto her, if she be loved together with others: so also
does God. Idem lib. de deuotione.

God is invisible and incomprehensible.
AS there is nothing shriller then a voice; nothing stronger then the wind;
nothing more violent then a savor, and yet these being carried through the air
unto our senses, are not seen with our eyes, but are perceived by other parts
of our body: so God is not to be comprehended of us by sight, or by any other
frail sense, but is to be looked upon with the eyes of our mind, where we see
his wonderful and excellent works. Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 1.

As no man is able to measure the length or the breadth of heaven, or to sound
the depth of the sea: so no man is capable of the incomprehensible majesty of
God. Epiphanius haeresi. 70. contra Audianos.

As we are not able to know the essence of any star: so we are not able to
reach to the knowledge of Gods essence. Philo. Iudaeus lib. 1. de Monarchia.

As he that endeavors to sail over the main Ocean, and cannot, is forced to
turn back the same way he went: so the ancient Philosophers and Orators
enquiring of the nature of God, failed in wit, and faultered in tongue,
confessing at the last that they could find none other thing, but that God was
incomprehensible, and unmeasurable. Chrystomus hom. 28. operis imperfecti.

As no man can measure the wind, or weigh the fire: so no man can attain unto
the unsearchable judgments of the Lord.

Even as one standing upon the shore does see the Sea, and yet does not see
the breadth and depth of it: so the Angels, and all the other elect, which be
in heaven do see God reallie, yet they can not comprehend either the depth of
his greatness, or the altitude of his eternity. Lodouicus Granatensis lib. 1.
Ducis peccatorum.

Even as there can be found nothing more bright and visible then the sun, yet
nothing is less seen then it, by reason of the excellency of his brightness,
and the weakness of our sight: so there is nothing in it self more
intelligible then God, yet there is nothing in this life less understood then
he, for the same reasons* Ibidem.

As that painter, when he depainted the funeral solemnity of a certain
kings daughter, pourtraied her kinsfolks with heavy countenaunces, and her
mother more sorrowful then the rest, but when he came to delineate the father,
he did cover his face with an artificial shadow, signifying thereby that his
Art did here fail him: so when we speak of God, and the deep mysteries of
his divinity, under awe of admiration, we are to lay our hands on our mouths,
and to adore him with ineffable and chaste silence. Ibidem.

God is not the Author of sin.
AS the Sun, which is made to illustrate and enlighten things, cannot obscure
and darken them: so God who is righteousness it self, cannot do unjustly.
Origines lib. 3. contra Celsum.

As the wicked do naughtily entreat the goodness of God: so God does use to
good end the evil works of the ungodly. Eusebius Emissenus, hom. 4. de
Epiphania.

As the Smith is not the cause, why the iron rusteth, nor the progenitour of a
lively body, is the cause of the filth and blemishes it afterward gathers:
so neither God, although he make and order all things, is the cause of any
sin and wickedness in them, Mercurius Trismegistus in Pymandro.

As it belongs unto God, being only good, to be the cause of every good
work: so it is unmeet and incongruous, that he should be supposed the author
of any evil. Fulgentius. lib. 1.

As a master that would try his servant, whether he be good or badde, sets
in place where he may come to sweet meats and money, now if this servant take
any, his master compelled him not to do ill, but laid open his bad
disposition: so also God giving unto men occasion to sin, if they will sin,
he does not make them to sin, but manifests the maliciousnes of their
hearts. Chrisostomus homil. 46. operis imperfecti

As the sun is not hurtful, although it seems so unto weak and bleard eyes;
and as honey is not bitter to the taste, albeit sick folk deem it so: so God is
not evil nor careless of men's actions, albeit wicked and reprobate men think
him so. Chrisost. hom. 7. in Joan.

As it is no wonderful thing to make a goulden bracelet of gold, but it is
admirable to make pure goulde of base lead: so to make good of good is a thing
of no such wonder, but to extract virtue out of vice, this is divine. God out
of the wickkednes of the ungodly done against the righteous does extract their
profit, yea out of our own faults he does produce our welfare, for by it he
works in us contrition, and by his favor we bring forth the fruits of
repentance. Pintus in Eze. cap. 38.

The patience and longanimity of God.
AS God patiently suffered Jonas to be swallowed of the Whaile, not that he
should perish, but that he being cast up again, might more submit himself
under the mighty hand of God, and more glorify him: so God from the
beginning has been patient in suffering man to be swallowed up of that great
Whaile, who was the author of preuarication, not that he should finally
perish, but that he might prepare him to seek for that salvation, of which
Jonas was a sign. Irenaeus li. 3. contra haereses cap. 22.

An householder does not suddenly cast forth a faithful servant but desires
him to stay: so the Lord long suffers, if any one has been faithful unto
him. August. sermon 146. in Lucam.

As Cities and Common wealths do nourish hangmen and executioners of justice,
by whom they may execute offenders and malefactors, not praising the office of
the hangma^, but tollerating his ministry for necessary uses: so God the great
magistrate and iusticer of this world does suffer tyrants and oppressors, as
certain hagme^, that by them he may take vengeance of ungodly men, and
afterward delivers the tyrants unto torment; so God punished the children
of Israel by the Assyrians. Theodoretus ser. 6. de Graecarum affectionu^
curatione.

Gods Providence.
AS a King when he would keep any man safe from danger, places him in his
palace, that not only the walls of the King, but also the eyes of the King
may defend him from his enemies, then the which guard none can be safer: so
the heavenly King by the same providence does defend his. Lodouicus
Granatensis lib. 1. Ducis Peccatorum.

As the sun does not only illuminate heaven, the sea and the earth, but shines
also through a window or a little creuice, and does cast light into ye inmost
place of the house: so the divine providence does not only preserve great
things, but also respects the very least, that are in the earth. Clemens
Alexandrinus lib. 7. stromatum.

As we know that there are men in a ship that directly sails into an haven,
although we see none of them, by reason of the right guydance of it: so we know
that God is the governor of all things by his providence, albeit we cannot
see him with our carnal eyes. Theophilus Antiochenus lib. 1. ad Antolycum.

As an house decaieth without an inhabiter; as a ship perishes without a
Pilot; and as the body dies being forsaken of the soul: so all things go to
wrack and ruin without the divine providence. Lactantius Lib. 3. cap. 20.

As a Wagoner directeh his chariot; and a Pilot his ship: so God guides all
his creatures. Philo. lib. de Somnijs.

As we know that there is a soul in a man's body, by the motion of the body,
albeit the soul be invisible: so God by his providence and ordering of all
things is apprehended; although by no eye he can be discerned. Theophilus
Antiochenus lib. 1. ad Antolycum.

As an Eagle caryeth her young ones upon her wings; and as a mother carries
her child in her arms: so God supporteth his. Deuteron. cap. 1. and cap. 32.

As God respects a little bird of the sea called Alcyon, that in the midst of
winter he sends a calm for fourteen days, (which the Mariners call Alcyon
days) til she has hatched and fledged her young ones, that the waves of the
sea may not trouble her, nor destroy her brood: so the divine providence
regards men in all their actions, who are made according to his Image, but
especially he defends his children, That they shall not be afraid for
any terror by night, nor for the arrowe that flies by day, for the Pestilence
that walks in the darkness: nor for the sickness that destroieth in the
noone day. Isidorus Clarius orat, 56. tomi primi.

As a skillful Architect provides all things necessary for his building: so
does God for his creatures. Lactantius de opificio dei. cap. 6.

Mariners, when they see a storm approaching, first call upon God, that they may
ariue safely in their wished haven, then they take in their sails, and provide
all things that are needful: so we must trust to the divine help and
providence, yet so, that we add also our one industry. Plutarchus.

The mercy and love of God.
AS a father, that has a lunatike and frantic son, does lament and grieve
when he hears his son to talk wisely with him; and presently sees him fall
out of his wits and run mad: so also our heavenly father does grieve and
lament (if so it could be) when he sees the corruption of our nature to be
so great, that in that very time, we are talking wisely with him in prayer,
forthwith we run here and there, and vage and wander through a thousand
cogitations. Lodouicus Granatensis, lib. de Deuotione.

As when a young bird does fall out of the nest, the damme flies after, and if
a serpent catch it to devour it, the dam flittereth about, and lamenteth her
loss: so God does seek the workmanship of his hands, when it is lost, and
does bring it home: when it is wounded, he cures it, and if it be fallen,
he lifts it up again. Clemens Alexandrinus oratione adgentes.

As the rod of Moses turned into a serpent before Pharaoh, devoured all the
Magitians rods turned into serpents: so the love of GOD as a fire deuoureth the
love of all worldly things. Bernardus sermon de Ascensione.

As kings set before the eyes of raceriders and contenders, garlandes, pre^ious
garments and rich rewards, to the end they should not faint: so does God, by
the words of his Prophets, as by the hands of many, set before his warriors,
crowns of immortality, that they with courage may contend for them.
Chrisosto. hom. 55. in Mathaeum.

As the visible light is the Hench-man of the suns brightness: so are the
benefits of God Heralds of the divine bounty. Laurentius Iustinianus de
spirituali animae resurrectione.

As a spark of fire falling into the vast ocean is nothing in stay or
appearance: so our sins are as nothing, yea much less then nothing, if they
fall into the bottom less gulf of the divine mercy; for the sea, although it
be great, has a limitation, but the clemency and mercy of God has none.
Chrysostom. hom. 3. de paenitentia.

As bodies well cured, are not only restored to good health, but to a good
habit: so God does not only purge our souls from vices, but indues them with
virtues. Chrysostom. hom. 22. ad Hebraeos.

As a loving father punishing him that slew his son, does also break the
sword wherewith his son was slain: so God plaguing the devil for the
downfall of Adam, inflicted also punishment upon the serpent, whom the devil
used as the sword of his malice. Idem hom. 7.

God being desirous to signify his love unto us, does liken it to the love of
hens, to the care of fathers, and to the pity of mothers. Chrysostom. in Psalm.
14.

As a drop of water is nothing compared to the Sea; and as a candle light is
nothing to the brightness of the Sun: so neither are our misdeedes to the
Divine clemency and bounty. Chrysostom hom. 13.

The justice of God.
AS by the quantity and greatness of one arm, we gather the quantity and
greatness of the other: so by the greatness of the arm of the divine mercy,
we measure also the quantity of the divine justice, seeing that there is one
and the same measure of them both. Lodouicus Granatensis. lib. 1. ducis
peccatorum.

As dust is scattered before a storm, as sand is wracked together by a
tempest, as the morning deawe vanishes at the Suns heat: so do the wicked
before the presence of the divine justice. Nazianzenus oratione 2. contra
Iulianum.

As a master of a family will not suffer himself to be derided and
contemned of his servant, but punishes their misdemeanors: so God, whose
house this whole world is, and whose servants all men are, will not suffer
himself to be blasphemed and reuyled, but will take vengeance on the
offenders. Lactantius de ira Dei. Cap. 27.

As a Judge inflicteth punishment upon malefactors, least others dreaming of
impunitie should grow to the same liberty: so deals GOD with sinners, that
others may be terrifyed and amend. Origenes Homil. 9. in Ieremiam.

As Physicians meet with some diseases before they appear: so God punishes
certain offenses before they be effected. Plutarch. in Moralib.

As some rivers do suddenly hyde themselves under the earth, yet are carried
thither, whither they tend: so the wrath of God although hid and secret,
brings at the last offenders into extreme calamities, ibidem.

As we both love and fear a Prince, as angry with the wicked, but pleased
with the godly: so also we love and fear God. ibidem.

As God is angry with them that imitate him in his thundering and lightning,
and casts them into hell, as he did Salmoneus: so also is he angry with the
lofty and proud, who imitate his greatness, but do not express his goodness.
ibidem.

As the pain of Childe-birth takes a Woman wheresoever it finds her, neither
can she fly from it: so the enemies of the Church do taste of the divine
vengeance, wheresoever it seems good to GOD, neither can they avoid it.
Fulgentius in Psalmum. 48.

As it is a fearful sight to see a Ship fraughted with Marchandice tossed
with a tempest in the midst of the Sea, so that the waves do cover it, and
beat by violence the sides in sunder, whereby the Mariners cry out, and are
at their wits end: so it is much more horrible, if it could be seen with
humane eyes, when as God does plague a guilty conscience in the midst of
vanity and ambition. Fulgentius in Psalmum 48.

Christ.
AS Christ was gentle and mild in his first coming: so will he be hard and
inexorable in his second. Lodouicus Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum.

In Dodona the Well of Jupiter being cold, does put out lights put into it;
but being extinguished, if thou put them in, they are lighted: so Christ,
if he touch one burning with concupiscences, does cool and assuage his
heat, but if he touch one cast down and broken in heart, he rayseth him
up, and makes him stand. Prior pars similitudinis ex libro 2. Plinii. cap.
106.

As the herb Panacea, called of Apothecaries Oppopanax, has a remedy for all
diseases: so the death of Christ is powerful against all hurtful affections,
and dangerous desires. Prior pars si^mil. ex lib. 25. Plin. cap. 4.

As Christ's coat was without wemme: so his life was without crime.

As without the Sun, there should be continual night: so without Christ
there should be everlasting destruction. Clemens Alexandrinus ad Gentes.

As an Husbandman does cast his seed not in this corner and in that corner
of his land, but casts it every where throughout his whole land: so Christ
commends the doctrine of piety to rich and poor, learned and ignorant, to
the strong and weak, albeit he, knows what success it shall have.
Chrysostom Hom. 45. ^n Matthew.

As the soul is the life of the body: so Christ is the life of the soul.
Petrus Chrysologus sermon 19.

As at the coming of the devil all nations mourned: so at the coming of the
Lord Jesus all people rejoiced. Arnobius in Psalm. 46.

As an advocate pleading for an offender, takes upon himself the cause and
faults of him, whom he patronizeth, as if they were his own, when
notwithstanding he is guiltless: so Christ being without sin: took upon
him our transgressions, and suffered for them, as if they had been his own.
Chrysostom Sermon aduersus haereticos. tom. 5.

As in a red hot sword there are actions and perfections of two natures,
the iron cuttes, and the fire burns: so in Christ there is two Natures his
Divinity and Humanity, and both have their actions and perfections.
Damascenus lib. 3. cap. 15. defide.

As the Vnscorne by touching poisoned water with his Horn makes it wholesome,
whereupon Naturalistes say, that before he drinks, he puts his Horn
into the Water: so Christ by his Humanity has made the poisoned Waters
wholesome, and has purified our souls from infection. Iacobus de Valentia in
Psalmum. 42.

As Gold and a Pearl make one Ring: so GOD and man make one Christ.

Themistocles having offended Philip the King of Macedonia, and could no way
appease his anger, meeting his young son Alexander, took him in his arms,
and met Philip in the face, Philip seeing the smyling countenannce of the
child, was well pleased with Themistocles: even so, if through thy manifold
sins and heinous offenses, thou provoke the heavy displeasure of thy God,
insomuch as thou shall tremble for horror, take his only begotten and
well-beloved son Jesus in thine arms, and then he neither can, nor will be
angry with thee.

It is written, that the blood of a Lamb does appease the cruel rage of a
fierce Lion: so the blood of the immaculate Lamb Christ does pacify the
wrath of God.

When the brethren of Joseph, had sold him to the Ismaelites, to pacify their
Father Jacob, they brought his Coat all to be bloudyed: so if we will
appease GOD our Father, we must bring unto him the blouddie Garment of his
son.

The Adamant though it be so hard that nothing can bruise it, yet if the warm
blood of a Goat be powered upon it, it bursteth: so although the heart of the
Atheist and unbeliever be so hard, that neither reward nor revenge can mollify
it, so stout that no persuasion can break it, yet if the grace of God
purchased by the blood of Christ, do but once touch it, it renteth in sunder,
and is enforced to acknowledge an omnipotent and everlasting Jehovah.

Astrologers say that the Sun passes through these three signs, Leo, Virgo,
and Libra: so the Son of righteousness, Christ Jesus in the law came as a
Lion, threatening and destroying; in the time of grace he came into the lap of
a Virgin in great humility, and at the day of judgment he will come in
Libra, to give to every one according as he has deserved.

As Theseus being guided by Ariadnes threede, which she tied at the entrance
into Dedalus Labyrinth, escaped all the danger and error of it: even so we
must make Christ the door, by which we must enter into the Labyrinth of all
our affairs, and tie Rahabs threede at this entrance, and follow it all the
way, that so we may be safe, and go in, and out, and find pasture.

As the life of Christ is the life of life: so the death of Christ is the death
of death.

It is reported that the Lybard uses a strange kind of policy to the Ape. He
lies down upon the ground as though he were stark dead, which the Apes
seeing come altogether, and in despite skip upon him. This the Libard bears
patiently till he thinks they have wearied themselves with their sporting.
Then suddenly he likewise leapes up and catches one in his mouth, and in each
foot one, which immediately he kills and deuoureth: so Christ being laid in
the dust, the devil insulted over him and trampled upon him, but he like a
lively Libard, starting up on Easter day, astonished the soldiers set to keep
him which were the Devils Apes, and made them lie like dead men.

As blind Sampson by his death killed the Philistines, when they were playing
the Apes in mocking and mowing at him: so Christ by his death destroyed the
devil.

Straliger writes, that the Chamelion when he espies a serpent taking shade
under a tree, climes up into that tree, and lets down a thread, breathed out
of his mouth as small as a Spiders thread, at the end whereof there is a little
drop as clear as any pearl, which falling upon the Serpents head kills him: so
Christ climing up into the tree of his Cross, lets down a thread of blood
issuing out of his side, like Rahabs red thread hanging out of her window, the
least drop whereof being so precious and so peerless, falling upon the
serpents head kills him.

The wild Bull of all things cannot abide any red color, therefore the
hunter for the nonce standing before a Tree, puts on a red garment, whom when
the Bull sees, he runs hard at him, as hard as he can drive, but the
Hunter slipping aside, the Bulls horns stick fast in the Tree, as when David
slipped aside, Saul's spear stuck fast in the wall: so Christ standing before
the Tree of his Cross, puts on a red garment dipped and dyed in his own
blood, as one that comes with read garments from Bozra, therefore the
Devil and his Angels, like wild Bulls of Bazan run at him, but he
shifting for himself, their horns stick fast in his cross, as Abraham's Ram
by his horns stuck fast in the briers; thus is the devil caught and killed.

A Dragon indeed kills an Elephant, yet so as the Elephant falling down kills
the Dragon with him; an Elephant kills Eleazar, yet so as Eleazar falling down,
kills the Elephant with him: so the devil killing Christ was killed of him.

When Mahomet the second of that name, besieged Belgrade in Seruia, one of his
Captains at length got up upon the wall of the City with banner displaied. A
noble Bohemian espying this, ran to the Captain, and clasping him fast about
the middle, asked one Capistranus standing beneath, whether it would be any
danger of damnation to his soul, if he should cast himself down headlong
with the Dog (so he termed the Turk) to be slain with him. Capistranus
aunswering that it was no danger at all to his soul, the Bohemian forthwith
tumbled himself down with the Turk in his arms, and so by his own death
only, saved the life of all the City: so the devil like the great Turk,
besieging not only one City, but even all mankind, Christ alone like this
noble Bohemian encountered with him. And seeing the case was so, that this Dog
the Devil, could not be killed stark dead, except Christ dyed also,
therefore he made no reckoning nor account of his life, but gave himself to
death for us, that he only dying for all the people, by his death our deadly
enemy might for ever be destroyed.

As it was bootlesse for Golias to brandish his spear against David: so it
little auailed the Devil to shake his spear likewise in the hand of the
soldior against the heart of Christ.

As David having heard Golias prate and talk his pleasure, when they came to
the point, at the first stroke ouerthrewe him: so Christ with that very self
same spear, which gave him a little venny in comparison, or (if it be lawful
for me so to speak) but a phillip on the side, which was soon after recured,
gave the Devil a deadly wound in the forehead, which with all his paws he
shall never be able to claw off.

As David only with his sling slew Golias: so Christ only by his death, and by
the power of his cross, which is the sling of David, did conquer and subdue
the devil.

The Palm tree, though it have many waights at the top, and many snakes at
the root, yet still it says, I am neither oppressed with the waights, nor
distressed with the snakes; Penny royal being hung up in the larder house, yet
buds his yellow flowers, and Noah's Olive tree being drowned under the water,
yet keeps her green branch; and Aarons rod being clung and dry, yet brings
forth ripe Almonds, and Moses bramble bush being set on fire, yet shines and is
not consumed: so Christ the true Palm tree, though all the judgments of God,
and all the sins of the world, like unsupportable waights were laid upon
him, yea though the cursed Jews stood beneath like venomous snakes hissing
and biting at him, yet he was neither so oppressed with them, nor so
distressed with these, but that even upon his cross he did most flourish, when
he was most afflicted.

The Phoenix though sitting in his neaste among the hot spices of Arabia he
be burnt to ashes, yet still he says, I die not, but old age dies in me:
so Christ the true Phoenix, though lying in his grave among the hot spices,
wherewith Nichodemus embalmed him, he was never like to rise from death to
life again, yet he dyed not, but mortality died in him, and immortality so
lived in him, that even in his sepulcher he did most live, when he seemed most
to be dead.

Epaminondas being sore wounded in fight, demanded of his soldiers standing
by, whether his enemies were overthrown or no. They answered yea. Then
whether his buckler were hole or no. They aunswerered also I. Nay then (says
he) all is well. This is not the end of my life, but the beginning of my
glory. For now your dear Epaminondas dying thus gloriously shall rather be
borne again then buried: so Christ was sore wounded, but his enemies, death
and the Devil were overthrown and spoiled. His Buckler, which was his
Godheade, was whole and untouched. Therefore* there was no harm done. His
death was no death, but an exaltation unto greater glory.

As snow covers the ground when it is ragged and deformed: so Christ with
his coat without seame, covers our sins, and though they were as crimson, yet
he makes them white as snow.

As Gedeons fleece when it was moist, the earth was dry, but when it was dry,
the earth was moist: so when Christ's fleece was moist as a green Tree, then
were all we dry like rotten sticks, but when his fleece was dry, all the
blood and water being wrounge out of his precious side, then were we moistened
with his grace.

As Jacob travailing toward Haram, when he had laid an heap of stones
under his head, and taken a nap by the way, was much revived with it after his
tedious journey: so Christ travailing toward heaven, when he had slept a
little in that stony sepulcher, which was hewn out of a Rock, lived then most
Princely after his paynefull passion.

As Jonas was in the Whales belly three days and three nights: so and so long
was the Son of man in the bowels of the earth, yet he had no more hurt then
Jonas had.

As Daniell was not hurt of the hungry Lions: so Christ was not hurt either of
the terrors of death, or of the horrors of Hell.

As Adam and Eve both in one day were expelled out of Paradise about noon when
the wind blewe: so Christ and the thief both in one day were received into
Paradise, yea both in one hour of the day, about the sixth hour, that is about
twelve a clock in the day time.

As Peter's shadow gave health to ye sick: so Christ's shadow gives life to the
dead.

As Elizeus being dead, raised up one from the dead: so Christ being dead, was
a Physician to the dead.

Pliny reports, that there was a dyall set in Campus Martius, to note the
shadows of the sun, which agreeing very well at the first, afterward for
thirty years together did not agree with the sun: so all the time of those
thirty, yea three and thirty years that Christ lived in his hmiliation here
upon earth, you might have seen such a dyall, in which time the shadow of the
dial did not agree with the shining of the sun, but thanks be to God all
the better for us.

As the sun went backward ten degrees in the dyall, when Ezechias went
forward fifteen degrees in his life, he lived fifteen years longer: so the
going of this sun Jesus Christ ten degrees backewarde, has healed all our
sickness, and set us a thousand degrees forward, and infinitely advanced us by
his death to euersting life.

As Rachel died her self in childbirth to bring forth her son Benjamin
alive: so Christ dyed to bring us unto everlasting life.

As when many birds are caught in a net, if a Pelican, or any other great
bird that is among them get out, all therest that are little ones follow
after: so Christ as a great bird having broken through the net of death, all
we escape with him.

As far as the Tree of life excels the tree of knowledge of good and evil:
so far the cross of Christ excels the tree of life.

As honey being found in a dead Lion, the death of the Lion was the sustenance
of Samson: so Christ's gall is our honey, and the bitter death of Christ by
reason of his righteousness is the sweet life of man.

As Hammons face was covered when he was condemned to dye: so the Suns face
was covered, when Christ was condemned to dye.

As David rent his garment when he heard of Ionathans death: so the Temple
rent his veil when it heard of Christ's death.

As the king of Niniuy threw up dust upon his head when he and his subjects
were appointed to dye: so the graves opened and threw up dust upon their
heads when Christ was appointed to dye.

As Job cut his hair when he heard of his Childrens death: so the stones were
cut in pieces and cloue asunder, when they heard of Christ's death.

As there were four rivers in the terrestrial Paradise, which watered the
whole earth: so in Christ, who is our Paradise, there are found four
fountains. The first fountain is of mercy to wash away our sins with the
water of remission. The second is of wisdom to assuage our thirst with the
water of discretion. The third of grace to water the plants of good works with
the dew of devotion. And the fourth fountain is, to season our affections
with the waters of emulation. Bernardus sermon primo de natiuitate Christi.

As the Sun exceeds all celestial lights in quantity, brightness, dignity
and power: so Christ excels all the Saints in goodness, wisdom, honor,
and might. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 1. de caelo et element^s. cap. 91

Olimpus a mountain of Macedonia is so hye, that the clouds are said to be
under it, for it is of such an altitude, that never any wind touches the top
of it, neither any grosnes of air ascends to it, which the Philosophers
ascending, that they might view the courses and motions of the stars, could
not live there, unless they carried with them spunges full of water, that so,
by ye attraction of water they might draw grosser air, as it is reported in
history: so Christ has so far exceeded all the Saints in excellency of life,
all the whirlewindes of passions and tribulations in the altitude of patience,
and all men in the height of wisdom, so that the Philosphers could not reach
unto the height of his divinity, but by spunges, that is, by creatures full of
the water of celestial wisdom. Ibidem.

As the herb Dracontea has the similitude of a serpent, but is without
venim, yea it is most contrary to serpents, and especially to vipers: so
Christ had the shape of sinful flesh; but he was altogether without sin, yea
he is most opposite to it, and especially to the devil. Idem lib. 3. de
vegetabilibus et plantis, cap. 85.

As the flower is the Medium between the branche and the fruit: so Christ is
the mediator between man and God. Ibid.

As a Hen does gather her chicke^s under her wings, does defend them against
the kite, and does feed them with the meat she finds: so Christ does gather
his elect under the wings of his protection in one faith and unity of the
church, does defend the^ against ye raging of the world, and does feed the^
not only with material bread, but with the spiritual food of his heavenly
doctrine. Idem, lib 4. de natatilibus et volatilibus, cap. 98.

The Holy Ghost.
AS Iron cast into the fire does participate of the nature of fire, his own
substance still remaining: so man by the working of the holy Ghost, is
transformed into God, yet still remaining man, being a partaker of the divine
purity and noblenes, as he was a partaker, who said: I do not now live, but
Christ lives in me. Ludov. Granat. li. 1 duc. peccat.

As oil among all liquid substances is the fittest too preserve light, and to
cure wounds: so the dinine unction of the holy Ghost does cure the wounds of
our will, and does illuminate the darkness of ourvnderstanding. ibidem.

As he that is over come with much wine loses the use of his senses, neither
differs much from a dead man, by reason of the strength of the wine: so when
any one is full of the heavenly wine of the holy Ghost, he dies to the world
and has all his senses with all their desires shackled and fettred. Ibidem.

As water set over a fire, when it does wax hot, as if it had forgot the own
proper nature, swells aloft, imitating the nature and lightness of the fire:
so also the soul being inflamed with the heavenly fire of the holy Ghost, is
exalted above it self, and carried up to heaven, whence that fire is sent.
Ibidem.

As the Sun shines of his own accord; the day is enlightened; a fountain
streameth; and a shower falls: so the heavenly spirit infuseth it self.
Cyprian.

As the soul infused into the body, is sufficient to make all the members
living, and to move and direct them unto their several offices and functions;
which are many and diverse: so the grace of the holy Ghost which is a form
supernatural and diuine' when it once has entered into the soul, is,
sufficient to move and direct it to the acting and execuring of all the duties
of a spiritual life. Lod. Gran. in lib. de deuotione.

As it is not possible that the earth should fructify only by rain, except
the wind does blow upon it: so it is not possible that only doctrine should
correct a man, except the holy Ghost work together in his heart. Chrysostom.
hom. 20. oper. imperf.

As the figures of things are not seen in a blemished glass so a man cannot
recelue illumination from the holy Ghost, except he cast away sin and the
lusts of the flesh. Basilius de spiritu sancto.

As fire is not diminished, albeit many candels be lighted at it; and as
Science is not impaired, although it makes many men skillfull: so the holy
Ghost is never a whit impouerished, although they be innumerable that
participate of his graces. Philo Iudaeus lib. de gigantibus.

As one and the same shower descending upon the world, appears white upon
thorns, red upon roses, purple upon the hyacinth, and of other colors falling
upon diverse and sundry colored things: so the holy Ghost being one, and not
any way diuisible, does divide his grace to every one as he pleases, in one he
is wisdom, in an other sanctification, in an other prophecy etc. and yet the
same Spirit. Cyrillus Ierosolymit. catechesi 16.

As the body of flesh is none other thing but flesh: so the gift of the holy
Ghost is none other thing but the holy Ghost Aug. lib. 15. de trinitate cap 19.

As the soul does give life to all the parts and members of man's body, making
the cye to see, the care to hear, and so in the rest: so the holy Ghost does
give life to the members of Christ's body, which is his Church Idem, lib. de
gratia noui testamenti.

As heat comes from fire: so the holy Spirit proceeds from the Father.
Paschasius de Spiritu sancto.

As Aaron is called Christ, and David and Saul, and others also, and yet there
is but one true Christ: so an Angel is called a spirit, and our soul is
called a spirit, and the wind is called a spirit, and there is an unclean
spirit, and yet there is peculiarly, but one holy Spirit. Cyrillus Ierosolymit,
catechesi 16.

The holy Ghost is compared to fire, to a Dove; to a cloud; and to a wind. To
fire, because he does enlighten our understanding, and exalts it from the
earth to heaven. To a Dove, because he makes us simple, gentle, peaceable,
and friends to all. To a Cloud, because he does refresh and cool us, and
defend us from the heat of the flesh, and does assuage and moderate the madness
and fury of our passions. And to a vehement and strong wind, because he moves
and inclines our will to all good. Lodouicus Granatensis lib. 1 ducis
peccatorum.

Heaven.
EVen as King Assuerus in his imperial city of Susan showed to his Princes all
his majesty, cost, and royal magnificence: so the great King of Kings in his
imperial and royal city of heaven does show to his elect the vnmesurablenesse
of his riches, wisdom, liberality and goodness, and the glory and excellency of
his majesty. Lodouicus Granatensis lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum.

As no man entered into the palace of king Assuerus clothed in sackecloth: so
it is lawful for no man to enter into the palace of God with a servile
garment, but he must be clothed with a wedding garment, that is, adorned and
beautified with true love and charity. idem in eod lib.

As a captain when he goes forth to fight, or when he begirdeth any defenced
castle, deuiseth many kind of stratagems for the obtaining of it, rayseth
fortresses, makes bulwarks, and uses many inventions to assault and batter
it, that at the length he may conquer it: so by all means we must labor and
endeavor, that we may get unto our selves that most excellent place and
cheifest good: for it is written; The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force. Lodouicus Granatensis in lib. de deuotione.

As the Patriarch Jacob thought his 7. years service short in respect of the
great love he bare to Rachell: so we should think all the tribulations of
this world short in respect of the great love we should bear to Heaven, which
is more beautiful then any Rachell. Idem in suis Meditationibus.

As a traveler goes far from his country and family, yet is desirous to
return thither again: even so we as banished from this world, should long
for our return to heaven, our true borne country. Stella de contemptu mundi.

As the precious pearls called Unions, albeit they be bred in the sea, yet
have more affinity with heaven, the semblance of which they do represent: so a
godly and a generous mind does more depend of heaven whence he fetches his
original, then of the earth, in which he lives.

As a house excels a few ashes, as a city excels a house, a province a
city, the Roman empire, a province, and all the earth the Roman Empire, and
the whole circumference the point of a circle: so far incomparably Heaven
extends and excels the comparison and proportion of al other things.
Cyrillus Ierosolymitanus catechesi. 6.

As there is extreme darkness in hell: so there is glorious light in heaven.
Basilius lib. hexa.

As a spherical figure is most capable to contain things: so heaven being of
the same figure is most capable of all ioies and blessedness.

As there are ten commandments in Moses Tables: so according to modern
Astrologers, there are ten spheres in heaven. Luna, Mercurius, Venus, Sol,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturnus, Caelum stellatum, Caelum cristallinu^, sieve aqueum,
and Primum mobile.

Angels.
EVen as the elder brethren do carry their younger brethren, when they be but
little ones, in their arms, and do keep them with great care and providence:
after the same manner the Angels, which are as our elder brethren, do tend and
keep us, who are as their younger brethren, and little ones, and do bear us
in their hands. Lodo. Granatens. lib. de deuotione.

As Angels are pure spirits: so also pure worship and spiritual service is
required of them. ibidem.

As caelum crystallinu^ sieve aqueum is not seen of us: so Angels in their own
nature are not visible unto us. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano libro 1. de caelo and
Elementis. Cap. 5.

As the fire is of a more subtle substance then any other element: so Angels
are of a more immateriall substance, then any other creature. ibidem.

As the fire is moved of Sol and Mars, as says Rabbi Moses: so Angels are
moved of God, who always attend his will. ibidem.

As the fire cannot be touched by reason of the heat: so Angels cannot be
touched by reason of their immaterialitie^ ibidem.

As the fire is a powreful element for deuastation: so are angels in executing
the wrath of God.

As a Physician leaves his patient when he is past cure: so the angels leave
us, when we fall into desperation. Origenes hom. 2 in Hieremiam.

As there are powers under earthly kings for ordering of state matters: so
there are principalities under the heavenly king for executing of his will, and
setting forth his praise. Epiphanius haeresi. 4.

As our friends lament for us, when as by reason of sickness and weakness, we
can receive no meat: so the holy Angels do mourn for their souls, that are
not fed with celestial and spiritual food. Macarius hom. prima.

As smoke banisheth Bees, and filthy savors drive away doves: so the
corrupted stinch of sin drives away the Angel, that is the keeper of our
life. Basilius in Psalm. 33.

As in martial affairs some soldiers are appointed to administer and bestow
honors, and some to execute vengeance and punishment: so holy Angels are
sent to the good and preservation of man, but devils are sent to punish the
wicked and rebellious. Chrisostom hom. 3 de patientia Job.

As after death there is no repentance auaylable unto man: so after the fall of
Angels there was no place of repentance left unto them. Damascenus lib. 2 de
fide cap. 4.

The word of God.
AS the same Manna was wholesome food unto some, and corruption and worms
unto others: so the same word of God is salvation unto some, and destruction
unto others. Orig. hom. 3 in numeros.

Wine much comfort those that be sound, and as the scripture says, it
makes merry the heart of man, but if he drink it that has a fever, it
brings danger and destruction unto him: so the word of God brings life
unto some, and death unto others. Idem homil. 5. in Iudic.

As a lantern does lighten our steps: so the word of God does illuminate our
understandings. Hilarious in Psalm. 118.

A Tree by continual moisture does grow to a great height: so a soul that is
continually watered with the divine word, comes to the perfection of Virtue.
Chrisostomus hom. de Anna et Samuelis educatione.

As to be hungry is a sign of bodily health: so to hunger and thirst after the
word of God is a token of spiritual health: Idem hom. 15. in Genesin.

As a sword does cut off the flesh: so the divine word does cut off carnal
concupisences. Ibidem Homil. 8. operis imperfecti.

Rain that falls upon a stone, makes it moist without, but it continues dry
within, because the moisture does not penetrate into it: so the word of God
falling upon a worldely man, does make a sound in his ears, but does not
pierce his heart. idem. hom. 31.

As every member receives nourishment from the stomach, and does convert it,
according to the nature of the member, as that which the liver receives,
becoms blood, that which ye gal receives, becoms choler, yt which the lungs
receive, becomes phlegm, and that which passes into ye paps becoms milk: so
al receive ye word of God uttered by his minister and preacher, but every one
does convert it according to the disposition of his heart, they that have good
hearts, convert it into life, perverse hearts turn it into anger and choler,
others into milk, that is, into sweet love, others into hatred, as into
hurtful phlegm, which is to be spued up. idem. hom. 38.

As Iron does mollify the hard earth: so the word of God does molifie the
hardness of man's heart. idem hom. 40.

Wholesome medicines and antidotes being taken without the direction of a
Physician, oftentimes become deadly and dangerous: so the word of God being
taken with out the magistery of Gods preacher, without direction of his
minister, and beyond the analogy of faith, becomes mortal and deadly unto the
hearer, reader, or receiver. Petrus Chrysologus sermon 156. de Epiphania.

As the body is nourished by earthly food: so is the soul by the food of the
heavenly word: Caesarius Arelatensis Hom. 22.

Swine do tread Roses under their feet, and seek for dyrt, they refuse
partriges and delicates, and do greedily hunt after acornes and other swash: so
frantic worldlings have no taste of the word of God, but most greedily gape
after the uncertain riches of this world. Hector Pintus in cap. 3 Ezechiel.

As he that would set upon his enemies, or defend himself from them, does need
a sword, by handling of which he may smite them: so he that would triumph
over the world, the flesh and the devil, the terrible enemies of his soul,
must carry in his hands, that is, in his works, the word of God. Ibidem.

There is a water in Macedonia, that being drunk of Sheep does make them
white: so the doctrine of Christ being received into the souls of believers
does make them clean and pure. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano libro. 1. de caelo
and elementis cap. 23.

As rain does purify the Air: so the doctrine of the word of God does
mundifie the heart of man. ibidem.

As the light does show unto us the forms and shapes of things: so the word
of GOD does manifest unto us the forms and fashions of vices and virtues
Idem. libro 1. de caelo and Elementis. Cap. 82.

As soar eyes cannot abide the light: so wicked persons cannot abide the word
of God. ibidem.

As seed does draw unto it the moisture of the earth: so the word of GOD
does draw unto it the affection of the soul. Idem, lib. 3. de vegetabilibus
and plantis, cap. 79.

As an arrowe does pierce the body: so the word of God does pierce and
penetrate the soul. idem, lib. 9. de artificibus, and rebus artificialibus,
cap. 79.

As a medicine does purge, water wash, and rain make fruitful: so the word
of God does purge the soul from corrupt affections, does wash it clean from
filthy sins, and makes it fruitful in good works, Ibidem.

As the want of meat does famish the body: so the want of Gods word does pine
the soul. idem, lib. 1. de actibus and moribus humanis, cap. 82.

The precious stone Draconites can neither be polished, nor admits any Art,
being otherwise of it self elegant, fair and translucent: so the holy word
of God, has his splendor of himself, neither does admit the affected Art of
Philosophy or Rhetoric.

The Cedar and luniper being anointed with oil, do neither feel worms,
nor are subject to rottennes: so that soul that is once endued with the juice
of the divine word, does feel no corruption of this world.

The leaves of the Tree Rhododendros are poison unto beasts, but medicine for
men against Serpents: so the word of GOD is wholesome nourishment unto wise,
sober and discreet men, but to fools and wicked men it ministers an occasion
of heresy and impiety.

As it was foolish to leave the fountains, and follow the rivers: so is it
foolish to leave the Holy Scriptures, and follow Quodlibetaries, and the
quirks of Sophisters.

As Alexander the great commanded, that none should paint him but Apelles,
none should cast him in any metal but Lysippus, or engraue his picture in
any Jewel, but Pyrgoteles, being excellent Artificers: so it is not meet
that the word of God should be preached of every one, nor that virtue should
be praised of every lewd and idle headed fellow.

We do not neglect the gold, though it lie in the durty e aith; nor the pure
coin, for that it comes out of the homely press; nor the precious stone
Aetites, which is found in the filthy neastes of the Eagle; nor the precious
Gemme Draconites, though it be ever taken out of the head of the poisoned
Dragon: so we must not less estimate or reverence the word of God, though it
be uttered of a sinful man, or pronounced out of an earthen vessel.

As Iron gathers rust if it be not used: so the soul gathers corruption, if
it be not conversant in reading the Holy scriptures. Agustin. quaest. 1 20. ex
vtroque testamento.

As Frankensence does not smell, except it be put into the fire; and as
mustarde seed does not bite, except it be ground to mustarde: so no
sentence of the Holy Scripture does show his force, except it be boiled and
concocted in the heart, Idem in speculo peccatorum.

As GOD is closed in the Heavens: so is he hid in the scriptures. And as all
men see this corporal Heaven, but do not see GOD dwelling in it: so all men
read the divine scriptures, but all men understand not the God of truth laid
down in the scriptures, unless he be so baptized, that he receive the Holy
Ghost. Chrisostom. hom. 4. oper. imperf.

As Jacob strove with the Angel in whom GOD was, who confessed himself to
be overcome: so the lover of the word of God must strive with the scripture
in which God is, and which is of God, neither let it pass from him until he
has sucked from it health and comfort for his soul. Rupertus lib. 6.

As in a glass we see both our beauty and deformity: so in the scripture we
behold what is good in us and what is naught. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 9.
de artificibus, et rebus artificialibus cap. 66.

The Church.
AS the natural heat of our bodies is helped of the exterior heat of heaven;
and as nature, although most careful to preserve it self, does re^ceiue much
help of external medecines, created to that end of God: so also the light
and inward help of grace is much helped by the light and doctrine of the
Church. Lodouicus Granatensis libro 2. Ducis Peccatorum.

As men are carried over the Sea in a ship to the court of any Prince: so men
are carried to God in the ship of the church, whose Pilot Christ is. Clemens
Romans epist. 1. ad Iacobum.

As they that are wronged at one Haven, do ariue at another: so they that have
been misled by the false Church, let them haste to the true. Cyprianus li. 3.
epist. 13.

As a branch is nourished by the sap of the root: so are Christians nourished
by the milk of the church. Cyprianus de simplicitate praelatorum.

As God is our father: so the church is our mother. Cyprianus.

As a rountaine has many rivers: so the Church has many members. Cyprianus.

As a man traveling to a far Country commends his Wife to his dear
friend, whom he choyselie keeps, that her chastity may not be corrupted:
so Christ going to his Father commended and committed his Church to Preachers
and Ministers, his faithful servants, which they must keep til his coming
incorrupt and inuiolate. Cyprianus ex sententiis Ep^scoporum concilij
Carthaginensis.

As Music does not delight the hearer except there be concord: so GOD is
not delighted in the church except there be unity and consent. Origenes
tractatu 6. in Math.

As many corns make one loaf: so many faithful people one Church. Eusebius
Emissenus hom. 5. de pascha.

As in a commonwealth some rule and some obey: so in the Church some are
pastors and some are sheep. Gregorius Nazianz. de modestia in disputationibus.

As a Wife is not put from her Husband, but only for fornication: so the
church is not put from Christ, but only for transgression. Chrisost. hom. 32.
operis imperfecti.

As a Woman is not known whether she will stand chaste, till she has been
solicited of vicious men, and then she is discerned: so the faith of the
Church is not well known, except Antichrists come unto it. Chrysostom. Homil.
2. in epist. Romans

Preachers.
AS Trees, which make large increase for themselves before they bear, become
much more fruitful afterward unto their owners: so Preachers the more
learned they are, and the more time they have well spent in the deep mysteries
of Divinity, the more profitable they are unto their hearers, for according to
the quality of their fruits, such shall be the profit of their auditors.
Lodouicus Granat. lib. de Deuotione.

As that goulde is not baser, which is found among coals, then that which is
found among precious stones; and as that medicine is not of lesser virtue,
which is drunk out of a vessel of Claie, then that which is drunk out of a
Vessel of Alablaster: so the word of GOD preached by a wicked man is not
debased, nor made better by a good man, but of it self is forcible, neither
needs the authority of man to grace it. ibidem.

As the prayer of Moses rather procured the victory against Amalech, then all
the swords that were drawn; so also we must suppose and believe, that in the
conversion of a sinner, the prayers, sighs, and groans of a true Preacher have
no lesser part, then all the other voices and words, albeit they be
ingenious, acute, and eloquent, Ibidem.

As water is conveyed into Orchards and Gardens by conduit pipes: so by
preachers the water of wisdom is conveyed into the church. ibidem.

As a sower casts some seeds into barren land: so Preachers cast some of
the heavenly seed into barren ears and sterill hearts. Clemens Romans lib. 3.
recognitionum.

As the Priest when he sacrificed, was to look that there was no spot nor
blemish in the beast: so he that preaches the Gospel, is to look that
there be no error in his preaching, nor fault in his doctrine. Orignes libro
10. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 16.

As the Priests of the oulde Testament carried Vrim and Thummim upon their
breasts; so the Preachers of the new Testament should be unto their auditors
both an instruction of verity, and an example of sanctity.

As men that are given to wine and banketting, do enquire after feasters and
ryotous persons: so men studious of their salvation should seek after learned
Preachers, and zealous Divines. Chrysostom. oratione 2. aduersus Iudaeos.

As a fountain does flow, albeit few or none do drink of it: so a Preacher
should not desist from his function, albeit few or none do hear him. idem
concione 1. de Lazaro.

As a Merchaunt does not leave of his traffic for a few losses: so a
Preacher should not leave his preaching for the the ingratitude of a few lost
cast-awayes. Ibidem.

As a Hammer, an Anuile, and a pair of Tongs, are a Smiths instruments, by
which he effects what he intends: so the books of the Prophets and
Apostles, and all the holy Scriptures are the instruments of preachers, by
which they work men's souls either unto reformation of a new life, or unto
confirmation in uprightness. Chrysostom. concione 3. de Lazaro.

As laborious husbandmen by tillage reap earthly gains of the earth: so
painful pastors by their doctrine reap spiritual gains, which neither can
perish, nor be corrupted. Idem hom. 1. in Isaiam super illis verbis, vidi
dominum sedentem.

As good parents give unto their children, not only those things that do
delight, but those things that also benefit: so faithful preachers and just
dispensers of Gods mysteries do not preach pleasing things, and sow pillowes
under their auditors cibows, but do tell them what is best for their behoof.
ibidem.

As mothers bear with their wayward children: so should preachers bear with
their untoward hearers, and seek by all means to win them, for greater is
the affection of the spirit, then of nature. idem hom. 1. in eadem verba.

As Sailors have havens and Islands to rest themselves in: so preachers should
have their times and oportunities of recreation and repast. idem sermene in
Ozian.

As a husbandman there sows his seed plentifully, where he sees the
ground fruitful and purged from weeds: so a Preacher having got a spiritual
field fruitful and clean, does abundantly with great alacrity disseminate
the divine seed. idem hom. 2. in Genesin.

As Physicians first minister corasiues, and then cordials; and as fathers
seeing their children disordred, do first correct the^ with words, and after do
admonish and comfort them: so a preacher after increpation and rebuking, does
ad comfort and consolation, and after the killing letter of the law does preach
the quickening spirit of the Gospel. idem. hom. 7. in Genesin.

As husbandmen do make ready their sithes, prepare their barnes, and feed
their oxen, that they may the better inn their harvest: so a preacher must
make his best preparation for the winning of souls. ibid.

As no man blames a physician, that has well done his duty: so no man should
rebuke a preacher, that has well executed his function. idem. hom. 13. in
Genesin.

As a schoolmaster bestowing his pains on a scholar, grieueth at his
non-proficiencie: so a preacher bestowing his pains on an auditorie, takes it
in ill part, if they do not profit by him. ibidem.

Physicians do be are with the sick kicking them with their heels, and
reuiling them with slanders and reproaches, because they seek for nothing else,
but the health of their patients; and although their patients rent their
clothes in their distemperature, yet they leave not their cure: so a Preacher
although he be ill entreated of his auditors, should not cease his
preaching, because he seeks them and not theirs, ibidem.

As children would be ashamed to return without profit from the school, if
their parents should every day examine what they learned: so would auditors
be ashamed so often to return from sermons without profit, if the Preachers
examined what they had profited. idem. hom. 32.

As Painters now lays on these colors, now on those, for the better
pourtraying of a beautiful picture: so a preacher sometimes speaks of heaven
and sometimes of hell to reclaim men from vice unto virtue. ibidem.

As Physicians do not use one kind of cure, but when they see that the
disease can not be overthrown by one medicine, they excogitate an other: so
the Physician of our souls does use many kinds of cure in his spiritual
business. ibidem.

As it is the manner of Physicians, albeit they see the diseases of their
patient to be greater than their art can cure, yet they do not omit their
duty, but set abroach all their skill, to see if they may either recure his
malady, or prolong his days; and if they profit nothing, yet they have the
greater excuse: so a Preacher should pretermit nothing that belongs unto his
duty and function idem. hom. 43.

As one schoolemaister is sufficient to teach an hundred boys: so one Preacher
like unto Paul is enough to instruct many auditors. idem hom. 10. in 1.
Timoth.

As they that cast nets into the sea, do not know what fishes they shall
take, but those that God sendes enter in: so when a Preacher does cast over
the people the net of the divine word, he knows not who will come unto God;
but whomsoever God stirs up, they cleave unto his doctrine. idem hom. 7.
operis imperfecti.

When an horse sees an open plain field, he is stirred up to the race: so
when a Preacher sees the Church full, he teaches with delight. idem hom. 9.
operis imperfecti.

As a king rejoices when he sees himself encompassed with the strong hand of
a valiant and populous army: so a Preacher rejoices, when he is encompassed
with a venerable and populous auditorie. idem hom. 21.

As a plentiful harvest is a token of a diligent husbandman: so a full Church
is a note of a painful pastor. idem hom. 36.

As Diers often dippe their clothes that they may take the deeper tincture: so
Preachers should often dippe the souls of their hearers in the die of the
divine word, that they may be washed from their old corruption, and be died
with the tincture of a new beauty. idem hom de fide, and lege naturae.

As buyers and sellers exchange one thing for another: so Preachers for their
spiritual gifts, do reap of their hearers temporal goods. idem hom. 15.
ad Philippen.

As Bees have both honey and a sting: so preachers must teach both Law and
Gospel. idem sermon. 83.

As the Apostles were not frustrated of their reward, whether the people
received them or no: so neither shall preachers. Aug. lib. 1. contra
Crescorium. cap. 5.

As a Cock croweth in the darkness of the night: so a preacher croweth in
the darkness of this world. Greg. lib. 30. Moral cap. 5.

As a Cock clappeth his wings before he crows: so a preacher should provide
and prepare himself before he preaches. Ibidem.

An Ethiopian enters black into the bathe, and comes out black again,
yet notwithstanding he that keeps the bath receives his money: so does a
preacher receive his reward, albeit his auditors profit nothing at all idm.
epi. 101

If Birds fly before they be fledge, they work their own ruin: so it
scholars preach before they be fit and able, they work both their own,
and their auditors overthrow. idem 3. part pastoralis. cap. 26.

Unripe Apples, that are blown down with the wind, have neither sweetness,
neither do they profit the stomach, but those that are ripe are sweet and
toothsome: so they that are Fathers and teachers before their time, have
neither spiritual sweetness, neither do they bring any profit to souls;
but they that be ripened by the holy scriptures, and seasoned in their lives,
are honorable in Gods house, laudable, sweet and wholesome unto their
hearers. Pintus in Ezechiel. cap. 32.

The Priests of Diana had three several seasons appointed unto them, one, in
which they should learn wisdom and virtue; another, in which they should
exercise it, and a third time, in which they should instruct others; and as
by the law of Numa Pompilius, the Vestal virgins, which for thirty years were
vowed unto Vesta, had their ordring divided into 3. seasons; the 1. 10. they
should learn the religion of their Goddess; the 2.10. they should sacrifice
to her, and the third 10. they should teach others newly chosen her rites: so a
Minister of the Gospel, should much more have his three several seasons, a
time to be furnished with knowledge, a time to be beautified with laudable
conversation, and a time to teach and preach unto others. ibidem.

As one candle cannot light another if it be put out: so a preacher cannot
inflame others with divine love, if he himself be destitute of it ibidem.

As a master sometimes by a wicked servant bestows a good alms: so God by
the ministry of a wicked man can draw men from their wickedness. ibidem.

As the Tongs and Snuffers, that snuffed the lamps and lights in the Temple of
Solomon were of most pure Gold: so they should be most pure who are bound to
purge others of their uncleanness. ibidem.

Sermons.
AS women do smell well, which smell of nothing; and in some a neglected habit
does very well please: so in a divine Sermon the ornament is more beautiful,
if affected exornations be neglected.

As good meats do feed the body: so divine sermons do nourish the soul.
Chrysostom. hom. 43. in Genes.

As good stomachs make better account of wholesome fare, then of dainty
cates: so good hearers should make better account of pithie Sermons, then of a
pleasing oration. Ibid. hom. 45.

As fire falling upon dry wood, does convert it into a flame: so the divine
seed falling into a good heart does make it fructify. Idem hom. 47. in Mat.

As we can easily and with pleasure sit out long plays: so for the benefit of
our souls we should at the least be as willing to sit out long Sermons. Idem
hom. 50. in Ioannem.

As we are ready to run to Music and merriments: so we should be as
prone and inclined to flock unto sermons. ibidem.

As some returning from a Garden do bring flowers with them; some out of an
orchard do bring apples; and some coming from great bankets do bring some of
the fragments to their children: so thou returning from a sermon, bring from it
unto thy wife, children and friends some good counsels and wholesome admonitions.
idem hom. 5. ad pop. Antioch.

As Seafish, although they live in salt water, yet have need of seasoning: so
many continually hear Sermons, and yet are never the better for them.
Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 1. Stromatum.

As those scholars learn better then others that learn with awe: so they
hear sermons more profitablie, that hear with fear and reverence. Basil. in
principiu^ Prou.

As he that eats meat does first masticate it with his teeth, and then
lets it down into his stomach: so when we hear a sermon, we should
meditate upon it, and consider what was spoken, whereupon it was spoken, and to
what end. Chrysostom. hom. 4. oper. imperfect.

As it nothing profits to have eaten meat, if thou presently vomit it forth
again: so it nothing profits to have heard a sermon, if thou forth with
forget it. ibidem.

A Christian.
AS a father that brings up his son to dedicate him to God in the
ministry of his word, does accustom him from his young years to
ecclesiastical matters, and directs the whole course of his life to the
purposed end: so God after he has elected any man to the participation of his
glory, he directs him by his fatherly care to the way of Christianity and
righteousness, which leads to that glory and faithfully continues him in
it, until he come to his wished end. Lod. Gra. li. I. Ducis peccat.

As we admire the happy estate of a Prince that is borne heir of a temporal
kingdonie: so much more ought we to admire and wonder at the most blessed
estate of a Christian, who is borne not to a temporal kingdom, but to a
kingdom everlasting, to reign in heaven with God himself, and with his
blessed Saints for ever and ever ibid

As a traveler that every day goes forward a little, if he persevere and
continue in his progress, soon comes to the end of his journey, but if he
fail and faint in it, and a little after begin his voyage anew, consumes
all his life in it, neither ever comes to the end of his journey: so it is
with a Christian, he must still walk forward, for when he says that it is
sufficient, then he plays the deficient. idem in li. de deuotione.

Even as he that lies in the midst of a swift river, if he does not labor to
take fast footing, and raise up his body, he is in danger to be borne down
and swallowed up of the water: so in this Christian and spiritual life, which
is like a deep and dangerous river, he lives in many ieopardies of falling,
who with tooth and nail does not labor to profit and go forward in it. idem.
in lib. de deuot.

As a Harper that intends to play upon his harp all the day, ought to have
his strings well tuned all that time; And as a hu^ter or a falconer that is
disposed to hunt and hawk all the day, ought all that time to have his hauks
and hounds in a readiness and at hand: so the life of a perfect christian being
none other thing, then a continual hunting of God and his grace, and a
continual harmony of the inward spirit, which is made by prayer, it is meet
and requisite, that he that will attend upon this exercise, that his spirit and
body be always disposed and apt unto it. idem in lib. de deuot.

As the chiefest commendation of a Pilot consists not in the guidance of his
ship in a calm, but in a tempest: so the chiefest commendation of a christian,
consists not in his service to God in prosperity but in adversity. ibidem.

As it is a thing most honorable for any knight or soldior, to bear the arms
of his king and captain: even as honorable is it to a true Christian man, to
suffer travel and persecution, as his foreguide and leader Jesus Christ did.
Stella de contemtu mundi.

A rock although beat with the billows and waves of the sea, continues firm,
neither is removed out of his place: so a true Christian albeit crushed with
the persecutions and tribulations of the world, persisteth steadfast, neither
lets his hope in Christ faint. Lodouicus Granatensis, lib. 1.
Ducispeccatorum.

Man.
AS a Painter in delineating and pourtraying a picture, has it in his power to
make it of what fashion he list: so has God the framing and disposition of
man. Lodouicus Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum.

As he that from an high tower hangs by a small thread which an other holds
in his hand, is at the dispose of him either for life or death: so is man at
Gods. ibidem.

As a stone always of his own nature falls downward, neither can it lift it
self upwards, without external help: so man by reason of the corruption of
sin does always tend downwards; that is, he does always slide to the love
and desire of earthly things, but if he be to be lifted up above, that is to
the love of heavenly things, he has need of the right hand of the highest.
ibidem.

Even as Iuie naturally seeks for some post or tree, which it may lean unto,
or some wall, by which it may be supported, and creep aloft, it being not able
to sustain and hold up it self; and as a woman naturally seeks for the
supportation and shadow of man, for she is an imperfect creature, knows that
the aid and help of man is necessary for her: so man's nature being weak,
seeks supportation of god, and being needy and wanting many things, does
seek for the shadow and refuge of God. ibidem.

As it is preposterous that the Mistress should wait upon the maid: so is it
intolerable that the flesh should govern the spirit, and the appetite the
reason. ibidem.

Even as a Glove is made for the use of the hand; and ascabberd, that a sword
may be sheathed in it: so also the heart of man is created for the use of God,
neither without him can any rest be found.

Even as the body of man is created for the soul: so it shall be punished with
the soul.

As water received into diverse vessels, does put on diverse figures and
shapes, according to the disposition and nature of the vessels: so does grace
infused into men; hence comes the variety of gifts, and yet the same spirit
that infuseth them.

As snow begins and ends in water: so man, how bigly soever he brave it,
began in earth, and shall end where he began.

As the flower may be known by the smell: so a man by his words.

As they that are tenants at will, bear themselves very even and upright: so
they that understand that the house of their body is lent them of Nature for
a short time, do live more temperately, and die more willingly. Seneca.

As an evil tree cannot bring forth any good fruit; as rotten and wormeaten
seed cannot engender any thing, but like it self; and as from a poisoned and
infected vessel we cannot draw one drop of good wine: so since our lapse we
are not able of our selves to produce any good work, but whatsoever springs
from us, sauoureth of corruption and pollution.

As wax cannot endure before the fire: so man's righteousness cannot stand
perfect before God.

As Merchants always praise, and esteem their wares and merchandise more then
they are worth: so man does his virtues, but when they are examined and prised
by those which know them, as by the spirit of god and his prophets, they are
altogether judged as old rags torn, tied together and patched up again, and as
old images new gilded over, which outwardly have glistering show, but within
are nothing but dust and dirt, or as counterfeit money, which is of ill metal
how goodly a print soever it have.

Some dream when they are asleep, that they have found great treasure, and
have a great joy in it, but after their wakning, they see that all is vanished
like smoke, whereupon they vex and grieve themselves: so when man thinks
that he is righteous, this is a dream, which passes through his spirits, and
vanishes as soon as he is awake and delivered from the darkness of
ignorance, wherein he was asleep and buried.

The arc of the covenant was but a cubite and a half high; the wheels of the
Cauldron were but a cubite and a half high, now we know that a cubite and a
half is an imperfect measure: so there is no man in this life perfectly
perfect, seeing that the very highest is as the Arc in Moses Tabernacle, or as
the wheels in Salomons Temple, but a cubite and a half high, perfectly
imperfect, when he begins, imperfectly perfect when he ends.

Even as the silkworme keeps her body spare and empty, and uses to fast two
or three days together, that she may stretch out her self the better, better,
and spin her thread the finer: so man must endeavor to bring under his body,
and as I may say, to diet it for the nonce, that he may no longer weaue the
spiders web, but with the silk worm spin a new thread.

As the Viper perceiving her old skin to be so stiff that she cannot easily
stretch out her self in it, strips it quite off: so we which are by nature a
generation of Vipers, must strip off our old skin, and perceiving we cannot
well do our endeour and stir our selves in the armor of Saul, we must with
David put it off, and put on the armor of light.

As Fletchers to make their shaftes fly steadily, piece them with Sugarchest,
or Holly, or such like heavy wood: so we must adioine, to that Aspe or Service
tree, or such other light matter, which we are all made of, the sweet
Sugarchest of the Holy Ghost, that we may not be unsteady as arrows of Aspe,
nor yet slothful in service, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.

Saint Ambrose reports, that the Be being to fly home to her hiue, and
fearing least if she should be taken by the way with the wind, she might
perhaps be blown about in the air, counterpeises her self with a little
stone, and so flies straight home: so we must build our selves upon the chief
corner stone, and be grounded upon the rock, and established with grace, that
howsoever the rain fall, or the floods arise, or the winds blow, or what
times soever come, yet we may stand fast in the faith of Christ.

As Eve deceived Adam: so the flesh deceives man. Lodouicus Granatensis lib.
1. Ducis peccatorum.

The Moon being in the wane, is again renewed: so is man after his death, at
the last resurrection.

The sun appears again after it sets: so does man at the sound of the
archangell.

The Sun, the Moon, the stars, the sea, the earth, trees, herbs, brute
beasts, and among these, Bees, Auntes and Shell fishes do forefeele and
foresee a tempest: so should man forefeele and foresee his own danger.
Plinius libro 8. cap. vlt.

As things, that are bred upon the earth, are for the use and commodity of man:
so one man should be for another.

As a vessel is known by the sound, whether it be hole or broken: so are men
proved by their speech whether they be wise or foolish.

Good Men.
AS the Laurel tree is not subject to lightning, nor hurt with that fires
violence: so the just man in the fire of tribulation is neither hurt nor
impaired, but always continues fresh and green. Stella de contemptu mundi.

As in winter a fruitful tree cannot be known from one that is unfruitful:
so in this world a good man can scarcely be discerned from an evil man.
Hermas seu Past.

As cockell and darnell springs up among good corn: so evil men grow up
with good men, and righteous people with ungodly folk. Cyprianus co^tra
Demetrianu^

As a bird soon gets out of a snare: so good men, if they fall, soon rise
again. Origenes hom. 5. in Psalm. 36.

As the light of a candle is dimmed by the brightness of the sun: so all the
works of good men are obscured by the perfection of Christ. Origenes hom, 9. in
Ezechiel.

As wrestlers for a prize sustain heat, sweat, dust and labor: so good men
for a crown must bear many things patiently. Chrisost. hom. 1. de
resurrectione.

As we say that that is a good body, that can endure heat and cold, hunger and
thirst: so we say that he is a good man, that can generously and valiantly
bear all the invasions of sorrow and grief. ibidem hom. 5. de patientia Job.

As a rich subject compared to a wealthy King, seems poor: so the best men
compared to holy angels are found sinners. Idem hom. 4. in 1. Timoth.

As the understanding of a sinner is more and more darkened: so the mind of a
good man is more and more enlightened. Idem hom. 1 8. operis imperfecti.

In the vineyardes of Engaddi there is a Tree, that when it is pricked,
ointment comes out of it, but if it be not pierced, it smells not so
fragrantly: so it is with a good man. Ambrosius in Psalm. beati immaculati sermon.
1.

As a house built upon a rock stands firm against all tempests: so a
righteous man building himself upon the rock Christ stands strong against all the storms of Satan, the world and the flesh.

As a tree that is planted by the water side, spreads out the root unto
moystnesse, neither can the heat harm it when it comes, but his leaf
continues green: so a good man that is planted by the waters of Gods grace,
spreads out himself unto every good work, neither does the parching heat of
persecution hurt him, nor the pinching cold of adversity benumme him, but he
always remains fruitful.

The gifts of men are diverse.
AS not every Painter is skillful in every part of his Art, but one excels
in mixture of colors, an other in drawing of lines, an other in due
proportion: so among them that profess learning, one excels in Rhetoric,
an other in Logic, an other in the Mathematickes, and others in other gifts.

So many men, so many minds.
AS Tigers are driven into madness by the sound of a tymbrell or a drum,
insomuch that they tear themselves in pieces: so that which quiets good and
civil minds, drives barbarous minds to fury and rage. Plut.

As among so many thousand men, there are no faces alike in every respect: so
every man has his several humor, and a cranke in his brayn that another
has not. Erasmus.

As the herb Sagapene is a food very acceptable unto Asses, but present
poison to all other living creatures: so oftentimes that which offends one,
is a pleasure unto another. Plinius libro 24. Cap. 1.

As diverse glasses make one thing to appear diversely, according to the
diversity of the glasses: so diverse men do interpret one deed diuerselie,
according to the diversity of minds; that which seems great to one, seems
small to an other, one man esteems it beautiful, an other deformed.

Some see better the thing that is near them, some see better a far off: so
some look better to other men's matters, then to their own, and some neglect
all men's businesses, and solelie intend their own.

The continual burning Mountain of Chimera is more enkindled with water, but
abated with haie: so some the more you desire them, the more inexorable they
are, and they more you dissuade them, the forwarder they are. Plin. lib. 2.
cap. 106

As the Agath stone is fired with water, but quenched with oil: so some the
more you entreat them, the colder they are: but if you neglect them, of their
own accord they will do it. Plinius libro 36. Cap. 19.

Wicked and ungodly men.
IF a mother should lay in a corner of her house, rats bane or some other
poison to kill rats and mice, and it should be found of her children, and
eaten; would not that be to the destruction and ruin of her house, which she
purposed should have been a benefit? After the same manner wicked men do
prevent all good and wholesome doctrines, abusing them for themselves, which are
delivered for others, always very studiously endeavoring to defend the
loosenes and dissolutenes of their life. Lodo. Granat. lib. de deuotione.

As one rotten sheep infecteth, be it never so great a flock: so one wicked and
vicious man impoisoneth, be it never so many folk.

As a Toade sucketh poison from the earth: so the wicked suck corruption from
vices.

As the salt flood quickly swells up, and as quickly sinkes down again and
turns to nothing: even so and such is the prosperity of the wicked.

As the smoke vanishes, and as the wax melts before the fire: so shall the
wicked perish at the presence of God.

As under a good tree all beasts may rest, but no creatures can rest under
thorns, but only serpents: so by an honest man, both good men and evil men
may have peace, but by a wicked man none can be quiet, but serpents, that is,
devils, who have their lodgings in the breasts of wicked men. Chrysostom. hom.
19. operis imperf.

As good meats are unwelcome to sick persons: so are good counsels unto wicked
men. Idem hom. 4. in 1. Cor.

As mad men cannot abide the cure of the Physician: so wicked men cannot abide
the reproof of a Preacher. Theodorus sermo. 1. de curandis grae. affectibus.

As sore eyes cannot away with the brightness of the Sun: so wicked and
ungodly men cannot away with the splen dour of the truth. Petrus Chrysologus
sermon. 87.

A wheel tilts up behind, and shootes down before: so the wicked are forward
to al badnes, but backward to al goodness.

As a dry thistle flower is blown away with the wind; as a thin scumme is
scattered abroad with a storm; and as smoke is dispersed here and there: so
is the hope of the wicked.

A fool buildes his house upon the sand: so an ungodly man grounds his hopes
upon the vanities of the world.

As ye raging sea cannot rest: so a wicked man is never of a quiet and
peaceable mind.

The heath, that grows in the wilderness, is good for nothing but the fire: so
the wicked are good for nothing but for fuel to make the fire of hell flame.

Women.
AS Pigeons are taken with beans, and children intised with Balls: so women
are won with toys.

As the beast Chimer has a Lions face, but a Dragons tail: so many women have
continent words, but unchaste works.

As the brood-hen, that all the day long bestows her pains in all the dust
she meets with, sleeps at night hungry and unsatisfied: so does that woman
that bestows her love upon many suitors.

A dumb Grasse-hopper is a wonder, because the whole kind of them is
garrulous; and yet they say, that there are some such about Rhegyum in Italy:
so more admirable is constancy and silence in women, because their sex is
mutable and loquacious, and yet they say, that there are some such women in
the kingdom of Vtopia.

As no man knows where his shoe wringes him, but he that has it on: so no
man knows the disposition of a woman, but he that has married a wife.
Plutarchus.

As a Loadstone by a secrette in nature draws Iron unto it: so a woman by a
Secret in nature draws man unto her.

As fire being touched does burn: so a woman being touched does kindle lust.
Hieronimus lib. 1. contra Iouinianum.

As those herbs do flourish that are planted by the river side: so those
seeds of lust do sprowte rankly that are nourished in the society and
familiarity of women. Nilus orat. 2. aduersus vitia.

The temples of the Egyptians were builded of very fair stone, and beautified
with gold, silver, and Iuory, but if you searched into them, you should find
nothing but a Cat, a Crocodile, or a serpent: so many women are very
beautifully adorned without, but if you look into them, you shall find
nothing, but enormous and adulterous minds. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 2
paedagogi, cap. 2.

As stigmaticall brandes are notes of a fugitive: so counterfeit colors are
tokens of an whore. Ibidem.

As a golden ring is in ye nose of a swine: so is beauty in an unchaste woman.
Salonius in parabolas Salomonis.

As the stone of Sicilia, the more it is beaten, the harder it is: so women the
more they are made of, the coyer they grow.

As a child is won with a Nut, and lost with an apple: so is a woman.

He that touches the Nettle tenderly is soonest stong: the Fly that plays
in the fire is singed in the flame: so he that dallieth with women is drawn to
his woe.

The soft drops of rain do pierce the hard Marble; many strokes overthrow
the tallest Oak: so a silly woman in time may make such a breach into a man's
heart, as her tears may enter without resistance.

A Rose is sweeter in the budde then full blown; young twigs are sooner bent
then old trees; white Snow sooner melted then hard Ise: so a woman, the
younger she is, the sooner she is to be wooed, and the fayrer she is, the
likelyer to be won.

There is no sword made of steel, but has iron; no fire made of wood but
has smoke, no wine made of grapes, but has lees: so there is no woman created
of flesh but has faults.

Chirurgions affirm, that a white vein being stricken, if at the first there
spring out blood, it argues a good constitution of body: so if a fair woman
having heard the suit of a lover, if she blush at the first brunt, and show
her blood in her face, shows a well disposed mind.

As a Dove seems angry, as though she had a gall, yet yields at the last to
delight: so women pretend a great skirmish at the first, yet are boorded
willingly at the last.

As castles that come to parle: so women that delight in courting, are willing
to yield.

As Fish caught with medicines: so women gotten with witchcraft, are never
wholesome.

As all Fish are not caught with flies: so al women are not allured with
personage.

Lions fawn when they are clawed, Tigers stoop when they are tickled,
Bucephalus lies down when he is curried: so women yield when they are courted.

Arelius (whose Art was only to draw Women) painted Venus Cnydia, catching at
the Ball with her hand, which she seemed to spurn at with her foot; the Myrre
tree being hewn, gathers in his sap, but not moved pours it footh like
sirup: so women are never more coye then when they are beloved, yet in their
minds never less constant, seeming to tie themselves to the mast of the ship
with Ulysses when they are wooed, with a strong cable, which being well
discerned, is a twinde thredde, throwing a stone at the head of him, unto
whom immediately they cast forth an Apple.

Young is the Goose that will eat no Oats* and a very ill Cock that will
not crow before he be old, and no right Lion that will not feed on hard meat
before he taste sweet milk: so a tender Virgin God knows it must be, that
measures her affections by her age, when as naturally they are inclined to
play the Brides before they be able to dress their heads.

Instruments sound sweetest, when they be touched softest: so women are wisest
when they be used mildest.

The horse strives, when he is hardly rained, but having the bridle, never
stirs: so women are stark mad if they be ruled by might, but with a
gentle rain they will bear a white mouth.

As fire is hot as well in the coldest region of the North, as in the
furthest Southern parallel: and as grass is of the same color in Egypt as it
is in Iewrie: so women wheresoever they be bred, be Mala necessaria. Robert
Green.

As the Diamondes in India be more hard then the Cornish stones in England:
and as the Margarits of the west are more orient then the Pearls of the South:
so women's affections are affected after the disposition of the clime wherein
they are borne: although Auicen in his Aphorisms settes down this conclusion,
that thorns no where grow without pricks, nor nettles without stinges. Idem.

As the people Hyperborei, spurn liquorice with their feet, and yet secretly
slake their hunger with the juice thereof: so coie wantons seeming to contemn
their suitors motions, stand in deadly fear, least they should leave of their
amorous passions,

As pumice stones are light and full of holes: so are those women that have as
many lovers, as their hearts have entrances for love.

As the earth yields weeds as well in the lowest valleys, as in the highest
mountains: so women are universally Mala necessaria, wheresoever they be
either bred or brought up. Green.

As the Lapwing runs away with the shell on her head, as soon as she is
hatched: so many girls no sooner out of cradell, but they look for husbands,
as soon as they touch the teenes they think themselves nauigable.

As when Nilus ouerfloweth before his time, Egypt is plagued with a dearth: as
ye trees that blossom in February, are nipped with the frostes in May: and as
untimely fruits have never good fortune: so those women that are wooed and won
ere they be wise, sorrow and repent before they be old.

As the Diamondes are tried by cutting of glass; the Topace by biding the
force of the anuile; the Sethin wood by the hard nesse: so women's excellency
is discovered in their constancy.

As the Hearts in Calabria knowing Dictamum to be deadly, yet browse on it with
greediness; and as the fish Mugra seeing the hook bare, yet swalloweth it
with delight: so women foresee, yet do not prevent, knowing what is
profitable, yet not eschewing the prejudice.

As the eye of the Basiliske pearceth with prejudice; the juice of Celidony is
sweet, but it fretteth deadly; and as Circes cups were too strong for all
Antidotes: so women's flatteries are too forceable to resist at voluntary.

The tallest Ash is cut down for Fuel, be^^^se it bears no good fruit;
the cow that gives no milk, is brought to the slaughter, the drone yt
gathers no Honey is contemned: so the woman that makes her self barren by
not marrying, is accounted among the Grecian Ladies worse then a carrion, as
Homer reports.

As the love between man and man proceeds of the similitude of manners: so
the love between man and woman issues of the sincerity of the heart.

The Physician says, it is dangerous to minister Physic unto the Patient,
that has a cold stomach and a hot liver, least in giving warmth to the
one, he inflame the other: so verily it is hard to deal with a woman whose
words seem fervent, whose heart is congealed into hard Ice least trusting
their outward talk, he be betrayed with their inward treachery.

As it is the eye of the master, that fatteth the horse: so it is the love of
the woman that makes the man,

The sweet songs of Calipso, were subtle snares to entice Ulysses; the Crab
then catches the Oyster when the sun shines; Hiena when she speaks like a
man deuiseth most mischief: so wanton women when they be most pleasant,
pretend most mischief.

As thou learnest of Alexander continency in not viewing the beauty of Darius
wife; temperance of Cirus, in not beholding the heavenly hew of Panthea;
abstinence of Romulus in not drinking wine, be it never so delicat; plainness
and simplicity of Agesilaus in despising costly apparel, be it never so
curious: so learn of Diogenes to detest women be they never so comely.

As the sore eye infecteth the sound: so the society with women breeds
security in the soul, and makes all the senses, senseless.

The tree Siluacenda bears no fruit in Pharo: the Persian tree in Rhodes does
only wax green, but never bring forth apple: Amonius and Nardus will only
grow in India: Balsamum only in Syria: in Rhodes no Egle will build her nest:
no Owl live in Creete: so no wit will spring in the will of women. John Lily.

As Socrates, Plato and Aristotle affirmed that women were fickle and
inconstant: so Pindarus, Homer, Hesiod, Ennius and Virgil auerred that they
were framed of contraries.

As Mantuan does rail on women in his Eclogs: so Euripedes does exclame of
them in his Tragedyes.

As Martial has taunted women: so Propertius has quipped them.

As some for inconstancy compare women to Chamelions, Polipes, and
wethercockes: so some for their alluring and incha^ting call them Sirens, for
craft Calipsoes, for subtilty Serpents, and for cruelty Tigres.

As Daphne for niceness was turned in to a tree: so Anaxarete for cruelty was
transformed into a stone.

As Horatia with daintiness did hurt her self: so Phillis through too much
love did hang her self.

As Cleopatra at the death of her Anthony did sting herself to death with
Serpents: so Hylonome did sley her self at the death of her Cyllar.

As Alceste was content to loose her life to preserve her Admetus: so were the
Mynian wives to preserve their husbands.

Ulysses though he detested Calipso with her sugared voice, yet he embraced
Penelope with her rude distaffe: so though one abhor the beauty of a whorish
Curtesan, yet he need not abstain from the company of a grave maiden.

Though the tears of the Heart be salt, yet the tears of the Bore be sweet: so
though the tears of some women be conterfet to deceive, yet the tears of many
be current to try their love.

Some one Rose will be blasted in the bud, some other never fall from the
stalk; the Oak will be soon eaten with the worm, the walnut tree never: so
some women will be easily enticed to folly, some other never allured to vanity.

As the Mint-maister is not grieved to see the coiner hanged, nor the true
subject the false traitor araigned, nor the honest man the thief condemned:
so honest women ought not to be grieved to see lewd women writ against, and
whores and curtesans to be railed at.

As hic Ignis is latin for fire in the chimney; and hoc Ignis latin for fire
on the table: so haec Ignis is latin for fire in the bed.

As there has been an unchaste Hellen in Greece: so there has been also a
chaste Penelope.

As there has bin a prodigious Pasiphae: so there has bin a godly Theocrita.

As some have desired to be beloved, as Jupiter loved Alcmena: so some have
wished to be embraced, as Phrigius embraced Pieria.

As there has reigned a wicked Iezabel: so has there ruled a devout Debora.

The sour crab has the show of an apple as well as the sweet Pippin, the
black Raven the shape of a bird as well as the white Swan: so the lewd wight
has the name of a woman as well as the honest Matrone.

There is great difference between the standing puddle and the running
stream, yet both water; great odds between the Adamant and the Pommice, yet
both stones: a great distinction to be put between Vitrum and the Crystal,
yet both Glass: so there is great contrariety between Lais and Lucretia, yet
both women.

One may love the clear conduit water though he loath the muddy ditch, and
wear the precious Diamond though he despise the ragged brick: so one may also
with safe conscience reverence the modest sex of honest maidens, though he
forswear the lewd sort of unchaste minions.

As Spiders convert to poison whatsoever they touch: so women infect with folly
whomsoever they deal withal. The petite Palace of Petty his pleasure.

As he that touches Pitch, shall be defiled therewith: so he that uses women's
company, shall be beguiled therewith. Green

As Jupiter, Mars, and Hercules for their valiant acts accounted Gods of the
paynims, were overcome and made slaves by the enchantment of women: so strong
Sampson, holy David and wise Solomon were overthrown by women.

As Venus yielded to her darling Adonis without any suit made on his part: so
the Duchess of Sauoy went on pilgrimage to the knight Mendoza,

As Oenone pleaded her right with Paris: so Dido let Aeneas understand how
deeply she desired him.

As Scilla made love to king Minos: so did Medca to Jason.

As Brysis besought the good will of Achilles: so Adalesia made love to Alerane.

As Portia the daughter of Cato, hearing of her Brutus death at Philippi
swallowed hot burning coals to follow him, as Plutarke, Valerius Maximus, and
Martial do write: so Gumnilda the wife of Asmunda King of Danes, hearing that
her husband was slain in the wars, slew her self with a sword, to accompany
him in death, whom she had dearly loved in life, as testifies Saxo
Grammaticus, in his first book of the Danish history.

As trusty Thisbe did goare her gorgeous body with the same sword, wherewith
princely Pyramus had pricked himself to the heart: so true hearted Iulietta did
die upon the corpse of her dearest Romeo.

As a rusty Rapier is no trusty Rampire to defend a man, though the Scabberd
be of fine Veluct: so a woman with foul conditions, is courselie to be
accounted of, though her face be fair, and body beautiful. The Petite
Palace of Petty his pleasure.

As the year does consist of four seasons, the Spring, Summer, Autumn and
Winter; And as man's body does consiste of four complexions, Choler, Blood,
Phlegm, and Melancholy: so the comely parts of a Woman do consiste in four
points, that is, to be a Shrewe in the Kitchen, a Saint in the Church, an
Angel at the bourde, and an Ape in the bed, as the Chronicle reports by
Mistress Shore Paramour to King Edward the fourth.

As the kind Spaniell the more he is beaten, the fonder he is: so the women
of Russia the oftener their husbands beat them, the better they love them.
They will not be persuaded that their husbands love them, except they beat
them. Richard Hackluyt in his Book of English Voyagers in the description of
Russia.

As Aetna is too hot, and Caucasus too cold: so it is naturally incident to
women to enter into extremities, they are either too loving, or too loathing:
too courteous or too coye: too willing, or too wilful: too merciful, or too
merciles: too forward, or too froward: too friendly, or too fiendly: the mean
they always meanly account of: as it is reported of Maria Stuarta Queen of
Scotts, in Action contra Mariam Scotorum Reginam.

The Soul.
EVen as in a bright and clear glass the sun beams do make the greater
splendor: so in a purified and clear soul the beams of the divine truth do
shine more clearly. Lodouicus Granatensis in lib. de deuotione.

As twice in a day we refresh our bodies, that is, at dinner, and at supper: so
also twice a day we ought to give due nourishment unto our souls. Ibidem.

As ordinary nourishment is necessary for the body, because the natural heat
does always consume and wast the substance of man, and therefore it is
necessary, that it be repaired on the one side, as it is decayed on the other:
so the soul has in it a pestilent heat (which is the concupiscence and evil
inclination of our appetites) consuming and wasting all good, therefore it is
needeful that that be daily repaired by devotion, which is wasted and decayed
by that hurtful and pestilential heat. ibidem.

As they yt have the charge and keeping of a clock, are wo^t every day twice to
wind up the plu^mets, for they of their own proper motion do by little and
little descend, and draw toward the ground: so they that desire to keep their
souls upright, and well ordered, ought at the least twice a day to erect and
lift up her weights, seeing that our wretched nature is so inclinable to things
below, that it always endeuoure^th to sink downwards. ibidem.

As a precious stone is not enclosed in earth, but in gold: so does not God put
his souerain balm, but into a pure soul, clean and free from filthy and
enormous corruption. ibidem.

As a living body not only fears death, but also fevers, wounds, yea and the
itch and scabs, albeit they be small: so a soul, that lives in grace, not
only fears and abhors gross and heinous sins, but also those, that
seem of lesser moment, and do make way and entrance to those that be grosser.
ibidem.

As a still and calm water is fitter and more disposed to represent the images
and shapes of things, no otherwise the^ a glass: so also in a quiet and calm
soul al things are represented most clearly and perfectly. ibidem.

As two seasons are necessary for corn cast into the earth, a cold season
that it may be hardened, and take deep rooting, and a warm, that it may
increase and sproute above the earth: so are both seasons necessary for our
souls, a warm season that they may increase in charity, and a cold yt they
may be rooted in humility. ibid.

As ground well watered in the morning, by the coolenes and temper does all that
day defend the herbs planted in it from the heat of the sun: so let the
soul of the righteous be watered in due season, and by prayer be well moistened
in God, that it may always have in it self the continual cool of devotion,
by which it may be defended from the love of the world. ibidem.

As the body is the instrument of the soul: so the soul is the instrument of
God. Plut.

As a tame bird if she be long nourished in a cage, and be let go, yet
endeavors to return thither again: so our soul being long resident in this
body, is not easily separated from it: but the soul of a child does easily
depart hence. Idem.

As a torch put out if it be forthwith put to the fire, by and by recouereth
light: so a soul the lesser time it staieth in the body, it sooner becomes
like unto it self Idem.

They that are manumitted and set free, do now those things of their own
accord for themselves, which they were wont to do for their Lords: so now
the soul does nourish the body with much labor, and many cares; but
afterward being free, it does nourish it self with the contemplation of
the truth, neither can it be sundred from it. Idem.

As they that have their feet under other men's tables, and dwell in other men's
houses, are vexed with many discommodities, and do always complain of one
thing or other: so the soul does now complain of the head, now of ye feet,
now of ye stomach, now of one thing, now of another, signifying that she is not
in her own house, but that she must go hence very shortly. Senec.

The Mind.
AS an even balance is alike inclined to either side, and swaied of it self
to neither: so is a doubful mind. Plut.

As they that pound Frankincense, albeit they wash their hands, yet a good
while after do smell of that odor: so the mind being long conversant in
honest businesses, will long preserve a pleasant memory of it. idem.

As those beasts that have their hoofes hardened in rough and sharp ways, can
easily abide any way, whereas the hoofes of those beasts are easily broken
that are fed and fatted in rank and fenny pastures: so the mind that is
accustomed to brook hardness, is not easily offended. Seneca.

A flame can neither be held down, neither can it rest: so an honest mind and
well disposed, is by a natural inclination carried unto those things that be
honest. Seneca.

Young trees are bended which way we will; heat does vnwarp crooked bords, and
that which is borne for some other use is brought to our bent: so much more
does the mind receive any form, being more flexible and obsequious the^ any
humor. Sen.

As a disease in the body is understood before hand by heaviness and
indispositio^: so a weak mind by some disturbance does foresee some evil that
is coming unto it. Se.

As first the humor is to be purged, whence madness proceeds, and afterward
the man is to be admonished; otherwise he that admonishes a mad man how he
ought to go, and how to behave himself abroad, is more mad then he that is
frantick^: so first the mind is to be freed from false opimions, and then the
precepts of Philophy are to be instilled in to it. Seneca.

As when children learn first to write, their hands are held and directed,
and afterward they are commanded to follow their copy: so first the mind is
to be led by rule, until it can rule it self. Seneca.

If Iron be placed between an Adamant and a load stone, it is now carried this
way, now that way: so a doubtful and wavering mind is sometimes carried to that
which is honest, and sometimes by headstrong affections it is haled to the
contrary.

As Venus had her mole in her cheek which made her more amiable; Helen her
scar in her chinne, which Paris called Cos Amoris, the Whetstone of Love,
Aristippus his Wart, and Licurgus his Wen: so in the disposition of the mind,
either virtue is ouershadowed with some vice, or vice ouercast with some
virtue. John Lily.

The goods of the Mind.
THe Sunbeams although they touch the earth, yet they are there, whence they
are sent: so the mind of a wise man although it be conuerfant here and there,
yet it is with himself. Seneca.

As the foolish vulgar people with great labor, and with great cost do seek
for remedies and medicines which grow in the furthest Indies and in Aethiopia,
when that springs in their gardens, which can better cure them: so with great
endeavor we seek for abroad the furniture of a happy life, in Empire, in
riches, and pleasures, when it is in our minds and souls, which does make us
happy.

The diseases of the Mind.
IF the fountain be muddy and troubled, whatsoever streams from thence cannot
be pure: so if the mind be infected with evil affections, it does vitiate all
things that come from it; but the contrary happens, if it be pure and
peaceable. Plut.

As Xenophon admonishes, we should especially remember to honor God in
prosperity, that if at any time need and necessity fall upon us, we may
boldly go unto him, as being already our friend: so those sayings which may
cure the diseases of the mind are long before to be provided, that when we
have need, they being familiar unto us, they may easily help us. idem.

As fierce and cruel dogs bark at every noise, but are quieted only with that
voice they know: so the diseases of the mind when they rage cannot be
restrained, except the sayings and admonitions be known and familiar, which
may correct them being moved. idem.

As a sick body can neither endure heat nor cold: so a sick mind is alike
offended in prosperity and adversity. idem.

They that cast and vomit sailing upon the sea in a ship, do think that they
should be better if they went out of that ship into a foist or galley; but it
is to no purpose, they carrying about with them fearefulnes and choler: so they
in vain do change the course of their life, who do bear about with them the
diseases of the mind. idem.

To them that be sick all things are tedious and troublesome, they loath
their meat, they accuse their Physicians, and are angry with their friends; but
their health being restored all things are pleasant unto them: so to a sick
mind every kind of life is unpleasant, but to a sound mind no kind of life is
unpleasant. idem.

One cough does not breed the co^sumption of the lungs, but that which long
continues: so one error does not forthwith beget a disease of the mind.
Seneca.

As some do always carry about with them precious stones, against diseases,
bewitchings, drunkenness, thunder and lightning, against ruins and such like
evils: so it behooves us to have always at hand some precepts of Philosophy
against the diseases of the mind, as against lust, anger, ambition, covetousness
and such like.

The Heart.
EVen as he that would play upon an harp, or any other instrument of Music,
ought before all things to have his strings well tuned, that they may fitly and
melodiously agree one with another: so it is necessary also that our heart
(seeing it is the chief instrument of that heavenly Music) be first well
tuned and prepared, for there can be no harmonious consort in a iarring and
untuned instrument. Lodouicus Granat. lib. de deuotione.

As milk, and many other meats are so delicate and dainty, that the very
air does taint them, and make them unsavory; and the vntemperatenesse of the
air, as some affirm, does put a Lute or a Harp out of tune: so great, or
without doubt much greater is the tenderness and daintiness of man's heart,
and is troubled for lesser cause. ibidem.

Even as the sight of the eyes is hurt with a small thing; and the brightness
of a glass is stained and obscured with a little breath: so a much lesser
chance, and a much lighter hurt is enough to dim the brightness of our
heart, to darken the eyes of our soul, and to disturb together with our
devotion, all our good affections. ibidem.

As painters are wont first to mundifie and whitelime the table, in which they
paint: so also the table of our heart is first to be wiped and whited, in which
the image of God shall be pictured and formed. ibid.

As an handmaid, that works in the presence of a Queen, stands before her
Lady with great gravity, with presentnes of mind, and orderly composition of
body, making notwithstanding neither loss nor delay in her work: so the heart
of man has such aptnes and promptnes, that with due reverence and attention it
may be lifted up to that majesty, which fills heaven and earth, not omitting
nor neglecting any of those things it does. ibidem.

As there is nothing which does more stir us up unto good, then the vigor and
strength of the heart: so there is nothing, which does more extinguish heat and
fervor in us, then the weakness and fainting of the same. ibidem.

As that is the best way to drive danger from cattle, to keep them from
feeding in dangerous places: so also it is needful that we do, if we will
drive away the dangers of a scrupulous heart. ibidem.

Even as a stone is moved more swiftly, when it approaches nearer his Center
(as the Philosophers say) because it now begins to taste and feel the
virtue and conueniencie of his natural place: so also man's heart created of
God, is more strongly moved, when it now begins to feel and taste somewhat
of his creator. ibidem.

As a moorish and fenny lake does send forth many gross vapors, which do so
darken the air, that scarce any thing can be seen clearly in it, till the Sun
dissolueth them: so our heart does cast forth such mists and fogs of cloudie
cogitations, that nothing can be well discerned in it, until they be
dissipated and disseuered by the heat of devotion. ibidem.

As the heart is the beginning of all our works: so according to the quality
and affection of our heart, such also is the quality and affection of our
works proceeding from it: which thing also we see in water flowing from a
fountain: if the fountain be muddy and troubled, the water will also be muddy
and troubled: but if the fountain be clear and bright, the water will be so
too. ibi.

Even as a young set or slip cannot be grafted into a tree, unless first that
bra^ch be cut off, into whose place it is to be inserted: so the divine will
cannot be grafted into our heart, unless first our own will be lopped away;
for these two wills are contrary the one to the other. ibidem.

Even as water of his own natural motion does always slide and drop
downewardes, and if any one desires to hinder that passage, he profits
nothing, for it will seek for some corner or chink, which it may break
through: so also our heart is always ready bent to all kind of pleasure, so
that if silence be imposed upon it, and any one thing be denied unto it,
forthwith it swells and rages, now winding this way, now that way, seeking
for a vent, and never rests till it has satisfied the lust. ibidem.

As working vessels are preserved from breaking by vent: so woeful hearts are
delivered from bursting by words.

The stone Tirrhenus, so long as it is whole swimmeth, but being once broken
sinketh: so the heart of man being once broken, it soon sinketh, and being
diversely distracted, it is easily overwhelmed.

Almighty God concerning the East gate of the Temple says thus; This gate
shall be shut, and shall not be opened, and no man shall enter by it, because
the Lord God of Israel has entered by it: so although the heart of a
Christian, which is the temple of the holy Ghost, may let many things enter
into it at other gates, yet it must keep the East gate, the most illuminate
and highest power and part of it, continually shut against all men, yea against
all the world, and opened only to one thing, that is, to God, who has
already entered into it, and enlightened it with his spirit.

As at the window of Noah's arc, there entered in no mist, no water, nothing
else but one thing only, which is light: so at this East gate, no mist of
humane errors, no water of worldly cares may enter in, but only the light of
heaven, and a sanctified desire to be fast knit, and perfectly united, by faith
and love to God.

As the Altar of perfume was placed close to the golden Censer, very near the
Mercy seat: so a Christian heart, which is a spiritual Altar of perfume, and
a sweet savor to God, must always approach nearer and nearer unto the throne
of Grace, and continuallye higher and higher advance it self to him that is
the highest and holiest of all.

As in a Well, except there be some water in it, we cannot easily see the
baggage that lies in the bottom: so in the depth of the heart without tears
we cannot see our sins.

Conscience.
AS Honey is not only sweet of it self, but also it makes that sweet,
which before was not sweet: so a good conscience is so merry and so pleasant,
that it makes all the troubles and tribulations of this world seem pleasant
and delightful. Lodo. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccat.

As they that sit at a banker are made merry by the variety of meats and
dainty cates, and by the presence of their friends, with whom they live: so
the righteous are made merry by the testimony of a good conscience, and by
the sweet favor of the divine presence. ibidem.

As the taste of delitious meat cannot sufficiently be expressed nor described
with words to him, who heretofore has not tasted of it: so neither the joy and
comfort of a good conscience to him that never felt it. ib.

As the morning sun when it is scarcely risen, and is not yet seen,
enlighteneth the world with the nearness of his brightness: so a good
conscience although it be not fully and plainly known, yet it reioiceth and
gladdeth ye soul by her good testimony. ibi.

As a shadow does always follow the body: so fear and desperation in all
places and at all times do wait upon an ill conscience.

As persecution procures a death to the body: so a conscience despairing
assures death to the soul.

As the herb Nepenthes, so much commended of Homer, being put into Wine,
drives away all sadness at a banquet: so a good conscience being placed in us
does abolish all the tediousness of life.

As true love toward a woman does not desire a witness, but has a mough, if it
enjoy her alone: so is a wise man contented only by the testimony of a good
conscience. Plut.

As a beautiful face is grateful and acceptable in the sight of man: so is a
clear conscience beautiful in the eyes of God. Chrisostomus hom. 6. operis
imperfecti.

If thou castest a little spark into a great deep, it is soon quenched: so a
good conscience does easily mittigate al grief. idem hom. 25. de via recta.

As there is no rain without clouds: so there is no pleasing of god without a
good conscience. Marcus Eremita, de his quiputant ex operibus iustificari.

As a brazen wall is a good defense unto a City: so is a good conscience unto
a man. Lodouicus Viues introductione ad sapientiam capite vltimo.

As gowtie diseases are full of fear: so are ill consciences full of
suspicion. Plut. in Apophth. 231.

As the shadow follows the body: so an evil conscience does follow a sinner.
Basilius, apud Antonium in Melissa, part. 1. sermon. 16.

Doctors and Doctrine.
EVen as a plaster is of no use, if it be not applied to the wound, and to the
diseased place: so neither are precepts nor doctrine auailable, if by education
they be not applied to the life. Lodouicus Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum.

If thou will put any good thing into Bottels and Bladders, thou must first put
the wind and the air out of them: so thou must put pride and disdain out of
his mind whom thou would teach. Plut.

As the seed of a sallow tree cast away before it be ripe, does not only
bring forth nothing, but is a medicine to procure sterilitie in women, that
they may not conceive: so the speeches of them that teach, before they be
wise, do not only show themselves to be fools, but do infect their
auditors, and make them indocible. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 27.

As a consort consists of diverse voices: so erudition is a mixture of diverse
disciplines. Seneca.

The meat that swimmeth in the stomach, is no meat but a burden; but the
same being digested, does pass into blood and strength: so those things, which
thou read, if they remain unconcocted in thy memory, they do thee small
good; but if they be digested into thy disposition, then they make thee better
learned. Seneca.

The earth which brings forth salt, brings forth none other thing: so
wits fruitful in learning, are not of such validity in other matters. Plin.
lib. 31. cap. 7.

Wine powered into vessels made of Yew, becomes deadly: so erudition otherwise
wholesome, if it fall into a pestilent nature, becomes dangerous by his
manners.

As the Laurel always continues green: so the fame of learning does never
wax old nor wither. Plin. lib. 15. cap. 30.

As they that are of a rank smell, do savor more rammish, when they are
anointed: so the rumor of naughtiness is more filthy, when the celebritie
of learning makes it more conspicuous, and more common in the mouths of men.

As a precious stone is a little thing, and yet is preferred before great
stones: so learning and doctrine is but little in show and ostentation, but
great in value and price.

Arts and disciplines.
AS they that often frequent theaters and play houses, with their pleasure do
also reap some profit: so Arts and Disciplines besides their pleasure and
dignity, do bring also profit and commodity. Plut.

A tree of her own nature does bring forth but one only fruit, but by
grafting it becomes laden with fruits of diverse kinds: so he that follows
his own nature, is always the same; but he that is guided by Art, is unlike
himself. Plin. lib. 17. cap. 14.

The Turbot, the Skate, the Raie, and the Puffen being most slow fishes, yet
have often found in their bellies the Mullet, being the swiftest of al fishes,
which they take by cunning and policy: so many by Art and skill do far excel
those that be mightier in riches and strength. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 42.

Plutarch testifies that he saw in Africa dogs carrying stones into the
water, till the water was risen so high that they might lap of it; the like
he reports of a dog casting little stones into a pot of pottage, til they
rose so high that he might eat them: so that which is wanting unto us in
strength, is to be supplied by Art.

As great waights which can be lifted up by no men's strength, are easily
drawn aloft by engines and devices: so that which thou can not do by force,
thou may easily atchieue by art and reason.

As in houses there are portals before the entrye; and as Cities have suburbs
by which they are gone into: so before virtue the liberal Arts are placed,
for it is gone unto by this way. Philo de congressu quaerendae eruditionis
gratia.

As the Gate is the entrance into an house: so learnings encyclopedarie is the
entry unto Virtue. Idem lib. de profugis.

As the sight does receive light from the air: so the mind does receive
light from liberal disciplines, that it may be made more sharp and piercing
for the mysteries of Philosophy. Aristoteles apud Laertium, lib. 5. Cap. 1.

As those first letters, by which children learn their elements, do not teach
the liberal Arts, but are as an induction unto them: so the liberal Arts
do not bring the mind unto virtue, but prepare it, and make it fit for
virtue. Seneca. Epist. 89.

As the diggers of wells many times do not find the water they seek for: so
they that seek for perfection and felicity in Arts, do miss of their end.
Philo lib. de Plantatione Noe.

Education.
AS many unprofitable weeds grow in a field, which are naught themselves, but
yet are the signs of a fertile and plentiful ground, if any man would till
it: so many unruly affections of the mind being badde of themselves, do
argue no badde wit, if education did rightly apply them. Plut.

There is not almost any tree, but it waxes wild and crooked, if it want
culture: so there is no wit so happy, but it degenerateth without orderly
education. Idem.

They that bring up horses well, do teach them to obey the bridle: so he that
will instruct children, must first make them attentive. idem.

There is no horse that well brooketh his Rider, but he that is tamed by Art
and cunning: so there is no wit, but it is barbarous and wild, except it be
tamed by education, and trained to moderation by precepts, idem.

There is no beast so wild, which is not tamed by skill: so there is no wit so
rude and clownish, which by education grows not mild. idem.

As husbandmen underprop young trees, that they may increase and grow straight:
so he that educateth young wits, adds precepts, and wholesome admonitions,
least they wander awrie. idem.

As Cork is in vain tied to Nets, that they may swim, if the Lead be so
proportioned that it draws them under water: so we are instructed in vain in
the precepts of well living if our wickedness will not suffer us to arise out
of foolishness. idem.

As a field untilled, does not only remain unfruitful, but also does bring
forth many weeds: so youth capable of reason, except it be exercised in
honest precepts, does not only not become good but runs into many vices.
idem.

A Bear does bring forth shapelesse whelps, and does form them by licking:
so it is meet that a young wit be polished by long industry. Plin. lib. 8. cap.
26.

The young Cuckoo being a bastard denoureth the legitimate birds, and the dam
too: so many brought up with great cockering, as Cockneys be, overthrow their
educators Plin lib. 10. cap. 9.

A tree unfruitful of it self, by grafting becomes fruitful: so a slender
wit by good education may be brought to very good pass. Plin. lib. 17. cap.
14.

A tree of the own nature, does bear but one fruit; but by grafting brings
forth many kinds: so they that have nothing but their own nature to direct
them, do always pipe one tune, but they that by education grow artistes; have
many harmonious Diapasons.

As there be certain fountains, that by drinking of them do change the skin
and hairs of man and beast into white and black: so in the countenance and
foreheade of a man does shine, with what precepts he has been endued, and
from what authors he has drawn the conditions of his life.

As potters clay and mortar, while they are moist and soft, are easilye
fashioned to any likeness: so young rude minds are fit for any
discipline. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 24.

As the herb Fenegreeke, the worse it is used, the better it prospers: so
some children the less they are cockered, the better they are. Plin. lib. 18.
cap. 16.

Mortar is presentlye to be used, because it quickelie hardens and dries:
so young years is forthwith to be framed to learning and good manners, before
it grow hard, and will not admit the hand of the fashioner. Plin. lib. 36.
cap. 24.

The Adamant is mollified by one thing, otherwise it yields not to the
Smithes hammer: so there is no wit nor disposition so rustical and savage, but
by one thing it may be ordered and tamed. Plinius lib. 37. cap. 4.

An Ape does almost kill her young ones by embracing them: so many Parents do
corrupt their children by immoderate love and affection in their bringing up
Plin. lib. 9. cap. 54.

In the tillage of ground, first it is meet that the ground be good, next
that the tiller be skillful, and then that the sea de be good: so in the
tillage and culture of the mind, the nature and disposition of the child does
resemble the earth, the schoolmaster the tiller, and the wholesome instructions
the seed. Plutarchus de liberis educandis.

As cart wheels bended by force, can never again be brought to their former
rectitude: so some wits depraved by education, can never again be corrected.
Idem in Moralibus.

As ground the better it is, the more it is spoiled, if it be not tilled: so
wits the riper they are, the worse they become, if they be not instructed
ibidem.

As all grounds are not fruitful, that are tilled: so all wits do not bring
forth fruit, that are well educated. Cicero libro 2. Tusc. quaest.

As an husbandman delights to see fruit of that tree he planted; and a
shepherd to see increase of those sheep he keeps: so does a schoolemaister
and a Tutor rejoice, to see those wits thrive and prosper, which they have
virtuously and industriously taught and tutered. Seneca lib. 2. epist. 34.

As branches of trees grown crooked of a long time, cannot be brought to
straightness, although they be often bended with the hand: so they that are
scarce honestly borne, and scarce ingeniously brought up do always look to
the ground; that is, they love base and vile things, neither ever are lifted
up unto virtuous or valorous endeavors. Politianus in Lamia.

As in a fat ground, which no tiller has touched, grow thorns and bushes: so
often in a generous mind, unless ingenious education help, vices spring up
with virtues. Idem de ira.

As husbandmen weed their fields of hurtefull plants: so parents and
teachers should weed vices out of the minds of their ehildren and scholars.
ibidem.

An untamed horse becomes dangerous: so an untaught son becomes
mischievous.

As a field long neglected grows wild, and brings forth briers and thorns:
so youth neglected brings forth vices and vanities. Chrysostom. hom. 5. in.
Math.

As we do not set a mad or a drunken keeper over our horses and Asses: so we
should not set an asse-headed schoolemaister, or a vicious Tutor over our
Children. Idem hom. 60.

As a vessel does keep the taste of the first liquour, that it was seasoned
with: so do children taste of their first education. Horati.

The Greek history reports that Alexander, that most potent king, and
conqueror of the world, could not leave those vices, which he had in his
tender years learned of his master Leonida: so whatsoever we are infected
withal in youth, we cannot relinquish in age. Hieronimus epist. ad Laetam, de
institutione filiae.

As water does follow thy finger, guiding it whither thou please: so tender
age is flexible to any thing, and is easily drawn whither soever thou leadest
it. Idem epist. ad Gaudentium de pacatulae educat.

Parents.
AS a Scorpion is not then only supposed to have a sting, when he smites, but
is always to be taken heed of: so they that are propagated of wicked
parents, although they do not presently run into mischief, yet they have
poison. Plut.

As fishes bredde and nourished in the sea, have no taste of the saltness of
the sea: so some being bred and brought up among Barbarians, are far off from
all Barbarousnesse.

As the younger Storkes do sustain and relieve their aged and decrepit dammes:
so should children provide for, and succor their aged and decayed parents.
Philo. lib. de Decalogo.

As the Eagle, (being the vnnaturallist bird to her young ones, that flies in
the air,) casts one of her two young ones out of the neast, and nourishes
the other: so many unnatural parents, especially the female sex, makes
especially much of some one child, and neglects all the rest; the eldest
has all the lands, and the other become beggars. Basilius Homil. 8. exameron.

Birds that have griping tallents do beat their young ones, when they are
fledgd, and cast them out of their neastes: so many churlish and filthy minded
parents, then especially show their scuruines and unnatural dealing to their
children, when they grow to pregnancy and maturity. Isidorus Clarius orat. 57.
tom. 1.

The Crow is commended for the love to her young birds, because she waits
upon them when they begin first to fly, and seeks food for them: so those
parents are to be praised, who continue their kindness to their children, not
only in childhood, but also in further years, ibid.

As the Emperor Octanianus taught his sons feats of war, and his daughters
the Art of clothing, that they might get their living, if any adversity
happened: so should parents do now a days, and then so many gentlemen's
children should not come to the gallows. Policrates libro 6. Cap. 4.

Ely the Priest brought the curse of God upon himself, and upon his children,
because he did not correct them: so do many parents now adays.

Aulus punished his son with death because he held friendship with Catiline
his enemy: so should Christian parents punish their children for keeping ill
company, although not so severely. Augustine. lib. 5. de ciui. Dei. cap. 18.

Children.
AS Iron and steel do excel other things in hardness, but are exceeded of the
Adamant: so the love toward children is a mighty and a powerful thing, but the
love toward God does excel it.

As the sap and moisture does ascend from the root to the plant, but the
plant does not return it again to the root but to fruit and seed: so the
love of parents does ascend from them to their children, but it does not return
again from the children to the parents. Chrysostom. hom. 1. ex varijs in Mathaeum
locis and homil. 32. operis imperf.

As children resemble their ancestors in the shape of body, and disposition of
mind, in habit, gesture, advice, and action: so it is probable, that in the
seed of Princes there is a certain hability engendered beseeming a Prince.
Philo, de legatione ad Caium.

As it is the rule of nature, that every man should be borne having two eyes
and five fingers, yet sometimes that the works of God might be manifested, some
have six fingers: so man seldom erreth beyond the law of nature, that the
child is borne unlike his parents. Chrysostom. Homil. 45. in Math.

As a Scorpion is not only to be thought then to have a sting, when he
smites, but is always to be taken heed of: so those children that descend
from wicked parents although they do not offend, yet they have poison.
Plutarchus in Moral.

As the soft wax receives whatsoever print is in the seal, and shows no
other impression: so the tender babe being sealed with his fathers gifts,
represents his image most lively.

Wheat thrown into a strange ground, turns to a contrary grain; the vine
translated into another soil cha^geth his kind; a slip pulled from the stalk
withers: so a young child as it were slipped from the paps of his mother,
and put out to nursing, either changes his nature, or alters his disposition.

A new vessel, will long time savor of that licour, that is first powered
into it: so the Infant will ever smell of the nurses manners having tasted of
her milk.

As the moisture and sap of the earth does change the nature of that Tree or
plant that it nourishes: so the wit and discretion of a child is altered and
changed by the milk of the Nurse.

As the parts of a child, as soon as it is borne, are framed and fashioned of
the Midwife, that in all points it may be straight and comely: so the manners
of the child at the first are to be looked unto, that nothing discommend the
mind, that no crooked behauior or indecent demeanor be found in the man.

As the stecle is imprinted in the soft wax: so learning is engraven in the
mind of a young impe.

Cockering.
APes almost strangle their whelps with embracing: so many parents by too much
cockering their children do utterly spoil them. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 54.

The young Cuckoo, although a bastard, yet it deuoureth the legitimate young
ones, with their dam: so some children brought up with too much cockering and
love, do subvert their parents. Plinius libro 10. cap. 9.

The herb Fenegreeke, the worse it is handled, the better it prospers: so
some children the hardlier they are dealt with, the better men they prove, and
some again the more they are made of, the worset they are.

As unbridled Colts do cast their riders: so cockered Cockneys do subvert their
fathers houses, and consume their patrimonies.

Youth.
EVen as out of a Vessel, first that comes forth, which is the purest, but
that which is troubled and muddie sinketh to the bottom: so in the age of our
life, that which is the best, is the first. seneca Epist. 109.

As it is an argument that that new wine, will not last long good, which at the
first is too fine and clear: so it is a sign of future debility, if the
iointes of the body be too soon knit, and the limbs at the first appear
beautiful. Lodouicus Granatensis in lib. de Deuotione.

As that wine which pleases in the tunnell, will not well carry age, but that
which is hard and smart at the first, afterward contenteth very well: so
youth soon ripe soon rotten, but that which is harder and of less pregnancy
at the beginning, afterward comes to maturity and fruitful ripeness.
Seneca.

As in a soft and gentle molde, any print or form we like, may easily be
effected. even so in the first estate of green and delicate youth.

As a field untilled, does not only remain unfruitful, but also does bring
forth many weeds: so youth capable of reason, except it be exercised in honest
precepts, does not only not become good, but runs into many vices. Plut.

As Countries and Cities leave them that sail in the sea: so childhood first
slippeth away, then youth, and then old age. Seneca epist. 109.

As no man perceives the coming of Storkes, but that they are come; neither
knows any man of their departure, but when they are gone; because they do
both privily in the night: so no man understands that youth departs, but
that it is departed, nor perceives that oldage is coming, but when it is
come. Plinius libro 10. cap. 23.

As the parting of ways does but a little differ at the first, but the further
that their parting extendes, the distance is more and more increased, so that
their differences are very spatiously opposed: so in youth a little progress
of years does make a great difference, Synesius de prouidentia, lib. 1.

Ezechias mourned and was disquieted, because he was to die being young. For
as unripe apples are pulled from the tree by force, but being ripe and come to
age, they fall of their own accord: so young men are hardly persuaded to leave
this life, and die as it were unwillingly, but old men depart more quietly
and peaceably. Hector Pintus in Cap. 38. Esayae.

As the finest buds are soonest nipt with frostes; and the sweetest flowers
sorest eaten with Cankers: so the ripest and youngest wits are soonest
ouergrowne with follies.

As the old Fox is more subtle then the young Cub; the Bucke more skillful
to choose his food then the young fawnes: so men of age fear, and foresee that
which youth leapeth at with repentance.

As the minerals of Aetna stooue fire; and as the leaves in Parthia burn with
the sun: so young years are incident to the heat of love, and affection will
burst into amorous and youthful parties.

As the nettle will have his sting: so youth will have his swing.

As the Juniper is sour when it is a twig, and sweet when it is a Tree: so
youth in time leaves his wanton ways, and directs his days after a more
moderat course.

As a seal is easily imprinted in soft wax, but if it grow hard, it is don
more difficultlie: so the wits of youth and children easily receive any
discipline, but if they be hardened by age, the impression is the harder.
Plutarke,

As they that have been kept in bonds, do wander more licenciouslie, then
they that never came in fetters: so does youth, when it is freed and loosed
from the government of a master. Plutarch in Moralibus.

As mortar and clay, while they are moist, do follow the hand of the fashioner
for any form: so tender and young minds are fit to receive any erudition and
discipline. Erasmus in similibus.

A yo^g vine does yield greater abou^da^ce of wine, but yt which is elder does
yield better wine: so young men speak more things, but old men speak more
profitable things, and more to the purpose ibidem.

Peaches are dearly sold, because they do not last above three days: so
youth is to be highly prized, because it soon fades ibidem.

There is a country in India called Pandorum, the people whereof in their youth
have white heads, but in their old age black: so some are very sober and
modest, when they are young, but growing further in years, do wax childish,
and wholly bequeath themselue^ ^o vanity and villainy, according to that verse:

Angelicus iuvenis senibus satanizat in annis. As the Estriche digesteth hard
Iron to preserve his health; as the soldiour lies in his harness to atchieue
conquest; and as the sick patient swalloweth bitter Pills to be eased of his
grief: so youth should endure sharp storms to find relief.

As in the fair Summer we repair all things necessary for the cold
Winter: so good manners in youth, and lawful exercises, be as it were victuals
and nourishments for age.

As the Cipres tree, the more it is watered the more it withers, and the
oftener it is lopped, the sooner it dies: so unbridled youth, the more it is by
grave advise counseled, or due correction controuled, the sooner it falls to
confusion, hating all reason t^^t would bring it from folly, as the tree does
all remedies that should make it fertile. John Lily.

As a horse is not to carry his own bridle: so youth is not to rule himself in
his own conceits.

Virtue.
AS in a Meddowe full of odoriferous flowers, it is a difficult thing to gather
the fairest and sweetest: so it is a hard thing to find out which of the
virtues is most excellent, that the palm and victory may be given unto it.
Greg. Nazianz. orat. de paupertate fouenda.

As the end of husbandry is the gathering of fruit, the end of building is
the inhabiting of the house, the end of sailing is riches, and the end of
contending is a crown: so the end of virtue is, that thou may be called the
servant of God, and be so in deed Gregorius Nycenus in Mystica Mosaycae vitae
enarratione.

As pleasure is found in Tauernes, in Cooks shops, in Bathes, and amongst
wicked men: so virtue is found in Temples, in Universities, in studies, and
among good men. Seneca de beata vita.

As the goodness of an horse does not co^sistin golden bridles, in costly
trappings, or in a velvet saddle, but in the swiftness of his running, the
strength of his legs, and the firmness of his pace: so the virtue of the
mind does not consist in riches, in the health of the body, in humane
estimation, or in liberty, for these things may be taken away; but in a
right knowledge of God, and an upright living among men. Chrysostom. hom. quod
nemo laediturnisi a seipso.

As it happens in trees, if one take a^ way the fruit with the leaves, and
cut off all the branches, the root still remaining sound, the tree eftsoons
flourishes with greater beauty: so if the root of virtue remain sound,
although riches be taken away, and the body putrify, yet all things return
with greater plenty, as we may see in Job. Idem hom. 4. ad popul. Antioch.

If you tread a precious stone in the dirt it shows the beauty more
perspicuously: so the virtue of the Saints, whethersoeuer it be thrown, it
still appears more beautiful, whether it be in servitude, in prison, or in
prosperity. Idem hom. 63. in Genesin.

As an odoriferous ointment does not keep his fragrancie shut up within it
self, but does send it forth, and sweeten those places near unto it: so
generous and excellent men do not hide their virtues within themselves, but do
both help others, and make them better. Idem. hom. 2. in 1. ad
Thessalonicenses.

The bark of a tree is sour and bitter, but the fruit is sweet and pleasant:
so virtue is bitter, but it brings forth most sweet and delicate fruit: Idem
hom. 30. in 1. Timoth.

As in a Lute melody is not made by the touch of one string, but all are to be
fingered: so all virtues are to be observed and practiced. Idem sermon de
vitijs and virtutibus.

As there is no victory without concertation: so there is no virtue without an
enemy. Lactantius de opificio dei cap. 20.

As in untilled fields, before we sow, we first cleanse them of thorns,
brambles, and briers: so vices are first to be purged out of our souls, before
we sow virtues in them, whence the fruits of immortality may spring. idem lib.
acephalo.

As chains be linked one within another: so be virtues; prayer depends of
love, love of joy, joy of gentleness, gentleness of humility, humility of
obedience, obedience of hope, hope of faith, faith of hearing, and hearing of
simplicity. And as virtues be chained together, so also be vices; hatred
dependes of anger, anger of pride, pride of vain glory, vain glory of
infidelity, infidelity of hardness of heart, hardness of heart of negligence,
negligence of slothfulnes, slothfulness of idleness, idleness of impatiency,
and impatiency of pleasure. Macarius hom. 40.

As it is in wealth, he that has much would have more: so in virtue, he
that has gained one virtue, will labor to get more, and he that has done one
virtuous deed, will go forward to do more. Chrysostom. orat. quarta aduersus
Iudaeos.

As a Pilot guides his ship by the stern: so a wise man gouernes his actions
by virtue. Idem hom. 26. in Genesin.

As he yt sits upon an high rock, cares not for ye waves of the sea, which he
sees tossed aloft, and converted into froath: so he that has seated his
security and rest upon virtue, is of a quiet and peaceable mind, and laugheth
at the worlds turbulent estate. ibidem.

As the billows of the sea sometimes seem to be carried aloft, and sometimes
to be deeply depressed downwards: so they that contemn virtue, and work
wickedness, sometimes through pride do floate aloft, and sometimes are
thrown down to hell gates. ibidem.

As fire does burn the matter put into it, making light the air adjacent: so
virtue does burn and consume vices, filling the soul full of light. Philo
lib. quis rerum diuinarum haeres.

As after the death of a Musician, or a Grammarian, their Music and Grammar
does perish with the^, but the Idaea of these arts do endure with the world
for ever, according to which the present age, and that to come are to be made
Musicians, and Grammarians: so if the wisdom, temperance, justice, and
fortitude of every one particularly should be taken away, yet in the immortal
nature of this Universe, immortal wisdom and incorruptible virtue is
engraven, according to which both the virtuous men of this age, and of the
future time shall be censured and approved. Idem, in lib. quod Deus sit
immutabilis.

As a seal Ring remains unhurt, although that which it sealed be spoiled and
marred: so although alvertuous impressio^s and Characters be abolished out of
the mind through a wicked life, yet virtue preserves her estate
incorruptible, being not subject to any fate. Idem in lib. quod deterius
potiori insidietur.

As we must not handle Music rudely, nor Grammar vnlearnedlie, nor any other
Art peruerslie: so we must not use wisdom craftilye, nor temperaunce
beastly, nor fortitude rashly, nor piety superstitiouslie, nor any other
virtue illiberallie. ibidem.

As the rising Sun does gilde the whole heavens with his luster: so Virtue
with her beams does illustrate the whole soul of man. Idem in lib. de
plantatione Noe.

They that go on false ground do often fall, but they that travel on sound
ground do make sure footing: so they that suffer themselves to be led by
the external goods of their bodies, do often fall, but they that go unto God
by virtue, their voyage is firm and certain. idem. lib. de Abrahamo.

As the first and chiefest part of a living creature is his head, the second
his breast, the third his belly; and as in the soul the first and chiefest
part is the part rational, the second irascible, and the third concupiscible:
so the first and chiefest of all virtues is wisdom, which is conversant about
the head, and the rational part of the soul; the second is fortitude, which
is conversant about the breast, and about wrath, the second part of the soul;
and the third is temperance, which is occupied about the bellye, and the part
concupiscible, which has the third place in the soul. idem. lib. 1.
allegoriarum legis.

As the enjoying of health does show us the inconveniences of sickness: so vices
do declare unto us what goodness virtue has in it, and darkness does tell
us, what an incomparable good light is. Hieronymus epist. ad Rusticum.

As the missing of one member does deforme the body of man: so the neglecting
of one virtue does show the imperfection of the soul. Diadochus de perfect.
spirit. ca. 24.

As a cloud does not make the Sun to lose his light: so neither does disaster
fortune dim the beauty of Virtue. Tyrius Platonicus sermon 26.

As a Lute does profit others by the sound, but neither hears nor
understands any thing it self: so they that speak of virtue do profit
others, but not living thereafter, do no good unto themselves. Diogenes apud
Laert. lib. 6.

As spices do make clouts and ragged apparel smell sweet, but silk does stink
being greased and infected with sweat: so any kind of life is pleasant, if
virtue be joined unto it, but wickedness does make the glorious and splendent
life irksome and intolerable. Plut. in Moralibus.

As a swift horse does run of his own accord: so he that is inflamed with
the love of virtue, needs not a monitour. ibidem.

As all things are pleasing to a Lover is his love: so in whom we love virtue,
we delight to imitate his gesture, his gate, and look ibidem.

As they that love truly, do love in their beloueds their stuttering and
palenesse, or whatsoever defect: so the Lover and embracer of virtue does not
abhor the banishment of Aristides, nor the poverty of Socrates, nor the
condemnation of Phocion. ibidem.

As of fire and earth, the world is compounded, being necessary elements, as
Plato says, the earth yielding solidity, and the fire giving heat and form:
so great empires are not obtained, except virtue be mingled with fortune, and
one be an help unto an other. ibidem.

As that is no true love, which wantes jealousy: so he loves not virtue
entirely that is not inflamed with the emulation of good deeds done of
others. ibidem.

As a Candle light is obscured by the light of the Sun: so the estimation of
all corporal matters is obscured by the spendour of virtue. Cicero lib. 2.
Offic.

As our bodily eyes are cleared and purged by certain Medicines: so the eyes
of our mind are enlightened by looking upon virtue. Seneca. lib. 2. Epist.
116.

As great Obeliskes are not made without great labor, by reason of their
hugeness, but being once builded, they continue infinite ages: so it is a
hard matter to attain virtue, but being gotten, it never dies. Plin. lib.
36. cap. 29.

The tree Lotos, which the Latins call Faba Graeca, vel Syriaca, has a most
bitter rind, but most sweet fruit: so the first endeavors unto virtue are
most hard, but nothing is more sweet then the fruit. Idem lib. 24. cap. 2.
and lib. 13. cap. 17.

Saffron thriues the better, if it be trodden on, and therefore that springes up
the best, that is set by pathwayes: so virtue exercised in extremities, does
thrive the better. idem lib. 21. cap. 6. and Theoph. lib. 6. cap. 6.

The Palm tree, because it has a plain bark, is hard to be climed into,
but it has most sweet fruit: so virtue has a difficult entrance, but most
pleasant fruit. Erasmus in similibus.

Bees flee to all flowers, yet do hurt none: so Virtue and learning are so
taken from others, that he is never the worse, that does communicate them.
ibidem

As the Arts were not perfected, as soon as they were invented: so neither is
virtue absolute and perfect in us the first day.

Seldom or never a vain of gold and silver is found alone, but there is
another not far off: so there is no virtue solitary, but one is joined to
another.

As lightning does blast all trees besides the Laurel tree, as says Pliny
lib. 2: so a great calamity does take all things away, besides Virtue. For
constant Virtue is a fair beautiful Baytree, always green, not to be
blasted by any lightning, nor to be destroyed by any thunder claps. Hector
Pintus in cap. 17. Ezechiel.

As he is not rich, that can speak of much wealth, but he that possesses it:
so he is not a just man that can reason of virtue, or knows the definition
of it, but he that is endued with it, and exercises it. idem in cap. 20.

As in the stone Opalum the semblance of many precious stones is seen, as the
firinesse of the Carbuncle, the purple of the Amethist, and the greenness of
the Emeralde, and all these shining together after an incredible mixture: so
all virtues are contained in the holy Scriptures, and do shine there after a
wonderful manner.

As there be seven Planets, Luna, Venus, Sol, Mercurius, Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn: so there are seven principal virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity, Prudence,
Justice, Fortitude and Temperance, which virtues Heluuicus Theutonicus
particularly compares unto the seven Planets in his first book de coelo and
elementis. cap. 84.

As there be seven principal metals, Quicksiluer, Brass, Gold, Silver, Tin,
Iron, and Lead: so there be seven chief virtues, vt supra, which the same
Heluuicus particularly co^pareth to these metals, in his second Book de
metallis and lapidibus, cap. 40.

As Garlic has seven medicinable qualities in it: so have the seven
principal virtues, which the same Author sets down in his third book de
vegetabilibus and plantis. cap. 81.

As there be five outward senses, the sight, hearing, smelling, taste, and
touching: so there be five inward virtues, Faith, Obedience, Hope, Charity,
and Humility, which the same writer compares together, in his sixth book, de
homine and eius membris. cap. 77.

As the bones are the strength of the body: so virtues are the strength of the
soul. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 6. de homine and membris eius, cap. 77.

As the bones are bound together by certain ligaments: so all virtues are so
combined and linked together, that one cannot be had without another. ibidem.

As the bones are nourished by the inward marrow: so virtues are nourished by
the divine grace. ibidem.

As the best Wine is in the midst of the barrel: so virtue does consist in a
mean. Idem lib. 9. de artificibus and rebus artificialibus, cap. 82.

It is to no purpose to light a lamp to burn, if oil be not powered in: so it
is to no purpose to teach that virtue is to be embraced, if the way and manner
be not delivered how to attain unto it. Plus tarch.

Even as a ditcher that by chance finds a precious stone, does little
esteem it, because he knows not the price of it: so ignorant infidels, and
profane worldly men, make little reckoning of virtue and virtuous men,
because they neither kn^^^ the dignity of virtue, nor the es^^^ (...) of her
followers. Lodouicus Granat (...) Ducis peccatorum.

The (...) called Sileni, were unpolished without, but curiously and with great
art wrought within: so virtue outwardly seems rough, when inwardly it is
full of beauty. ibidem.

As blood relieueth a distressed heart: so virtue comfort an afflicted soul.
ibidem.

Even as God is a goodness so universal, that in him alone are found all the
perfections of all good: so after a certain manner the same are found in
Virtue. ibidem.

Even as of the conueniencie and proportion of the members and lineaments, and
of the humors of the natural body, a certain beauty arises, which is
acceptable to the eyes of men: so of the order and virtuous frame of the life,
laudablie led and formed, so great a beauty proceeds, that not only it is
most acceptable to the eyes of God and Angels, but it is also beloved of
perverse and froward men. ibidem.

If a noble and beautiful woman, worthy of a Kings bed, should be married
to a foul Collier, it would move all men to compassion, that beheld her: so
much more effectually shall he (...) ^oued, that sees virtues, worth (...)
^od, and divine reward, to be ma^^ vassals to compass the dross and dung of
this world. ibidem.

He that sells precious Pearls, and rich Gemmes, ought very well to know
them, that he be not deceived in the price; and the ouerseer and governor of
a princes house ought to know ye deserts of every one in the house, that he may
dispose of every one according to his dignity, for otherwise he shall commit
many errors, and offer great inequality: so a man that deals with the
worth and value of virtues, is to know the price and dignity of them, that
comparing them between themselves, he may see which is to be preferred before
others, and render and tender to every one her due honor. ibidem.

Even as we make greater account of an heap of Gold, then of Silver; and do
more esteem an eye, then a finger: so also it is meet and requisite that with
greater endeavor and diligence we should apply our selves to the worthier
virtues, and with the lesser to the less worthy, lest we disturb the
spiritual business. Idem lib. 2. Ducis peccatorum.

As in all things as well artificial as natural, there are found some
truel, and some seeming and appearing so, but are not so in deed; and as there
is both true Gold, and that which is false, lawful money, and counterfeite
coin, true Gemmes and false Gemmes: so also among Virtues, some are true, and
some that appear to be so, but are not so in truth. ibidem.

As the foul Toade has a fair stone in his head; the fine Gold is found
in the filthy earth; the sweet Kernel lies in the hard shell: so Virtue is
many times harbored in the heart of him, that most men esteem misshapen.

As the precious stone Sandastra has nothing in outward appearance, but that
which seems black, but being broken, powers forth beams like the Sun:
so Virtue shows but bare to the outward eye, but being pierced with inward
desire, shyneth like Crystal.

Faith.
AS a child that learneth his first elements, ought to believe that his
master teaches him, and not to ask the reason why this Letter is called A,
and that B: so in the mysteries of Faith, we must not ask the reason, how
this may be, and that may be, but we must give credit to the Scriptures.
Lodouicus Granat. in lib. de deuotione.

As he that having never seen glass before, seeing a curious and an excellent
vessel made of it, and set before his eyes, can not be induced to believe
that it was made of a certain kind of straw, and sand, and that only by the
breath of man: so is it in matters of Faith being considered of by the light of
reason. ibidem.

As we cannot imitate nor well understand the Art of Bees in making their
honey combs, and tempering their honey; nor the Art of Spiders in weauing
their Webbes; nor the Art of Silk worms in spinning their Silk: so much
less can we imitate the divine works, or comprehend in our reasonable
understanding the mysteries of Faith. ibidem.

If thou have life, thou have heat: so if thou have a lively Faith, thou have
good works. Nazianzene.

As fire cannot be without heat, nor the Sun without light: so a justifying
Faith cannot be without justifying works.

As a river comes from a fountain: so faith comes from the Lord.

As water makes the earth fruitful: so faith enricheth the soul with good
works.

As the Carbuncle shines in the night, and in darkness casts light unto the
eyes: so faith shines in the darkness of heresy, and in the night of
persecution, neither can it be overcome or extinguished of either.

As there are twelve kinds of a Carbuncle: so there are twelve Articles of our
says. Isidorus.

As a garment touched with the stone Amiathon, does resist fire, and if you
hang it over the fire, it will not burn, but become brighter: so the soul
being endued with Faith, does resist the heat of persecution, and by it
becomes more glorious. Isidorus.

As Quicksiluer is the Element or matter of all metals, according to the
Philosopher: so Faith is the foundation of all virtues.

As the Almond tree flourishes before any other tree: so Faith ought to
flourish before any other virtue.

As we cannot live without the elements: so we cannot attain knowledge without
Faith. Clemens Alexandrinus li. 2. Stromat.

As nothing is delectable unto men without light: so nothing is acceptable unto
God without Faith. Origenes lib in Job.

As a light is not lightened of Oil, but is nourished by Oil: so Faith does
not grow of works, but is nourished by works. Chrysostomus hom. 18. operis
imperfecti.

Hope.
EVen as an Anchor fastened into the earth, keeps the ship safe, which
stays in the midst of the waves, and makes it that it fears not the
billows of the raging sea: so lively Hope being firmly fixed upon the heavenly
promises, preserves the mind of the righteous unremoved in the midst of the
waves of this world, and makes it that it conte^neth and despises all the
storm and tempest of the winds. Lod Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccat.

Even as a son in all his troubles and necessities, which happen unto him,
trusts and affiaunceth his repose in his Father (especially if he be rich
and powerful) that his help and fatherly providence will not at any time
fail him: so should man have this heart of a son to God his father, who
both can and will help his children better then all the fathers in the world.
Idem lib. 2. Ducis peccatorum.

As a ship by the anchor is kept from the violence of tempests: so the soul by
Hope is kept from the rage of temptations, F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 9. de
Artificib. and reb Artif. cap. 70.

As a staff does support a man: so does Hope. ibidem.

As the husbandman sows his land in hope of fruit: so men perform the duties
of Christianity in Hope of heaven. Macar. hom. 14.

As a Merchant takes pains to furrow the vast Ocean in hope of earthly gains:
so a christian strugleth through the waves and billows of this life in hope of
heavenly reward. Basil. in Psalm. 1.

As the hope of a crown and victory makes the discommodities of war
tolerable: so the hope of heaven makes the griefs and turmoyles of this life
portable. Chrysostom. lib. 3. de prouidentia dei.

As an helmet defends the head: so Hope defends the soul. idem homilia
nona in priorem ad Thessalonicenses.

As pillars support and uphold earthly buyldings: so Hope supporteth and
vpholdeth spiritual buildings. Laurentius Iustinianus in ligno vitae, cap. 2.
de spe.

As it did not hurt Rahab to dwell with the people of Jericho, but her faith
kept her safe: so sin does not hurt them that in Faith and Hope do expect
their redeemer. Macarius hom. 31.

As without sustenance the body would sink: so without hope the heart would
burst.

As Abraham begat Isaac: so faith begets hope.

Charity.
AS the Physician hates the disease, yet loves the person of the diseased: so
we must love that in our neighbor, which is good, and made of God, and abhor
that, which man and the devil have made evil. Lod. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis Peccat.

As the members of the same body, albeit having diverse duties and functions,
and differing also in form, do tenderly and mutually love one another, be
cause they live by one, and the self same reasonable soul: so much more ought
faithful Christians to love one another, who are made alive by that divine
spirit, who by how much he is more noble, by so much also he is more powrefull
to knit and unite those together, in whom he dwells. ibidem.

In the Temple there was not any thing, which either was not gold, or that was
not covered with pure gold: so it is not lawful that any thing should be in the
lively temple of our soul, which is not either charity, or ouergilded and
deaurated with charity. Idem. lib. 2. Ducis Peccatorum.

Even as all the life of the body proceeds from the soul: so all the dignity
and worth of external virtues proceed from the internal, but especially from
charity. Ibidem.

As gold excels all other metals: so Charity excels all other virtues,
whether theological or moral. Geminianus lib. 2. de Metallis and lapid. cap.
40.

As in a material building one stone is knit unto another by lime and mortar:
so in the spiritual building one Christian is joined to another by charity.
Chrysostom. hom. 7. operis imperfecti.

As death is the end of sin: so is charity, because he that loves God
cease to sin. Ambrosius lib de Isaac and anima.

As Hearts in swimming over a river, by holding up one another head, do help
one another: so we sailing over the sea of this world by charity should help
one another. August. lib. 83. quaest. 8.

As Ginger is medicinable against the cold causes of the breaste and lunges: so
charity is a medicine against the cold icenes of niggardice and avarice.
Geminianus lib. 3. de vegetabilib. and plant. cap. 5.

As a root is engendered of moisture and celestial heat: so charity grows
from the moisture of devotion, and supernall heat of the holy spirit. Idem. l.
3. de veget. and plant. cap. 9.

As the Cipres tree is very fragrant in savor: so the odor of charity is so
sweet unto God, that without it nothing smells well. Ibidem.

As the same hand is divided in diverse fingers: so the charity of many does
make the^ one, and yet they are severed. Plut.

As fire in all shops is an instrument for all artisans and workmen: so
nothing is well done without charity.

As the sun is of an uniting virtue, for it unites the planets in their
effects: so charity does spiritually unite, and therefore it is called the
bond of perfection, because it perfectly unites the soul to God, and binds
the hearts of the faithful together. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano libro 1. de
caelo and elementis cap. 13.

As the sun is of a reviving nature: so is charity, and does translate from
death to life. ibidem.

As the sun is of an attractiue power, to draw vapors vpwardes: so is charity,
for it heals the heart, and draws up the affections to God. ibidem.

As the sun and the fire are never without heat: so charity is never without
works and well doing. ibidem.

As the sun and the fire are communicatiue of themselves: so also is charity.
ibid.

As fire is most active among the elements: so is charity most active among the
virtues. ibidem.

As a light is not diminished by participation: so charity is not lessened, by
being divided to many, but rather augmented. ibidem.

As heat is the chief agent in generation: so is charity in producing the
works of virtue ibidem.

As heat mollifieth hard metals: so charity softeneth hard hearts. ibidem.

As vessels are made of clay: so by charity the heart of man is made a divine
vessel. ibidem.

As clay mingled with vinegar does stay the bleeding at the nose: so charity
tempered with the vinegar of compunctio^, does restrain the flux of sin.
ibidem.

As the Sardian stone expels fear, procures mirth, makes bold, and
sharpeneth the understanding, as says Dioscorides: so Charity brings joy,
joy expels fear, and by consequent it makes bold and valiant, and
whetteth the understanding to contemplation of heavenly matters. Idem lib. 2.
de Metallis and Lapid. cap. 5.

Prudence.
AS in a living creature the first and cheifest part is the head, the second
the breast, and the third the privy members; and as in the soul the first and
chiefest part is rational, the second irascible, and the third concupiscible:
so prudence is the first, and cheifest virtue, which is conversant about the
head, and the rational part of the soul; the second is fortitude, which does
establish the heart, and is busied about anger; and the third is temperance,
which is occupied about the privy parts, and the faculty concupiscible, which
has the third place in the soul. Philo. Iud. lib. 1. legis allegoriarum.

A Serpent when he is within the danger of man, of all parts of his body,
keeps his head from blows, which he does either by gathering his body into
a circle, or hiding it in an hole, and suffers his other parts to be beaten:
so if any persecution happens unto us, prudence teaches us to hide our
head, which is Christ, that taking ye blows upon us, we may safeguard the
faith received of him by the loss, if need be, of our bodies. Hilar. cano.
10. in Math.

The prudence of the serpent is seen in two things, in safegarding his head,
with yielding his body to strokes; and in his drinking, for when thirst
oppresses him, and he goes to drink, he does not take his poison with him,
but leaves it in his den: so our prudence should be, in time of persecution
and temptation, rather to deliver to the sword and fire all that we have, then
to hazard and endanger our head, that is, to deny Christ; and secondly when we
go to the holy church of God, or to prayers, or to receive the holy mysteries,
that we do not carry with us in our cogitations, maliciousnes, voluptuousnes,
or enmity. Epiphanius haeresi. 37.

As a Captain guides his army, a Pilot his ship, God the world, and the
understanding the soul: so prudence tempereth and governs the felicity of
this present life. Archytas apud Stobaeum sermon. 1.

As a skar does warn us to take heed of a wound: so prudence in the
consideration and memory of passed dangers does make us more wary and
cautelous. Plut. in. Mor.

As the Beuers of Pontus do bite off their privy members, when they are hunted,
because they know, that for them they are pursued: so it is the part of a
prudent man sometimes to cast away yt thing, for which he is endangered. Eras.
in similibus.

Hearts when they feel themselves wounded, do run to the herb Dictamnum,
and presently the arrow falls forth. Bears because their eyes often grow
dim, thrust their heads into the hiues of Bees, that being stung till the
blood follow, the grossenes of the humor may be purged. The Lisard being to
fight with the serpent, places himself not far from a certain herb, and
as often as he perceives himself wounded of the serpent, so often he runs
to that herb, and presently returns to the co^bat as hole as a fish. The Fox
cures himself with the juice of the pine tree. The Torteise having eaten the
flesh of a Viper, auoideth the hurt of poison by eating wild Margerom. The
serpent does cure his sore eyes by feeding on Fennel. The hedgehog makes two
holes in his cave, one toward the North, and the other toward the South, when
the North wind blustereth he shuts his Northren hole, and looks to the
South, and when the South wind blows, he opens his hole toward the North:
so man being prudent and reasonable should see what is good for him, and
foresee things to come. Isidorus Clarius orat. 56. tom. 1.

As he should not take a Lute in his hand, that is ignorant in music: so he
should not take rule and sovereignty upon him, that is not endued with
prudence. Plut.

As the Cyclope having his eye thrust out, stretched out his hands hither and
thither without any certain aim: so a great King or mighty Potentate, who
wantes pendence, sets upon al his affairs with great hurly burly, but with
no judgment. Plut. and Homerus lib. 9. Odys.

As Tin separateth brass and lead from gold and silver: so prudence
distinguishes good from evil, and discerns things profitable from hurtefull.
F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano libro 2. De metallis, and lapidibus. Cap. 40.

Tin defends other metals from the fire: so prudence defends the other
virtues from perishing. Ibidem.

As the smelling discerns good sauors from ill smelles: so prudence
discerns good things from bad. Idem. lib. 6. de bomine, et membris eius cap
61.

As Socrates by the Oracle of Apollo was held the wisest man among the
Heathen: so Solomon by the testimony of God, was the wisest man upon the earth,
so that there has not been the like among the Kings, which were before him,
neither after him came the like. 2. Chron. cap. 1.

Justice.
AS sin is sweet in the beginning, but bitter in the end: so Justice on the
contrary, it seems bitter in the beginning, but is sweeter then honey in the
end. Origenes.

As a judge would not overcome any man, nor have any adversary, but pronouncing
his sentence determines with the honester side: so justice is against no man,
but gives to every man his own. Philo lib. 1. legis allegoriarum.

As fire cannot burn without fuel, by which it is nourished: so the meat and
food of the soul is justice, by which it lives. Lactantius lib. 2. cap. 13.

As he that sits in a strong house, when a storm arises, hears the noyce
of the tempest, and how the trees are tossed of it, but he himself feels not
the blast: so he that sits encircled with justice, when the world is
disturbed, hears of the hurly burlyes and tumultes, but is not touched
himself. Chrysostom. Hom. 48. oper. imperf.

As the mind of a sinner is more and more darkened and dimmed, and is further
and further removed from the light of truth: so he that exercises justice,
has his mind more and more enlightened, and ascends to the knowledge of
greater wisdom. Idem hom. 18. operis imperfecti.

As silver is hard, but yet to be melted: so although justice is severe, yet
it has compassion, and not indignation. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 2. de
metallis et lapidibus cap. 4.

As Aristides and Phocion were the iustest men amongst the Athenians; Bias
among the Prienaeans; Aristophanes among the Messenians; Timoleon among the
Corinthians; Glaucus among the Spartans; Prodicus among the Grecians; Chiron
among the Centaures; Maris among the Laodicians; Ripheus among the Troyans; and
Hermes, Bochyris, and Mycerinus among the Egyptians: so Fabricius, Camillus,
Cato, Titus Manlius, Augustus, Alexander Seuerus, and Vrsus Nolanus were
accounted the iustest men among the Romans.

Fortitude.
AS a stone cutter ought always to have his mallet in his hand, by reason of
the hard matter which he labors in: so he that will either become good, or
continue virtuous, must always have fortitude in a readiness, as a spiritual
mallet to tame and overcome the difficulties, which meet with him in the way
of virtue. Lodou. Granat. lib. de deuotione.

As Hearts have great horns in vain, because they want courage: so it is not
enough to be rich, except thou be valiant. Plut.

As they that walk stroutingly, and Shakerleyan like, are called proud and
haughty persons, whereas they are termed valiant and valorous, that advance
themselves in fight and combatte: so he that reares and liftes up his mind in
adversity, is to be accounted valiant and invincible. Idem.

As an ill chance at dice, is by art and cunning to be turned to the best
advantage: so whatsoever happens in the life disasterously, fortitude and
true valor turns it to the best part, and makes the best use of it. Idem.

As Iron does bruise all other metalles: so fortitude does overcome all kind of
dangers. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 2. de metallis et lapidibus, cap. 40.

If a weight be laid upon the branches of the Palm tree, they do not bend
downwards after the manner of other trees, but of their own accord to strive
and mount aloft against the weight of the burden: so the mind of a valiant
man, by how much it is pressed and held down by adverse fortune, by so much it
becomes more vigorous and valorous. Plin. libro. 16. cap. 43.

As those parts of trees are stronger, that are opposite to the North, then
those that look toward the South or west: so we are more firm and valiant
in those things, in which Fortune has exercised our fortitude.

The Crocodile is terrible against them that fly, but does fly from them that
follow him: so many, if thou yeeldest unto them, rage like Lions, but if thou
valiantly contemnest and withstandest them, they become as fearful as Hares.
Plinius.

As a Lion fears nothing, but a Cock: so a valiant heart, and a magnanimous
spirit fears nothing, but reproach, slander, and disgrace.

As a bearde is a token of heat and natural vigor: so fortitude to resist
sin is a sign of spiritual strength. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano. lib. 6. de
homine et membris eius, cap 29.

As three of the nine valiant worthyes Hector, Alexander Magnus, and Julius
Caesar were Ethnickes; and other three Jews, Joshua, David, and Judas
Machabaeus: so the other three, Carolus Magnus, Godfrey of Bullen, and Arthur
of Britain, were Christians.

As Hercules was the strongest among the heathen: so was Sampson among the
Jews.

As Milo Crotoniata did carry at the games of Olympus a Bull a furlong, and
when he had done slew him with a blow of his fist, and eat him up in one
day: so Bithon was so strong, that as Pausanius testifies in Caelius, he
carried a Bull on his shoulders, for which memorable and prodigious strength,
he had his picture set up at Argos.

Temperance.
AS Justice comes not by avarice and desire of gain: so neither temperance
is obtained by intemperance, nor christian conversation by delicates and
dainties, Clemens Alexand. lib. 2. paed cap. 1.

As intemperance threw Adam out of Paradise: so tempera^ce is a good mean to
cast sin out of the soul. Chrisost. hom. 10. in Math.

As horses are curbed with bridles least they should prove resty iades: so the
body is to be moderated with temperance, least it prove an unruly servant to
the soul. Augustinus Cap 10. De salutaribus documentis.

As it is impossible for a Serpent to put off his old skin, except he glide
through a narrow place: so is it impossible for us to put off our oulde man
with his corruptions, except we enter through the straight gate of abstinence,
fasting and temperaunce. Climacus de discretione, gradu. 26.

As swine cannot wallow in hard dried clay: so Devils cannot tumble and keep
reuell-route in abstemious and temperate souls. ibidem.

As the earth if it be moderately watered does abundantly yield the seed it
received, but if glutted with showers it brings forth thorns and weeds: so
our heart, if it be moderately maintained, it plentifully powers forth graces
received of the holy spirit, but if it be glutted with wine and belly cheer,
it brings forth thornie cogitations, and corrupt weeds. Ibidem. cap. 48.

As a lamp is without oil: so is abstinence, fasting and temperance without
charity Cesarius Arelat. hom. 32.

As gluttony kindles the concupiscence of luxury: so temperance and abstinence
mortifieth the lusts of the body. Isaac presbyter de mundi contemptu.

As the stomach being corrupted with the immoderate eating of sweet meats,
is purged by a bitter potion: so they that have lived riotouslie and
luxuriouslie are never better cured then by a temperate and an austere kind of
life, especially if there be given unto them to drink the bitter wine of the
Lords passion: Guerricus abbas sermon primo de Epiphania.

As the Athenians did never consult of peace, but in mourning apparel, as
Demades said: so moderate living does never enter into our minds, except we
be driven to it by sickness and diseases. Plut. in Moral.

As in a calm the ship is made ready against a tempest: so by slender fare,
and spare diet we are made more fit to avoid surfeit at a large banquet: Ibidem.

Men that are only fat, tall and strong, are like unto the Pillars of
buildings, as Aristotle said. Ibidem.

As from ships whose pumpe is full the burden and load is to be withdrawn: so
from surfeit swollen churles, that carry flesh budgets about them, meat and
drink is to be withdrawn. ibidem.

As Mariners in fair weather do spread their sails, but when they fear a
tempest they draw them in: so the body, when it is in sound health, may feed
more largely, but fearing a disease, it must be dealt withal more warely.
ibidem.

As the Planet Mercury is said to rule over the water: so temperance does rule
over the waters of concupiscence and the fluds of lust. F. Ioannes a S.
Geminiano lib. 1. de caelo et elementis cap. 77.

As Mercury does dispose the child unto wisdom that is borne under his
predominancy: so the moderation as well of meat, as of venery does dispose unto
the atchiuement of prudence. ibidem.

As Mercury does always go after the sun: so temperance makes the flesh to
yield obedience to reason. ibidem.

As Mercury (according to Ptolomy) swaieth rule in Gemini and Virgo, but not in
Piscis: so temperance has dominion over Gemini, that is, over the senses of
the body, which are twofold, as over the two eyes, two ears, etc. and it
reigns in Virgo, because it preserves virginity, but it fails in Piscis,
that is, in them that live in the waters of delicacy. Ibidem.

As Tin (according to Aristotle) is compounded of good quicksiluer, but of
bad sulphur: so temperance is compounded of the moderation and strength of
regular reason, and of the delight and will of the flesh. Idem lib. 2. de
Metallis et Lapid. cap. 36.

As Tin cracketh all other metalles, that it is mixed with: so temperance and
abstinence does pull down pride, and bruseth all the rebellions of the body.
Ibidem.

As that Amethist is good, which is beautified with the mixture of two colors,
purple and violet: so is that temperance profitable, that is adorned with two
virtues, with charity, and humility. Ibidem.

As there are five kinds of the Amethist, as says Isidore: so there are five
principal parts of temperance; abstinence, sobriety, chastity, shamefastnes,
and modesty. Ibid.

As ye Amethist is powerful against dru^kennesse, as says Dioscorides: so is
temperance. ibidem.

As the Amethist makes men vigilant: so does temperance. Ibidem.

As the Amethist is soft and easy to be engraven: so does temperance make a
man capable of every good and beautiful sculpture, of all honest actions and
virtuous demeanors. Ibidem.

As Porcus among ye Indians; Masinissa among ye Numidians; Epaminondas among
the Thebanes; and Lycurgus among the Lacedemonia^s, were renowned for sober and
te^perate men: so Socrates, Plato, and Pericles were famous for te^perance
among ye Athenians, and Julius Caesar among ye Romans; so yt Cato was wont to
say of him, yt he alone came sober to subvert ye common wealth.

Abstinence.
AS a sick man comes to physic: so every one should come to feed on
dainties, that is, not seeking for pleasures in them, but relief of necessity.
Lodon. Granat. lib. de deuotione.

Eue^ as a dead body is preserved by myrrh which is bitter, otherwise it would
putrify and breed worms: so also our flesh is corrupted through delicacy and
effeminacy, and brings forth vices, which otherwise by temperance and
abstinence is kept in the duty of virtue. Ibidem.

As that rain is ye best, yt mildly showreth upon the earth, but a sudden
and a violent rain hurts the meadows and destroys the corn: so that meat
is the best for the body, that is taken temperately and with abstinence, but
gluttony destroys and enfeebleth it. Ibidem.

As full furnished tables breed lothso^e surfets: so mean repasts make healthful
persons

As a fasting man's spetting, is poison unto a serpent: even so abstinence is
the bane of all vices whatsoever.

As they that offer sacrifice, do not taste of it: so certain give liberal
entertainment to others, themselves notwithstanding being very abstinent. Plut.

As worms in childrens bellies are killed by sharp and bitter medicines: so
sin dwelling in our inwardest parts is slain and exstinguished by
abstinence and fasting. Basilius homil. 1 de ieiunio.

As the stone which the Grecians call Amianton, cannot be polluted: so an
abstemious person can hardly be corrupted. Ibidem.

As hunger and thirst do make meat and drink pleasant to the taste: so
abstinence and fasting do season and sweeten all meats and food whatsoever.
Ibidem.

As oil makes the iointes of a wrestler supple: so abstinence and fasting
does ad strength unto him that exercises himself in piety. Idem homil. 2. de
ieiunio.

As water allayeth heat: so abstinence and fasting allayeth lust. Ibidem.

As ingurgitation and gourmandising makes the body heavy and unweildy: so
abstinence and fasting makethe it light and nimble. Ibidem.

As they that keep horses for the race do diet them before they run: so he
that will be fit for the heavenly race, must diet himself by abstinence and
fasting. Ibidem.

As gluttony does bring innumerable evils unto mankind: so abstinence and
fasting does bring innumerable good things both to the soul and body.
Chrysostom. hom. de Iona propheta.

As little ships swiftly sail over the sea, but those that are ouerloaden are
drowned in the waters: so abstinence and fasting makes the mind lighter, that
it can easilier sail over the sea of this life, and lightlier soar up to
heaven, and see that happiness, which God has provided for it. Ibidem

As he that washes himself and afterward tumbleth in the durte, washes
himself in vain: so he that fasteth and abstaineth from sin, and yet
walloweth in sin, his abstinence and fasting is to no purpose. Idem sermon
1. de ieiunio.

As he that recouereth a sick man unto health, commands him to abstain
from those things, that brought his disease: so the Lord after baptism
commended and commanded abstinence and fasting unto us against the sin of
gluttony; for the intemperance of the belly disparadic'd Adam. Idem hom. 10.
in Math.

As physic is many times unprofitable, through the unskillfulness of him that
uses it: so is fasting and abstinence. idem hom. tertia ad pop. Antioch.

As horses are to be restrained with bit and bridle: so our bodies are to be
brougth under and to be kept under by abstinence, fastinges, watchings and
prayers. Augustinus cap 10. de salutaribus documentis.

As oil makes the raging sea calm: so fasting and abstinence extinguisheth
the burning and boiling lusts of the body. Ibidem.

As a lamp is without oil: so is abstinence and fasting without charity.
Caesarius Arelat. hom. 32,

As the body becomes unweildy by gourmandizing: so it becomes weak and
feeble by too much fasting and abstine^ce. Diadochus de perfectione spiritali.
cap. 45.

As Christ by touching the waters of Jordan, sanctified all other waters: so by
his fasting and abstinence he has sanctified our fastinges, and abstinence.
Lodouic. Granaten.

As Apollonius Tyaneus was counted very abstemious among ye Heathen: so
Emericus ye son of Stephen king of Pannonia is for his abstinence registered
among ye christians.

Prayer.
EVen as a traveler after that he has rested himself, and taken meat,
begins to feel ease, is refreshed, and recouereth strength to walk and
travel further, although he has no delight in his meat, nor contenteth his
taste: so also Prayer, which is the spiritual meat of the soul, is the cause
of a new fortitude and a new spirit to walk in ye way of the Lord, albeit
oftentimes it yields no spiritual taste. Lodou. Granat. lib de deuotione.

Even as they yt inhabit the north parts of the world, where the cold is
vehement, do keep within doors, and in hot houses to defend themselves from
the injury and vntemperatenes of the weather; but they that cannot do this,
come often to the fire* and being somewhat warmed do return again to their
labor: so also the servant of God, living in this cold and miserable region of
the world, where charity is waxen key cold, and iniquity does rage and abou^d,
must often repair to the fire of prayer, that he may grow warm. Ibidem.

As Sampson was being without his hair: so is a man without prayer. ibidem.

Even as there is no essential difference between him that speaks, and him
that writes the same thing: so also prayer, which is a confession of the
divine praises, or (that I may speak more properly) a certain petition to God
for some necessary thing: whether this petition be made with inward words, or
with outward, which are the images of internal things, there can be found no
essential difference between this and that. Ibidem.

As the smith knows that his iron is first to be heated, and to be made soft,
before he labor to make a stamp in it: so prayer is to be used to the
softening of the heart, that thereby it may be made ready for the keeping of
the divine law. Ibidem.

As the hill is the way unto the mountain, and the means to ascend unto it:
so prayer is the way, and the ascending to mortification Ibidem.

Even as a diligent and careful traveler that enters into an Inn, to break
his fast, eats, and withal is careful to make an end of the voyage he has
taken in hand, so that although his body be in the Inn, yet his heart and
mind is about his journey: so also the servant of God, when he goes to pray,
let him on the one side enjoy celestial sweetness, and on the other side let
him purpose to bear troubles and molestations for his love, of whom he is so
much made of, and who will not have any one to eat his bread, but in the
sweat of his face. ibidem.

As the children of this world besides their daily repast, have their
extraordinary feasts and bankets, in which they are wont to exceed the manner
of other refections: so it is also behoouefull, that the righteous besides
their daily prayer, have their feasts and spiritual bankets, in which their
souls may feed, not measurablie (as at other times) but may be filled and
stuffed with the divine sweetness, and with the plenty of Gods house, ibidem.

As the body is dead, and waxes quickly filthy without the soul: so the
soul without prayer is dead, miserable, and very unsavory. Chrysostomus lib.
1. de orando Deum.

As a City, which is not compassed and fenced with walls, easily comes into
the subjection of enemies: so the devil easily brings that soul under his
dominion, which is not fenced and guarded with prayer. Idem lib. 2. de oratione.

As trees that have taken deep rooting, cannot be pulled up: so the fervent
prayers of the faithful cannot be beaten back, till they have ascended into
the presence of the highest. Idem. hom. 5. de incomprhensibili natura dei.

As the roaring of a Lion affrighteth the beasts of the Forest: so the prayer
of the righteous profligateth the devils of hell. Idem hom. 53. contra Apost

As the joints of the body are bound together by nerves and sinews: so the
souls of the righteous are established by prayer. Idem lib. 2. de orando Deum.

As water is the life of a fish: so is prayer the life of a Christian. ibidem.

As Gold, precious stones, and Marble do make the houses of Kings: so prayer
does buyld the Temple of Christ, that he may dwell in our hearts. ibidem.

When a King enters into a City, his Nobles and train follow after: so
when prayet enters into a soul, all other virtues follow after ibidem.

As perfume well confected does delight the smell of a man: so the prayer of
the righteous is sweet in the nostrilles of the Lord. Idem hom. 13. operis
imperfecti.

As a Soldier is no body without his armout, nor armor without a Soldier:
so prayer is nothing without fasting, nor fasting without prayer. Ibidem hom.
15.

As there may be something without a smell, but there cannot be a smell
without some thing: so a work without prayer is something, but prayer without
a good work is nothing; and if thou prayest, thou prayest not of faith. Idem
hom. 18.

As fire does scowre off the rust from iron: so prayer does scowre our souls
from the rust of sin. Idem, hom. 42. ad pop. Antioch.

As no medicine can cure a wound, if the iron remain within it: so no prayer
profits his soul, who has deadly hatred festring and rankling in it.
Augustinus de rectitudine Catholicae conuersationis

Plato writes, that the Lacedaemonians were never heard to pray for any thing,
but that which was good and profitable: so a Christian should never pray for
any thing, but that which is good in the eyes of God, and profitable for
himself. Isidorus Clarius, orat. de fructu orandi, tom. 1.

Alms deeds.
AS the Princes of this world, determining a voyage, do send their
furniture, treasure and provision before them, and they themselves follow after:
so we are to divide our goods amongst the poor, that they may prepare an
entrance into life for us. Stella de contemptu mundi.

As water sprinkled upon an hot glowing gad of iron, although it seem to cool
the hot burning iron, yet at the length it causes it to burn the more
vehemently: so the works of mercy, albeit at a blush they seem to make the
soul less fervent, by reason of the sundry businesses, which happen in
exercising them, yet they make it more earnest and vehement in the ways of the
Lord. Lodouicus Granat. lib. de deuotione.

Even as nothing is more natural unto God, then to do well unto all his
creatures: so he that participateth more of the spirit and goodness of God,
he is more ready to do good unto others. ibidem.

As in a treasury, they use to mingle no false money which outwardly has a
little gold, and seems to be good, yet inwardly is a mixture of most base
mettalles: even so, and no otherwise are the works and alms deeds of
Hypocrites, who outwardly will appear just, as if they were no sinners, when
inwardly they have seared and foul deformed consciences. Stella de contemptu
mundi.

As water quenches burning fire: so alms deeds resists sins. Clemens
Alexand. lib. 3. paedagogi, cap. 7.

As seed cast into the earth, brings forth profit to the sower: so bread
cast into the lap of the poor, will in time to come yield thee great
commodity. Basil. hom. in dite scentes.

As corn kept in thy garner is devoured of vermin, but being cast into thy
land, is not only preserved, but increased: so riches kept in thy Chest
under lock and key, do waste and fade, but if thou disperse them into the
bellies of the hungry, they do not only not vanish, but rise to greater
value. Chrysostomus homil. 7. de poenitentia.

As an unfruitful Elm gives moisture to the Vine, that the Vine may bring
forth fruit both for it self, and for the Elm: so let thy substance further
the relief of the poor in this world, that their sanctity may further thee
in the other. Chrysostom. hom. 12. operis imperf.

As he that writes an Epistle to a friend, whilst he writes, sees in his
heart the person of his friend, to whom he writes: so he that gives alms
for Gods sake, sees no man in his heart, but the person of GOD alone, for whom
he gives it. Idem, homil. 13. operis imperfect.

As worldly men by Usury increase their pelf to their damnation: so
spiritual men by alms deeds increase and multiply the love of God toward
them, to their salvation. Chrysostom. hom. 7. in Epist. ad Romans

As no man sorroweth to receive a kingdom, or greeueth to have remission of
his sins: so let no man sorrow to lay out his money upon maintenance for the
poor, because he shall receive great gaynes by it. Idem Homil. 21. in Epist.
ad Romans

As rich men's sons for an ornament do wear Gold Chains about their
necks, as a sign of their greatness and Nobility: so we ought always to
be arrayed in the roabes of bounty, that we may show our selves to be the
sons of him, who is merciful, who causes his Sun to arise both upon the
good and badde. idem Hom. 1. ad Philippen.

As in physical confections one herb is predominant: so in spiritualll
matters, alms deeds are in especial account with God. idem, hom. 9. ad
Hebraeos.

As Judges having received gifts do not suddenly proceed to pronounce sentence,
but endeavor to agree the parties: so the Lord deals with them, whose gifts
are given to the poor. August. ser. 146.

As we are not once to do well, but always: so we are not once to give
alms, but always. Chrysosthm. hom. 1. in Epist: ad Philippen.

A lump of vnmolten Lead put into a vessel full of holes, does rest in one
side of the vessel, but if it be melted with fire, it fills all the holes:
so an heap of money being frozen with the cold of avarice, lies in the chest
profitable to no man, but if it be melted with the fire of divine love, and
powered out, it flows to all parts of the poor, and relieuing the needy, it
fills all the holes and crannies of poverty. Hector Pintus in cap. 5. Ezech.
37.

As the sea is fed by land Rivers, which has no need of them, when as the
land is left dry: so many bestow their largess and bounty upon them that
have no need, and let the needy and distressed perish. idem in cap. 18.

As sheep and oxen are not eaten, except they be dead and dressed: so many
Churles give no alms, but when they are dead and buried. idem in cap. 16.

As mount Oliuet (according to Augustine) was a mountain of ointment and
unction, of fatness and refection, of medicine and cure, by reason of the
abundance of oil there growing: so a merciful man may be fitly resembled to
this mountain, by reason of his alms, which are the oil of mercy and pity.

As that seed is the best, which is white within: so are those alms deeds the
best, which come from a pure intent. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 3. de
vegetabilibus, and Plant. cap. 20.

As one Torch borne before does give more light, then four borne behind: so
one good deed done in life time is more acceptable unto God, then forty after
death. Polancus in Methodo adiuuandi eos, qui moriuntur.

Devotion.
HE that would have Iron always to glow and shine read hot, it is necessary
that he always apply it to the fire, for if he take it from the fire,
forthwith it returns to his natural coldenesse: so the most noble affection
of Devotion so depends of that, that man be continually united unto God by
actual love and contemplation, that if he turn himself but a little from
him, forthwith he slideth back to the bosom of his mother, that is, to the
old disposition, which before he had. Lodouicus Granat. lib. de deuotione.

As a furnace, if it be well heated in the morning, is kept hot all the day
after with a little fire; but if it grow cold again, it requires a great
deal of fire, before it be thoroughly heated again: so Devotion being well
heated by prayer preserues heat a long time, but through dissuetude of prayer
it grows cold, and requires much prayer to heat it thoroughly again. ibidem.

As sweet water standing in an open vessel, having no cover, does forthwith
lose the sweetness and grace of the sent: so the sweet and precious ointment
of Devotion does loose all the virtue and efficacy, when the mouth is loosed and
dissolute, that is, when the tongue does lavish and superabound in too much
talk and prattle. Ibidem.

As fire cannot be kindled nor kept in wet and moist matter: so neither can
Devotion in the delights and pleasures of the body. Ibidem.

As in a harp we are to observe, that the strings be neither stretched too
straight, nor loosened too slack, for then they are either broken, or yield
an untuned and an unpleasant sound: so in the celestial exercise of devotion,
it is meet that the body be neither macerated by too much hunger, nor fatted by
too much plenty, for both of them bring very much hurt to this exercise.
Ibidem.

Even as fire, or any odoriferous or fragrant smell, the more it is covered and
kept close, the more and longer it preserves the sent, and keeps the heat:
so also the love of God and devotion. Ibidem.

As nature is not content with the deaw, that in the night time falls upon ye
earth, but also now and then it raineth, and yt plentifully, not for a week,
but oftentimes longer; for so it is necessary, that the heavens should be now
and then more liberal toward the earth, and should so glut it, that neither
the sun, nor the wind may make it dry: so also our soul besides the common and
daily deaw, ought to have certain peculiar times, in which our eyes may do
none other thing, then shower down most plentiful tears of devotion, by which
our soul may be so filled with ye virtues and juice of the holy ghost, that
al ye tribulations, and al ye winds of this world may not dry it. ibid.

The fear of the Lord.
EVen as a ship is not safe without ballace or lastage, for it is easily
tossed with every wind, now on this side, and now on that, to the great danger
of the ship: so is the soul endangered, which lacks the burden and ballace
of the divine fear, which poyseth the soul, that the winds of worldly
favor, or of divine graces, do not toss and puff it up, and so overthrow
it. Londou. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis Peccatorum.

As Fennel has an opening virtue, as Plato says: so the fear of God opens
the way unto love.

As the needle leads the thread: so fear introduces love. August.

As serpents by the taste of Fennel put off old age: so the fear of God
puts away inueterate sin. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 3 de vegetabilib.
and plant. cap. 77.

As among the kinds of precious stones called Berylli, that is the best, which
is the palest: so among men he is the best that fears the Lord. Idem. lib.
2. de Metallis and lapid. cap. 37.

As the precious stone Beryllus being opposed to the sun beams, does burn
the hand of the holder: so the fear of the Lord being heated with the love of
Christ does burn the hand of the bearer, so that it makes him to labor in his
vocation very ardently. Ibidem.

As Princes have Porters that keep out unruly people from their palaces: so
the souls of ye righteous have, The fear of the Lord, for their porter to
keep sins from them. Idem. lib. 10. de actib. and Morib. Human. cap. 80.

As he that has his body fastened through with a nail, cannot easily do any
thing without grief: so he that has his soul pierced through with the fear
of God, cannot easily commit any filthy offense. Basil. in principium Proverb.

As by a bridle a Horse is held from his rage: so by fear the soul is kept
from sin. Chrysostomus De verbis Isayae, homil. 5.

As an Oak deeply rooted is not ouerthrown by the force of the wind: so a
soul deeply founded in the fear of the Lord is not overwhelmed by the
winds of temptation. Idem Hom. quinquagesima tertia in Joan.

As a beam of the Sun entering into a house by a crannie, does enlighten all
things in the house: so if the fear of the Lord be in the soul, it shows
unto it, all her sins, albeit they be very small. Climacus De discretione
gradu. 26.

Perseverance.
AS it does not profit to have sailed succesfully and prosperously a long
voyage, if at length we make shipwreck in the Haven: so it profits not to
have lived religiously without final perseverance. Lodouic. Granat. lib. 2.
Ducis Peccatorum.

Even as a student in the liberal sciences, if he daily make progress in good
letters, and diligently frequent the Schools, in a very short time comes to
the perfection of the arts he studieth: so on the contrary part, he that often
and much intermitteth and breaks off his study, either very late, or never
becomes learned ide^ lib. de deuot.

As he that has a journey to go, must not sit down in the midst of his way,
and there leave off: so he that trauelleth to heaven, must not only begin to
live honestly, but must continue so til death. Chrysostom. hom. 4. ad Ephesians.

As a Rhetoricia^ does not only begin his oration, but also does end it: so a
christian must begin in virtue, and end in virtue. Idem hom. 24. ad Hebraeos.

As that physic is unprofitable, which does not restore the sick to health:
so that life well lead is to no purpose, which does not so continue to the end.
Ibidem.

As that debtour does not satisfy his creditour that pays part, but he that
paieth all: so he does not please God that gives part of his life unto him,
but he that bequeatheth all. Greg. lib. 22. Moral. cap. 6.

As no man obtains victory, but he that goes through stitch: so no man
attaineth unto glory, but he that continues in vprightnes unto the end.
Ibidem.

As that seed is sown in vain whereof the reaper fills not his hand in
the harvest: so an honest life is ill begun, and to no purpose, except it
persevere unto the end. Caesarius Arelatensis. hom. 25.

As light is necessary for corporal eyes, that they may enjoy their end and
use: so perseverance is necessary for all them, that are predestined and
called to the kingdom of heaven. Laurentius Iustinianus cap. 1. de
perseuerantia.

As the eye is opened in vain without the light: so he runs in vain, that
does not persevere to the end of his life. ibidem.

Hard stones are pierced with soft drops, great Oaks hewne down with many
blows: so the stoniest heart is mollified by continual persuasions, or true
perseverance.

As no beast without a tail was offered unto the Lord: so we cannot offer up
our selves unto God without perseverance. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 10. de
actibus and moribus humanis, cap. 61.

It is said that a Pecocke having lost her tail, is ashamed to show her self
to ame body: so without perseverance no man shall dare to appear before God
in judgment. ibidem.

Piety.
IF you do anoint Cedar and Juniper with with oil, they neither feel
rottenness, nor are subject to worms: so a soul endued with piety from
above, is not subject to the corruption of this world. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 40.

As the precious pearls called Vnious, although they are bred in the sea, yet
have more affinity with heaven, whose face they resemble: so a godly and
generous spirit does more depend of heaven, whence he takes his original,
then of the earth, upon which he lives. Plin. lib. 9, cap. 35.

As the Painter Apelles had wont to complain, when any day passed him, in
which he had not drawn a line: so a godly Christian should grieve, if any day
passes, in which he has not profited in piety.

As Iron and steel do exceed other metals in hardness, but are excelled of
the Adamant: so the love toward our children is powrefull, but our piety to
God does far exceed it.

Goodness.
AS Scarabees and Vultures are offended at oyntmentes; and as the Scythian
swear that he had rather hear the neighing of an horse, then a Musician
sweetly singing: so the best things do not please all men. Plut.

As the Phoenix is never but one alone, which is scarcely credited of any man:
so there is the greatest scarcity of the best things.

As there is but one Phoenix bred in five hundred years: so the increase of
famous and excellent men is very rare. Seneca.

As worms engender sooner in soft and tender wood, then in that which is more
hard and knottie; and as moathes do breed sooner in the fine wool, then in
course flocks: so ambition sooner assaulteth an excellent and rare man in all
kind of vetrue, then another, who is not so virtuous.

As Pindarus writes that King Therons coursers were such as would never be
weary of going: so should we be never weary of well doing.

Humility.
AS the valleys are more abundant and bring forth more fruit then the
mountains do, by reason that being more low, they receive more commodiouslie
all the dew and fatness which falls and descends from the hie hills: even
so it behooves that we be low and humble in our own eyes, if we will, that
God replenish us with his graces, the which can find no place in us, if we
presume any whit of our virtues.

As the Heart does kill all sensible venomous beasts: so humility does kill all
intellectual venomous serpents. Climacus de discretione, gradu. 26.

As a Barrel except it be close hooped, and have no leakes, cannot hold
wine: so the heart except it be defended with humility and chastity, and have
notany leakes for vices, it cannot be the receptable of God. Sanctus Isayus
abbas oratione 12. de vino.

As wine does become naught, except it be kept in Vaultes and Cellars: so all
the labors of youth are vain, except they be preserved with humility. Ibidem.

As we cannot drink out of an earthly fountain, except we bend down our
selves: so we cannot drink of the lively fountain Christ, except we humbly
bend down our selves, for it is written, God resists the proud. Caesarius
hom. 30.

As spices smell sweetest when they are pouned: so when the good things, that
man has in him are, as it were pouned by humility, they are more acceptable
unto God. Peroaldus in summa virtutum.

As ignorance brings forth presumption, and presumption ruin: so knowledge
brings forth humility, and humility grace; it increases light,
perseverance in goodness, blisfull joy in hope, a desire to be perfect, a taste
of wisdom, constancy in faith, love in patience, ioyfulnesse of spirit,
uprightness of mind, zeal of Justice, and a thirsting desire of virtue.
Laurentius Iustinianus De inststutione and regimine praelatorum.

A bough of a tree the fuller of Apples it is, the heavier it is, and the more
laden with fruit it is, the more lowly it hangs: so the wiser a man is, the
more humble he is, and the more he is laden with the fruits of wisdom, the more
submisse and lowly he is; but a proud man like a barren branch mounteth
alofte, not seeking the profit of his soul, but vanity. Hector Pintus in cap.
2. Ezech.

As a rain flood is low in Summer, and as it were creeps on the ground, but
in the Winter and Springtime does flow and abound: so also humility in
prosperity is very small, but in adversity is very great and strong.
Bernardus Iustinianus in vita Laurentij Iustiniani.

As Christ was humble and meek: so must Christians be.

As Abell is commended for innocence; Noah for righteousness; Abraham for
faith: Isaac for matrimonial love; and Jacob for simplicity and painful
labor: so Moses is commended for meekness, the Scripture says of him in the
twelfth of Nombers the third verse: Moses was a very meek man, above all the
men that were upon the earth.

As salt seasoneth all meats: so humility seasoneth all virtues.

As a wild Bull tied to a fig tree becomes tame: so a proud man keeping
company with an humble man becomes more lowly. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano
libro 3. De vegetabilibus and plantis cap. 29.

As Serpents cannot abide the shadow of an Ash tree: so the Devils cannot
abide humility. ibidem.

As the gum of the Tree Bdellium cures both inward and outward impostumes:
so humility heals both the sins of the heart, and the vices of the flesh.
ibidem.

As Cinnamon grows in watery places: so humility grows in those hearts,
that are watered with true wisdom. Ibidem.

As Hysope boiled in wine with dry figs does purge the lunges, and the breast of
all diseases growing of cold causes: so humility mingled with the Wine of
charity, and the sweet Fig of mansuetude does purge and cure the
infla^mations of wrath, and the swellings of pride. ibidem.

As the herb Dill expels windiness: so humility banisheth pride. ibidem.

Patience.
AS much rain wears out the roughest Marble, and with continuance of strokes
the hardest steel is pierced: even so, the greatest patience by extremities
may be perverted, and the kindest heart made cruel by intolerable torturinge.

As he that has an adamantine body is not subject to the wounds of darts:
so he that is armed with patience takes no harm by the wounds of reproaches.
Chrysostomus homil. 2. ad populum Antioch.

As Joseph left his coat in the hand of the harlot, but fled away with a
better coat of Chastity: so also cast thy coat into the hands of the
calumniatour, and fly away with the better covering of righteousness, least
whilst thou chalengest the vesture of thy body, thou loosest the precious
vestiment of thy soul. Idem Homil. 12. operis imperfecti.

As arrows shot forciblie against any hard substance, do rebound back
again, but being sent with a milder flight, enter and stick fast: so we more
exasperate evil speakers by repugning them, when as by patienlie yielding, we
easily appease them, and mitigate their fury. Idem hom. 14. in Joan.

If a rich man be called poor, he laugheth at it, because he knows it to
be false: so if we with patience would smile at injuries done unto us, it
would be a great argument, that we are falsely reprehended. Idem. hom. 48.

As merchants sustain the dangers of the sea, for earthly lucre: so let us
with patience undergo all extremities and all hard measure, that the world
offers unto us, for the kingdom of heaven, and the presence of God. Idem. hom.
76.

As water quenches fire: so patience extinguisheth anger. Ide^. hom. 22. ad
Hebraeos.

A dog biteth the stone yt is cast at him, never respecting him that cast it:
so they that are impatient look always to the second means, and never to
God, that sends tribulations. Dorotheus, de accusatione sui ipsius, doctrina.
7.

As physic repaireth health in bodies: so tribulation begets patience in
souls. Laurentius Iustinianus, in ligno vitae de patientia, cap. 3.

As it is a cruel thing to deny water to him that is thirsty: so it is an
evil thing to pass over in silence the praises of the excellent virtue
patience. Idem. cap. 2.

As David is commended for his holy zeal, and Cornelius for his alms deeds;
so is Job for his patience.

As gold is not diminished in the fire, but made brighter: so a patient man in
adversity is not daunted, but made more glorious. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano
libro. 2. de metallis and lapidibus, cap. 24.

As the stone Chrysopassus hides his brightness in the date, but shows it
in the night: so patience appears not in prosperity, but in adversity.
ibidem.

Obedience.
AS Clay does follow the hand of the fashioner: so should man be obedient to
the will of God. Chrysostom. lib. 1. de prouidentia. and Justinius de recta
confess. sieve de S. and coessentia Trinitatis.

As it is meet that beasts should obey us: so it is requisite, that our reason
should obey God. Procopius in Leuitic.

As Adam by disobedience became subject to death: so our Savior by obedience
subdued death. Thalassius ad Paulinum presbyt.

As the sun, moon, stars, and the sea obey God, so much more should man.
Theodoret. sermon. 3. de graecarum. affect. curat.

As victory is not expected without a captain; and as there is no hope of
arriving at the haven without a Pylot: so without obedience it is impossible,
not to be hazarded in the sea of this life. Laurentius Iustinianus de ligno
vitae, cap. 3. de obedientia.

As the Jews declared their obedience in the shadow: so ought Christians much
more to perform theirs in the substance, seeing that the bright Son of
righteousness has appeared unto them. Chrysostom. hom. 60. in Genesin.

He that bestows his study upon Ischomachus, shall prove a husband man; if
upon Lampides, a Pylot; if upon Charidemus a Captain; if upon Simon, a
skillful rider; if upon Perdices, a tauerner; if upon Crobylus, a cunning
cook; if upon Archilaus, a dauncer; he that studieth Homer shall prove a Poet;
if Pyrrho, a contentious wrangler; if Demosthenes, an orator; if Chrysippus, a
Logitian; and he that is conversant in Plato and Aristotle, shall become a
learned Philosopher: so he that obeys the Lord, and does his will, and
meditateth upon his word, shall be made according to the image of his master,
and shall resemble his sanctity and integrity. Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 7.
Strom.

As servants obey their masters, and wives their husbands, and the Church her
Lord, and the disciples their pastors: so all men ought to be subject to the
higher powers, not only for fear but for conscience. Greg. Nazian. oratione
ad subditos it is more perculsos.

As we all are worthily angry with Adam because he rather obeyed his wife then
God: so we should be angry with our selves, because we rather study to obey and
please our flesh and other creatures, then God. Bernardus ser, 1. de omnibus
sanctis.

As the legs do swiftly and willingly obey the motions of the soul in running
hither and thither: so man should be ready to obey the will of God, in
performing whatsoever he commands. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano li. 6* de
homine, and membris eius. ca. 46.

Repentance.
AS he is counted a mad fool, that having many weighty burdens to be
carried, and many sufficient horses to carry them, yet lays all the burdens
upon one of the weakest and woorst horses, the other being sent empty away: so
is he to be counted a fool much more mad, that imposes the burden of
repentance to be carried of old age, sparing youth and manly age, and
letting them go empty, which are much stronger, and far more fit to
carry then old age; old age being scarce able to support her own
infirmities. Lodouicus Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum.

The repentance of wicked men fearing death, is like that which sailers make,
when they are in danger of shipwreck, they promise to change their lives,
and to embrace virtue in their extremity, but when the storm is ouerpast,
they return to their former vomit, and become worser then they were before,
making no account of their vows and protestations, yea reputing them as
dreams and toys. Idem lib. 2. Ducis. peccat.

As a thunderbolt lighting on a venomous serpent, extinguisheth all the poison,
because it extinguisheth all the natural moisture: so the virtue of repentance
extinguisheth wickedness in sinners, and the poison of sin. F. Ioannes a S.
Geminiano lib. 1. de coelo and elementis, cap. 60.

As snow makes the earth fat, by shutting the pores of the same: so
repentance, albeit it makes the body lean, yet it fatneth the soul, by
restraining the appetites of the flesh ibidem.

As snow covers many foul places: so repentance covers much infamy.
ibidem.

As the sea provoke vomit: so repentance procures abomination of sin.
ibidem.

As the sea brings headache: so repentance brings remorse of conscience.
ibidem.

As the sand does stay the violent rage of the sea, that it cannot pass the
bounds: so repentance does restrain the violence of sin, least man should
transgress the commandments of God. ibidem.

As Aloes is bitter: so is repentance. Idem lib. 3. de vegetabilibus, and
Plant. cap. 56.

As Wormwood drives Mise and Worms from books and clothes: so repentance
drives temptations from the soul, and bitings from the conscience. ibidem.

As Centorie is an herb both bitter and sweere: so is repentance bitter in
meditation of Gods judgments, and sweet in embracing his mercies. ibidem.

Truth.
AS a glass does make no representation of any picture, except it be steeled,
or else vnderlaid with tin, brass, gold, or some such like solid substance,
which may stay the image from gliding through: so the image of truth does not
shine, but in solid and sound souls, that are founded in true virtue.

As the wild beast is taken, after he has been long hunted: so the truth
appears, after it has been discussed by reason, and sought with labor.
Clemens Alex. lib. 1. Strom.

As a Gardener knows how to gather a Rose without pricking his fingers: so a
contemplatour and searcher out of the truth, knows how to find it without
gathering of falshoode with it. Idem lib. 2. Strom.

As all living creatures do breath the same air, but after diverse manners: so
many come unto the truth, but after diverse ways. Idem lib. 6.

There are many ways that cross the kings hie way, whereof some lead to
headlong Rocks, other to swift Rivers, others to the deep sea, therefore he
that is wise will keep the Kings trodden path, which is freed from danger: so
when others speak this and that, we must not depart from the truth, but we
must more exactlie and diligently seek out the knowledge of it idem. Hom. 7.

If any man should see the city of Rome subverted of enemies, and neglects
the defense of it, when he might have defended it, he does seem to have
betrayed it, because he freed it not when he might: so when thou see the
truth impugned and indaungered of wicked men, and may defend it, if thou do
not safe guard it, thou betraiest it. Chrysostom. hom. 25. operis imperfect.

The beauty of Helen so inflamed the gallants of Greece, that for her they a
long time ventured their lives at the siege of Troy, and at last sacked it: so
the holy Martyrs of Christ Jesus have most valiantly, not only ventured
themselves at the siege of Sodom, but laid down their lives for the Truths
sake, which Truth of Christians is incomparably more beautiful, then the Helen
of the Grecians. August. Epist. 9.

As a Partridge is good meat, but it is not eaten raw, because no stomach
can digest it: so truth is a most excellent food, but it is not rawly or
sowrely to be propounded, but roasted, or boiled, and seasoned with the salt of
wisdom; for there is no stomach that will receive the raw and sour truth.
Hector Pintus in cap. 58. Esayae.

As there is but one God: so there is but one truth, which is Christ.

As the purest Emerald shines brightest when it has no Oil: so truth
delights, when it is apparelled worst.

Concord.
AS thou may easily break spear by spear being severed one by one, which
thou can not do being joined together: so those that by variance are parted,
are easily overcome, when as those that hold together cannot be subdued. Plut.

Two or mo voices sounding together, do make better harmony: so whatsoever is
done in a family, let it be done by the consent both of man and wife, but yet
by the dispose and order of the husband, ibidem.

As in a body the best co^stitution is made of the temperature of moisture,
drines, heat and cold: so by the concord of brethren, the stock and progeny
does best flourish idem.

The stone of Tuscia, albeit great, does swim above water, but being broken
in pieces it sinketh to the bottom: so by concord we are supported, but by
discord we go downwards and come to naught. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 106. and
Aristot. de Natura. cap 12.

As the stone of Scyros, being whole, does flote aloft, but being parted does
settle to the bottom: so concord does hold us up, but discord does tumble us
down. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 17.

The Salamander does not come forth but in great showers, in fair weather she
shows not her self: so some only show themselves in time of sedition and
insurrection, when peace is disturbed, but in time of quiet and concord, do lie
as though they were dead.

As the members of a natural body by consent do help one another: so the
members of a politic body by concord do aid one another. Macar. hom. 3.

As no building can long be supported, if the ligame^ts be taken away: so the
church cannot grow to her perfection, except it be bound with the bonds of
peace, charity and concord. Basil.orat. 1. de amore in deum.

As one eye cannot be turned about, with out ye other be also turned; but they
are always turned together one way: so the body and the soul, and the whole
society of the righteous shall have such concord and agreement in heaven, that
they shall will no contrarieties, but shall always have the same will. Lodouicus
Granatensis in suis septem Meditationibus, Meditatione septima.

Decency.
AS one garment does more become a wise man then any other, albeit he hate
none: so it is more seemly to live in this place, then in that. Senec.

The herb Chamaeleon does change the color of the leaves according to the
earth wherein it grows, therefore in one place it is black, in an other
green, in an other blewe, and in an other yellowe, and so in other places of
other colors: so it is meet that a man order the frame of his life according
to the placa, time, and persons, where, when and with whom heliueth.

Hospitality.
THe serpents of Syria have no poison for the people that are bredde in the
country with them, neither do they ever set upon them, but strangers they
sting to the death: so Ilanders are courteous enough to their own countrymen,
but cruel to strangers.

As a Fisher casting his net into the sea, does catch fishes, and sometimes
does draw up gold and precious Margarites: so Lot catching men with his net,
catched also Angels; not knowing of it. Which Saint Paul spoke to this man's
praises, saying; Be not forgetful to lodge strangers; for thereby some have
received Angels into their houses unawares. Chrysostomus concione 2. de Lazaro.

Many godles and profane Actaeons have enough meat and lodging for their
yelping hounds, and bawling curres: so thou who professest godliness and
religion, be at the least as liberal, to thy poor brother, who has the image
of God in him, as well as thou thy self have, and for whom Christ died, as
well as he did for thee. Isidorus Clarius oratione vndecima tom. 1.

As Crows do wait upon, and conduct Storkes from one place to another, and
do fight against their enemies, which I gather, because when the Storkes do
depart out of our Country, there is not any Crow seen with us, and
afterward they return wounded; an open sign of their helpefull aid: so men
being not only reasonable but religious creatures, let them at the least
perform as much one to another. Basilius Hom. 8. exameron.

As he is monstrously malicious, that dammeth up a flowing fountain, or
forbids the Sun-shining, or will not abide that another should light his
candle at his, or that grudgeth to show the hie way to a traveler: so is he
exceeding inhumane, that will not profit another, and may do it without his
own discommoditie.

Liberality.
AS the stone Siphnius does wax hard being heated in oil, otherwise it is
very soft: so some are made worse by largess and beneficence.

Almost it always happens, that that which pleases the smelling,
discontenteth the taste, as the fig is of sweet taste, but of no smell; but the
herb Cotonea is of very fragrant savor, but of a most bitter and sharp
sapour: so thou shall hardly find in one man a fair tongue and a bountiful
heart, an alluring word, and a liberal work.

As that drink does more moysten the belly, and assuage thirst, which is let
down by little and little, then that which is gulled and swilled down
altogether: so that bounty does more restrain the importunate crauer, which
is given by little and little, then that which is bestowed all at once.

The fig tree does not flourish with blossoms and flowers, when it bears the
sweetest fruit: so some are very bountiful, who make no large promises. Plin.
lib. 1. cap. 26.

As the sun does glad and cheer all creatures: so liberality makes all men
merry. Isidorus Clarius oratione 61. tom. primi.

As all men hate a covetous man: so every one loves a liberal man.

As vessels of a like bigness, one of which being full and the other empty,
being beat upon do yield an harmonious sound: so a liberal rich man, and a
needy poor man do make a good consent. Erasmus in similibus.

Silence.
CRanes when they fly out of Cilicia, they carry little stones in their mouths
and so they safely fly over the mountain Taurus, which is full of Eagles,
and this they do in the night, that their noise may not bewraie them: so
silence and taciturnitie is safe every where. Plutarch. in moralib. Plin. lib.
10. cap. 23. Aristot. de natu. lib. 9. cap. 10.

As a skillful Archer presently aims at his mark: so he is wise that
speaks few words, and those to the purposed. Plut.

As mysteries are beheld with silence: so some things are better commended by
silence then by speech. Idem.

When we make trial of a vessel, we power in water before we commit wine
unto it: so sometimes some light matter is to be committed to our friends,
whereby we may try the secrecy of their silence, that if they blabbe it forth,
it may not be greatly material. Idem.

As they that are ouerburdened with wine, cannot keep in their meat: so where
wine abounds, there is neither secrecy nor silence. Seneca.

It is a wonder to see a dumb Grasshopper, because this kind of creature is
full of clatter and noise; and yet it is said, that there is some such in the
field Rhegium: so we do wonder at constancy and silence in a woman, because
this kind is wavering and talkatiue; and yet they say, that there is some women
constant and silent, happy is that man that lights on such an one. Plin. lib.
11. cap. 27.

The Thrush never sings in the company of the nighting ale; Roscius was
always dumb when he dined with Cato: so fools should keep silence, when
wise men talk.

Mediocrity.
A ship in a little river, seems great, but in the sea, it appears but
little: so they that are but mean in one place, seem great else where. Seen.

Too much fruisfulnes does kill some trees: so too high a gale of fortune does
spoil some.

The flow of Nilus being either in defect or excess, does bring famine to the
Egyptians, that is, if it flow above 18. cubits, or be under 12: so both too
much, and too little wealth does hinder a good mind; want does pinch, and
abundance does suffocate good purposes. Plin. lib. 18. c. 18.

As the Birds called Martinets, do either fly, or lie upon the ground,
because they want feet: so some are too vehement in either part, either they
are too busy, or too idle, they have no mean. Plin. lib. 10. cap* 39.

Nightingales do kill themselves with singing: so do many with immoderate
study. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 29.

Wine drunk moderately does help and strengthen both they eyes and sinews,
but too much being taken, hurts both: so by moderate study the life is
adorned and beautified, but too much labor does weaken and destroy it.

Iuie being drunk does hurt the sinews, which being outwardly applied does
profit and comfort them: so if thou wholly give thy self unto Philosophy, it
does hinder and hurt thy religion, but if thou moderately drinkest of it, it
further reth much thine erudition. Plin. lib. 24. cap. 10.

Salt being sparingly sprinkled upon meat, does give a grace unto the taste: so
if thou minglest a little antiquity, or mirth with thy speech, it becomes
more beautiful, but if more then enough, there is nothing more unpleasant.

Gallus a river of Phrygia being moderately drunk of, does cure the diseases
of the body, but being immoderately tasted of brings franticknes of mind: so
if thou moderately tastest of Philosophy, it much profits, but if thou wholly
addictest thy self unto that study, it takes away the health of thy mind,
and affects thee with a fury of vain glory. Plin. lib. 31 cap. 2.

Protogenes that excellent Painter is taxed, because he knew no time to take
his hand from his table: so some writers do offend in immoderate diligence;
who think that they never have mended a thing well enough. Plin. lib. 35. cap.
10.

A vine except it be pruned does wax barren through fruitfulnes and fecundity:
so forward wits are to be restrained from immoderate study, least they consume
themselves.

As a man is to keep the way between fire and water, so that he neither burn,
nor drown himself: so we are neither to decline to the right hand nor to the
left, but to keep a mean. August. Epist. 82.

Chastity.
AS it is better to be in health, then to be sick and discourse of health: so
it is better to be chaste and continent, then filthy and polluted to discourse
and prate of chastity and continency. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 3, stromat.

Many among the Gentiles did abstain from wickedness, either because they could
not obtain their purpose, or because they feared men, or because they sought
after greater pleasures, and so let the present slip: so in the Faith and among
Christians, some are chaste and continent either for ^he promise sake, or for
the fear of God. Ibid. li. 7

As a valiant Champion is known by the good habit of his body: so a good
Christian is discerned by the chastity and continency of his life. Basilius in
regulis fusius disputat. anterrog. 17.

As the images of Satyrs do move laughter; and as sadder pictures do procure
soberer thoughts: so a virgin the image of chastity, and the very shape of the
virtue it self ought to convert our affections to the consideration of God.
Idem. de vera virginitate. 27.

As dogs feed themselves in butchers shambles: so devils feed themselves in
unchaste and incontinent men's souls. Palladius in vita Mosis abbatis.

As the Be is laborious, chaste and continent: so ought virgius to be.
Ambrosius lib. 1. de virginibus.

As the Be does feed upon the honey dew: so a virgin does feed upon the
divine word. Ibidem.

As a flower does soon perish by drought, and wither with the wind: so
chastity in women is soon corrupted, either through want of wedlock
authority, or through the procliuity of age to vice. Hieronimus epist. ad
Saluciam de viduitate seruanda.

As it is not safe to commit a little whyrry to the seas violence: so it is not
safe to commit a virgins chastity to suitors importunity. Idem. epist. ad
Gaudentium de Pacatulae educatione.

As a ship desires the haven: so chastity loves solitarines. Nilus oratione
secunda aduersus vitia.

As incontinency neither eats, drinks, rests, sleeps nor uses venery
pleasurably, by reason of satiety and superfluous ingurgitation: so continency
truly enjoys these, and gives the right use and touch to all pleasures.
Xenophon, lib. 4. de dictis Socratis.

As an ox after he is gelded increases in strength, and is made more tame and
fit for labor, and of a softer pace: so by chastity a man is made more
capable of grace, more ripe unto repentance, fitter for the labor of
obedience, and more grave and modest. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 5. de
animalib. Terrestrib. cap. 17.

Isidore, Cicero, Iuuenal, Phisiologus and Pliny report that the beast called a
Beauer being pursued of hunters for his testicles, which are profitable for
medicine, does bite them out, and leave them for the hunters, and so escapes
and saves himself: so continent and chaste persons do not carnally, but
spiritually castrate themselves for the kingdom of heaven, least they should
be taken by infernal hunters, that is, of devils, by the lusts and pleasures
of the flesh. Ibidem.

As the low shrub Cinnamomum, the rind whereof is that spice we call Cinnamon,
grows among briars and brambles, and among hard rocks, and therefore it is
gathered with great difficulty: so the chastity and continency of the flesh
does not spring of the daintines of delicat life, both do grow out of the
sharpnes of repentance, and out of the austeritie of abstinence. Idem lib. 3.
de vegetabilib. et plant. cap. 11.

As Cinnamon unless it be dried yields nosmell, as says Plynie: so the
flesh except it be dried by abstinence from the moisture of luxury, does not
yield to god the sweet odor of continency. Ibidem.

As the Margarite is engendered of the heavenly dew: so continency is
possessed by the gift of the heavenly grace. Idem. lib. 2. de Metallis et
lapid. cap. 7.

As Margarites are little in quantity, but great in valor: so virgins and
continent persons are little in appearance, by reason of humility, but great in
esteem, by reason of virtuous valor, Ibidem.

As steel is of a purer substance then iron: so are continent persons of a
purer molde then unchaste lollardes. Ibidem.

As steel is more durable and lasting then iron: so a continent man is longer
lived then an incontinent man. Ibidem

S. Martin visiting his dioeses saw a meddow, part of which swine had
miserably rooted up, and part stood untouched, beautified with the flourishing
of many fair flowers; said he, the part rooted up of filthy swine, resembles
the bodies and souls of incontinent persons, but that which stands untouched,
shows the glory of virginity, and continency. Sulpitius in vita S. Martini.

Virginity.
SNow, albeit cold, yet it is melted by the fire: so Virginity does fade and
perish by familiarity and conference with women. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib.
1. de caelo et elementis. cap. 47.

As milky whitenes does grace the celestial circle Galaxia so the pure
whitenes of mind does beautify virginity. Idem. lib. 1. de caelo et
elementis. cap. 83.

As the circle Galaxia does not depart from one place of his orb to an other,
but is moved with the fixed stars: so pure virginity does never depart from
Christ to follow any other love, but is moved with the fixed constancy of
euer-during resolution. ibidem.

As the stone Asterites has light included in it: so virginity has
resplendent graces included in it, idem lib. 2. de Metallis et Lapid. cap. 39.

As the Cedar is delighted in by man, for ye pleasing greennes: so virginity is
acceptaple unto God for the pure and flourishing vnspottednes. Idem. lib. 3. de
vegetabilib. et Plant cap. 80.

As the odor of Cedar does profligate serpents, and recreate men: so the
odor of virginity does drive away devils, and delight Angels, because
virginity is of affinity with angels, as Hierome says. Ibidem.

As the gum of the Cedar tree does keep books from worms and moathes: so
virginity does keep lust from devouring of the body, and concupiscence from
feeding on the soul. Ibidem.

As the fruit of the Cedar tree is of three tastes, sweet in the rind, sour
nere the core, but in the midst of a medley taste between both: so holy virgins
must be sweet and mild in external conversation, but inwardly sour, that
is, fearful and careful, but in the midst, that is, in their body they
must be somewhat temperate, that they be neither weakened by the sowrenesse
of too much austerity, nor grow distolute by the sweetenes of too much
delicacy. ibidem.

As Roses by their virtue heal many languors: so virginity does deliver from
many tribulations, which the married do suffer. Ibidem.

As Violets are cold, watery and odoriferous: so virgins are cold in the
concupiscence of the flesh, watered by the tears of devotion, and odoriferous
in the example of their honesty. Ibidem.

As a violet by the smell does mitigate the heat of the brain, does comfort
the animal spirits, and does provoke sleep: so virginity by her smell does
cool the heat of the flesh, does comfort and recreate the spirit, and does
dispose and prepare unto sleep, that is, unto the quiet of contemplation.
Ibidem.

As the lilly is of a wonderful beauty: so virginity is of a wonderful
purity. Ibidem.

As the lilly being whole and untouched, long continues, and sweetly
smells, but being broken, foiled and rubbed strongly stinketh: so the flesh
of man, whilst it continues untouched and whole by virginity, it smells
sweetly both to God and man, but when the seal of virgenitie and chastity is
broken, and when it is rubbed by the vice of luxury, the^ it yields both a
carnal and spiritual fetour. Ibidem.

As a lilly is beautified with seven white leaves, and seven golden grains
growing within the leaves: so holy virgins have seven virtues of the soul
which resemble the seven leaves, to wit, justice, te^perance, fortitude,
prudence, faith, hope, and charity, and seven gifts of the holy Ghost, which
resemble the seven golden grains, to wit, wisdom, science, understanding,
counsel, courage, piety, and fear. Ibidem.

As a broken lamp is not repaired: so lost virginity is not recovered: Idem
lib. 9. de Artificib. et reb. Artif. cap. 81.

As a lamp does not cast light without oil: so virginity and chastity do
not please without grace and charity. Ibidem.

A wild beasts have fairer skins then tame beasts: so solitary virgins are
more beautiful, then affable. Ibidem.

As the thighs are made of great bones, because they sustain great weight: so
virgins have need of great strength, because (as saint Augustine says) among
all the combats of Christians, there is none more hard, then that of
chastity. Gird (says David Psalm. 44.) thy sword upon thy thigh: for he is
girded with a sword upon his thigh, who does always war against the
temptations of the flesh. Idem, lib. 6. de homine and membris eius. cap. 76.

As Eve a virgin, brought forth sin into the world, which brought destruction
to mankind; as Hugh Broughton writes in his Consent of Scripture: so Mary a
virgin brought forth Christ, who bought salvation to the world.

VVisdome.
AS by the lessening of our shadow, we perceive that we are more in the
light: so by the diminishing of our foolishness, we know that we have
profited in wisdom. Plut.

As he that extremely hungreth and thirsts, can by no means be pulled from
his victuals, till he has satisfied his appetite: so all other things are to
be neglected of him that thirsts after wisdom. idem.

Seed, although it be little, yet being sown in a fit place, comes to
great growth: so wisdom consists in a few words, but increases in the
action. Senec.

Some cannot see things that are very near unto them, but they can well
discern those things that are further off: so some men are more wise in other
men's matters, then in those things that appertain unto themselves.

As great Obeliskes are squared by great labor, and placed by the exceeding
strength and wit of man, but being once placed, they endure infinite ages: so
it is a very hard thing to obtain a fame of virtue and wisdom, but being
once gotten, it never dies.

As the Wine called Maroueum, which Homer remembers, being mixed with twenty
times so much water, yet keeps his own strength: so true wisdom is not
polluted by any filthy pleasures. Plin. li. 24. cap. 4.

If the stars of Castor and Pollux appear severally the one from the other,
it portendeth ill hap; but if they be seen jointly together, it
prognosticateth good luck: so it is requisite that might be not severed from
wisdom, otherwise it is pestilent.

As the Loade-stone by a certain secret and unknown force does draw Iron
unto it: so wisdom by a secret reason does draw the minds of men unto it.
Plin. lib. 35. cap. 10.

The Northren wind is vehement in the beginning, but milder at the end, and
contrarily, the South wind is mild in the beginning, but vehement at the
end: so they that take matters in hand boysterouslie, have no good success,
but they that with wisdom begin, with good success make an end.

As the Sun the more direct it is over us, the lesser is our shadow; but the
more indirect it is, by so much increases the shadow of our bodies: so the
more true wisdom a man has gotten, the less gloriously he thinks of
himself, but the further he is from it, the more he vaunteth of that he would
seem to have.

The root of a Reed being powdered and laid on the stem of fern, does
extract a stalk; and in like manner so does the root of fern being laid on
the stem of a reed: so wisdom does root out of the soul the love of money, and
in like manner the love of money does root out wisdom.

As the Lord granted the office of baptizing to many, but kept the power and
authority to remit sins in baptism one lie to himself, whereupon John
says, He it is that baptizeth with the holy Ghost: so also he gives speech
to many, but wisdom to a few, to whom he will, and after what manner he
pleases. August. de scala Paradisi.

As the sight is conversant about al things visible, and the hearing about all
things audible: so wisdom is conversant about all kind of beings and essences.
Pythagoras apud Stobaeum, ser. de virtutes.

As foolishnes although it has obtained that it desired, yet thinks that it
has never enough: so wisdom is always content with that is present, neither
ever repents it self. Cicero lib. 5. Tusculanar.

As we do not approve the science of Physicians for the art sake, but for ye
health it brings: so wisdom, which is the Art of well living, would not be
desired, if it effected nothing, but now it is desired, because it is as it
were the work-mistresse of all joy and delight. Idem lib, 1. de Finibus.

As the Sun is the eye and soul of nature, by which all things are
discerned, begot, nourished, increased, and cherished: so is wisdom in the
world. Politian. in Lamia.

As gold is the most precious among metals: so is wisdom among the virtues.

Lapidaries do say that the stone Corneolum being hanged about the neck, or
worn on the finger, does help in disputation, does mitigate wrath, and does
stay a flux of blood: so wisdom does profit in disputation to find out the
truth, to repress anger, and to stay our readiness to sin. F. Ioannes a S
Geminiano, lib. 2. de metallis and Lapidibus. cap. 32.

As the herb Amomum is powerful against the stings of Scorpions, does refresh
the eyes, and aslwage the pain of the entrails: so wisdom does profligate
the deceits of heretics, does comfort the eyes of the mind, and in grief
does cheer the sad heart. Idem lib. 3. de vegetabilibus and plantis cap. 71.

As the Box tree has always green leaves: so wisdom has always grateful
and amiable words. ibidem.

As by our taste we relish things below here upon the earth: so by wisdom we
taste those things that are above in heaven. Idem, lib. 6. de homine and eius
membris. cap. 65.

A wise man.
AS the wisest Grammarian may be found a fool in black smiths work, and as
the skilfullest Pylot may be found inexpert in the Art of Medicine: so he
that is wise in those things that appertain unto GOD, may be a fool in
those things, that concern the world. Origenes libr. 10. in Epist. ad Romans
cap. 16.

As sweet odours by their fragrancie do sweeten all the places near unto them:
so a wise man does make all them the better that converse with him. Philo lib.
de somniis.

As the Mulberie tree does first bring forth fruit, and then Bloslomes: so a
wiseman brings forth works before words Peraldus in summa virtutum.

Phidias could not only make Images of Yuorie, but also of Brasle, of Marble,
or if thou had brought unto him any baser matter, he would have made the
best of it that could be made: so a wise man, if it may be, will show his
virtue in riches, if not in riches, in poverty, if he may he will show it in
his Country, if not in his Country, in banishment, whether he be captain
or soldier, sound or sick, or in what estate soever he be in, he will
behave himself commendablie in it. Seneca. Epist. 86.

As an Adamant cannot be broken: so the mind of a wise man can not be daunted
nor enfeebled* Idem, lib. 2* de tranquillitate.

As we see beautiful pictures, when the Gate of the Temple is open: so we see
excellent representations of virtue, when a wise man opens his mouth.
Socrates apud Stobaeum, ser. de virtute.

As they that sail with successful winds, have instruments ready, whereby
they may arm themselves against a storm: so they that are wise in
prosperity, will prepare themselves to bear adversity. Idem apud Stobaeum,
ser. 1. de prudentia.

As Pylots observe the winds, least they be crossed of them: so a wise man does
observe the affections of his mind, least he be overwhelmed of them.
Aristonymus apud Stobaeum, ser. 1. de prudentia.

As true love toward a woman does not desire a witness, but has enough, if
it secretly and alone enjoy her: so a wise man is content with the testimony
of his own conscience Plutarchus in Moral.

As the Planet Mercury departs not from the Sun, albeit it be otherwise a
vaging and wandering Planet: so a wise man may by no means wander and stray
from honesty. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 17.

As the world is every way round and sphericall: so a wise man seeks for
nothing without himself, but is content with himself* Idem. lib. 2. cap. 2.

As the birds Halcyones in the midst of winter do make the sea calm, not
only for themselves, but also for others: so a wise man in the most turbulent
times does not only preserve unto himself the tranquillity of mind, but also
makes others quiet and peaceable. Idem lib. 10. cap. 23.

As nature shows herself no less admirable in making a Gnat, the^ in
forming an Elephant: so a wise man both in great and little matters shows
himself excellent. idem lib. vndecimo, cap. 2.

As snailes go slowly, neither do they touch any thing, nor move themselves
any way, but first they assay it with their horns: so it is meet that a wise
man be consideratiue and discoursiue, and by leisure and advice take matters in
hand, a taste of them being first had. idem. lib. 9. cap. 32.

As certain beasts do tear and rent off those parts of their bodies, for which
they know themselves enda^gered, as the Beuer does, named also of some Castor:
so it is the part of a wise man sometimes to cast away his riches, that he may
save his life. Idem lib. 8. cap. 30. and lib. 36. cap. 16.

As God is the wisest and of greatest understanding, and yet speaks the
least: so a wise man will speak nothing but that which is necessary. Erasmus
in similibus.

The ancient Physiologers said that the Sun was fed with salt water, and
the Moon with fresh: so wise men seek for bitter things, so they be to fit
able; but fools follow those things that are pleasant and delectable. ibidem.

As unwise men do not foresee a tempest, but too late, when they receive harm
by it; but contrarily wise husbandmen do foresee and take heed: so the common
sort of improvident men do learn by woeful experience; but a wise man does
avoid the evil foreseen. As Democritus admonished his brother, reaping his
corn in a very hot gleame, that he should let the rest of his corn stand,
and carry that into his barn he had cut down, because on a sudden he
perceived that it would rain exceeding abundantly. ibidem.

As the stars go a contrary course unto the world: so a wise man goes against
the opinion of all. Seneca.

As neither the world increases, nor the Sun, nor the moon, nor the sea: so
all wise men be alike. Seneca.

As hail makes a great noise upon a tiled house, but does it no harm: so the
insultinges of Fortune cannot hurt a wise man. Seneca.

As a good workman, in not only a workman in one matter alone: so a wise man
does carry himself well in either fortune. Seneca.

As a dwarf is a dwarf, although set on the top of a mountain, but a
Colossus is lofty, albeit placed in a valley: so a wise man is great in what
fortune soever, but a fool is base in the height of prosperity. Seneca.

As a good workman makes a picture of any matter: so a wise man well guides
himself in any fortune. Sen.

As lightning forth with kills any creature besides man: so the storms of
fortune forthwith overthrows unlearned and brutish people, but stirs not a
wise man.

The leaves of the shrub Rhododendros is poison unto cattle, goats and
sheep, but to man they are a remedy against the venim of serpents: so that
which brings destruction unto fools, as adversity or erudition, that a wise
man turns to his good and welfare. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 21.

Friendship.
AS milk does run together, and is coagulated by the rennet: so men are
combined together, and made one by friendship. Plut.

As fire is the sweetest of al condiments, as says Euenus: so friendship does
sweeten every part of the life, if it be mingled with it. Idem.

As they that have a good stomach, and are sound and healthful creatures, do
digest and concoct stones. Iron, serpents, and scorpions, and do turn them
into nourishment; but contrarily those that be weak and vnhealthful are
offended with bread and wine: so fools do loose friendship, but wise men
well know how to use emnities aright. Idem.

As brute beasts if they be compelled by force to mingle themselves in
generation with a diverse kind, do not joy in it, but hang down their heads:
so friendship does well fare and unite among those that be like. Idem.

As our eyes, tongues and hands are to be made much of, because we cannot
live without them: so are friends, because no life is vital without them. Dion
de regno orat. 3.

Musk though it be sweet in the smell, is sour in the smacke; the leaf of
the Cedar Tree, though it be fair to be seen, yet the sirrup depriueth
sight: so friendship though it be plighted by shaking the hand, yet many times
it is shaken off by fraud of the heart. John Lily.

A pint of the wine called Maroneum, which Homer so much commends, being
mingled with five quartes of water, yet keeps his old strength and virtue,
not to be qualified by any mixture: where salt grows nothing else can
breed: so where friendship is built, no offense can harbor.

The friendship of many.
AS an unchaste, and unshamefast woman mingling her self with many, has no
certain lover: so is he that hunteth after the friendship of many. Plut. in
Moralibus

As a maid gathering one flower after another in a meadow, is still possessed
with a fresh desire to gather those that are fresher and newer, and does
neglect those she gathered before: so are those that seek after the
friendship of many, being cloied with the friendship of one, they presently
seek for another. Ibidem.

As the first matter is varied after diverse forms, when it has not the proper
form: so is the mind that searches for the friendship of many. ibidem.

The friendship of a few.
AS Briareus feeding fifty bellies with an hundred hands, was no happier then
we, that feed one with two hands: so thou shall reap as much commodity by
the friendship of a few, as by the friendship of many; for the discommoditie
is recompensed, if a few do minister unto thee, thou have to minister but unto
a few. Plutarch.

As it is absurd for a lean man, or a blind man to fear, least he should
become come Briareus with an hundred hands, or Argus with an hundred eyes: so
some do absurdlie fear, least they should have too many friends, when they
have not as yet one true friend. Idem.

Friendship neglected.
EVery Tree cannot be brought to good fruit, nor every wild beast to be tamed,
therefore we are to convert them to as good use as we may: so they that
cannot be brought unto friendship, let us use their hatred unto our own
commodity. Plutarch.

The Storke albeit she go away, yet she always returns to the same neast:
so it is meet that we should not forget our friends although they be severed
in place from us, but we ought always to carry their memory about with us.
Plin. lib. 10. cap. 23.

Friendship broken off.
AS a Diamonde if it chance to be broken with a hammer, does fall into such
small pieces, that they can hardly be discerned with the eyes: so the nearest
and dearest friendship, if it chance to be broken off, is turned into the
greatest grudge and displeasure: and of the firmest leagues, if once they be
broken, do spring the deadliest discords. For lenity being requited with
unkindness does rage above measure. Plin. lib. 37. cap. 4.

As pieces of Crystal can by no means be joined together again: so it is a
most hard thing to reconcile those, who are fallen from firm friendship into
mortal hatred. Plin. libro 17. cap. 3. and libro. 37. Cap. 2.

As those things, which are wont to be glued, if they be dissolved, are easily
glued together again; but if the body be broken, it is hardly set together
again: so among some if friendship be a little wronged, it is easily knit
again, but if it be broken between brethren, it never knitteth again, or if
it knit, it is with a scar. Plutarch.

There is nothing so fast knit as glass, yet once broken, it can never be
joined; nothing fuller of metal then steel, yet ouerheated it will never be
hardened: so friendship is the best pearl, but by disdain thrown into
vinegar, it bursteth rather in pieces, then it will bow to any softness.

It is a salt fish that water cannot make fresh, sweet honey that is not made
bitter with gall, hard gold that is not mollified with fire: so he is a
miraculous friend that is not made an enemy with contempt.

Friendship reconciled.
THe Fir tree does so stick together with glewe, that first the soundest part
of the tree will break, then that which was glewed: so after returning into
favor again the friendship ought to be the firmer, and they should more
firmly cleave together, whom the glue of mutual benevolence has coupled
together, then those whom nature has joined. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 2.

As Tin does soulder together brass being broken in pieces, by reason of the
affinity it has with it: so a friend ought to reconcile friendship broken
off by some unkindness, by applying himself unto his friend. Plut.

The choice and trial of Friends.
AS thou do try money, whether it be counterfeit, before thou have need to
use it: so thy friend is to be tried before thou have need of him. Plutarchus
in Moralibus.

As he is a fool, that buying an horse does not look upon him, but upon his
furniture: so he is a very fool, that choosing a friend does estimate him by
his apparel and wealth. Seneca.

As Zeuxis did leasurely paint that, which should long endure: so that friend
is to be had long in trial, that is long to continue. Plin. lib. 35. cap. 9.
and 10.

As that ship is strongly to be built, which in tempests is to be a refuge
unto us: so that friend is diligently to be tried, whom we are to use at all
assaies. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

Ixion loving Juno, fell into a cloud: so some whilst they seek for true
friendship, do embrace that which is counterfeit and false. ibidem.

As they that by tasting of deadly poison do cast themselves into
destruction: so he that admits of a friend, before he know him, learneth to
his own harm, what he is. Ibidem.

As swallows do build their nests under ye roofs of men's houses, and yet are
not conversant with men, not do trust them: so some have always their friends
in suspicion and jealousy, especially Ilanders. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 24.

As careful husbandmen do first discern by certain marks, whether the
ground be fruitful, and do try it, before they commit their best seed unto
it: so a friend is to be tried before thou committest thy secrets unto him.

As first we make trial of a vessel by water, and afterward power in wine:
so first we must commit some trifling thing unto our friends, that we may
try the faithfulness of their silence, which albeit they tattle abroad, there
is no danger in it. Plutarch.

As the Pyrit stone does not display his fiery nature, except thou rubbest it,
and then it burns thy fingers: so the maliciousnes of certain, who profess
themselves friends is not known, till thou have made sufficient trial of them.

The Camel first troubles the water before he drinks, the Frankensence is
burned before it smell: so friends are to be tried before they be trusted,
least shining like the Carbu^cle as though they had fire, they be found being
touched, to be without fire.

A true Friend.
AS that is not good ground, which brings forth no fruit, except it be
continually watered, but that is good ground, which during both heat and
cold, preserves, nourishes, and cherishes that was committed unto it: so is
he not to be called a friend, who no longer staieth with thee, then thy
prosperity lasts, but he is a true friend, that at al assaies stands with
thee, and in all fortunes stands by thee.

As that Wife is more worthy of commendations, which keeps her fidelity to
her husband, being far removed from him, then she is, that does the same, being
in her husbands sight: so is it among friends.

As a Physician if the matter require it, does sometimes cast into his
co^fections saffron and spikenard, and causes his patient to taste of
toothsome meats: so also a friend does use as the time requires kind
blandishmentes, and comfortable conference. Plutarke.

As that sound is more pleasant, which consists of many voices and those
different, then that which is only one voice: so that friend is more pleasing,
who is so agreeing, that sometimes he does disagree, then he that by flattering
agrees with his friend in all things.

As Painters for a time lay by their works, that coming to reuiew them
again, they may the better judge of them; for assiduity is the cause, why they
discern the less: so if we would rightly judge of our friends, let us
sometimes have them from us, for then we shall judge of them the better; the
reason, why we cannot judge aright of our selves is, because we are always
present with our selves.

The Glaze worm shines most bright in the dark; the pure Frankincense
smells most sweet when it is in the fire; the Damask rose is sweeter in
the still, then on the stalk: so a true friend is better discerned in the
storms of adversity, then in the Sunshine of prosperity.

As it is not the color that commends the good Painter, but a good
countenance; nor the cutting that valueth the Diamond but the virtue: so it is
not the gloss of the tongue that tries a friend, but the faith.

As all flowers that are in one Nosegay, are not of one nature, nor al ringes
that are worn upon one hand, are not of one fashion: so all friends that
associate at bed and board, are not of one disposition. Scipio must have a noble
mind, Laelius an humble spirit: Titus must lust after Sempronia, Gysippus must
leave her: Damon must go take order for his lands, Pythias must tarry behind,
as a pledge for his life.

A cunning archer is not known by his arrow, but by his aim: so a friendly
affection is not known by the tongue, but by the faith.

A living creature has his chiefest strength within him: so a true friend
without ostentation, does then most help, when he concealeth it.

As a physician does cure his patient, he not feeling it: so one true friend
does help another without telling it. Plut.

There is so great concord in music, that it seems to be but one sound, and
one voice: so true friends are but one mind.

Certain apples are bitter-sweete, and in old wine the very smartnes and
tartnes is delightsom: so the memory of dead friends does bite the mind, but not
without pleasure. Seneca.

As honey does pierce and purge exulcerated wounds, otherwise it is sweet and
delectable: so ye liberty of a friend does not bite, but that which is vicious
and corrigible. Plut.

The Physicians Cucurbitae, drawing all the infection in the body into one
place, do purge all the diseases: so the iarres of friends, reaping up all the
hidden malices or suspicions, or follies that lie lurking in the mind, makes
the knot more durable.

Water is praised, for that it sauoreth of nothing, fire for yt it yields to
nothing: so such should be the nature of a true friend, that it should not savor
of any rigor, and such the effect, that it may not be conquered with any
offense.

Methridate must be taken inwardly, not spread in plasters; purgatio^s must be
used like drink, not like bathes: so the counsel of a friend must be fastened
to the mind, not the ear: followed, not praised, employed in good living, not
talked of in good meaning

A fained Friend.
AS ruptures and cramps do then pinch, when the body is molested with any
disease: so false hearted ftiends do fawn upon prosperity, but do afflict them
that be in adversity, and insult over their misfortune. Plut.

The swallow in summer flies unto us, but in the winter flies from us: so an
unfaithful friend is present in prosperity, but altogether absent in adversity.
Plin. lib. 10. cap. 24.

The birds Seleucides are never seen of the inhabitants of the Caspian
mountains, but when they have need of their aid, against the Locusts
devouring the fruit, neither do they know whence they come, or whither they go:
so certain do never appear but when they have need of our help; neither do
they visit their friends, but when some necessity does urge them. Plin. lib.
10. cap. 27.

As thou can not retain hurtful meat without offense, nor cast it up with
grief: so if thou retainest an evil friend, he hurts, neither can thou
cast him off without enmity and tumult, as if thou should cast forth choler.
Plut.

As Creon did nothing help his daughter, but embracing her did perish with her
in the fire: so many not enjoying happy friends, do perish with those that are
unfortunate. idem.

As those that be unskillful in swimming, whilst they would help them that are
in danger of drowning, do drown together with them, and do hurt more, then
they profit: so do those friends that in adversity do only lament and
sorrow with their friends. Idem.

As flies do not remain in those vitling houses, where there is no sauors nor
smells: so the vulgar and popular friends of rich men do tarry no longer then
profit continues. Idem.

Mice do gnaw the meat, and do live under the same roof with men, yet they do
not converse with them: so some friends scarce current, neither do forsake by
reason of commodity, neither do love or repose affiance.

As the fish Scolopidus in the flood Araris, at the waxing of the moon is as
white as the driven snow, and at the waning as black as a burnt coal: so a
fained friend in prosperity is very loving, but in adversity exceeding lowering.

As al coins are not good that have the image of Caesar, nor al good that is
coined, with the kings stamp: so all is not truth that bears the show of
godliness, nor all friends that bear a fair face.

As the Raven which Noah sent forth of the Arc, made no longer reckoning of
him, who had saved her from death, and maintained her in the Arc one hundred
and fifty days, then she stood need of him: so many friends do now
esteem, delight, praise, and often visit thee, because they would supply
some of their present necessities by thee, which being compassed, they are no
longer for thee.

As a fruitful tree is so long cared for, as it brings forth store of fruit,
but when it fails to bring the woonted increase, no man cares for it: so and
no otherwise stands the case with thee, while thou have riches, credit, and
art in prosperity, thou shall be sure to be beloved, honored and visited, but
if thy state impair, and need catch thee by the back, then the world no
longer smiles upon thee, farewell poor forsaken man, no more fruit, no more
friends.

As there is great conformity and union between Gold and Quicksiluer, yea
such and so much, as when the gold is purified in the furnace, the quicksiluer
(being converted into smoke) is sought of the gold in what part soever of the
fire it be, to unite it self therewith, yet notwithstanding all this affection
and friendship, whenever the gold is taken forth of the fire, it forsakes
and leaves the quicksiluer there behind, converted into smoke, and there ends
the kindness: so at what time thou shall enter into the fire of tribulation,
the friendship thou had with many will be turned into smoke, and so shall
thou be left in the furnace of affliction.

As there are many current rivers, which in winter time are full of water, when
as there is no necessity of water, yet in summer following are dried up, when
eueryone stands most in need of water, which dried up rivers help not the
thirsty traveler, but when he comes to drink, and finds none, returns
thence deceived: like to such rivers are fained and cou^terfeit friends, who in
time of prosperity, and when no need is, promise much, but when time of
adversity comes, and that there is manifest necessity to be seen,
performance comes short, all friendship is dried up, and not a drop to be
found.

As the Marigold opens early in the morning, being fresh and fair, but at
night shuttes up again, as half dried and wythered: even so the worlds
friendship soon fayles and withers, the Suns heat perishes the flower,
and afflictions triall' puts down all louc and friendship.

As Ixion prosecuting Juno, fell into a cloud: so many do run into
counterfeit and fained friendship. Plut.

As Choak-weede is an enemy to Ciches and Orobos, as Cockle is hurtful unto
Wheat, as wild Otes is noysom unto Barley, as Henbane is mortal unto
Lentilles, and all these do kill by embracing: so the friendship of some is
more pestilent, then their enmity. Plin lib. 18. cap. 45.

The swallow which in summer creeps under the eues of every house, in winter
leaves nothing but dirt behind her; the Humble Be having sucked honey out of
the fair flower does leave it, and loath it: so a fained friend having got
what commodity he can, leaves his friend in the suds.

The comparison of a friend and a flatterer.
AS Patroclus going to the battle, took all Achilles armor, besides his
spear, which he touched not, by reason of the weight and bigness: so a
flatterer does take upon him all the signs and tokens of a true friend,
besides the liberty of admonishing. Plut.

As a Physician does his endeavor to maintain and increase health: so also
does a friend; but a flatterer deals superficially, and suggesteth that,
which only delights. Idem.

A flatterer is like that schoolmaister, that chideth his scholar for his
style and paper, and never blames the barbarismes and solaecismes he
commits. Idem.

He is like also to an ill orator, answering nothing to the arguments, but
carping at the voice, and the books negligently written. idem.

As if a man seeming a Physician, should cut the hairs and nails of a man
diseased with blaynes, botches and fistulaes: so a flatterer uses liberty in
those things, in which there is no need. Idem.

As a sweet odor smells well, and so also does a medicine; but that is
profitable for nothing, but to delight; this besides the odor has also
greater profit: so also a flatterer is only pleasant, but a friend is
profitable and necessary, Idem.

As a picture has pleasant colors, and Medicines have also acceptable
colors: so a friend does therefore delight, that he may help; but a
flatterer only delights. Idem.

Where the body is swelled and puffed up with corrupt and vicious humors,
there arise botches and impostumes: so what a friend is angry with, loves or
hates, that the flatterer inuerteth to a cross end. idem.

A Medicine applied to a wrong place, does afflict without fruit: so does
admonition being used out of due time. And the same does a friend with grief,
which the flatterer does with pleasure, for both of them do hurt. idem.

Marriage.
AS Chains and Fetters take strength by being linked together: so does the
state of the family by the consent and agreement of man and wife: Plut. in.
Moral.

As the body can do nothing without the soul, neither can the soul be in
quiet, except the body be in health: so between husband and wife all things
are in common. ibidem.

They that bait their fish-hookes with poison, do easily both kill and catch
the fish, but corrupted and naught: so they that compass their husbands, or
wives by forcerie, amorous potions, or poisons of love, shall have them
stupide, dull and unprofitable. ibidem.

As Circe did not enjoy them, whom she had turned into Swine and Lions, but
beyond all had most comfort and love of Ulysses, being in his right form and
shape: so those women that get themselves hushandes by Magic and Witchcraft,
do lead an unpleasant life with them, by reason they are wood and out of
their right minds. ibidem.

Those women that had rather reign and dominere over foolish and sottish
husbands, then obey those that are wise and discreet; do as they, that in a
voyage make choice rather to lead a blind man, then to follow him that sees,
and is skillful in his way. ibidem.

As Pasiphae being the wife of Minos, chose rather the company of a Bull, then
of her husband: so certain lascivious women being married to temperate and
continent men, do divert their minds to the lust of incontinent and
intemperate lechers. ibidem.

As they that cannot mount upon an horse by reason of weakness, do teach him
to bend his knees: so some having married generous and high spirited wives,
endeavor not to make them better, but to bring them under, ibidem.

According to the greatness of the horse we square his furniture: so according
to the dignity of the wife, the government is to be moderated. ibidem.

As moisture does mingle it self in every part: so between the married
there ought to be a general community. ibidem.

As it is called wine, although the greater part of it be water mixed with the
wine: so it is called the house and possessions of the husband, albeit the
wife brought the greater part. ibidem.

As Christ was borne of a Virgin, that he might show that light was risen to
the world from a Virgin: so he wrought his first miracle at a marryage at
Cana in Galile, that he might both honor virginity by his birth, and
marriage by his divine miracles, by which he turned water into wine.
Epiphanius haeresi. 67. contra Hieracitas.

As the Sea ouerswelling his banks: so is man or woman transgressing the
bonds of marriage. Chrysostom. Homil. 1. operis imperfecti.

When thou see a man continually haunting the houses of Physicians and
Chrirurgians, thou may well conjecture, that that man is not well: so when
thou see a man or woman, seeking for a diuource, or to separate themselves,
know for certainty, that he is a lascivious man, and the woman an incontine^t
harlot. idem. hom. 32. operis imperf.

As partners do not thrive well, except they live peaceably together: so
neither does man nor wife, except they lovingly live together. Idem Homil.
26. in 1. Cor.

A righteous man although he desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
yet he takes nourishment, not for a desire to live, but in the duty of
providence, because it is necessary that he live for the good of others: so
it was needful, not lustful, that holy men did link themselves in marryage
with women, for that that meat is unto man, that is marriage unto mankind.
Augustinus de bono coniugali, cap. 16.

As the merit of patience in Peter, who suffered is not greater then in John,
who suffered not: so the merit of continency in John, who was never married,
is not greater, then in Abraham, who begat children. For this man's marriage, and
the others virginity in their several times both served Christ. Ibidem cap. 21.

As a husbandman, after he has committed his seed to ye ground, expects
harvest, neither does cast in more seed: so the mean and moderation of our
concupiscence is limited in the procreation of children. Athenagoras de
resurrections mortuorum.

When we buy houses, horses, and servants, we look that they be strong, sound
and faithful* so when we mary a wife, we should regard that she be religious,
chaste, and modest. Chrysostom. orat. de pulchritudine et vxore tomo 5.

As he that says marriage is naught, dispraiseth virginity: so he that says
virginity is naught, dispaiseth marriage, because in comparison, meliority
takes increase and augmentation from his positive Good Idem. lib. de
virginitate.

As they that will not suffer their servants to eat and drink openly, do
force them to gourmandize privily: so they that will not communicate, their
mirth, sportinges and playings with their wives, cause them to make substitutes
unto their husbands, who may administer these things unto them. Bernardus
Scardaeonius, de pudicitia matrimonij, cap. 1 8.

As chafe is soon set on fire, and soon quenched, except some firmer matter
be put unto it, to nourish it: so the love of married folks kindled only by
beauty, does soon vanish, except it be supported by good conditions, and
nourished with wisdom. Rhodiginus. libro 28. cap. 21.

Geometricians say, that lines and superficies are not moved of themselves, but
together with their substaunces: so it is meet that a Wife have no affection
proper to her self, but that her studies, cares, laughter and whatsoever else
be common with her husband. ibidem.

Kings that be wrastlers cause their subjects to exercise that feate:
Princes that are Musicians incite their people to use instruments: so husbands
that are chaste and godly, cause also their wives to imitate their goodness, as
we commonly say, a good jack, makes a good gill, and this holds e diuerso.

As the pain in the left side procures grief in the right side: so it
behooves a husband to be moved with the commodities or discommodities of his
wife, and so must the wife.

Vessels when they are new glued are dissolved by every occasion, but when
their joints are well knit together, they are scarsely sundred with fire or
sword: 10 the first fellowship of married couples is broken by light trifles,
but if it be well knit, it is far more firm.

As fevers arising of hidden causes, and growing by little and little, are more
fearful and grievous, then those that spring from manifest and urgent causes:
so hidden and concealed enmities do more violate the amity of those that be
married, then those that are expostulated and explaned.

As gall was cast out from the sacrifice of Juno: so the marriage bed should
be without bitterness.

A wife.
AS an Orator does more move his audience by urging the matter to the
purpose, then by his affected exornations: so a chaste Wife does more please
her honest husband by her virtuous demeanor, and religious conversation, then
by garish attire, or finical ornaments. Plut. in Moralibus.

As a Pipers melody is by another sound: so a woman should talk and
answer by her husband. ibidem.

The Moon when it is joined with the Sun, is obscured and hid, but when it
is far from the sun, then it shines: so a froward and peevish wife, pouteth
and puleth in the presence of her husband, but in his absence is as merry as a
Cricket, or Pope John.

As Philosophers honoring a Prince, do make themselves more noble, not the
Prince: so wives submitting themselves to their husbands, obtain praise, but
endeavoring to ouerrule them, they hear ill. Plut in Moral.

As accidents are not moved of themselves, but are moved with their subjects
and substances, as we say in Logic: so a wife must apply her self unto her
hrsband both in earnest and play, in mirth and mourning. ibidem.

When the blustering wind strives to carry away our clokes or garments, we hold
them the faster; but if the Sun cast his hot beams upon us, we put off both
cloak and coat: so if a wife endeavor to reclaim her husband from any
enormitie by railing and cursed speeches, she more provoke him; but if she
entreat him with mild words, and use her pleasingest parts, she works a
great deal more effectually. ibidem.

He that comes near Elephants, must not have a bright shining garment, he
that comes near bulls, must not wear red nor purple, he that travels by
Tygres, must not sound Tymbrels nor bells, for with these things, these beasts
are madded: so a wife must abstain from those things, which she knows will
anger her husband. Ibidem.

As there is no profit of looking glasses set with gold and precious stones,
except they represent right forms: so there is no fruit of rich wife, except
she will dispose her life according to her husbands, and live in unity and
coucord with him. Apud Stob. sermon. 70.

As she is a fool, that dare not wash her face, because she would not have her
husband think she paints it so she is a nigger, that dare not laugh, least her
husband should think she is lascivious. Plut. in Moralibus.

As wine is so sharp, that the same is notwithstanding profitable and pleasant,
not bitter, as aloes: so ought the huswife of a family to be. Ibidem.

They that fear their Vines will make too sharp Wine, must not cut the arms,
but graft next to them Mandrake, which causes the grape to be more pleasant:
so they that fear to have cursed wives, must not with rigor seem to reclaim
them, but speak gentle words in every place by them, which makes them more
quiet.

As a Diamond is not bruised by the hammer, but by blood: so a wife is not won
by force, but by fair means.

As a worm perishes wood: so a wicked wife destroys her husband. Proverb.
5.

As it is irksome living in the wilderness: so it is tedious living with a
wrathful wife. Ibidem.

As it is dangerous to dwell with a Dragon and Lion: so it is perilous to
remain with a malicious wife. Eccle. 25.

As it is wearisome for an old man, to climb up a sandy hill: so it is
irksome for a quiet man to abide with a brawling wife. Eccles. cap. 21.

As storms and whirlewindes ouerwhelme old ruinous ships: so the wicked
endeavors of wives do drown the brittle souls of their husbands. Basilius
hom. de diuite.

As no man knows, where the shoe wringes, but he that wears it; so no man
knows the disposition of a woman but he that has married a wife. Plutarchus in
Moralibus.

As he is unwise, that forsakes the honey, because he is slunge of the Bees: so
that wife is not very wise, that forsakes her husband, because he angreth her.
Ibidem.

As the Aspe does borrow poison of the Viper: so one wicked gossip does borrow
venim of an other, to spit at their husbands. Diogenes apud Maximum sermon. 39.

As birds do tread only for procreation: so should man and wifely together
for procreation of issue. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano l. 4. de natalibus et
volatilibus c. 15

As both the male and female bird do nourish their young ones: so should man
and wife jointly bring up their children. Ibidem.

The storke does always associate himself with his female so long as she
lives: so the husband ought to stick to his wife till death part them. Ibidem.

As storkes hate adulterous treadings: so should man and wife detest adulterous
copulations. Ibidem.

As Cats wax wood being anointed: so some wives are mad, if their husbands
use oyntmentes, either because they suppose they are not healthful, or else
that they affect other women. Plut.

Matrimonial Society.
AS Christ loved the church: so husbands must love their wives. Ephesians. 5.

The Viper being the deadliest of all serpents, desires to engender with the
Sea Lamprey, and by hissing does bring ye Lamprey out of the vast ocean, and so
the Lamprey engendereth with ye poysonfull viper: so a wife must bear with her
husband, though he be rough and cruel, neither for any wrath or fury must
she break the marriage bond. He does strike thee, thou must bear him: he is
thy husband; he is a drunkard, but he is joined by nature unto thee. He is
fierce and implacable, but he is thy member, and the most excellent of all thy
members. But as the Viper does vomit out his poison for the reverence of
engendering: so a husband must put away all fiercenes, roughnes, cruelty, and
bitterness toward his wife for the reverence of union. Basilius hom. 7.
Exameron.

If soldiers agree well together, al things succeed prosperously, but if they
dissent, all runs to ruin: so it is between man and wife. Chrisost. hom. 20.
ad Ephesians.

If a Captain rank his soldiers well together, the enemy cannot make any
inrodes into his camp: so if the husband, the wife, the children and servants
bend al one way, great is the unity and concord of that house. Ibidem.

As thou art thy wives, and she thine: so are thy goods hers, and hers thine.
Ibid.

As when the governors of a ship do disagree, they that are in the ship
with them, do fear shipwreck: so when the man and wife are at variance and
debate, it is likely, that they that dwell with them, shall partake of their
inconveniences. Idem. hom. 56. in Genesin.

whatsoever a king hears devised against his kingdom, he presently thinks
it to be true, his mind is full of suspicion because he loves his kingdom
well, and is jealous over it: so if a husband love his wife well and she him,
whatsoever ill they hear spoken one of the other, they are presently
suspicious and jealous; and albeit it be not fit or worthy to be heard, yet the
zeal and ardent love, that they would have nothing amiss in either of them,
does make the hearing of it, and the suspicion and jealousy of it tolerable
and excusable. Idem, hom. 2. operis imperf.

As no man cutteth off his legs, because they are lame, nor his feet, because
they are distorted, nor his hand because it is withered, because no man hates
his own flesh, but does nourish and cherish it: so no man ought to dislike,
hate, or detest his wife, nor a wife her husband, saying he or she is such and
such an one, because they both partake of one nature, and have tied themselves
together with the indissoluble knot of marriage. Isidorus Clarius oratione
tricesima quinta tomi primi.

Love.
AS the root, which the Physicians commonly call Rubarbe, does by a certain
peculiar virtue purge choler, albeit by nature it be choleric: so many times
it comes to pass, that one love does drive out on another, as one nail does
expel another, or anger puts away anger, and grief, greef.

As the fish Echeneis, of some called Remora, albeit but little, yet stays a
ship under sail: so now and then a fair maid, although but of small
strength, stays a man hasting to study, or posting to war, and detaineth
him with her.

As the brightness of the Sun does both heat and shine upon the face of the
beholder: so true love does heat the mind by desire, and shine in the face by
example. Idiota de contemplatione amoris diuini.

Tears fall from the eyes upon the breast: so true love rises from the
understanding, and falls into the heart. ibidem.

As envy consumes both body and soul: so does love.

As fire laid by wax does easily melt it: so the fire of love does easily
dissolve arrogancy. Chrysostomus cap. 5. ad Galat.

As fire is not felt without burning: so love is not touched without piercing.
Basil. de vera virginitate.

As poison mixed with sweet wine at the first is pleasant to the drinker, but
afterward it deadly payneth: so they that bestow their Love upon fair and
beautiful Hariottes, at the first feel pleasure, but afterward dolor,
sorrow and bitterness do follow. Diogenes apud Laertium lib. 6.

As the Sun has many beams: so love has many passions.

As the Sunbeams do pierce deeply: so love does pierce deadly.

As the dropsy comes of abundance of moisture: so love springs many times
from abundance of lust.

As a lamp is maintained with oil: so love is nourished with idleness.

As two boordes are joined together with glue: so a man and woman are jointly
combined and united together by love.

As a ship does perish without a pilot; as a city is in danger without a
magistrate; as the world is full of darkness without the Sun: so the life of
mankind is not vital without love. Philippus Beroaldus oration. habita in
enarratione Propertij.

As the Diamond is beauteous to the sight, and yet deadly poison to the
stomach; and as the Bacan leaf contains both the Antidote, and the Aconite:
so love (unless only grounded upon virtue) breeds more disparagement to the
credit, then content to the fancy.

The eyes of many lovers are like Salamander stones, that fire at the sight of
every flame; and their hearts are as queasie as the Mineralles of Aetna, that
burn at the heat of the Sun, and are quenched with the puff of every wind.
Green.

As fire without fuel: so is love without lands

As the Cedar tree without fruit; or the corn sown in the sands that
withers for want of moisture: so is love without wealth.

As the Chrisolite is proved in the fire; and the diamond by the Anuill: so
love is tried, not by favor of Fortune, but by the adversity of Time.

As the fairest blossoms, are soonest nipt with frost; and the best fruit
soonest touched with Caterpillars: so the ripest wits are most apt to be
overthrown by love.

As the Heban blossoms open with the dew, and shut with the Sun: so lovers
in presence of their mistres have their tongues tied and their eyes open,
pleading with the one, and being silent with the other.

As men allure Doves by the beauty of the house; and reclaim Hawks by the
fairness of the lure: so love joined with virtue is able to recall the most
straggling Aeneas to make sails again to Carthage.

The rattling thunderbolt has but his clap, the lightning but his flash: so hot
love begun in a moment, ends in a minute.

The dry touchwoode is kindled with lime; the greatest mushrumpe grows in
one night, the fire quickly burns the flax: so love easily enters into
the sharp wit without resistance, and is harbored there without repentance.

In battles there ought to be a doubtful sight, and a desperate end; in
pleading, a difficult entrance, and a diffused determination: so in love there
is a life without hope, and a death without fear.

Fire comes out of the hardest flint with the steel, oil out of the driest
Ieate by the fire: so love out of the stoniest heart by faith, by trust, by time.

As the Hop, the poale being never so high, grows to the end; as the dry
Beech kindled at the root, never leaves until it come at the top, and one
drop of poison dispearseth it self into every vein: so affection having
caught hold of the heart, and the sparkles of love kindled in the liver, will
suddenly though secretly, flame up into the head, and spread it self into
every sinew.

New love works like new wine. Or water in a caudron, which when it fecleth
the heat of the fire, it forthwith boileth, swells, and is carried aloft.

As the Hunter plieth his hounds, the Falkner his Hawks, and the fisher his
angle, forgetting the pain through delight of the pastime: so the lover
prosecuteth his love, esteeming all labors and troubles but trifles, in respect
of the inning hope of his amorous harvest.

As the sore called an Oncom or Fellon, beginning at the fingers end, and by
sufferance falling into the joint does hazard a Mahem, or at the leastwise a
Cure: so love beginning at the eye, and by sufferaunce descending to the heart
does threaten life, or at the leastwise Reason: as the one therefore at the
first is to be scalded; so the other is presently to be suppressed, for
without a timely violence, either malady is incurable. William Warner in his
Pans Syrinx.

As fire in what place soever it be, ever works: so our will never stands
idle, neither knows how to live without loving.

As an Apple being well knit together gither and mellowed, is more sweet and
pleasing then when it is green; yet that apple being ouer-ripe and too much
mellowed, becomes wrinkled, sapelesse, and welneere sauourlesse: even such is
the love of men over young and over old, the one sour and sharp, the other
dry and senseless.

As one only light makes an entire and perfect shadow, whereas many lights
being together, confoundes and defaceth it: even so from one only Friend and
loyal lover, true and perfect love is to be expected

As one knows not a Musition, but either by his voice or touching his
instrument: even so he cannot be reputed a perfect lover, except he make it
known by the testimony of the true signs belonging to love.

As without thread, a needle serves to no use: so neither the pleasures of
love, without due prosecution; and though a needle have two, three eyes or
more, by reason whereof it carries as many threeds with it, yet it makes but
one entrance, mary it makes the work the faster: even so, he yt delights to
dally with many, binds himself thereby the more strictly to her he loves in
deed. Leon Baptista Alberto, Florentine, in his Hecatonphila.

As the most constant patience (being too far provoked) conuerteth into
fury: so a wrathful lover is more to be feared, than a savage monster that
has no reason.

As the best wine does make the sharpest Vinegar: so the deepest love turns
to the deadliest hate.

Bauin though it burn bright, is but a blase; scalding water if it stand a
while, turns almost to Ice; Pepper though it be hot in the mouth, is cold
in the mawe: so hot love is soon cold, and that affection that frieth in
words, commonly freezeth in works.

As Jupiter transformed himself into the shape of Amphitrio, to embrace
Alomaena, into the form of a swan to enjoy Lada, into a Bull to beguile Io,
into a shower of gold to win Danae: so Neptune changed himself into an
Heyfer, a Ram, a flood, a Dolphin, only for the love of those he lusted
after. And Apollo converted himself into a shepherd, into a bird, into a
Lion, for the desire he had to heal his disease.

As the first draught of wine does comfort the stomach, the second inflame the
liver, the third fume into the head: so the first sip of love is pleasant,
the second perilous, the third pestilent.

The least spark if it be not quenched will burst into a flame; the least moath
in time eats the thickest cloth; and I have read that in a short space there
was a town in Spain undermined with Conies, in Thessalia with Mowles, with
Frogs in France, in Africa with Flies: so love, which secretly creeps into
the mind, (as the rust does into the iron, and is not perceived) consumes the
body, yea, and confounds the soul. John Lilly.

The little grain of Mustard Seed in time becomes a tree, the slender twigge
grows to a stately greatness, and that which with the hand might easily
have been pulled up, will hardly with the axe be hewn down: so love at the
first may be easily eradicated, which being grown can hardly be razed.

As a sinew being cut, though it be healed, there will always remain a
scarre, or as fine linen stained with black ynke, though it be washed never
so often, will have an iron mowle: so the mind once mangled or maimed with
love, though it be never so well cured with reason, or cooled by wisdom, yet
there will appear a scarre, by the which one may guess the mind has been
pierced, and a blemish, whereby one may judge the heart has been stained.

As they that angle for the Tortois, having once caught him, are driven into
such a lithernesse, that they loose all their spirits being benumbed: so they
that seek to obtain the good will of Ladies, having once a little hold of
their love, are driven into such a trance, that they let go the hold of their
liberty, bewitched like those that view the head of Medusa, or the Viper tied
to the bough of the Beech tree, which keeps him in a dead sleep, though he
begin with a sweet slumber.

New Wine is more pleasant then wholesome, and Grapes gathered before they be
ripe, may set the eyes on lust, but they make the teeth on edge: so love
desired in the bud, not knowing what the blossom will be, may delight the
conceit of the head, but it will destroy the contemplative of the heart.

Apelles was no good painter the first day; he that will sell Lawne, must
learn to fold it: so he that will make love, must first learn to court it.

As between the similitude of manners, there is a friendship in every respect
absolute: so in the composition of the body, there is a certain love engendered
by ones looks, where both the bodies resemble each other, as wouen both in one
loome.

Every flower has his blostom, his savor, his sap: so every desire should
have to feed the eye, to please the wit, to maintain the estate.

Poison will disperse it self into every vein, before it pierce the heart:
so love maimeth every part before it kill the liver.

As by Basil the Scorpion is engendered, and by the means of the same herb
destroyed: so love which by time and fancy is bred in an idle brain, is by
time and fancy banished from the heart.

As the Salamander, which being a long space nourished in the fire, at the
last quenches it: so affection having taken hold of the fancy, and living as
it were in the mind of the lover, in tract of time alters and changes the
heat, and turns it to chillness.

As the Almond tree bears most fruit when it is old: so love has greatest
faith when it grows in age.

The young Vines bring the most wine, but the old the best: so tender love
makes greatest show of blossoms, but tried love brings forth sweetest juice.

As the precious stone Anthracites, being thrown into the fire, looks black
and half dead, but being cast into the water, glistereth like the Sun
beams: so the precious mind of man once put into the flame of love, is as it
were ugly and loses her virtue, but sprinkled with the water of wisdom, and
detestation of such fond delights, it shines like the glorious rays of
Phoebus.

As the best charm for a toothach is to pull out the tooth: so the best
remedy for love, is to wear it out.

Fire is to be quenched in the spark, weeds are to be rooted up in ye bud,
follies in the blossom, green sores are to be dressed roughly least they
fester, tetters to be drawn in the beginning, least they spread, Ringwormes to
be anointed when they first appear, least they compass the whole body: so
the assaults of love are to be beaten back at the first siege, least they
undermine at the second.

Herbs that are the worse for watering, are to be rooted out, trees that are
less fruitful for the lopping, are to be hewn down, Hawks that wax
haggarde by manning, are to be cast off: so fond lovers that increase in their
follies when they be rejected, are to be despised.

The Spaniell that fawneth when he is beaten, will never forsake his master:
so the man that doteth when he is disdained, will never for go his Mistress.

Theseus would not go into the Labyrinth without a thread, that might show
him the way out: so neither any wise man will enter into the crooked corners of
love, unless he knew by what means he might get out.

Hot fire is not only quenched by the clear fountain: so neither is love
only satisfied by the fair face.

He that has sore eyes, must not behold the Candle: so he that would leave
his love, must not fall to remembering of his Lady, the one causes the eye to
smart, the other the heart to bleed.

You shall never beat the fly from the Candle, though she burn; nor the
Quail from the Hemlocke, though it be poison: so neither the lover from the
company of his Lady, though it be perilous.

As the herb Heliotropium, is always inclined to that place where the Sun
shines, and being deprived of the Sun, dies; and as Lunaris herb, as long
as the Moon waxes, brings forth leaves, and in the wayning shakes them
off: so a lover whiles he is in the company of his Lady, where all joys
increase, utters many pleasant conceits, but banished from the sight of his
Mistress, where all mirth decreaseth, either lives in Melancholy, or dies
with desperation.

As Andromache whenever she saw the Tomb of Hector, could not refrain
from weeping, or as Laodamia could never behold the picture of Protesilaus in
wax, but she always fainted: so lovers, whenever they view the image of
their Ladies, though not the same substance, yet the similitude in shadow,
they are so benumbed in their joints, and so bereft of their wits, that they
have neither the power to move their bodies to show life, nor their tongues to
make answer.

There must in every Triangle be three lines, the first begins, the second
augmenteth, the third concludes it a figure: so in love three virtues,
affection, which draws the heart, secrecy, which increases the hope, and
constancy, which finisheth the work, without any of these rules there can be
no triangle, without any of these virtues, no love.

There is no man that runs with one leg, no bird that flies with one wing:
so no love lasts with one limme.

As the earth wherein the mines of silver and gold is hidden, is profitable for
no other thing but metals: so the heart wherein love is harbored, receives
no other seed but affection.

When the Hoppe grows high, it must have a pole, when the luie spreads, it
cleaves to the flint, when the Vine rises, it draws about the Elm: so when
Virgins wax in years, they follow that which belongs to their appetites,
love, love.

As fire cannot be hidden in the flax without smoke, nor Musk in the bosom
without smell: so neither can love be hidden in the breast without suspicion.

As the straightest wandes are to be bent when they be small: so the precisest
Virgins are to be won when they be young.

As fire when it bursteth out, catches hold soonest of the driest wood: so
love when it is revealed, fasteneth easiest upon the affectionate will.

As an English man cannot abide a stranger to be his equal, nor to be dared by
any: so he cannot by any means suffer a partner in his love.

As there are four kinds of wars; foreign, civil, combat, and in the
conscience: so there are four kinds of love; spiritual, carnal, temporal,
and common. F. Johannes a S. Geminiano lib. 1. de caelo and elementis, cap. 4.

As the Raine-bowe has four principal colors in it; read, iacinth color,
azure, and green: so love especially works four passions in the soul;
zeal, excess, hatred, and languorment. Ibidem.

As the sunbeams pierce deeply: so does love. Ibidem.

Love is likened to the Fig Tree, whose fruit is sweet, whose Root is more
bitter, then the clawe of a Bittor: to the Apple in Persia, whose blossom
sauoureth like Honny, whose bud is more sour then gall: and to a Laberinth
which leads us into worser pains, then Sisiphus suffers, into more
torments then Tantalus abides, and into greater grief then Ixion bears.

As no man can be twice happy; as Saint Hierome writes in an Epistle to
Iulia, chapter four: so to be wise, and eake to love, is scarcely granted
to Jove above.

As stars abound in heaven, Hares in Athon, and Bees in Hybla: so love is full
of slightes.

The sting of a Serpent by continuance enuenometh ye whole body, he that is
charmed of the Torpedo by procrastinatio^ runs mad: so the prick of love by
delay is incurable.

As Anacreon, who spoke by experience, and writ by proof, calls love a
tyrant, mischievous, cruel, hardy, unkind, foul, ungracious, cursed,
wicked, the cause of all mischief, the forgetter of reason, the father of
frenzy, the disturber of the mind, the enemy to health, the sink of sorrow,
the garden of grief, and to conclude, a confused Chaos of misery; so that if
it might be seen with bodily eyes, or be an object to our exterior senses,
the Basiliske is not more feared, nor the Cockatrice more avoided then
loathsome love would be eschued and detested: so Miltiades the Athenian was
wont to say, that of all the plagues, wherewith the gods did afflict mortal
men, love was the greatest, in that they sought that as an heavenly bliss,
which at last they found their fatal bane.

As Demophoon was false in love to Phillis, Aeneas to Dido, Jason to Medaea,
Paris to Oenone: so true in love was Charites to her husband Lepolemus,
Cornelia to Gracchus, Iulia to her Pompey, Artemizia to Mausolus, Panthea to
Abradatus, Portia to Brutus, Alceste to Admetus, Penelope to Ulysses, Sulpitia
to Lentulus, Hipparchia to the Philosopher Crates, and Macrina to her Torquatus.

As Jupiter enforced Apollo to fly his kingdom Paphos, and to live exilde in
Thessalie: so love there constrained him to keep king Admetus sheep.

As Cupids dart caused Diana to love the swain Endimion, and Calisto to love
Jove: so it caused Clitia to love Phoebus, and Cloris Mercury.

As swouning mortifieth every member, as pestilence infecteth every part, as
poison pierces every vain: so love, if in time it be not looked unto, will
bring body and mind to utter confusion.

As the virtues of love are many: so the inconveniences are infinite.

There is no cloth so fine, but Moathes will eat it; no iron so hard, but
rust will fret it; no wood so sound, but worms will putrify it; no metal
so course, but fire will purify it: so there is neither Man nor Woman so free
but love will bring them into thraldom and bondage.

As Lordship can brook no mateship: so neither can love; according to that
verse:

Dame Venus and Kingdoms can no riualitie suffer.

As the wisest man said, Caniicles. 8. that love is strong as death, and zeal
is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are fiery coals, and a vehement
flame; Much water cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: so all
writers with one mouth have confessed, that the godliest men, that ever were,
the wisest that ever were, the valiantest men, that ever were, have been
brought by love to most outrageous impiety, to most extreme folly, and most
vile villainy. That there have been none so stout, but love has made them
stoop, none so wise, but love has made them fools, none so shamefast but
love has made them bold. They have recorded that love is above Lord or laws,
above prince or privilege, above friend or faith. Where love leads, no
Master is made account of, no King cared for, no friend forced of, no duty
respected, no honesty regarded, but all things done according to the passion,
which prevails over us; so that they have thought that love is some heavenly
influence, and no earthly accident.

Self-love.
THere is no creature that more fervently loves her young ones, then an Ass
and an Ape: so many unlearned idiots do more esteem their own vanities, and
scurrilous pamphlets, then any other man's grave and learned writings.

As they that walk in a wrong path, the further they go, the worse it is for
them: so it is for them that go forwards relying upon self-love.

Not as Physicians do cure choler by bitter things: so we must put away anger
by anger. Plut.

If one eye little letters too much they offend the eyes: so they that
wrathfullie and of self-will, and self-love regard small matters, are
enkindled to greater matters more ragingly. Idem.

As Mares seeing their own shape in the water, are driven into madness, as
says Columella: so some too much loving themselves, and admiring their own
doings, through insolency become almost mad.

The Emmot is an industrious creature, and labors for no body, but herself:
so many mortal men do only care for themselves, and regard their own business.

As every man's disease seems most bitter unto himself: so every man's
discommodity does especially grieve himself.

As the dropsy grows through too much abundance of matter and moisture as
Auicene writes: so pride and contempt of God comes through too much
self-loue. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 6. de homine and membris eius, cap. 5.

Affections.
AS that tempest is more dangerous, which suffers not to arrive in the haven,
the^ yt which forbids to sail: so those motions of the mind are more great
and greeuos which carry us away headlong, then those that disturb our reason,
and hinder our quiet. Plut. in Moralibus,

As by Circes cups men were suddenly transformed into wild beasts: so
affections do make a man suddenly to be another then he is. ibidem.

As in a great storm a ship is not stayed, except the anchor be surely
fastened: so in the great hurly burly of business, sound reason must season
the mind, that it be not carried away of affections. Ibidem.

As the sails are to be proportioned according to the greatness of the ship: so
our desires are to be moderated according to our abilities. ibidem.

As the shoe is wrested after the wringing of the foot: so every man's life is
of that sort as the affections of his mind are. ibidem.

As thou in vain drawest pure water out of a muddy well: so thou can not be
pleasant to others or pliable to thy self, except thou purgest thy mind of
evil affections. ibidem.

As horses well ordered and manned, do of their own accord go the right way,
albeit the Cochema^ does not use the rains: so the affections being accustomed
to reasons managing and moderating, do not assay any filthy or dishonest
thing, either in dreams, or in diseases, albeit reason be in an ecstasy.
Ibidem.

As he that has sour and dead wine, can neither make wine nor vinegar of it:
so according to Zenoes opinion the first motions of the mind are neither good
nor evil. Ibidem.

As an open mossy place does expel nothing that falls into it: so a mind
endued with a vicious bashfulnesse is open unto nothing, but to filthy
affections. Ibidem.

As they that cannot abide candle light, are much less able to abide Sun
shine: so they that are troubled with small matters, are much more distracted
with greater. Ibidem.

As those diseases of the body are more grievous, which break forth into
wounds and swellings: so are those affections more burdenous, which through
grief make the life tedious; it is a disease of the mind to believe that all
things are made of moates in the Sun, but yet it does not plague the mind so
much as covetousness does. ibidem.

As childish complaints do easily vanish away: so toyish desires the matter
being taken away do soon fade. Ibidem.

As the changing of the Moon, or a sharp wind, or the ebb of the sea, or
any such light change of things does take life from a sick and weak man: so
every small offense does disturb weak minds, corrupted by affections, when as
they that are of a strong heart and a resolute mind, do not feel any such
matter.

As no creature neither tame nor wild does yield to that reason which it
wa^teth: so neither any affection. Seneca.

As many wild weeds springing up in a field, are evil and naught of
themselves, and yet are signs of a fruitful ground, if it were tilled: so the
affections of the mind being evil of themselves, do argue no ill wit, if it
were tilled with hole some instructions. Plut. in Moral.

As angry dogs bark at every noise, but are quiet when they hear a voice
known and familiar unto them: so the diseases of the mind when they rage they
cannot be restrained, except the speeches be known and familiar unto the^ which
may correct them being moved. Ibid.

As the body is not capable of pleasures, except it be well ordered: so the
mind does not participate of true pleasure, except it be free from fear and
other affections. ibidem.

As diseases although but small in the beginning do still grow worse and worse,
if they be letten alone: so if but once thou admit evil affections, although
they be but of small moment and validity, they will increase and grow to
greater head. Seneca.

As a man has always remedy at hand against the poison of serpents, to wit,
his spettle, which they being touched withal, or a little hot water being
cast upon them they fly away, and if it enter into their mouths they die:
so we always carry a present remedy about with us against al pestilent
desires, if we knew how to use it. We must look for it in our minds.

As there are serpe^ts, that meet with us in the woods, and some lie lurking
at home in our houses: so some affections are managed by reason, and show
themselves reasonable, and some lie lurking in our works, and show themselves
unreasonable. Marcus heremita de lege spiritali.

As they are to be freed from fetters, that have a long journey to go: so
they are to be withhelde from immoderate affections, that directly would go
unto God. Theodoretus de spirituali animae resurrectione.

As the four humors of the body (heat, coldness, drines, and moisture) are the
causes of all welfare and ill fare in the body: so the four principal
affections of the mind, (love, hatred, joy and grief) are the causes of al joy
and annoy in the mind. Richardus Victorinus de statu interioris hominis, c. 34.

As they that kill the head of a Serpent, kill the whole body also: so they
that cut off the first motions of ill affections, kill the whole rabble of
them. Procopius in Exodum.

As there is no sire so hot, but it is quenched with water: so there is no
affection so strong, but it is weakened with reason.

He that has been burned, knows the force of the fire, he that has been
stoung, remembers the smart of the Scorpion: so he that has endured the
brunts of fancy, knows best how to eschew the broils of affection.

As thou art wary in thy travel, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone
or a prick: so in thy life, be wary that no affection rule thee, that may
offend. Epictetus, in Enchiridio, cap. 53.

As sailors do apply themselves to the chaunges of the winds: so do wise
men to the affections of the mind. Aristonymus, apud Stobaeum sermon 1. De
prudentia.

As Tarquine, when he walked in his Garden, did with a wande strike off the
heads of Poppie: so we must especially resist the stronger and more
powrefull affections of our minds. Angelus Politianus de ira.

As they that live under a Tyrant, are in bondage and servitude: so are they,
that are ruled by headstrong affections. Philo, lib. quod omnis probus sit
liber.

As they that are ruled by good laws, live in peace: so they yt are ruled by
sound reason, and not by unruly affections, live in rest and tranquillity.
ibidem.

As Noah's Arc did admit all kind of creatures, which Paradise did not: so
man's body does admit all unruly and untamed affections, but admits not
virtues worthy of praise. Idem lib. de plantatione Noae.

As a sparrowe tied by the leg, assaying to fly, is pulde down by the string
to the ground: so the mind being not freede of affections, endeavoring to
fly to the knowledge of celestial things, is held down by affections, and
cast to the earth. Maximus lib. primo de charitate.

If the eye be troubled, it cannot exactlie see his object: so if the heart
be disturbed with affections it cannot well behold the truth. Basilius in
Psalm. 33. and epistola. 1.

As a foul polluted glass cannot receive the impressions of pictures
presented before it: so a soul dimmed and darkened with carnal affections and
wordly cares is not capable of spiritual illuminations. Idem, Epist. 64.

As too much wine makes drunk: so the affections of lust, sorrow, and wrath,
having expelled reason, do bring madness. Idem in cap. 5. Esayae.

Brethren.
AS in a pair of scales, when one goes up the other goes down: so one brother
ought to yield unto another advanced to higher dignity. Plut.

As in Arithmeticke figures of lesser value being added to greater does
multiply them, and in like manner are multiplied themselves: so one brother
dignifieng another, increases the honor of hun that is dignified, and
adorneth the dignifier with the splendor of his dignity. ibidem.

As those fingers, that can neither write, nor play upon an instrument, are
moved with those that write and play: so one brother should be like affected
to another. ibidem.

If thy weapons break, or be taken from thee, thou may repair them again,
or get thee other, but thou can not get thee another body: so thou may find
other friends, but not other brethren. Ibidem.

Of the same first matter, elements arise most repugnant and opposite between
themselves: so many times of the same parents brethren are bred of most
contrary dispositions.

As Caine and Abell; Ismael and Isaac; Esau and Jacob; Amphion and Zetis;
Eteocles and Polynices; Titus and Domitian.

As civil seditions are better transposed to enemies, then bestowed on our own
countrymen: so it is better, and more equal, respectively, to envy and malign
others, then our own brethren, although it is not good to envy or malign any
body. Plut.

Admonition.
AS we cast bridles upon horses, not in the race, but before they run: so
those that are inclined to wrath or lust, are to be restrained by reasons and
admonitions, before they come into danger. Plut. in Moralibus.

As Nurses do not chide nor punish their children that are fallen, but first
run and lift them up, and after chide them: so a friend when he is afflicted,
is to be helped and lifted up, and afterward to be admonished and chidden,
that by his own fault he fell into that calamity. ibidem.

They that have the toothach forthwith run unto the Physician, and tell him of
their grief; they that have agues send for him; but he that is frantic,
neither calls him, nor admits him being called, by reason of the
intolerable veheme^cy of his disease: so those yt do hide their faults,
neither do suffer any one to admonish the^, of these there is no hope. Ibidem.

As a soar eye cannot abide light: so neither does an humorous mind admit of
a severe admonition, but if thou will cure it, thou must mingle praise with
thine admonition. Ibidem.

As Telephus, because he wanted a friend, was constrained to seek for remedy
of his enemy for the cure of his wound: so they that have not good friends to
admonish them of their faults, do oftentimes hear them of their enemies.
ibidem.

As medicines do first bite and offend, and afterward do bring health and
delight: so wholesome admonitions at the first are somewhat bitter, but
afterward are most pleasant and acceptable to him that is admonished. ibidem.

As phlegm gathered by little and little, does then especially appear and
ouercom, when nature is overcome: so certain friends dare not admonish those
that be mighty, unless fortune begin to turn her wheel, and then being
humbled, they begin to deal with them. ibidem.

A sound man bears it, if thou vpbraid him with his intemperancy, lust and
riot; but a crasie and an unsound man will not: so a friend is to be
admonished, when he cease to be angry, or to love. ibidem.

As a blow foreseen, is more easily awarded: so a mischief forethought of,
or warned of, does less offend. Seneca.

As Physicians forbid to minister receipts, when the disease is growing, or
raging, but when it somewhat abateth: so to those first motions and eager
extremities of wrath and grief, consolation and admonition is not to be used,
but when as in time they begin to be somewhat lighter.

As Physicians forbid to give Elleborum, albeit it be effectual, to old men,
or to children, or to those that have weak bodies: so our admonition is so to
be te^pered that he may suffer it, whom thou would amend; neither only the
vice is to be looked unto, but the nature of him whom thou studiest to amend.
Plin. lib. 25. cap. 5. in fine.

As wholesome herbs loose their force of healing, by being customarily used:
so if thine admonition be daily and of custom, it does not amend him that is
accustomed to it.

As in the Country of Vmbria the earth is drier by rain, and moyster by
heat, whereupon Cicero does iestingly say, that that there dust comes of a
shower, and of dryness dirt: so admonition does make some men the worse.
Plin. lib. 31. cap. 4.

As some precious stones do wax bright being steeped in Vinegar, and some
become clear being boiled in honey: so bitter reprehension makes some men
better, and other some milder admonition.

Beauty.
AS the hanging up of a net directly against the Sun, does partly obscure
the brightness of his beams: so pensiveness somewhat diminishes the
featured regardes of beautiful Paragons.

As good wine lacks no tasters: so fair women lack no suitors.

As with an easy price and an Iuie bush badde wine is uttered: so beauty and
tractablenesse do get many bad women husbands.

As the Glo-worme is bright in the hedge, but black in the hand: so are many
beauteous women, fairly made, but fowly manered.

As by the current of a stream, we come to the Fountain: so when we meet
with any beautiful body we should follow the perfect regard thereof so
far till we are arrived at the especial point and groundwork, which is
God himself, for from him all beauty has original.

As fire burns those that either touch it, or stand too near it: so beauty
inflameth those that either stand near it, or far off. Xenophon apud
Stobaeum sermon, 64.

As the fairest Leopard has his spots, the finest cloth his list, and the
smoothest shoo his last: so the most blazing beaucie has some blemish.

Where the wine is neat, there needs no Iuy-bush; the right Coral needs
no coloring: so where beauty is perfect, there needs no painting.

As the Adamant draws the heavy iron, the harp the fleet Dolphin: so
beauty allureth the chaste mind to love, and the wisest wit to lust.

The purple die will never stain, the pure Ciuet will never loose his savor, ye
green law rell will never change his color: so beauty can never be blotted
with discourtesie.

As Milo that great wrastler began to weep, when he saw his arms
brawnfallen and weak, saying, strength, strength, is but vain: so Helen in
her ^ew glass, viewing her old face, with smiling countenance, cried,
Beauty, where is thy blaze?

As when the counterfeit of Ganimede was shown at a Market, every one would
feign buie it, because Zeuxis had therein showed his greatest cunning: so when
a beautiful woman appears in a multitude, every man is drawn to sue to her,
for that God has showed such rare art in her.

As a fresh color does easily dim a quick sight; as a sweet Rose does
soonest pierce a fine sent; as pleasant sirrups do chiefliest infect a
delicate taste: so beautiful women do first of all allure them that have the
wantonnest eyes, and the whitest mouths. Lilly.

As the Eagle soars not so high in the air, but she can epsy a little fish
in the sea; as the Sun in Cancer goes retrograde; as the coldest clime has his
Summer; and as Apollo was never so stoicall, but semel in anno he could let
fall a smile: so the most severe Pilgrim or Palmer has an eye as well as a
heart, and a look to lend to beauty, as a thought to bend to Theology. Green.

As the Bauin is but a blaze: so beauty.

As the gorgeous Cedar is only for show and nothing for profit; as the Apples
of Tantalus are precious in the eye, and dust in the hand; and as the star
Artophylax is most bright, but fitteth not for any compass: so those that
stand upon their outward portraiture, are commonly prejudicial.

As the fairest roses have pricks; the purest lawnes their moles; and the
brightest Diamondes their crackes: so those that are beautiful have many
times imperfect conditions, for nature having care to polish the body so far,
ouerweenes her self in her excellency, that she leaves their minds imperfect.

As the Adamant draws the iron, the Ieat the straw, and the sight of the
Panther the Ermly: so does beauty draw the eyes of youth.

The Lapidarie thus chooses a true Saphyre, when he sees it to glister, he
covers it with Oil, and then if it shine, he allows it, if not, he
breaks it: so if thou fall in love with one that is beautiful, cast some
kind of color in her face, either as it were misliking her behavior, or
hearing of her lightness, and if then she look as fair as before, woo her,
win her, and wear her.

As it is rare to see the Sun without light: so it is as rare to see a fair
woman without a lover.

Those that are stung of the Scorpion, are healed of the Scorpion; the fire
that burns takes away the heat of the burn; the Spider Phalangium that
poysoneth, does with her skin make a plaster for poison; the spear that
wounded Telephus, must heal him: so he that is wounded and stung with
beauty, must be cured and healed with beauty.

Silver although it be white, yet it draws black lines: so Rodophe, Lais, and
Phrine, although they had beautiful faces, yet they had foul deeds.

The skin of the Ermelin is desired, and the carcass despised; the horn of
the Unicorn most preciouslie received, and his flesh rejected; the hoof of
the Leopard is the thing the hunter seeks, or else he is contemned: so the
beauty and riches of a woman is highly regarded of most men, but her honesty
and virtue lightly esteemed.

As the Dear with the sight of a fair Apple stands at gaze: so men through
beauty are driven into a maze.

As beauty made Venus to love Anchises: so it made Luna to like Endimion.

As the Curtesan Lamia blinded king Demetrius with her beauty: so the renowned
Curtesan Flora fettered Cassius, that worthy Roman.

As the Viper being tied to a Beech tree, falls into a slumber: so diverse
beholding beautiful persons have stood as though with Medusaes head they had
bin turned to a stone.

As Pigmaleon for beauty loved his Image of Iuory: so the beautiful picture
of Ganimede, greatly astonished the ladies of Cypres.

The wise Lapidaries say, that the precious stone with the most glistering
hew, has always the most secret virtue, the pure gold is chosen by the
perfect color; the best fruit, by the brauest blossoms: so the best
conditions are commonly discerned by the sweetest countenance.

As the Dormouse cannot shut his eye, as long as he lies in the beam of
the Sun; and as the Dear cannot cease from braying, where the herb Moly
grows: so Beauty causes one to stare, so long as it is in presence.

As the stone Topason is not more loved for the outward hue, then hated for
the poison, which secretly is hid within it; or as the herb Nepenthes is
not more lyked for the pleasant shape, then loathed for the poisoned sap: so
beauty cannot inflame the fancy so much in a month, as ridiculous folly can
quench it in a moment. Green.

As the Dolphin has nothing to cover his deformity, but a few glistering
scales; and as the clownish Poet Cherillus had nothing to be praised in his
verses, but the name of Alexander: so many have nothing to shadow their
folly, but a fair face, nor nothing to be commended, but a little fading
beauty.

As a Ring of Gold is in a swines snout: so is beauty in a fool.

As love is thought to be some heavenly influence, and no earthly accident: so
according to Ouids opinion, Forma numen habet, Beauty has some Deity or
Godhead within it.

As a Flower soon fades: so does Beauty.

In bodies of lesser stature and corpulencie commonly there is greater valor
and more wit, then in those that be huger and vaster.
THe Be being a very little creature, is admirable in her labors, and witty
in her government: so in little bodies there is often the greatest wit, as in
little Ulysses there was the wit of Mercury, but in great Alax the strength of
a Bull. Therefore Palingenius says very well in his book called Libra.

Ingenio plerunque caret, qui robore praestat Raro vtrunque Deus largitur, vt
idem Sit sapiens, and sit robusto corpore pollens. The greater the creature is,
the less fruitful it is; but little creatures are very numerous in their
breeding, as the Linnet being a very little Bird does bring forth twelve
young ones: so they that have less in weight, do recompense it by plurality in
number.

Unfruitful trees are stronger and of greater bulk then those that be
fruitful: so their bodies are stronger that are unfruitful in learning, then
theirs that exhaust themselves by painful labors, and consume themselves by
nocturnall lucubrations.

Time, Age.
AS he that intendes to pass a River, stays on the bank till the rough
storms be ouerblowne: so in the stearne tempests of time, we should await and
not wilfully cast our selves into danger, considering that what may not be
done to day, happily to morrow in better sort will be compassed.

As sour Wine and Apples do wax mild and sweet through age: so the
insolency of age is mitigated by long use of things.

As he is not praised that has sung much, pleaded much, or governed much, but
he that has done these things well and wisely: so is he to be praised that
has lived well, not he that has lived long. Plut.

As to them that sail, countries and cities do slip away: so by the swift
course of winged time, first childhood slips away, then youth, then the best
years of old age. Seneca.

As the Apian wines and some other at the first are sweet, but by years do
receive sowrenesse: so some become through age more inhumane.

As the Aminaean wines are by age made the better: so some in youth are more
dissolute and rough, but through age and experience be come more mild and
tractable.

As the Cage must be shut, before the birds be flowne: so tide and time must
be taken, while they may be had. Posthac occasio calua, Time is balde behind,
therefore must be taken by the forelocks.

As the Cedar the elder it is, the straighter it grows; and as Narcissus
flowers, the higher they spring, the more glorious is their hew: so should men
as they exceed in years, excel in virtues.

As the Trojans repented too late, when their Town was spoiled; and as it is
too late to shut the stable door when the steed is stolen: so when the time
is past, it is too late to recall it, for it is deaf, and hears no man,
neither knows how to return.

It is too late to recall the stone already cast; to beat the bush, the birds
being flowen; to break the bargain, the bands being sealed; it is too late
to defend the walls, when the City is overcome; to sound the retraite, when
the battle is fought; to apply the salve when the sore is incurable; it is
too late to withhold the stroke already strooken; it is too late to dry the
malt the kill being on fire; to wish for rain when the shower is past; it is
too late to cry Cave, when thy Coin is consumed, to beware when thy wealth is
wracked, to be charie when thou have nothing whereof to take charge; the calm
comes out of time, when the ship already has suffered shipwreck; it
booteth not to stop the breach when the town is overflowed; it is too late
to dislodge love out of ones breast when it has infected every part of the
body; it is too late to cast Anchor, when the ship is shaken to pieces
against the rocks; it booteth not to send for a Physician when the sick
party is already departed: so when time is once past, it can never be
recalled again.

Benefits.
AS we must sow again after an ill crop; as we must sail again after
shipwreck; and as the bankerout does not fear nor drive the Usurer from the
exchange: so albeit one benefit has happened to an ungrateful man, yet we must
not leave of to do well, but bestow an other, and see if it will thrive any
better. Seneca.

There is a kind of Lopster called Garus, which being burnt and put into
wounds does cure them, if thou do not in the mean while name Garus: so some
benefits are no benefits, if thou make remembrance and co^memoration of them.

As our honorable knights of the noble order of the Garter, do wear their
Garters and Georges in token of their honors and dignities: so we should
always be adorned with beneficence and benefits, declaring that we are the
sons of him, who is merciful, who suffers his sun to arise both upon the
good and bad.

As the Sun does not expect our prayers and adorations, that it should arise,
but does presently cast his light and brightness abroad, and is rejoiced at of
all men: so neither do thou expect the vain applause and popular praise of
men, that thou should bestow benefits, but frankly and freely bestow them,
and thou shall be beloved as the Sun. Epictetus apud Stobaeum, sermon. 44. de
magistratu.

As I owe no money to him, that is willing to lend me some, but has not: so I
am not bound to him, that would bestow a benefit upon me, but does not.
Seneca, lib. 6. de Benef. cap. 11.

As the fig tree flourishes not with blossoms, when it has the sweetest
fruit: so some do bestow benefits without any promises. Plin. lib. 1. cap. 26.

As fire is by little and little extinguished, except it be nourished with
some combustible matter; so the mutual love of mortal men does by little and
little decay, if it be not fostered and cherished by mutual benefits, and
often duties of benevolence. Laurentius Iustinianus in sermon de Christi
corpore, seu de Eucharista.

Benevolence.
AS an Adamant of his own nature is infringible, but being steeped in warm
Goats blood is broken with a hammer: so some wits can be tamed by no force, but
are only mollified and made tractable by fair dealing. Plin. lib. 37. cap. 4.

Some precious stones being soked in Vinegar do glitter, and many wax bright
being boiled in honey: so sharp reprehension does make some better, and some
are trained to better fruit by mild admonition.

As at table play the chance of the dice is to be disposed of by art and
reason to the best purpose: so that which happens in life is to be turned to
the best use, and to be construed after the fauourablest manner. Plin. lib. 37.
cap. 12. and lib. 10. cap. 12.

As a river divided into many streams does run slowly and faintly: so
benevolence being spread and distracted among many, is enfeebled and diminished.
Plut.

As those living creatures which bring forth but one young one, do love more
vehemently: so the benevolence and hearty good will, which is borne to one
only, is more ardent and entire. Plut.

Business.
AS he is sooner wearied, that knows not how long his voyage is: so he
effects a thing with lesser tediousnes, who foreknowes the manner and reason of
his business.

As we ought not to enter into Labyrinthes without a thread, whereby we may
safely return again: so we ought to take no business in hand, except we see
some way to dispatch it.

As it is more painful to cast thine empty hand, then if it were peysed with
some stone, or some matter of weight: so it is more troublesome to bestow thy
pains in matters of no moment, then to be industrious in serious business.

As they are more wearyed that walk in uneven ways, then they that walk in
equal paths: so it is more laborious again and again to reiterate and
repeat the same matters, then to be conversant in diversity of businesses,
and variety of affairs.

As many do yawne, when they see others gasp, and do make water, because
they see others do so: so some are moved to take business in hand upon no
sound judgment, but because they would imitate and resemble others.

Exercise.
AS Iron or Brass does wax bright by using: so the vigor of the mind does
gloriously appear by exercising. Plut.

As iron does rust, if thou do not use it: so does the vigor of the mind, if
thou do not exercise it. Idem.

Wells, that have water drawn out of them, do yield the cleerer water, but
those become putrified, of which none is partaker: so exercise does beget a
wholesome habit both in the soul and body. Clemens Alexand. lib 1. Stromatum.

As exercise does makesoldiours ready in feats of arms: so also it does make
schol lers perfect and prompt in delivery of scholasticall points. Hierom. in
vita Malchi. monachi.

As drop of water make stones hollow: so by exercise ye barrennest wit is
brought to some reasonable pass. Plut. de liberis educandis.

As Iron and brass are worn by the touch of the hands: so by exercise the
hardness of wit is worn away. ibidem.

As cart wheels bended by force, can never again be brought to their former
rectitude: so whatsoever we exercise our selves in, from that we can hardly be
reclaimed. Ibidem.

As there is no field so barren, but that tillage may do good of: so there is
no wit so sterill, but by exercise it may be bettered. ibidem.

As trees neglected grow crooked and barren: so do wits. ibidem.

As the strength of the body decaieth by lazines: so the vigor of the mind
decaieth without exercise. ibidem.

Horses well broken and managed, do obey their riders: so wits well exercised
do go through in their imploymentes. Ibidem.

Perturbations.
EVen as wild beasts according to their nature are hurtful unto men, and yet
when they are tamed, do them good service: so when as the perturbations of our
soul are governed and moderated, they help us in many exercises of virtue.
Lodo. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis peccatorum.

Even as our fleshly eyes cannot behold the stars, nor the beauty of heaven,
when it is cloudy and ouercast: so neither the eyes of our souls can
contemplate the eternal light, when as they are obscured with the clouds, and
passions of this life. ibidem.

Even as in clear and pure water all obiectes are seen, even unto the least
sand, which is in the bottom, which cannot be seen in water troubled and
polluted: so our soul does clearly know, what she has in her self, when
she is quiet and calm, but if the storms of passions do obscure and disturb
her, then she neither sees her self, nor any other thing. Idem lib. de
Deuotione.

As the heat suppressed is more violent; and the stream stopped makes the
greater deluge: so passions concealed, procure the deeper sorrows.

As a city ruled by tyranny comes to destruction: so does a man over whom
perturbations have sway. Philo lib. quod omnis probus sit liber.

As Noah's Arc admitted all kind of creatures which Paradise did not: so man
entertaineth all unruly and untamed passions and perturbations, but admits
not laudable virtues. Idem lib. de plantatione Noe.

As a sparrow tied by the leg, is by the string held back from flying: so a
man tied unto affections and perturbatious, is held back from the
contemplation of celestial matters. Maximus lib. prime de charitate.

As a polluted glass can reflect no perfect representation: so a soul
occupied in secular disturbances, and dimmed with sensual carnality is not
capable of the holy spirits illuminations. Basil. Epist. 64.

As wine causes drunkenness: so perturbations bring madness. Idem in cap. 5.
Esayae.

As indigestion brings diseases to the body: so perturbations raise
infirmities in the mind. Chrysostomus sermon 1. De fato.

As they that are sick of a fever do loath all things: so disturbed minds are
stormeblasted on every side. Idem Homil. 35. in 1. Cor.

Commodity.
AS Merchants upon the sea, and husbandmen upon the land spare no pains in
hope of gains: so christians for a crown that perishes not should esteem no
troubles too hard, nor any afflictions too grievous.

As soldiers sustain wounds in hope of the spoil, and champio^s receive
blows in hope of the prize, which rewards are temporal: so Christians ought
patiently to entertain all injuries, and suffer all persecutions in hope of
that reward, which is eternal and everlasting.

As the Moon bestows upon the world that light she has received of the Sun:
so the gifts received of God, are to be employed to the commodity of others.

As he that is once stung of a Scorpion, is never after stung with Waspes,
Hornettes or Bees: so there is no discommoditie, that has not some commodity
joined unto it. Plinius libro 28. cap. 3.

In Boaetia by the River Orchomenon, where the god Trophonius stands, there
are two fountains, one of which brings memory, the other forgetfidnesse: so
commonly when a great commodity is present with us, a great discommodity is
not far from us.

Achilles spear could as well hurt as heal: the scorpion as well stinges, as
he stintes the pain; the herb Nerius as well poisons the sheep, as it is a
remedy to man against poison: so every commodity has his discommodity, and
every pleasure his pain, according to ye prouerbial verse.

Omnis commoditas sua fert incommodae secum. The earth brings forth Hemlocke
to endanger the patient, as Endive to delight the people, as well the nettle to
sting, as the Rose to distill, as well the Spider to yield poison, as the Be
to give honny: so every sweet has his sour, every gain his pain, and all
mirth is mingled with some moan.

Assiduity.
AS he that adds a little to a little, and does it often, does at length make
a great heap: so assiduity much avails to atchieue a good and well disposed
mind. Plutarch.

As a drop of water by assiduity does make a stone hollow; and as Iron by often
muching is wasted: so assiduity does overcome the hardest things. Plut.

There is a river in Phrigia called Gallus, of which if you drink moderately,
it cures the maladies of the body, but if immoderately, it makes the mind
frantic: so if moderately thou give thy self to the study of Phylosophie,
it profits; but if wholly without intermission thou appliest that study, it
takes away the firmenes of the mind, and headlong carries it about with a
fury of vain glory.

Assiduity takes away admiration.
AS he that enters into a famous city or royal palace the first day walks
wondering, by reason of the novelty of things, that there he sees; but
afterward seeing those oftener, that wonderment is diminished: The same thing
happens to them at the first, that enter into the new city of grace, by
reason of the nouelty of things, which by little and little are uncovered and
laid open in it. Lod. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis Peccat.

Adoption. Abdication.
AS he doteth and plaieth the part of a frantic man, that reuerenceth and
worshippeth the image and picture of his brother, but smites and beats the
body: so is it a foolish thing to love the name of those adopted, and to
disinherit and hate the true brother. Plut.

Emulation.
As that is not true love, ye wants jealousy: so he does not earnestly
affect virtue, except he burns with the emulation of famous deeds done by
others. Plutarch.

As Alexander emulated Achillis, Julius Caesar Alexander, Tully Hortensius, and
Demosthenes Isocrates: so the Thessalonians did emulate the church of Macedonia
and Achaia in providing relief for the poor saints.

Exhortation.
AS the wild Fig tree never brings forth any ripe figs, but yet
begets worms, which flying to the true Fig tree, do eat of the rind of
the figs, and so do yield maturitie to them: so there be some that cannot
do any famous thing of themselves, but yet by some mean or other they provoke
others to do it.

Endeavor.
HE that hunteth the Hare with an Ox, and shoots with a plough, and goes
about to catch Hearts with a fish net, if he does not obtain his purpose, he
cannot accuse fortune, but his own foolishness: so they that endeavor to
compass, what they cannot effect, ought not to blame fortune, but their own
folly. Plut.

Correction.
AS they that pull down houses near unto temples, do spare them, which are
joined unto the temples, least they should pull down any part of the
sanctuary: so some vices are warely to be corrected, which have a near
alliance with virtue.

Nurses oftentimes clensing the bodies of their children from spots and
blemishes, do sometimes pull off skin and flesh together: so whilst we too
scrupulously endeavor to amend some faults, we do very much hurt; as the
disciplinarians do.

As they that cannot abide the hand of the Chirurgian, are cured by diet: so
they that cannot bear rough remedies, are to be corrected by milder cures.

As cold water and hot water does cure them that be burnt and have kybes: so
some errors are to be taken away after a diverse manner, both by severity and
lenity, by taking away benignity, and adding severity.

He that does chide his friend for light trifles, and holds his peace in
great matters, does the same that the ouerseer of wrestlers does, who suffers
the wrestler to be a drunkard and a leacher, and any is severe about a box of
ointment, Plut. in Moralibus.

As hard brawned flesh does not easily receive the prints of rods: so a mind
accustomed to sinning is not moved with a light correction. idem.

He that forthwith flies from him that admonishes him, does as if he that
is launced should fly from his Physician without binding up of his wound, or
receipt of cure. idem.

Nurses when the children wraule do eftsoons give them the breast: so a
scholar being daunted with correction, is to be raised up with praise, that
he faint not. Idem.

As they are hardly cured that want sense of themselves in a disease, as those
that be in a lethargy, or in a frenzy: so they are very hardly brought into
a right path, that do not acknowledge their faults Idem.

As a blemish that has long grown is hardly taken away: so inueterate vices
are not easily corrected. idem.

Medicines presently bite and offend, but afterward bring health and
pleasure: so wholesome admonitions at the first are somewhat bitter, but
afterward, the correction is most grateful. idem.

As the feeling of the disease, is the beginning of health: so the beginning of
correcting the life, is acknowledgment of the fault. Idem.

Chance.
AS that Painter expressed by chance the foaming of a Horse, by putting in his
mouth a sponge full of diverse colors, which he could not delineate by Art:
so chance brings to pass some things, which our providence and care could
not effect. Plut.

As chance made the Corinthian vessels; and as by chance the Painter expressed
the foming of a dog, when by Art he could not do it: so many things happen by
chance, which advice and counsel cannot tell how to bring about.

Ceremonies.
AS the holesomenesse of the place is known by the color of the inhabitants:
so the sanctity of a function is argued by the life of them, that are
conversant in it; as they that are conversant in ceremonies, being of a most
wicked life, do show that they are nothing available unto piety.

As Magitians being guilty unto themselves, that that is false and counterfeit,
which they promise, do by certain prodigious prescriptes, and portentous
ceremonies bewitch and infatuate those that be ignorant: so certain priests
when they are far off from true piety, do infolde and entangle the unlearned
in ceremonies, that the common sort may be less hurtful and cumbersome unto
them.

Comfort
AS Physicians in a great flux of phlegm do not presently administer inward
confections, but first apply something outwardly, which in time may break that
glutinous humor, and then they cure it: so in a fresh grief we must hold
our peace, until the sorrow somewhat mitigated may admit consolation. Plut.

As Physicians forbid to administer medicines, when the disease is eagerly
growing, or severely raging, but when it somewhat stinteth: so comfort is not
to be applied to those first motions of anger and grief, but when by time
they begin to be somewhat assuaged. Seneca.

As a precious ointment does not only delight the sinelling, but also is a
remedy against ill smells: so the memory of good deeds does comfort in
distress. Plut.

Labor.
AS there are more that will wash; then will be anointed: so fewer aspire by
labor to high and famous matters. Plut. in Moral.

When the Mariners see a tempest approaching, first they call upon God, that
they may arrive safely in the Haven, then they take in their sails, and do
what is to be done: so we must rely upon the divine providence, but so, that
we also use our own labor and industry. ibidem.

Hesiod commands husbandmen to sacrifice first to God, and then to follow
their business; and a soldiour calls first upon God, and then he arms himself:
so before all things we must cast our care upon God, and then lay to our
helping hand. Ibidem.

Mariners and sailors from the labor of sailing, do filthilie transpose
themselves unto pleasures, and from pleasures they return unto sailing: so
many made giddie with inconstancy do pass from delights to labors, and from
labors to delights. Ibidem.

As hot Iron is consumed with many sleckings: so the body is corrupted with
often change, that is, if it now intend immoderate labors, and now be
effeminated with immodest pleasures. ibidem.

As the Rose being the acceptablest of al flowers does grow on a thorn: so
most sweet fruit does grow of hard and sharp labors.

As some are wooing a long time a cursed wife to their cost: so some by long
labor procure unto themselves great loss. Sen.

As the herb Moly is hardly dug out of the ground, but i^ more effectual
for medicine then other herbs: so those things that are excellent are not
compassed, but by great study and pains.

As nature has hid precious stones very deep in the earth, but vile and base
things are every where found: so those things, that are the best, are known
unto very few, neither are achieved, but by great labor.

Plants are nourished by moderate watering, but choked by too much moisture:
so the mind is helped by moderate labors, but confounded by immoderate toil.
Plutarch.

Nightingales contend so much in singing, that their life does sooner fail
them, then their song: so many through immoderate study do shipwreck their
health, and whilst in learning they would be excelled of none, they perish in
their endeavor. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 29.

Continual faecundity does make barren a fruitful field: so continual labor
does dull the sharpness of wit. Seneca de tranquillitate vitae.

The Kings of Egypt did foolishly consume the money of the land, and the labor
of the people, about the building of the Pyramides, which were only for
ofte^tation: so many take great pains in unfruitful matters

As the little drops of rain pierce the hard marble; and the iron with often
handling is worn to nothing: so untired labor does overcome all things.

Imitation.
AS many followers of Aristotle stammered in their speech like him, and many of
Platoes familiars crouched in the shoulders like him: so they that covet to
express all things, do unwisely imitate many foolish things. Plut.

As a son desires to be like his father: so they that imitate Authors, do
endeavor themselves to be like them. Seneca.

As many yawne, when they see others yawne; and make water, when they see
others do so: so many are moved to take businesses in hand not by any certain
advised judgment, but they imitate what they see in others.

As the beast called a Buffe does imitate in the color of his hairs, all
trees, plants and places, which he lies under or upon: so it shall be more
safe for us, to imitate the rites and customs of whatsoever country we travel
to, or inhabit.

Mourning.
Covetous peisants when they have hoorded up many things, do not use that is
present, but deplore that is lost: so they that mourn and lament for the dead,
do not enjoy the living. Plut.

As every tree has her fruit: so there is not any other fruit of mourning but
tears. idem.

As a troublesome guest is sooner received into thy house, then thrust out of
doors: so if thou give place unto mourning, it is not so easily expelled.
idem.

As light is comfortable to heavy hearts: so are merry thoughts to mourners.
idem.

As a diseased Physician is not to be praised: so neither a comfortless
mourner.

The night follows the day, and the day the night, summer follows winter,
and winter summer: so mourning follows mirth, and mirth mourning.

Husbandmen do not weep when they bury their corn in ye ground, because they
expect a plentiful harvest: so we should not immoderatly mourn and lament,
when we leave our friends in the grave, because we look for a joyful
resurrection. Chriso. hom. 41. in 1. Cor.

As after great and vehement showers comes a pure and clear air: so after a
mass of mourning, and floods of tears comes the serenitie and tranquillity
of mind. Chrysostom. hom. 6. in Mat.

As by water and the spirit: so again by tears and confession we are purged,
so that we do it not for ostentation. ibidem.

As rain does moisten the earth: so tears do water the soul. Idem hom. 4. de
poenit.

As he that is condemned by secular judgment, cares not for any fair sights,
or threatricall shows: so he that mourns truly, cares not for pampring his
belly. Climacus de discretione, gradu. 26.

When Roses are planted, nothing is seen but thorns, afterward springs the
fair and lovely fruit: so they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.
Isidorus Clarius oratione octaua tomi tertu.

In Gallia there is a very cold fountain, which as Fulgosus testifies, with
the water does send forth flames of fire: so a true Christian with religious
tears ought to stream forth the flames of divine charity. Hector Pintus in
cap. 40. Ezech.

Pliny writes, that the tears of Vine-braunches do cure the leprosy: so
the tears of those Vine-branches which are grafted into the true Vine, do
cure the leprosy of sin.

Saint Augustine witnesses, that the Eagle feeling his wings heavy, plungeth
them in a fountain, and so renueth his strength: so a Christian feeling the
heavy burden of his sins, batheth himself in a fountain of tears, and so
washing off the old man, which is the body of sin, is made young again,
and lusty as an Eagle.

As Peter's faith was so great, that he lept into a sea of waters to come to
Christ: so his repentance was so great, that he lept into a sea of tears when
he went from Christ.

As the Olive tree is most abundant in fruit when it distilleth: so a
Christian is most plentiful and powerful in prayer, when he weepeth.

As Mustard-seede has his name in Greek, because it makes the eyes weep: so
he that in prayer has faith, as a grain of Mustard Seed, has such a faith
as makes his eyes weep.

As Elizaeus did cast salt into the waters of Jericho, to make them sweet: so
must we salt and season our prayers with tears to make them sauourie and
delightsome to God.

Manners.
HE that with contrary winds is tossed hither and thither, neither compasses
what he intended, he does not sail much, but is tossed much: so he that has
long lived, and has not lived well, he has not long lived, but has been
long, Seneca.

As the little Be seasing upon al flowers, brings that home which is
profitable: so a virtuous man does extract from every place, that which may
make for the bettering of his life. Plut.

As the Ieat draws a straw unto it, as the Lodestone draws iron, and the
Chrysocolla gold: so every man associateth that man unto himself, who is of
like conditions and manners.

As Caeneus was made a man of a woman: so some ill conditioned become better
manered. Plut.

Salt waters, that have rain fall into them, become sweeter then others: so
they are wont to be better, whom the influence of the divine grace does change
from a contrary living, as Paul was.

Nature.
AS of the same Clay the shape of this beast, and that beast is formed, which
being dissolved, is fit for some other figure: so Nature of the same matter
does produce one generation, which being extinct, she propagateth of it
others and others. Plut.

As Nilus brings forth wholesome fishes, and fruitful plants, so it
engenders the Crocodile and the Aspe: so Nature as she is fruitful in good
things, so she brings forth something hurtful. idem.

An Ox is fit for the plough, a horse for the saddle, and a dog for hunting,
as says Pindarus: so every man ought to apply himself to that manner of
living, which nature has disposed him unto. idem.

Moles have their sight taken from them, but they have their hearing well: so
where Nature has denied the valor of body, there she commonly bestows the
vigor of mind. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 69.

As he that makes a ship or an house, can easily unmake them again: so that
Nature can best dissolve a man, that framed him. Cicero de Senectute.

As no honest man takes it in ill part that a due debt is demanded of him, or
a thing that was left with him: so when Nature requires again what is her
own, we ought not to spurn against her, but willingly yield unto
necessity. Philo, lib. de Abrahamo.

It is natural for the Vine to spread, the more you seek by Art to alter
it, the more in the end you shall augment it; it is proper for the Palm tree
to mount, the heauyer you load it, the higher it sprowteth; though iron be
made soft with fire, it returns to his hardness; though the Falcon be
reclaimed to the fist, she retyreth to her haggardnesse; the Whelpe of a
Mastiffe will never be taught to retriue the Partridge: so where the
excellency of Nature does bear sway, it is a very hard thing, or altogether
impossible to alter it.

The silly Mouse will by no manner of means be camed; the subtle Fox may
well be beaten, but never broken from stealing his pray; if you pownde spices,
they smell the sweeter; season the wood never so well, the Wine will taste of
the Caske; plant and translate the Crabtree, where, and whenever it please
you, and it will never bear sweet Apple: so where the force of Nature keeps
possession, it is hard to displace it. Lily.

As the stone Abeston being once made hot, will never be made cold, and as
fire cannot be forced downward: so Nature will have course after kind.

As the Aethiope cannot change his skin, nor the Leopard alter his hew; and
as it is not possible to gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles: so it
is to no purpose to force any thing to strive against Nature.

As in tilling of the ground and husbandry, there is first chosen a firtile
soil, then a cunning sower, then good seed: even so we must compare Nature to
the fat earth, the expert husbandman to the Schoolemaister, the faculties and
sciences to the pure seeds.

As the fertile soil if it be never tilled does wax barren: so that which is
most noble by nature, is made most vile by negligence.

As the Torch turned downwarde is extinguished with the self same wax, which
was the cause of his light: so Nature turned to unkindness is quenched by
those means it should be kindled, leaving no branch of love, where is found no
root of humanity.

News.
AS Cooks wish for a plentiful breed of cattle, and fishers of fishes: so
busy brained innouaters do hunt after news, and innovation in states. Plut.

As we set up meat from cats and dogs: so we must take heed, what we speak
before newes-mongers, and insinuating intelligencers. idem.

As our bodies are more endangered in the Spring, and in Autumn, by reason of
change: so all novelty does offend and hurt the common wealth.

As change of meat, drink and air does offend, albeit it be into like, or
into better: so it is better still to retain our old Princes and Magistrates,
then to gape for new, because all innovation is full of danger and
disturbance.

As Apion called Homer from the dead, for none other cause, but to know from
what parentage he was descended: so many take great pains, and bestow much
cost, only to hear news, and know novelties. Plin. lib. 30. cap. 2.

Recreation.
AS we see birds for procreation and profit sake make themselves nestes, and
afterward being freed from their labors freely to fly abroad, and take their
pleasure: so our minds being wearied with labor and business do covet and
delight to expatiate abroad being free from carke and care. Cicero lib. 2. de
Oratore.

As an engrauer, that has had his eyes long fastened upon his work, and
wearied, does again refresh them, by withdrawing them from their former
intensiuenesse: so we ought sometimes to recreate our minds, and with
certain delights to refresh them; but let thy delights be such, as may be
wholesome and profitable unto thee. Seneca lib. 2. epist. 59.

As land although sown but every other year, does recompense that
intermission by fruitfulness: so wit refreshed with a little recreation, does
return to study with that alacrity and vigor of spirit, that it does more
in a shorter time, the^ before being dulled it would have done in a longer.
Plinius lib. 18. cap. 16.

As there are intercourses of sleep and waking, of night and day, of fair
weather and foul, of war and peace: so labors are to be eased by disportes
and recreations. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

As we unloose the strings of a harp or a bow, that we may the better stretch
and bend them again: so the mind is to be recreated with leisure, that it
may be made more fit for labors. Ibid.

A wagoner does not always hold straight his raines, but does sometimes
loose them: so children are sometimes to be refreshed, favored and cherished.
ibidem.

A bow that always stands bended becomes the weaker: so a wit that is always
toyled becomes duller.

As there is watching: so there is sleep; As there is war: so is there
peace; As there is winter: so is there summer; As there be ma^y working days:
so is there also many holy days.

We unbend the bow, that we may the better bend it; we unloose the harp,
that we may the sooner tune it; the body is kept in health, as well with
fasting as eating: so the mind is healed with ease, as well as with labor.

Hippomanes ceased to run, when he had gotten the goal; Hercules to labor
when he had obtained the victory; Mercury to pipe when he had cast Argus in a
slumber: so every action has his end, and then we leave to sweat, when we
have found the sweet.

The Ant though she toil in summer, yet in winter she leaves to travail; the
Be though she delight to suck the fair flower, yet is she at last cloyed
with the honey; the Spider that weaueth the finest thread, cease at the last,
when she has finished her web: so after earnest study we are to recreate our
wearied minds.

Reprehension.
AS he is to blame that blames Nilus for bringing forth the crocodile and the
aspe, never remembering what fruitfulnes it brings unto Egypt: so is he to be
reprehended that reprehendeth nature for bringing forth some fruitful things,
never calling to mind the innumerable good things she produces. Plut.

Fables tell us, that the hagges called Lamiae were clear sighted abroad, but
when they came home they put their eyes in a box, and saw nothing: so some
are very clear sighted to reprehend others, and are stone blind to espy any
thing in themselves. Idem.

As they that have no quiet at home, have all their pleasure to be abroad: so a
mind that unto it self is guilty of villainy, abhorring it self does feed
with the malicious reprehension of others. Idem.

It is an easy matter to pull down that another has builded; but it is a
very hard matter either to reedifie the same again, or to build a better: so
it is an easy matter to find fault with another man's oration, but to speak
after the same manner or better, it is not so easy. Idem.

When in Summer it thundereth more, then it lightneth, it portendeth great
store of wind, as Pliny says: so when one vehemently declares against other
men's vices, himself showing no integrity of living, it is a manifest sign of
a mind more puffed up with the wind of ambition, then endued with true
godliness.

Sorrow.
AS the oven dampt up has the greatest heat; fire suppressed is most forcible;
the streams stopped, either break through or ouerflowe: so sorrows concealed
as they are most passionate, so they are most peremptory.

As a wise pilot in a calm does expect a tempest: so in tranquillity the mind
is to be prepared for grief and sorrow. Plutarchus.

As Physicians in a vehement flux of phlegm do not forthwith use inward
medicines, but first outwardly apply outward things, that may ripen the humor,
and then they cure it: so in a new grief we must be silent, till it growing
more mild it may admit comfort. Idem.

We make those things sauourie by mixing sweet things with them, which by
nature are bitter: so sad and sorrowful things by reason are to be allayed.
Idem.

As flies do rather choose to sit upon rough places, then upon glass or
smooth places: so some do forget pleasant things, and remember only heavy
and maestiue matters. Idem.

As the rose, the fairest of all flowers, does spring of thorns: so of
sorrowful and sharp labors most pleasant fruit is gathered.

As wine mixed with vinegar has not the same sweetness: so sadness and
heaviness annexed to the holy spirit, has not the same pure and clean prayer.
Hermas seu Pastor.

As a boat is drowned by a tempest: so the mind is dejected by sorrow.
Chrisost. Hom. 10, de poenitentia.

As they that sail over the vast ocean sea, cannot be without sickness: so
they that live in this world, cannot be without sorrow, Idem, Hom. 67 ad pop.
Antioch.

As a moath does eat a garment: so sorrow does feed on the heart of man.
Idem, epist. 8. ad Olympiam.

As the tenderest wood is most anoyed of worms: so the feeblest minds are
most molested with sorrow. Basil. hom. de gratiarum action.

As clouds do take from us the brightness of the sun: so sorrow does take
from us the affability of speech. Chrisost. hom. 6. ad pop. Antioch.

As certain leaven apples have a sowrish sweetness, and some old wines have
a sweetish sowernesse: so both our sorrow must be joyful, and our joy must be
sorrowful.

As there be two colors, red and blew in one rainebow: so there must be two
affections, joy and sorrow in one heart.

Praise:
AS they that give niggardly, seem to have but a little: so he that sparingly
or unwillingly praises another, seems to hunger and thirst after his own
praise. Plut.

If thy field could be made fertile with praising, it were no less to be
praised, then plowed or manured: so if thy friend can be made better with
praising, it is expedient sometimes to praise him: but if he cannot, to what
end is unprofitable soothing? Idem

We ought not to tickle them, that are inclined to laughter: so we ought not to
praise them, that are greedy of glory, Idem.

As every crown does not become every conqueror: so all praise does not fit
every man. Idem.

A Peacocke does not spread his tail except he be praised: so many do not
show what is within them, till they be commended. Plin. libr. decimo cap. 20.

As another man's tickle and touch does more vehemently procure laughter, then
our own: so is it a better decorum to be praised by others, then by those that
are o^ our own affinity and familiarity.

Praisers of them selves.
THey that would not be troublesome nor grievous to sore and bleared eyes, do
shadow the brightness of the sun from them: so some among their own
commendations do mingle a little dispraise, that they may avoid envy.
Plutarchus.

They that are hunger-starued for lack of food eat their own flesh: so
some, thirsting after praise and glory, when they want others to praise them,
commend themselves. Idem.

As we are commanded either altogether to keep out of a pestilent place, or if
we be in it, to behave our selves very circumspectly: so we must not at all
praise our selves, or if we do, it must be done very warily and cautelously.
Idem.

The Cock being conqueror, presently testifies his victory by crowing: so
some do boast of their own exploites, and become the ridiculous heralds of
their own praises. Plinius lib. 8. cap. 33.

The Tongue:
AS it is hard to hinder and hold in an un broken and unbridled colt foming and
chafing in the midst of his race: so it is much more difficult to restrain
an unruly and a malicious tongue.

As the Northwinde drives away the rain: so does an angry countenance the
slaundering tongue. For as Saint Hierome says: An arrow shot from a bow
sticks not in the hard rock, but with violence reboundeth back again, and
hurts him, that shot it.

As he does ill that fireth an house; and he also, that when he may quench it,
does not; and much more he, that coming to the flame, warmeth himself by it:
so he does ill that speaks ill of another; and he also, that does not stay a
sla^derous tongue, when he may; but much more he, that takes an occasion by a
detracters words, to spit forth more poison of defamation.

Even as sailors are wont to have all dangerous places noted and decyphered in
their Maps, by which their ships might be endaungered and hazarded; that they
may avoid them: so the servant of God ought to have all kind of corrupt
speeches noted and set down, that he may not be endangered by them.

As rivers have banks, that they may not ouerflow: so reason is to be the stay
of the tongue, that it may not run counter.

As unlucky howling night-rauens do envy the rest of man, by disquieting him
with their nightly ill-sounding moan: so a virulent and venomous tongue does
always disperse something abroad, that may disturb the concord of men. Plin.
lib. 11. cap. 25.

As a bridle does direct a horse: so reason should rule the tongue.

As if a Roman should be judge, he could not perceive thy reasons except
thou did speak latin: so Christ does neither hear nor attend thee,
except thou speak in his tongue. Chrisost. hom. 76. in Matthew.

As one spark does make a great fire: so an ill tongue does procure great
emnity. Idem hom. 9. operis imperfecti.

An il tongue is compared to a sharp rasor; to bow and arrows; and to
serpents. To a sharp rasor, which shaueth the hairs, he not feeling that is
shaued. To bow and arrows, which are sent from far, and wound the absent. To
serpents, which bite privily, and leave poison in the woun d

As a parrat is known by speaking like a man: so we are known to be
Apostolical, if we speak like the Apostles, and Angelical, if we speak
like Angels. Chrysostum hom. 26. ad populum Antiochenum.

Contrariety.
AS lime is heated by water: so co^trarieties do move some.

As heat is allayed by cold: so choler is allayed by phlegm.

The precious stone Anthracites a kind of carbuncle, being cast into the fire,
looks as if it were dead, but being drowned in the water, it shines like
sparks of fire: so contraries do move some; if thou prickest them forwards,
they are the more backwarde; if thou disswadest them, they are more enkindled;
they become enemies to the^ that deserve well, and friends to them, that merit
ill.

As wine does make some dull, and some quick-spirited, some dumme, and others
talkatiue according to the disposition of their bodies: so the same
foolishness, and ignorance of the truth, does stir up some to covetousness,
and others unto pleasures.

As the sun does harden clay, and soften wax: so the same speech spoken of the
same man, does work remorse in one, and obstinacy in another.

As a black ground does best beseem a white counterfeit, and Venus according
to the judgment of Mars, was then most amiable when she sat close by Vulcane:
so contraries being opposed one against another, do manifest themselves more
evidently.

As the Laurel is greenest in the foulest winter: so the lime is hotest in the
coldest water.

As the glow-worme shines brightest when the night is darkest: so the Swanne
sings sweetest when his death is nearest.

As out of one and the self same root, comes as well the wild Olive, as
the sweet; and as the Palm Persian Fig tree bears as well Apples as Figs: so
a mother thrusts sometimes into the world at one time, the blossoms of
gravity and lightness.

As the breath of the Lion ingendereth as well the serpent as the Ant; and as
the self same dew forces the earth to yield both the Darnell and wheat; and
as the Easterly wind makes the blossoms to blast, and the buds to grow: so
one womb many times nourishes contrary wits, and one milk diverse manners, as
Amphion and Zetis; Titus and Domitian, Boleslaus and Vuenceslaus, etc.

As the Vine and the Cabbish, the Oak and the Olive tree: so the serpent and
the Ash-tree, the Iron and Theamides, can by no means agree together.

Cunctation.
THe whelps of Lions are borne ill fashioned, they move themselves when they
are two months old, but scarcely go at six months: so those things that
are to become excellent do grow by leisure, and are perfited by little and
little.

Choice.
THe water of the sea is unprofitable to drink, but it nourishes fishes, and
is serviceable for sailors: so we must excerpe and extract whatsoever commody
is in any thing. Plut.

As it is a goodly thing to have sailed and traveled by many cities, but it is
expedient to inhabit and dwell in one of the best: so many things are to be
known, but the best things are to be followed and kept. Idem.

Glory.
WHen the Sunbeams are perpendicular over a man's head, they either altogether
take away his shadow, or make it very little: so exceeding great glory does
quite extinguish envy. Plutarchus.

As a smoke, great at the first, does soon vanish: so does glory falsely
gotten. Idem.

As that fire does make no smoke, that presently breaks into a flame: so
neither is that glory subject to envy, that presently shines forth, but envy
attends them, that rise by degrees. idem.

As a shadow waits upon us, whether we will or no: so glory follows virtue,
albeit she fly from it. Seneca.

As they that are distempered by sickness, do abhor the pleasantest meats: so
fi^thie fellows never tasting of true glory, coeneuer seek after it. Cicero
Philip. pr.

As it is leuity, to hunt after vain glory: so it is foolishness to put from
us true and deserved glory. Idem in Pisonem.

The shadow sometimes goes before, and sometimes comes behind: so
sometimes glory comes before, that we may see it, and sometimes it comes
after us, but that is greater, which comes after, and then, when envy is
hushed; for whilst Democritus raged, Socrates could scarcely be heard of: Rome
honored not Cato, till she had lost him: Rutilius his innocence had not been
diuulged, if he had not been iniuried. Seneca epist. 80.

The ancient Sapientes called glory a Crocodile. For as a Crocodile does
follow a man flying him, and flies from him that follows him: so glory does
fly from them that desire it, and does follow them, that fly it. Albertus
Nouicampianus.

As he that is clothed with silk and purple, will not have a durty cloak put
on him: so holy men clothed with excellent virtues, should not cover
themselves with humane glory. Dorotheus De humilitate, doctrina. 2.

Vain Glory.
AS moathes do eat out a garment: so vain glory has eaten out many men's
possessions. Chrisostom. homil. 42. in Genesin.

As drunkenness obscureth reason: so vain glory corrupts discretion. Idem.
hom. 2 in Joan.

As we despise earthly riches, when we hope for heavenly possessions: so we
contemn the vain glory of this life, when we persuade our selves of celestial
glory. idem hom. 28. in Joan.

As a profane woman does set her self to sale to every body: so do they that
are given over unto vain glory. Idem hom. 17. in epist. ad Romans

As nights succeed days, and winters summers: so grief and heaviness follows
vain glory and pleasure, either in this world, or in the world to come.
Maximus lib. 2. de charitate.

As the Pismyre eats the ends of the corn, she has gathered, that it may
not sproute nor grow: so vain glory nippeth all our good parts in the head,
Climacus de inanis vitae fuga.

As Iuie embracing a tree withers the root: so vainglorie corrupts the
root of true virtue, if it spring up by it. Nilus oration. 7. aduersus vitia,
and S. Isaias abbas oratione 16.

As the wind carries away the print of thy footesteppe paced in sand or dust:
so vainglorie utterly takes away the virtue and reward of an alms deed.
ibidem.

As the flower flourishes to day, and to morrow is withered: so does humane
glory. Isidorus Clarius oratione 105. tomo secundo.

As a shadow has no footing: so neither has vainglorie. Henricus de Hassia
in Soliloquio animae.

The tract of a ship is not discerned in the sea: so neither the glory of man
has any biding in the world. ibidem.

As the wind pufs up the waves: so vain glory pufs up vain men.

As an Ass is not to be preferred before a horse, albeit he be decked with
golden trappings: so no man is to be vainglorious and proud for external
acontrements, and outward habiliments, seeing that the Elephant excels him
in hugeness, the Lion in courage, the Nightingale in singing, the Peacocke in
beauty, Bees in cunning, the Spider in weauing, the Hare in swiftness, the
Eagle in sight, the Ass in hearing, and the Dog in smelling. Isidorus
oratione de humilitate tomo primo.

As the little Worm Teredo, that eats woodde, in the night shyneth, and
makes a crackeling, but in the day time is known to be a Worm, and
putrefaction: so also Vainglory shyneth and glistereth with great pomp in
the night of this world to weak and dim eyes, which cannot judge but by
outward appearances; but when that clear and bright day of judgment shall
come, wherein God shall reveal the darkest and obscurest things of our souls,
and shall manifest the secret counsels of our hearts, then those that seemed
happy and glorious, shall be known to be filthy and vile, and without any
hope of salvation. Lodouicus Granatensis in lib. de septem Meditationibus,
Meditatione quinta.

Braggers:
THey that are hungry, are more provoked with appetite, if they see others
eat: so braggers are more inflamed with glory, when they hear others
extolled. Plu.

As many riuals snarle about one love: so they iar that affect glory and
praise by one thing. idem.

As a Chamaeleon is fedd with none other nourishment, then with the air, and
therefore she is always gaping: so popular applause does nourish some,
neither do they gape after any other thing but vain praise and glory. As in
times past Herostratus and Manlius Capitolinus did: and in our age Peter
Shakerlye of Paul's, and Monarcho that lived about the Court.

As the Moon is sometimes big, sometimes small, and sometimes is not seen at
all, never continuing in one estate: so Braggers that place their praise in
Parasites mouths, are sometimes extolled, as great personages, and sometimes
depressed, as base pesants, and sometimes they are no body, and sometimes some
body, as it pleases their slipperie tongues to make them. Bernardus sermon
de Natiuitate Joan. Baptistae.

Gratitude.
AS we do not grudge to give the pawns back, when the goods are restored: so
let us not grudge to restore and repay thanks to God, for the benefits that
he bestows upon us. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

As we repay Usurers their money with gain: so let us repay both God and man.
Seneca.

As Beans and Lupines do not make the ground lean where they grow, but do
fat it: so a grateful man does make his estate the better of whom he has
received a benefit, and rendereth as good as he received. Plin. lib. 18. cap.
14 and cap. 12. eodem lib.

A learned man is learned albeit he hold his peace; a valiant man is
valiant, albeit he hold his hands; a good Pylot is skillful, albeit he be
on dry land, because they are men of perfect skill, and nothing is wanting
unto them, but opportunity to show it: so is he also a grateful man, that
is only willing to requite and regraciate, albeit he has none other witness
of it, but his own kind and thankful mind. Seneca de benefic. lib. 4. cap.
21.

As our Ancestors have left their learned wrytinges unto us their posterity:
so we should not only be grateful to one age. idem. cap. 30.

As glory does rather follow them, that fly it: so the fruit of a benefit
is more gratefully repayed unto them, that do not expect it. Idem lib. 5. de
benefic.

As it is meet that we pardon them, that unwittingly have offended: so they
are not to be repayed thanks that have benefited us of necessity. Cicero
libro. 1. de inuentione.

As fertile fields do render more, then they received: so should a grateful
man in repaying of thanks. Hesiodus, and Cicero lib. 1. Offic.

Ingratitude
AS Swine eating Acornes under an oak, never look up that they may see from
whence they come: so ungrateful men receiving benefits from God, never cast
up their eyes to heaven to give him thanks. Lodouicus Granatensis lib. 1. Ducis
peccatorum.

As he is exceeding ungracious, that having received large and ample gifts of
a king, which then forthwith mustered up an army, and sets upon the King:
so is that man most ungrateful, that with those same benefits which God has
bestowed upon him, moves war, and sets himself against him. ibidem.

As it is a wickedness intolerable, if a married woman should give all her
ouches, tablets, rings, chains, earerings, and bracelets, which her husband
gave her, that she might be beautified with them, and so please him, to an
adulterer, that she may allure him to her love: so it is ingratitude
insufferable, if man spend and consume his fortitude, strength, health, and
riches, which God has given him to glorify and honor him withal, upon evil
works, and most filthy and dishonest actions. ibidem.

As Iuy cleaving to the boughs of trees, is raised aloft through the help of
another: so base pesants mounting aloft thorough the countenance of mighty
men, become a means to strangle them of who^ they were promoted. Plut. in
Moralibus.

The stone Siphnius being heated in oil waxes hard, otherwise it is very
soft: so some are made worse by benefits.

As he is an ^ill father that gives his daughter to a divorced man; as he is
an ill householder that commits his goods to a spendthrift; as he doates that
leaves his son to a covetous Guardian: so is he an ill benefactour, that
bestows his benefits upon thankelesse persons. Seneca lib. quarto de ben.
cap. 27.

As that servant is exceeding ungracious, that having received kindness of his
master for his ill deeds, if he repay ingratitude: so is that man exceeding
faulty, that for all his misdeedes done against God, receives benefits, and
yet remains thanklesse. Basilius in 2. ad Timoth. hom. 5.

As a husband loving his wife tenderly (to make his affection known unto her,
bestowing upon her many great presents of gold and costly jewels) is very
heavy if she dissemble the gifts which he has bestowed upon her, and say
she has purchased them by her own money: so God can in no wise be pleased
with us, if we will conceal, or else attribute to our selves, the graces
which he has bestowed upon us, which he would have to be testimonies, tokens
and demonstrations of the inviolable love and fidelity that he bears unto us.

As Alexander Phrygius, who of Poets is commonly called Paris, was ungrateful
to Menelaus, and to the King of Sydon, who had given him friendly
entertainment, as Dictys Cretensis writes in his first Book de Bello Troiano,
in stealing away the ones wife, and treacherously killing the other: so M. and
D. Brutus, C. Cassius, Cn. Domitius, C. Trebonius, Q. Tullius Cimber, the two
Seruilii, Casca Hala, and many others, were very unthankful to Julius Casar,
who slew him with three and twenty wounds in the Senate house, albeit he had
latelye pardoned them for their sighting against him on Pompeyes side, as
says Appian in his second Book of the Roman civil wars.

As the Romans suffered P. Scipio Aphricanus the first, who defended them from
so many perils, most miserably to die in Lynternum: so the second Scipio
Aemilianus Aphricanus for all that he subdued Carthage, and Numantia, which
refused to become tributaries to the Romans, found in Rome a murderer, but not
a revenger.

As the Athenians were ungrateful to Theseus and Solon: so were the
Lacedaemonians unto Lycurgus.

As Synon was unthankful to the Trojans: so was Zopyrus unto the Babylonians.

As the Romans were ungrateful to M. Furius Camillus: so was Ptolomeus
Dionifius king of Egypt unto Pompey.

As the Athenians were very unthankful to their famous Captain Miltiades, in
casting him into prison, and suffering him there to die, who had freed them
from the Persians in the expedition of Darius: so was Valentinianus Caesar
very ungrateful to that valiant Captain Aecius, whom he commanded to be
slain, and Iustinianus unto that renowned Captain Bellisarius in commanding
his eyes to be plucked out, in banishing him, and forcing him to beg his
bread, who had delivered the Roman Empire from the savage cruelty of
barbarous nations, who overcame the Persians in the East, the Vandales in
Aphrica, and the Goths in Italy.

As M. T. Cicero was slain of Pompilius, whom he had saved from the
gallows: so Leo the Emperor was deprived both of life and honor of Michael
Thraulus, upon whom he had bestowed many dignities.

Plynye says that the colte of an Ass, when he has filled his belly,
turns his heels against the damme, and kicketh her: so many ungrateful men
having received blessings from God, and benefits from man, do spurn against
the one and contemn the other.

He that nourishes a serpent, nourishes his own bane: so he that bestows a
benefit upon an unthankful person, may perhaps arm an enemy against himself.
Plut. in Moralibus.

He that anointeth a dead carcass with precious ointment loses it: so he
that bestows a benefit upon one ungrateful, casts it away. ibidem.

As dogs have been so mindful of their masters benefits, that they have
dyed by their slain bodies, and some of them have detected the murderers, and
brought them to execution: so men should much more be mindful of good turns,
and requite them with thankfulness and all possible recompense. Basilus
homil. 9. Exameron.

Chiding.
AS the wound of Telephus was healed with the same spear that made it: so the
wound of chiding is to be healed of him, that made it. Plut. in Moral.

As a good Physician had rather heal a disease by sleep and diet, then by
Scammony or Castoreum: so a friend, a father and a schoolemaister do more
endeavor to correct by praise, then by chiding, if so it may be. ibidem.

As a salve not being applied to the right place, does grieve without fruit: so
does chiding being not used, as it ought. Ibidem.

As sharp medicines, but necessary, do ease the sick, but offend and infect
the sound: so sharp reprehension does cure vice, but offend honest men.
ibidem.

As a Physician when he has made incision and cauterization, does not
presently leave his patient, but applies unto him lenitiue and gentle salues:
so they that have sharply rebuked, ought by mild and gentle speeches, to
mitigate the bitterness of the former reprehension. Ibidem.

As an Image maker does first with strokes cut his stone, and afterward
polish and smooth it: so a friend does mitigate his chiding with gentle and
pleasing speech. ibidem.

Physicians in bitter medicines do mingle some sweet things, that they may
allure their patient to take them: so parents ought to assuage the sharpenes
of reprehension with milder words. ibidem.

Some precious stones being steeped in vinegar do wax bright, and some being
boiled in honey: so bitter reprehension does better some, but milder admonition
does better fit others.

If thou take sparingly of the herb Elleborum, it does more offend,
because it does stick to the bowels, and infect the body, but if thou take
greater quantity of it, it does pass through thee more speedily, and so does
less harm thee: so thy friend is not to be chidden, except with that
vehemence, that may free his mind from vice; for a lighter expostulation does
grieve friendship to no purpose. Plinius lib 25. cap. 5. in fin.

Wholesome herbs do loose their virtue by often using them: so often
admonition does not amend him, who is accustomed to daily chiding.

As cold does make and take away kibes and chilblaines: so the speech of a
chiding friend does cure that grief it procured. Erasmus.

As they that are forced to use incision, had rather cut with brass, then with
iron, because by this means the wound is more curable: so he that is
constrained to chide any man, ought so to moderate his speech, that it may
have mingled with it some secret cure.

As the Physician by mingling bitter poisons with sweet licor, brings health
to the body: so the Father with sharp rebukes, seasoned with loving looks,
causes a redress and amendment in the child.

The fairest Iennet is ruled as well with the wand, as with the spur: so the
wildest child, is as soon corrected with a word, as with a weapon.

Affliction.
AS in one and the self same fire both the gold is made bright and shining,
and the wood is burnt and consumed: so by the fire of affliction the righteous
is made more beautiful, as gold; but the unrighteous as dry and unfruitful
wood is turned into coals and ashes. Lodou. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis Peccatorum.

Under the same flaile, the husks are diminished and broken, but the grain
purged and purified: neither therefore is the mother or lees confounded with
the oil, because they are pressed and trodden under the same press or planke:
so one, and the self same weight pressing the good and the bad, does try,
purify and purge the good; but does damnifie, consume and wast the bad. ibidem.

As the sea cannot be without waves and billows: so this life cannot be
without tribulation and temptation.

As children, when they are feared or daunted, forth with run to the bosom and
lap of their father: so should we have recourse to GOD our Father in the time
of tribulation. Stella De contemptu mundi.

As no man calls a surgeon to the house of a sound man, but to the house
of him that is wounded: so God commonly sends not his spirit, who is called
the co^forter, to their houses, that enjoy vain joy and comfort, but to the
houses of them, that be desolate and afflicted for his love. Ibidem.

As the poorer sort have more right and title, then rich men, to crave aid and
relief at places of hospitality succor and: so he that is more afflicted and
troubled, has iuster cause to desire aid and help at the bounty of the
divine mercy. Lod. Granat. lib. de Deuotione.

As a good householder gives to his sick servant more dainty meats, then he
does to the rest, not because he is worthier then the rest, but because he is
weaker, and in greater need: so the gracious God of heaven deals with those,
that be afflicted and in need. ibidem.

Even as a purging medicine, although bitter, is no less profitable, the^
other meat although it be pleasant: so affliction, although sour, is
sometimes no less necessary, then favor, although it be sweet. ibidem.

As it does no less profit the sick to eat with loathing and abhorring, then
it does the sound to feed with appetite and stomach: so it does no less
profit us sometime to be fed with the bread of affliction, then it does to be
cheared up with the dainties of prosperity. ibidem.

As a wise pilot in a calm does expect a storm: so in prosperity the mind is
to be prepared for adversity.

They that in a storm fly for succor vndera tree, when it is past going away
do pull down the boughs: so in affliction we use the help of some, whom in
prosperity we afflict by envy.

As in the midst of winter the birds alcyones do enjoy great calmnes, whereby
others are also benefited: so when fortune does most rage, then the godly do
especially enjoy tranquillity of mind, which they also make others partakers of.

Prosperity.
AS that stage player is not the happier, that by representation seems a king
or an Emperor: so that man is not the happier, by the gifts of fortune, that
being esteemed as he is in himself, is no body. Seneca.

As too much rankenesse breaks the stalks of corn: so too much prosperity
undoes men's minds. Seneca.

As health in the higest perfection, as says Hippocrates, is dangerous: so in
great prosperity disasterous haps are to be feared. Plutarch.

As he that is diseased with the dropsy, the more he drinks, the more he
increases his disease: so a man the more he surfets in his prosperity, the
more dangerous is his estate. Chrisost, concione 3. de Lazaro.

As the hand is one, whether it be extended abroad, or contracted together: so
a man should be always one, whether he be in prosperity or adversity. August.
sermon. de prudentia ad Eremitas.

As Hawks are lost by soaring too high: so they that by prosperity are carried
aloft, do most what loose themselves. Hector Pintus in cap. 17. Ezechiel.

When the sun enlightneth one hemisphere, another hemisphere is full of
darkness: so when prosperity fawneth upon one, aduerfitie frowneth upon
another. Idem in cap. 26.

The voice so long as it is uttering, because many things concur to the
articulating of it, as the teeth, the tongue, the throat, the palate, and the
lips, seems to be a thing existing and solid, but being looked into, it
is nothing else but an empty sound: so the great men of this world, living
in prosperity, so long as they breath, because many things concur, which
seem to dignifie them, as riches, power, and honor, they are deemed great and
mighty potentates, but being intombed in a sepulcher, then they are forth with
known to be nothing, but dust and ashes. Ibidem.

As the Moon does suffer no eclipse, but when it is in the full: so then
commonly the image of God is eclipsed in man, when he is full of riches and
prosperity. Idemin cap. 40.

As the Moon, when it is in the full, is furthest from the Sun: so many that
flow in riches, and are full of prosperity are furthest from God. Ibidem.

Branches too heavy laden, are broken; and too much fecundity comes not
unto maturity: so too much prosperity destroieth the possessor. Seneca epist.
39.

As they that sail with a prosperous wind have instruments, which they use
against a storm: so they that are wise in prosperity, should prepare
themselves against adversity. Stobaeus. sermon. 1. de Prudentia.

As they that have the falling sickness, are taken with a cold and with a
swimming of the brain: so if a little fortune lift up an unlearned man, he
presently shows himself, what he is. Plut. in Moralibus.

As a good fire is a good ornament to a house in cold weather, as Homer said:
so prosperity is much more pleasant, if it be beautified by the virtues of the
mind. ibidem.

As they that have fierce horses, do deliver the^ unto horse breakers, to make
the^ more tame: so men being puffed up with prosperity, are to be taught how
variable fortune is, and how weak the estate of human frailty, that they may
be made more moderate, and sober minded. Scipionis Maioris dicterium est apud
Plutarchum.

As Iuy kiss trees with embracing: so prosperous fortune does destroy and
strangle, whilst it flattereth and fawneth. Plinius lib. 16. cap. 35.

As trees forth with die, when they are fruitful beyond their went: so fortune
being prosperous and favoring beyond custom, does often intimate that ruin
is at hand, Erasmus in Similibus.

As it often happens, that in very fair weather a storm does arise: so in
prosperity many times a sudden disturbance of things does grow. ibidem.

As beans breed windiness in the belly, and raise fumes in the head: so
temporal prosperity brings the windiness of puffing pride, and breeds the
fume of vain glory. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 3. de vegetabilib. and
plant. cap. 64.

Tribulation.
AS rain falling upon the earth, does fructify the corn: so tribulation
entering into the soul, does stir up a desire unto God. Chrisostom. hom. 14.
ex varijs in Matthaeum locis.

As gold is not hurt in the furnace: so tribulation and adversity does not
hurt a constant soul, but brings forth patience, and cutteth away
slothfulness. Ibidem.

As a flaile beats the chafe from the corn: so tribulation drives sensual
and carnal delight from the soul. ibidem.

As the goldsmith does not take his gold out of the fire, till he see it
purified from the dross: so God does not take us out of the cloud of
tribulation, till he see us mundified and cleansed from the dross of our
corruption. Idem Homil. 4. ad pop. Antioch.

As it is sometimes day and sometimes night, sometimes summer, and sometime
winter: so sometimes we have tribulation, sometimes consolation, sometimes
heaviness, sometimes happiness. Idem hom. 63.

As fire makes the gold to shine, and the chafe to smoke: so tribulation and
aduerfitie purifieth the good, but polluteth and damnifieth the wicked. August.
lib. 1. de ciuitate Dei. cap. 8.

As the grape is not wine, nor the olive oil before they be pressed: so men do
not put off their carnal desires, to be made pure wine for the Lords
drinking, nor sweet oil for an incense unto his nostrils, before they be
broken in the press of tribulation. Idem in Psalm. 83.

As spice when it is pouned, does show what smell it has: so holy men in
tribulations do show what virtue they have. Greg. lib. 1. moral. cap. 4.

Fire kept down by blowing, increases: so do good men increase in virtue and
religion being held down by tribulation. Idem epist. 27.

The Physician lets that sick man have what he will, of whose recovery
he despayreth; but he restrains him, of whom he has hope, from many
things: so God troubles and afflicts them whom he loves. Idiota cap. 11.
contemplationum.

Those medicines are commonly best, that are the bitterest: so tribulation
albeit it be bitter to the flesh, yet it is profitable and wholesome to the
soul. ibidem. cap. 14.

Grief compels us to seek remedy: so tribulation causes us to seek
comfort at the hands of God. Ibidem. cap. 16.

It is written ye in the building of the temple all the stones were hewed with
axes and hammers: so the lively stones that are to build the celestial
Jerusalem must be polished with diverse strokes and beatings ibidem cap. 19.

As gold cast into water does neither loose his color, nor his price, but
being cast into fire is made more splendent and pure: so a righteous man does
not loose his virtue in the water of prosperity, but in the fire of calamity is
made more glorious and shining, when as the wicked are like unto clay, that is
dissolved in water, and hardened in fire. Hector Pintus in cap. 37. Ezechiel.

As a shower falling into the sea seems to add nothing to it: so disasterous
fortune does nothing hurt a wise man. Seneca de consolatione. cap. 16.

As Peter walked upon the waters by faith: so the holy Saints walk through
the floods of tribulations by faith. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 1. de caelo
and elementis cap. 49.

As black lead is often found in the veins of the earth with gold and
silver: so grievous tribulations are often borne of the saints with great joy.
idem lib. 2. de Metallis and lapidibus cap. 38.

Debt.
AS we give money to have a hand or a foot cut off, if they be putrified and
corrupted: so house and household are to be made away, that we may discharge
our selves from debt, and so become free men. Plutarchus.

As a horse once broken to carry one rider, carries one after another: so they
that once fall into debt, still fall in further and further. idem.

Choleric men that do not purge themselves in time, do fall into greater
inconveniences: so they that suffer their debtes to increase, afterward abide
the greater calamity. idem.

The fish Polypus, whatsoever he catches in his claws, he holds it fast:
so many when they have gotten other men's money into their hands, do very
hardly part from it. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 29.

Defense.
THe serpent Amphisbena has a head at both ends, and does use both ends as a
tail: so some do defend themselves now this way, now that way; when they
think it commodious they fly to the liberty of the church, and when it makes
for them, they shrowde themselves by the countenances of Princes.

Custom.
AS he that drives a nail into a post, fasteneth it at the first stroke yt
he gives with his mallet, but more firmly at the second, but so fast at the
third, that it can hardly be pulled out again, and the oftener that he
knocks it, the faster it sticks, and is pulled out again with the greater
difficulty: so custom in sinning does so deeply drive vice into our souls,
as it were with a great mallet, and there it sticks so fast, that scarcely
any thing may be found, by which it may be haled and pulled out. Lodo.
Granat. li. 1. Ducis peccat.

As he that in the morning is not able to pass over the foo^d, when as yet the
water is low, shall be much less able to pass over it at night, when the
banks are full, and the river swells like the floods and tides of the sea:
so he that in the beginning is not able to sway the rule of his perverse
affections, shall much less be able to tame them, when they are accustomed in
any violent proceeding. ibidem.

As he that is not able to pull up a plant newly rooted, is less able to do
it, when it has taken deep rooting: so he that is not able to pull up the
root of vices lately planted, shall be much less able when they have taken
profound rooting, and through custom stick faster in the soul. Idem. lib. 2.
Ducis peccatorum.

As he that is endangered with a long and a pernicious disease, seldom so
comes to his former health, that not some relics of the disease remain in
his body: so the custom and diuturnitie of sin, is seldom healed and cured
without some relics remaining ibidem.

Even as it is very hard to with draw a great river from his natural course,
which by many years it has been accustomed to, to another curre^t: so also
it is very hard that a man should change his life, which many years he has
led, and should assume another. Lodo. Gran. li. de denot.

As the habit to think always evil things, does so bind a man, that he can not
think of good things: so on the other side the use and custom of good things
does so change a man, that he thinks not on evil things. ibdem.

As Rachell when she went out of her Country, took away with her the Idols of
her fathers house: so they that have accustomed themselves to any thing, albeit
they leave it. yet some relics will remain with them Stella de contemptu
mundi.

As a man speaks that idiome and dialect of speech, which he has always
used: so it is in the customarie frequentation of any other thing. Ibidem.

As fire the more fuel it takes hold of, burns more extremely: so the
nature of sin the longer it continues, the further it spreads, and
becomes more untamed. Chrysostom. contra Gentiles and hom. 22. ad pop.
Antiochae.

As he that is conversant among sweet odors, does a good while after smell of
the^: so a mind that has been accustomed to honesty, does long after
retain some sparks of it. Plut.

They that have long been bound in fetters, when they are loosed, do yet
halt, neither can they on a suddame go perfectly: so they that have been long
accustomed unto vices, when they forsake them, do retain certain relics of
them. idem.

As a blemish that has been long growing, and taken deep rooting, is hardly
taken away: so inueterate vices are hardly corrected. idem.

As a Book diverse times blotted in one place is not easily made clean: so
the mind that often relapseth into the same vices.

As hardened and brawned flesh cares not for the printes of rods: so the
mind accustomed to sin is not moved with a slight correction.

As Mithridates by customing himself to take poison, became incapable to be
poisoned: so the evils which thou accustomest thy self unto do not offend.

As the entance into a we will or bownet is easy, but the getting forth again
very difficult: so the way unto vice is easy, but the return from the
customarie frequentation of it is very hard.

As they that are accustomed to dwell in corrupt and pestilent places, do long
endure in them: so they that are accustomed to greeuances and discommodities,
do little care for them. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 6.

As the sight of some men does inchant: so there be some, the whole custom of
whose life does infect good manners.

As thick skin and brawned flesh in time becomes almost senseless: so the
custom of sin takes away the feeling of sin. Plin. lib. 25. cap. 2.

As an inueterate leprosy is not easily cured: so that sin is not easily
left, which custom imposes as a necessity.

Conuersing and living together.
AS they that walk in the Sun, although they came to no such end, become
sunburned; and as they that sit in an Apothecaries shop, do smell of the
fragrancie of that place: so they that converse with a wise man, although not
to the end to become wise, yet are made better by him. Seneca.

As certain small creatures, when they bite, are not felt, but the biting is
discerned by a little pimple or read spotte, but in the tumor no wound
appears: so thou shall find that although conuersing with good men does not
presently profit, yet that it has profited. Seneca.

As a disease by infection does creep unto thy neighbor, when as health does
not the same unto him that is sick: so by keeping company with wicked men good
men are easily corrupted, when as the contrary does not follow.

As the fish Torpedo does not hurt, unless touched, but does after a strange
manner transpose her poison from the hook to the line, and so to the
Angle-rodde, and then to the hand: so wicked and pestilent fellows do not
hurt, if thou keep thy self from their conversation, but if thou conuersest
with them, then very contagiouslie they infuse their infection. Plin. lib. 23.
cap. 1.

As in husbandry it is not enough that thou show thy self a good husbandman,
but it is also available with what neighbor thou live: so in life, it is
not enough that thou show thy self a good man, but it also skilleth with whom
thou have conversation.

As the venomous herb Aconitum does kill by contaction: so the conversation
of some does slay by infectio^, Plin. li. 29. ca. 2.

As the Pyrit stone does not discover his fiery nature, except thou do
rub it, and then it does burn thy fingers: so thou shall not perceive the
maliciousness of some, except thou have some commerce with them.

As not only the Lodestone does draw iron unto it, but also one iron does
draw an other being rubbed with the Lodestone: so by conuersing together,
either the profit of virtue, or the poison of vice does pass from one to
another.

As they that take an Antidote before poison, are not hurt of the poison: so
they that have their minds strengthened and confirmed with wholesome opinions,
and good instructions, are not infected by the speech of impious persons, if
they chance to fall among them.

Wines do not only relish of the grounds they grow in, but also of the trees
and plants they grow by: so we do not only express their natures from whom
we descend, but also their manners with whom we live.

As they that are bitten of a mad dog, do not only become mad, but also
do infect others with contagion: so they that are possessed with any pestilent
opinion, do also infect others with their speeches and conferences.

As a Heart does draw venom out of holes by his breath, and does purge them: so
some by their godly conversation do draw others from sin, and convert them
unto God. Basilius in Psalterium.

As the plague does infect: so does evil company. Idem de spiritu sancto.

As vinegar does corrupt wine: so wicked men do infect the good, therefore let
us go out of Babylon. Chrysostom. hom. 28. in Matthew.

As one whore does make many fornicators: so the wickedness of a few does
pollute a great part of the people. Saluianus de vero iudicio and prouidentia
Dei, lib. 7.

Fear.
AS we do not drive fear from timorous horses by keeping the^ in the stable,
but by leading them by the force of bitte and spur into those places, which
they fear so also a fearful and timorous mind is to be forced, that at
length it may put off this vain fear. Fr. Lodo. Gran. lib. de deuotione.

As the body is not capable of pleasures, except it be in good temper: so the
mind does not partake of true pleasure, except it be void of fear. Plut.

As a flame raised by the wind, is greater and more vehement, but less durable
and constant: so a vehement desire joined with fear, has uncertain pleasure,
idem.

The Crocodile is terrible to those that fly, but flies those that follow: so
if thou yeeldest or fear some, they wax haughty and cruel, but if thou
boldlye contemnest them, and valorouslie withstandest them, their choler is
presently over, and they put dagger in sheath. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 25.

As a Chamaeleon because he is a fearful beast, does often change color: so
they that are timorous, and want strength, do apply themselves unto
policies, and invent dangerous stratagems. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 33. and lib.
28. cap. 8.

Old age.
AS they are glad, that have fled from furious and cruel masters: so old men
ought to rejoice, that by the benefit of age they are freed from the infection
of lust. Plut.

As water mingled with wine does make it more moderate, and as the sober
nymphs do restrain the drunken God: so old men being mingled with youth in
a common wealth, by their reverence do make their rashness and ambition more
temperate. Idem.

As an old singer does not leave his art, nor cast away his ^arpe, but makes
that music, which has the least trouble and difficulty in it, and leaves
the shriller parts of singing unto youth, who are more fit for them: so in old
age we must not altogether leave of the businesses of the common wealth, but
choose those affairs that are the quietest, which agree most unto this age.
Idem.

As the diversity of the sphericall motions, does temper the motions of al
things: so the cunctation of old age, does moderate the festination of youth.

As no man perceives when Storkes do come, but that they are come, nor any one
knows when they depart, but that they are departed, because they do both in
the night very privily: so no man perceives youth departing, but that it is
departed, neither does any man understand old age coming, but that it is
come. Plin. l. 10. c. 25.

A young vine does yield greater plenty of wine, but an old vine does
yield better wine: so young men speak more words, but old men speak things
more profitable.

As of a running river thou have so much as thou take up: so of years
always hasting away, thou receiuest no other thing, but that thou bestowest
upon perdurant matters.

As fruit is not found upon that tree, upon which first there was no
blossoms: so we cannot in age attain to lawful honor, if we in youth do
not labor in the exercise of some discipline. Cyprianus de 12. abusionibus.

A body that is molested with agues and sickness, although it be strong, yet
it is afflicted, and weakened, but when the diseases are ouerpast, it
recouereth strength again: so the mind in youth does abound with fevers, and
the love of glory and pleasures does exceedingly possess it, but when old age
comes, it profligateth and chaseth away all these passions, some by satietie,
and some by philosophy. Chrisost. Hom. 7. ad Heb.

As the haven is quiet: so old age is peaceable and desires rest. Idem, hom.
cum presbyter esset designatus.

As the canker sooner enters into the white rose: so corruption, especially
the corruption of covetousness, does easily creep into the white head.

As he that is tossed this way and that by diverse tempests, neither comes to
that place he would, has not sailed much, but has bin tossed much: so he that
has long lived, neither has profited in good manners, has not lived long,
but has long been. Seneca de breuitate vitae.

As a prodigal man soon wastes a great deal of wealth; so a voluptuous
intemperate man soon shortens his life, and never comes unto old age. ibidem.

As a ship full of leakes cannot long hold out: so an old man full of
infirmities and diseases cannot long live. Idem. lib. 2. epist. 30.

As our mothers womb does hold us 9. months, and prepares not us for it
self, but for that place, we are to go forth into, being now fit to draw
breath, and look abroad: so through all this space from infancy to old age we
are preparing for another childbirth of nature. Idem, lib. 2. epist. 103.

As not all wine does sour through age: so not all old age is crabbed.
Cicero, in Catone Maiore, vel de senectute.

As we praise a young man, in whom there is some gravity: so we commend an
old man, in whom there is some relics of an honest youth. Ibidem.

As wantonness and lust is more proper unto youth, then unto old men, and yet
not unto all young men, that is, unto those that are honest: so dotage and
deliration is not proper unto all old men, but unto those that are weakheaded
and light brained. Ibidem.

As wise old men are delighted in youth of good towardness; and their age is
more tolerable unto them, that are embraced and reverenced of youth: so young
men delight in the precepts of old men, by which they are brought unto the
study of virtue. Ibidem.

As he is not praised, that has sung much or pleaded much, or governed much,
but he that has done it well: so he has not lived long, that has lasted out
many years, but he that has lived well. Plutarchus in Moral.

As wine soon sowreth: so our life soon ends. Antiphanes, apud Stobaeu^ ser.
113.

As to the stomach quatted with dainties, all delicates seem queasy; and as
he that surfetteth with wine, uses afterward to allay it with water: so those
old men, that have ouercharged their gorges with fancy, account al honest
recreation mere folly, and having taken a surfeit of delight, seem now to savor
it with despite.

As old men are very suspicious to mistrust every thing: so are they very
credulous to believe any thing; the blind man does eat many a fly.

As the herb Moly has a flower as white as snow, and a root as black as
inck: so many times age has a white head, showing pity, but a black heart,
swelling with mischief.

Old men's counsel.
IT is reported that the bird Ibis, the older she is, the more odoriferously
and sweetly she smells: so ye glory of old men is more calm, and their
counsels more safe. Plut.

Counsel.
AS he that is sick of his liver, does foolishly if only he show his soar
nails unto the physician: so does he foolishly that being troubled and
disturbed with great evils and mischeefes, does ask counsel of his friend
about trifles. Plut.

There be some that cannot see things near unto them, but they can discern
things further off: so many are better advised in other men's matters, then in
those things that pertain unto themselves.

As the hagges called Lamiae are blind at home, but see all things abroad: so
some are too clear eied in other men's business, but are hoodwincked in their
own.

If among birds one female tread another, it begets an egg, but nothing
is bredde of it: so that counsel, which thou conceiuest in thy mind, if it be
not seasoned with reason, it is frivolous and unprofitable. Aristot. li. 6.
cap. 2. de not. animal. et Plin. lib. 10. cap. 58.

As Apion calling Homer from his grave, asked him none other thing, then from
what parents he was sprung: so some, a counsel of grave men being conuented,
do co^sult of nothing but of toies and trifles.

Evil counsel is the worst unto him that gives it.
AS Perillus, who gave the brazen bull unto Phalaris, perished by his own
invention: so many times evil counsel does fall upon the head of the
author. Plini. lib. 34. cap. 8.

As oftentimes the fish Polypus is taken and held, whilst he deuoureth shell
fishes: so now and then whilst we endeavor to hurt others, we bring our selves
into danger. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 29.

As Cybele, Arsaces chamberlain and bawd, was poisoned with the same poison,
that she thought to have dispatched Cariclia with: so Achemenes, Cybeles son,
being at the point to have traitorously slain Oroondales lieutenant of Egypt,
before he had given him a deadly wound, was stricken through himself with an
arrow of an Ethiopian. Heliodorus in the 8. and 9. book of his Ethiopian
History.

As Diomedes king of Thrace cast others as prouender to be eaten of horses: so
he by Hercules was cast to the same horses, and devoured of them.

As Busiris king of Egypt used to burn others in sacrifice before his Gods:
so he by Hercules was burnte in sacrifice upon the same altar.

As by that thing a man does plant, a man is often times supplanted; as Noah
in planting a vineyarde, was supplanted by the wine, Genesis 9. so by that a man
does invent, he is often circumuented, as Haman was hanged on the same
gallows, that he had prepared for Mordec. Ester, 7.

As the Israelites blasphemed God with their fiery tongues: so God punished
them with fiery serpents.

As Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron offered strange fire before the Lord: so
they were devoured with fire. Leuit. 10.

As the Princes of Judah were cruel: so cruel beasts tore them in pieces.
Jeremy. 5.

As Pharaoh would needs drown the children of Israel in his waters: Exodus 1.
so God paid him again with the self same coin, drowning him afterward in
the red sea. Exodus, 14.

As the woman had eaten of the forbidden fruit: so her punishment was
appointed by fruit; That the fruit of her womb should be brought forth in
pain and heaviness. Genesis 3.

As man sinned eating: so God limited his penalty by eating, saying; Thou shall
eat thy bread in the sweat of thy brows.

As Adoni-bezek cut off the thumbs of the hands and of the feet of seventy
kings: so Judah cut off the thumbes of his hands, and of his feet, Judges. 1

As Cresseida was inconstant to Troylus: so king Diomede proved inconstant to
her.

As John Martin of Briqueras a mile from Angrongue, vaunted every where, that
he would slitte the ministers nose of Angrongue: so he was assaulted by a
wolf, which bit off his nose, so that he died thereof mad. John Fox in his
book of Acts and Monuments, 2. tom. page 1088.

Rash Counsel.
AS the North wind is boisterous at the beginning, but mild at the ending;
and contrariwise the south wind is mild at the beginning, but vehement at the
ending: so they that rashly and headstrongly enterprise any matter, do freese
in the pursuit to their hurt and danger, but they that advisedly take things
in hand, are more and more encouraged in the progress of their labor.

Fortune.
AS in the games of Olympia the chalenger contended with what adversary so ever
came: so in the course of our life, we must wrestle against whatsoever
fortune, Plutarchus in Moral.

A Blind man running against one, calls him blind, that did not shun him:
so we call that fortune blind, into which we fall through our own blindness.
Ibidem.

As the winds are succesfull to some, and adverse to others: so fortune does
favor one, and frown upon an other, Ibid.

As a pigmy, although set on a hill, is but a dwarf, but a Colossus placed in
a valley, is great: so a wise man is great in whatsoever fortune, but a fool
is base in the greatest prosperity. Seneca.

As hail pattering upon an house, makes a great noise, but does no hurt: so
the insulting of fortune cannot do any thing against a wise man: Idem.

As shell fishes increase, when the moon increases, and decrease, when it
decreaseth: so a fool depending of fortune, is sometimes great, sometimes
base, sometimes hie, sometimes low, sometimes as proud, as a peacocke,
sometimes as suppliant, as a beggar, as Rhamnusia pleases to change her self.

As an adamant neither yields to the fire, nor to the hammer: so the mind of
a wise man is invincible, not to be conquered by any of fortunes violences.

As a good workman makes a picture of any matter: so a wise man carries
himself well in both fortunes, either prosperous, or adverse.

Nilus brings a dearth unto the Egiptians, if it either exceed in flowing, or
reach not to the ordinary limit, that is, if it either flow less then twelve
cubits, or more the^ eighteen: so either too much prosperity, or too much
adversity does hurt and hinder a good mind, the one by vexing and tormenting
it by need, the other by calling and seducing it from virtue and honsty by
delights and delicacy.

A hedghog foreseeing a tempest, hides himself in the earth: so when a chaung
of fortune happens, the mind is to be fortified with precepts of philosophy.

As an archer sometimes hitteth the white, and sometimes shoots near it: so
fortune sometimes seaseth upon our selves, and sometimes upon our goods.
Maximus apud Stobaeum, ser. 18.

As a glass shows, what the face is: so fortune shows what the man is.
Euripides, apud Stob. 88.

Grass so long as it is green, does cover the mountains, and adorn the
meadows, and through the beauty does delight and refresh the eyes of the
beholders; but when the heat of the sun, has dried up the moisture and
consumed it, then it is many times made fuel for the fire: so as long as
fortune smileth, and gives health, riches, friends, honors and dignities, so
long man florisheth, his acquaintance are delighted and refreshed by him, and
all men, behold him with admiration; but when the heat of persecution has
scorched his glory, or the frost of adversity has pinched his wealth, or the
infirmity of sickness has decayed his health, the^ he fades as a flower, and
many times he becomes fuel for the fire of hell. F. Joan. a S. Gem. lib. 3.
de vegetab. et plan. cap. 26

The use and abuse of a thing.
PRometheus seeing a Satyr kiss the fire at the first sight of it, admonished
him, that if he touched it, it would burn him, but if he used it, as it
should be used, it was profitable both for the heat and light: so the same
thing, as thou use it, is either dangerous or profitable. Plut.

If many be made drunk with wine, not therefore are the vines to be dug up
by the roots, as Lycurgus caused the^, but rather more water is to be used to
allay the wine: so if many abuse Poetry, it is not forthwith to be banished,
but a caution is to be used, that it may be wholesome. Idem.

As in the nature of things, those that are the most beautiful, do soonest
wither and decay, as Roses, Lilies, Violets, when as other last longer: so in
the life of man, those things that are most flourishing, are very quickly
abused, and diuerted into a contrary use. Plinius. lib. 9. cap. 15.

The fish Polypus otherwise a stupide creature, uses great cunning intaking
other fishes: so many men are very wise for their own lucre and gain, but in
other things very blockish and brute beasts. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 29.

As wines poured into vessels made of the tree Taxus, become mortal and
dead-in: so wholesome erudition and instruction falling into a pestilent and bad
nature; becomes hurtful and dangerous. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 11.

As the salt sea water is unwholesome to drink, but yet carries a ship better
then the fresh river, which is wholesome for drink: so every thing has his
use, if it be used in the right kind.

As the Philosopher that sent the tongues, sent the best and the worste meat:
so riches are very good, if they be well used, but stark naught, if
otherwise. Plutarchus.

Wine does comfort those that are in health and live moderately, and (as the
scripture says) it makes merry the heart of man; but if he drink it that has
a fever, it brings death and destruction unto him: so it comes to pass,
that the same thing used diuersely, does bring life to one, and death to
another. Origenes in libro Iudic. homilia quinta.

As the satiety of honey procures vomit: so good things being not well used,
become hurtful. Greg. Nazianzenus li. 1. de Theolo.

Riches.
ALthough it is necessary and needful to eat for the relief and sustentation
of ye body, yet superfluity of meat does very much hurt. And although ye life
of man consists in the blood, yet too much abundance of blood, is the cause
of death and oftentimes kills men: so riches although they be necessary for
the maintenance of life, yet superfluity of temporal goods is no less
hurtful to the soul, then too much meat to the body, or too much blood to
the life, Lod. Granat. lib. de Deuotione.

A trauailer for his provision in his voyage carries his money in gold, for so
is he richer, and is troubled with less weight: so the Lord does lighten his
children, laying upon them but easy burdens, but yet sufficient, and that
which may content them. ibidem.

As those kingdoms and cities which the devil showed to our Savior Christ
upon the mountain, were not true riches, but fantastical and sightly in the
eye: even so all the riches, honors, and glory of this world, are no perfect
goods, but fained, dissembled, and as saint James says, a vapor that appears
a while, and in a moment is dispersed.

As the full gorged Faulcon will not know her master and turn unto him: so the
rich man that is pampered with prosperity, does forget God, and does separate
himself from him.

Even as the children of Reuben and Gad desired Moses yt he would leave the^
there in the country of Jordan, where was good feeding for their cattle, never
caring to go to the land of promise: in like manner, there are many that refuse
the kingdom of heaven, promised them in perpetual possession, for the love of
riches and corruptible goods they enjoy in this false world. Stella de
contemptu mundi.

As in good and sauory meats poison is often received, and they that have
eaten thereof are forthwith ready for the grave: so sweet are ye riches of this
world to such as love them, yet under them is death hidden, because they make a
man proud and vicious, which brings him to eternal death. Ibidem.

As the children of Isreal's Manna would have corrupted, and been filled with
vermin, if it had bin saved: so this worlds vain riches, are no way sooner
lost, then by too much saving them. ibidem.

As smoke mounted on high, is quickly out of sight: even such is prosperity,
it bears a show for a while, and at length comes to nothing, ibidem.

As upon the mountain of Gilboa perished the noble and great men of Israel: so
does prosperity lead men up as it were to a mountain, and suddenly thence
tumbles them headlong down. ibidem.

As the Gentiles vainly adored the Idol Mercury, each of them carrying a
stone in the honor of their Idol: even so they that honor worldly
prosperity, steal the honor which is due to God, and bestow it on a base
Idol. ibidem.

As a wise man is not hurt of a serpent, because he keeps him far from him;
but a fool taking him by the tail is bitten: so riches, being received of a
wise man, do not hurt him, because he knows how to use them, but if a fool
lay hold on them, they bite him, because he gripes them too hard. Clemens
Alex. lib. 3. paedag. cap. 6.

As a land flood is soon up, and soon down: so are riches here to day, and
gone to morrow; to day it is this man's ground, to morrow his, and next day
another. Basil. in. Psalm. 61.

Wells that are drawn, have sweeter water, but being untouched become
putrified: so the rest of riches is unprofitable, but their motion and public
using is profitable and fruitful. Idem. hom. in ditescentes. and Clemens Alex.
lib. 1. Stromat.

As that earth which is a little removed from the root, is the nourishment of
the plant; but that which lies the nearest unto it, does depresse and burden
it: so if riches fall close upon the soul of a man, they drive it down to
hell, but if they be somewhat removed, and distributed to the use of the
poor, then the possession of them is in the right kind. Idem in cap. 5.
Esayae.

As Lions, Leopards, and Bears become wild and fierce, because they are
brought up in darkness: so riches being kept close and hoorded up, are more
fearful then wild beasts, and roar more terribly then a Lion; but being
brought into the light, and bestowed on the poor, of lions they become lambs,
and of dangerous rocks, calm havens. Chrysostom. hom. 14. de auaritia.

As a ship too heavy laden, does drown, but being moderately gaged, sayleth
prosperously: so when thou burthenest thy self with more riches then is
requisite, they easily drown thee, but when thou layest up what is meet for thy
necessity, when a storm happens, thou may easily flote over the waves.
ibidem.

As we seeing a rich man and a poor man painted upon a wall, do neither envy
the one, nor despise the other, because they are not true things, but fained
shadows: so if we well knew the nature of riches and poverty, of glory and
reproach, and of all other things, whether joyful or sorrowful, it would free
us from the perturbations they bring, because they are but false shadows, and
feined counterfeits of things to come. Idem concione 4. de Lazaro.

As children not knowing how to use swords and knives, do endanger themselves:
so many men not knowing how to use money, endamage their souls, by buying with
it such a burden of vices, which depresse them to hell. Idem hom. 66. in
Genesin.

As shoes too big hinders a traveler; and too many clothes a runner: so does
too much money him that travels to heaven. Idem hom. 7. de poenitentia.

As no wise man will build his mansion house upon the sand: so no wise man will
build his happiness upon riches, which are brittle, fading, and soon vanish.
ibidem.

As if an earthly king should say, no rich man shall be promoted in my
kingdom, would not all cast away their dishonored riches? so when the
heavenly King does say, that it is hard for rich men to enter into his
kingdom, will not they much more cast away these impediments? Idem hom. 9. in
Mat.

As he is a foolish husband man, that takes his good grain, and castes it
into a lake, leaving his fruitful ground unsown: so is he a greater fool,
that hydes his treasure in the earth, and leaves the fruitful ground of the
poor unsown. ibidem.

As thorns do prick being touched: so do riches being griped, Idem hom, 23.
in Joan.

As Scorpions and Vipers do lurk among bushes and thorns: so do inordinat
thoughts couch themselves in the deceitfulnes of riches. Therefore Christ
calls the cares of this present life, and the frauds of riches, thorns.
ibidem.

As meat kept undigested in one part of the body, does neither profit it, nor
nourish the rest, but being digestably communicated to all does nourish all: so
riches if thou keep them alone, thou shall receive no fruit by them, but if
thou possessest them with others, then thou reapest the greatest commodity by
the^. idem, hom. 10. in 1. Cor.

As a tree planted in fertile and good ground, does every year bring forth
seasonable fruit: so money planted among the poor, and put into their hands,
does not only every year, but also every day bring forth spiritual fruits,
that is, confidence in God, departing from sin, a good conscience, spiritual
joy, comfortable hope, and other good things, which God has prepared for them
that love him. ibidem.

As they that honor thee for thy friends sake, saying that thou art worthy of
no honor of thy self, but only for him, do mightily dishonor thee: so
riches are the causes of reproach unto us, whilst they are more honored, then
the possessors of them. Idem hom. 7. ad Colossenses.

As he that says, thou thy self art worthy of no honor, but I honor thee
for thy servants sake, does reproach thee: so do they that honor rich men, for
their riches. ibidem.

As a good father seeing his son doat upon an harlot, does banish her his
sight: so our heavenly father seeing that his children would doat upon riches,
and leave his love, does either not give them, or else does take them away.
Idem hom. 33. ad Hebraeos.

As a whoorish countenance being filthy of it self, is painted to deceive
others, that they by reason of the veil, may not see the filthiness: so
riches carry a fair flourish of pleasure, that we may not discern the pain
and plague, that they bring with them. Idem hom. quod nemo laeditur nisi a
seipso.

As the Moath is bred of cloth, rust of iron, and thieves of need: so
covetousness is bred of riches, desire of gain, and gaping for more, of much
having. Petrus Chrysologus, sermon. 7.

A fly coming to a barrel of honey, if she touch it with her mouth, and take
that is necessary, departs safely, but if she cast her self into it, she
drowneth, and there perishes: so a man, if he take what riches he has need
of, that he may honestly sustain himself, he may be taken from them and
fly to heaven, but if he wholly drown himself in them, there he sticks,
and bringes himself to destruction. Pintus in Ezeciel. cap. 16.

As a banquet has no grace without guestes: so riches have no pleasure without
virtue. Antistenes apud Stobaeum, ser. 1. de prudentia.

As they that have drunk of the same Wine, some are drunk, some mad, and
some more mild: so they that are enriched alike, are not affected alike.
Aristonymus apud Maximum, sermon 12.

As gold is tried by the touchstone: so riches do show what is in a man. Chilo
apud Laertium.

As thou would not be drowned sailing in a fair ship laden with gold:
so thou ought not to desire sitting in a large and sumptuous house, to be
overwhelmed with the cares of worldly riches. Cleobulus apud Stobaeum, ser. 3.
de Temperantia.

As thou seeing a viper, an aspe, or a scorpion, enclosed in iuory, or in a
golden shrine, do not love them, or esteem them for the excellency of the
matter, as happy creatures, but rather do abhor and detest them for their
venomous and deadly nature: so thou seeing much mischief and wickedness in
riches, and in the pride of fortune, be not amazed at the splendour of the
matter, but contemn the prauitie of the manners. Epictetus apud Stobaeum. sermon.
3.

As gold put into a trembling hand, does also tremble: so riches heaped up
together of a mind full of cares and fear, are shaken together with it, and
are affected after the same manner. Hypseus apud Stobaeum sermon. 90. de
Temperantia.

The taste of the Wine is altered with the caske: so riches do vary according
to the condition of the possessor. Socrates apud Stobaeum sermon. 92.

As a horse if he want a bridle is unruly; and will not be managed of the
rider: so also are riches, if they be not governed by reason. Idem apud
Stobaeum. ser. 3. de Temperantia.

As they that are sick of Fevers, are diversely affected by diverse things,
that is, by hot things, they wax cold, and by cold things they wax hot: so
also riches bring trouble to fools, and poverty bringes joy to a wise man.
Plutarchus in Moralibus.

He that bestows riches and glory upon a wicked man, gives wine to him that
has an ague, honey to one distempered with choler, and dainty meats to one
troubled with Morbus coeliacus, which do increase the disease of his mind,
that is, his foolishnes. ibidem.

As garments do seem to add heat unto a man, when as of themselves they are
cold, but they do not add it, but do defend him, that is, in his body: so
riches seem to give a pleasant life, when as that proceeds from the mind,
and not from external things. ibidem.

As fire is not to be blamed because it deuours cities, corn fields, and
vineyards, seeing yt it is given for many good uses, as to dress meat, to
expel darkness, and to comfort life: so riches unto a wise man are helps
unto virtue, but to a fool are the destruction of his life. Elisius Calentius
in epist ad Hierarcum.

A bird held only by a feather, escapes away with a little loss: so riches
ought not to hinder us from the study of wisdom. Seneca.

A golden bridle does not make a horse the better: so neither do the ornaments
of fortune make a man the better. Seneca.

As a Pilot is never a whit ye better guide because he has a great ship: so is
he never a whit the better man, that has the greater fortune. Seneca.

As instruments are of no use unto them that are ignorant of music: so are
riches unto them, that know not how to use them.

As the Philosopher sending the tongue of a sacrificed beast, sent the beast
and the worst thing: so riches are very good, if thou use them well, but
very evil, if thou use them badly.

As a nettle, if thou handlest it gingerlie, does sting thee, but if thou
gripest it hard, does not pain thee: so money, if thou handlest it tenderly
and lovingly, it will infect thee, but if thou dealest with it contemptuously
and negligently, it will not hurt thee.

As among the Egyptians, there was no man esteemed happy, that had not a beast
full of spots: so amongst us in England there is none accounted wise, that
has not his purse full of gold.

As thorns do prick: so do riches prick with labor in getting them, with
fear in keeping them, and with grief in losing them. F. Ioannes a S.
Geminiano lib. 3. de vegetabilibus and plantis, cap. 18.

As thorns do choke the seed, that it cannot spring up: so riches do choke
with care the seed of the divine word, that it cannot fructify in the heart.
ibidem.

As hayres are not only an ornament, but also an help unto the body: so
riches are an ornament in dignity, and an help in necessity. Idem lib. 6. de
homine and membris eius, cap. 24.

Rich men.
AS many abroad seem happy and merry, and yet a crabbed wife at home marres
all their mirth: so rich men outwardly seem happy, when as inwardly with
cares they are tormented night and day. Plut.

As the fish Scombrus is in the water of a sulphur color, but without the
water like unto other fishes: so rich men in their kingdoms seem like unto
Gods, and to be far more excellent then others, yet in death they nothing
differ from others.

Hearts when they are constrained to cast away their horns, do hide them,
especially the right horn, that it may not be medicinable unto others: so many
rich men, albeit they cannot use their riches themselves, yet they will not
suffer any other to have part in them. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 21 and Aristotel. de
Not. lib. 9. cap. 5.

Albeit the Ass be most immusical, yet ye best pipes are made of his bones, as
Aesope says in Plutarch: so many rich men although unlearned, yet do support
students wits by their wealth.

As rich tapestry oftentimes covers much filthiness: so the riches of great
personages does hide many calamities. Plut. in Moralibus.

As Bucephalus Great Alexanders horse without his furniture did easily admit
any rider, but being adorned with his royal trappings would carry no man but
Alexander himself: so men in low estate do tolerate any thing, but being
made rich, they snuff and fume, and will carry no coals. Plin. lib. 8. cap.
24.

As old bags of no worth, are esteemed according to the value of the money
they have in them: so rich men albeit but fools and dolts, are prized after
the rate, of the goods they possess. Bion apud Stobaeum sermon. 89.

As many threeds bound together, cannot enter into the eye of a needle, but
being sundered, may enter: so a rich man being clogged and tied with his
wealth cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, but parting it among the poor
he may get in. Pintus in Ezechiel. cap. 16.

As the Elm does support the vine: so rich men ought to sustain the poor.
Caesarius Arelatensis hom. 17.

As a dog waits upon a child to get his victuals from him: so the devil
attends upon rich men to catch their souls. Chrysostom. hom. 7. in Epist. ad.
Romans

As we entering into a prison, grieve to see men clogged with chains and
fetters: so entering into the view of this world, we have much more cause of
grief, to see rich men so fettered with the chains of their wealth.
Chrysostomus Homil. 14. in Matthew.

As every Artisan best knows his own trade: so a rich man should be skilful
in his own art, that is, how to divide his riches aright among the poor. idem
Homel. 50. in Matthe.

As we do not say that he is well, that always thirsts, albeit he ^^^nde by
many rivers of drink: so we say that those rich men do not enjoy prosperity,
who are always griping for more. Chrysostom. concione 2. de Lazaro.

As a camel cannot get through the eye of a needle, by reason of the bunch on
his back: so rich men cannot enter into heaven by reason of their deformed
covetousness, and enormous desires. Ambrosius sermon 4.

As it is hard for a Periwinkle in the sea to swim, or for the snaile upon the
land to (...) while they bear their houses upon their backs; even so it is
hard for a rich man that trusts in his riches, with all his big bunches of
wealth upon his back, to go through the needles eye, and to enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

As trees are watched and hedged about whilst fruit is upon the^, but when it
is gone they are neglected and unregarded: so whilst rich men abound with
wealth, they are visited and reverenced, but when they become poor, they are
despised and contemned. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 3. de vegetabilibus and
plantis, cap. 18.

Poverty:
THey that whip thy garments do not touch thy body: so they that vpbraide thee
either with thy birth, or thy poverty, do not properly touch thy self, but do
reproach that that is without thee. Plut.

As the striking of a full vessel, and an empty vessel does make an harmony in
music called Diapason: so a needy poor man and a bountiful rich do well agree
together

They that are in deep dens, are not stricken of the thunderbolt: so the
lowest fortune is the safest.

As riches breed neglect of salvation: so poverty, whilst it coueteth to be
satisfied, declineth from righteousness. Amb. in epi. ad Ro^.

As the Physicians skill is known by curing the diseased: so now and then by
poverty the providence of Gods mercy is perceived. Laurentius Iustinianus lib
de contemptu mundi cap. 11.

As a course garment does not make the body less healthful: so poverty does
nothing hinder the free boldness of speech. Socrates apud Stobaeum sermon. 11.

As they that are borne in Persia do not desire to dwell in Graecia, and there
to enioie prosperity: so poor men, who know the nature of riches, although
they live in great need, yet they do not endeavor to wax rich by ill means.
Epictetus apud Stobaeum. sermon. 11.

It is safer to sail near the shore, then in the vast Ocean: so a poor man's
life is not so subject to dangers, as his is, that is rich. Aristonymus apud
Stobaeum sermon. 95.

By a disease of the body some do receive this commodity, that they are freed
from those businesses, with which they were plunged; by which means they
recover greater strength and validity: so to some, banishment, poverty and
shipwreck have been occasions to study Philosophy. Plut. in Moral.

The Fir tree is easily set on fire, because it has an oily moisture: so he
that is poor in spirit is easily inflamed with the divine love, because he
has an oily humidity, that is, a devout affection of mind. F. Ioannes a S.
Geminiano lib. 3. de vegetabilibus and plantis cap. 51.

As the wild Ass is the Lions pray in the wilderness: so are poor men the
meat of the rich. Ecclesiasticus cap. 13. verse. 20.

Those things are difficult which are excellent.
AS the pricking Asparagus brings forth most pleasant fruit: so of hard
beginninges proceeds great pleasure, Plutarchus.

The more pains thou take to engraue any thing in steel or marble, the
longer it continues: so that we learn with greater diligence, is more hardly
forgotten.

As the Rose being a flower acceptable beyond all others, grows of a thorn:
so of the greatest and sorest labors comes the sweetest fruits.

As the Palm tree is very hard to be climed, because of the plainness and
slipperinesse of the bark, yet has most sweet fruit: so learning and virtue
have a difficult entrance, but very pleasant fruit. Plin. lib. 13. cap. 4.

The Lions whelps are borne without shape, they scarcely go in six months, and
do not move before they be two months old: so those things that are to
become excellent and egregious, are perfited by little and little. Plin. lib.
8. cap. 16.

As the Phoenis is bred but every five hundredth year: so the ^ncrease of
famous men is very rare. Plinius libro 10. cap. 2.

Asses breed all their life long, but mankind has a certain time appointed:
so the multiplication of base things is common and easy, but excellent
things happen seldom. Plinius libro 8. cap. 43. and Seneca.

As the herb Moly is hardly dug out of the earth, but beyond other herbs
is sovereign and effectual unto medicine: so those things that are famous and
excellent are not compassed but by great labor. Plin. lib. 25. cap. 4.

As excellent herbs and flowers do not grow, but by great tillage and
culture, when as Onyons, Leekes, and such like stuff do prosper without any
great toil: so excellent and admirable things are not brought to pass
without great pains, when as baser matters are more obuious.

Dignity.
THose that are called Agrippae, because they are preposterously borne, that
is, with their feet forwards, are supposed to enter into life very vnluckely
and ominouslie, and to the great hurt of mankind, as Marcus Agrippa, Nero,
and Richard the third: so they that intrude themselves into Empire or
ecclesiastical promotion by violence, injustice and simonie become very
pestilent both to themselves, and to those they are set over.

Among the Thessalians it was a capital crime to kill a Storke, for none other
cause, but because she killed serpents; and in England Kites are spared by an
act of parliament, because they purge cities of garbage and entrals of beasts:
so honor and dignity is to be bestowed upon some, not that they are worthy of
it, but because their diligence is necessary for us.

Falling stars are suddenly extinguished: so those that fortune has suddenly
adua^ced, are in a trice cast down. Plut.

Meteors soon breed, soon vanish: so in honors and dignities, those that are
soon up, are soon down.

As that which falls from an high loft, makes a great noise, and is heard of
all: so he that falls from an high estate, his ruin is every where heard of.
Chrisost. hom. 40. operis imperf.

As he that presumes to usurp honor not given him of God, is worthy of
blame: so he that puts it from him being given unto him is guilty of
disobedience. Idem. hom. 1. in 1. Timoth.

As they that climb up a rotten ladder, are in danger of falling: so all
honor, power and glory, which is contrary to humility, does endanger the
possessor. Climacus de discretione gradu 26.

As wise men do not estimate the valor of horses by their trappings: so
neither do they value great personages by their honors and dignities, but by
their virtues. Isidorus de humilitate tomo primo.

Honor.
AS he that stands on a high tower, if his foot but slip is in danger of a
shrewde fall: so he that sits in honors seat.

As the Iuy winds about an old dry tree to make it saplesse: so does honor
circle thee to leave thee accountlesse.

As there is nothing that flies away more speedily then a shadow: so there is
not any thing more unconstant then honor.

As the Viper being burnt to ashes, is good to heal the biting of a Viper: so
if thou be bitten with worldly honors and vanities, desiring likewise to be
healed thereof, remember that thou must return to ashes, the very corruptible
matter whereof thou wast made.

As the first Adam lost honor by pursuing and following it: so the second Adam
got honor by avoiding and eschewing it.

As the Iron must first be well heated in the fire, ere it can be wrought by
the hammer, and driven out on the anuile: so cannot thy fame and name be
honorably enlarged til they have first suffered the strokes of many temptations,
and past through the fire of piercing trials.

The purest wine gets soonest into the head, which makes a wise Lord or ruler
of servants, when he sees any of his followers seek to disorder themselves
with drinking of the best wine, that they shall abate the strength thereof with
water: even so is the will of God, when favor of men and worldly regard do
trouble the senses, and ouermaister our wits, that they should be qualified
with ye water of more provident respect, namely those blames and defects which
depend upon them.

When Antiochus entered the Temple, he took away the lights and the
candlestickes: even so worldly favor no sooner enter into our thoughts, but it
extinguisheth al light of knowledge of our selves.

As things carried aloft by the wind, the wind no sooner cease, but they fall
to the ground: so it fares with them, who without desert, and by the favor of
men are highly promoted, when favor slacketh down falls their dignity, in a
miserable case is he that has no better assurance.

As the snow in summer, and as rain in harvest are not meet: so is honor
unseemly for a fool.

As every crown does not become every conqueror: so every honor does not
become every man. Plut.

As a great Colossus, and a huge statue ill poised, are easily subverted: so
too much honor through envy does overthrow many. Plut.

They that heap honors and glory upon an evil man, do give wine to one sick
of a fever, honey to one oppressed with choler, and meat to one troubled with
morbus coeliacus, which increase the disease of his mind, that is, his
foolishnes. Plut.

Nobility.
AS faith is very rich, but without works, quite dead: so nobility is good,
but if not accompanied with virtue, most base and infamous. Stella de contemptu
mundi.

As of one root springs both the Rose and the brier: so of one mother may
descend both a bad son and a good; for a man may be borne of a noble birth,
and yet himself become vile and dishonorable. ibidem.

As in fertile earth grows the Hemlock, which is a venomous and deadly herb,
and in the barren grows the pure gold: so oftentimes out of honorable houses
issues degenerate minds, and out of base Stocks proceeds valorous thoughts.
ibidem.

As he is a fool, who having at all no beauty in him, will nevertheless
extol his own beauty and perfection: even so as foolish is he that believes
himself to be noble, not having any part of nobility in him.

As of a bitter root many times comes sweet and pleasant fruit: so from a
poor race may issue some to be famous and noble, by the virtuous behavior
which afterward shall renown them. ibidem.

As gross clouds cover the sun, Moon and Stars, and robs men of their
celestial splendor: so the vices of them that are virtuously descended,
obscure the worthy actions of their famous forgoers. Ibidem.

As brickes take their beginning from clay: so nobility took her beginning
from obscure parentage. Gregorius Nyssenus apud Antonium monachum in Melissa.

As it nothing profits a muddy river to have sprung from a pure fountain: so
it nothing helps vicious children to have descended from noble houses. Hector
Pin^ tus in cap. 16. Ezechiel.

As he that is born a fool, is born a slave: so he that is borne a wise man,
is nobly borne. And therefore Antisthenes said very well* that nobilitye did
folly and only consist in virtue and wisdom, whereupon the Stoikes concluded,
that only wise men were noble men.

As estimation many times springs from the foolish opinion of the people, and
not from desert: so does nobility. Lodo. Viues in introductione ad Sapientiam.
cap. 3.

As little Crab fishes do hide themselves in great empty shells, that they may
be the more safe: so some distrusting their own strength and virtue, do
protect themselves under the noble titles of their ancestors. Erasmus.

As no bird can look against the sun, but those that be bred of the Eagle,
neither any Hawke soar so high, as the brood of the Hobby: so for the most
part none have true sparks of heroicke majesty, but those that are descended
from noble races.

As the wine that runs on the lees, is not therefore to be accounted neat,
because it was drawn of the same piece; or as the water that springs from
the fountaynes head, and flows into the filthy channel, is not to be
called clear, because it came of the same stream: so neither is he that
descends of noble parentage, if he desist from noble deeds, to be esteemed a
Gentleman, in that he issued from the loins of a noble Sire, for that he
obscureth the parents he came of, and discrediteth his own estate.

The pure Coral is chosen as well by his virtue, as his color; a king is
known better by his courage then his crown: so a right Gentleman is sooner
seen by the trial of his virtue, then blasing of his arms.

The Rose that is eaten with the Canker is not gathered, because it grows on
that stalk that the sweet does; neither was Helen made a star, because she
came of that Egg with Castor: so neither is he a true Gentleman, that has
nothing to commend him, but the nobility of his ancestors.

As it is a sign of true honor and nobility to reprove sin: so to renounce
it is the part of honesty.

As no Thersites could be transformed into Ulysses: so no Alexander could be
couched in Damocles.

A good name:
FIre once kindled is easily kept, but being extinct it is hardly rekindled:
so it is an easy thing to maintain a good name, but being once lost, it is
not so easily recovered. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

Ships well repayed, do endure many years: so we must continuallye add
something to the propagation of our good names, least time and age eat them
out. ibidem.

As a shadow sometimes goes before, and sometimes comes after: so some
forthwith do get good report, and some have it not till after death, but he
later that it comes, it is wont to be the greater. Seneca.

As the famous monuments called Obelisci were long time in making, and reared
with much ado, by reason of their hugeness, etc exceeding weight, but being
once finished, they continued many ages: so it is a hard thing to get a name
of virtue and wisdom, but being once gotten, it is never extinguished.

As in very great Obeliskes almost as much is builded under the earth, as is
above, that they may stand immovable: so a firm and sound foundation is to
be laid for the continuance of a perpetual name.

As spices then do smell more fragrantly, when they are either moved, broken or
powned: so virtues fame is then largely dispersed, when it is exercised in
serious employments and weighty affairs.

As Physicians forbid to wash the teeth with the juice of the herb Alcakengy,
although it be good to fasten them, because the danger is greater, then the
commodity, for at length it will bring madness: so those things are not to
be dealt in, that hurt the name, and increase the wealth, nor that learning to
be meddled with, which polisheth the tongue, and infecteth the manners.

As fire in a dark night is a far off discerned, but in the Sunshine is
scarcely seen: so many a paultry rymer, and bawdie ballad-maker, seems among
base conceits of great esteem, but in the view of more glorious and splendent
spirits, they appear none other then dunghill birds, and alefied Groutnowls.
Tyrius Platonicus sermon. 24.

An ill Name.
AS some by the deformities of their body have got unto them a surname, as of
crooked legs, to be called Vari, of flabberkin lips, Chilones, of great
noses, Nasones, of read noses, Salamanders: so manic by their mischievous
misdeedes do purchase infamous and ill names, as Nero for his beastliness to
be termed the Beast of Rome; Tamberlane for his tyranny, The wrath of God,
and Attila for his cruelty, The scourge of God, etc.

As it grieueth a father to see his son deadly sick, or irrecuperably
ouermatched in fight with his enemy: so it grieueth any good nature to hear
himself ill spoken of, or to hear his wife and daughters termed dishonest.
Iouianus Pontanus de fortitudine, lib. 2. cap. 5.

As many Christians abstain from much mischief, least after this life, hell
should be their inheritance: so Tiberius Caesar kept himself from many
outrages and misdemeanors, least after death an ill name should follow him.
Erasmus in Epistola ante Suetonium Tranquillum.

Albeit thou powrest water upon the herb Adyanton, or drownest it in the
water, yet it continues dry; so infamy, slander, or an ill name will not
cleave to a good man, albeit one endeavor to defame him.

A Courtly life.
AS the Moon the nearer the Sun it is, the less light it has: so more
fruit and dignity is in them, that are far off from great Princes.

There is a certain herb in India of an especial savor, full of little
serpents, whose stinges are present death: so the courts of certain Princes
has that which delights, but unless thou be wary, they harbor deadly
poison.

Antes do gnaw that end of the corn which begins to sprout, least it
become unprofitable unto them: so great men that they may always keep their
servants in service and slavery, do hold them under, least looking up after
liberty, they should forsake the Court through the tediousnes of servitude.

As it is a very rare thing to see the birds called Halciones; but when they
appear, they either bring or portend fair weather: so Bishops and
Cleargie-men, should seldom come to the Courts of Princes, but either to
preach manners, or appease tumults.

There is a kind of pulse called Cracca, which Culuers take such delight in,
that having once tasted of it, they cannot afterward be driven from that
place: so they that have once tasted of the honey and honor of the Court, can
never be driven from the Court. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 16.

A Mule ingendered of an Horse and an Ass, is neither Horse nor Ass: so some
whilst they would be both Courtiers and Prelates, are neither.

Strange it is, that the sound eye viewing the sore, should not be dimmed; that
he that handles pitch should not be defiled: so is it strange that they that
continue in the Court, should not be infected.

Nylus breeds the precious stone, and the poisoned serpent; and as in all
ryuers there is some fish, and some frogs; and as in all gardens there be some
flowers, some weeds; and as in all trees, there be some blossoms, some
blasts: so the Court may as well nourish virtuous Matrones, as the lewd Minion.

Courtiers.
AS the star Artophylax is brightest, yet sets soonest: so Courtiers
glories being most gorgeous, are dashed with sudden overthrows.

As the Camelion turns himself into the likeness of every object: so
Courtiers as Aristippus that fawnde upon Dionysius, aim their conceits at
their Kings humor, if he smile, they are in their iolitie, if frown, their
plumes fall like Peacockes feathers.

The Indian Torteises in a calm do delight to floote aloft in the noone-Sun
with all their back bare above water, until their shelles (having forgot
themselves) be so parched with the heat of the Sun, that they cannot get
under water, and so they swimming above water, become a prey unto fishers: so
some allured with hope of great matters, do thrust themselnes into the Courts
of Princes, and are so lulled a sleep with the pleasures of the Court, that
they cannot forsake it when they would, and betake themselves to their woonted
rest. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 10.

As the herb Heliotropium is carried about with the Sun, and whither soever
it moves, thither the herb turns his head: so Courtiers which way soever
their king does beck, thither they bend. Plin. 18. cap. 24. and 27. eodem lib.

The Crocodile sometimes lives upon the land, and sometimes in the water; she
lays her eggs upon the land, and seeks her prey in the water: so some are
both Courtiers and ecclesiastical persons, but in both places very pestilent
fellows. Conradus Lycosthenes Rubeaquensis.

As the Adamant cannot draw iron, if the Diamond lie by it: so vice cannot
allure the Courtier, if virtue be retained.

Kings.
AS the Leopard by reason of his sweet savor does allure wild beasts unto
him, and so does destroy the^: so the courts of princes I know not what
enticing allurements they have, that draw men into destruction. Plinius libro.
8. cap. 27.

As the herb Heliotropium does always look toward the sun, and when it
is hid does gather in the flower: so many to the Kings beck bend their
endeavors, and to what thing soever they see him inclined, to that they address
themselves. Plin. lib. 18. cap. 27.

As the crocking of frogs beyond their wont does prognosticate an imminent
tempest: so when the speech of evil men is of most force with Princes, and
good men are silenced, then the confusion of their estate is at hand.

As the dogs of Malta are especially delighted in among the rich and delicate
women of that I Will: so effeminate princes do greatly set by flatterers, who
both speak and do all things according to their humors. Plin. lib. 3. cap.
vltim^.

That which oil is unto flies, emmots, and to other insect and entailed
creatures: that is flattery unto foolish princes. Those being anointed with
oil do die, these by flattery and assentation of clawbackes are drawn to
destruction, and they draw their common wealth into the same praedicament.
Plin. lib. 11. cap. 19.

As a vine except thou prune it, does largely extend it self abroad,
embracing and enfolding all things in her arms: so an ambitious Prince is
always encroching upon his neighbors, except he be now and then curbed.

As it is dangerous to call up devils, because if there be an error in any
thing, it is committed with great ieopardie; for they say that Tullus
Hostilius was stricken with a thunderbolt, because he endeavoring by Numaes
books to call down Jupiter, had done some things unskillfully: so it is
dangerous to converse with Princes, or with estates of overthwart conditions,
because they being offended at any small matter, do utterly overthrow a man.
Plin. lib. 2. cap. 55. et. lib. 28. cap. 2.

As the counters of arithmeticians are sometimes in account worth many
thousands, and sometimes worth nothing: so the friends of kings sometimes
can do any thing, and sometimes displeasure being taken they can do just
nothing. Plut.

As a temperate air does make the earth fruitful, and an ungentle climate
does cause sterility; so the favor and benignity of a prince, does stir up
and revive honest studies, but avarice and currishnesse, does extinguish and
kill the Arts. Idem.

As the lodestone does draw unto it all iron, but the Ethiopian lodestone
does draw another lodesto^e unto it: so the king carries the people, whither
he lists: but a great king draws also other kings unto him.

As other beasts level their looks at the countenance of the Lion, and
birds make wing as the Eagle flies: so Regis ad arbitrium totus componitur
orbis. If Saul kill himself, his armor bearer, will do the like.

Such beef, such broth; such lips, such lettice: so such Lords, such laymen.
In Traians time all men studied justice, in that he was just. In Octauius days
each one would be a Poet, because he delighted in Poesy.

As a bridle maistereth an horse; and a stern the ship: so a King be he good
or had, will after him lead all his people. If he serve God, the people will
serve him also, if the King blaspheme, his subjects will do the like.
Cornelius feared God, so did all his household. Dives cruel, and so are all
his household.

A Kingdom.
MAny in outward show seem glorious, all which glory a curs wise at home
turns into sorrow: so a kingdom seems to bring all content with it, yet it
is well known that crowns have cares, and that a courtly life is a miserable
splendor. Plut.

As Venus court cannot brook a rival: so a kingdom cannot abide a compeere;
according to the english Hexameter; dame Venus and kingdoms can no riuality
suffer.

As it is dangerous to transplant old trees: so innovation in a kingdom,
that has long continued after one manner, is full of peril. Plut.

The hand is not the weaker, because it is divided into fingers, but fuller of
agility to labor: so in a kingdom the businesses are better done, which are
imparted to many. Idem.

They that willingly go into a river, are nothing at all hurt, but they that
fall in by chance, are greatly astonished: so they that advisedly come to the
gouernmente of a kingdom, do moderatly sway their empire, but they that
rashly intrude them selves into it, afterward repent themselves Idem.

Boisterous winds do most of all shake the highest towers; the higher the
place is, the sooner and sorer is the fall; the tree is ever weakest toward
the top; in greatest charge, are greatest cares; in largest seas, are sorest
tempests; envy shoots at high marks: so a kingdom is more easily got then
kept.

As Britain would not contain Porrex and Ferrex; and as the same kingdom
could not hold Belinus and Brennus: so Thebes could not contain Eteocles and
Polynices; nor Rome hold Romulus and Remus.

As Iugurth could not tolerate his brethren Hiempsal and Adherbal to have part
of his kingdom: so Amulius would not suffer his brother Numitor to have any
participation of government with him.

Princes.
AS they that neither eat nor wash, but by the prescription of the physician,
do not enjoy health: so they that refer all things to the judgment of the
Prince, they make him more lordly, then the city is willing he should be, so
that nothing can be done rightly except the prince will it so.

As the king of the world does regard great affairs, leaving small matters to
fortune, as Euripedes says: so a prince should not be exercised but in great
and serious business

First it is necessary that the rule or square be right and straight it self,
and then it may direct other things that are applied unto it: so first it is
necessary that a prince want faults himself, and then that he prescribe laws
unto others. Plut.

If you put the herb Eruggium into the mouth of a goat, when she stays,
then all the rest do stay, until the shepherd pull out the herb: so the
manners and conditions of a prince are disseminated among, the people after a
wonderful manner. Idem.

The Cybind makes such deadly war with the eagle, that they fighting
together, are oftentimes taken up for a prey: so princes making mortal war
between themselves, are now and then subverted of some third one.

As it is prodigious that many suns should appear: so also is it, that there
should be many Monarchs, Princes or Emperors. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 31.

As the sun is not one to a poor man, and another to a rich man, but common
alike to all: so a prince ought not to respect the person, but the matter.

As God when he sees all things, yet is like to one that sees nothing: so a
prince ought to be ignorant in nothing, and yet to dissemble many things.

As magitians do promise prodigious things, that they may allure the credulous
people unto them: so princes do present great hopes unto their subjects, that
they may make them more obedient unto the^.

As a vine although it be the noblest of al trees, yet needs the supportatio^
of reeds, props, and of other unfruitful trees: so princes, potentates, and
great scholars need the help of inferior persons.

The lion is feared of all other beasts, and yet fears the crowing and comb
of a cock: so great princes are compelled sometimes to fear the slanders and
reproaches of inferior people.

A proppe if it be not strongly set in the ground, falls down, and
overthrows whatsoever leans on it: so a prince except he steadfastly stick
unto his maker, soon brings both himself, and they that consent unto him,
to utter ruin. Cyprianus lib. duodecem abusionum.

As it is the part of the sun to illuminate the world with his beams so it is
the part of a prince to succor and co^miserate them that be in distress.
Agapetus Diaconus de officio principis.

As dogs do watch flocks of sheep, not that they fear themselves, but the
flock: so a Prince or a king ought not to live for himself, but for his
people. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

As he is not only worthy of one punishment alone, that infecteth with poison
a public fountain, of which all doc drink: so is he most hurtful that
infecteth the Princes mind with wicked opinions, whence so much harm
redoundeth unto men. Idem de institutione principis.

A Prince is nothing else, but a physician of the common wealth. But it is not
enough for a physician that he have skillful ministers about him, unless he
himself be very skillful and vigilant: so it is not enough for a Prince, if he
have honest magistrates, unless he be very honest himself, by whom they may
be both chosen and amended. Ibidem.

There is nothing higher then God: so it is meet that a prince should be
exceeding far removed from the base cares of pesa^ts, and from fordide and
filthy affections. Ibid.

As the sun after the setting does not presently hide ye light: so a Prince
endued with wisdom, yea after he departs out of life, does leave behind him
peace and justice, and good government, which does endure till tyranny
overthrow it. Hector Pintus in cap. 27. Ezechtel.

He that would see whether a fish be corrupted, does look upon the head, for
this does first putrify: so the prince being corrupted, they rest are easily
perucrted. Will thou know the state of the common wealth, behold the prince.
Idem in cap.pri. Esaye.

In the upper region of the air there are no clouds, storms and thunder are
engendered more low: so a prince ought to be of a settled and quiet mind,
perturbations are more tolerable in men more obscure, but in princes, they are
altogether intolerable. Idem. in cap. 48.

As a physician does not use one medicine for all diseases, no not in one
disease, if so it does vary, but observing the intensions, remissions,
repletions, vacuations, and mutation of causes, does vary many things for
health, now experime^ting this, no we ye: so a prince ought to have variety in
his guernme^t, he must be one in peace, and another in war, he must be are
himself one way to a few, and another way to a multitude. etc. Philo lib. de
Joseph.

A physician, nor a pylot are chosen by chance, but for their skill: so
neither is a prince or a ruler to be chosen by hap hazard, but for his wise
dome, and therefore wise Moses does not remember in any place that rulers were
chosen by lotte, but he had rather that they should be brought in by voices.
Idem lib. de creatione princis pis.

As a ship cannot be without a pylot, nor an army without a captain: so a
city cannot be without a prince or ruler, least the mighty should devour the
meaner sort, and the strong the weak. Chrysostom. hom. 6. adpop. Antioch.

As the color of Jacobs rods were, such was the color of the cattle, which
were bred of the sheep conceauing in the sight of the rods: so as the actions
of the prince are, such are wont to be the cogitations of the subjects. Jacob
is the prince, his works are the rod, his subjects the sheep, cogitations the
conceauings. Hector Pintus in cap. 17. Ezechicl.

As a man deprived of his eyes, a bideth in darkness: so a common wealth
bereaved of just and wise Princes, continues in black pitchie horror. Idem
in cap. 38.

As a captain is the eye of his army: so a prince is the eye of the common
wealth. For this cause Demas an excellent orator, when he saw great Alexander
dead, he compared the army of the Macedonians to a Cyclope. Ibidem.

A governor of a ship does seek for the best mariners, and an Architect for
the skilfullest builders: so a prince ought to purchase unto himself those,
that are the fittest for government. Plut. in Moralibus.

As unskillful caruers do think that the beautifullest picture, which is the
greatest: so many princes by their pride and disdain do think themselves
great potentates. ibidem.

As the blinded Cyclop stretched out his hand every way, but with no certain
aim: so a great prince, that wants wise dome, takes every thing in hand
with great hurly burley, but with no judgment. Ibidem.

Neither the greatness of the ship, nor the price of the wars, nor the
number of passengers, does make a good pylot ever the prouder, but the more
diligent: so a good prince, the more that he governs, he ought to be the more
diligent, not the more insolent.

The education of a Prince.
AS he is more grievously to be punished that castes deadly poison into a
fountain, whence all drink, then he that only casts it into a cup: so do
they more offend, that corrupt the disposition of a Prince, then they that
corrupt a private man. Plut.

As cities were wont to honor sacrifices, because they craved of God a common
good for all: so a good master of a Prince is to be honored, who makes the
Prince such an one, that he may beco^e profitable to all. Idem.

As an Artisan does more willingly make that harp, by which he knows Amphion
is to build the walls of Thebes, then that, by which Thales is to appease the
commotion of Sparta: so a philosopher does more willingly take pains to frame
the wit of a prince, that may profitte the whole world, then of a private
man, that pockets up knowledge for him self. Idem.

A good Prince.
AS God has placed in heaven the sun, to be a most noble and excellent pattern
of his beauty: so has he placed in the common wealth a wise, just and
liberal Prince, to be a representer of his virtues, Plut.

As a Physician, when he has drawn out much corrupt blood, does minister unto
his patient wholesome meat: so a Prince when he has taken away lewd and
ungodly persons, does make much of them that be good. idem.

As a Musician does not presently cast away nor break his iarring strings, but
by extension and remission does bring them unto harmony: so a Prince ought to
amend offenders, and not presently to take them out of the world, idem.

As we owe more unto that Neptune, that has brought us home most precious
merchandise: so we owe more to that Prince, who bestows his pains for the
public good, and not for his own pleasures. Seneca.

If the planets of the world do but a little stay or err, it is don to ye
great hurt of al: so if a Prince go astray, or be slothful, it is to the great
danger of his state and common wealth. Seneca.

Only the King of Bees has no sting, or at the least uses it not, besides
he is greater in body, and more beautiful in show, but of lesser wings then
the other Bees: so it is meet that a Prince be most gentle and courteous, and
never to be far from his dominions. Plinius lib. 21. cap. 17.

The King of Bees does not labor himself, but walking and flying about
others, does as it were exhort them to labor: so a Prince not by labor, but
by advice and commandment ought to profit his. ibidem.

The sun is most pleasant unto them, that can behold it: so is the Prince to
them, that love justice.

As a Lion does sooner tyrannize over a man then a woman, but touches not
children, except famine constrain him, and spares the suppliant and
prostrate: so a Prince and those that be mighty ought to pardon inferiors, and
to make trial of their strength upon them, whom it is praise worthy to over
come. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16.

As a new seen Comet does portend to mortal men either great good, or great
harm: so a new Prince does bring safety to his subjects, if he be good, but
ruin and destruction if he be evil. Plinius libro 2. cap. 26.

As the sun with his heat cherishes the earth: so a good Prince with his
bounty cherishes scholars and learning.

An evil Prince.
AS the lightning is first seen, before the sound of the thunder be heard; and
as the blood is seen before the wound: so an e^^ll prince sometimes
condemns, before the party be arrained. Plut.

As one fault cannot amend another: so a foolish and a wicked prince cannot
amend his people. Idem.

As the dog-starre is pestilent to every body: so the power of an evil prince
does hurt all.

Hearts when they set up their ears, are of a very good hearing, but when they
let them down, then they are deaf: so evil Princes hear a far off any thing
that pleases them, but if it be otherwise, they understand not, albeit thou
shoutest in their ears.

When frogs croke above their wont, they-presage a tempest approaching: so when
the speech of evil men preuailes most with Princes, then confusion is at hand.

As an eclipse of the sun does bring great hurt to mankind: so an error of the
king, although it be small, does work great disturbance in the public state.
Plinius lib. 2. cap. 10.

A Vine except it be pruned, does largely spread it self abroad, embracing and
enfolding all things with her branches: so an ambitious Prince is always
encroching upon his neighbors except he be restrained.

Empire.
AS he ought not to meddle with a lute, that is unskillful in Music: so he
ought not to take empire and rule upon him, that is not endued with wisdom and
prudence.

As of fire and earth, the world is compounded, as of two necessary elements,
according to Plato, the earth yielding solidity, and the fire heat and form:
so great empires are not compassed nor conquered, unless prowess be mingled
with success and fortune, and one be an help unto the other. Plut.

They that hunt beasts, do put on the case of a Heart, they that foul, use
feathered clothes; and every one takes heed that he do not appear unto wild
Bulls in purple or red garments, or unto an Elephant in white apparel, because
by these colors they are provoked to wrath and rage: so he that would tame a
fierce and barbarous Nation, he must for the time apply himself unto them
both in manners and apparel idem.

As thou can not tell, whether a vessel be sound or no, unless thou powrest
water into it: so neither can thou know a man, except thou committest empire
and rule unto him. idem.

Power.
AS he that rides a young Colt with a naughty Bridle, is quickly set
besides the saddle: so he that in deuoureth to subdue the common people, being
not sufficiently furnished with power, is quickly cast from his dominion. Plut.

As the Sun when it is at the highest near unto the Septentrionall pole,
seems then least to move: so the greater the power is, the more the rashness
of the mind is to be restrained. Idem.

As ill dreams do somewhat for the time distract the mind, but do nothing
else: so evil men, but without power, do little hurt. Idem.

As the feathers in a birds wing being cut, do in time grow again: so does
power, except it be continually curbed and repressed.

If either Castor or Pollux appear alone, it presageth hurt, but if they show
themselves jointly together, it foretells good luck: so it is not meet that
power should be separated from wisdom, for if it be, it is very pestilent.

As Saturn, who holds the highest place among the 7. Planets, is very
slowly moved about in his sphere: so it is requisite that they that be in
great place, and have great power be not rash and timorous. Plin. lib. 2. cap.
6.

As some lightning does melt brass and iron, but does not dissolve soft wax:
so the divine power, and kingly might does rage against withstanders, but does
spare them that yield and give place.

As raging thunderbolts do vainly tear in pieces barren mountains to no
purpose: so foolish strength does spend it self upon those things which it
need not.

As neither Egypt by reason of the heat, nor Scythia by reason of the cold, do
feel any lightnings, or thunderclaps: so either great power, or extreme
poverty does make safe from reproaches.

A Commonwealth.
AS the temper of the world does consist of contrary elements after a
wonderful harmony: so a Commonwealth does stand by the diverse endeavors of
men.

As a ship is joined together by many strokes, by many nails and pinnes, and
then does stand a certain time till the joints be well settled together, and
afterward does cut the seas: so a Commonwealth is established by much
labor, but taking increase and growth in time, it yields a quiet and
peaceable life unto the inhabitants. Plut.

A governor of a ship does something with his own hands, and somewhat by
others: so in a Commonwealth, one ought not to have all offices engrossed in
his hands, but one ought to have one, and another, another, for things are done
better which are done by the aduices and judgments of many. Idem.

There was a time appointed unto the Vestalles, first, wherein they should
learn; secondly, wherein they should exercise that they had learned; and
thirdly, wherein they should teach others; The same thing Dianaes Priests at
Ephesus did: so they are to do, that are to take the government of a common
wealth upon them. idem.

As Wine does first serve and obey the drinker, but by little and little mixing
it self with the blood in the veins, does rule over the drinker, and makes
him a drunkerd: so he that comes to the government of a Commonwealth, at the
first applies himself to the humors of the people, but afterward he
draws them to his purpose, and makes them his subjects and vassals. idem.

As they that have nothing to do at home walk idly abroad: so many moath-eaten
Politicians, because they have no private business of their own, they pry into
and prate of Commonwealth matters. idem.

As Spring and Autumn do endanger our bodies, by reason of change: so all
innouations do offend and hurt a Commonwealth.

When as brute creatures do leave their ordinary course of nature, it
portendes a tempest; that is, when Cormorants, and Gulles, do forsake the seas
and rivers, when Antes hide themselves, or cast out their eggs, and when
worms craule out of the earth: so when the wicked are audacious, the religious
mute, the people wise, the Princes dotardes, and the Priests together by the
ears for earthly matters, then it presageth the ruin of a commonwealth.

As the life of all the members proceeds from the heart: so from the
Commonwealth proceeds the common good of every one, and of the saftie of it
depends the safety of all. Geminianus, li. 6. de homine; and eius membris.
cap. 57.

A Captain.
AS the purge Elleborum raises all within, and first goes out it self: so a
valiant Captain exhorting his Soldiers to be valorous, first issues upon
the enemy himself, as Herophilus says in Pliny.

As a Prince is the eye of a Commonwealth: so a Captain is the eye of the
army. Hector Pintus in cap. 38. Ezechiel.

As a Pylot is chosen for his skill in navigations: so a Captain ought to be
made choice of for his expertnesse in feats of arms.

War.
AS in admirable cunning, and curious workmanship, but unprofitable, there is
greater praise given unto the workman, by whose art it is made, then unto the
king by whose cost it is effected: so the greatest glory of war consists in
the hired soldior, by whose industry the battle is stricken, but the least
part does return unto ye kings, who also hire the soldiors with other men's
money.

As Herostratus, an obscure and base man, could easily burn the temple of
Ephesian Diana, which was 220. years a building of all Asia, at the costs of
so many kings, and beautified with the labors and cunning of so many excellent
workmen: so it is a most easy matter to overthrow and subvert famous and
admired cities, but very hard and difficult to reedifie and raise them up again.

As the wings of birds being clipped, in time do grow out again: so warlike
forces do continually gather head, except thou often curb them and keep them
under.

Dragons sucking the blood of Elephants, do kill them, and they in like manner
being drunken with their blood, are squeesed in pieces by the fall of the
Elephant, and so die: so oftentimes in war, both parts do destroy, and are
destroyed, and both sides do endamage, and are endamaged. Plin lib. 8. cap. 12.

A Plough-man except he be crooked, and bending to his labor, he does never
make clean work, nor furrow his land handsomely, as the people of the old
world were wont to say: so a soldiour, except he can swear, swagger, rob,
ravish maids, and defloure matrones, and play the villain in grain, is
scarcely counted a man at arms in these corrupt times.

Aristotle writes in his ninth book de Historia animalium, that the Cybind
and the Eagle do so vehemently contend and strive, that oftentimes clasping
together in the air, they fall down unto the earth, and are taken up alive of
shepherds: so now and then it comes to pass, that whilst princes peruersly
exercise mortal and deadly wars between themselves, and other inuader
comes and subuerts them both.

Victory:
A Lion is easily taken, if a cloak or a garment be cast before his eyes,
otherwise he is inexpugnable: so it is easy to get the victory over the
strongest, if his disposition be known.

As a Lion does more rage against a man, then against a woman, but touches
not children, except hunger constrain him, and spares the suppliant and
prostrate: so the mighty ought to pardon the weak, and to try their strength
against them, whom it is glorious to overcome.

Laws.
AS that rule ought to be straight, by which other things are squared: so it
is necessary that a Lawmakers be without vices himself, that he may prescribe
right Laws unto others. Plut.

As crows break through spiders webs, but flies are entangled: so laws do
vex the comminaltie, but are broken without punishment of mighty and great
persons. Anacharsis.

As the best remedies and medicines proceed from the worst diseases: so good
laws are made of evil manners.

As in a Lute, harmony is not made by the touch of one string, but all the
strings are to be stricken numerously and harmoniously: so in the virtue of our
minds the observation of one law is not enough for us unto salvation, but all
are to be kept with great diligence. Chrysostom. hom. 36. de virtutibus and
vitijs.

As where there are many Physicians, there are many diseases: so where there
are many laws, there are many vices: Arcesilaus apud Laertium lib. 4. cap. 6.

As a strong wall does defense a city: so does good laws defend common wealths.
Dion orat. 74. De lege.

Sailors that take notice of landmarks, do the safeliest come to a haven: so
they that live according to law, do the safeliest pass over the course of
their lives, and at the last find a quiet and peaceable harbor. ibidem.

As he is not a man, who wantes reason: so that will not long be a City, which
is not governed with laws. Idem orat. 36. Borysthenica.

Where thou see abundance of Apothecaries, and affluence of drugges, there
thou may deem that there are many diseases: so where thou see innumerable
laws, there it is certain, that there the men are exceeding wicked and
irreligious. Aristoteles apud Stobaeum.

As the body does come to naught with out the soul: so a City is subverted,
that is governed by no laws. Demosthenes apud Maxim. sermon. 58.

As a perfect Grammarian has no need of precepts for his Art: so a perfect
just man has no need of any law. Philo. lib. 1. Allegoriarum legis.

As the soul is the life of the body: so the law is the life of a City.
Stobaeus sermon 41.

As diseases were before remedies for them: so evil misdemeanors were before
the constitution of good laws. Philippus Beroaldus, in oratione habita in
enarratione Verrinarum.

Lawyers.
AS one Goasehauke is enough for one shire: so one lawyer is enough for a city;
and therefore the city of Basil, maintains but one only lawyer, as Peter Ramus
says in his Basilca.

As the Switzers and Logic fight for every body: so do Lawyers.

As Sumners live of the sins of the people: so do lawyers.

As Arcesilaus said, that where there were many Physicians, there were many
diseases: so Plato said, that that Commonwealth was miserable, where the
multitude of Lawyers did abound. Therefore very well says our English
Satyrist:

Woe to the weal where many lawyers be,
For sure there is much store of malady.
Sheep that go for shelter to a bush, leave their fleece behind them, and
return naked: so men that go for redress of wrong to Lawyers, leave their
wealth behind them, and return monilesse.

As lecherous and luxurious persons do spend themselves upon whores: so
envious and malicious people do consume themselves upon lawyers.

As a balance stoopeth to that side, whence it receives most weight: so
lawyers favor him most, that gives most.

As a Horseleach is an exceeding waster of the humors of that body it seaseth
upon: so Lawyers are exceeding consumers of that man's wealth they deal with;
whereupon a Lawyer is called in Iuuenall, Hirudo forensis, ab Hirudine, a
Horseleach or bloudsucker. Nomen habet a re. Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis.

As our wickedness makes a lawyer necessary: so necessity makes him
honorable; and therefore he is not in the deepest truth to stand in rank
either with the Divine, Historian or Philosopher. Sir Philip Sidney in his
Apology for Poetry.

Many Tauernes and Taphouses do nourish intemperancy and incontinency: so many
Lawyers, and Pettifoggers do not only kindle, but also maintain quarrels,
discord and variance.

A few great potentates in a state do well, but a multitude of them are not
so convenient: so a few Lawyers are tolerable, but the abundant rabble of them
are as intolerable, as the multitude of Friars were.

Flies feed upon ulcers: so Lawyers upon discord.

Vultures prey upon dead carrion: so lawyers upon dissensious and discordious
persons

A Judge.
AS he that shoots an arrowe directs it unto the mark, neither does he aim
it gone, short, or wide: so a just Judge will do, neither will accept the
person in judgment. Basilus in principium prouerbiorum.

As a just pair of scales, is neither corrected by a true balance, nor judged
by a false: so a just judge is neither examined of the righteous, nor rightly
reprehended of the wicked. Epictet. apud Maximum sermon. 5. and apud Stobaeum
sermon. 5. de iustitia.

As a line drawn diameterwise in a geometrical figure does equally divide one
side from another: so a Judge must be partial to neither side.

As they that would see more sharply and certainly, do shut one of their
eyes: so a Judge shall more directly understand the truteh, if he has no
respect of persons.

As the sun is not one to a poor man, and other to a rich man, but alike
common to all: so a Judge must not respect the person but the matter.

Judgment.
AS expounders of the scriptures, do open the mysteries of them, as much as
they can: so of hard and abstruse matters we must judge warelie and
circumspectly. Plutarch.

Straight things being put in the water, seem to be crooked and broken: so
when we judge amiss of matters, the fault is in us, not in the matter. Seneca.

As Tymanthes, who pourtrayed Iphigenia, expressed all the affections and
passions of others, but covered with a veil Agamemnons countenance: so some
things are better left to every ones judgment and consideration, then
expressed with words.

Magistrates.
AS Physicians provide for the health of the body: so Magistrates provide for
the heath of the City. Philo libro de Joseph.

As fire of his own nature, retains heat, and heates things moved unto it:
so a Magistrate ought not only to be full of justice himself, but also to
administer it unto others. Idem lib. de Iudice.

As thunderboltes fall to the danger of few, but to the fear of all: so
magistrates ought more to terrify then to hurt. Seneca lib. 3. de ira Dei.

Alexander caused Bucephalus being old to be carried of other Horses to the
battle, that being fresh and untired, he might the better serve his purpose
in the war: so we are to use the diligence and industry of old and ancient
magistrates; we are to rid them of as much labor, as we can, that they
may be reserved for necessary uses. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

A stage player does so add gesture unto his part, that he does not pass
beyond his lines: so he that takes Magistracy upon him, must not pass the
prescript of the law, or of his King. Ibidem.

As longing women do greedily devour hurtful meats, and a little after do
cast them up again: so the common people, either through foolishnes or for
want of better, do elect any magistrates, and afterward do reject them.
ibidem.

They that sail in the same ship, and they that war in the same tents, ought
to help one another: so ought they that bear office in a common wealth.
ibidem.

They that have safely sailed by the Syrtes, and shipwreck themselves by the
Haven, perform no great matter: so they that laudablie carry themselves in
one or two offices, and afterward fail in the chiefest, deserve small
commendations. ibidem.

As the seas are such, as the winds are, that toss and turmoile them: so the
multitude in such, as the magistrates are that rule them.

As a Physician ought to seek for the profit of his patient, and not for his
own: so ought a magistrate, to seek for the public good, and not for his
private gain. Patritius Senensis lib. 2. tit. 1. de institutione regis.

A Painter does not only adorn with his pencill the eyes and the face, but
beautifieth with variety of colors the whole picture: so a good magistrate
does not only order one kind of people in his common wealth, but brings
happiness to the whole state. ibidem.

He that learneth music, does spoil his first instruments: so an ignorant
and unskillful Magistrate does great hurt to those he rules over. Erasmus in
Similibus.

As that medicine is better, that cures the corrupted parts of the body,
then that which rottes them off: so that Magistrate is better that corrects
evil Citizens, then he that takes their lives from them. ibidem

Change of air and diet, does offend: (...) does change of Princes and
Magistrates, because all innovation brings disturbance. ibidem.

Corrupt bodies pertain to the Physicians cure: so corrupt conditions belong
to the Magistrates office. Demosthenes, de legibus ac earum laudibus, Orat. 2.
contra Aristogit.

Vengeance.
AS some rivers do suddenly hide themselves under the earth, which nevertheless
are carried thither, whither they tend: so the vengeance of God although it be
hid, yet at the length it brings the offenders into great calamities. Plut.

As Physicians do meet with some diseases before they appear: so God does
punish some things, that they may not be done. Idem.

As Physicians do scorch the great toe in the cure of the hyp-gout, and when it
paineth in one place, they remove the medicine to another place: so God
sometimes casts vengeance upon the children, that he may cure and recall
the parents. Idem.

As God is angry at him, that imitateth his thunder and lightning, and casts
him into hell, as he did Salmoneus: so he heapeth vengeance upon the heads
of the proud and arrogant, that aemulate his greatness, but do not imitate
his goodness. Idem.

As a father seeing his child willing to cut a thing, does take the knife and
cut it himself: so reason taking vengnace out of the hands of wrath, does
profitably chastise. idem.

He that taught us to shoot, did not forbid us to dart, but forbad us to aim
amiss: so punishment and vengeance is not forbidden, but it is to be don
opportunely and in place. idem.

Certain remedies are more grievous, then the disease it self, that it is
easier to die, then so to be cured; as to suck out the blood from the fresh
bleeding wounds of dying sword-players: so it is sometimes safer to suffer an
injury, then to revenge it with a greater discommoditie; it is better to have
peace, although it be not very just and equal, then to bring upon us war with
a thousand calamities.

Punishment.
AS they that are pined away with a long consumption, do not escape death, but
do die lingringly: so they that are not forth with punished, do not escape
scorfree, but are tortured with a long punishment, which is bred through a
fearful expectation of it. Plutarch.

Slothful sailers do lie lazily snorting in the haven in fair weather, and
afterward when the winds be aloft are constrained to sail with danger: so he
that punishes not when he is quiet in mind, sometimes is forced to punish when
he is angry. idem.

He that taught us to shoot, did not forbid us to dart, but did forbid us to
err, and wander from the mark: so punishment is not forbidden, but is
conveniently to be done in time and place.

As the gal of the Hiena and the spawne of a Sea-calfe, and other parts of
hurtful beasts are very effectual in medicine against great diseases: so God
uses now and then the wickedest tyrants for the punishment of vices. Plut.

As of a Viper, a Crocodile, and other poisonful beasts, Physicians do make
remedies against poison: so punishment does either drive or recall many from
vices.

For the biting of an Aspe there is no remedy, but that the bitten part be cut
off: so some vices are only healed by the punishment of death.

As a tree lopped of her branches, does spring again, but being plucked up by
the roots, does no more grow: so vice, if it be altogether taken away by
punishment, does no more increase. Plinius lib. 22. cap. 13.

Storkes, when they fly into the field called Pythonis Come, a place of Asia,
do tear in pieces that Storke that comes last, and that being thus punished,
the rest are at quiet: so the vices and enormities of a multitude are to be
corrected and cured by a public and solemn punishment of some few or one.

As that Physic is more to be approved, which does heal the corrupted parts
of the body, then that which does cut them off: so that magistrate is better,
which by some moderate punishment does correct his citizens, then he, that cuts
them off.

Banishment.
THere be many meats which are sour in the mouth, and sharp in the Mawe, but
if thou mingle them with sweet sauces, they yield both a pleasant taste and
wholesome nourishment; diverse colors offend the eyes, yet having green among
them, whet the sight: so banishment guided with the rules of Phylosophie,
becomes more tolerable.

He that is cold does not cover himself with care but with clothes; he that
is washed in rain dries himself by the fire, not by his fancy: so he that
is banished, ought not with tears to bewail his hap, but with wisdom to
heal his hurt.

As Socrates would neither call himself an Athenian neither a Grecian, but a
Citizen of the world: so Plato would never account him banished, that had the
sun, fire, air, water and earth, that he had before, where he felt the
winters blast, and the summers blaze, where the same sun and the same Moon
shined.

As all the Athenians dwelt not in Colliton, nor every Corinthian in Graecia,
nor all the Lacedaemonians in Pitania: so every man cannot soiourne in his
^a^^ue soil.

As he that having a fair Orcharde, seeing one tree blasted, recoumpteth the
discommodity of that, and passes over in silence, the fruitfulness of the
other: so he that is banished does always lament the loss of his house, and
the shame of his exile, not reioicing at the liberty, quietness and pleasure he
enjoys by that sweet punishment.

The Kings of Persia were deemed happy in that they passed their winter in
Babylon; in Media their Summer; and their spring in Susis: so certainly the
exile in this may be as happy as any King in Persia, for he may at his leisure
being at his own pleasure, lead his winter in Athens, his summer in Naples,
and his spring in Argos,

The Pine Tree grows as soon in Pharao as in Ida, the Nightingale sings as
sweetly in the desartes as in the woods of Creete: so a wise man lives as well
being exiled into a far country, as in his own home.

The Moon shines as well at Corinth as at Athens, and the Honnie that the Be
gathers at Mautua is as sweet, as that she gathers in Hybla: so a
contented Cosmopolite, though banished from his own country, may live as well
in an other.

As M. Furius Camillus was banished of the ungrateful Romans: so Bellisarius
that valiant Captain was both banished, and his eyes pulled out of
Iustinianus.

As Alcibiades being banished by the Athenians, became chief Captain of the
army of the Lacedaemonians: so Coriolanus was more beloved of the Volscians
among whom he lived in exile, then of the Romans with whom he was a citizen.

As Cadmus the King of Thebes was driven out of the self same City, which he
had builded, and dyed old in exile among the Illirians: so Theseus whose
famous acts are so blazed abroad through all the world, was driven out of
Athens by the self same Citizens, which he himself had placed, and died an
old banished man in Tyrus.

As Solon, who governed his citizens with most golden laws, was
notwithstanding exiled by them into Cyprus: so Lycurgus, for all his prudent
policy in governing the city Sparta, was constrained by the La cedemonians to
lead his life in exile.

As Sarcas king of the Molossians, vanquished by Philip King of Macedonia,
ended his miserable days in exile: so Siphax the great King of Numidia seeing
his City taken, and his wife Sophonisba in the arms of his mortal foe
Masynissa, and that his misery should be a trumpet to sound out Scipioes
triumph, ended his life both exiled and imprisoned.

Travailing.
AS the wandering stars are not happier then the fixed stars, because they
wander: so a trauailer is not happier, then he that staieth at home, in that
he does travel. Plutarch. in Moralibus.

If Antes be excluded their holes, and Bees their hiues, they stray far
abroad: so some if they once go out of their country, think themselves
banished. ibidem.

As snailes always carry their houses about with them: so some abhor to
travel into strange countries. ibidem.

As the herb Aspalacus lives no where but in Boetia, where it is bredde, but
presently dies if it be elsewhere transplanted: so many cannot by any means
live in a foreign Country, because they are instructed in no art. Erasmus in
similibus.

As the beast Tarandus imitateth in the color of his hair, the color of all
trees, plants, and places he lies under, or in: so he shall be more safe,
that in travel imitateth the customs and conditions of that country he
trauelleth to. ibidem.

As in Africa the south wind is clear and fair, and the north wind cloudie,
against the nature of all other Countries; so some with the region do change
their manners and conditions. ibidem.

The herb Empetron, called in Latin Calcifraga, in English Sampier, the
nearer the sea it is, the less salt it is, but the further off it is, ye
salter it is: so some in France resemble Germans, but being in Germany
resemble Frenchmen, and the further they are from a Country, the more they
resemble it.

A horse in a Mault-mill, is as far in the morning as at night, when he has
done his days work: so many travelers are as wise, when they go forth, as
when they come home.

Many schoolemaisters are as rich, when they leave teaching, as when they
begin: so are many travelers, whether you respect crowns in their purses, or
knowledge in their minds.

As the young scholar in Athens went to hear Demosthenes eloquence at Corinth,
and was entangled with Lais beauty: so most of our trauailers which pretend to
get, a smacke of strange language to sharpen their wits, are infected with
vanity in following their wills.

The bird Acanthis being bred in the Thistles, will lie in the Thistles; the
Grasshopper being sprung of the grass, will rather die then depart from the
grass: so many are so far from traveling, that they cannot abide to leave the
sight of the smoke of their own chimneyes.

As the snaile that crept out of her shell, was turned eftsoons into a toad,
and thereby was forced to make a stool to sit on, disdaining her own house: so
the traveler that stragleth from his own country, is in short time
transformed into so monstrous a shape, that he is fain to alter his mansion
with his manners, and to live where he can, not where he would.

No Moss will stick to the stone of Sisiphus, no grass hang on the heels of
Mercury: so no butter will cleave on the bread of a traveler.

As the Eagle at every flight loses a feather, which makes her bald in her
age: so the traveler in every country loses some fleece, which makes him a
beggar in his youth, by buying that with a pound which he cannot sell again for
a penie. Repentance.

As wines made of good grapes are more wholesome being drawn from their Lees: so
those which for a good cause depart their country, are as men of a singular and
divine quality to be embraced of all sorts.

The world.
AS a house made to dwell in does perceive nothing of it self, but is subject
to the lord that made it, and that inhabiteth it: so the world perceiving
nothing of it self is subject to God that made it, who made it for his own
use. Lactantius. lib. 2. cap. 6.

As a Book deciphers the mind of the author: so the world, as a written
Book does witness and contestate the glory of God, and his royal majesty.
Basil. hom. 1 1. exameron.

As milk is presently curded: so the world presently was. Justinius, quaest. 3.
earum quas gentes ponebant Christianis.

When we see an excellent piece of workmanship, we praise both the work and
workman: so when we cast our eyes upon the glorious fabric of the world,
we should not only bestow commendations upon it, but also magnify God, that
made it. Theodoretus, sermon. 3. de prouidentia.

When we hear an instrument of Music melodiouslie tuned, consisting of
diverse soundes, of Means, Tenours, Trebles, Countertenours, and Bases, we
know that there is one that does thus harmoniouslie order it: so when we see
the concordious disposition of the world, where things inferior do not rise
against superior, nor low things against lofty, we are to know, that it is
only God that does thus moderate them. Hector Pintus in cap. 1. Ezechiel.

When we see in a city sundry sorts of people, noble, and vulgar, rich and
poor, young and old, to live in love and peace without iniurying one another,
we presently judge that the ruler is just, mighty and wise: so when we view
the huge mass of the world, and the great concord of so many different things,
we cannot but wonder at the justice, omnipotency, and wisdom of the creator
and governor of them. ibidem.

Although a tree bring forth many branches, yet there is but one root of all
those branches: so in the world, albeit one man does propagate and produce
another, yet there is but one father who has created al. Chrysostom. hom. 43.
operis imperfecti.

As God is not to be accused of impotencie, that he made but one world, and not
many: so he cannot be accused of imperfection, that he did not make the
world, as soon as he was himself, but when he would. Justinius, in
Resutatione responsionis Gentilis ad 3. quaest. Christianorum.

An husbandman does sow in one ground wheat, in another barley, in another,
other seeds: so God has planted immortality in heaven, alteration and change
upon the earth, and in the whole world life, and motion. Trismegistus, in
Pymandro.

The love and vanity of the world.
AS the fish Lepo, or Mole, does stick unto sea rocks: so many men cleave
unto the world, and contemn immortality. Clemens Alexandrinus in exhortatione
ad gentes.

As the same cies cannot at one time behold heaven and earth: so the love of
the world, and the love of God cannot dwell together in one heart. Cyprianus.
de 12. Ascensionibus.

As children do more admire and love a Babie of cloutes, then a beautiful
woman: so worldlinges do more esteem the pelf and trash of this world, then
the pleasures and treasures of heaven. Chrysostom. hom. 80. in Ioannem.

It is in vain to power water into a sieue; to snatch at the flame of fire;
and to beat the air: so the love of the world is vain, and extreme
vanity. Idem hom. 77. in Matthew.

As pitch does pollute; as lime does detain; as a snare does enthrall: so does
the love of the world pollute, detain and inthrall. Dugo Philonius de
scientia been moriends.

As the beauty of a whore does allure: so the garishnesse of the world does
entice. Isaac presbyter de mundi contemptu, cap. 2,

As the sea does one while cast shell fishes, crampe fishes, and weeds upon
the shore without water, and by and by does suppe them in again, and carry
them into the deep: so the world does sometimes banish us, and sometimes
receive us, and when we think our selves safe on the shore, then we perceive
our selves deceived, and tossed with variety of calamities. Hector Pintus in
cap. 3. Ezechiel.

The contempt of the world.
Swallows, as says Solinus, do not build their nests in ruinous houses, or
in ill-built edifices: so neither should men build their Mansions and
Tabernacles in this ruinous and tottering world. Hector Pintus in cap. 10.
Ezechiel.

As they that live in a ship, are neither fed, nor clothed of it, but have
their maintenance from else where: so the souls of Christians living in this
world take their celestial food, and spiritual clothing, not from this
World, but from heaven. Macarius, hom. 44.

A child when he is hungry, sets naught by his costly iewelles, and
sumptuous apparel, but only sets his mind upon his mothers dugge, whereby
he may be refreshed and nourished: so a Christian ought to contemn all the
enticements of this world, and wholly repose himself upon God. Idem hom. 45.

Children in their nonage delight in trifles, but when they grow men, they
contemn such vanities: so worldlinges, being ignorant as children, do love
the vanities of this world, but wise men growing to some ripeness in
Christianity, do contemn and despise them. Nilus in lib. ascetico.

As sailors cast their preciousest jewels into the sea to save their lives: so
we must cast from us all the pelf and pleasures of this world to save a better
life. Ibidem.

A woman that is with child with a male, is less troubled both in the bearing
and birth: so the Evangelical Margarite is compassed with lesser dolor, then
worldly substance, therefore let us embrace the first, as worthy of our
pains, and contemn the other with all the vain gains.

Reason.
AS a ship, that has firm anchorage, can make stay in any haven: so the
mind, if it be ordered by right reason, can live quietly in any place.
Plutarchus in Moral.

As a grasshopper and a hawk do not see alike; and as an eagle and a partridge
do not fly alike: so all, that are partakers of reason, are not of like force
in the sharpnes of disputation, and wittiness of reasoning. Ibidem.

As a monitor sitting by a boy does always admonish him, that he offend not:
so reason being always present with the mind, does not suffer it at any time
to err and offend, ibidem.

It is not enough to have a sound body, but it is also requisite, that it be
of a good habit and strong: so the reason ought not only to be pure, and free
from vices, but to be courageous and well fortified. Ibidem.

As a stern and a bridle are not sufficient, unless there be some present
that can moderate and rule them: so eloquence is not sufficient to moderate and
govern the people, unless reason be present also the moderatour of the
speech. ibidem.

If there were no sun, we should have eternal night: so if we had no reason,
we should nothing at all differ from brute beasts. ibidem.

In a great storm a ship is not stayed, unless a weighty anchor be surely
fixed in the bottom of the water: so in the great hurley burley of businesses,
great reason ought to bridle the mind, least it be carried away of affections.
Ibidem.

The seeds of a Cypres tree are so small, that they can scarsly be discerned
with the eyes, and yet a great and tall tree does spring from so small a
seed: so reason is a very little thing and occult, but yet is very great, if
it show it self, and unfold his force. Plin. li. 17. cap. 10.

As great weights, that no man's strength can peyse, are easily hoysed aloft by
engines and devices: so that which we cannot do by force, is easily brought to
pass by art and reason. Idem.

As horses, that are grown fierce and cruel, by reason of their often fighting
in the wars, are delivered unto riders and tamers, that they may become more
gentle and tractable: so men that are poud and puffed up through prosperity,
are to be brought to reasons school, that they may look into the imbecillitie
of human affairs, and see the variety and mutabilitie of fortune and blind
chance. Cicero lib. 1. Offie.

As nature does not bring forth her goodness except it be ripe and mature: so
the good of man is not in man, except perfect reason be with it. Seneca lib.
2. epist. 125.

As the whole body does yield obedience unto the soul, for by the souls
command we lie down and rise up: so the whole multitude is ruled by reason,
and bended by the awe of this commander. Idem, lib. 1. de Clementia, cap. 3.

As that is not the best ship, that is the faireliest painted, but that which
is best for sail; and as that is not the best sword. which has a golden
scabberd, but that which best cutteth, and is best for defense; and as that is
not the best square, which is the beautifullest, but that which is the
straightest: so he is not the best man, that is the mightiest, or wealthiest,
but he that is ordered and ruled by right reason, and sound judgment. Idem.
epist. 77.

As a naughty boy does hate his schoolmaster, or any one that wishes him
well, and corrects him for his faults: so he that is in love with his
affections does hate right reason, which should govern him. Philo lib. de
sacrific. Abelis.

As it is absurd, that a good master should be under subjection to a wicked
servant: so is it absurd, that the reasonable and immortal soul should be in
servitude to the brutish and corruptible body. Thalassus ad Paulinum
presbyterum.

As nature has given to diverse kinds of creatures diverse defenses for the
preservation of their lives and safties, as strength to Lions, swiftness to
Hearts, swimming to Fishes, flying to Fowls, and cauerns in the earth to
creeping things: so unto man has God given reason, by which he subdueth all
other creatures. Tyrius Platonicus, sermon. 10.

As a ship in a tempest is easily drowned, unless the pylot manage it by his
industry: so affections do draw a man from ill to worse, unless they be
governed by sound and solid reason. Antonius, ser. 76. part 2.

As a ship, that wantes a good pylot is driven in stormy weather against
rocks: so a man that wantes reason in the mutiny and tumult of his affections
is swallowed up of his passions. Laurentius Iustinianus de contemptu mundi,
cap. 1.

Scholars.
AS one going to fetch fire at an other man's house, and finding a good fire
there, does sit him down by it, and there does stay: so some scholars always
cleave unto their masters; neither do light their own wits, that at home
they may enjoy their own fire. Plut.

As a bird, whatsoever meat she gets, presently carries it to her young
ones, and is never the better for it her self: so some do therefore learn,
that they may presently teach others, becoming never the better them selves.
Idem.

As slothful and greedy curres do at home tear and bite the skins of
wild beasts, but in hunting do not once touch them: so some praeposterously
studious do deal only with trifles, and never come to the touch of learning.
Idem.

As many women do not conceive by some men, but being joined to others become
fruitful: so there be some, that with some masters are indocible, but do
profit with other teachers: because as between bodies, so between wits, there
is a sympathy, and an Antipathie.

As planters of trees by all means seek their increase; so scholars should
by all means seek their profit in learning. Phillo Indaeus lib. de
Agricultura.

The divine law pronou^ceth those beasts unclean, that do not chew their
cudde: so learning pronounces those scholars insufficient and
non-proficients, who do not meditate, and ruminate on those things they hear.
Philo lib. de agricultura.

Hunting dogs follow the wild beast this way and that way: so good scholars
hunte after a thing not understood this way and that way, until they attain
the vndentanding of it. Cyrillus Alex in Joan. lib. 1. cap. 2.

As husbandmen hedge in their trees: so should good school masters with good
manners hedge in the wit, and disposition of the scholar, whereby the blossoms
of learning, may the sooner increase to a bud.

As naughty women, having trod awry, conceal the names of the right fathers
of their children: so many scholars stealing their learning from diverse
authors do conceal co^ceal their names; which is palpable theft and no plain
dealing. Ingenui pudoris est (vt ait Plinius) fateriper quos profecerimus; et
haec quasi merces authori iure optimo pensitanda est, ne fures esse videamur.
Grati ania miesse duco, (inquit Franciscus Patricius) eorum nomina profiteri,
quos imitamur, et a quibus accepimus.

Study.
AS that which thou engrauest in steel and marble with great labor, endures
longest: so that we learn with great study, we never forget.

As they that love lightly, do rejoice at the presence of a friend, but being
absent do easily forgette him; but they that love entirely and dearly, do
not suffer that to be absente from them, which they love: so some are easily
pulled by businesses from the study of philosophy; but they that truly love
her, neglect all things before they will be drawn from her, neither can any
thing without her be pleasant unto them. Plut.

As beasts feed one one where, and another, another where: so one man
studieth divinity, and other law, another physic, another philosophy, and an
other follows arms.

As Hermophrodytes called also Androgyni do so resemble both sexes, that they
are neither men nor women: so some, whilst they study to be both divines, and
thetoricia^s, are acknowledged of neither.

As from the people called Seres there comes the softest silks, and the
hardest iron: so from some diverse studies and contrarious endeavors do
proceed.

The Crocodile sometimes lives in the water, and sometimes on the land, she
lays her eggs on the land, and gets her prey in the water: so whilst some
study to be both prelates and courtiers, they become pestilent members both in
Church and court.

Wine moderately drunk does strengthen the sinews, and corroborat the sight,
but taken immoderatly does hurt them both: so by moderate study the life is
adorned, but immoderatly applied, it is much harmed.

A vine except it be now and then pruned, perishes and becomes barren
through her own fruitefulnesse: so a pregnant and fruitful wit taking
immoderate pains in study, is consumed by his own labor.

Protogenes, being otherwise an excellent painter, is taxed, because he knew no
time to take his hand from the table: so some students and writers are much
to blame, because they neither know time to leave of their study, nor know not
when a thing is sufficiently amended.

Nightingals do so contend in singing, that they die in the contention, their
breath rather failing them then their song: so some by too much study
extinguish their health, and whilst they would be overcome of none in study,
they perish in their endeavors, Plin. lib. 10. cap. 29.

Contemplation.
AS their eyes are dimmed that come out of the clear sun into a dark place: so
also are the eyes of their mind that come from the contemplation of divine
matters unto humane. Seneca.

As a saphyre is of the color of a fair sky: so contemplative men are of a
quiet and celestial conversation. F. Ioannes a S. Gemintano lib. 2. de Metakis
et Lapid. cap. 6.

As the Lazull stone is better, the more it does resemble a celestial color:
so co^templatiue men are the better the more they resemble celestial citizens.
ibidem.

As the Lazull stone being puluerizd does cure the quartaine fever: so the
contemplation of celestial things does banish idleness. Ibidem.

As the juice of Mandrake drunk with wine, does make the body se^sles of
pain: so contemplation mingled with the wine of divine love, and eternal
comfort does make the soul forget worldly vanities. Ibidem.

As the wild fig tree ripeneth the good fig tree: so the active life makes
the contemplative fruitful. Ibidem.

As a wine cellar ought to be removed from heat: so a contemplative life ought
to be free from the heat of concupiscence. Idem lib. 9. de Artificib. et Reb.
Artif. cap. 1.

Sophisters.
AS iuglers, and they yt play tricks of legierdemaine do deceive us, and that
with a certain pleasure: so to be entangled in sophistications in ridiculous,
not dangerous. Seneca.

As meat ill sauouring, does not seem to savor ill to them that have eaten
it: so the intricate conclusions and fallacies of Scotistes and Sophisters,
although they do greatly offend those that are adorned with polite literature,
yet they offend them nothing at all, that are drunk with such trifles, nay
they seem unto them beautiful and elegant.

As the Panther does savor well, but only to beasts, which he allureth
unto him, and not unto men: so Scotus, I^^uell, Faber, Buridanus, Borreus,
Burleus, Clictouius, Dorbell, Johannes de Celaia, Clilbertus Crab, and other
such crabbed and obscure Sophisters are more pleasant then any spice unto
beetle-headed plodders, but more loathsome then any uncleanness to fine and
fresh wits.

As the horns of the beast Bonasus are only a burden unto him, and of no
use, they are so wound one within another: so sophisters have logic and
reason, but it is so sophisticated, that they: can wine no body by it. Plin.
lib. 8. cap. 15.

As whores do de ceiue yongme^ by guilefull speeches: so sophisters do ensnare
fools in the deceitful nets of false syllogismes. Olympiodorus in Ecclesiasten,
cap. 7.

A lecherous eunuch would seem to do much, but can do just nothing: so a
bragging sophister would seem to prove much, when he proves just nothing.
Dion Nycaenus de regno orat. 4.

A wanton ill hunting dog taking a false sent, does draw by his opening the
other dogs after him: so an idle headed sophister does by his quirkes and
quiddities draw the rude company of foolish people after him. Ibidem.

As grasshoppers are full of noice: so sophisters are full of words. Clemens
Alex. lib. 1. strom.

Memory.
AS books are consumed with worms, that are never looked upon: so memory
perishes except it be renewed. Seneca.

Little fishes slip through nets, but great fishes are taken: so small things
slip out of the memory, when as great matters stay still. Erasmus.

As pies have a wonderful desire to imitate the voice of man, so that through
extreme endeavor they sometimes kill them selves: so it is marvelous pleasant
and delightsome to many to learn by heart poems, songs and sonnets, and to
sing them, albeit they understand them not. Conradus Lycosthenes Rubeaquensis.

As Lupus Ceruarius, a beast ingendered of a hind, and a wolf, does in the
time of hunger and famine forget his food, if so he see any body: so from many
that presently slippeth out of memory, which they purposed to speak of when as
they hear words spoken to an other effect. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 22.

Cast any thing into a standing water, and circles will arise, which put out
one another: so when one thing comes into the memory, another thing is
thrust out, therefore the memory is always to be repaired, that as one matter
passes, another may be present. Gregor Nazianzenus orat. in funere patris.

As Seneca was of such perfect memory, that he could rehearse after one, by
hearing two hundred verses; yea, a greater marvel of memory, he could recite
two thousand names of men, being repeated once before him, with as good a
memory, as he that first named them: so Carmides of Greece was so famous for
this faculty, that the never bearde any reading, but he could repeat it
word by word without writing, were the writing or reading never so long, he
would not misle a syllable

Learning.
AS it makes nothing to the dispatch of the journey to have known the way,
except thou have endeavor and strength to walk: so learning does nothing
profit, if thine own virtue be wanting. Lactantius lib. 6. cap. 5.

As the maturity of things have their seasons, flowers in the spring; corn in
summer, and apples in autumn: so the fruits of winter is learning. Basilius
epistol. 172.

As hunting dogs by the sent do follow wild beasts a far off: so the
lovers of learning do follow after justice and other virtues being enamoured
with the sweet smell that comes from them. Phio libide somnijs.

As wels, whence much water is drawn, are not only not diminished, but made
the sweeter: so learning and science by teaching and infusing it into others is
not decreased, but increased. Idem lib. de somnijs et lib. de gigantibus.

As a light lighting many lights, continues of the same bigness, and is not
lessened: so science in men by imparting it, is not annihilated. Ibidem.

As the images of our absent friends are grateful unto us, because by a false
solace they lighten the languormente of their absence: so much more must
learning be welcome unto us, which is the true footestep of an absent friend,
and a true note of of his perfection. Seneca epist. 10

The crocodile otherwise a dangerous and an invincible creature, yet so
fears the men of the i will Tentyra, that at their voice she is afrighted, so
tyrants albeit they contemn all men, yet they fear the writings of the
learned, as Tyberius did. Plinius lib. 8. cap. 25.

As walls area defense unto a city: so learning unto the mind. Democratus apud
Antonium in Melissapart, 1, sermon. 50.

As husbandmen more willingly see the ears of corn hanging downewardes, then
standing up, because the one is fruitful, the other fruitelesse: so
learning and philosophy had rather see her scholars submisse and humble,
the^ lofty and swelled with glory, for the one becomes profitable, the other
vain Plutarchus in Moralibus.

Nightingals are so delighted with singing, that they die with contending,
their wind sooner fails them, then their song^ so some through an immoderate
love of learning do shipwreck their health, and whilst in learning they will
of none be overcome, they perish in their endeavors. Plinius lib. 10. cap. 26.

Elephants although they cannot swim, yet they are wonderfully delighted in
rivers: so some although they are ignorant of learning, yet they desire to be
conversant with learned men. idem. lib. 8. cap. 5.

Nectar the drink of the Gods, the more it was drunk, the more it would
ouerflow the brimme of the cup; the stone that grows in the river of Caria,
ye more it is cut, the more it increases: so learning ye more it is exercised,
the more it increases, and the more it is published, the more it is propagated.

The manner of learning.
AS before we be familiarly acquainted, many things offend us in a man which
after acquaintance we like very well of: so in learning and Philosophy, the
first tediousness is to be tolerated, until through use it become easy and
pleasant. Plut.

Vessels do fit and incline themselves to receive that, which is powered into
them: so he that learneth must apply himself, that none of those things run
out, which are profitably taught. idem.

The ears of putrified vessels, are rather filled with any thing, then with
that is necessary: so some forthwith do learn foolish things. idem.

An Orator.
AS a learned Physician is known by a desperate disease, and a good Pylot in a
storm: so a cunning Orator is discerned in pleading and persuading difficult
and serious matters. Sidonius, in Epistol. ad Rauricium suum.

As a careful Physician, before he applies his medicine, does not only
search out the nature of the disease, but also the manner of the living of the
diseased, and the nature of his bodie^ so also an Orator, when he takes a
doubtful and weighty matter in hand, he must by all possible means search
out, what the Judges think, what they expect, what they would, and by what
speech they will be the soonest lead. Cicero lib. 2. de Oratore.

As there is no matter so combustible, which takes fire, except fire be put
unto it: so there is no mind so ready to conceive the force of an Orator,
which can be inflamed by his speech, unless the Orator himself come inflamed
and burning unto it. Ibidem.

As it was said of the Greek Musicians, that they became Pypers, that could
not prove Harpers: so we see many that when they cannot become Orators,
prove Lawyers. Idem, orat. pro Murena.

As certain vessels of Clay are had in estimation, by reason of the Art, that
is used in making them: so many times a matter of no moment, and of small
consequence does commend the wit of an Orator.

If the grauing Iron be hot, thou may easily engraue in precious stones,
what thou listest: so an Orator shall more easily move and persuade, if he not
only plead vehemently, but fervently, and affectionately love that he
prayseth, and detestably hate that he discommendeth.

As it is dangerous, if all incline and run to one side of the ship, but then
the ship is well peysed, when one bends one way, and an other another: so
dissension and discord among Orators, Rhetoricians, Lawyers, and Plaiers, do
make the state of a City more safe. Plut. in Moral.

As he is a ridiculous Musician, that pricketh a grave matter with a Lydian
note: so is he a ridiculous Orator, that speaking of the precepts of well
living, does lasciuiously and riotously superabound in rhetorical exornations,
and figurative condiments. ibid.

Eloquence.
AS it is not enough to have a bridle, or the stern of a ship, except there be
one that may guide and moderate them by skill: so eloquence is not sufficient
to govern and rule ye people, except reason be present the moderator of the
speech. Plut. in Mor.

As it is the praise of water, if it savor of nothing (for savor is a sign
of that which is putrified:) so although of all others we require eloquence,
yet we say, that a Divine ought to be without glosing and affectation.

As that is not the best picture, which by the matter testifies the wealth of
the owner, or the art of the painter, but that which truly represents ye
thing it personateth: so that is the best eloquence, which makes no
ostentation of the wit of the speaker, but very fitly shows the matter.

As silken garments are discommended, because the body appears through them,
whereas garments were invented to cover the body: so that eloquence is
ridiculous, which does not declare the matter, but obscure and darken it,
seeing that speech was given us to lay open our minds and matters. Plin. lib.
11. cap. 22.

As the Box tree is always green, but of a naughty savor, and has seed
odious unto all living creatures: so some besides the grace of speech, do bring
nothing but that, which is to be avoided. Idem. lib. 16. cap. 17.

The tree Tilia has a sweet bark, and sweet leaves, yet no living creature
can abide to taste or touch the fruit of it: so the speech of some is elegantly
composed, and Rhetoricallie delivered, and yet there is no fruit of matter or
sentence in it. Ibidem cap. 15. and Theophrastus. lib. 1. cap. 10.

As some Physicians are almost skillful in the cure of all diseases and
languors, and yet can render no true reason of them: so some very eloquent,
know all the points of Rhetoric, and the grounds of their Art, yet are
very bare in the substance of argument, or soundness of matter. Philo in lib.
quod deterius potiori insidietur.

As infantes cannot speak, but by hearing others talk: so none can be
eloquent but by reading and hearing elocutions and exornations of speech.
August. lib. 4. de doct. Christ. cap. 3.

As he that has a beauteous body, and a deformed mind, is more lamented
for, then if both parts were deformed: so they that deliver false things
eloquently, are more to be pitied, then if they spoke them rudely and
clownishly. ibidem. cap. 28.

As wholesome meat retains his own virtue, whether it be delivered out of
an earthen vessel, or a silver Platter: so truth is not impaired, whether it
be uttered politikelie or plainly. Idem libro 5. confessionum. cap. 6.

As luxurious persons behold the comeliness of the body, and not the beauty
of the mind: so some only mark the structure of orations, and not the frame of
arguments. Theophilus Alexand. Epist. 2. Paschali.

As Brass is engendered of Sulphur, and Quicksiluer: so eloquence is compounded
of two things, of interior meditation, which resembles sulphur, and of
exterior pronunciation, which resembles quicksiluer.

As brass being mingled with other metals, changes both color and virtue,
whereupon there comes three kinds, one white like silver, another yellow like
gold, and a third also like gold, drawn into thin plates, which players
make their crowns of: so eloquence is threefold, spiritual eloquence, which
gains souls; secular eloquence, which winnes gain; and poetical eloquence,
which moves delight.

As Brass soon rusteth if it be not oyled: so eloquence soon becomes
offensive, if it be not anointed with the oil of charity.

As brass is the fittest metal to make bells and trumpets of, by reason of
the sound: so eloquent men are best to make preachers of, because they will be
heard.

As brass has many virtues against many infirmities; for as Plin. and Diosc.
say, brass being burnt and puluerized, does purge hurtful humors, heal
wounds, expel darkness from the eyes, and eats away superfluous flesh: so
divine eloquence, and the tongue of a preacher being burnt, that is, inflamed
with the fire of the holy spirit; and puluerized, that is, grounded on
humility, has virtue to dissolve the hardness of heart, to dry the lust of
the flesh, to purge the noisome affections of sinful men, to heal the wounds
of temptations, to banish the mists of errors, and to eat away the gluttony
of intemperate persons.

Though the Rose be sweet, yet being tied with the Violet, the smell is more
fragrant; though meat nourish, yet having good savor it provoke appetite;
the fairest nosegay is made of many flowers; the finest picture of sundry
colors, and the holsomest medicin of diverse herbs: so though the naked truth
be welcome, yet it is more grateful, if it come attired and adorned with fine
figures, and choice phrases.

A good governor, that is also beautiful, is more acceptable to the people: so
is a Philosopher, that is eloquent. Seneca.

A Diamond set in gold is more grateful: so is the truth adorned with eloquence.

Speech.
AS neying is proper to a horse, barking to a dog, bellowing to an ox, and
roaring to a lion: so speech is proper unto man. Philo lib. de somniis.

As a sick man does not seek for a learned phisitia^, but for one skilful to
cure him: so we do not expect a flaunting speech of a Philosopher Seneca apud
Erasmum.

Musicians make the sweetest melody by the gentlest touch: so a gentle speech
does more move the people, then a crabbed. Plutarchus in Moral.

As a horse is turned about with a bridle, and a ship by a stern, so men are
led by speech. ibidem.

As houses without doors are unprofitable: so are men that have no rule of
their speech. Ibidem.

As in calamity our firmest and best friends are present with us: so let our
best speeches be also present. Ibidem.

Some do love nothing in an apothecaries shop, but the fragrancy of the smell,
neglecting the goodness of preservatives, and the virtue of purgatiues: so some
do look for nothing in Plato and Demosthenes, but the purity of the Atticke
speech. Ibidem.

Arras clothes when they are wide opened, do show the pictures wrought in
the^, but being lapped up, they conceal and hide the same: so a speech aptly
composed and well pronounced, does set before our eyes the order and course of
the matter, but being ended, the most of it slippeth our of our minds. Idem in
Graecorum apophthegmatis.

As women do then smell well, when they smell of nothing: so that speech has
the best ornament that wants affectation. Cicero ad Attic. lib 2.

As the Painter Protogenes knew Apelles by the draught of one line, although
he had never seen him before: so by one only speech a man may be discerned,
what wit and wisdom he has. Eras. in similibus.

As the same sun does melt wax, and harde^ clay: so the same speech does
make some better, and some worse, according to the diversity of dispositions.

As the load stone does not draw any thing unto it but Iron, although other
things be much lighter: so the speech of some does not move all, but only
those that are inclined to that they persuade.

As salt moderately sprinkled on meat does season it, and adds a liking to
our taste: so if thou minglest in thy speech some antiquity or pretty conceit,
it adds great beauty unto thy talk, but if it be done too affectedly, there
is nothing more unpleasant.

In a vine whatsoever is taken away by pruning from the matter, is added unto
the fruit: so the fewer the words be, the grauer are the sentences.

As Timanthes is praised in this, that in all his works, more always was
understood then was painted: so that kind of speech is the best, wherein many
things are left unto consideration, and few discoursed of, and wherein there
is more sense then words. Plinius lib. 35. cap. 10.

Nettles have no pricks, yet they sting: so words have no points, yet they
pierce.

As one metal is to be tempered with an other in fashioning a good blade,
least either being all of steel, it quickly break, or all of Iron, it never
cut: so fares it in speech, which if it be not seasoned as well with wit to
move delight, as with Art to manifest cunning, there is no eloquence.

Pronunciation.
FIshes do so labor to imitate the words man, that oftentimes they die in the
endeavor: so it is delightful unto some to learn by heart, psalms, prayers,
and fine speeches, and afterward to pronounce them, they not understanding
them. Conradus Lycosthenes Rubeaquensis.

The Bird Taurus being but little of bulk, does imitate the bellowing of an
Ox: so some being base and mean of themselves, yet do pronounce and utter
great and high matters, and speak of Emperors and the mighty potentates of
the world.

A good play sometimes is hissed off the stage, through the fault of the
plaier, ill acting it: so a good speech does displease, if it be ill pronounced.

As by the same breath, but sent forth after diverse manners, we heat and cool
things: so by the same speech being diversely pronounced, we either stir up
affections, or move none.

He that runs with all his might and maine, staieth himself not where he
will, but is carried further then he would: so too much celerity in
pronunciation is rashly carried, whither it would not. Seneca.

Hearing.
THe gates of the city are shut in vain, if one be left open, by which the
enemies may issue in: so it is not sufficient to be temperate in the other
senses, if the hearing be open to pernicious speeches. Plutarch.

As that gate is more diligently to be kept, which leads unto the Kings
court: so the hearing is more warily to be kept, because it is very nearely
joined to the rational part of the soul, and by it that is admitted, which may
either much help, or much hurt. Idem.

As Hunters do not suffer their dogs to smell after, or to bite every thing,
but they keep them fresh for the wild beast: so it is meet that the ears and
the eyes be kept from wandering every where, and be only reserved for necessary
matters. idem.

Hearts when they lift up their ears, are of a very sharp and clear hearing,
but when they let them down they become deaf: so Princes if there be any
thing that pleases them, they hear it a far off; but if otherwise, they will
not understand, albeit thou criest aloud unto them.

Sea-fishes live in salt water, and yet are not the salter: so many hear the
word of God, and are never the better. Clemens Alexand. lib. 1. stromatum.

He that learneth to build, and never builds, his learning is to no
purpose: so he that hears, and never brings that into action he hears,
his hearing is in vain. Macarius in regulis fusius disput. interrogat.

Great and often showers do hurt the earth: so many intricate and deep
insoluble questions do damnifie the hearers. Gregor. Nazianz. lib. 1. de
Theologia.

Men would sit from midnight till noone to see the games of Olympus: so should
we to hear those matters, that do not only concern this life, but that is
to come. Chrysostom. Oratione 2. aduersus Iudaeos.

As those men that are given to wine and drinkings, as soon as they rise, do
inquire where any bankets, suppers, comessations, or compotations are to be
kept: so we, as soon as we arise, should diligently enquire, where we may
hear any wholesome exhortation, admonition, doctrine, or sermon, that may bring
us unto Christ. ibid.

As a Physician prepares his medicine in vain, except his patient will
receive it: so a Preacher shall not deal effectually, except his auditors obey
him. Idem hom. 2. in Genesin.

An Auditour, and his Duty.
A Good guest does not think that it only belonges to him to be well
entertained at another man's costs and charges, but he again in like manner
prouides to requite his courtesy: so a diligent auditour does not idly hear a
careful speaker, but it is meet that he help and grace the speaker with his
countenance, eyes, applause and favor. Plutarch.

As in housekeeping both friends and enemies do profit, as Xenophon says: so
a vigilant and wise auditor not only becoms better learned by the wise sayings,
but also by the errors of others. idem.

As we come to an holy banquet: so we should come to hear, with a peaceable
and a fauorabie mind, that we may benignely approve good speeches; and if any
thing be said yt is scarce curre^t, we may secretly note it, both what was the
cause of the error, and the scope of the speakers mind. idem.

As Tragedians at Theaters: so Philosophers in schools are to be heard till
they end. idem.

As in those things that are sung unto a pipe, many faults escape which the
hearer takes no notice of: so in an elega^t and flaunting oration many foolish
matters slip by the auditor, which he marketh not by reason of the colors and
garnishing of Rhetoric. idem.

As that vessel is not filled, which always powers forth, and never
receives: so he does not receive wisdom, that always speaks and never
hears. idem.

As he that comes to a banquet, feeds on those things yt are set before him,
neither asks for other things: so it is meet that ye learner hear sile^tly,
until he has finished that speaks, and the^ if he please he may propound
any profitable question. idem.

They that make garlands, seek for things most beautiful, and not most
profitable; but Bees settle upon the bitterest thime, and suck honey out of
it: so it is requisite that an auditour do not only embrace the elegancies of
speech for pleasure sake, but that he also collect the force and profit of
sentences. Idem.

As lovers do favorably interpret some faults: so also ought auditor* idem.

As in meats we do not always seek after pleasure, but also after health
and holesomenes: so also in reading and hearing author. idem.

As vnfledg'd birds hang always gaping at the mouth of their dams: so some are
so troublesome unto their teachers, that all things must be chewed before they
can receive it, neither will they at any time provide for their own feeding.
idem.

As at ball play it is the part of one to strike it, and of another to catch
or stop it: so both the hearer and the speaker are to discharge their duties.
idem.

As they that hear Comedians, do not hear them for this end, that they may
become Comedians, but for pleasure sake: so now adays many do hear learned
sermons, and preachers divinely discoursing, not that they may be bettered by
following them, but that they may be delighted, and have their ears tickled.

He that goes in embassage with letters from a great Prince, of himself is
many times both obscure and obscurely descended, yet they that receive them,
not looking unto his estate, receive the letters with great reverence and
silence, because of him that sent them: so auditors ought not to look to the
speaker, neither to his meanenes, but because he speaks from God, therefore
he is attentively to be heard. Chrysostom. hom. 44. in Genesin.

He that puts bread into his mouth, or any other meat, first cheweth it
with his teeth, and then lets it down into his stomach: so when we hear
the word of God, we must first meditate upon it, and see what it is that is
spoken, and then whereupon it was spoken, and to what end. Idem hom. 41. oper.
imperf.

As we cannot well discern the taste of the meat we receive, except we first
masticate it with our teeth: so we cannot understand the virtue of the word
we hear, except we meditate upon it. ibidem.

As the meat does nothing profit us we have eaten, if we cast it up again:
so the word does nothing profit us, we have heard, if we forget it. ibidem.

Those beasts among the Jews were clean, which chewed their cud: so he is a
spiritual and holy man, that hearing the word of God, does ruminate and
meditate on it, and when he has understood it, does commit it to memory, that
thence, as out of a storehouse, he may take for his use and need. Ibidem.

Breuiloquence:
THe celtiberians do so temper and harden their Iron, that it being buried in
the earth, that may be purged and taken away which is earthly: so the Laconique
speech is made more piercing by taking away that which is superfluous. Plut.

Disputation.
AS Ulysses is derided of the wooers in Homer, because he asked a piece of
bread and not a sword and a target: so they are more to be derided, that in
serious disputation object vain and frivolous matters. Plut. in Moral.

As by gymnasticall disportes the strength of the body becomes more firm: so
by disputation the strength of the mind becomes more fresh and lively. Which
kind of learned concertation the Poets intimated unto us by the weapons of
Pallas, and the Hebrews when they said, that Iron was the badge of wise men.
Picus Mirandula, in Apologia propositionum suarum.

As in wrestling the strength of the body is seen: so in disputation the
force of the mind is discerned. Tyrius Platonicus sermon. 5.

Examples of life.
AS they that comb and trim themselves, do use a glass: so he that takes in
hand any exploite sets before himself the examples of laudable personages.
Plut.

If thou put the herb Exungium into the mouth of a goat, when she staieth
all stay, until the goatherd take out the herb: so the examples of Princes and
great estates do mightily prevail among the common people. idem.

As a wart or a wrinkle does more offend in the face, then great blemishes and
skars in another place of the body: so small faults, do seem great in a
Prince, and are very hurtful, because they are in view of all men, and the
people are prone to follow them. idem.

He that seems good by being compared with them that are bad: is as he that
admires his own swiftness, when he looks upon them that are lame. Seneca.

As Zeuxis pourtraying Juno, out of all the Agrigentine virgins chose five of
the fairest, that he might imitate, what was most excellent in them: so out of
many, we are to propounde the best unto our selves for an example of life,
neither are we to imitate all things in them, but the best things.

As the Sun, moon and stars do differ from one another in light, and yet are
all glorious creatures, and do direct our courses in travel, both by sea and
land: so the saints do differ one from another in religious perfections; and
yet are al setters forth of Gods glory; and may serve for examples to guide and
direct our lives in this world; as we must imitate Abraham in faith; Joseph in
chastity; Moses in meeknes, and Job in patience. Origenes lib. 1. in Job.

As sweet odours, and unsavory smells do communicate themselves unto many: so do
good and ill examples. Eusebius Emissenus, hom. de initio quadrages.

As Paynters when they make one picture by another, do respect very
seriously their pattern and exemplar: so when we practice to grow to
perfection we should pattern our lives after the example of holy men, that we
may grow as they did. Basil. epist. 1.

As one dove flying away, the rest do follow: so are we drawn a way by
example. Chrysostom. de continentia Joseph.

As the victories and valiancy of others enkindleth valor in the breasts of
soldiors: so should the examples of patience in others, beget christian
patience in us. Idem sermon. in beats Job and Abraham.

Zeal.
AS zeal must erect our discretion, that we run not too slowly: so
discretion must direct out zeal, that we run not too fast.

As the woman in the 31. of the Proverbs, and 13. verse, labored with her
hands, and with the counsel of her hands: so in our labors we must have both
zeal and discretion.

In the Leuiticall law God forbids to bring unto him any blind offering: so
all blind zeal, is a blind offering, which God will not accept.

As Minerua is said to put a golden bridle upon Pegasus, that he should nor
fly too fast: so our Minerua, that is our christian discretion, must put a
golden bridle upon Pegasus, that is, our earnest zeal, least if our zeal be
unbridled, it make us run too fast.

Octanian the Emperor did bear in his Eschocheon, a Crabfish and a
Butterfly, with this mot. Soft pace, goes far. A Crabfish creepes. That's soft
pace. A Butterfly flies. That goes far. A Crabfish, a Butterfly, Soft pace,
goes far. And Vespasian the Emperor did stamp in his coin a Dolphin and an
Anchor, with this Impresa, Soon enough, if well enough. A Dolphin out-strips
the ship. That's soon enough. And Anchor stays the ship. That's well enough. A
Dolphin, an Anchor, Soon enough, if well enough: so in all our actions we
must have zeal to further our endeavors, and discretion to moderate our
course. Doctor Playfere.

If the lower spheres in the heaven should not be stayed with the contrary
course of the highest sphere in the firmament, they would soon set the whole
world on a light fire: so if our zeal be not tempered with discretion, and
the inferior affections of the mind, if they be not stayed with the contrary
course of reason, and with the middle motion of the spirit of God, they will
soon ouerheat us, and overthrow all we go about.

The string of an instrument may be as well too high, as too low; if it be
too low it iarres, if it be too high it breaks: so the mind of man may be
as well too intent, as too remiss; if it be too remiss, it runs too slowly,
if it be too intent, it runs too fast.

Wit.
AS many wild weeds growing in a field, although naught of themselves, yet
are the signs of a fertile and fruitful ground, if it were tilled: so many
affections of the mind being naught of themselves, do argue no barren wit if
it were rightly ordered. Plut.

Mortar is to be straightwaies used, because it quickly dries: so the wit
of a child is to be forthwith endued with literature and wholesome counsel,
least it growing stubborn and hard do not admit the hand of a fashioner.
Plinius libro. 36. cap. 24.

As Vessels of a narrow mouth do more difficultlie receive, but do more
surely retain the liquor: so wits that do more slowly conceive for the most
part do more assuredly remember. Quintilianus.

There is lesser force and virtue in the roots of wholesome herbs, when the
seed waxes ripe: so the edge of wit and nature waxes blunt and dull, when we
give our selves to get children.

The Adamant by one thing is softened for the stroke of the hammer, otherways
it is impenetrable: so there is no wit so fierce and barbarous, which may not
be tamed by one means or other.

As some trees do fairly flourish, but do bring forth no fruit: so the
towardness of some children does promise great fruit of life, which as soon
as it grows up, being drowned in vain pleasures, it deceives the
expectation of all men. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 26. and 27.

It is reported that in Albania there are men, that have eyes of a fiery
rednes, who like Owls, do see better in the night, then in the day: so some
are more witty in devising mischievous matters, the^ in inue^ting things good
and laudable. Plin. li. 7. ca. 2.

As those women that conceive and bring forth too soon, do soon wax old, as
the Indian Calingae do, that bring forth at five years of age, and die at
eight: so those wits that are soon ripe, are soon rotten. Plin. lib. 7.
cap. 2.

Trees exceeding fruitful, do soon wax old: so excellent wits are seldom
long lived, and the best things among mortal men, do soonest decay.

The Sallow tree does cast off her seed, before it be ripe, whereupon Homer
calls it A spoil fruit: so some wits too soon ripe, do teach and write
before it be meet.

The Olive tree is long a growing, but it brings forth excellent fruit; the
Sallowe tree presently shoots up, but it is barren: so it is with wits too
soon ripe. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 26. in fin. and lib. eod. cap. 27.

A courageous horse is fitter for carriage and burdens, then an idle jade, and
yet no man lays them on: so great wits are fittest for the discharge of
great and weighty functions, but few employ them, being contented with
dizzards and cow-babies, whom they may ouerrule and control at their
pleasure. Seneca.

The earth that brings forth salt, brings forth none other thing: so wits
fruitful in learning, are not so forcible in other matters.

The fish Trochus has coiture with it self, and does conceive of it self: so
some through the happiness of their wit do infuse into themselves the seeds
of learning, whom the Grecians call Autodidactoi, teachers of themselves. Plin.
lib. 9. cap. 52.

As small wines in time wax sour: so vulgar wits come to dotage in
continuance, but those that be excellent, and wits of proof, do hold out
till the last date of old decrepit age.

As certain grounds have in them Merle, or white earth like Chalk, by which
they are manured and fatted: so an honest wit has that in it, which can better
it self.

As fire skippeth to Bitumen, as soon as it comes near it, by reason of the
cognation it has with it: so wits borne to learning, do forthwith take it:
Plin. 2. cap. 108.

As we perceive the shadow of a dial passed, but perceive it not passing; and
as it appears that a plant has increased, but we discern it not
increasing; so the going forward of wits, because it stands of small
increasinges, is perceived afterward a far off.

As in great Forrestes mighty wild beasts are bredde: so in great wits,
great vices are wont to spring up. Plut. in Moralibus.

The earth the more fruitful it is by nature, the more it is corrupted, if it
be neglected: so wits, the more pregnant they are, the more vices they bring
forth, if they be not rightlye instituted. ibidem.

The fire the clearer it burns, the sooner it goes forth: so wits the
more illustrious and ripe they be, the shorter is their continuance amongst
us. Seneca de consolatione. cap. 23.

As the sweetest Rose has his prickle, the finest Velvet his brack, ye fairest
flower his bran: so the sharpest wit has his wanton will, and the holiest
head his wicked way. John Lilie.

The freshest colors soonest fade, the keenest Rasour soonest turns his
edge, the finest cloth is soonest eaten with the Moathes, and the Cambricke
sooner stained then the course Canuas: so the pregnantest wit is soonest
perverted,

As the fleetest fish swalloweth the delicatest bait; the highest soaring
Hawke trayneth to the lure: so the wittiest brain is inueigled with the
sudden view of alluring vanities.

He that will carry a Bull with Milo, must use to carry him a calfe also; he
tha^ coueteth to have a straight tree, must no^ bow him being a twigge: so he
that think^ to have wisdom in age, must labor to get wit in youth, and he
that would be upright in age, must not bow down to vice in youth.

The Potter fashioneth his Clay when it is soft; the Sparrowe is taught to come
when he is young; the Iron being hot, receives any form with the stroke of
the Hammer, and keeps it being cold for ever: so the tender wit of a
child, if with diligence it be instructed in youth, will with industry use
those qualities in age.

The fine Crystal is sooner crazed then the hard Marble; the greenest Beech
burns faster then the driest Oak; the fairest silk is soonest soyled; the
sweetest wine turns to the sharpest vinegar; the pestilence does most rifest
infect the clearest complexion, and the Caterpiller cleaves unto the ripest
fruit: so the most delicate wit is allured with small inticement unto vice, and
most subject to yield unto vanity.

The Sun shines upon the dunghill, and is not corrupted; the Diamond lies
in the fire and is not consumed, the Crystal touches the toad, and is not
poisoned; the bird Trochilus lives by the mouth of the Crocodile, and is not
spoiled: so a perfect wit is never bewitched with lewdnes, neither entised with
lasciuiousnes.

As he is a Cockescombe that prefers the blossom before the fruit, the bud
before the flower, and the green blade before the ripe Ear of corn: so is he
a fool that prefers his own wit before all men's wisdoms.

As the Sea-crab swimmeth always against the stream: so wit always
strives against wisdom.

As the Be is oftentimes hurt with his own honey: so is wit not seldom
plagued with his own conceit.

The Vine watered with wine, is soon withered; the blossom in the fattest
ground is quickly blasted; the Goat, the fatter she is, the less fertile she
is: so man, the more witty he is, the less happy he is.

Fire (an Esement so necessary that without it man cannot live) does as well
burn the house, as burn in the house, if it be abused; Treacle does as well
poison as help, if it be taken out of time; Wine if it be immoderately taken
does kill the stomach, inflame the liver, and mischief the drunken; Physic
does destroy, if it be not well tempered; Law does accuse, if it be not rightly
interpreted; Divinity does condemn, if it be not faithfully construed; poison
is taken out of the Honisuckle by the spider; venom out of the Rose by the
canker; and dung out of the Maple tree by the Scorpion: even so the greatest
wickedness is drawn out of the greatest wit, if it be abused by will, or
entangled with the world, or inueigled with women.

The Rose, though a little it be eaten with the Canker, yet being distilled,
yields sweet water; the Iron though fretted with the rust, yet being burnt
in the fire, shines brighter: so wit, although it has been eaten with the
Canker of his own conceit, and fretted with the rust of vain love, yet
being purified in the Still of wisdom, and tried in the fire of zeal, will
shine bright, and smell sweet in the nosthrilles of all young nouices.

As an edge cannot be any thing worth, if it have nothing to cut, and as
Miners cannot work without metals: so wit cannot thrive withoutwealth.

As it nothing avails to be a cunning lapidarie, and have no stones; or a
skillful Pilot and have no ship; or a thriftie man, and have no money: so it is
to little purpose to have fine dexterity of wit, except there be wealth to
maintain it.

He that has a garden plot, does as well sow the pothearbe, as the Margerom,
as well the Leek as the Lilly, as well the holsom Isop as the fair Carnation,
the which he does to the intent he may have wholesome herbs as well to nourish
his inward parts, as sweet flowers to please his outward desire, as well
fruitful plants to refresh his senses, as fair shows to please his sight:
even so, whosoever that has a sharp and capable wit, let him as well give his
mind to sacred knowledge of divinity, as to the profound study of
Philosophy, that by his wit he may not only reap pleasure, but profit, not
only contentation in mind, but quietness in conscience.

He that thinks to buy meat in the Marker for honesty, without money, may
have a godly mind, but he shall be sure to have an empty belly: so he that
seeks to get wealth by wit without friends, may have a witty head, but he
shall be sure to have an empty purse.

There is nothing more smooth then Glass, yet nothing more brittle; nothing
more fair then snow, yet nothing less firm: so there is nothing more fine
then wit, yet nothing more fickle.

As Polypus upon what rock soever he lights, turns himself into ye same
likeness; or as the bird Piralis sitting upon a white cloth is white; upon
green, green, and changes his color with every cloth; or as our changeable
silk turned to the sun has many colors, and turned back, the contrary: so wit
shapeth it self to every conceit, being constant in nothing but in
inco^stancie.

As the rude Poet Cherillus had nothing to be noted in his verses, but only
the name of Alexander; nor that rural painter Daretus any thing to cover his
deformed Ape, but a white curtain: so many have nothing to shadow their
shameless wickedness, but only a show of wit.

Diversity of Wits.
THose Cedars, that yield the fairest flourish, bring forth no fruit, but
those which do not so fairly flourish, are fruitful: so many times some have
the fine grace of Rhetoric, that lack the soundness of wisdom; and some
again have plenty of profitable matter, that want the exornations of
eloquence.

As some women do not conceive by some men, but being joined to others become
fruitful: so some wits are indocible of some masters, which being under
others do profit: because there is a simpathie and an antipathie of wits, as
well as of bodies.

As the adamant does resist all force, and is mollified by the warm and fresh
blood of a goat: so some wits will not be managed by any force, but are
softened and moderated by fair means and gentle behavior.

As among so many thousand men, there are no faces alike in every respect: so
every man has his several disposition and manner of living.

Books.
AS gold is tried by the touch: so good books by their worth.

As in sweet oils, ointments and wines: so in books antiquity does add
estimation and price.

As those precious stones are more to be esteemed, which not only do delight
the eyes with variety of colors, and the nose with a sweet sent, but also
are effectual for medicine: so those books are most to be regarded, which
have not only the exornations of speech, but also do free the mind from
vices by holdsome precepts.

Bees abstain from withered flowers: so we should abstain from corrupt,
vicious and obscene books.

Physicians forbid to use the herb called Wintercherie although it be good to
fasten loose teeth, because the danger is great in bringing dotage, and
deliration: so we must not use those books, that polish the tongue, and
corrupt the manners.

As it is safe to lie upon the herb Tryfolie, because serpents cannot abide
to come near it: so we should be conversant in those books, in which no
infection is to be feared.

As to them that are dim sighted, every place is dark and obscure, because
they carry darkness about with them in their eyes: so to the unlearned every
book, and every style is difficulte and abstruse

In times past, they that made decrees for the people, had wont to write, Good
Fortune, that they might seem to have added nothing of their own: so some do
write trifles in other men's books, which pertain nothing to the matter.
Plutarchus.

As they that are wise, do not forthwith drink of every fountain, because
some bring health, some bring a seemly countenance, and others bring
destruction: so it is not safe to read every took, because as out of some thou
may suck a good disposition of mind, so out of others, lust, out of others,
ambition is drawn.

As that work is most laudable, wherein the art commends the matter, and
the matter countenanceth the art: so that is the best book, wherein the
profitablenesse of the argument commends the eloquence, and the eloquence of
the author commends the argument.

As cheries be fulsome when they be through ripe, because they be plenty: so
books be stale when they be printed in that they be common.

As I refer the readers to Conradus Gesners Bibliotheca for Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew authors: so for English writers I refer them to Andrew Maunsels
Catalogue of English books.

Reading of books.
AS in meats we do not only look for pleasantness, but for hole somenesse:
so in hearing and reading of authors. Plut.

As we see our selves in other men's eyes: so in other men's writings we may
see, what becomes us, and what beco^mmeth us not. Idem.

As a field too much dunged, becomes parched, but if it have no compost, it
waxes barren: so by moderate reading the wit grows and is brought to good
liking; for the mind is no less fatted by reading, then the ground by
manuring. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 23.

As it is more profitable often to manure the ground, then to manure it much:
so daily reading brings more fruit, then plodding continually at it. Plin.
ibidem in fine.

As the sent of spices and flowers is more acceptable somewhat off, then close
to the nose: so there are somethings, that please, if they be lightly passed
over; which being exactly looked into, do loose their grace; of which kind
are the fables of poets, and the histories of gentiles

Those things that live long, do not soon spring up: so that work that thou
would have always to be read, ought to be thoroughly labored in, and
seriously scanned.

As curers of men's bodies do extract holeso me medicines out of poisonous
serpents and venomous beasts, and reject that which is hurful and dangerous: so
in reading poets, historians, and philosophers, we should leave that which is
naught, and take that which is good and profitable. Theodoricus Cyraenensis
ser. 1. de Graec. aff.

As travelers have many ostes, but few friends: so they that cursorily read
all things hand over head, do run over much, and remember little. Seneca
epistola secunda.

As beasts do chew their cuds: so profiting wits do ruminate, what they
read. Philo in lib. de Agricultura.

As meat eaten greedily, has neither profitte nor pleasure: so authors read
oouer too hastily. Polybius lib. 3. Historiarum.

As drunken men, think they see more, when they see but one: so they that
through unskillfulness do not see the truth in authors, do bring in many
and diverse constructions.

A choice is to be had in reading of books.
AS Ulysses by stopping his ears with wax escaped the danger of the Sirens:
so, if in reading of authors, we meet with any obscene or erroneous matter,
we are to pass it over with deaf ears and blindfolded eyes. Plut.

As Bees do not gather all things of one flower, but of one they gather wax,
of another honey, and of another beeglew: so all things are not to be looked
for out of one author, but we must take that out of each one which is most
profitable; Out of poets and orators eloquence and splendor of words; Out of
Logitians sound and solid arguments; Out of Philosophers the knowledge of
nature; and out of Divines precepts of living. Plin. lib. 11. cap 7.

As Bees out of the bitterest flowers, and sharpest thorns, do gather the
sweetest honey: so out of obscene and wicked fables some profit may be
extracted. Plutarchus.

As some in feastinges do use an Amethist against drunkenness: so in reading
of poets we must use the direction of good rules, least they infect the mind.
Plin. lib. 37. cap. 9.

As little Bees from every place bring home that which is profitable: so a
student does excerpe from every author that which is for his purpose. Plinius
lib. 21. cap. 21.

No man is so mad, that had rather drink poison out of Neroes great rich
boule, then wholesome wine out of a Samian vessel: so he that is wise, had
rather fetch wholesome precepts of living, set down in what style soever, then
draw pestiferous opinions out of the eloquentest writer.

We must not so obey poets and philosophers, as scholars do their
schoolmasters: but as Cate being a boy obeyed his schoolmaster, commanding him
to do a thing, who asked him, for what cause he so commanded? so credit and
belief is to be yielded unto books and Authors, if they render sound
reasons for their assertions. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

As the Lord de la Nouue in the six discourse of his politic and military
discourses censureth of the books of Amadis de Gaul, which he says are no
less hurtful to youth, then the works of Machiauell to age: so these books
are accordingly to be censured of, whose names follow; Beuis of Hampton, Guy of
Warwick, Arthur of the round table, Huon of Bordeaux, Oliver of the castle,
the four sons of Aymon Gargantua, Gireleon, the Honor of Chivalry,
Primaleon of Greece, Palmerin de Oliua, the 7. Champions, the Myrror of
Knighthood, Blancherdine, Meruin, Howleglasse, the stories of Palladyne, and
Palmendos, the black Knight, the Maiden Knight, the history of Caelestina, the
Castle of Fame, Gallian of France, Ornatus and Artesia. etc.

The use of reading many Books.
AS Phisitia^s apply a medicine, found out for one disease, to all them that
are either like it, or have any affinity with it: so we must apply the sayings
of authors unto diverse uses. Plut.

Bees out of diverse flowers draw diverse juices, but they temper and digest them
by their own virtue, otherwise they would make no honny: so all authors are
to be turned over, and what thou read is to be transposed to thine own use.
Seneca.

One tall tree is not wondered at, where ye whole wood mounteth aloft: so one
sentence is not marked, where all the whole book is full of them. Se.

Out of herbs and plants the best things are to be extracted: so the best
sayings are to be gathered out of authors:

Philosophy.
AS Anacharsis said that the Athenians did use money to none other end, but
to number and count withal: so some do use the precepts of philosophy only
for ostentation. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

The air, which is in the ears, unless it be quiet, and want the proper
sound, and be free from tinckling and noise, does not exactly receive those
things, that are spoken: so that part, which is called philosophy, does not
rightly judge of those things, that are outwardly received, if any thing does
inwardly disturb and distract. Ibidem.

He does not dig for puddles, that has wells and fountains of his own,
and knows of them: so he does not seek for council of others, who himself
has learned philosophy. Ibidem.

Strangers that are enfranchised, and made free denisons, do condemn, and
take in ill part many things done in the city, when as those, that are borne,
and brought up in it, do allow and approve them: so do they that have tasted
of philosophy from their childhood. Ibidem.

As it is grievous unto passengers by sea, when they leave the country they
know, and that appears not to which they sail: so to fresh men in
philosophy at the first it is troublesome to depart from accustomed pleasures,
when as yet they do not see to what happiness philosophy will bring them.
Iibidem.

Birds soar aloft in the air, but cattes live by scratching and biting upon
the earth: so in the study of philosophy, some bestow them selves upon
contemplation of high matters, others give them selves to quiddities and
sophistications. ibidem.

As according to Philoxenus, that is the sweetest flesh, which is no flesh, and
those the delicatest fishes, which are no fishes: so that philosophy best
delights, which is mixte with poetry, and that poetry best pleases, which
relisheth of philosophy. Ibidem.

When vessels are filled full of liquour, then the air is expelled: so they
that have profited in philosophy, are filled with the truest riches, and now
do less glory in bushy hair, and gay apparel, and are less rigorous to
others, but more severe against themselves. ibidem.

As men are initiated with clamor and tumulte, but afterward when as the
holy things are in hand, there is silence, and hearkening with reverence: so
the beginninges of philosophy are tumultuous, but the mysteries full of
tranquillity Ibidem.

As in a storm when the sign Gemini appears, the mariners conceive hope of a
calm: so after the first brunte and difficulty in philosophy, the light of
truth arises and drives away all diffidence. Ibidem.

Menedemus said, that many came to Athens, who first were wise men;
afterward became philosophers, that is, students in wisdom, then
Rhetoricians, and last of all idiots: so in philosophy the more thou shall
profit, the less thou shall be puffed up with pride and disuaine. ibidem.

As a balance cannot stand still but falls to one side or other: so in
Philosophy, he that profits not unto goodness, proceeds unto
naughtiness. Ibid.

As they that expect a siege, do gather up their money, and provide victuals,
and prepare all things that are necessary against the enemies coming: so
against the insultings of wrath and anger the mind is to be furnished with the
precepts of philosophy. Ibidem.

As the stone is to be applied unto the line, and not the line unto the stone:
so our life is to be squared by the rules of philosophy, and not philosophy
by the customs of our life. Ibidem.

As they that sail in a large sea, do conjecture by the force of the winds,
and by the compass of their course, that they have gone forwards; albeit the
haven does not as yet appear unto them, yet they never rest till they have
attained unto the haven: so we must not rest in philosophy, until we have
attained the perfect habit of a wise man. Ibidem.

As in the cure of a disease ease is not felt, unless a sound habit be
recovered: so philosophy is not profited in, unless foolishness fall away by
little and little, and a better habit of mind be assumed. Ibidem.

As when children learn first to write, their hands are guided, and
afterward of themselves they imitate their copy: so the mind is first to be
directed by rule and prescript, until it begin to philosophy of it self.
Seneca.

As first that choler is to be purged, whence madness grows, afterward the
man is to be counseled and advised; otherwise he that admonishes a mad man
how he should behave himself at home and abroad, is more mad then the
mad man: so the mind is first to be freed from false opinions, afterward
the precepts of philosophy are to be delivered. Seneca de consolatione cap.
24.

Wool does forthwith drink up some colors, but not others, except it be
often boiled and sod in them: so wits do presently relish of other
disciplines they learn, but philosophy, except it be deeply rooted, and
soundly seated, does not color the mind. Seneca.

As the soul is hid in the body whence every part has his vigor and motion;
and the mysteries, which are the best part of holy things do not he open, but
to those that are initiated into them: so the precepts of philosophy are
known to every body, but that which is the best in philosophy lies hid.
Seneca.

Seeds that are cast into good ground, thrive thereafter, but falling into a
barren soil, prove sterill, like unto their earth: so also prove the precepts
of philosophy, if they fall into a good or bad mind. Seneca.

That fountain in which Nitre is bred, neither breeds nor nourisherh any
other thing: so philosophy, that is, the study of wisdom, does wholly
challenge unto her self the whole mind.

As the water of the sea is sweeter in the bottom, then at the top: so the
deeplier that thou penetratest into philosophy, the less bitterness it has.
Erasmus in Simil.

As a precious stone is a very little thing, and yet it is preferred before
large and great stones: so philosophy is a little thing in show, but very
precious in price.

Bay beries are bitter, but yet wholesome: so the precepts of philosophy are
more wholesome, then delightsome. Plin. lib. 16. cap. 30.

As there is nothing more profitable for the strength of the body then wine, if
it be well used; nor any thing more hurtefull, if it be abused: so
philosophy is a very profitable thing, if it be moderatly used; but very
pestilent, if thou be so drunk with the study of it, that thou alienatest
thy self from the common functions of life.

As the hedgehogge presaging a tempest, does either wind himself as round as
a footeball, or hides himself in the sand: so against the frowns of
fortune, the mind is to be confirmed and strengthened with the precepts of
philosophy. Erasmus in Simil.

Considia refusing all austere cure, Democrates the physician ministered unto
her the milk of goats which he fed with masticke: so they that altogether
abhor the severe precepts of philosophy, are to be instructed with more
pleasing fables, but those which relish of philosophy. Ibid.

As the herb Nasturtium does extinguish lust and venery, but quickens the
vigor of the mind: so the study of philosophy does traduce and transpose the
strength of the body unto the force of the mind, that a man by so much is more
wise in eternal things, by how much he is duller in these earthly, gross and
corporal matters. Plin. lib. 20. cap. 13.

As some carry every where about with the^ certain precious sto^es against
diseases, inchau^tmentes, drunkenness, lightning, and other mischaunces: so
certain rules of philosophy are ever to be kept with us, and carried about of
us against the diseases of the mind, lust, wrath, ambition, covetousness, and
such like.

As honey, which is most sweet unto others, is very bitter unto them that have
ye Iau^dice: so the precepts of philosophy are pleasant unto good men, but
grievous to the bad.

As vinegar is sour to be tasted, but forcible against the stinging of
serpents: so the precepts of philosophy are austere and severe, but yet they
bring present remedy against the pestilent concupiscences of the mind. Plin.
lib. 23. cap. 1.

Iuie being drunk does hurt the sinews, but being outwardly applied does
help them: so if thou altogether give thy self unto philosophy, it hurts
piety and religion, but if thou moderately tastest of it, it much profits
unto learning and erudition. Eras. in Simil.

If thou moderatly drinkest of Gallus a river of Phrygia, it cures the
infirmities of the body, but if thou immoderately quaffest it, it brings
franticknesse: so if thou moderately studiest philosophy, it much profits,
but if thou wholly addictest thy self unto the study of it, it takes away the
soundesse of mind, and fills thee full of vainglorie. ibidem.

As the herb Dictamnum draws darts and arrows out of the body; Hearts showed
first the use of it: so Philosophy does draw out of the mind the darts of
fortune. Plin. li. 25. cap. 8. Theophrast. lib. 6. cap. 16.

As oil does assuage the aches of the body: so Philosophy does appease the
co^motions of the mind, and does expel the mists of ignorance. Plin. lib. 2.
cap. 106.

As the stone Pyrites does not discover his fiery nature, except it be rubbed
and fretted, and then it does burn thy fingers: so the force of Philosophy is
not perceived, except thou exercisest it.

As Physicians when they would give unto their loathing patients a medicine of
a sharp and sour taste, do mingle it with sweet liquor, and so palliate the
wholesome bitterness: so, and after the same manner ancient Philosophy seized
upon those ancient Barbaria^s, being covered in the vestments of fables,
verses, and poems, and so allured them unto instruction by cloaking the
tediousness of discipline. Tyrius Platonicus sermon. 29.

As there is no use of Physic, except it banish diseases from the body: so
neither of Phisosophie, except it expel vices from the soul. Pythagoras apud
Stobaeum. ser. 82

As Gardiners do first water their ground so first let us water our souls with
tha^ which may be safely taken from the philosophy of the Heathen, that they
may the better receive the spiritual and heavenly seed Clemens Alexand. lib. 1.
stromat.

As the law taught the Hebrews till the coming of Christ: so philosophy
afte^ the manner of a schoolemaister taught the Grecians. Ibidem.

As Agar and Ismael should have bin subject to Sara and Isaac: so philosophy
and the Arts ought to be subject to divinity.

Many are so idle and negligent, that they take no care for the vine, but
presently pluck the grapes: so many think themselves so ingenious, that they
neither regard philosophy, nor Logic, nor the phisickes, but only require a
bare and naked faith. Clemens Alexand. lib. stromat.

As the light of a Candle is nothing, if it be compared to the brightness of
the sun: so neither is humane philosophy, if it be compared to Christian
Divinity.

As heaven, earth, and the air are not to be contemned, because some have
abused them, worshipping them for God: so neither is philosophy to be rejected
although many have abused it, but we may lawfully reap profit by it. Gregorius
Nazianzenus orat. funebri in laudem Basilii.

Even as when the wooers could not have the company of Penelope, they ran to
her handmaidens: so they that cannot attain to the knowledge of philosophy,
apply their minds to things most vile and contemptible. Bion the Philosopher.

Philosophers.
AS the people called Psylli in Africa, and the Marsi in Italy are not only
themselves not hurt of serpents, but cure others being hurt by touching them
with their spittle: so it is not enough for Philosophers, not to be corrupted
themselves with vicious affections, but it is requisite that they free others
from hurtful desires by their speech and precepts.

They say that the Bath-keepers of Asia and Graecia, when they would drive the
people from them, make a smoke in them with Darnell and Cockle, which causes a
swimming in the head: so Philosophers as often as they would remove the
unlearned multitude from their books, they mingle in their writings certain
Mathematical numbers and figures, which do breed such a giddiness and
dizinesse in their heads, that they cast away their books. Plin. lib. 18. cap.
17.

As the highness of mountains does less appear to those that behold them
a far off, but when you come nearer them, then their height is better known:
so no man knows how high and lofty the mind of a Philosopher is, and what
eminency it has over all humane things, unless you nearly contemplate it,
and come unto him by imitation. Seneca.

As Tragaedians in Theaters: so a Philosopher in schools is to be heard until
the end. Plut.

As a Physician more willingly cures that eye, which sees for many, and
watches over many: so a Philosopher does more willingly instruct the mind of
a prince, who is provident and careful for many. Idem.

As many ignorant men are desirous to taste of the honey of Pontus, but when
they have tasted it, do presently vomit it forth again, by reason of the
sweetness and bitterness: so many curious fellows desirous to make a trial
of the wit and learning of Philosophers, and especially of Diogenes, being
put down of them, were constrained forthwith to turn their backs. Diogenes
in diatribis, and apud Stobaeum sermon. 11.

As an husbandman cutteth up by the roots thorns and briers, and warily and
circumspectly pruneth his vines and olive trees, least he cutting away that
which is superfluous, cut also away that is sound and profitable: so a
philosopher does utterly ^oot out of the minds of young men lust, covetousness,
envy and such like; but he warily amendeth immoderate shamefastnes, least he
should quite eradicate and extirpe it. Plutarchus in Moral.

Sepulchers without are beautifully garnished, but within are full of corruption
and dead men's bones: so in the opinions of philosophers, the superficial
exornation of words being taken away, thou shall find many vain and absurd
things, especially, when they discourse of the soul, now honoring it, now
reproching it, without mean or modesty. Chrysostom. hom. 28. operis imperfect.

Poetry.
AS in a Vine clusters of grapes are often hid under the broad and spacious
^eaues: so in deep conceited, and well ^ouched poems, figures and fables, many
things, very profitable to be known, do pass by a young scholar. Plut.

As according to Philoxenus, that flesh is most sweet which is no flesh; and
those the delectablest fishes, which are no fishes: so that Poetry does most
delight which is mixed with Philosophy; and that Philosophy, which is mixed
with Poetry. Plutarchus in Commentario, quomodo adolescens Poetas audire debet.

As a Be gathers the sweetest and mildest honey from the bitterest flowers,
and sharpest thorns: so some profit may be extracted out of obscene and
wanton Poems, and fables. idem.

Albeit many be drunk with wine, yet the Vines are not to be cut down, as
Lycurgus did, but Wells and Fountains are to be dug near unto them: so
although many abuse poetry, yet it is not to be banished, but discretion is
to be used, that it may be made wholesome. Idem.

As Mandrake growing near Vines, does make the wine more mild: so philosophy
bordering upon poetry does make the knowledge of it more moderate. idem.

As poison mixed with meat is very deadly: so lasciviousness and petulancy
in poetry mixed with profitable and pleasing matters is very pestilent. idem.

As we are delighted in deformed creatures artificiallye painted: so in
poetry, which is a lively adumbratio^ of things, evil mattersing eniously
contrived do delight.

As Physicians use for medicine the feet and wings of the flies Cantharides,
which flies are deadly poison: so we may gather out of the same poem, that may
quell the hurtful venom of it; for poets do always mingle somewhat in their
Poems, whereby they intimate that they condemn, what they decalre. idem.

As our breath does make a shiller sound being sent through the narrow channel
of a Trumpet, then if it be diffused abroad into the open air: so the well
knitte and succinct combination of a Poem, does make our meaning better known
and discerned, then if it were delivered at random in prose. Seneca.

As he that drinks of the Well Clitorius, does abhor wine: so they that have
once tasted of poetry, cannot away with the study of philosophy; after the
same manner holds the contrary.

As the Anabaptists abhor the liberal arts and humane sciences: so
puritanes and precisians detest poetry and poems.

As Eloquence has found many preachers and orators worthy favorers of her in
the English tou^g: so her sister poetry has found the like welcome and
entertainment given her by our English poets, which makes our language so
gorgeous and delectable among us

As Rubarbe and Sugarcandie are pleasant and profitable: so in poetry there is
sweetness and goodness M. John Haring. in his A^pologie for poetry before his
translated Ariosto.

Many cockney and wanton women are often sick, but in faith they cannot tell
where: so the name of poetry is odious to some, but neither his cause, nor
effects, neither the sum that contains him, nor the particularities
descending from him, give any fast handle to their carping dispraise. Sir
Philip Sidney in his Apology for poetry.

Poets.
AS some do use an Amethist in compotations against drunkenness: so certain
precepts are to be used in hearing and reading of poets, least they infect the
mind Plut. and Plin. lib. 37. cap. 9.

As in those places where many wholesome herbs do grow, there also grows
many poysonfull weeds: so in Poets there are many excellent things, and many
pestilent matters. Plut.

As Simonides said, that the Thessalians were more blockish, then that they
could be deceived of him: so the riper and pregnanter the wit is, the sooner it
is corrupted of Poets. idem.

As Cato when he was a scholar would not believe his master, except he
rendered a reason of that he taught him: so we are not to believe Poets in all
that they write or say, except they yield a reason. Idem.

As in the same pasture the Be seaseth on the flower, the Goat grazeth on the
shrub, the swine on the root, and the Oxen, Kine and Horses on the grass: so
in Poets one seeks for history, an other for ornament of speech, another for
proof, and an other for precepts of good life. idem.

As they that come very suddenly out of a very dark place, are greatly
troubled, except by little and little they be accustomed to the light: so in
reading of Poets, the opinions of Philosophers are to be sown in the minds
of young scholars, least many diversities of doctrines do afterward
distract their minds. idem.

As in the portraiture of murder or incest, we praise the Art of him that drew
it, but we detest the thing it self: so in lascivious Poets let us imitate
their elecution, but excrate their wantonness. idem.

Some things that are not excellent of themselves, are good for some, because
they are meet for them: so some things are commended in Poets, which are fit
and correspondent for the persons, they speak of, although in themselves they
be filthy and not to be spoken: As lame Demonides wished, that the shoes that
were stolen from him, might fit his feet that had stolen them. idem.

As that ship is endaungered, where all lean to one side, but is in sasetie,
one leaning one way, and another another way: so the dissension of Poets among
themselves, does make them, that they less infect their readers. And for this
purpose our Satyrists, Hall, the Author of Pigmalions Image, and certain
Satyrs, Rankins, and such others, are very profitable.

As a Be does gather the juice of honey from flowers, whereas others are only
delighted with the color and smell: so a Philosopher finds that among Poets
which is profitable for good life, when as others are tickled only with
pleasure. Plut.

As we are delighted in the picture of a Viper or a spider artificially
enclosed with in a precious jewel: so Poets do delight us in ye learned and
cunning depainting of vices.

As some are delighted in cou^terfet wines confected of fruits, not that they
refresh the heart, but that they make drunk: so some are delighted in Poets
only for their obscenity, never respecting their eloquence good grace, or
learning.

As Emperors, kings and princes have in their hands authority to dignifie or
disgrace their nobles, attendants, subjects and vassals: so Poets have the
whole power in their hands to make men either immortally famous for their
valiant exploites and virtuous exercises, or perpetually infamous for their
vicious lives.

As God gives life unto man: so a Poet gives ornament unto it.

As the Greek and Latin Poets have won immortal credit to their native
speech, being encouraged and graced by liberal patrones and bountiful
Benefactors: so our famous and learned Lawreat masters of England would entitle
our English to far greater admired excellency, if either the Emperor Augustus,
or Octauia his sister, or noble Mecaenas were alive to reward and countenance
them; or if our witty Comedians and stately Tragedians (the glorious and
goodly representers of all fine wit, glorified phrase and queint action) be
still supported and vphelde, by which means for lack of Patrones (o
ungrateful and damned age) our Poets are soly or chiefly maintained,
countenanced and patronized.

In the infancy of Greece, they that handled in the audience of the people,
grave and necessary matters, were called wise men or eloquent men, which they
meant by Vates: so the rest, which sang of love matters, or other lighter
devises alluring unto pleasure and delight, were called Poetae or makers.

As the holy Prophets and sanctified Apostles could never have foretold nor
spoken of such supernatural matters, unless they had bin inspired of God: so
Cicero in his Tusculane questions is of yt mind, that a Poet cannot express
verses abundantly, sufficiently, and fully, neither his eloquence can flow
pleasantly, or his words sound well and plenteously, without celestial
instinction; which Poets themselves do very often and gladly witness of
themselves, as namely Ovid in 6. Fast.

Est Deus in nobis agita^te calescimus illo, etc

And our famous English Poet Spenser, who in his Sheepeheards Calender
lamenting the decay of Poetry at these days, says most sweetly to the same.

Then make thee wings of thine aspiring wit
And whence thou came fly back to heaven apace. etc.
As a long gown makes not an Advocate, although a gown be a fit ornament for
him: so riming nor versing makes a Poet, albeit the Senate of Poets has
chosen verse as their fittest raiment; but it is yt faining notable images of
virtues, vices, or what else, with that delightful teaching, which must be
the right describing note to know a Poet by. Sir Philip Sidney in his Apology
for Poetry.

A comparatiue discourse of our English Poets, with the Greek, Latin, and
Italian Poets.
AS Greece had three Poets of great antiquity, Orpheus, Linus and Musaeus; and
Italy, other three ancient Poets, Liuius Andronicus, Ennius and Plautus: so
has England three ancient Poets, Chaucer, Gower and Lydgate.

As Homer is reputed the Prince of Greek Poets; and Petrarch of Italian Poets:
so Chaucer is accounted the God of English Poets.

As Homer was the first that adorned the Greek tongue with true quantity: so
Piers Plowman was the first that observed the true quantity of our verse
without the curiosity of Rhyme.

Ovid writ a Chronicle from the beginning of the world to his own time, that
is, to the reign of Augustus the Emperor: so has Harding the Chronicler
(after his manner of old harsh riming) from Adam to his time, that is, to the
reign of King Edward the fourth.

As Sotades Maronites ye Iambicke Poet gave himself wholly to write impure and
lascivious things: so Skelto^ (I know not for what great worthiness, surnamed
the Poet Laureat) applied his witto scurrilities and ridiculous matters, such
among the Greeks were called Pantomimi, with us Buffons.

As Consaluo Periz that excellent learned man, and Secretary to King Philip of
Spain, in translating the Ulysses of Homer out of Greek into Spanish, has by
good judgment avoided the fault of Ryming, although not fully hit perfect and
true versifying: so has Henry Howarde that true and noble Earl of Surrey in
translating the fourth book of Virgils Aeneas, whom Michael Drayton in his
Englands heroycall Epistles has eternized for an Epistle to his fair
Geraldine.

As these Neoterickes Iouianus Pontanus, Politianus, Marullus Tarchaniota, the
two Strozae the father and the son, Palingenius, Mantuanus, Philelphus,
Quintianus Stoa and Germanus Brixius have obtained renown and good place among
the ancient Latin Poets: so also these English men being Latin Poets,
Gualter Haddon, Nicholas Car, Gabriel Haruey, Christopher Ocland, Thomas Newton
with his Leyland, Thomas Watson, Thomas Campion, Brunswerd and Willey, have
attained good report and honorable advancement in the Latin Empire.

As the Greek tongue is made famous and eloquent by Homer, Hesiod, Euripedes,
Aeschilus, Sophocles, Pindarus, Phocylides and Aristophanes; and the Latin
tongue by Virgill, Ovid, Horace, Silius Italicus, Lucanus, Lucretius, Ausonius
and Claudianus: so the English tongue is mightily enriched, and gorgeously
invested in rare ornaments and resplendent abiliments by sir Philip Sidney,
Spencer, Daniel, Drayton, Warner, Shakespeare, Marlow and Chapman.

As Xenophon, who did imitate so excellently, as to give us effigiem iusti
imperij, the portraiture of a just Empire under ye name of Cyrus (as Cicero
says of him) made therein an absolute heroical Poem; and as Heliodorus writ
in prose his sugared inue^tio^ of that picture of Love in Theagines and
Cariclea, and yet both excellent admired Poets: so sir Philip Sidney writ his
immortal Poem, The Countess of Pembrookes Arcadia, in Prose, and yet our
rarest Poet.

As Sextus Propertius said; Nescio quid magis nascitur Iliade: so I say of
Spencers Fairy Queen, I know not what more excellent or exquisite Poem may be
written.

As Achilles had the advantage of Hector, because it was his fortune to be
extolled and renowned by the heavenly verse of Homer: so Spensers Elisa the
Fairy Queen has the advantage of all the Queens in the world, to be
eternized by so divine a Poet.

As Theocritus is famoused for his Idyllia in Greek, and Virgill for his
Eclogs in Latin: so Spencer their imitatour in his Shepheardes Calender, is
renowned for the like argument, and honored for fine Poetical invention, and
most exquisit wit.

As Parthenius Nicaeus excellently sung the praises of his Arete: so Daniel
has divinely sonetted the matchless beauty of his Delia.

As every one mourns, when he hears of the lamentable plangors of Thracian
Orpheus for his dearest Euridice: so every one passionateth, when he reads
the afflicted death of Daniels distressed Rosamond.

As Lucan has mournefully depainted the civil wars of Pompey and Caesar: so
has Daniel the civil wars of York and Lancaster; and Drayton the civil wars
of Edward the second, and the Barons.

As Virgil does imitate Catullus in ye like matter of Ariadne for his story of
Queen Dido: so Michael Drayton does imitate Ovid in his Englands Heroical
Epistles.

As Sophocles was called a Be for the sweetness of his tongue: so in Charles
Fitz-Iefferies Drake, Drayton is termed Goldenmouth'd, for the purity and
pretiousnesse of his style and phrase.

As Accius, M. Attilius and Milithus were called Tragoediographi, because they
writ Tragedies: so may we truly term Michael Drayton Tragoediographus, for
his passionate penning the downfals of valiant Robert of Normandy, chaste
Matilda, and great Gaueston.

As Joan. Honterus in Latin verse writ 3. Books of Cosmography with
Geographicall tables: so Michael Drayton is now in penning in English verse a
Poem called Polu-olbion Geographical and Hydrographicall of all the forests,
woods, mountains, fountains, rivers, lakes, floods, bathes and springs that
be in England.

As Aulus Persius Flaccus is reported among al writers to be of an honest life
and upright conversation: so Michael Drayton (que^ toties honoris and amoris
causa nomino) among scholars, soldiers, Poets, and all sorts of people, is
held for a man of virtuous disposition, honest conversation, and well governed
carriage, which is almost miraculous among good wits in these declining and
corrupt times, when there is nothing but rogery in villainous man, and when
cheating and craftines is counted the cleanest wit, and soundest wisdom.

As Decius Ausonius Gallus in libris Fastorum, penned the occurrences of ye
world from the first creation of it to his time, that is, to the reign of the
Emperor Gratian: so Warner in his absolute Albions England has most admirably
penned the history of his own country from Noah to his time, that is, to the
reign of Queen Elizabeth; I have heard him termd of the best wits of both our
Universities, our English Homer.

As Euripedes is the most sententious among the Greek Poets: so is Warner among
our English Poets.

As the soul of Euphorbus was thought to live in Pythagoras: so the sweet
witty soul of Ovid lives in mellifluous and honytongued Shakespeare, witness
his Venus and Adonis, his Lucrece, his sugared Sonnets among his private
friends, etc.

As Plautus and Seneca are accounted the best for Comedy and Tragedy among the
Latins: so Shakespeare among ye English is the most excellent in both kinds
for the stage; for Comedy, witness his Ge^tleme^ of Verona, his Errors, his Love
labors lost, his Love labors won, his Midsummers night dream, and his
Merchant of Venice: for Tragedy his Richard the 2. Richard the 3. Henry the 4.
King John, Titus Andronicus and his Romeo and Juliet.

As Epius Stolo said, that the Muses would speak with Plautus tongue, if they
would speak Latin: so I say that the Muses would speak with Shakespeares fine
filed phrase, if they would speak English.

As Musaeus, who wrote the love of Hero and Leander, had two excellent
scholars, Thamaras and Hercules: so has he in England two excellent Poets,
imitators of him in the same argument and subject, Christopher Marlow, and
George Chapman.

As Ovid says of his work;

Iamque opus exegi, quod nec Iouis ira, nec ignis,
Nec poterit serrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.
And as Horace says of his; Exegi monumentu^ aere perennius; Regalique
situpyramidu^ altius; Quod non imber edax; Non Aquilo impotens possit diruere;
aut innumerabilis annorum series and fuga temporum: so say I severally of sir
Philip Sidneys, Spencers Daniels, Draytons, Shakespeares, and Warners works;

Non Iouis ira: imbres: Mars: ferrum: flamma, senectus,

Hoc opus vnda: lues: turbo: venena ruent.

Et quanquam adplucherrimum hoc opus euertendum tres illi Dij conspirabu^t,
Cronus, Vulcanus, and pater ipse gentis;

Non tamen annorum series, non flamma, nec ensis,

Aeternum potuit hoc abolere Decus.

As Italy had Dante, Boccace, Petrarch, Tasso, Celiano and Ariosto: so England
had Matthew Roydon, Thomas Atchelow, Thomas Watson, Thomas Kid, Robert Green
and George Peele.

As there are eight famous and chief languages, Hebrew, Greek, Latin,
Syriack, Arabicke, Italian, Spanish and French: so there are eight notable
several kinds of Poets, Heroic, Lyricke, Tragic, Comicke, Satiricke,
Iambicke, Elegiacke and Pastoral.

As Homer and Virgil among the Greeks and Latins are the chief Heroic Poets:
so Spencer and Warner be our chief heroical Makers.

As Pindarus, Anacreon and Callimachus among the Greeks; and Horace and
Catullus among the Latins are the best Lyrick Poets: so in this faculty the
best among our Poets are Spencer (who excels in all kinds) Daniel, Drayton,
Shakespeare, Bretto^ 20 As these Tragic Poets flourished in Greece,
Aeschylus, Euripedes, Sophocles, Alexander Aetolus, Achaeus Erithriaeus,
Astydamas Athenie^sis, Apollodorus Tarsensis, Nicomachus Phrygius, Thespis
Atticus, and Timon Apolloniates; and these among the Latins, Accius, M.
Attilius, Pomponius Secundus and Seneca: so these are our best for Tragedy,
the Lord Buckhurst, Doctor Leg of Cambridge, Doctor Edes of Oxforde, master
Edward Ferris, the Author of the Mirror for Magistrates, Marlow, Peele,
Watson, Kid, Shakespeare, Drayton, Chapman, Decker, and Benjamin Johnson.

As M. Anneus Lucanus writ two excellent Tragedies, one called Medea, the other
de Incendio Troiae cum Priami calamitate: so Doctor Leg has penned two famous
tragedies, ye one of Richard the 3. the other of the destruction of Jerusalem.

The best Poets for Comedy among the Greeks are these, Menander, Aristophanes,
Eupolis Atheniensis, Alexis, Terius, Nicostratus, Amipsias Atheniensis,
Anaxa^drides Rhodius, Aristonymus, Archippus Athenie^sis and Callias
Atheniensis; and among the Latins, Plautus, Terence, Naeuius, Sext. Turpilius,
Licinius Imbrex, and Virgilius Romanus: so the best for Comedy amongst us be,
Edward Earl of Oxforde, Doctor Gager of Oxforde, Master Rowley once a rare
Scholar of learned Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge, Master Edwardes one of her
Majesty's Chapel, eloquent and witty John Lilly, Lodge, Gascoyne, Green,
Shakespeare, Thomas Nash, Thomas Heywood, Anthony Mundye our best plotter,
Chapman, Porter, Wilson, Hathway, and Henry Chettle.

As Horace, Lucilius, Iuuenall, Persius and Lucullus are the best for Satyr
among the Latins: so with us in the same faculty these are chief, Piers
Plowman, Lodge, Hall of Imanuel College in Cambridge; the Author of
Pigmalions Image, and certain Satyrs; the Author of Skialetheia.

Among the Greeks I will name but two for Iambicks, Archilochus Parius, and
Hipponax Ephesius: so amongst us I name but two Iambical Poets, Gabriel Haruey,
and Richard Stany hurst, because I have seen no mo in this kind.

As these are famous among the Greeks for Elegy, Melanthus, Mymnerus
Colophonius, Olympius Mysius, Parthenius Nicaens, Philetas Cous, Theogenes
Megarensis, and Pigres Halicarnassaeus; and these among the Latins, Mecaenas,
Ovid, Tibullus, Propertius, T. Valgius, Cassius Seuerus and Clodius Sabinus: so
these are the most passionate among us to bewail and bemoane the perplexities
of Love, Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, sir Thomas Wyat the elder, sir Francis
Brian, sir Philip Sidney, sir Walter Rawley, sir Edward Dyer, Spencer, Daniel,
Drayton, Shakespeare, Whetstone, Gascoyne, Samuel Page sometimes fellow of
Corpus Christi College in Oxford, Churchyard, Bretton.

As Theocritus in Greek, Virgil and Mantua^ in Latin, Sanazar in Italian, and
the Author of Amyntae Gaudia and Walsinghams Melibaeus are the best for
pastoral: so amongst us the best in this kind are sir Philip Sidney, master
Challener, Spencer, Stephen Gosson, Abraham France and Barnefield.

These and many other Epigrammatists ye Latin tongue has, Q. Catulus, Porcius
Licinius, Quintus Cornificius, Martial, Cn. Getulicus, and witty sir Thomas
Moore: so in English we have these, Heywood, Dra^te, Kendal, Bastard, Dauies.

As noble Mecaenas that sprung from the Hetruscan Kings not only graced Poets
by his bounty, but also by being a Poet himself; and as James the 6. now
king of Scotland is not only a fauorer of Poets, but a Poet, as my friend
master Richard Barnefielde has in this Disticke passing well recorded:

The King of Scots now living is a Poet,
As his Lepanto, and his furies show it:
so Elizabeth our dread soueraign and gracious Queen is not only a liberal
patron unto Poets, but an excellent Poet herself, whose learned, delicate and
noble Muse surmounteth, be it in Ode, Elegy, Epigram, or in any other kind of
Poem Heroicke, or Lyricke.

Octauia sister unto Augustus the Emperor was exceeding bountiful unto
Virgil, who gave him for making 26. verses, 1137 pounds, to wit, ten
Sestertiaes for every verse, which amount to above 43. pounds for every verse:
so learned Mary, the honorable Countess of Pembrook, the noble sister of
immortal sir Philip Sidney, is very liberal unto Poets; besides she is a
most delicate Poet, of whom I may say, as Antipater Sidonius writes of Sappho:

Dulcia Mnemosyne demirans carmina Sapphus,
Quaesiuit decima Pieris vnde foret.
Among others in times past, Poets had these favorers, Augustus, Mecaenas,
Sophocles, Germanicus, an Emperor, a noble man, a Senator, and a Captain: so
of later times Poets have these patrones, Robert king of Sicil, the great king
Frances of France, king James of Scotland, and Queen Elizabeth of England.

As in former times two great Cardinals, Bembus and Biena, did countenance
Poets: so of late years two great preachers have given them their right hands
in fellowship, Beza and Melancthon.

As the learned philosophers Fracastorius and Scaliger have highly prized them:
so have the eloquent Orators Pontanus and Muretus very gloriously estimated
them.

As Georgius Buckananus Iephthe, amongst all modern Tragedies is able to abide
the touch of Aristotle's precepts, and Euripedes examples: so is Bishop Watsons
Absalon.

As Terence for his translations out of Apollodorus and Menander, and Aquilius
for his translation out of Menander, and C. Germanicus Augustus for his out of
Aratus, and Ausonius for his translated Epigrams out of Greek, and Doctor
Johnson for his Frogge-fight out of Homer, and Watson for his Antigone out of
Sophocles, have got good commendations: so these versifiers for their learned
translations are of good note among us, Phaer for Virgils Aencads, Golding for
Ouids Metamorphosis, Harington for his Orla^do Furioso, the translators of
Senecaes Tragedies, Barnabe Googe for Palingenius, Turberuile for Ouids
Epistles and Mantuan, and Chapman for his inchoate Homer.

As the Latins have these Emblematists, Andreas Alciatus, Reusnerus, and
Sambucus: so we have these, Geffrey Whitney, Andrew Willet, and Thomas Comb.

As Nonnus Panapolyta writ the Gospel of saint John in Greek Hexameters: so
Ieruis Markham has written Salomons Can ticles in English verse.

As C. Plinius writ the life of Pomponius Secu^dus: so young Charles
Fitz-Ieffrey, that high touring Falcon, has most gloriously penned the
honorable life and death of worthy sir Francis Drake.

As Hesiod writ learnedly of husbandry in Greek: so has Tusser very wittily
and experimentally written of it in English.

As Antipater Sidonius was famous for extemporall verse in Greek, and Ovid for
his Quicquid conabar dicere versus erat: so was our Tarleton, of whom Doctor
Case that learned physician thus speaks in the seventh Book, and seventeenth
chapter of his Politikes; Aristoteles suum Theodoretum laudauit quendam peritum
Tragoediarum actorem; Cicero suum Roscium: nos Angli Tarletonum, in cuius voce
and vultu omnes iocosi affectus, in cuius cerebroso capite lepidae facetiae
habitant. And so is now our witty Wilson, who, for learning and extemporall
wit in this faculty, is without compare or compeere, as to his great and
eternal commendations he manifested in his challenge at the Swanne on the Bank
side.

As Achilles tortured the dead body of Hector, and as Antonius, and his wife
fuluia tormented the liueleffe corpse of Cicero: so Gabriell Haruey has showed
the same inhumanitie to Green that lies full low in his grave.

As Eupolis of Athens used great liberty in taxing the vices of men: so does
Thomas Nash, witness the brood of the Harueys.

As Actaeon was wooried of his own hounds: so is Tom Nash of his I Will of Dogs.
Dogs were the death of Euripedes, but be not disconsolate gallant young
Iuuenall, Linus, the son of Apollo died the same death. Yet God forbid that
so brave a wit should so basely perish, thine are but paper dogs, neither
is thy banishment like Ouids, eternally to converse with the barbarous Getes.
Therefore comfort thy self sweet Tom. with Ciceros glorious return to Rome,
and with the counsel Aeneas gives to his seabeaten soldiors. lib. 1. Aeneid.

Pluck up thine heart, and drive from thence both fear and care away:
To think on this may pleasure be perhaps another day.
Durato, and temet rebus seruato secundis.
As Anacreon died by the pot: so George Peele by the pox.

As Archesilaus Prytanaeus perished by wine at a drunken feast, as Hermippus
testifies in Diogenes: so Robert Green died of a surfeit taken at Pickeld
Herrings, and Rhenish wine, as witnesses Thomas Nash, who was at the fatal
banquet.

As Iodelle, a French tragical poet being an Epicure, and an Atheist, made a
pitiful end: so our tragical poet Marlow for his Epicurisme and Atheism had
a tragical death; you may read of this Marlow more at large in the Theater of
Gods judgments, in the 25. chapter entreating of Epicures and Atheists.

As the poet Lycophron was shot to death by a certain riual of his: so
Christopher Mar low was stabd to death by a bawdy Seruingman, a rival of his
in his lewd love.

Painters.
APelles painted a Mare and a Dog so lively, that Horses and Dogs passing
by would neigh, and bark at them; he grew so famous for his excellent Art,
that great Alexander came often to his shop to visit him, and commanded
that none other should paint him; at his death he left Venus unfinished,
neither was any ever found, that durst perfect, what he had begun. Zeuxis
was so excellent in painting, that it was easier for any man to view his
pictures, then to imitate them, who to make an excellent Table, had five
Agrigentine Virgins naked by him; he painted Grapes so lively, that Birds
did fly to eat them. Parrhasius painted a Sheet so artificially, that
Zeuxis took it for a Sheet in deed, and commanded it to be taken away to
see the picture, that he thought it had vayled; as learned and skillful Greece
had these excellently renowned for their limning: so England has these;
Hiliard, Isaac Oliver, and John de Creetes, very famous for their painting.

As Greece moreover had these Painters; Timantes, Phidias, Polignotus, Paneus,
Bularchus, Eumarus, Cimon Cleonaeus, Pythis, Apollodorus Atheniensis, Aristides
The banus Nicophanes, Perseus, Antiphilus, and Nicearchus: so in England we
have also these; William and Francis Segar brethren, Thomas and John Bettes,
Lockey, Line, Peake, Peter Cole, Arnolde, Marcus, Jacques de Bray, Cornelius,
Peter Golchis, Hieronimo and Peter Vande Velde.

As Lysippus, Praxiteles, and Pyrgoteles, were excellent engrauers: so we have
these engrauers, Rogers, Christoper Switser, and Cure.

Music.
THe Loadstone draws iron unto it, but the stone of Aethiopia called
Theamedes drives it away: so there is a kind of Music that does assuage
and appease the effections, and a kind that does kindle and provoke the
passions.

As there is no law that has soueraintie over love: so there is no heart that
has rule over Music, but Music subdues it.

As one day takes from us the credit of another: so one strain of Music
extincts the pleasure of another.

As the heart rules over all the members: so Music over comes the heart.

As beauty is no beauty without virtue: so Music is no Music without Art.

As all things love their likes: so the most curious ear the delicatest
Music.

As too much speaking hurts; too much galling smarts: so too much Music gluts
and distempereth.

As Plato and Aristotle are counted princes in philosophy and Logic;
Hippocrates and Galen in physic; Ptolomie in Astrology, Euclide in Geometry,
and Cicero in eloquence: so Boethius is esteemed a Prince and captain in
Music.

As Priests were famous among the Egyptians; Magi among the Caldeans; and
Gymnosophistes among the Indians: so Musicians flourished among the Grecians,
and therefore Epaminondas was accounted more unlearned then Themistocles,
because he had no skill in Music.

As Mercury by his eloquence reclaymed men from their barbarousnesse and
cruelty: so Orpheus by his Music subdued fierce beasts, and wild birds.

As Demosthenes, Isocrates, and Cicero excelled in Oratorie: so Orpheus,
Amphion, and Linus, surpassed in Music.

As Greece had these excellent Musicians; Arion, Dorceus, Timotheus Milesius,
Chrysogonus, Terpander, Lesbius, Simon Magnesius, Philamon, Linus, Stratonicus,
Aristonus, Chiron, Achilles, Clinias, Eumonius, Demodochus, and Ruffinus: so
England has these; Master Cooper, Master Fairfax, Master Tallis, Master
Tauerner, Master Blithman, Master Bird, Doctor Tie, Doctor Dallis, Doctor
Bull, M. Thomas Mud, sometimes fellow of Pembrook hal in Cambridge, M. Edward
Johnson, Master Blankes, Master Randall, Master Philips, Master Dowland,
and M. Morley.

Sin.
AS he runs far that never returns: so he sins deadly that never
repents. Porters and cariers when they are called to carry a burden on their
shoulders, first they look diligently upon it, and then they peise and lift it
up, and try whether they are able to undergo it, and whether they ca^ carry it:
so before we sin, we should consider whether we be able to carry the burden of
it, that is, the punishment, which is hell fire. Lodouic. Granat. lib. 1. Ducis
peccat.

As the palate, that is corrupted and distempered by ill humors, cannot taste
the sweetness of meat, for that which is sweet seems bitter, and that
which is bitter sweet: so a soul corrupted with the humors of vices and
inordinate affections, and accustomed to the flesh pots of Egypt, cannot taste
Manna, nor the bread of Angels. Ibidem.

Even as in a country, where all are borne Aethiopians, it is not an ugly
thing to be black, and as where all are drunk, it is no ignominy nor slander
to be drunk: so the monstrous servitude and slavery of sin, because it is
so familiar and common to the world, scarsly is known or noted in any man.
Ibidem.

As swine are a certain heard of beasts, that delighte in mire and durte, and
are nourished with the basest and most unclean meats: so the filthy souls of
sinners are delighted with no other thing, except with the most filthy durte of
carnal pleasures. Ibidem.

As wine is marred by vinegar; and fruits are spoiled of worms; and every
contrary is corrupted of his contrary: so also all the powers of our soul are
disturbed and infected through sin, which is an especial enemy, and most
contrary to our souls. Ibidem

Even as adultery is the most contrary thing to marriage: so that which is most
contrary to a godly and virtuous life is sin. ibidem.

Even as the roots of trees being cut up, the boughs and branches, which
receive life from the roots, do forthwith wither and perish: so those seven
capital sins, which are wont to be termed the seven deadly sins, which
are the general and universal roots of all other vices being hewn in
sunder, and utterly eradicated out of our souls, suddenly all the vices will
die, which are derived from them. Idem. lib. 2. ducis peccat.

As the comedies of Plautus and Terence, are at this day the very same
Comedies, which they were a thousand years ago, albeit the persons, that then
acted them be changed: so the same vices, which in times past were in the men
of this and that condition, are now also, although perhaps the names be
somewhat changed. Ibidem

As deadly poison speedily pearceth the heart, kills the spirits, and
brings death: so sin kills the soul, and speedily brings it to
destruction. Ibidem.

It is said that thunder bruseth the tree, but breaks not the bark, and
pearceth the blade and never hurts the scabberd: even so does sin wound the
heart, but never hurt the eyes, and infect the soul, though outwardly it
nothing afflict the body.

As the devil is the father of sin: so sin is the mother of death.

As a man comes into a house by the gate: so death came into the world by sin.

As a fire goes out, when all the fuel is spente, but burns as long as
that lasts: so death dies when sin cease, but where sin abounds, there
death rages.

As cursed Cham laughed to see Noah's nakedness: so the devil loves it alife to
see us sin.

As pride is far off from him that repents: so humility is far off from him
that sins. Marcus Heremita, de his, qui putant ex operibus iustificari.

A young man in a tavern seeing Diogenes, fled through shame further into it,
nay, says Diogenes, the further thou flyest into it, the more thou art in the
tavern: so sinful men, the more they hide themselves within themselves, the
more they are that they are; but they must come out of themselves, if they
desire to avoid them selves. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

The fish Ephimera is bred without engendering, of the putrefaction of the
earth, and within three hours after it is bredde it dies: so sin is bred
beyond the course and order of nature of the corruption of the appetite, and is
extinguished by the three parts of repentance, contrition, confession and
satisfaction. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 4. de natalibus et volatile. c. 62.

Drink does kill a mouse, as Aristotle says: so does sin kill the soul.
Idem, lib. 5. de animalibus terrestribus. cap. 35.

As a mule is engendered against the course of nature: so is sin engendered not
of nature, but it is a vice and an enormitie of nature, desiring that, which is
not of the same order. Ibidem. cap. 93.

Old age is full of misery, which brings a corporal death: so sin is full
of misery, which brings eternal death. Idem, lib. 6. de homine et membris
eius. c. 52.

As there be seven kinds of leprosy: so there are 7. capital sins.
Ibidem, 53.

The best way to kill a meteriall serpent, is to kill him in the head: so the
best way to kill the spiritual serpente is to kill him in the head, that is to
kill sin in the beginning. Venerabilis Beda.

Kill a cockatrice when he is an egg, and he will not bite thee: so kill sin
in the beginning, and it will not hurt thee.

As foxes are to be killed when they are cubs: so sin is to be beaten down,
when it is growing.

As the Babylonians children were to be dashed against the stones: so sin is
to be nipped in the bud. Psalm. 137.

Pride.
AS violent waters are prone to often eruptions, becoming shalowest within
their ordinary channels: so proud persons are evermore capable of higher
dignities, though not well able, to exercise their present mean offices.

As winds blow most fiercely, when they are about to cease: so men, when they
are most proud, as Pope Julius, and Cardinal Woolsey, then they are nearest
to destruction.

As God is angry at them, that imitate the thunder and lightening, and does
cast them into hell, as he cast Salmoneus: so he does disdain the proud
and lofty minded, who emulate his greatness, but do not express his
goodness. Plutarchus in Moralibus.

If thou will put any good thing into bladders, thou must first remove the
wind and air out of them: so thou must take all pride and swelling out of his
mind, whom thou meanest to teach. Ibidem.

As the Cedar tree is unfruitful and stiff: so a proud man is unfruitful and
obstinate. Basilius in psalm. 28.

As a blind man may be easily discerned of all: so may a proud man, that
knows not the Lord (for the beginning of pride is the ignorance of God) be
easily known, as being deprived of his greatest light. Chrysostomus, hom, de
Ozia.

As the ship, that has passed many waves, and escaped many tempests, at the
length shipwracking in the very haven, does loose all the treasure it
contained: so the proud Pharisie, after that he had undergone the labors of
fasting, and had performed the exercise of many notable virtues, through his
pride and arrogancy made shipwreck of them all in the very haven. Idem, hom.
de profectu Euangelij.

That body, which has lost a good temperature is subject to diseases: so that
soul that has lost humility is enda^gered with pride, rashness, weakness and
foolishness, Idem ser. contra desperationem et superbiam.

As he that is frantik knows neither himself, nor those things that are
before his feet: so a proud man neither knows him self, nor any man about
him. ibidem.

As covetous men the more they receive, the more they stand in need of: so a
proud man the more he is honored, the more honor he desires. Idem, hom. 1.
in secundam ad Thessalonicenses.

As they that are swelled, are not in good health: so they that are proud, are
not in their right wits. idem, hom. 17. in 1. Timoth.

As in an heap of wheat, the chafe lies higher then the wheat, not that it is
worthier, but because it is lighter, and being lighter it gets ye higher
place: so in this life a proud man is lifted above an humble man, not for his
merit and virtue, but for his vanity, and false opinion of himself, and
being vain of himself, he prefers himself before those, of who^ he is
excelled in virtue. Hector Pint. in c. 15. Ezech.

As pride is the beginning of all vices: so it is the ruin of all virtues.
Isidorus.

They that are sick of the dropsy, by reason of the grossness of their
bodies, seem to be in good estate, notwithstanding they be full of nothing
but water and such evil humors, which in the end are the cause of their
death: so they that are proud, by reason of their ouerweening co^ceits, seem
to be in great reputation and credit, when before God they are most abominable
and detestable.

Covetousness:
AS fire, when there is more wood cast on, burns more fiercely: so
covetousness the more wealth it has, the more it desires. Lod. Granat. lib.
2. ducis peccatorum.

As drink in a dropsy is the cause of greater thirst: so riches in covetous
men are the causes of greater avarice. Ibidem.

As the hollow spoute receives much water, and yet retains nothing but air:
so ye covetous man gathers much wealth, and yet possesses nothing but cares.

As the fish Polypus uses great skill in taking of other fishes, being
otherwise a stupide and foolish creature: so many men are very wise for their
own lucre and gain, but in other things very blockish and brute beasts.

As vultures do smell three days before hand where any dead carcasses will
fall, and do fly thither: so greedy gapers after livings, do many years
before hand long for the death of the possessors. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 6.

Covetousness is like the serpent Hidaspis, the more it sucks, the more it is
a thirst, eating men alive as the Crocodile, and it is a vice of as dangerous
allurement, as the place, where the Sirens sit and chaunt their prejudicial
melody.

There is a certain thorn among the Indians, the juice of which being
sprinkled into the eyes, does bring blindness to all living creatures: so the
dust of gold being cast into the eyes of men, does make them stark blind.

As physicians say that cold does hurt the bones, the sinews, and the
teeth: so Paul does say more breefly, because he is the master of breuity,
that covetousness is the root of all evil. Chrysostom. hom. 75, in Matthew.

As bees flock unto a honey deaw: so covetous men hunte after the smell of
gain. Plutarchus in Moralibus. Meminit eius etiam Maximus sermon. 12.

As great fishes devour the small: so covetous cormorants eat up the poor.
Basilius hom. 7, exameron.

As gluttons cannot spare any thing from their own bellies: so covetous men
cannot spare any thing from their own purses. Idem hom. in ditescentes.

As the sea is never seen without waves: so the minds of covetous men are
never without perturbations, cares, dangers, trembling and fear. Chrysostom.
Hom. 36. in Matthew.

As a moath does corrupt a garment: so does covetousness eat and rust a wretched
soul. Idem, hom. 48.

As the man of Chios sold his best wine to others, and drunk the dead wine
him self: so do covetous men, they enjoy the worst of their wealth, and keep
the best for worms, moathes and rust. Plut.

As an itchy scabby place stands need always of friction and rubbing, so the
thirst of a covetous mind is never quenched. idem.

As they that fall a sleep through heaviness, dream of sorrowful things: so
they that hunt after wealth, and are covetous, do dream of usury, extortion,
enhaunsing of rentes, and such like dishonest gripings. Idem.

As adulterers love other men's wives; and contemn their own: so some men are
more delighted with searching after other men's goods, then with enjoying their
own. idem.

As the root of a reed being beaten small and laid upon the root of fern,
does bring forth a stem; and also as the root of fern being beaten small and
laid upon the root of a reed does extract a stalk: so in like manner the
desire of money does drive out of the soul the love of wisdom, and wisdom
does drive out of the soul the love of money.

As among the Myconians baldnes is no unseemly thing, because all are borne
bald there: so amongst Londoners pride and usury, and among lawyers covetousness
and bribery are counted small faults, or rather none, because these vices are
as a general murraine among them.

As an Adamant does draw iron from a lodestone: so the love of money does draw
men from christian piety, does call them away from all goodness, neither does
suffer them to stick unto Christ.

In the I Will of Chios the face of Diana is placed aloft, whose countenance
seems heavy to those that enter in, but cheerful to them that go out: so
certain sordide illiberall pesauntes do with heavy countenaunces entertain
their friends, fearing least they should put them to cost, and should ask
any thing of them, but they are cheerful at their departure. Plin. lib. 35.
cap. 5.

As the Emmots of India do only keep the gold dug out of the cauerns of the
earth, but do not enjoy it: so a covetous rich man neither himself enjoys
his riches, neither vouchsafes the use of them to any other. Plin. lib. 11.
cap. 31. et Herodot. lib. 3.

Horseleaches and crablice have no place for voydance of their excrements, and
because they are insatiable, they swell with sucking of blood and so burst: so
a covetous man is choked with his own store.

As that earth, which has veins of gold and silver, is in a manner barren of
all other things: so they that thirst after gold and silver, and have
conceived these metals in their minds, they commonly bring forth no fruit of
any good thing.

The Eagle is the most ravenous among birds, she dies not by disease, nor by
old age, but through hunger: so a covetous man, the more years that grow
upon him, the more his covetousness increases, and the nearer he is to his
grave, the more hungry he is after gain. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 3.

In quicksiluer all things do swim but gold, for it draws this alone into
it: so nothing does settle in the mind of a covetous man, but lucre and
gain; arts, learning, disciplines, and honesty do float above, neither have
power to descend into his breast. Plin. lib. 33. cap. 6.

Hearts when they are constrained to cast off their horns, do hide them,
especially their right horn, that for medicine it may not be of use to
others: so many worldly cormorant rich men, when as they cannot use their
riches themselves, yet they will not suffer others to enjoy the^, Plin. lib. 8.
cap. 32. Arist. l. 6. de not. cap, 5.

As idolaters sacrifice oxen to their idols: so covetous men sacrifice their
souls unto their wealth. Chrysostom. hom. 64. in Matthew.

As he that is sick of a fever does not quench his thirst by drinking, but
does more inflame it: so he that is diseased with covetousness, when he
receives money is not therewith satisfied, but does more kindle it. ibidem.

As a drunkard is vexed with greater thirst, then he that uses wine
moderately; and as fire is made greater by adding of fuel: so the desire of
money is more increased by the plenty of gold: idem hom. 1. in Matthew.

As an eunuche does lament, because he cannot perform his desire with a
virgin: so do all covetous people that gape for wealth. Idem hom. 74.

As he that sees a golden cup, precious stones, and costly apparel in
darkness, cannot discern the worth of it: so a covetous man can by no means
perceive the beauty of the best things: Ibidem.

As they that gathered more. Manna, then was permitted, had more worms and
more corruption: so have covetous men, that gather more wealth, then they
should. idem. hom. 4. in 1. Cor.

As Pharaoh compelled the Israelites to spend their time in gathering straw
and stubble: so the devil constrains covetous men to consume their time in
gathering clay and dirt: for what is gold and silver but clay and dirt? idem
hom. 40. in Mat.

As hell is never satisfied: so covetous men have never enough. August. epist.
3. ad Ioannem comitem.

As the birds Seleucides are insatiable in the eating of locustes: so are
covetous men in gathering of riches. Isidorus Clarius oratione 36. contra
auaros.

As a shadow does hinder the light of the sun: so covetousness does hinder
the light of grace. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano li. 1 de Coelo et Elementis cap.
8.

As the shadow of the earth does cause an eclipse of the moon, when the earth
comes between the sun and the moon: so the desire of earthly things
does cause the eclipse of the soul, when it is put between the soul and
God. Ibidem.

As a shadow does either repress or altogether extinguish heat: so
covetousness does either diminish or extinguish the heat of charity. Ibidem.

As a shadow is an induction to sterilitie, for not any thing increases,
where there is continual shade: so the seed of the divine word cannot take
increase, and bring forth fruit, where there is covetousness and care for
riches. Ibidem.

As the shadow is a friend unto serpents, and a nourisher of snakes: so
ceuetousnesse is most acceptable unto infernal serpents, that is, unto devils,
because by it they most of all entangle and ensnare souls. Ibidem.

As a shadow hinders the ripening of fruits: so covetousness hinders the
fruits of repentance. ibidem.

As a shadow brings darkness, and darkness fear: so does covetousness,
least it loose that it has gotten. Ibidem.

As a shadow provoke sleep, and that by reason of the coolness: so
covetousness induces sleep, that is, profoundnesse, and vnmoueablenesse in
sin. ibidem.

As certain cauernes in the mountain Aetna do always burn, by reason of
the abundance of sulphur; so is covetousness always on a light fire, by
reason of the greediness of gain. Idem in eod. lib. cap. 58.

The Arabian Onix stone is of a black color with white streakes: so covetous
men although they be painted with honors, yet they have black and filthy
minds. Idem lib. 2. de Metallis et lapid. cap. 3.

Dioscorides says that the Onix stone either worn about the neck, or carried
in the hand, brings sadness, multiplieth fears, and moves the mind to
strife and contention: so also does covetousness; it brings sadness, when
it has not what it desires; and fear, to loose that it has; and strife,
because Meum and Tuum, as Seneca says, are the causes of al strife. Ibid

As the Onix stone cannot hurt in the presence of ye Sardyan stone: so
covetousness cannot infect him, in whom the love of God is, for where the love
of God is, there the love of this world has no place. Ibidem.

As an onyon is of a cold and glutinous nature as says Dioscorides: so
covetousness does cool the soul, by excluding the heat of charity, and
does hold it fast, by reason of the viscous lyme of wealth. Idem lib. 3. de
vegetabilib. et Plant. cap. 6.

An Onyon as says Dioscorid. does yield little nourishment unto the body: so
covetousness does yield little nourishment to the body, but none at all to
the soul. Ibidem.

As Onions do provoke choler: so does covetousness provoke anger. Ibidem.

As Henbane brings death to the body by bodily sleep: so covetousness
brings death to the soul by spiritual sleep. Ibidem.

As ravenous birds do love to live alone, as says Aristotle: so do covetous
men. Idem. lib. 4. de Natatilib. and volat. cap. 9.

Ravenous Birds do drive their young ones from them, so soon as they can
fly: so do covetous peole put out their children, as soon as they can shift,
and casseir their servants, as soon as they have serude their turns. Ibidem.

As Griphons keep Mountains, wherein are precious stones, but neither use them
themselves, nor suffer others to enjoy them: so do covetous men deal in
keeping their wealth. Ibidem ex Isidoro.

As a Hog seeks for his meat in dirt and mire: so a covetous wretch
seeks for felicity in Silver and Gold. Ibidem.

As a horseleach has a triangular mouth, and a trunk in it, with which she
does drink blood, and when she has drunk enough, she vomiteth it out
again, that she may suck more, as Isidore says: so covetousness has a
triangular mouth, that is, three ways of ill getting, to wit, by rapine,
theft, and usury, whose trunk is insatiable desire, with which it sucketh out
the blood of the poor, as it manifestly appears in vsuries, by which when it
has filled the purse, then it vomiteth it forth again, that is, it puts
that gain out again to usury, that it may gain more. Idem lib. 5. de
Animalib. Terrestrib. cap. 10.

As a dog lying upon hay, eats none himself, nor suffers others to eat:
so does a covetous man. Ibidem.

As certain serpents keep Balsamum, but have no use of it, nor suffer others
to use it: so do covetous men their riches. Ibidem.

As Bees gather honey of flowers, and die in the dregs: so do covetous men
ibidem.

As a spider in a short time makes her web, which the wind as soon
breaks: so a covetous man soon gathers a great deal of wealth together,
which misfortune soon scatters. Ibidem.

As an Ape huggeth her young ones: so a covetous miser huggeth his wealth.
Ibidem.

As the leaprosie corrupts all the members: so covetousness infecteth all the
affections. Idem lib. 6. de homine and membris eius. cap. 10.

As a leaper has diverse spots: so a covetous man has diverse vices. Ibidem.

As the ancient Greek and Latin poets made Tantalus a mirror of
covetousness, who was tormented with hunger and thirst, notwithstanding he
stood in a river up to the chin, and had goodly Apples hanging over his nose
continually: so our English modern Poets, note above al others Justice Randoll
of London to be infected with the same vice, a man passing impotent in body,
but much more in mind, that dying worth many thousands, and leaving behind him
a thousand pounds of gold in a chest full of old boots and shoes, yet was
so miserable, that at my Lord Majors dinner he would put up a Widgen for his
supper, and many a good meal did he take of his frank neighbor the widow
Pen.

As pride is the souls timpanie, and anger the souls frenzy: so
covetousness is the souls dropsy.

Luxury.
AS wood preserves fire: so the thought preserves and nourishes desires and
concupiscences.

Like as fire works wood altogether into fire: so lust wholly alienateth man
into lasciuiousnes.

As smoke drives away Bees: so luxury drives away spiritual graces.
Basilius hom. 1. de ieiunio.

As fire changes hard and cold iron, and makes it as fire: so lust tameth
iron, and hardy minds. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 1. de caelo and
elementis, cap. 47.

As out of two flints smitten together, there comes out fire: so out of the
unchaste touch of man and woman there comes out the fire of concupiscence and
luxury. Ibidem.

As a wall, although not burnt of a candle, yet it is blacked: so if women
cohabitate with men, the Devils Bird-lime shall not be wanting. Hieronymus.

As we may easily fall into a pit, but not so soon get out again; so we
may easily fall into the sin of luxury, by reason of our natural
corruption, but we can hardly get from it.

As sulphur is hot, and therefore soon fired: so is luxury.

As God has given eyes unto us, not to look for our pleasure, but for things
necessary for our life: so has he given unto us genitors, for none other
cause, but to increase the world, as the name of them may teach us. Lactantius,
lib. 7. cap. 25.

As drunkards do spue forth lewd speeches: so luxurious persons do utter
lascivious and obscene words. Chrysostomus oratione 5. aduersus Iudaeos.

As a Pilot making shipwreck in the haven, obtains no pardon: so pollution of
wedlocke-state in married persons has no defense either with God or man. Idem,
hom. 3. de Ozia.

As he that was possessed of the Devil, lived among the graves, and cut
himself with stones: so luxurious persons live among harlots, who are full of
stinch and filthiness, and cut themselves with vices, which are sharper then any
stones. idem. hom. 29.

As it is unjust, through covetousness to encroach upon any man's living: so is
it unjust through lust to subvert the limits of good manners. Augustinus lib.
15. de ciuitate Dei.

Fire is extinguished two ways, either by withdrawing the fuel, or by
casting on water: so the fire of luxury is quenched two ways, either by
withdrawing the fomentations of the flesh, or by casting upon it the cold
water of repentant tears. Hugo Victorinus lib. de carnalibus nuptijs vitandis.

Envy.
AS a worm bredde in woodde consumes it: so also is envy bredde in the
heart, and the heart is the first thing that it excruciateth; and when it has
corrupted the heart, it also takes away the natural color of the countenance.

The serpent Porphyrius has poison, but because he is without teeth, he has
it only for himself: so some do envy, and malice, but they hurt no body
but themselves, because they want ability.

Take away the fuel, and the fire goes forth: so take away the occasion, and
envy cease. Plut.

Dogs bark at the unknown, but are gentler toward them they know, as
Heraclitus said: so envy does most annoy men newly advanced, but is not so
raging against those, whom it has bin acquainted with. Idem.

As venom does devour Iron: so does envy consume the possessours of it.
Basil. hom. de inuidia.

As Vipers are brought forth by tearing in pieces their dammes belly: so
envy does gnaw in sunder the soul of the conceiuer. Ibidem.

Vultures and Flies fly over sweet Ointments, and pleasant Meadows, and seize
on carrion and ulcers: so envious persons do pass over that which is well done,
and only busy themselves with errors, infirmities and imperfections. Ibidem.

As the Phoenix burns herself: so does an envious man. August. sermon 18.
ad fratres in Heremo.

As that water is venomous, which serpents live in: so is that soul poisoned,
in which envy dwells. Palladius in historia de Stephano lapso.

As a worm is not bredde in Cedar: so envy is not begotten in the heart of a
wise man. Hector Pintus in cap. 19. Ezechiel.

As the Flies Cantharides are bredde in the soundest wheat, and in Roses most
flourishing: so envy does most oppose it self against good men, and
proficients in virtue. Antonius in Melissa, part 1. sermon. 62.

As toothache springs from three things, as says Auicen, from the substance
of the teeth, from the nerve, which is in the root of the teeth, and sometimes
from the gums: so envy springs from three things, from personal prosperity,
from advanced honor, and from massy wealth. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 6.
de homine and eius membris. cap. 37.

As there is no Lark without a crest: so there is no wit without natural
borne envy. Stobaeus sermon. 36. ex Plutarcho.

Where there is no light, there is no shadow: so where there is no felicity,
there is no envy. Plut.

Bauins are known by the bands, Lions by their claws, and cocks by their
combs: so envious minds are known by their manners.

Gluttony.
AS corporal fasting does lift up the spirit to God: so superfluity of meat
and drink does cast and sink it down. Lodo. Granat. lib. de deuotione.

As the spirit when it is full of devotion, does inuit the heart to spiritual
and divine things: so the body being full of meat, does draw and hale the
same unto corporal and vain matters. ibidem.

As ships of lighter burden do swiftly sail through the sea, but those that
are ouerloaden with many burdens are drowned: so fasting makes the soul
light, that it lightly saileth over the sea of this life, that it mounteth
aloft, and beholds heaven and heavenly things, but being ouerburdened with
too much meat and drink, the spirit grows sleepie and the body heavy, the
soul is captiuated, and made subject to a thousand miseries. ibidem.

As a soldior that is ouerloaden can hardly manage his weapon: so that man can
hardly watch at his prayers, who is gluttonously filled with superfluity of
meats, Ibidem.

As much water is the cause of moorish grounds, fens, myres, and muddy places,
where nothing engenders but Toades, Frogs, Snakes, and such like foul
vermin: even so excess of wine procures brutish, wicked and beastly desires,
many sensual appetites, and other sinful qualities. Ibidem.

As Trees which are planted or cut in the full of the Moon, do but engender
worms, loose their own virtue, and perish: the like does excess of eating or
drinking, for when the belly is full, it nothing but increases the worms of
sin in the soul, consumes the whole man, and cutting him off from God,
makes him die and wither in wickedness. Stella de contemp. mundi.

As the walls of Babylon were ouerthrown by Nabuchadnezar: even so does
surfeting by meat or drink destroy all the virtues abiding in the soul. ibidem.

As Mathematicians circumscribe all things within a center and a circumfere^ce:
so many do circumscribe al pleasure within their bellies. Plut. in Moralibus.

Aristotle says that the fish whom the Grecians call ovoc, hoc est, Asinus, of
al other living creatures has the heart in the belly: so gluttons have theirs.
Clemens libro 2. paedag. cap. 1.

As a cloud does obscure the beams of the Sun: so gluttony does dim the
splendor of the mind. Nilus oratione 1. aduersus vitia.

As birds that have weighty bodies are unapt for flight: so gluttons with
their fleshy panches are unfit for contemplation. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano
lib. 4. de natalibus and volatilibus, cap. 35.

Anger.
AS a drunken man cannot do any thing wisely and with reason, and of which he
does not afterward repent him, as we read of Alexander the great: so when as a
man is disturbed and troubled with anger, and blinded with the smoke of this
passion, he cannot rest, neither take aduiseme^t, which to day although it
seem just and reasonable unto him, yet to morrow, when the fury of his passion
shall be over, he shall confess that it was unjust and unreasonable.

As in a tumult we do not hear what is spoken unto us: so angry persons do
not admit other men's counsel, unless reason speak within, which appeaseth
the hurly burly of the mind. Plut.

As a tumor arises by a blow of the flesh: so effeminate and weak persons
do most of all swel with anger; as women and old men. idem.

The Barbarians do infect their weapons with poison, that they may do double
hurt: so angry folks do again and again poison their tongues with venomous
words. idem

As the first messengers are not forthwith believed, as Phocion of Athens
hearing tell of Alexanders death, said, if he be dead to day, he will be
dead to morrow and for ever: so we must not presently believe anger, saying
unto us, he has iniuried me, but we must protract the time for many days,
and make further inquiry. idem.

As the body is shaken and corrupted with a long cough: so the mind is
exulcerated with often anger. idem.

As a child through unskillfulness does often hurt himself, when he would hurt
another: so many times anger does hurt it self, when it would wrong others.
idem.

As we do not bridle horses in the race, but before they run: so they that
are subject to anger, are to be admonished by reasons, before they fall into
danger. Idem.

If one fire be joined to another, the flame becomes the greater: so anger by
anger is not appeased, but is more provoked. Chrisost. hom. 12. operis
imperfecti.

As Asses bite and kick: so angry people rail and fight. Idem. hom. 3. in
Ioannem.

As winter is full of storms: so is an angry mind full of perturbations. idem.
hom. 9. ad pop. Antioch.

Vinegar infecteth a vessel, if it long stay in it: so anger corrupts the
heart, if it make any aboade in it. Augustinus Epistola. 88.

A scald head is soon broken: so a woman and a child are soon angry. Sen. lib.
1. de ira.

As lukewarm water asswageth inflammations: so gentle and mild words do
quench anger. Anthonius part 2. sermon 53.

As the sun for forty years never saw Episius eating: so it never saw John
the Anchorete angry.

Idleness.
AS the Milesian garment did not become Hercules, when he served Omphale,
after he had put off his Lions spoils: so neither does it befit a civil man,
after his magistracy to give himself unto idleness and voluptuousnes. Plut.

As the birds called Martinets are always either flying, or lying still upon
the earth, because they want feet: so some are too vehement in both
extremities, they are either too busy, or too idle, they keep no mean. Plin.
lib. 10. cap. 39.

As they that walk, and play crankes upon ropes, if they be but a little
careless, fall down, and so perish: so they that walk in this life, if they
give themselves but to a little idleness, they are thrown headlong into
folly. Chrisost. hom. 3. de Ozia.

As rust does putrify iron: so idleness does corrupt the wit and disposition
of man. Ovid. lib. 5. de tristibus elegia. 12.

As water continually entering into a ship by some secret leak, does at the last
drown it, through the carelesnes of the Mariners: so by idleness and slothfulnes
evil thoughts and concupiscences are so long multiplied, till the ship of the
heart yielding unto them, be endangered with finne. Bernard. sermon. de S. Andrea.

As in standing water, venomous worms are engendered: so in an idle soul ill
thoughts and hurtful concupiscences are bred. Laurentius Iustinianus lib. de
perfectionis gradibus, cap. 9.

Birds that are couped up, soon grow fat: so by lazines the body grows
corpulent, and the mind unfit for any good exercise. Seneca epist. 122.

As too much bending breaks the bow: so too much remission spoileth the
mind. Seneca.

Rust does fret the hardest iron, if it be not used; the Moath does eat the
finest garment, if it be not worn; moss does grow on the smoothest stone,
if it be not stirred: so impiety does infect the wisest wit, if it be given to
idleness.

Standing water is sooner frozen, then the running stream; he that sits is
more subject to sleep, then he that walks: so the idle man is far more
subject to be overcome of vice, then he that is exercised.

Vice.
A Pilot that has dashed his ship against a rock, will not only afterward
be wary of it, but of all other rocks: so he that detesteth the ugliness of
one vice, will also warily fly from other vices. Plut.

As he is miserable that serves a cruel and dogged master, from whom he may
fly: so is he much more miserable that is a servant and a slave unto vices,
from which he cannot fly. idem.

As a spot or a blemish, that has long been letten alone, is hardly taken
away: so inueterate vices are hardly corrected. Idem.

In war a court of guard, and watching is continually to be held: so we must
never cease to strive against vices. idem.

As he that despaireth ever to be rich, makes havoc of that he has, but
he that is in good hope to be wealthy, will make spare of little matters: so
he that fully purposes to be a good man, does endeavor to correct and amend
the least vices, and neglects not any thing, that may any ways further him
to the attainement of virtue. Idem.

They that through unskillfulness cannot tell how to make a piece of wood
straight, do wrest and bend it to the contrary part: so some in flying from one
vice, do fall into a greater. idem.

As those wounds of the body are more grievous, which make an Ulcer: so those
vices of the mind are much more grievous which more vehemently do disturb and
distract* idem.

The water called Lyncestis or Acidula, does make drunk as well as wine: so
poverty and lack of knowledge does make some vicious and wicked; for the same
vices do spring from diverse causes, as arrogance springs both from knowledge
and unskillfulness. Plin. lib. 31. cap. 2.

It is easy to slip into a weele-net, but to come out is vety difficult: so it
is easy to fall into vices, but to return unto virtue is not so easy.

For the biting of an Aspe there is no remedy, but the cutting of the infected
parts: so some vices are only cured by death. Plin. lib. 8. cap 23.

Scorpions do bring forth each other, and do kill each other, for it is said
that the Scorpion does bring forth eleven young ones, all which the damme
kills saving one, but that one kills his damme, and auengeth his brothers
blood, and this does God, that that pestiferous brood should not too much
increase: so of one capital vice, many vices are bred, as of covetousness are
engendered treachery, fraud, cousenage, perjury, unquietness, violence, and
hardness of heart, but oftentimes one of these daughters does kill their
mother Avarice, unquietness of mind does many times so weary the covetous,
that they strive by all means to cast off the burden of this vice, and quite
to leave the world. And so it is in other capital vices. Geminianus lib. 5. de
animalibus terrestribus. cap. 120.

As one poison expels another, as the fatness of the snake prevails
against the biting of the Crocodile, and the head of a Viper heals the wound
of a Dragon: so one vice expels another, as covetousness restrains
gluttony, and ambition and vainglory bridleth luxury, for fear of infamy. ibid.

Pleasure.
WHere weeds are plucked up, there corn thriueth: so where concupiscence is
expelled, there righteousness arises. Chrisost. hom. 8. oper. imperf.

As they that sail in a sandy sea, are sometimes on ground upon the dry sands,
and sometimes flote aloft upon the swift current: so he that follows after
pleasure, sometimes is tormented through want of it, and sometimes over cloied
through abundance. Sen. lib. de beata vita.

As swine do durty themselves in the mire: so voluptuous men do befilth
themselves with pleasure. Basilius in Psalmum primum.

As the Lord appeared not to Abraham so long as he stayed in his own country,
but when he came into the land shown unto him, he had great promises made
unto him: so as long as we continue in the world and worldly pleasures, our
minds are not enlightened with any divine illumination, but when we obey Gods
commandments, God manifests himself unto every one according to his
capacity. Cyrillus Alexan. in dictis veteris testamenti.

He that writes in the water, leaves no characters behind him: so pleasure
lasts no longer, then the very act. Gregor. Nyssenus homilia 5. in
Ecclesiastin.

As the greater sorrow obscureth the lesser: so the pleasure of the mind
obscureth the delight of the body. Plut.

If drunkardes and banketters rush into an house of mourning, they do not
only bring no mirth unto ye mourners, but they rather procure greater
lamentatio^: so pleasures also do offend an unsound body. ide^.

Lysimachus when he was constrained to yield himself unto the Scythians by
reason of thirst, and when he had drunk a little cold water, Good God (quoth
he) what a great deal of felicity have I given for a little pleasure: so we
are to think when we fall into a long disease for a little Venery. idem.

There are a kind of thieves, whom the Egyptians call Philistae, who embrace
them they take, to the end to strangle them: so pleasures whilst they do
flatter, they kill. Seneca.

As he is as well dead, that is buried in odours, as he that is rent and torn
in pieces of wild beasts: so they are alike unhappy, that give themselves to
luxurious pleasures, as they that spend their days in hunting after the vain
puff of ambition. Seneca.

They that drink of the lake Clitorius, cannot abide wine: so they that surfeit
in worldly pleasures, do abhor honest and true delights.

As the wine which Homer calls Maroneu^ being mingled with 20. times so much
water, as the quantity of wine comes to, still keeps his strength and virtue:
so a virtuous upright wise man is not subdued by any pleasures. Plin. lib. 14.
cap. 4.

The ancient natural Philosophers do write, yt the sun is nourished with sea
water and the Moon with fresh water: so wise and virtuous men do seek for
sour things, so they be profitable; and fools hunt after those things only
that may delight.

As the Planet Saturn is in effect cold, dry and heavy: so pleasure does
make cold, by extinguishing the heat of spiritual love; dry, by consuming the
moisture of devotion; and heavy, by depressing the mind to inferior things. F.
Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 1. de caelo and elementis, cap. 90.

As Saturn is called a nocturnal planet: so the pleasure of the flesh does
seek for the darkness of the night. ibidem.

They that are borne under Saturn, as says Ptolomy, do not abhor impure and
unclean garments, and do love other filthy things: so luxurious persons do not
abhor the exterior note of infamy, besides they oue filthy and polluted
actions. ibid.

Laban following Jacob ouertooke him upon the mountain Galaad, which mountain
is most delicate for pasture, fruits, and fou^tains: so the devil persecuting
man does overtake him among the delights and pleasures of this world. ibidem.

The serpent Amphisbena has two heads, at either end one: so has pleasure
two heads, that is, two capital vices, Luxury, and gluttony* idem lib. 5. de
animalibus terrestribus, cap. 121.

A snaile by leisure creeps to the tops of Trees, and there eats the leaves,
and wheresoever she creeps, she leaves a slime behind her: so the pleasure
of ye flesh by little and little increases, and ascends to the top of great
trees, that is, it does possess and overcome great men, as gluttony overcame
Adam, and luxury David and Solomon; and eats the leaves, that is, does
deuastate the ornaments of virtue in the^, and whersoeuer it creeps, it
leaves impure slime behind it, that is, infamous examples, and a corrupted
memory. ibidem.

Drunkenness.
LAsie curs are busy under the table, but idle in hunting: so it is ignoble
and base, to be free speech'd in thy cups, and a cowarde in talk when thou art
sober. Putarchus.

As the caske is broken by the working of wine, and that comes aloft which
lay in the bottom: so drunkenness does discover the secrettest things of thy
breast. Sen.

As they that are ouerburdned with wine, cannot keep their meat, but all goes
out together: so does also the secrets, when wine abounds. Seneca.

As the fishes called Polypi do not stretch out their claws, but for meat: so
some do measure all their felicity by meat and drink. Plut. and Plin. lib.
9. cap. 29.

Lysimachus by reason of thirst was constrained to yield himself unto the
Scythians, afterward when he had drunk cold water, good God (said he) for
how short a pleasure have I given away my happiness: so also we shall be
constrained to say, if we fall into a long disease, for a drunken feast or a
little Venery.

Flies and such like creatures do live by sucking, and therefore in stead of a
tongue they have a trunk: so thou shall see some drunkards, who live only by
drink, and care for no meat.

As frugality is an inducement to fasting, so is drunkenness unto
lasciviousness. Basilius hom. 1. de ieiunio.

As ships taken with a violent tempest, are forced to cast their goods over
boorde: so drunkards overtaken with wine are forced by vomit to disgorge
themselves. Ide^. hom. de ebrie. and luxu.

As brightness does dim the sight; and terrible soundes amaze the hearing:
so drunkenness does dull the understanding, and astonish the memory. Ibidem.

As valleys are full so long as the land floude lasts, but are dry and
empty, when it is gone: so drunkardes being full of Wine do spue and cast,
but a little after are oppressed with thirst. Ibidem.

As when a fever is past, the weakness remains: so when drunkenness is
gone the effects continue, which torment both body and soul. Chrysostom. hom.
58. in Matthew.

As Scylla and Hydra among the Poets are armed with many heads: so is
drunkenness; hence fornication, hence effeminacie, hence wrath, hence inordinate
loves proceed. Idem hom. 71.

As too much rain glutteth the earth, that it cannot be tilled: so too much
drink so drowneth the soul, that it admits no spiritual culture.
Augustinus sermo. de ^brietate vitanda.

As in fennes serpents, and venomous worms are engendered: so in drunkardes
moist brains are many vices bredde. Ibidem.

Adultery.
AS the Coockowe lays eggs in other birds neastes: so some men do make
other men's wives mothers. Plinius libro 10. cap. 9.

A Pilot that makes shipwreck in the Haven is worthy of no pardon: so he or
she that has attained the Haven of marriage, and then shipwreck their
chastity, are worthy of no favor, neither with God nor man.

As covetousness encrocheth upon other men's goods: so adultry enters upon other
men's wives.

As rust defaceth the brightest iron: so adultery corrupts the purest paragon.

In a honny comb there are two things, honny and wax. In like manner in the
face of a Harlot there are two things, beauty of countenance, and
sweetness of speech. The wax does kindle the fire, and the honey does yield
sweetness: so the beauty of an harlot does inflame the flesh with the fire of
lust, and does subvert the mind by the inticement of alluring speech. The honey
does distill from the wax, whilst the harlot does sweeten her words. Hugo
Victorinus lib. de carnalibus nuptiis vitandis.

The panther is so greedy of the exrements of a man, that if they be hanged
out of his reach, he kills himself with reaching at them: so that which is
the filthiest, is the sweetest unto some men, that like horses neigh after
their neighbors wives. Plinius lib. 8. cap. 27. and cap. 17. eod. libro.

As some through the stupour of their senses, and corrupt tastes, do not taste
the sweetness of meats: so adulterous and libidinous Epicures have no taste
of true glory. Cicero Philip. 2.

As they are filthy creatures, that rejoice when they enjoy their adulterous
pleasures: so are they wicked that desire them with a libidinous mind. Idem
lib. 4. Tusc. quaest.

As Joseph lost his coat by his chastity: so leachers lose their good names
by fornication and adultery.

As Goats and Swine are filthy creatures: so are adulterous persons, which
are rightly compared unto them.

As chaste men have their conversation in heaven: so adulterous leachers have
theirs in hell.

As Tarquinius Superbus king of the Romans was banished with his son
Tarquinius Sextus for the deflouring of Lucretia, a noble and honorable
matrone: so Lodouicus Gonzaga for his adultery was beheaded of the citizens of
Mantua.

As the Chrysolite being worn on the finger of an Adulteress, so detesteth
the crime, as it cracketh in pieces by mere instinct of nature: so the Unicorn
is such a foe to adultery, and such a friend to chastity, as he always
preserves the one, and kills the other.

Munster writes in his second Book fol. 45. that in some part of England and
Scotland, there is great store of the best kind of Ieat stone. If any body
drink the powder of this stone in water, if the same party be contaminate
with libidinous acts, the same body our of hand shall be enforced to make
urine, and shall have no ability to keep it back, but if a virgin drink of
it, there is no power to make urine follow: so the juice of the Basco leaf so
abhors unlawful lust, as it will not by any means be digested in the
stomach of a Strum, pette.

As Teundezillus King of Spain, for committing violent adultery with a Lady
of a Noble house, was deprived both of life and Kingdom: so Galeatius Maria
Duke of Millaine committing adultery with a Citizens wife of the same, was by
the same Citizen slain, being at a Mass.

As Anthonius Venereus Duke of Venice, caused his own son to die in prison,
because he had ravished a maid: so Hippomenes taking his daughter Limon in
adultery, caused her to be devoured of an hungry horse.

The Egyptians for adultery, cut off the man's privy members, and the woman's
nose: so the Armenians for the same act gelded the men, and after open whipping
branded the women with a hot Iron.

As God appointed stoning and burning for adultery: so the Arabians,
Tartarians, Turks, Athenians, Tenedians, Crotoniates, old Saxons, Parthians,
ancient Brytaines, as writes John Capgraue, and now the Geneuians punish it
with death.

As Opilius Macrinus Emperor of Rome ordained that adulterers should be
punished with fire: so Julius Caesar the Emperor made a law, that adulterers
should be put to death with the sword.

As among the Thracians this was the law, that such as were taken in
whoredom, should be stripped stark naked, and be bound to a post, and so with
arrows pierced and stricken to death: so among the Indians such as be taken in
adultery, are led up to some high rock, and cast down headlong, that their
necks may be broken.

As the Mitylenians strangled all such, as were taken in adultery, without any
mercy showed: so the Mantuans beheaded the adulterers.

As most of the Gentiles severely punished adultery: so most of the Christians
laugh at it.

Munster writes, that the Indians do use natural conjunction together openly;
and Sansonius in his Book de Regnis says, that certain frantic people in
Fez, accustom to use women forciblie in public places, and in the presence
of many: so the Spaniardes in America ravished the women, both their own
bands, and the Indians beholding them; and at Insull a Town in Flaunders,
three of these Galiants entered a Citizens house wholly of their faction, where
two of them held the husband, whylest the third ravished his wife in his
presence; a fact that many brute beasts detest and abhor, as among four
footed beasts, the Elephant, who, as the same Munster says, never covers
the female but in secret, who, as Pliny and Soline write, never uses any
adultery; and among fowls, the Storke, who never treads his female, but in
her nest, which may teach men and women to use wedlocke-woorke with honesty
and shamefastness; and never treads any but his own female, as Aristotle
says, which may teach every one to abhor adulterous copulations.

Jealousy.
AS an Egg, the more it is heated, it waxes the harder: so jealous suspect
the more it is credited, the wooorse it is for us; and the less we regard it,
the greater is our quiet.

As the Mole being in the deep earths obscurity, strayes about every way,
passing through the hardest molde she meets withal, but so soon as she comes
to the day light, all her force and strength immediately fayles her: even such
is the jealous opinion hid within the dark cloud of an afflicted mind, it
never cease to remove fresh thoughts with infinite perturbations, but when
truth does discover it, it is presently nothing.

As there is no content to the sweetness of love: so there is no despair to
the prejudice of jealousy.

Inconstancy.
AS the Chamaeleon is an unclean creature, and forbidden in the law, because
he changes himself into all colors, that are laid before him: so are all
they unclean, that are mutable and unconstant, and are figured by this beast.

Unconstant people may fitly be resembled to hunting dogs, who follow two
Hares, and take neither; to a tree, that is often transplanted, and therefore
hardly increases; to a wound that is slowlier healed because the medicines are
daily altered.

As birds that do both swim and fly, in the holy scriptures are counted
unclean: so are all unconstant persons, that halt between two opinions, that
as Weathercockes are turned to and fro with every wavering blast of
inconstancy.

Even as the Sea swells, when the Moon increases, and ebbeth, when it
decreaseth: so do they that are governed by the flux and refluxe of the
variety of occurrences.

As wax is pliable to working, and wiers to wresting: so are women to
inconstancy.

As the beast Hyaena, and the Rat of India called Ichneumon, are sometimes
males and sometimes females: so many are unlike themselves, now boasting
valourouslye, now puling tenderlye; now being Philosophers, now becoming
Ruffians; sometimes friends, sometimes foes.

As weaker bodies do more feel the flux and refluxe of the Sea, and the
increase and decrease of the Moon: so inconstant and wavering minds are more
vehemently moved, with contrariety of things.

As pitchers are carried about by the ears: so many are haled too and fro with
every wind, and every word. Plut.

Among the Troglodytes there is a lake, that thrice in a day is salt and
bitter, and thrice a gain sweet and pleasant, and as oftentimes in the night,
whereupon it is called, The mad lake: so some inconstant people are sometimes
moodie, sometimes mild, sometimes liberal, sometimes niggards, sometimes
loving, and sometimes loathing. Plin. 31. cap. 2. and lib. 2. cap. 6. Herodotus
lib. 4.

Inconstant women are like the winds that rise in the shoares of Lepanthus,
which in the Morning send forth gustes from the North, and in the Evening
calmes from the West; their fancies are like April showers, begun in a
Sunshine, and ended in a storm, their passions deep hell, their pleasures
Chimeraes portray, tures, sudden joys that appearing like Juno, are nothing
when Ixion touches them but duskie and fading clouds.

As the breath of man upon steel no sooner lights on, but it leapeth off: so
are inconstant persons in the beginning and ending of their loves.

As Saltpeter fireth at the first, and yet proves but a flashe; and as deaw
upon Crystal, no sooner lights on, but it leapeth off: such is the heart
and thoughts of unconstant people.

The River Hypanis being the chief of the Scythian rivers, of it self is
pure and sweet, but about Callipolis it is infected with the bitter Fountain
called Exampeus, and so being unlike it self, it runs into the Sea: so
some at the beginning are courteous and friendlye, who afterward are found
to be unlike themselves. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 100. Solin. cap. 23. Strab. lib.
9. Pompon. Mel. lib. 2.

As Euripus in Euboea, does ebb and flow seven times in a day after a
wonderful swiftness, and again three days in one month does stand stone
still, in the seventh, eight, and ninth day of the Moons age: so many being
unlike to themselves, are either too hasty, or too slow, too extreme in
either part.

The serpent Amphisbena has a head at both ends, and does use both ends as
her tail: so some are so fugitive and inconstant in their affections, that
they cannot tell what to resolve upon, nor what trade of life to bend
themselves unto.

As bats never fly directly forwards, but flitter here and there: so do
inconstant people. Basilius de constitutione monastica, cap. 9.

As the planet Mercury is good being joined with a good planet, and bad with a
badde: so is an inconstant porson; he fits himself for the company, F. Ioannes
a S. Geminiano. lib. r. de Coelo et Elementis cap. 38.

As the air is light in substance: so is an inconstant person of belief.
Ibidem.

As the air is easily moved: so is an inconstant person, for he never
continues long in one mind. Ibidem.

As the air is very subject to infection and corruption: so is he or she,
that is inconstant. Ibidem.

Ambition.
THey that lament, because they do not excel in all things, albeit most
different, do as if one should take it in ill part, that a vine does not
bring forth figs, and that an olive does not bring forth clusters of grapes.

He that studieth to be Plato in learning: to sleep with a blessed matron, as
Ephorium: to drink with Alexander, as Medius: to be rich, as Isinenias: to be
valiant, as Epaminondas: and does grieve that one is not all these: he does,
as if one should sorrow that a lion of the wilderness, is not the same that a
little Melitaean puppy is in the bosom of a rich Lady. Idem

The Poet Accius when as he was of a very low stature, yet in the house of
the Muses he made himself a picture of a very great size: so many being
indeed vile and base, by ambition and braggardisme do stroute and stretch out
themselves. Plin. lib. 34. cap. 5.

The Chamelaeon because he is fed with air, and not with solid meat, is
always open mouthed: so they that are nourished with glory and popular
applause, do always catch at some thing, that may increase their renown.

As full eggs do sincke to the bottom, but those that are empty do swim
aloft: so those that are truly virtuous and learned do not so much boast as
they that be otherwise.

As the winds when they are about to cease do blow most fiercely: so men
when they do most extol and magnify themselves, as Pope Julius and Cardinal
Woolsey, then they are wont to be nearest unto destruction.

The dove is swift in her flight, but when she opens her wings at large and
houereth in the air to please her self, then she is seized upon by the hawk
lying in wait for her: so many whilst they brag of more strength then they
use, become a prey unto their enemies. Plinius. libr. 10. cap. 20.

The peacock spreads not his 100. eied tail, except he be praised: so many
suppose yt they have not what they have, except others admire them. Plin. lib.
10. cap. 21.

The cock being conqueror forthwith blazeth abroad his victory by crowing:
so many do make boastes of their own exploites, and become ye ridiculous
emblasoners of their own praises. Plin. l. 8. c. 33.

As the Chamaeleon has great lights, but nothing else within him: so many
have nothing else besides vain boasting, and windy ostentation. Plinius libr.
11. cap. 32.

The bird Taurus being very little, yet does imitate the voice of an ox: so
many being base and ignoble, do speak of nothing but of Emperors, Kings,
and state matters. Plin. lib. 9. cap. 42. ex cap. 31. codem lib.

Little crab fishes, that they may be the safer, do hide them selves in the
concauities of empty shells, and when as the^ grow greater, they go in to
those that are more capacious: so many distrusting their own prowess and
virtues, do defend and countenance themselves with the titles of their
ancestors.

Flatterers and Parasites.
AS a physician anatomising the body of a man, does keep a certain concinnity
and dexterity with his hand, but does avoid an apish representation: so
liberty does admit vrbanity, gravity being preserved, but a flatterer with
laughing and scurrill jesting does as it were sweeten liberty with an ill
sauce. Plut.

As an ill picture does represent a thing, with ragged garments, wrinckled and
deformed: so a flatterer does imitate a friend with clamours and frivolous
endeavors, acting nothing sincerely. Idem.

An ape when he can neither keep the house like a dog, nor carry burdens as a
horse, nor plow as an ox, does mock and mow and move laughter: so a parasite
when he knows not how to be serviceable in serious and weighty matters,
becomes a minister of delights and pleasures. Idem.

One when he had very filthily pourtrayed cock chickins, he commanded his boy,
that he should let no live cock chickins come near his table least by the
comparison he should be blamed: so a flatterer with all his maine and might
does drive away true friends, least by being compared with them he be found to
be as he is. idem.

As pillowes do seem to withstand the couching of the head, but yet do give
place and become very pliable: so the liberty of a flatterer seems to swell
and carry it self alofte, but it easily receives whatsoever inclines to it.
Idem.

As those beasts are very hardly found, that change color according to the
semblance of ye place: so thou shall hardly find those flatterers, that can
apply themselves to every humor, and to al courses of life. Ide^.

As counterfeit things do only imitate the brightness and splendour of gold: so
does a flatterer imitate the grace, obsequiousnes, and chearfulnes of a friend.
Idem.

As the fish Polipus does change color according to the place he is in: so
flatterers do apply themselves to the observance of time, place and persons.
Idem.

As Tragaedians have need of a chorus, and a theater to applaud them: so they
that delight in parasites and flatterers, do nothing, except there be others
that may applaude them. Idem.

As according to Mathematicians the superficies and the lines are neither
bended, nor produced, nor moved of themselves, because they are merely
intelligible things, but are bended, lengthened and moved together with their
bodies: so a flatterer is not moved of his own affection, but is angry with
his angry friend, and does laugh with him rejoicing.

As they that pamper horses, do not feed them with lentils and vitches, but
with better grain: so flattery does not annoy poor and base men, but it is
the disease and ruin of great families and rich fortunes. Idem.

As lice forsake a liuelesse body, because they want the blood wherewith they
were nourished: so flatterers are attendantes to prosperity and prefermentes,
but shrinckers back in adversity and disasterous fortune. Idem.

As they that bring up a beast to tame, do first apply themselves to the
disposition of the beast, and do mark, with what things it is either
offended or pleased, until such time as they have made it tractable: so a
flatterer does apply himself to all the affections and studies of his friend.
Idem.

The best cooks in their sauces do mingle some tarte thing, whereby they may
take away the fulsomnesse of that which is too sweet: so flatterers do mingle
a certain kind of fained liberty and severity, that they may flatter more,
when they seem to chide and speak freely. Idem.

As water does slip down, where it finds a hollow place or a downfall:
so a flatterer does then most of all tax and urge his friend, when he sees
that he is down and that he has ouerthrown himself. Idem.

As limning and pourtraiture is a silent poesy: so also a flatterer in silence
does commend by his countenance and gesture. Idem.

As hunters do the more easily deceive wild beasts; when they assault them,
as though they were doing some other thing: so a flatterer does most of all
then clawe and glauer when he seems not to praise. Idem.

As the running stream is of no certain color, but always resembles the
color of the ground it glideth over: so a flatterer is always unlike
himself, fitting himself to the present occasion. Idem.

In a Comedy of Menander a false Hercules is brought in, bearing a bumbast and
a counterfeit club without substance or solidity: so the liberty of a
flatterer is hollow and unsound. Idem.

As a glass does imitate whatsoever object is opposed against it: so also
does a flatterer. Idem.

As a shadow does go whither thou go, and seems to do what thou do: so
a flatterer does follow thee whither soever thou turnest thy self. Idem.

As a Chamaeleon does change himself into all colors, except it be into
white: so a flatterer will imitate thee in all things, except it be in that
which is honest. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 33.

As unskillful painters, when they cannot delineate those things that are
beautiful, do blaze their portraitures with warts and wrinckles: so a
flatterer does represent the intemperancy, and wrath of a friend. Idem.

As there be meats and condimentes, which neither do make blood, nor begette
spirit, neither do strengthen the sinews, nor increase the marrowe, but
only do procure lust, makes the belly flatuous, and do swell the body: such
also is the speech of a flatterer, it only stirs up and provoke unto vice
and wickedness, but barren to any good. Idem.

As painters by shadows and obscurities do illustrate things that be
glorious and brighte: so a flatterer praising diverse vices in others, that are
absent, does nourish and cherish them in his friend, that is present. Idem.

As Orators do sometimes bring in another person speaking, either that they
may procure more credit, or that they may avoid envy: so a flatterer reports
what he has heard of others as concerning his friend, albeit he has heard
nothing at all. Idem.

As wine being mingled with the juice of hemlocke, does make the poison
incurable, (which of it self is an antidote against this aconite) because the
heat of the wine does presently carry the strength of the poison unto the
heart: so a flatterer, understanding that liberty of speech is a remedy against
flattery, does mingle it with his adulation, that it may be the more hurtful.
Idem.

Glass does wonderfully imitate crystal, a base thing that which is most
precious: so does flattery imitate friendship, a vile thing that which is most
excellent. Plinius, libr. 9. cap. 29. et libr. 37. capite 2.

As the libarde through his sweet savor does allure other wild beasts unto
him, and so does kill them: so flatterers through their fair speeches do
allure men unto them, and do destroy them. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 17.

As the beast Hyaena counterfeiting man's voice, and by hearkening does learn
ones name, whom she calling forth deuoureth: so flatterers by fair speech,
do allure, til they have drawn into destruction. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2.

As all fishes are not allured by one bait, but some with one; and some with
another; whereupon skillful fishers do especially fish with that bait, which
they are delighted with: so a flatterer finding ye disposition of a man, what
he delights in, and what he abhors, with that thing he tickleth and
gulleth him, in which he takes greatest pleasure.

As the serpent Cerastes is not bred by the Cipres tree by reason of bitterness,
nor by the Box tree by reason of hardness: so the plague of flattery does fly
from grave and severe dispositions, but does sease upon effeminate and
delicate natures. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 24.

As Panthers have a sweet smell, but a devouring mind: so have flatterers.

Straight trees have crooked roots, smooth baits, sharp hooks, the fairer ye
stone is in the Toades head, the more pestilent is her poison in her bowels: so
flatterers talk the more it is seasoned with fine phrases, the less it
sauoreth of true meaning.

Hypocrisy. Hypocrites.
AS the Tiger when he hunteth for his prey, does hide his claws: so
hypocrites for their commodity speak fair, when they mean ill.

As the Pyrit stone is then most horte, when it looks most cold: so when
hypocrites look the most demu^e, they mean the most mischief.

As Ianus was double faced: so hypocrites are double hearted.

As sepulchers are beauteous without, but full of corruption within: so
hypocrites seem outwardly religious, but inwardly are replenisht with
iniquity.

As he that takes the muster of men does diligently view their bodies and ag^,
to see if they be sit for the war: so the Lord making choice of souls for
the spiritual warfare does search into their wills, and if he find any hidden
hypocrisy, ^he rejects the man, as vnsitte to be ente^alned, but if he
find him worthy he bestows his grace upon him. Cyrllus Ierosolymit.
catechesi. 1.

As the fish Polypur: to catch his prey u^neth himself into the color of every
stone he meets with: so hypocrites to satisfy their wills, turn themselves into
the condition of every company; they are sober with the sober, intemperate with
the intemperate, irreligious with the Atheist, and precise with the puritan.
Basil. hom. 7. exameron.

As foolish women, when they lack natural beauty, do painte themselves: so
wicked hypocrites when they want inward virtues, assume outward semblances.
Gregorias Nazianzenus orat. in funere patris.

As the Chamaeleon assumeth all colors, but white; that in the mean while I
may speak nothing of Proteus the Egyptian sophister: so an hypocrite is all
things but a good christian, simple hearted and honest, such an hypocrite was
Iulianus Apostata. Idem orat. 1. in Iulianum.

A sepulcher seems beautiful, so long as it is shut, but when it is open, it
is stinking and horrible: so hipocrites, so long as they are not known seem
jolly fellows, but when they are laid open, they are abominable. Chrysostom. hom.
45. operis imperfecte.

As a stage player takes upon him an other man's person, sometimes being a
servant, and sometime a Lord: so an hypocrite takes upon him the person of an
honest man, when indeed he is a very knave. Idem. in sermon de Ieiunio.

As he that represents Agamemnon, is not Agamemnon: so an hypocrite seeming an
honest man, is no honest man. Augustinus lib. 2. de sermon domini in monte,

The Estrich seems as she would fly, yet has no use of flying: so
hypocrisy seems to have the image of sanctity, but is ignorant of a
sanctified life. Gregorius libr. 7. moral. cap. 15.

Bull rushes and sedge have a show of greennes, but bear no fruit: so the life
of hypocrites. Idem lib. 8. cap. 27,

As Simon Cyrenaeus carried Christ's cross of constraint and not willingly: so
hypocrites do the work of Christ unwillingly, executing that openly, which
they do not love inwardly. Bernardus sermon de benedict. et Gregor 8. Moral.

As a swan has white feathers and black flesh: so an hypocrite has fair
words but foul works. Hector Pintut in cap. 40. Ezechiel.

As merchantes sell the skins of wild beasts, but do not meddle with the
entrals: so hypocrites only meddle with outward things, but do not deal with
inward matters. Ibidem.

As those rocks in the sea, are more dangerous, which are covered with a little
water, then those, which are eminent and easily discerned, which matiners may
avoid: so hypocrites pretending piety are more dangerous then notorious wicked
persons, for these being known, we may eschew them, when we know not how to
avoid the other. idem in cap. 9. Esayae.

Silver albeit it be white, yet it makes black lines as lead: so hypocrites
show otherwise then they are.

As wine mingled with water does more provoke vomit, then either pure water, or
pure wine: so that wickedness is more intolerable, which is colored with piety,
then yt wickedness, which shows to be so of it self

As Apothecaries gild over their medicines, that they may sell them the better:
so hypocrites gilde their words, that they may the better compass their
purpose, nay many ca^ tip their tongues with the gold of the gospel, yt they
may the sooner entrap.

The Carbuncle has a show like fire, and yet has no fire in it: so hypocrites
have the show of piety, but in truth are far from it. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 5:

The Indians do so counterfeit the precious stone Opalum that it cannot be
discerned, but only in the sun: so some hypocrites are so cunning in their
dissimulation, that it is hard for any to descry them, but the eyes of
wisdom. Plin. lib. 37. c. 6.

As the beast Camelopardalis resembles a horse in his neck, an ox in his
feet and legs, a cammell in his head, and a Tiger or Leopard in his
spots: so hypocrites, do put on diverse shapes of men, if thou beholdest
their habits, they seem holy; if their speech, thou would think, a
champion spoke, but if thou look into their life's, thou shall find them
knaves, if into their writings, clowns and dotards.

As the Cretian can lie, the Grecian shift, the Italian court it, and as
Alexander can carouse, Romulus abstain, the Epicure eat, the Stoike fast,
Endimion sleep, and Chrysippus watch: so the hypocrite can fit all
companies, play the ambodexter in all places, and be a pleasing parasite for
all times, he can be precise with the puritan, iniunctiue with the potestant,
and Popeholy with the papist.

As the Camelion though he has most guts, draws least breath, and as the
Elder tree though he be fullest of pith is farthest from strength: so
hypocrites though outwardly they seem full of piety, yet inwardly they are
swelled with vice.

The bird Taurus has a great voice, but a small body: the thunder a great
clap, yet but a little stone; the empty vessel gives a greater sound then
the full barrel: so hypocrites have plenty of words and promises, but scarsity
of works, and performances.

In painted pottes are hidden the deadliest poison; in the greenest grass is
the greatest Serpent; in the clearest water, the vgliest Toade, and in the most
curious Sepulcher, are enclosed rotten bones: so hypocrite; under their fair
pretenses do shrowde foul intendements.

As the Estrich carries fair feathers, but rank flesh; and as the Cypres tree
bears a fair leaf, but no fruit: so hypocrites make fair shows, but have
foul souls.

When the Fox preaches, the Geese perish; the Crocodile shrowdeth greatest
treason under most pitiful tears: so in a kissing mouth there lies a galling
mind.

In the coldest flint there is hot fire; the Be that has honey in her mouth,
has a sting in her tail; the tree that bears the sweetest fruit, has a
sour sap: so the words of hypocrites, though they seem smooth as oil, yet
their hearts are as crooked as the stalk of Iuie.

The Spider in the finest web, does hang the fairest fly: so an hypocrite
with the fairest words does betray the truest meaner.

As there needs no more but one pin or prick to pearce a bladder, and to
make all the wind therein enclosed incontinently to come forth: even so there
needs no more, but one very little temptation to pull the visard from
hypocrites, and to discover them to every man, who shall know after that they
shall be sifted, that there was nothing but a color and an imagination of all
the reputation of righteousness and virtue, which they had gotten among men.

As the basest gold, though it be raied with some dirt, is always more
precious then the brightest lead that a man can find: so the righteousness of
a Christian man, though it be defiled through many infirmities and
imperfections, yet notwithstanding is more to be esteemed then all the
righteousness of hypocrites and infidels.

As Barnacles are both fish and flesh; as the Israelites spoke both Ashdod and
Hebrew; as Ianus saw both before and behind; as Balaam did both bless and
curse; and as the Sea-mew, or the Gull, lives both in the water, and upon the
earth: so hypocrites are neither flesh nor fish, they are holy with the holy,
and profane with the wicked; as Ehud they are ambodexters, with the Church of
Laodicea, they are neither hot nor cold; with Tullie, they are both for Caesar
and Pompey; and with Tytides, they cannot determine, whether to join with
Achilles or Hector.

Usury.
AS a fish deuoures the bait with the hook, so an Usurer deuoures the man
with his money. Basil. in. Psalm. 14.

Vipers are borne by gnawng asunder the bellies of their dams: so Usury is
bred and nourished by consuming the houses and substance of debtors. Ibidem.

As Baederastice is unlawful, because it is against kind: so usury and
increase by gold and silver is unlawful, because against nature; nature has
made them sterill and barren, and usury makes them procreatiue.

As he that is stung of an Aspe, falls a sleep with delight, and so dies by
the sweetness of sleep: so he that takes upon Usury, for the time is
delighted, as one that had received a benefit, and so by the sweetness of the
benefit, he perceives not how he is made a captive. Chrysostom. hom. 12 operis
imperfect.

As the poison of an Aspe does lurkingly run through all the members, and so
corrupts them: so usury does run through all thy wealth, and does convert
it into debt. Ibidem.

As a little leaven sowreth the whole Iumpe of dow, and turns it into the
same nature: so usury whose house soever it enters into, it draws unto it all
the substance, and conuerts it into debt. Ibidem.

A Conie together brings forth and nourishes other young ones, and again
grows great with young: so usurers take usury upon usury, and gain upon
gain, they call for their lucre before it come to the birth. Plut. in
Moralibus.

As fire growing to power does consume one thing after another: so does usury
Ibidem.

Vultures kill nothing themselves, but seize upon it being killed of others:
so Usurers live upon the sweat of other men's brows, and enjoy the fruit of
other men's labors, against the ordinance of God and man. Erasmus in similibus.

As he that tumbleth in the mire, becomes more foul and filthy: so they
become more and more indebted, that have to do with Usurers. Plut.

Choleric men, that will not be purged in time, daily increase their humor,
til dangerously they be diseased: so they that suffer usury to increase and
grow upon the^, and do not discharge themselves of it, do run into
irrecuperable danger and peril. Idem.

Plato does forbid to ask water of neighbors, until thou have dug thine
own ground, to see if thou may find a vein for thine own use: so we
should try all means to relieve and help our selves, before we borrow money
upon vsurre. Idem.

As the fish Sargus does always follow the fish Alutarius, that he may feed
on the mud that the Alutarius rayseth: so usurers do intrude themselves into
other men's business, that they may take the fruit and gain of their labors.

As Tigres are swift in catching their prey: so Usurers are speedy in
gathering of wealth. F. Ioannes a S. Gemimano, lib. 1. de coelo and elementis,
cap. 21.

Plime says, that Eagles feathers being put among other feathers, does
devour and consume them: so an Usurers filthy lucre being put among an other
man's wealth, does quite dououre and consume it. Idem, lib 4. de natalibus, and
volatilibus. cap. 72.

Pigmies are a cubite hie (for so their name signifies among the Grecians)
dwelling in the mountains of India by the Ocean; as says Augustine, at three
years, they are of perfect and mature age, they bring forth at five, and grow
old when they are seven. Therefore as Pigmies do soon increase, and soon
decrease: so wealth got by Usury, does soon increase, and soon decrease;
as it is soon gotten (being the trade of an idle Merchant to tell out ten and
take in eleven) so is it speedily lost, and suddenly squa^dered; De male
quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres, Idem lib. 5 de animalibus terrestribus, c.
1 22.

As excommunication does not only, bind them, against whom it is denounced,
but also them, that partake with them in cases not permitted: so usurers
themselves are not only odious and cursed, but they infect others dealing in
the action with them, as Notaries and Scriueners, that had wont to be sworn at
the entering into their office, never to draw any writ for any case of Usury.
Idem. lib, 8. de canonibus and legibus, cap. 76.

As a vessel filled with water, sinketh to the bottom, and is there detained:
so an usurer laden with the burden of unrighteous Mammon, is pressed down to
the earth, and there violently held down of the Devil for ever aspiring to
heaven, except the miraculous favor of God unloose him. Idem, lib. 9. de
artificibus and rebus artificialibus, cap. 90.

As an ox is sold to the butcher for money: so an Usurer does sell his soul
to the devil for lucre. Ibidem.

Heresy, Heretics.
AS they that are bitten of a mad dog, do not only run mad themselves,
but do infect others with madness: so they that are infected with any pestilent
and heretical opinion, do infect others by their speech and conference.

As a wolf clothed in a sheep skin does the greater harm: so does an
heretic that has his tongue tipped with the scripture. Ignatius in Epist. ad
Heronem.

As Circe changed men into beasts: so heresy turns men into devils. Clemens
Alexandrinus lib. 7. strom.

As wicked scholars shut their masters out of doors: so heretics drive the
Prophets from their conuenticles, least they should reprehend them. Ibidem.

As the Serpent deceived Eve, promising that unto her he had not: so heretics
pretending great knowledge, do bring death to their believers. Iren. prologo
in lib. 4.

As Pilate would have seemed innocent of Christ's death by washing his hands:
so Heretics pretend truth and scripture, when they are as deep in iniurying
Christ, as Pilate was. Athanasius oratprima.

As the serpent Dipsas does poison all the waters he drinks of: so heretics do
deadly poison all the souls that believe them. Epiphanius Haeresi. 34. contra
Macosios.

As the serpent Drynas, is like unto the color of an Oken leaf, whence he
has his name: so Heretics seem to be like Christians, when in deed they
are as ill as Jews. Idem haeresi 65. contra Paulum Samosatensem.

As an Ape is like unto a man, and yet is no man: so Heretics are like unto a
Christian Church, and yet are no Christian Church. Chrisostomus hom. 19. operis
imperfect.

As serpents creep upon their bellies, and feed upon dust: so heretics do all
for their bellies, and for the vainglorie of their hearts, and do feed upon
earth, that is, upon earthly and carnal men. Idem hom. 45. operis imperfect.

As a member cannot live being cut from the body; nor a branch of a tree be
green, being hewn from the stock: so all heretics being cut from the
body of one Church, neither can have the life of Christ in them, neither the
greenness and viriditie of spiritual grace, but their Church is desolate and
forsaken, Idem, hom. 46.

A spark of fire at the first is scarcely seen, but if it get nourishment it
consumes large cities and great Countries: so heresy and perverse doctrine
beginning at the first of one, finds afterward two or three auditors, and
being let alone creeps like a canker by little and little throughout the body.
The heresy of Arius at the first was a little spark in Alexandria, but
because it was not forthwith smothered, it set a fire the whole world.
Hieronimus libro 3. comment. in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 5.

As fowlers by craft catch birds: so heretics by subtilty surprise men.
Optatus Mileuitanus libro 6. ad sinem contra Parmenianum.

As the children of Moab and Ammon descended of Abraham's consanguinitie, and
yet always hated the kindred and stock of Abraham: so heretics say that they
believe in Christ, and they always endeavor to subvert the catholic faith of
the christians. Rupertus lib. 2. in Sophoniam.

As Dathan and Abyron conspired against Moses: so do heretics against the
church. Eugubinus in cap. 11. Deuteron.

As Nabuzardan the Chiefetaine of Nabuchodonosor did destroy Jerusalem, and
profane the vessels of the temple: so the heretics of our time, being the
Chiefetaines of the devil, do endeavor to subvert the Church of Christ, and
to profane the holy vessels of the temple, that is, the Sacraments ordained
not of Solomon, but of Christ. Pintus in Ezechielem cap. 4.

As the name of Nabuzardan signifies the speech and message of a strange Lord,
or of a strange judgment: so heretics do not sound the idiome and name of
Jesus Christ our Lord, but of another Lord, that is, of the devil, whom Christ
calls the prince of this world. ibidem.

As Ismael the son of Nathaniah did weep with the friends of Godoliah, whom
he had slain: so heretics, and so do hypocrites, weep for that, which they
wish most harm unto: F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano. libro 5. de animalibus
terrestribus capite 72.

A panther by the beauty of his skin, and sweet smell of his breath does
allure other beasts unto him, but by the fearfulness of his head he fears
them away, whereupon he hides his head, till he has laid hold on them, that
come to see him: so heretics and hypocrites outwardly pretending great
sanctity, and by the fame of their doctrine, which they color with devotion
and simplicity, hiding the malicious head of their corrupt intent, they draw
many simple and ignorant auditors unto them, and do destroy them with their
poisonous doctrine. ibidem.

As young Lions do tear and rent the womb of their dammes in bringing them
forth: so heretics do rende and tear in pieces the unity of the church
their mother, who spiritually does bring them forth. Idem libro 5. de animal.
terrest. capite 108.

When the time approaches of the Vipers bringing forth, her young ones do
not stay the operation of nature, but gnaw her sides in sunder, and so come
forth with the destruction of their damme: so heretics being bredde in the
womb of the Church their mother, not staying for, nor sustaining her
correction, by rebellion do depart from her, and whilst they gnawe in sunder
her unity, as much as lies in them, they labor to bring her unto destruction.
Ibidem.

Young Panthers hating their da^s, do beat in pieces with their hooues ye wombs of
their dams, because they resist their egresse and deliverance, whereupon a
panther brings not forth but once: so heretics, with their nails, that is,
with their maligna^t doctrine do tear in pieces the unity of the church their
mother, because she does resist their perfidy. ibidem.

A Wolf infecteth the wool of that sheep he woorieth, so that a garment made
of it proves lousie, as says Isidore: so an heretic by his biting does
corrupt the simplicity of man's conversation, and makes it to abound with
lice, that is, with corrupt works. ibidem.

Death.
AS he is to be called a skillful Physician, that can so temper his medicine,
that it brings health, which is the end of his physic: so is he to be
termed truly wise, who has so learned to lead his life, that a good death may
follow.

As the herb colloquintida is most bitter: so is the memory of death to a
rich covetous man. F. Ioannes a S. Geminiano lib. 3. de vegetabilib. and plant.
cap. 40.

As Colloquintida does stretch out her braches a far off: so death does stretch
out himself so far yt none can escape him. ibid.

As that Colloquintida is most poisonous and deadly, which grows alone: so is
that death most fearful, upon which a pure conscience and true repe^ta^ce does
not atte^d. ibid.

As that Colloquintida is good, according to Macrus, which is white: so is that
death which is religious. ibidem.

As by a serpent the death of man came: so by the death of man a serpent is
ingendered, that is, of the marrowe of his back bone, as says Hippocrates.

The beast Hyena has the neck of a Viper, the back of an Elephant, the
greedines of a Wolf, the mane of a horse, the voice of a man, and is sometimes
male and sometimes female: so death is likened to a Viper for his swiftness,
to an Elephant for his force and violence, to a Wolf for his voracity, to a
horse for his vnbridlednesse, to a man for his deceiptfulnesse, and to male and
female, because it takes away both kinds.

As the ashes of a Scorpion drunk in wine, is a remedy against the stinging of
a Scorpion: so the meditation of death is a remedy against sin, which is the
cause of death. Gemin. lib. 5. de animal. Terrest. c. 80.

As in sleep there is no remembrance of labors: so the saints by the sleep
of death do rest from their labors. idem lib. 6. de homine and Memb. eius cap.
45.

As a man whilst he sleeps fears the power of no adversary: so the saints
by the sleeep of death are taken out of the hands of al adversaries, and do
enjoy the security of eternal safety. ibidem.

As a Waspe stinging a stone, does not hurt the stone, but her self by loosing
her sting: so death lost his sting by running upon life, which is Jesus Christ.
Athanasius de passione domini.

As water falling upon the earth, is swallowed up of it, so that it is no more
seen: so a man by death falling into the earth, is so consumed and destroyed,
that he is never found again in the condition of his mortal state. Idiota de
contemplatione mortis, cap. 10.

As all rivers run into the sea: so all they that come into this fluctuous
life, must enter into the sea of death. For death is the punishmente of all,
the tribute of all, the prison of all, the conqueror of all, and the
receptacle of all. Ibidem. cap. 13.

As he that would conquer a castle, at the first does make way to the ruin
with his greater shot, after he does assault, invade and possess it: so
deals death, who first sends his battering shot of great sickness and
infirmity, which does so vanquish and break the natural strength of the body,
that the soul can no longer defend her castle, and then death seiseth upon it.
Ludo. Granat. l. 1. ducis peccat.

As for the biting of an aspe there is no remedy, unless the parts infected be
cut away: so certain vices are healed only by death. Aristot.

As pilgrims are cheerfully welcomed into Innes or lodginges, yet ere their
departing some account of expenses is made unto them: so though we have a little
show of pleasant entertainment in this world, yet at our deaths we must render
a severe and strict account for the same. Stella de contemptu mundi.

As no man does marvel, yt that is molten, which might be melted, or burnt,
which is combustile: so to be dead is not to be marvelled at, because we are
mortal. Plut.

As borrowed money is willingly to be paid again: so our life, which God has
lent us, is without repining to be rendered to him again, when he calls for it.
idem.

No man takes it in ill part to have a candle lighted, but every one misliketh
to have it put out: so we rejoice at a birth, but sorrow at death. Idem.

He that beyond measure is given to wine does also suck up the dregs: so
there are many that love their lives so well, that they would not die, no not in
old age. Sen.

As he is more prosperous, whom a speedy wind brings into the haven, then he
that in a calm is wearied upon the sea: so he is more fortunate, whom speedy
death takes out of the miseries of his life. Seneca.

As fire burns fiercely, when it has store of fuel, but dies of his own
accord when it lacks matter: so great is the difference between the death of
young men and old men. Seneca.

A sword-player fearful in all the fight, smites home and grows valiant or
rather desperate, when he sees no way but death: so death is fearful being
far off, but less dreaded being at hand. Seneca.

As Swans seeing what good is in death, do end their lives with singing: so
ought all good, and honest men to do. Cicero, lib. 1. Tusc. quaest.

Unripe apples are hardly pulled from the Tree, but being ripe, they fall of
their own accord: so force does take life from young men, but maturity and
ripenes from old men. Idem de senectute.

They that speak evil of the dead are like unto dogs, that bite at stones
cast at them, but do not touch them that hurt them. Aristoteles in Rhetoricis
ait Platonem huius similitudinis authorem esse.

As Croesus with all his wealth: so Aristotle with all his wit, and al men with all their wisdom, have and shall perish and turn to dust.

As Aristippus searched how to prolong his life: so Socrates sought how he
might yield to death.

As life is the gift of God: so death is the due of nature; and as we receive
the one as a benefit: so must we abide the other of necssity.

As the bud is blasted, as soon as the blown rose; and as the wind shakes
off the blossom as well as the fruit: so death neither spares the golden
locks nor the hoarie head.

As a Be stinging a dead body takes no hurt, but stinging a live body often
times loses both sting and life together: so death, so long as it stung
mortal men only, which were dead in sin, was never a whit the worse, but
when* it stung Christ once, who is life it self, by and by it lost both sting
and strength.

As the brazen serpent was so far from hurting the Israelites, that
contrariwise it healed them: so death is now so far from hurting any true
Israelite, that on ye other side, if affliction, as a fierce serpent, sting us,
or if any thing else hurt us, presently it is helped, and redressed by death.

Those which will needs play the hobgoblins, or the night walking spirits (as
we call them) all the while they speak under a hollow vault, or leap forth
with an ugly vizard upon their faces, they are so terrible, that he which
thinks himself no small man, may perhaps be afrighted with the^; But if some
lusty fellow chance to step into one of these and cudgel him well fauouredly,
and pull the vizard from his face, then every boy laughes him to scorn: so
death was a terrible bulbegger, and made every man afraid of him a great while,
but Christ dying, buckled with this bulbegger and coniured him (as I may say)
out of his hollow vault, when as the dead coming out of the graves were seen
in Jerusalem, and pulled the vizard from his face, when as he himself rising,
left the linen clothes which were the vizard of death behind him. Doctor
Playfer.

As that ass called Cumanus Asinus, ietting up and down in a Lions skin, did
for a time terrify his master, but afterward being descried did benefit him
very much: so death stands now like a silly ass, having his Lions skin pulde
over his ears, and is so far from terrifying any, that it benefits all true
Christians, because by it they rest from their labors, and if they be
oppressed with troubles or cares when they come to death they are discharged.

All the while Adam did eat any other fruit which God gave him leave to eat,
he was nourished by it, but when he had tasted of the forbidden tree, he
perished: so death had free leave to devour any other man, Christ only
excepted, but when it went about to destroy Christ, then it was destroyed it
self.

Those barbarous people called Canibals, which feed only upon raw flesh,
especially of men, if they happen to eat a piece of roasted meat, commonly
they surfeit of it and die: so the right Caniball, the only deuourer of all
mankind, death I mean, tasting of Christ's flesh, and finding it not to be
raw (such as it was used to eat) but wholesome and heavenly meat indeed,
presently took a surfeit of it, and within 3. days died.

As when Judas had received a soppe at Christ's hand, anon after his bowels
gushed out: so death being so saucy as to snatch a sop (as it were) of Christ's
flesh, and a little bit of his body, was by and by like Judas, choked and
strangled with it, and feign to yield it up again, when Christ on Easter day
revived.

Sharp frosts bite forward springs, Easterly winds blasteth towardly
blossoms: so cruel death spares not those, whom we our selves living cannot
spare, as it spared not king Edward the sixth, nor sir Philip Sidney, who could
never have lived too long.

As madness and anger differ nothing but in continuance and length of time: so
neither do death and sleep.

The Devil:
AS the Lion that killed the disobedient Prophet returning from Bethel, did
neither tear his dead body, nor hurt his Ass: after the same manner is the
power of the Devil, being a roaring Lion restrained, and kept within limits, so
that he can extend his fury no further, then God gives him leave.

As they that would have dogs come unto the^, allure the^ with bread or flesh:
so ye devil allureth souls unto him with pleasures and riches. Clemens
Alexand. lib. 2. strom.

As a fish snatching at the bait, not seeing the hook, is taken: so the Devil
having the power of death, greedily carrying Jesus unto death, and not seeing
the hook of his divinity included in him, was caught and overthrown
himself, Idem in Symb. Apost.

As one night is sufficient to bring darkness over the whole world: so the
Prince of darkness is sufficient to disturb al mortal creatures. Macarius.
hom. 5.

As Endive is like unto Lettice, yet the one is sweet, the other bitter: so
the devil sometimes shows himself like an Angel of light, yet the one is
glorious, the other ugly and deformed. Idem. hom. 7,

As a man and a woman commits corporal fornication: so the devil and the
soul commits spiritual fornication. Idem. hom. 15.

As Sericants wait for the arest of men indebted: so devils wait to arest
sinful souls. Idem. hom, 43.

As a strong stone wall resists a dart: so faith resists the devil. Greg.
Nazian. oratione in sanctum Cyprianum.

As a dog stays still under the Table, if he find any fallings, but
departs if he find none: so the devil does continually gape upon us; if he
get any blasphemous word, he stays still, but if thou let no sins pass
from thee, he will leave thee. Chrysostom. concione, 3. de Lazaro.

As Pirates set upon rich laden ships, but pass by them that be empty: so the
devil assaileth them that be stuffed with virtues, but he lets wicked
worldlings and mammonists live in quiet. Idem. hom. 4. de verbis Isayae. Vidi
dominum.

As a Pilot seeing one star can direct his course to any city or province:
so the devil being the prince of the air, does not only see, but also know
all the principalities, and dignities of the world, and therefore he could
point out to our Savior the honor and state of every kingdom. Idem. hom. 5.
operis imperfect.

Hell.
If we be so delicate and tender in this life, that we cannot suffer patiently
a fever of 3. days: so much less shall we in the life to come be able to
suffer everlasting fire. Lud. Granat. lib. 1. ducis peccat.

If we be terrified when we see any horrible punishmente inflicted upon a
malefactor in this life: so much more shall we be tormented at the sight of
the dreadful and intolerable punishments in the other. Ibidem.

As the wicked have offended God with all their parts, powers and senses, and
have employed them all, as instruments to serve sin with: even so shall Gods
divine justice ordain, that in all the self same parts, powers, and senses,
they shall suffer son owe and torment; that so that may be fulfilled, which is
written. How much he glorified himself, and was in delicacies, give him so
much torments and lamentations. ibid.

As it happened to Sisera, who before he slept drunk of the sweet milk in
Iaels bottle, but she awaked him after another manner, by nailing his head down
fast to the ground: even so do men sup up the sweet milk of this worlds
vanities, till they are suddenly overtaken with death eternal, because they
cannot awake from the drowsy sleep wherein they are fast nailed down by their
own negligent follies. Stella de contemptu mundi.

As Egypt a figure of hell, was full of darkness and a land of captivity: so is
hell. Rupertus lib. 2. in Math.

As in this world it is a kind of solace to have others partakers of our
miseries: so in hell it shall be great vexatio^ to the damned, to see others
tormented as themselves. Chrysostom. hom. 48. de Ira.

As entrance into the house of Dedalus was open, but regresse was denied: so
the way into hell is very wide and open, but the return from it is altogether
impossible.

As Abeston a stone of Archadia being once set on fire, can never be
exstinguished neither by rain nor tempest, as says Isidore: so hell fire being
once kindled can never be quenched.

As an old man said in the lives of the fathers; when a nource would weane her
child, she lays some bitter thing upon her dugge, which when the child
feels, he abhors it: so oppose the bitterness of Hell against the
delights of the world, and thou shall be withdrawn from them.

As the righteous shall rejoice in heaven by reason of their great joy and
blessedness: so on the contrary part, sinners shall be tormented with
unspeakable tortures in hell. Lodouicus Granat. in suis septem Meditationibus,
Meditatione septima.

As beauty, agilitie, fortitude, liberty, health, pleasure, and eternity is
matter of rejoicing unto the righteous in heaven: so the vglines of sin, the
burden of it, imbecilitie, servitude, infirmity, anxietie, and everlasting
death shall with grievous torments afflict sinners in hell. Ibidem

As the friends of God shall be secure, that they shall not loose their
blessedness in heaven: so the enemies of God shall loose all hope to be
delivered from those torments, which they live in in hell. ibidem.

As in this world we are all under one Sun, yet we do not feel the heat
of it all alike, because one is more hot, and another less hot: so in hell in
ye fire, there is not one manner of burning, because here what the diversity of
bodies does (for after one manner ye fire does burn chafe, after another
wood, and after another iron) that there does the diversity of sins, they have
the same fire, and yet it does not burn them alike. ibidem.

As the saints in heaven have love and perfect charity: so the damned in hell
do burn against all with spite and hatred. ibidem.

As the saints in heaven do rejoice at another good: so the damned in hell do
repine at it, neither is there any thing found at which they more grieve, then
at the glory of the saints, and therefore they wish that all might be damned
with them. ibid.

As God made heaven for good men: so he made hell for wicked men.

FINIS.
A Table of the Common places into which these Similitudes are digested.
A
ABdication. page 160 Abstinence. page 86 Abuse and use of a thing. page 198. b
Admonition. page 148 Adoption. page 160 Adversity, vide Tribulation.
Adultery. page 308, b Affections. page 133. b Affliction. page 183 Age. page
153 b Alms deeds. page 90, b Ambition. page 313. b Ancetors, vide nobility
Angels page 21, b Anger. page 31, b Antiquity vide speech, and books. Arts.
page 57, b Assiduitie. page 159. b Assiduitie takes away admiration. page 160
Atticke tongue vide speech. Auditour and his duty page 255. b Authors vide
books.
B.
Banishment. page 235 Barbarians, vide anger. Beauty. page 149, b Benefits.
page 154, b Benevolence. page 155, b Bishops vide courtly life Bitterness, vide
marriage Bodies of little stature wiser then those that be vaster. page 153
Books. page 265 Reading of books. page 266 b A choice is to be had in reading
books, page 267, b The use of reading many Books. page 268, b Braggers and
boasters, page 177 b Brethren. page 147 Breuiloquence. page 257, b Business.
page 156.
C.
Calamity vide Tribulation. Captain. page 227 Ceremonies, page 162, b
Charity. page 77 Chastity page 109 Chance, page 162 Chiding, page 181, b
Choice and trial of a friend. page 121 Choice. page 175 Children. page 63
Christ, page 10, b Christians. page 33, b Christian discretion, vide zeal,
Church, page 26, b Clergy, vide courtly life: Cockering, page 64 Comaedians,
vide poets. Commendation, vide praise Commenders of themselves, vide praysers
of themselves Commodity page 158, b Commonwealth, page 226, Concord, page 104
Co^cupisce^ce, vide luxury Conquest, vide victory Conscience, page 55, b
Continency, page 109 Contrariety, page 174 Conuersing and living to gither
page 190, b Conversation ibidem Contemplation, page 245 Correction, page 161
Counsel page 195. b Evil counsel is the worst unto him that gives it. page
196 Rash counsel, page 197 Courtly life page 215 Court, ibid. Courtiers, page
216, Covetousness page 292, b Cross, vide tribulation, Cunctation, page 175
Custom page 188
D
Death, page 326, b Debt. page 188 Decency, page 105 Defense, ibid, b
Devotion, page 93 Dignity, page 209, b Those things are difficult which are
excellent, page 208 b Disciplines, page 57, b Discord vide Concord and
matrimonial Society Disputation, page 257, b, Devil, page 330, b Doctors and
Doctrine, page 56, b Drunkenness, page 307
E
Education, page 58, b Education of a Prince, page 222 Ears vide Hearing,
Eloquence, page 250 Eloquent men, ibid. Eloquence threefold. ibi. Empire. page
224, b Emperors vide Princes. Emulation, page 160. Endeavor, ibid. Envy, page
299, b. Erudition vide Doctors and Doctrine, Examples of life, page 258
Exercise, page 156, b. Exhortation, page 160. Exile, vide Banishment. Eyes,
vide Hearing.
F
Fables, vide Poetry. Fame of learning vide Doctors. Fasting vide abstinence
et temperance. Fathers vide Children. Faults vide Admonition Faith, page 74,
b. Fear. page 192. Fear of the Lord. page 94. Fools vide Honor. Fornication
vide Adultery Fortune. page 197, b. Fortitude, page 82, Flatterers. page 314,
b. Friendship, page 118. Friendship of many, ibid, b Friendship of a few, page
119. Friendship neglected, ib, b Friendship broken off, ibid Friendship
reconciled, page 120, b The choice and trial of a Friend, page 121 A true
Friend, page 122. A fained Friend, page 123, b. The comparison of a Friend and a
flatterer, page 126.
G
Gentry vide Nobility. Glory, page 175, b, Vain Glory, page 176, b, Gluttony,
page 300, God, page 1 Gods unity, simplicity, and perfection, ibidem, God is
iuuisible and incomprehensible page 3, b, God is not the Author of sin, page
9, Gods patience and longanimity, page 6, Gods providence, page 6, b, Gods
mercy and love, page 7, b, Gods justice, page 9, Godliness vide Piety, Gold
vide Riches, Goodness, page 97, Government vide Empire et kingdom, Gratitude,
page 178, Grief vide sorrow unlawful gain vide usury.
H.
Harlots vide Adultery Heart. page 53 Heaven. page 20, b Hearing. page 254, b
Heresy. page 324 Heretics. ibid. Hell. page 333 Histories of the gentiles,
vide reading of books. Holy ghost. 18, b Hope. page 76 Honor page 210
Hospitality. page 105, b Humility. page 97, b Husbands vide marriage.
Hypocrisy. page 318 Hypocrites. ibid.
I.
Idleness. page 303 Jealousy. page 311 Imitation. page 164, b Inconstancy.
page 311, b Indulgence vide cockring Industry vide labor. Infamy vide an ill
name. Ingratitude. page 179 Inhumanitie, vide Hospitality. Injury, vide
Vengeance. Innouaters, vide News. Intelligencers, ibid. Innovation. ibid. A
Judge. page 230, b Judgment. page 231 Justice. page 81
K.
Kings. page 216, b Kingdom page 218 Kingdoms cannot abide riualitie ibid. b
L.
Labor. page 163 Lamentation, vide Mourning. Laws. page 228, b Lawmakers.
ibid. Lawyers. page 229, b Learning. page 247. b The manner of Learning. page
248, b Filthy Lucre, vide Usury. Love, page 133 Love in old men, ibid. Love
in young men, ibid. Self-love, page 133 Too much love vide Cockering, Luxury,
page 298 Lust, ibid.
M.
Magistrates. page 231 Magistracy. ibid. Magnanimity, vide fortitude. Man.
page 35 Manners. page 166, b Marriage. page 127 Matrimonial society. page 132,
b. Mediocritie. page 107, b Meditation, vide an Auditor and his duty. Modesty,
vide Tempera^ce Meeknes vide Humility, Memory, page 246, b Good men, page 38
Men's gifts are diverse, page 39 So many men, so many minds, ibid. wicked and
ungodly me^, page 40 Mind, page 50, b The goods of the mind, page 51, b The
diseases of the mind, page 52 Ministers vide Preachers, Monarchs vide Princes.
Money vide Riches, Mothers vide Children, Mourning, page 165 Music, page 287
b Musicians, ibidem.
N
Nature, page 167 Nation vide Empire, A good Name. page 213 b, An ill Name,
page 214 b, News, page 168 b, Novelties, ibid. Nobility, page 211 b,
O
Obedience, page 100 b, Obiurgatio^ vide Chiding Officers and Offices vide
Magistrates, Offspring vide Children, Old age, page 193 Old men. ibid. Old men's
counsel. page 195 Orators. page 249 Oratory vide Eloquence.
P
Parasites, page 314, b Parents. page 62 Passions vide perturbatio^s. Patience.
page 99 Painters page 287 Perseverance. page 95 Perturbations. page 157, b
Petyfoggers vide lawiers. Philosophy. page 269 Philosophers. page 274 Piety.
page 96, b Pleasure. page 305 Poetry. page 275 Poems. ibid. Poets. page 276, b
A Comparatiue discourse of our English Poets, with the Greek, Latin, and
Italian Poets. page 279 Politians vide Common wealth. Potentates. page 219
Poverty. page 207, b Power. page 225 Prayer. page 88 Praise. page 172 Praysers
of themselves. ibid. b Preachers. page 27, b Prelates vide courtly life,
Princes, page 219 A good Prince. page 222, b An evil Prince. page 224 Prince
of darkness vide devil. Pride, page 291 Proud men vide pride. Pronuntiation,
page 254 Prosperity, page 184, b Prudence, page 79 Punishment, page 234
R
Reason, page 241 Recreation, page 169 Repentance, page 101, b Reprehension,
page 170 Reueng vide Vengeance, Riches, page 199 b Rich men, page 206
Rhetoricia^s, vide Orators Rule vide Empire.
S
Sermons, page 32, b The holy Scriptures, vide the word of God, Silence, page
107 Simony vide dignity, Sin, page 288, b Sinners, ibid. Science vide
learning, Shamfastnes vide Temperance, Slander vide an ill name, Scholars,
page 242, Schoolemaisters, ibid, Society vide conuersing, and living together,
Sobriety vide abstinence and temperance, Sophisters, page 245, b Soldiers vide
War, Sorrow, page 170, b Soul, page 48, b Speech, page 252, b Study, page
244 Strength vide power. Superfluity vide Riches
T
Taciturnity vide Silence, Tears vide Mourning, (...) (...) (...) (...) ^^d,
(...) idid ^^^^^tion, page 186 b Truth, page 103, Time, page 153 b Tyrants vide
punishment and affections, (...) ^^ny vide Princes,
V
(...) vide fortitude, ^^ngeance, page 233, (...) page 67, (...) page 228,
(...) page 304, ^^^^^tie, page 111. ^^^gins, ibid, Vnstaved people vide
inconstancy, Use and abuse of a thing page 198, b Usury, page 322,
W
^arre, page 227, Wickedness vide Vice and sin, Wine vide Drunkenness,
Wisdom, page 113 A Wise man, page 115, b Wit, page 260 Wits soon ripe,
soon rotten, ibid. Excellent Wits, seldom long lived. ibid. Diversity of
Wits. page 264. b Women, page 41 Word of God. page 23 World. page 238 The love
and vanity of the World. page 239 Contempt of the World. page 240 Wrath, vide
Anger. Wife. page 130
Y.
Youth. page 64, b
Z.
Zeal. page 259
FINIS.

