A PROFITABLE AND necessary Discourse, for the meeting with the bad Garbelling
of Spices, used in these days. And against the Combination of the workmen of
that office, contrary unto common good. Composed by diverse Grocers of London,
wherein are handled such principal matters, as follows in the Table, before
the book.



Printed at London, by R. B. for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater noster Row at
the sign of the Talbot.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Web Knight, Lord Mayor of London, and to
the right Worshipful the Aldermen of the same City his brethren.
BEcause the complaints of sundry of the retayling grocers of London, to the
chief officers the gardians, and to the first men of that society, against
the fact of bad garbelling of spices, betvveene them and the Marchantes, has
in lieu of reformation taught many indigneties and wrought some indignation
toward the co^plaina^ts. Therefore no council was better (that despair of
remedy amongst them, could then conceive or bring forth) then to fly to your
most godly wisdom for such helps therein, as do bear an Anologie and
proportion correspo^dent to the mischiefs and diseases in the fact of garbling.
Or if that do fail to follovv the saying of the Poet Musaeus, the which is
thus set forth: It is good sometime to sound in open street
The wicked works which men do think to hide.
meaning that by publishing of some small pamphlet touching the same, such good
may ensue, either the vvorkemanne to grow better, or the buier to be more
vviser, in the office of garbling (a matter right Honorable and worshipful,
full of rashness to break open a discourse, whereinto a man may more easily
enter, then find the way out again.) But since that authority and power
(which works by operation) to redress these defectes, is as yet left,
only in them which are the aucthors of them, we mean in the Garbeller and
workmen. Our wit is such (which ought to work with council and
discretion) to allow and advance this small treatise under your Honors favor
and protection, the effect vvherof is to shevve the abuses done in that
office, with the right use and motion thereof: vvherin your wisdoms and Honor
may be pleased, to excuse our boldness under this defense, that in great
inconveniences, great Officers have not despised the meanest voices. Then shall
our duties to the co^monvvelth be out of danger, and the same aduantaged by
your wonted affection, to whatsoever concerns common good, and by this our
labor. In the which affection we beseech the Creator of all things, to
assist your Lordship and worships with his holy spirit, and to give you the
same for council and conduction in the service of her Majesty, this City,
and to his glory, and your posterity for ever hereafter. Grocers Hall in
London.

Your most humble the Retailors Grocers. London.

To the discreet and virtuous Readers.
IN discoursing with diverse worshipful Merchants of the company of Grocers
and others, upon the practices in garbelling of spices in London, a thing to
to the retaylors of such spices of no small importance: as well for that thereby
they are touched in honor and honesty, being enforced as it were to put to
utterance corrupt spices, as in conscience and care to have reformation for
such constraints: We speak our minds therein; not of things done this day;
yesterdny, or the day before: but of things done long since by experience,
and of the observation of the said practices, and of the corruption therein
daily used, and of the reformation now required (the which many years more
then some scores past was conceived and foreseen.) Therefore to bury the hatred
grown, both hetweene the seller and the buier, we proposed a possible means to
profit the merchant, satitfie all the retaylers, and to assure the buier and
occupier of the goodness of such spiees without fraud. The means are grounded
upon the true knowledge of the nature of garbelling of spices, the which is not
only the true sifting of the same, but the dividing of the good from the bad,
and the putting of them up in their said deuisions, and upon the due
understanding of the difference of garbelling used in time past, with the time
present. And in that difference a just choice is to be made, and an ordinance
to be given, for the Garbeller to follow, for the benefit of all, the which
our intent and meaning is, with the consent of all, and in favor of thee
gentle Reader to publish, to the end, the practices of garbelling may be
garbelled (we mean reformed) and her Majesty and people of this realm be
better served in such affairs. For whose satisfaction, we labor with hope,
craving of thee the like utterance of friendship toward us, and to accept our
meaning, if thou find not this discourse to be quallited to thy liking.

Vale.
The Table.
1 WHy the Art of garbelling was first invented and by whom. Folio. 1. 2 The
ancient deuisions of spices used in London, fol. 3. 3 The abuses now used in
the said Art there. 11. 4 How the danger of those abuses, extends as well to
the retailors Grocers, as to the merchant, and thereby the garbeller in danger
of question of his oath taken therein. 13. 5 The abuses of the workmen, and the
necessity of reformation thereof, and for whose sake it is to be done, fol.
17. and 19. 6 Who may reform these abuses in London, and the manner how to
reform them, 23. 7 The manner of true garbelling, 31. 8 The rate set and
allowed by the maiestrates, for the garbeller to receive in his office, 71. 9
The rate by himself advanced, and received, 71. 10 The orders necessary to
be made and kept, between the chief garbeller, and his workmen, fol. 50. 11
The brief abstracte of the Acts of Common Council, made in London for
garbelling, in Anno xviii. of king Henry the eight, and in Anno. second of king
Edward the sixth fol. 63. 12 The oath thereupon appointed, for the said
Garbeller. fol. 87
Reformation for Garbelling.
1 Herein is showed that king Henry the sixth did first give the office of
Garbelling of spices in London, to the Mayor and Cominaltie of the same.

2 That the Merchants and Retailors Grocers, did devise the laws how the same
should be garbelled for ever.

3 What Garbelling is.

Chap. 1.
IF the care which the Ancient Romans had, to perform the judgment and
decrees of their lawmakers be well weighed and observed: amongst the rest of
great respect and honor, the obedience of Fabius Maximus to the ordinances of
his son, is to be admired: who being a Maiestrate and in place of judgment,
and seeing his father a far off coming toward him on horse back (a thing
forbidden amongst the Romans) he commanded his father to set foot on ground,
the which the father obeyed, and embracing his son, made greater account of
him, then if he had done otherwise. And on the other side, one Vestius was put
to death because he arose not when the Tribune of the people passed before him,
the which he with obedience and patience endured. And diverse Citizens of Rome
were disfranchised for breathing and yawning a little to loud, in the presence
of the Censors: whereat they nothing repined. This we set forth, for that it
should be remembered, that if the common breach of laws and decrees be
permitted, then ensues not only the contempt of the Maiestrate, but also the
very ruin of that, for whose cause such ordinances were advanced: a thing
befallen to the subject of this matter now in hand; namely in the fact of
Garbelling of spices. The necessity of clensing and purifieng whereof, in the
time of the reign of king Henry the sixth was then debated, and the office of
Garbelling was by the same king given to the Lord Mayor and Cominaltie of this
The office of Garbelling was by K. Henrye the vi. first given to the Lord
mayor and comminalty of london.
famous City of London, but in such wise, notwithstanding, that it is very
apparent, that as well the Marchantes owners of such spices, as the Grocers
retaylors of the same City, were called to give advice for the conceiving and
creating of such ordinances therein, as might best tend to the benefit of the
Merchant, the utterance and sale of the Grocer, and the goodness of the thing
garbelled for the health of the people of this realm: upon the which
ordinances the Art of garbelling was pronounced to consist, it being an habit
of working according to right, reason, and mechanical or a handicraft, the
full knowledge whereof was partly gotten by use, at that time by Richard
Hackdie and William Hackdie and Aunsell, first garbellers after the said gift.
Aunsell Citizens, and partly by instructions and reason, taught and showed by
the merchants and Grocers then being, and was left to the execution of the said
persons the officers aforsaid, the which aduises, as well of the said Merchants,
Grocers, and of the said officers, are thus set forth.

1 The deuisions of Spices by the said parties, are particularly set down.

2 The same to be at no time altered.

Chap. 2.
For So Much as every thing has his natural, proper and inward corruption, of
which it is eaten and at the last consumes Every thing has his natural
corruption, whereof at the last it is consumed.
and begins to spread it self in the best part to mar all, as rottenesse in
spices is their proper evil. And for that also, the same spices are also
subject (as all other things are) to accidents, and thereby also may be
destroyed before their natural overthrow, as bruses, water, dust, and age in
spices. Therefore for the avoiding and curing of such natural corruption when
it happens, and thoroughly to meet with all such hurtful accidents to such
spices, being aliments and nutrimentes to restore and preserve the health of
man, or to prevent some infirmity and diseases, ready to overthrow their good
estate: We (say they as skillful physicians, preventing diseases and laboring
in forseene mischiefs, according to the causes whereon the effects of such
corruption do depend) have ordained these deuisions to be observed in the
setting forth those spices, with their qualities by way of garbelling and first
of:

Nutmegges.
The operation whereof we mean not to set forth, being no part of our charge:
only for the dividing of the good from the badde, we hold it necessary that
they be divided into three sorts.

The first and the best we call case nutmegs, the which are smooth, weighty,
fair, and fullof oil.

The second sort we call Bale, the which are also fair and great but somewhat
wrinkled, and here and there oil in them, and declining to corruption.

The third and last sort we term Rompes, so termed being wrinkled, bruised, ill
colored, and do want their oil, and thereby are become dry or rotten. The
which sorts to be so severally put up.

Pepper.
If the same by some accident shall receive wet, or otherwise be evil
conditioned: we think it meet to be sorted by it self and to be kept from
the dry. Both which to be garbelled and cleansed from the dust and corrupt
pepper, and to be uttered in one sort, in such manner as the same does arise
from the place it came, and notwithdrawing the head sort of pepper from the
small.

Maces and Cynamon.
We hold it best to garbell and cleanse them into three sorts, to wit: Lardge,
middle and petit.

Ginger, Gauls, Rise and Erreus.
That the same shall pass into two sorts, (viz) Lardge and petit.

Cloves, Grains, Woormseed, Anniseed, Comminseed, Dates, Senie, and all other
things garbellable.
We likewise think it best to garble and cleanse them into one good sort from
the dust and garbels, according to the nature of the thing it self.

1 The proof that those deuisions were by the^ so appointed to be made and
kept.

2 That the L. Mayor and comminalty by two several acts of Common counsel
have allowed the same.

3 That the Garbeller thereby is excluded to make laws by himself therein, or
to alter the same.

4 That the common people have received the same as a custom, and do in every
fair and market, procure troubles for putting spices to sale, garbelled to the
contrary.

Chap. 3.
FOr the approouing of which Deuisions, besides the ancient remembrance thereof,
left with Master Blaze Saunders late garbellor, the same may plainly
appear in this. That in Flaunders, Marchantes before then, and long since,
brought from Antwerp, Brudges and Roane, their Nutmegs and other spices in such
condition and sorts as is beforesaid, with a seal of the figure of the right
hand upon every vessel or bag of case nutmegs and other spices in such
condition and sorts as is aforesaid. And on their bail Nutmegs, a hand with a
bar overthwart, and the other sort without mark. And in such sorts the same
were bought and sold, as by an act of Common council, holden by your
predecessors it may appear in Anno. 4. of K. Henry the viii. To the which
deuisions, the Merchant, Retailor, and Garbeller (say they) shall hold
themselves contented without alteration; unless there shall be cause of
correction of those sorts, upon search of them by the Garbellor in London: as
also by another act of Common counsel made in An. 18. of K. Henry the eight,
it is set forth: the which may appear at the end of this present discourse.
The filth and dust of which said spices, were held unwholesome and not vendible
but to be rejected as unserviceable: your predecessors then were moved with
those reasons, to allow and confirm those deuisions as reasonable and full of
equity between the merchant and the retailors, and were desirous that the
same should also remain and abide, for the avoiding of deceit or loss of the
common people, who have in such measure noted and felt the benefit of the said
deuisions, that now in open faires and places corporate, they do daielie
procure the spices sorted to the contrary, to be seysed on as goods
forfeited, and not garbelled as they ought to be; to the great trouble of the
retaylors, and notable detriment. Upon these and such like beginnings, and by
the acts of Common council ensuing, the fact of garbelling Covetousness
does work confusion of all right.

The fact of garbelling a bond of unity between the merchant and the grocers.


has had continuance, until now of late that covetousness or ignorance in
the principal officer, has bred the change and overthrow of the pollitike
devise of this Art. These our predecessors also thought the fact of garbelling
(as is before appointed) to be a bond of great unity, for the retailors with
the merchants, and of no less service for the Commonwealth: and in that
sense, they all (by the humble petition of the garbeller) agreed, that it
should be enacted by a common council therefore especially made, that he
might visit the garbelling of Antwerpe and Brudges, only to refine if need
were, but not to alter their said deuisions: and that the Merchants and
retailors should not afterward alter their sorts of garbelled spices, but put
the same to sale, in such wise as the same spices were garbelled (in such
manner as is by the premises justly to be inferred) and not before they were
so garbelled or refined, upon a penalty therein expressed; and to be
accounted as an enemy to that form, appointed therein for common good, as we
before have remembered, for the observation of which indifferency, There is but
one way to goodness.
the said officer takes his corporal oath. And for so much as the fact of
garbelling cannot be good, but after one sort, but to the evil it may be many
ways done: as to hit a white, there is but one way, but to miss it there are
many ways. We say as commonly it is said, that that thing is rightly don,
which is done to the order and institution of good policy. And for such we
esteem those deuisions to be, and that they are the only way of clean
garbelling, for the The Merchant feels the heart by the garbellers presence in
his house.
common wealth, whereon that art depends, and for whose sake the Merchant is
contented to make the Garbeller the master of his merchandise for the time,
(the inconveniences whereof he best feels, but least knows) and the
retaylor is appointed his instrument to put the same to sale, according to the
deuisions so made bought and sold, whereby it is made very apparent to your
wisdoms, that the sovereignty of that and every other good order, is the
sure foundation thereof, with the union and bond of all the particulers, for
whose cause the same was conceived, made and advanced, and herein as in all
other cases, if every man should have no other respect but to his own, their
unity would soon be dissolved.

Chap. 4.
1. The greefes of the Retailors grocers.

2. What it is they do require of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.

But to resume and to continue the speech by us already begun, of the abuse of
this art. We say, that injury is offered to those goods of Merchants, and by
the sale of those goods, to the honor and person of the seller: the which
injury is not done by force, for force may be repelled by force, but by
fraud, and by this fraud an injustice passes to all, the which is to be
removed by reformation. And herein we are not called to do, but to demand
justice, the which we require, even no further, then that those laws of your
predecessors, made as touching the fact of Garbelling may be kept and obeyed by
those workmen, who are parties thereunto: the which belongs to your offices
to see performed. And under this obedience, is contained The garbeller is not
to make laws at his pleasure, nor to place nor displace any without consent of
the l. mayor
that moderation which the officer in this Art of garbelling, ought to observe,
namelye, that he must not of his own motion direct such manner of Garbelling
as himself pleases, nor abuse the manner of garbelling first used; nor by
the same abuse, take upon him any part of the maiestrates office, in judging
and making forfeit what he likes. It is for the Commonwealths sake (whom he
may thank) that he comes into the Marchantes doors: and therefore it is meet
for him to speak, say, and do all things for the preservation thereof by his
faculty, as it was first appointed by your predecessors, who were as you are,
armed with power, to enforce his obedience to these their ordinances, or to
punish the contrary, or to remove him. But forsomuche as covetousness,
wherewith a man being surprised, shall want knowledge how to command
himself, may entice him to fall from all ancient orders, and to practice
strange deuisions, as well of spices, as of profit and honesty, the which are
never separated in matters of good quality; for nothing is just nor
profitable if not honest: and Nothing is profitable that is not honest
he that makes a division of them, by setting forth and separating his actions
in this wise, saying; this deed is honest, but that deed is profitable for me,
he cannot be without fraud: but will rend a sunder all equity ordained by
public power. Therefore we have set forth the abuses now offered, and
wherein the ancient deuisions are not observed, and how these deuisions now
used, brings detriment to the Merchant and loss to the retaylors, as we have
taken in hand, being the second point by us set down in the premises of this
discourse, and to show wherein the ancient order is observed though
corruptly, and why the garbeller of late sued to have his manner of garbling,
with further authoririe to be allowed to him, by act of Common council.

Chap. 5.
1 The particular abuses of the Garbeller in this office, as well in the
clensing and dividing of spices, as in the putting up of the same.

2 By those abuses, he will convert great benefit either to the Merchant or to
the retaylor at his pleasure* the which could not happen, if the ancient
orders were kept.

Have makes wast.
ANd first in Nutmegs, for expedition and have (the first point of his gain)
though it make wast to all others. He would and oftentimes does draw them
into one sort, casting out some of the Rompes, and by that one sort he may
upon occasion of bribes, displeasure or ignorance, convert the same sometimes
to the benefit of the Marchante, and otherwhiles to the grocer retailor, as is
hereafter declared: but to whomsoever it is, the common people have the harm
thereby, and the retailor is very often discredited: and by these means,
contentions are, may be, and have been moved, between the merchant, seller,
and buier. For by this workmanship this fraud is maintained: Nutmegs falselie
packed up.
that on the top of his vessel or bag, there are bestowed nutmegs of fair
condition, and in the bottom or a foot downwards, there are found Nutmegs not
so good, by vi. viii. and xii. pence in the pound: And to the contrary when he
list, the worst are laid uppermost, and in such sort, that the retaylor must
make sale thereof upon forfeiture of the same; a thing which could not happen
by the ancient deuisions, for thereby the best are set forth by it self, by
the name of case, being such as is aforesaid, full of oil, fair and of good
perfection, and more permanent and lasting then others, and is known by his
mark. The next sort being called bail, is not half so oilie as the case,
but declining and apt to corruption, and are not to be put up among the best,
for that it will disgrace them speedily, and in short time change into a Rompe:
the which matter common and daily experience proves, the which by a man
skilful, and a cunning Garbeller may easily be drawn from the best, but not
by the unskillful; so that the remainder being rompes are left to themselves.
The which we wish, for that the same is a spice of choice and prise, that the
garbelling and putting up thereof, were committed to men of better judgment
and skill, as by the garbellers own petition it is required, and not to those
who now are artificers therein, for that they know not how, or malitiouslie
will not divide the same as they ought to be, being a matter of great
importance and of regard. Hereby and by the sequel, you may see the abuses,
and easily discern the differences of his garbelling to one sort (the which
is no garbelling, but a practice tending to abuses as is hereafter proved)
and the ancient deuisions, and heerwithall you may The merchant does forfeit
his wares by the manner of garbelling now used.
note the danger (if we may call it a danger) that by this practice of the
dividing of Nutmegs into one sort, the merchant and the retaylor present and to
come hereafter, may and do incur by the said Act of common council, made An.
18. of king Henry the viii, the said division being contrary to the ancient
custom: for where it is said, that no merchant nor other, do sell in gross or
retaile within the City of London, any manner of spices before it be
garbelled, tried, and made clean by the officer, as of old time accustomed:
whereby it may or shall evidently appear to the buiers thereof, to be good
perfect, clean and wholesome, upon pain of forfeiture of the same spices so
sold. The which matter is not nor can be performed in this one sort of
dividing; but to make it a danger (as we take it) the garbeller has humbly
besought The practice of the garbeller is to intrappe the Merchant.
your honor and worships of late, to give him power by order and act of common
council, to seize upon all such wares and spices, as are made forfeitable by
the same act, and other acts since made, the which authority (he says) is
wanting in the same Acts. This being considered, we cannot sufficiently
marvel, what has moved him to enter into so preposterous a course; for from
this abuse in nutmegs, he has fallen further to abuse the ancient sort and
manner of garbelling of

Pepper.
The wet and dry pepper are to us the retaylors sold and mingled together, and
in that sort by him garbelled, nay rather vngarbelled; but the same in that
wise, we are enjoined to put to sale, whereby we are hindered and the people
deceived, and the Merchants still in danger of the statutes before mentioned,
and the head or greatest pepper of both wet and dry are taken apart, and
mingled with other sorts, from whence it was not taken, and in brief he makes
deuisions therein as himself list, and contrary to the ancient order, the
which was, as is aforsaid, but in one sort the dry pepper by it self*
without substracting the greatest from the same, and the wet pepper by it
self, the difference being noted by the seal thereon, the which was well
known to our predecessors. But hereby the common people are much abused,
being constrained to buy the small from the great, and the wet with the dry:
the one tainted and corrupted with salt water, and unwholesome and altered in
color, and the best thereby made worse.

Maces and Cynamon.
He observes the ancient order of dividing them into three sorts, but in such
wise, that by the packing and putting up of the same, no such indifferency is
used, but that by his oath he may be called in question therein.

Ginger, Gauls, Rise and Erreus.
He likewise observes the ancient manner of passing them into two sorts.

Cloves, Grains, Woormseed, Anniseed, Comminseed, Dates, Senie, and all other
things garbellable.
He sorteth them into one sort, from the dust and garbels but corruptly: the
rather for that in all he reserueth this power to himself, to disgvize the
Merchant or the retaylor, for by separating the great from the small, he may
lay the one or the other so upwards or downwards that if his favor be not
bought, nor craved, he may convert the benefit which way himself lists,
either to the merchant or to the retaylor. And forsomuche as the substance of
our grief consists in the understanding of these abuses and imperfections,
therefore we may with more safety, and without the imputation of curiosity
enter therinto; otherwise we might be thought curious, in seeking after other
men's faults (a matter from which wise men will divert and quench the same) for
as sometime, it is good to cease to inquire after lawful things, as an
exercise and practice of justice: so it is likewise expedient, sometime to
leave untaken that which a man may lawfully take, whereby to restrain the
desire of unlawful taking. But by Profitable adversaries to the Garbeller.
this our curiosity, we wish to be more profitable to the aduersarye of our
good then to our selves, by showing him of what he is to beware, and what to
correct. And first to prove these abuses to be such in this workman, whom we
have regarded as the principal body (the which being infected, the members his
ministers cannot do their duty.) We say, that albeit he promises, that he
will well and lawfullye behave himself in the office of Garbelling, without
any partiality, taking reasonably; and that after he has packed up the goods
by him garbelled, he will set thereon a mark, that the common wayer may take
knowledge thereof: yet in these matters, and in many other things apperteining
to that office, he departs from his said promise in behauing himself, as in
this Chapter following it appears.

Chap. 6.
1 Whereas the principal Garbeller uses diverse practices, tending to the
slander of the office, therefore herein are set forth some of the same
practices

2 The proofs thereof are set forth by a petition of the workmen of the
said office, which remains with the body of this society.

For So Much as the Garbeller affirms, that this manner of garbelling is a
lawefull manner of garbelling: therein we (as our predecessors did) do not
repute it lawful garbelling, to put wet and dry pepper together: a thing by
him used.

Item, To give license to any man to buy spices garbellable, and to license one
and not another, to carry the same hither and thither vngarbelled, under his
passing seal, is not lawful; a matter very notorious and enterteineth
suspicion of much evil.

Item, to arrest some marchantes, and not other some for keeping their goods
vngarbelled, longer then the Act of Common council appoints, is (so far as
he can allow) partiality.

Item, To take money of merchants before their goods be garbelled, and to take
more money of one then of another for garbelling of like commodity, is
partiality: likewise to take more money, then by the act of common counsel is
limited, is unlawful.

Item, To garbell Nutmegs into case and bail according to the ancient custom
in one place, and not in another, is partiality.

Item, By skill and policy, to hinder the sale of merchants in their goods,
requires disfranchisement, the which may arise, by puttinge Nutmegs into one
sort together in one place, and to hinder the sale of the like in another
place, he will divide them into two sorts, wherein the retaylor, so long as he
may find them so divided, will never look to him with one sort: and hereby
oftentimes, the Merchant is constrained to regarbell them. But to wade further
into these or other particularities of his proceedings were too tedious; and
are not heerin for diverse good causes to be discovered: by these it is evident,
that the Art of garbelling is not lawfully used, but by him unlawfully abused,
and the skillful ruling or governing of a company is to begin in himself: but
the head being such, let us behold the proceedinges of his ministers.

Chap. 7.
1 Diverse notable abuses done by the workmen under the said garbeller.

2 They can deceive both Merchant and grocer, and their leader also.

3 The Marchantes may save 2000 pounds yeerelie, if the ancient manner of
garbelling were observed.

NOt long since, a merchant had a commodity wherein the workmen garbellers
labored, by the space of xiiii. days: the which commodity, for that it was
bought or at the least agreed for, before the garbelling thereof, by certain
retailors, the Merchant promised his reward to these ministers, the retaylors
also promised their reward, to have the same well and duly garbelled: but
secretly and underhand, one of the said ministers required of one of the
retaylors xx. shillings, promising therefore to leave good garbell, if he
bought the same garbell: the The deceiuer is deceived.
retaylor made his countenance to gratify this friendship, but he would not
part with any of the money required, until he saw this promise to succeed; in
this hope these garbellers labored to make good garbell until the end, and the
retaylor made have to buy this garbel at a good prise, hoping to have had store
of good stuff in the same; and also to retain his promised reward: the which
by delays these garbellers suspected. And thereupon one of them makes suit to
the merchant that he might buy the said garbell, he had his answer, that he
came not in time, it was sold to the retaylor: to this the said workman and
his consortes gave countenance of their good liking, but withal to cover their
abuse, and to revenge the breach of the retaylors promise, one of them closes
with the Merchant, and says: Sir you promised us a reward to take pains in
this commodity, for the true garbelling thereof, the which is performed on
our part, but if you will give us xx. s. the garbell shall be again cast
over, and thereby we doubt not, but to profit you very much. Why says the
Merchant, my masters you know my mind, they that pleasure me, to them I will
not be ungrateful.

Here (...) and by regarbling of the garbell, the merchant saved v. pound, or
more in money; their reward was given, and the garbell is packed up, the which
the retaylor with some gladness and cost received, knowing nothing of the
regarbling thereof, and in lieu of his reward, gives few and cheap words of
thanks to the Garbellors; who commending the same in derision, leaves the
same to his further and gentle consideration. By this (being one of the least
of their bad practices) your Lordshippe and worships may see the undue regard,
the said Garbeller and workmen do bear in these affairs to their duties,
the rather for that there is as yet, no good law appointed to hold them
thereunto: by these also we inform our selves (and so some of us have This
loss may be compared to the Ecco which cannot be found but yet is sensibly
heard and known.
heard it delivered, by the mouth of some of those ministers) that the
merchants in this city (if reformation were herein had by an expert
garbeller) might save 2000 pounds yearly, whereof in this wise they are
deceitfully defrauded, besides the harms the retaylor and the common people do
sustain by their bad practices, a great impiety in the suffrance thereof, the
rather for that under the color of garbling, for the health and wealth of the
people, the proper owner of such goods, does receive abuse within his own
doors. Truly the question why every such proprietary of such goods, may not
cleanse the same, as well as to have an officer thereof, has weighty reasons on
both sides, but it is out of our purpose to dispute thereof.

And for further proof of the second point of our determination; the which is,
that the deuisions now used, are contrary to the causes, for the which the
said Act was conceived. We say as is beforesaid, That by the impunitie of
these offenses; and from thence many shifts and sleightes are raunged and
derived, the which by the weakness and ignorance of the principal garbeller,
is fostred in the members his workmen, cheeflie by the small account which is
made of the accomplishment of the ancient manner of garbelling, the which being
misregarded, these members (good fellows, right Honorable, that will make you
to believe that flies do carry pyke-staues, in those countries from whence
these spices do come) are comforted, contrary to the form and fashion of
this Art, in the retch of the said principal officer, and before his face,
strangely and notably to defraud him of his duty, and corrupt their whole
affairs, to the prejudice of the retaylors, but chiefly of the Merchants; and
amongst many others, this one we think meet to have it remembered for his
avail.

A Merchant has a commodity of Cloves, Maces, Wormeseed, or such like to be
garbelled, the quantity is waied, or otherwise known to this head garbeller,
and found to be some 600. pound weight, it being cleansed, the good of some
one of these commodities, arises to 300. or 400. pound weight, from which
quantity, these members being confederates with the Merchants man (who makes
it no sin to deceive the deceiuer) withdraws the third or half, having
ready the like weight of old garbell. Now this head garbeller, for the leuyeng
of his duty, reuisiteth the weight aforsaid; then to disguize him, they will
thrust the old and new garbell together to hold weight, and thereby measure
and levy his duty, according to the good remaining: and the rest of his duty
is good prize to them, in which ouer-reach, the sealer likewise in his office
is as handsomely disguised: the manner how is unfit here to be set down.

Chap. 8.
1 The notable and intolerable devices of these workmen, to beguile the
Merchant.

2 The means how to reform them.

THese inconveniences as is most apparent, may well be prevented, by following
the ancient manner of Garbelling, associating the same with the petitions
ensuing, all tending to one uniform order in garbelling, to the benefit of
all: for by dissorting of the said spices from the ancient deuisions; the said
workmen in this office, to the great prejudice of all parties, take liberty to
pack the commodity up very corruptly, and will give such secret marks,
either by a knot made on the third, in the bag made up, or by A bad practice
of the workmen against the merchant.
a spot of Ink, that being confederate with another of their friends, who shall
come to buy the same of the merchant, may thereby know how much or how deep,
the best sort do lie under the second, or worst sort, the which is laid upon
purpose upon the top of the bag, and heerby a man of their intelligence,
shall take up the best commodity, and leave the worst to the retaylor; yea and
pay less for the same, then for the remainder: the merchant believing that he
holds the best sorts still, by reason that the best of his commodities is laid
uppermost. Wherein we inform our selves, that the merchant loses v. pound in
the hundredth weight, by their differences in garbelling and putting up of the
same. The loss runs not to the benefit of the retaylors, but by the bad
handling thereof, his loss likewise ensues. Besides we take that regarbling
is intolerable, and falls out as evil to the retailor, as filtching of the
best falls out to the Merchant, albeit the weight be made up by a little old
garbel, bought of purpose (a matter if it be often used, for the merchant to
look unto) all which considered, with many more wherein every one of us have
a sufficient feeling thereof in himself by his own harm. We say that the
principal officer, may think that these abuses are contrary to the meaning
of the first erection of garbelling, and that the good of the Commonwealth
herein, is the law of this Note.
Art: and that he nor his, can commit a fault, nor yet rest from their duties
without the hurt of those, whose health and benefit is chiefly considered in
this art, the which is but a division of the good from the bad spices, and not
to hinder the marchantes sale or his distribution thereof, or the retaylors
detriment by sleightes and practices of their own inventions, and further if
he had reason of the alteration of any of these ancient ordinances; if these
were evil established, and could obtain such as are agreeyng with
themselves: yet in reason he is to bring, as well the Merchant as the retaylor,
in heart and mind to help the estate thereof, and he is not of his own motion,
to intermeddle in the reformation thereof, it being not his private affairs:
and they all are to show it to the superior, whom we know and take you to be,
whose hands are unbound, to dispose and to order these affairs, being more
public then private.

But to grow brief in this matter alleged, and to set forth some
resolutions in such questions as may arise heerin. And first, where it is by
some merchants; Ignorant in the quality of garbell and spices (the which
sometime falls Question.
into their hands that expect not for them) alleged, that if the ancient
deuisions should be used, that then they should sell the best, and be
constrained to keep the other sorts: as in Nutmegges if they be divided into
case and bail; the case may be sold and the Bail shall remain; And
therefore they like the same to be done into one sort. Hereunto we say,
and will amend his account in this manner: That if the said marchante have
three bags Answer.
of Nutmegs of some 600. weight, first suppose that all the rompes be taken
out, and that the rest do way 400. weight, being made into one sort, worth to
be sold at v. shillings the pound, it arises to the sum of 100. pound, the
which if afterward they be divided into case and bail, the case does arise
to 250 pound The merchant does not know many times what he does sell.
weight, being worth six shillings the pound, amounts to 75. pound, and 150.
weight of bail remaining, being worth iiii. shillings the pound, arises to
30. pound, the whole sum being 105. pound. So that it appears, that the
Merchants gain is greater by these deuisions, then by one sort. And it cannot
be denied, but the retaylor shall know better hereby what he buieth then
otherwise: and the Merchant what he sells, being disguized as is aforesaid,
and Note.
as is hereafter set forth. And thus much the officer herin could tell the
Merchant; with this, that he finds upon the sight of the nutmegs, now sent
from beyond the seas, that their factors in those parts care not, if the best
sort of Nutmegs be picked out from the second sort, the which they account
will serve well enough in London, to draw into one sort; but he commends and
colors these evils with a commendable title of expedition, in that one sort
is quickly done: wherein his gain is singular, as thus.

He appoints three men, being hired at xii. pence the day a piece, to
garbell the said 600. weight of nurmegs into one sort, he takes as his due
xvi. shillings. These three men can draw those into that sort in half a day,
and do receive xviii. pence for their labor, so his gain is clear xiiii.
shillings vi. pence, the which if they were duly garbelled would ask three
days work, the labor whereof arises to nine. s. wherein it plainly
appears, that by passing this 600. weight into one sort, he gains xiiii.
shillings six pence, in half a day, and by keeping the ancient The good of the
commonwealth is the law of true garbelling.
deuisions, he gains but six shil. in three days, the which is the cause of
his expedition: without care either to the welfare of the Merchant, retaylor,
or to the people into whose hands the same do pass. But we refer it to
your Honorable consideration, to judge what gain this expedition brings in
six days, when he has xiiii. shillings six pence, in a forenoon. The which
being by his workmen well noted for recreation sake, and to try the judgment
of the said principal garbeller for a Dilemma in this expedition, they will
sometime get a heap of small stones and lay them by their work, and
themselves will play the good fellows and let all alone: wherewith if any
coffeehouse do grow by the master garbeller for expedition, then they do
show these stones, and ask him if that be no labor to pick them out, and
thereby these poor men sometime do gain a days labor or two. Wherein for
that these workmen have of themselves found out and required certain orders to
be kept among themselves, and accordingly have made their request to the
said officer, the which is correspondent to the matter by us required,
therefore we have caused the same their orders to be herein set forth, to the
end, that the said chief garbeller may be enjoined to allow thereof, as a
mean and for a principal correction of their former abuses and conversation,
by the repetition whereof, these persons our friends will be angered (as is
very like.)

But it is not material, so that they be bettered, Anger better to be
tolerated tha^ vice.
and for that purpose, we are their friends, and anger is better to be
tolerated then vice, or such inconveniences as are aforesaid. But forsomuche
as reprehension will breed but small reformation herein: we for that we know
that your intent is to embrace the cause that runs to the avail of the
commonwealth, and to suppress the contrary, do sue to your lordshippe, that
by way of your decree, confirmed by Act of Common council, it may be
perpetually and irreuokeablie ordained, that the ancient and first
ordinances aforesaid, may be observed and kept, and all other exercise of
Garbelling to be abolished. And that insomuch as the said workmen therein,
are fallen from their true labor, and by negligence of their governor, do
falsify their works, to the hurt of many, partly for want of a reasonable
sallerie, the which may be redressed, if the orders by themselves contrived
and herein set forth may be granted, being such in our opinions, as do
tend to public profit, as well as to the private gain of the said office.
That the same their ordinances may likewise be ratified with this.

He requires to use men of skill, but he will unskillfully use them.
That none do work, inthe said office, but able men and such as have
skill, as the Garbeller himself, by his petition requires, and to be by your
Honorable assent first allowed.

And further, for that the envy of their dooinges has exposed and made the
Retaylor; subject to many mislikinges with the people, who do buie the said
spices (for an ease in this evil) it may also please you, to give your assent
for the publication and confirmation of these ordinances also ensuyng; whereby
neither the Marchantes, Retaylors, nor Grocers, being Chapmen abroad, nor
common people may reenter into any fear, to be abused by the enterprises of
these needy workmen, being no Winterlinges nor colde-hanlers, of and in the
Art of garbelling: wherein as we have The remedies in the^ evils.
noted the mischief, so we have found out the remedy, by this necessary
pathe, being accompanied with the ancient order, the which hitherto has
been broken up and disturbed, by the mysse-regarde of the first and chief
Garbeller, whose practice has been and is (more and more) under sundry
pretenses to abase the credit and authority of those ancient deuisions of
spices, and to gain partakers to overthrow all that stand in his way, by
him taken to ouerreache the absolute power of handeling the said office in
London, to him given by your Honors predecessors, as he does by his garbelling
in other places, by force of her majesty's letters pattents to his own
purposes: and has endeavored to possess them diversely and their favors, to
the end aforesaid, and has presumed to make laws in some cases, and in other
cases he craves the same to be established by an act of common council. And
that also it may be ordained that his ministers and workmen under him, may
take their oathe to observe the same to their vttermoste, the which for that
they be not contrary nor prejudicial to the order of the ancient manner of
garbelling, but only do tend to this end, that we may have and receive our
spices duly divided and so packed up, or else that we may compass our remedy,
if those ancient deuisions should be falsified or corrupted.

We therefore have particularly set forth the true uniformity in garbelling
of every spice in his kind, for the more better and plain directing of the
said workmen, and all other therein. And that in case in the execution of these
ordinances and labor, the said principal officer shall not receive a
sufficient fee, upon every thing garbelled, that then his duty may be
increased, according to such judgment as himself heretofore has required;
especially, if the amendment of his rate in the things required as to little,
may not be defaulcked out of things, that he does garbell, for which he has
too much, as is hereafter declared.

Chap. 9.
1 The true manner of Garbelling of every particular spice, and of their
deuisions.

2 That by the marks herein set forth, every sort may be known with the
party who put them up, and the time.

3 The which manner of Garbelling the Grocers do sue, to have confirmed, and
expreslie set forth, by act of common council.

PEpper of all Spices ought to be garbelled in the selfsame nature it first
came in, whether case, callico, half bar wet or dry, the Garbeller ought
not to alter the quallitie thereof, for fear of deceit; and to garbell it
well, it ought to be thus handled by a workman of skill. First the dust must
be sifted through a sieve, that ought to have such holes, that not only the
dust but also the gravel must go through: that being done, it ought also to
pass through another syue, of such holes that they may be all equal, to the
end that the stalks of the said pepper, may be seperatcd from the good pepper:
that being done, there remains then nothing, but that the garbeller do
fan out all the light pepper, from the said good pepper. And for so much as it
is impossible for the garbeller (if he respect expedition) so to fan, but
that he shall throw out much small, hard, wrinkled pepper that is good,
Therefore he ought to regarble the said light pepper again. And that which
he finds to be sound, although it be small, yet he ought to put the same
into the good pepper, and so to mingle it, that he deceive neither the
merchant, nor Grocer, for in such a case as this is, many times it rests in
the disposition of the Garbeller, to please or displease as is before recited.
If he should mingle upon the top, or within a little from the top it would
hinder the sale of the pepper, peradventure two pence in a pound: again if it
be mingled in the midst, or in the bottom, so far from the sight of the
Grocer, that he is not able to discern the same, then is he hindered many
times two pence in a pound. And therefore to prevent this fault and such like
in many other spices, which may be so garbled and mingled together, that the
one or the other shall be mightily deceived. We therefore have thought it good,
to devise a mark for the workman, that does garbell and put up marchantes
spyces: that when he has made up his work, the same mark with his name,
may be set upon the top of the bag, or other vessel; showing thereby the
division and sort therein contained, and the goodness thereof (notwithstanding
the seal of the garbeller to be used at his pleasure) the which mark may
pass with Bonus, melior, optimus, according to the thing garbelled, as thus
for an example.

HORTON. the 26 of March An^o 1592

Pepper. bo.

HVXSLEY. the 2 of April An^o 1592

Pepper. me.

NEALE the 7. of July. Anno. 1592.

Pepper op.

HAMBLETON the 16 of September Ano 1592

Maces bo.

DENSHEIRE the 8 of Dece^ber Ano^ 1592

Maces. me.

WRIGHT the 12 of October Anno 1592.

Maces op.

NVTTINGE the 30 of August Ano 1592

synamon bo.

FREEMAN the 3 of June Anno 1592

synamon me.

BOMER the 9 of May Anno 1592

synamon. op.



A fit remedy hereby if the retaylor or merchant be at any time deceived.
The which marks may be printed in paper, and every of the said workmen to
carry his own mark.

Cloves.
Are a sweet spice, and profitable to garbell, The small cloue as good as the
great.
and in them there is no great cunning to be showed by the workmen, but to
garbell them clean, by picking them upon a Table, and after that the dust is
sifted out, the small cloue is as good as the biggest, and therefore there
can come no great hurt to the Merchant or grocer, if the smallest be put
either in the top, bottom or midst: only this there rests upon the skill
of the sworn garbeller, to certify by his mark whether they be wet or dry,
that is so put up.

Maces.
Are a spice that ought to be divided by the Garbeller, into three several
deuisions, viz: large, myddle, and petit, and to perform this matter, he ought
to have a sieue of a reasonable These siues and such like are to be provided by
a man of judgment and skill, that has been trained up in garbling
scantling to sifte the myddle from the large, and likewise a sieue fit for the
purpose to take the dust from the petit. This being done, the shelles,
nuttes, feminine Maces, and such like stuff being taken out, their rests a
kind of honesty in the sworn garbeller, that puts them up into the
Barrel, bag, or hogeshed, to see whether the large maces be all of one like
goodness, if the one half or part of them be brighter then the other, by
twelve pence or two shillings in the pound, and if two sorts of maces be
mingled together in the merchants house before the garbeller do come unto the
owner thereof, or otherwise by himself at the request of the merchant: then in
such cases as this is, he ought to put on his mark according to the goodness
thereof. This course being once taken, it will little prevail the merchant to
deceive the Grocer, by putting on bright Maces upon the top of his vessel;
again, by a true mark the merchant shall be relieved although they do appear
worst in sight, upon the view of the grocer.

Synamon.
Also is a spice to be divided into three several sorts, viz: Large, myddle,
and petit, in this kind of Spice there is no great skill to be used, only this:
that the Garbeller that shall garbell it, ought to see that amongst the large
Synamon, Synamon black, having taken salt water loses his substance, and
otherwise it may be good.
there be no middle Synamon, viz: Synamon vnpiped, neither yet any great gouty
sticks or otherwise black, which if he find any, he ought to break them in
pieces, and to put every stick in his right place, the middle synamon which
shall come from the large, ought to be so handled, that the garbeller deal
not partiallie between the marchante and the grocer; their ought nothing to be
taken from that sort, but so much petit as will pass through a ginger sieue,
that being done, the dust with the strawes are to be taken from it, by fanning
by a workman of skill. And for so much as there are diverse sorts of Synamon of
sundry goodness, therefore the skillful Garbeller, ought to have this special
regard, that is, that he after the garbelling of any such sort, do set on a
just and true mark, as well profitable to the merchant as to the Grocer.

Nutmegges.
Are a spice that are to be divided into three sorts, viz. Case, Bail, and
Rompes: and without a garbeller of judgment and skill have the handling
thereof, they cannot be truly garbelled as they ought to be, for the benefit
of the Merchant, and all those that shall buie them. And therefore to perform
this true garbelling, they must be sorted and divided out, every one from the
other according to their goodness, the case nutmegs must be full of oil, the
bail nutmegges likewise must contain so much oil in him, that if he be
forced between the finger and the thumb, and will not hold, he is then to be
cast among the Rompes: and for expedition, the workman must sifte the duste
and pieces from the Rompes and other nutmegges before they divide them, and
that workman that takes the charge of their making up, ought to set a just
and a true mark upon the top of the bag, answereable to their goodness; to the
end that the Grocer may know what he buieth, and with out this order be
followed, the merchant shall not justly know what he sells, nor the Grocer
what he buieth.

Ginger.
Likewise, is a spice that is to be divided into two sorts, viz. large and
petit: in this spice there is no great skill to be used, considering now the
manner of his garbelling. Ginger garbelled at Antwerpe, or otherwise vngarbled
from by south: the manner of dividing is all one, for by a sieue appointed for
the purpose ginger is sifted, at the will and pleasure of him that takes the
sieue in hand, and as soon falls the good through as Note.
the bad, and thereby it lies in the power of the garbeller, to please or
displease whom he will for a reward. In this kind of spice there is no
certainty in garbling; for one while the sieue is too great, and another while
too little, but between too great and too little, it cannot be truly
garbelled: but after the manner of his garbelling, the one sort being taken
from the other, with a few stones or strawes or other filth therein contained,
it is become clean, good, and wholesome for man's body.

But the manner to handle the same, is to sifte out the dust and lay the ginger
upon a table and to pick the same by hand, viz: the large from the small, and
every raze of Ginger be it great or The true garbling of ginger, is to pick it
by hand upon a table.
small having substance in it, is to be termed large: and contrariwise, every
raze being long or broad wanting substance, is to be accounted of as petit.
This course in garbelling of ginger, by a sworn garbeller being performed, the
merchant shall benefit more then heertofore he has done, by five pound vphon
the hundredth, as has been proved. And the retailing grocer shall be no more
deceived; and the garbeller shall have his fee (no doubt) answerable to his
pains taking.

Gawles.
Gawles are a commodity for another manner of purpose then for man's sustenance,
they serve for Diers, and otherwise to be used, yet notwithstanding therc is
under a pretensed color of dividing, some care had for the garbelling of them,
but not in such manner and form as they ought to be; expedition in the
garbeller is the overthrow of the ancient deuisions, as it may appear in the
dividing of these Gauls and other spices. These are divided into two sorts,
but in such manner and order, that it rests in the disposition of the
Garbeller whom he will please or displease, no uniformity in the garbelling
of them is used at any time; but according to the smalnes of the gaul, so is
there a sieue appointed, nay rather we should have said according to the
greatness of the owner of them, so is friendship offered. But now to speak
of their true manner of garbelling, there ought to be a sieue appointed for the
purpose, and the skillful sworn garbeller ought to have the handling thereof,
to sifte and divide as the sieue will give him leave: this being done, there
rests then nothing, but to take out the stones, sticks, oak apples, and
such like, and then they are clean.

Rise.
Rise is a grain good for man's body, and is to be divided into two sorts, viz,
large and petite. This commodity has need of an honest, skillful, and a sworn
garbeller, to sift and fan, and otherwise to sort and divide the badde Rise
from the good, with such judgment and skill, that all the good and sweet Rise
may be known from the badde and mustie, and that by the mark he shall set
on, and without a just and a true mark, al men may be deceived. For the rise
many times may and are oilye, mustie, Corrupted Ryce.
and full of worms. There is no way better to reform what has been amissc in
the garbelling of this Rise, then first to appoint a sieue of a true
scantling, to the end to sort and divide as is abousaid.

Annyseedes.
Are a commodity that for the most part come filthy and full of dust and had
need of skillful garbellers, otherwise through the foulness of the work,
there passes many good seeds thorough their sieue which are many times left
among the bad to the great loss and hinderance of the grocer. To set forth the
manner of their deuisions as they ought to be, is first to sift them clean
from the stalks and other filth: that being done there rests behind the
greatest labor which must be performed by fanning. And for that the labor
thereto belonging is painful to the workmen, and nothing gainefull; therefore
they do many times neglect their duties. But to prevent this mischief, there
is no way better then to give such reasonable allowance as they may justly
live by their labor: that being done, the merchant shall have no good seeds
left in his garbell, neither the grocer bad seeds left in his good. And
for so much as Anniseedes come many times euillie colored, and mustie, therefore
the sworn Garbeller ought to make known the goodness, and cleanesse of the
seeds by his mark set thereon as aforesaid; otherwise the retaylors Grocers
may be deceived.

Wormeseedes.
Is a drugge that is much used for many purposes, this commodity had as much
need of a skillful garbeller as the Nutmegs, and in some respects more
needful, for Nutmegs are to be divided by hand upon a table, and do require
but a little labor in respect of hard working, only this, there is great
judgment and skill to be used in their deuisions: for wormeseed after that it
is sifted, is to be made clean by fanning, and that by much labor and pains
taking. Of all commodities that are to be garbelled, the workman deserves not
his money better then in this, if he garbell as he ought to do. That
garbeller that shall handle this drug ought to be skillful and just, otherwise
the merchants, Grocers, and people shall be all deceived, the Merchant in
respect of the good seeds left among the bad; and the grocer and the rest, by
the garbel which they buy among the good. But to prevent the same, it lies in
the power of a skillful garbeller to remedy at his pleasure, if he may have
tools and fee answerable to his skill and pains. And here is a thing to be
remembered, to the said workmen and others, that whereas there is always as
much and more good seeds left in the garbell of wormseeds then bad seeds More
good seeds left in the garbel, the^ bad seeds in the good.
in the good, and yet many times there are found the fourth part garbel, when
they have done with the best in such cases as this is: we wish with all our
hearts, that the merchant might have the garbell which we receive among the
good, and we the good seeds which are to be found among the garbell, the which
mischief must be avoided as is before said, and not else.

Greines, Almonds, Dates, Seenie, Comminseed, Turmerick, and such like.
They are to be garbelled in all fidelity for the avoiding of deceit. But to
set down particularly how every of these commodities in their kind ought to
be garbelled, were a thing too tedious. But for that there is no better way
then the ancient manner of Garbelling of spices, and the just packing or
putting up of the same in such manner as is aforesaid, the which may the
better be performed, if your Honor and Worships do make choice of some honest
manne, skillful in that Art and action, to reuisit and survey these works and
workmen, and to put up the same as is before remembered. Therefore we pray your
Lordship, that these causes may receive due hearing, the rather for that we
are informed that the Clerk of her Majesty's spicerie have herein found out
the faults, and do search after convenient remedies, as is fit.

Chap. 10.
1 The garbellers fee and duty is set forth.

2 His notable gain by the labor of three men.

3 His exaction is intolerable, in that he will not be contented with the
small rates in spices, where his labor is great.

FOrsomuche as it may be made known to all persons what the Garbellors
duty is, the same at large is expressed in an act of common council hereunto
added upon purpose, and the rather that it may also appear to all, the
exaction done by the garbeller in exceeding the same without warrant. And for
that he is not satisfied with the ancient rates, nor with his own exactions
therein, but still practices to have a higher rate, it being probable that he
by the easy labor of three men in the week, may by the wages he now
receives, gain cleerelie five pound and vpwardes, all his charges borne.
Therefore we have particularly set forth some part of his labors, with
diverse reasons, proving that he has small cause to find himself agreeued, or
to be tedious to the merchant about his allowances, or to sue for higher
rates, esteeming it a matter of more indifferency, that the merchants might
rebate the price of those things wherein the garbeller his labor is little, and
his gain great, and to add the same to such, as his pains are great and his
gains very small. And for proof heerof we say as his workmen in their book
to him promised to perform, the which for that purpose we have also hereunto
annexed: That in

Pepper.
By the labor of three men he will garbell in one day viii. bags of pepper
from by south, waieng about xx. C. at vi. d. the hundredth after the maiestrates
rate, arises to x. s. But his extraordinary rate is two. s. upon By exacting
upon pepper, gained his men's wages, and xii. pence more then his due.
every bag, amounts to 16, s, out of which sum he does now allow his men
for their workmanship, 7, d, ob, upon every bag, the which arises to v, s so
that his clear gain is 11, s, by the day, 11. s.

Cloves.
He will garbell by the labor of three men C, li, weight in one day, his rate
which is allowed is two, d, for the pound, the which arises to 16, s, 8, d out
of which sum he allows his workmen three farthinges for the pound, the
which arises to 6, s, and his proper gains de claro is, 10 s. 8. d

Maces.
Likewise by the labor of three men he will garbel in one day 4, C, weight his
rate allowed is 2, s, 8, d, the which arises to 10. s. 8. d By maces, his
men's wages gained extraordinary.
But his extraordinary rate is 4, s, upon every C, weight, grows to 16. s
out of the which rate he does allow his men 16, pence, upon the C, the which
is 5, s, 4, d, so his gains de claro is, 10. s. 8. d

Synamon.
Also by the labor of 3. men he will garbell in one day x, C, weight of
Synamon, the maiestraies rate is 16, d, the C, and thereby his due arises to
13. s. 4. d But by his extraordinary rate he receives 2, s, 8, d, upon every
C. weight By Synamo^ gained his men's wages, and 5. s. over.
the which arriseth to 26, s, 8, d, out of which sum, he allows his men x,
d, upon every C, weight, the which is 8, s, 4, d, and so he gains, 18. s. 4.
d

Nutmegges.
By Nutmegs gained 5. shil* more then the ancient allowance, besides the
overplus of his men's wages.
Three men will garbell in a day of this spice 6, C, weight and vpwardes, at
xii. pence the C, being the old rate arises to vi, s, for his due, 6. s. But
by his extraordinary rate he takes 2, s, 8, d, upon the C, whereby he raises
his dne to 16, shil, out of which sum his men have x, pence upon the hundredth
weight. And so his gains is clearly, 11. s.

Ginger.
By ginger gained his men's wages, and 9. pence more then his due.
Ginger also by the labor of his three men he will garbell xxx, C, weight,
receiving for it 6, pence upon the C, after the maiestrats rate amou^teth to
15. s. His extraordinary rate is 9, d, upon the C, weight arises to 22, s, 6,
d, out of which sum he allows his men for workmanship 2, d, ob. upon the C
weight, arises to 6, s, 8, d, so his gains de claro is, 15. s. 9. d

Gawles.
By the like labor of three men he will garbell in one day 40 C, weight of
Gauls at six pence the C, after the maiestrates rate, arises to, 20. s. But
by his extraordinary rate he does receive upon every C. weight, viii. d. the
which arises to 26. s. 8. d. out of which sum he allows his men for
workmanship 3. d. upon the 100. weight, grows to x. s. so his gains is de
claro, 16 s. 8. d

Rise.
In this also by the like labor for one days work will arise for 40. C. weight
at 6. d. the hundredth being the maiestrates rate, 20. s. But his extraordinary
rate, is 8. d. upon the C. out of which he allows his men three pence upon
the C. the which is x. s. And his gain is, 16. s. 8. d

Annyseedes.
In these are great labor, yet three men will garbell ten C. weight at 6. pence
the C. in one day, the which after the maiestrates rate is 5. s. His
extraordinary rate is viii. d. upon the C. of which the workmen have three
pence upon the C. the which is two s. vi d, and his gain is, 4. s. 2 d.

Woormeseed.
These are always very foul, yet by the labor of three men, 100 weight, may
be garbelled in one day: the due rate is two pence upon the pound, the which
arises to 16. s. 8. d Out of which sum he allows his men three farthings
upon the pound the which arises to six shillings three pence, and so he
gains, 10. s. 5. d Grains, Senie. Almonds. Comminseed. Dates, Turmerick. In
these commodities and such like, which are not so profitable, but more painful
to be cleansed then many of the rest, yet be they never so foul, by the labor
of three men, in one day he does gain all charges borne, above 4. s.

Chap. 11.
1 That the garbellers petition for reformation to your honor, may be conferred
heerewith.

2 The garbell need not to be taken from the possession of the Merchant, if
these ordinances be confirmed.

3 The manner how these ordinances may be briefed, and brought into the form
of law and acts of common council.

Finally, for so much as for want of better judgment, the principal garbellor,
by sundry petitions labors to your Lordeship: and we, that the garbel and
dust might be packed, conveyed and disposed, according to his constitutions:
and wholly to be drawn from the possession of the Merchant. Whereby it is to
be inferred, that he accuses and condemns the merchant and others, to have
dubbed and falsified the labor of his workmen, by mixing the same with the
thing garbelled. And for his countenance therein, produces the words of the
Acts of Common council before recited, the which we take to be frivolous and
not indifferent, yet very sufficient to make the said garbeller maisterfull,
and a ready mean to hide and color his own follies, making the same his
proposition and subject to talk of. Therefore, and for the preventing of that
poor help, we have the rather advanced these old ordinances as aforesaid to be
indifferent, and to quallifie that point of the said Act, in yielding up the
said garbell and dust to the chamberlain, or to any other. For if by your
wisdoms it shall be enacted, that this manner of garbelling before recited,
shall be observed: and that such marks be set and made upon every sorts, as is
herein set forth; Then no abuse can or may arise but it may be known, by
whom the same comes, whereby remedy may be had accordingly, neither can any
garbell or dust, be employed or used as the garbeller surmiseth against the
Merchant and others. And therefore not necessary for him to part therewith to
the garbeller or to any other: but more requisite to be from them detained.

And now for an end herein, these short ways and manner of garbling, which
we have remembered and set forth being observed, will bring us all to an
agreement, the which being denied or misregarded, these our petitions and
reasons being once made known, the curses of those that shall suffer
detriment in these affairs, we know cannot light upon us, but upon the Authors
of such offenses. And forsomuche Every member does carry help to maintain the
body according to his proportion.
as the body is preserved, by reason of that proportion, which every member
bears toward it: so it is to be conceived, that in this mystery of the
Grocerie, being compounded of the merchant, warehouse men, and the retaylors,
each member should carry the same and like reason of proportion, for the
sustentation thereof, the which cannot be had without the unity aforesaid. The
which thing undoubtedly will come to pass, if these ordinances may be by
your wisdoms with the grave advise of the counselors and cominaltie of this
famous City, ratified and reduced into form of law. Whereby every party to
this exercise, may be constrained to walk in his vocation. Wherein Al ought
to live for the service of their prince and country.
we do assure ourselves, that you do care, to direct your will and works to the
service of god, the Queens majesty and this our country, for whose service we
all do live.

FINIS.
Here ensues the petition and orders, required of the workmen in garbelling
of the principal garbeller, for the dissoluing of such complaints as were
moved against them (as they pretend) the which for that the same do contain
many things worthy to be regarded: therefore we have added the same to this
discourse, as very pertinent thereto.
IT may please your worship to be informed, that for so much as it has pleased
you to advise us the company of workmen to your office of garbelling, to
assemble together, and to set down such matter, as might show the ways and
means how to remove the controversies, which are oftentimes stirred against
us, and moved amongst our selves, and how your Worship may reap more gain
by our common accord, then heretofore you have done. Therefore we have
briefly set down in articles, the matters of our requests, wherein if it
shall please you, to answer us in that mutual care and consideration, by
uniting and preferring us, whereby our common gains may be multiplied: then
we shall not only think our selves men altogether of miserable fortune, to
have led our lives in that exercise and office, whereby such dissension and
preposterous orders are maintained, the which may be eased and redressed,
without hindrance or prejudice unto your office, but also we shall be enforced
to seek our remedy, and complain to the City, or to her Majesty and
Council, for that we shall hold the denial heerof, and your meaning thereby
to be suspected, and purposed to hold us in debate and controversy one with
another. The which may and will be avoided, in form following;

Inprimis, Omitting to move your worship, for the obtaining of any privileges
for your workmen or office (albeit the like is used, toward the workmen of
the mint by reason of that office) and laieng aside such benefit as does
appertain to your office, by not garbelling diverse things, which by virtue of
your grant, are to be by us garbled. And for avoiding of innovation or
alteration of any matter to your office appertaining, we only beseech your
worcester. to grant unto us this rate and price, the which we have set down in
certain, upon such things as are usually garbled by us, the allowing whereof,
will not draw you into so great charge, we working according to the same rate,
as our working now does at xii. pence the day, as is hereafter proved.

Pepper the bag, 8 d. or else by the hundred weight, 4 d Cloves the C, 6 s. 8 d
Maces the C, 18 d. Wormseede the hundred, 6 s. 8 d Nutmegs divided into case,
bail, and romps, the hundred, 2 s. Synamon the C. 12, d Grains the C, 4, d
Rise the C, 3, d Anniseedes the C, 6, d Comminseed the C, 6, d Turmerick the C,
3, d Gawles the C, 3, d Senie the C, 2. s, 6, d Nutmegs the hundred, the rompes
being only taken out, 12, d Cassia fistula the C, 12, d Colianders the C, 3,
d Gum arabeck the C, 3, d Bayberies the C, 2, d Dates the C, 4, d Orchall the
C, 6, d Mastick the C, 4, d Frankensence the C. 6, d Orris the C, 3, d Staves
acre the C, 3, d Gallingall the C, 6, d Setwall the C, 6, d Long pepper the C,
6, d Spignard the C, 12, d Ginger the C, 4, d
But for such sorts of wares as are perished, wet rotten or worm eaten,
wherein much labor is to be bestowed, we except the rate set down.

The proof of the gain hereby.
The gains which shall or may redounde to you, by the labor of all your
woorkemen now employed, and by their laborers associat, by allowing of the
said rates required, arises unto in the year, above one hundredth pounds,
more then you do now receive by their work (allowing but xii. pence to each
workman and viii. pence to every labourer per diem) if they do work all the
year; or ratablie for the time of their work, as by this example it may
appear.

Three workmen and their labourer, being allowed the wages of iii. s. 8, d.
do garbell six bags of pepper, for the which your duty is xii, s. and your
clear gains 8, s, 4, d, by the day, the which in the week, your charges
defaulked is, 2. li. x. s But these four being allowed 8, pence upon the
bag, will garbell eight bags by the day, for the which they shall receive v.
s. 4 pence, and your due thereby is clear gains 10. s. 8 d, the which in the
week your charges defaulcked is, three pound 4. s. and so your gain is more in
the week, by 14. s. then it was before 3. li. 4. s

Thus it appears that your workmen shall multiply your gain, and better
their wages, viz: to every workman six pence, and to the labourer two pence by
the day, more than they before received, so that the labourer shall have x, d,
and the workmen 18, d, a piece, by the day.

Also that it may appear to you, that the gain growing heerby arises not to
so much by your allowing of this rate, for in this allowance of 8 pence upon
the bag of pepper, arises but to 4 pence more, then was paid for working of
the same at xii, d, the day, as that it must be performed by our diligence and
sore labor, wherein it may be you will demand of us, why we should not
accomplish that labor for you, upon that wages of twelve pence the day, as we
would and offer to do, if the rate of viii. pence upon the bag were allowed
unto us.

Thereunto our answer is, that the first and chiefest fault is in your self,
for that when some store of work is in hand, you do appoint us (your workmen)
in such companies, that being some of us placed where a months work is;
will lengthen and make the same six weeks, by reason, that they know that the
works of the rest of the companies by you appointed, will so soon be done,
that they shall have no business therein, and hereby some do work, and some
do play, and diverse other further mischiefs do arise, the which matter must be
redressed in form hereafter expressed, with your favorable assent or
otherwise by some further authority.

The second fault is, that some of these companies so by you appointed, by
imbecilitie can do no better, and oftentimes you do join with us new
comers, whose works are cast upon the others necks, and the last and
cheifest cause is for that men of judgment and skill, can not have such tools,
as they in truth ought to have for expedition, the which they will provide, if
accord be made as is decent.

And for so much as these mischeefes and faults have produced other
inconveniences, as well to you as to us, viz: for that your self is thereby
grown into disfavor with diverse marchantes and grocers, and for your ease or
fantasy, you give out hard words against us, whom nevertheless you do
imploye; Whereby also often times we are grudged at and disdained, the which
we as no^ looking to the ground of these imperfections, whereby to seek for
better remedy, thinking our selves abused, return the same again.

For the bettering and avoiding of which inconveniences, we have agreed
amongst our selves, (if you shall please to yield to the said rate required)
how to live by our work, in love and concord together, and by what
companies, and in what sort. Whereby not only these discordes may be
dissolved, but your gain shall be performed to the vttermoste, and your
self quieted; to our good report, and your own profit, and for the
commodity of all those whose business we shall take in hand.

Our agreement being nine workmen with eight Laborers now employed, whose
number are not to be increased, will handle all the business as is declared in
this manner following.
The nine Workmen.

Horton. Hambleton. Huxsley.

Nutting. Neale. Wright.

Boomer. Freeman. Denshire

The eight Laborers.

Archer. Warner. Phillips. Air.

Harrison. Chadwicke. Smith. Morris.

If the work shall lie in one place, then thus.

Horton. Huxsley. Ha^bleto^. Freema^. De^shire. Boomer. Neale. wright. Nutting
Archer.




If the work fall out in two places, then these shall work.

Horton. Huxsley. Nutting wright. Boomer

Neale. Ha^bleto^ De^shire. Freema^. Archer.

If in three places, then thus.

Huxsley. Horton. Nutting. Harrison.

Hambleton. Wright. Boomer. Archer.

Neale. Denshire. Freeman. Air.

If the work shall lie in four places, then thus.

Horton. Huxsley. Nutting. Harrison.

Wright. Hambleton. Boomer. Air.

Neale. Warner. Smith. Air.

Freeman. Denshire. Chadwicke. Phillips.



Our agreement further is, that the rate we require being allowed, the
overplus of the money levied by the said rate, more then twelve pence the day,
by any companies that labor, shall be equallye divided amongst them that
labor not.

Our agreement further is, that if the workmen in one place may be dispatched
by three or four, or fewer, that then those that shall work, to be elected by
consent of all the rest, who shall give an account to the rest, of their work,
and value thereof.

Also we agree that one man shall be named and appointed by us of our said
company, not only to travel and to see how and where our work shall fall
out, but also we agree that every of the said companies which shall be
dispersed, shall be placed and appointed to their work, by the said person so to
be nominated amongst us, who shall ouersee our works in all places.

Item, we agree that a book shall be made and kept by him, in the which the
sum and particulers of our work shall be set down, as well for the
preservation of your duty, as for many necessary causes to our selves
apperteyning about our own gain.

Item, we agree every morning in the time of work, to repair to your house,
for your direction notwithstanding, and to inform you of the premises; the
which if you can advise to better, or shall discern any fault, then to give
directions accordingly.

The which matters and agreements considered, it will plainly appear, that
the same tends not to our own gain so much, as to the credit of the office,
our quiet, and your great avail. And for proof also hereof if need shall be,
we can and will produce a certificat, request, and petition of the best and
expertest merchants, and Grocers in London, testifieng and desiring that the
same may so proceed, for diverse resons by them used, not to be rejected, they
finding themselves agreeued, and do surmise;

1 First, that by reason of our small wages many of us do better the same, by
imbezelling of their commodities.

2 Item, That we do prolong our work, upon purpose to be always occupied,
and thereby do trouble their houses longer then reason, to grieve them and to
annoy their affairs.

3 Item, That there is no ouerseer in that work, so that the Grocers affirm,
that many things are badlie handled, and the marchantes do impute it to us,
but the Grocers do allege that we are bribed, to amend our small wages.

Therefore, and to avoid all surmises by merchants and Grocers, we have
further thought it good, to accept it by an oath from the Lord mayor, if these
our requests be allowed and confirmed by authority. And the rather, not only
to show our true and plain meaning in your affairs, but cheeflie to draw from
you all suspicion, and objections, which you for want thereof may in any wise
conceive against these our said requests howsoever. And upon the said oath
taken, we require to have in our several bonds, to you made, for our true and
good dealing, it being sufficient to pass our oaths in this behalf, without
any bond or other writing.

The Oath we mean to take.
YOu shall swear that you shall well and honestly behave your self in the
office and action of Garbelling, within the City of London, without stealing,
imbeazelling, or vnlawfullle, or vnhonestlie conueieng away any part of such
spices as are left to your charges, in any Merchants house, or elsewhere.

You shall as much as in you shall lie, garbell and cleanse all manner of spices,
drugs, and merchandise justly, truly, and indifferently, according to your
skill and judgment, without respect of any person or persons whosoever.

And in these and in all other things, that to the office of garbelling
apperteineth, during the time of your work, you shall well and truly behave
your self, so God shall help you.

Furthermore our conclusion and request is, that you may be pleased to yield to
our said desires: and that if hereunto you can object any thing to the
contrary, it may also please you, to set down in writing, and that with
speed, your said objections, to the end that we may answer the same: otherwise
we trust you will pardon us, if we do sue for the censure of the Lord Mayor
to be given in our said requests, it being more convenient to allow of the
said rates, then either to retain six men to work, and three Laborers at a
certain fee by the year, and to bind them to execute all the said work, or
otherwise to allow xviii. pence by the day, for every days work to the
workmen, the rather, for that the rest will not be dismissed, it being their
exercise, nor they will not willinglye subject themselves to be appointed to
any places of work, otherwise then by their own accord and assent, as before
is described, and as they have agreed upon, to the which agreemente, they do
subscibe their names, and do require to have it ratified and confirmed by your
worship, to whom the office apperteineth as we think. In witness whereof,
we have caused this to be made, and by us under written the xiiii. day of
October, in Anno. 1590.

Subscribed. Thomas Horton, gro. John Freeman, grocer. John Neale. William
Hambleto^, gr. Thomas wright. Richard Huxsley. John Nutting. John Boomer.
Robert Warner, grocer. John Harrison, grocer. John Devonshire, Grocer.


Here insueth the Acts of Common Council before remembered, made in Anno
xviii. of King Henry the eight: and in Anno the second of King Edward the
sixth, concerning the Garbelling of spices, drugges, and Merchandise, in London.
Commune Consilium tent* apud Guildhall Ciuitatis London, vicessimo septimo,
die Februarii, An. Regni Regis Henrici Octaui, xviii. in presentia.
Adermen.
Thome Seymer, Mil* Maioris. Iohannis Baker, Recordatoris. Gulihelm. Butler.
Millit. Thome Exmew. Millit. Iohannis mundi. Millit. Thome Bauldry. Millit.
Iohannis Allin. Millit. Iacobi Spencer. Michaelis English. Iohannis Rudstone.
Radulphi Doder. Iohannis Hardy. Christopheri Ascue. Stephani Peacock, and
Nicholai Lambert, Vicecomites ciuit. eiusd. etc.


AT this Common council the Garbeller of spices exhibited a bill, concerning
the garbelling of certain spices, and other things which then and there was
openly red and well understood, and thereupon agreed and granted, that it
should be entered of record as it is, and so to be continued, adding
thereunto this cause of prouiso.

Provided always that all such bags of pepper being of the weight of two C.
or above, that ought to be garbelled, and being marked with the mark of the
hand of Antwerpe, upon the opening thereof, by the garbeller or his deputy, be
found well and truly garbelled, and no refuse or garbel in effect therein
found, above the weight of one pound and a half; that then and so often the
said garbeller or his deputy, shall nothing ask or require, by reason of his
said office, of the owner of any of the said bags, for opening of the same. And
if any thing be misordered by the said Garbeller or his deputy, by reason of
any partiality, or othetwise in executing The garbeller or his deputy to be
punished for not performing their duty.
of the said office: that then the reformation thereof, and also the penalties
to be laid upon the garbeller or his deputy, to be done from time to time, by
the good discretions of the mayor and Aldermen for the time being, etc.

To the right Honorable Lord, the lord Mayor of this City of London, and the
Worshipful Aldermen, his brethren, and to the descreet commons, of this
present Common counsel assembled.
IN full humble wise shows unto your good Lordship and masterships, your
Suppliant and Citizen Robert Cooper garbeller. That whereas by Act of Common
council, holden the xvii. day of September, in the 4. year of the reign of
our most dread Sovereign Lord that now is, K. Henry the eight, it was
enacted, That all manner of spices, drugges, and other merchandise, after that
time to be brought and conveyed from the parts of Flaunders, into this realm
of England, marked with the mark of Antwerp, or Brudges, called the right
hand, should not by the Garbeller be garbelled here; for so much as it was then
supposed, that all manner of spices, drugs, and other merchandise, that did
bring the said mark very truly garbelled and cleansed: by color whereof,
diverse and sundry merchants, sithence that time hitherto, have used to bring
and convey, and yet daiely do, from the said parts into this Realm and City
of London, great substance of spices, drugges, and other merchandise, bearing
the said mark of the hand, and the same here put to sale, with spices, drugs,
and merchandise, notwithstanding the said marking, being here found full of
dust, fusses, filthes, and other garbell not only to the great deceit and
loss of the Kings liege people, of all degrees, eating and using the same in
meats and drinks, and otherwise, and besides that many great complaints,
rumors, and exclamations, have thereupon ensued, by a great number of persons
which have found themselves agreeued in that behalf. Wherefore it has
pleased my L. Mayor and my masters his Brethren, knowing the kings most high
pleasure in that behalf, at a court of Aldermen, to admit and authorize your
said suppliant unto the said office of garbelling, giving him in commandment,
to garbel and cleanse al manner of spices, drugs, and merchandise, which ought to
be garbelled, as well those that be marked with the said mark of the right
hand, as all other unmarked or otherwise marked, according to which authority
and commandment, your said supp. and officer has taken upon him to garbell and
has garbelled amongst other, all such diverse and sundry spices, drugs, and
other merchandise marked with the said mark of the right hand, and found in
them great quantities of dust, filth, and garbell, which he has here in
Guildhal ready to be showed. Pleseth it therefore your good Land masterships, the
said deceipts and other the premises tenderlye considered, to inact, ordeine,
and stablish, now at this Common council, and by the authority of the same,
that your said suppliant and Garbeller, and all other succeeding in that room,
within this City, may and shall have all power and authority from henceforth
duly, truly, and indifferently, from time to time, to garbell and cleanse
all manner of spices, drugs, and other merchandise, the particular names
whereof hereafter ensue, as well such, and as many of them as be marked with
the mark of the said hand, as all other being otherwise marked or unmarked.
That is to say.

Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, Maces, Nutmegges, Woormseed, Galingall, Goome,
Setwall, Cynamon, Long pepper, Spignard, Grains, Cominseeds, Anniseeds,
Frankincense, Senie, Cassiae Fistula, Almonds, Morriswax, Gawles,
Coliandersced, Bayberries, Dates, Rise, Masticke, Turmerick, Orris, Stauesacre,
Orchall, and Littmus.

And moreover to enact and stablishe that no merchant or merchants, Freeman, or
foriner, inhabiting within this City or suburbs of the same, nee any
merchant stranger, from henceforth, take upon him or them, nor any other for
them, or in their names, or in the name of any of them, to utter or sell,
ingrose or retayle, within this City of London, any manner spices, drugs, or
other merchandise aforenamed, before that it be garbelled, tried, and made
clean, by the said garbeller or his deputy or deputies, for the time being,
and sealed with the seal of the said office, as of old time accustomed,
whereby it shall or may evidently appeer to the buiers thereof, good, clean,
perfect, and wholesome, as well for man's body, as otherwise to be used, upon
forfeiture of losing of all such spices, drugs, and other merchandise, so sold
vngarbelled, and vnclensed, or to the value thereof, to the use of the
Comminaltie of the City, and for every hundred weight or bags of Spices,
drugs, or other merchandise, bought and sold, contrary to this ordinance, the
seller and buier thereof, shall forfeit and pay at every time that they so
offend forty shillings equally between them to be borne and paid, and the
same money to be divided into three parts, (that is to say) the one part
thereof to the use of the Mayor and comminaltie of this City. The second part
to the wardens and fellowship of Grocers, and the third part to the taker,
that first shall take, and seize any such spices, drugs, or other merchandise
bought, or sold, contrary to this ordinance. And moreover be it enacted and
established by the authority of this Common council, that it shall be lawful
for every person or persons, upon due proof thereof made, if any forfeit or
forfeitures, as does appear above rehearsed, for to be recovered against
every manner of person or persons so offending by action of debt, and that it
shall not be lawful for the party defendant, in no wise to wage the law,
whereby the party plaintiff, shall or may loase his suit, nor yet no protection
allowed in that behalf.

Provided always in that behalf, and be it further enacted, that the
Garbeller his deputy and deputies for the time being, shall take, bear, and
carry away, and toward him or them to retain all manner of garbell and
garbels, as dust, fusses, and other filth, that he or they at any time
hereafter shall happen to garbell, try and cleanse, out of all and every
manner drugs and other merchandise, to the intent and purpose, that no person
shall eftsoons put, mix, or intermeddle the said garbell into or with any
manner of spices, drugs, or other merchandise, in avoiding and eschewing the
great slander and rebukes, that by occasion of such intermedling might grow
and redound unto your said officer, his deputy or deputies, being thereof
giltlesse and innocent. And that the owner of all such dust, fusses, and other
filthe, shall find and provide a bag or bags, to bestow and put in the
same garbelles and other filthe, and thereof shall take the just and true
weight, the said Garbeller his deputy or deputies, shall mark upon the said
bag or bags, and thereon the owner shall set on his seal, and the said
bag or bags so waied, marked, and sealed, the said Garbeller his deputy or
deputies, for the time being, shall immediately at the costs of the said
owner, carry and convey to the Guildhall in London, there to remain in sure
keeping, under the keys of the said Garbeller and of the controller of the
chamber of London, unto such time as the owner of every such garbell and
garbels, shall make and deliver unto one of the said two officers, or to their
deputies a bill obligatorie, wherein they shall stand bound unto the
chamberlain of London for the time being, in such sum of money as by one of
the said two officers shall be thought good and reasonable, that the same owner
shall convey, or cause to be conveyed the said garbell and garbelles unto the
parts of beyond the seas, by a certain day to be limited, by the said two
officers or one of them, and that the owner thereof shall pay for housroome and
keeping of every such bag, one half penny every week, as long and by all
the time thar he shall suffer any such bag to lie and remain.

Provided also that if the owner or owners of any such bag or bags of
garbell, suffer the same to be and continue in the said Guildhall, over and
above the space of nine months, that then the said bag or bags with the
garbell to be and remain there still as goods forfeited and confiscate to the
use of the comminaltie of the City of London, And that the Mayor of the same
city for the time being within a month then next ensuing shall appoint and
provide for the sure conueieng thereof unto the parts of beyond the seas, there
to be sold to the most advantage and the money coming of the sale to be
delivered to the chamberlain of London for the time being, to the use of the
common weal of the said City, and all such garbell, dust, fusses, and other
filth, which is tried and cleansed as is aforesaid, and being of no value nor
substance, shall be conveyed into Cheap, or into some other convenient place,
within this City at the pleasure and commandment of the Mayor, for the time
being, and there to be openly burnt in the sight of the people, so that they
may well see and perceive the good order and justice truly executed in that
behalf.

The Rates and prises what the garbeller shall take for garbelling all manner
of Spices, and other things that ought to be garbelled, rated, and prised, the
xiii. of August, Anno 1526. by the wardens of the grocers in london, and the
sociates, as hereafter does ensue.
The rate of the Maiestrates. The exaction of the garbeller. Pepper from by
south the C. 6, d. xii. d. Pepper and Ginger with the mark of Antwerp or
Brudges, if it need to be garbled the C. 4. d 6. d Cloves not clean that need
to be picked by hand, the pound is 2. d. The rate of the Maiestrates. The
exaction of the garbeller. Mases not garbled, the C. weight, 2. ^, 8. d. 4. s.
Wormeseed the li. 2. d Nutmegs the hundred, 12. d 2. s. 8. d Gallingall the C,
x, d. Setwall the C, 12, d Synamon the C. 16, d 2. s. 8, d Long pepper the C,
16, d Spignard the C, 2, s. Grains the C, 6, d 8. d Almonds the C, 6, d 8. d
Rise the C, 4, d 8. d Anniseedes the C, 6, d 12. d Comminseed the C, 6, d 8. d
Gawles the C, 6, d 8. d Moreswax the C, 4, d Senie the C, 3. s, 4, d 4 s.
Cassia fistula the C, 2, s. Colianders seed the C, 5, d 8, d Gum arabeck the C,
4, d 8. d Bayberies the C, 2, d 4. d Dates the C, 6, d 12, d Turmerick the C,
4, d 8, d Orchall the C, 6, d Litmus the C, 3, d Mastick the C, 6, d
Frankensence the C. 12, d Orris the C, 6, d 8. d Staves acre the C, 6, d 8. d

But all manner of wares wet with water, rotten or bruised wherein there is much
labor, and long time, that then, as the merchant and the officer can agree for
the doing thereof, and if they cannot agree, that then the wardens of the
Grocers for the time being, to be indifferent judges between them.

Commune Consilium tent. apud Guildhall Ciuitatis London, desimo septimo, die
Iunii, Anno. Regni Edwardi Sexti, secundo, Coram.
Iohanne Gresham, Mil. Maioris. Adermen. Robarto Brook, Ar. Recordatoris
Randolpho Warren. Millit. Gulihelmo laxton. Martino Bows. Iohanne Tolis.
Iohanne Wilford. Andrea Iud. Georgio Barn. Gulielmo Lock. Augustino Hind.
Richardo Turk. Henriccho goodier. Iohanne lion. Iohanne ambert, Gulihelmo
garrerd. Thome White and Robarto Chartsey. Vicecomites ciuit. eiusd. etc. Ac
maiore part Comunitatis, Comu^is consilii ciuitatis predict. existente.

ALso at this court a bill was devised and drawn, by the learned council of
this City, by the commandment and assente of the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen
of the same city, for and concerning the garbelling and cleansing of all such
spices, drugs, wares and merchandise, as heretofore have used or ought to be
garbelled or cleansed, within the said city and the lyberties thereof, was
read and by the commons presently assembled, well and ripelie conceived and
understand, and because the same and the matter therein contained, unto them to
be good consonant unto reason, and profitable for the commonweal, for all our
said sovereign lord the kings subjects. It was therefore ordained, enacted,
and established, by the said lord mayor and Aldermen, and commons in the said
council assembled, and by the authority of the same. That the said bill
shall be entered and engrossed of record, for a good and profitable law, act,
and ordinance at all times hereafter, firmly and inuiolablie to be observed,
obeyed, and kept in every point, according to the tenor, true meaning, and
effect of the same; upon the several pains and penalties therein mentioned
and contained, the tenor of which bill hereafter ensues.

WHere by the Act of Common council, holden in the Chamber of the Guildhall
of the city of London, the xx. of February 1526. in the xviii. year of the
reign of our late Sovereign Lord, of most worthy memory King Henrye the
eight, before sir Thomas Seimer knight, then Lord Mayor of the said city, and
the Aldermen of the same, it was amongst other things enacted and established,
by the said L. mayor aldermen and commons, in the same common council then
assembled, and by the authority of the same, that all kinds of sorts of
spices, drugges, and merchandise specially recited and perticularlie
expressed, within the same act wheresoever they were garbled, as well those
that are marked with the right hand of Antwerp, Brudges, and Roane, as all
other marked or unmarked, and all other which of right ought and of long time
then past, according to good and ancient laws and ordinanances, in that
behalf made and provided, had been accustomed to be garbelled within the said
City, and the liberties thereof, by the common garbeller of spices, of the
same city, thereunto lawfully appointed, by the Lord Mayor of the said
City, for the time being, before that the same spices, drugges, and
merchandise, or any parcel thereof, were or should be put to sale, uttered,
or sold, and that the garbell, fusses, and dust taken, garbelled, and cleansed,
out of the said spices, drugs, wares, and merchandise, should be brought and
conveyed by the same garbeller to the Guildhall aforesaid, to be from thence
conveyed and transported within a certain time limited, by the said Act of
Common council, made the xx. day of February, in the said xviii. year of the
said late king, into the parts beyond the seas, and otherwise be disposed upon
certain pains and penalties, in the same Act mentioned and expressed, as by
the same Act it does and may more fully appeer upon record: By the which said
act of common council, or yet by any other like act concerning the garbelling
and clensing of the said spices, drugs, and merchandise, hitherto made and
provided, there is not any certain time limited or appointed, within which the
owners and possessors of such spices, drugs, and merchandise, hitherto made and
provided, there is not any certain time limited or appointed, within which
the owners and possessors of such spices, drugs, and merchandise, keeping the
same long in their custody and possession, do many times by covert, secret,
and fraudulent ways and means, utter and sell the same, before that it be
seen, searched, garbelled or cleansed, by the said common garbeller, or his
deputy or deputies, to the no little loss, damage, and perrill, of all the
buiers and occupiers thereof, for remedy and reformation whereof:

Be it ordered, established, and enacted, by this present common council, and
by the authority of the same, That the same former Act of common council,
made the said xviii. year of the reign of our late sovereign lord K. Henry
the viii* concerning the garbelling of spices, drugs, and merchandise, shall
stand, continue, and remain, in full strength, force, and effect; adding and
adjoining thereunto, that if any person or persons at any time hereafter, do
retain or keep, or cause to be kept, in his or their possession, or in the
possession of any other person or persons* any manner of bag, chest, vessel,
or remnant of any of the said spices, drugs, or merchandise, what mark or
seal soever they are, or any of them shall have or bear upon the^, and do not
cause the same to be duly garbelled or sealed, by the said common garbeller,
or his sufficient deputy or deputies, within the space of 4. months after the
bringing of the same merchandise, into the said city or the liberties thereof,
Almonds, Rise, and dates, always excepted, that then all and every such person
or persons, having or keeping in form aforesaid, any part or parcel thereof,
as it shall please the owners of the same to reserve and keep for his or their
own proper expenses, in his or their own houses, being under the weight of one
quarter of a hundred vngarbeled, and vnclensed, contrary to the tenor and
effect of this present Act and ordinance, shall forfeit and pay or cause to be
paid, for every bag, chest, vessel, remnant, and parcel, of all the said
spices, drugs, and merchandise, except before excepted, so being vngarbled,
and kept by the space of four months, xxvi. s. 8. d. in the name of a pain.

And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any chest*
vessel, bag, parcel or remnant of Almonds, Rise, and Dates, be now or
hereafter shall be in form aforesaid, kept, or reserved, by the owner or
owners, keeper or keepers of the same, not garbled and cleansed, by the said
garbeller his lawful deputy or deputies, within half a year next after the
bringing of the same Almonds, Rise, and Dates, into the said City, or
liberties thereof, That then every such person and persons* shall forfeite and
pay for every such chest, vessel, and bag, remnant, and parcel of
Almondes, Rise, and Dates so kept vngarbled, other then such as shall be kept
for his or their own necessary use and expenses, within their own household,
contrary to the tenor and effect of this present act, and ordinances, xxvi. s.
8. d. in the name of a pain.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
this present act nor any thing therein contained, do not in any wise stretch
or extend, to the hurt, damage, or grief of any person or persons, for not
garbelling or cleansing, of any of the said kind of spices, drugs, and
merchandise, which now are and do remain in the custody, and possession of
any person or persons, of the said City or the liberties of the same, within
the several times before limited and appointed, for the same, so always that
all and every such person and persons, now having as is aforesaid, any of the
said sorts of spices, drugges, and merchandise, within the said city, or the
liberties thereof, do cause the same, and every part and parcel thereof
(except as is before excepted) to be garbelled and cleansed by the said Common
garbeller or his sufficient deputy or deputies, within four months now next
ensuing, without fraud or further delaie.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any
person or persons at any time or times hereafter, do utter or sell or cause
to be sold, or put to sale, or convey out of the said city, any bag, chest,
vessel, parcel, or remnant, of the said spices, drugges, or merchandise,
being of the clear value of x. pound, and upwards, before they or any of them
shall be garbled, and sealed by the common garbeller, or by his deputy or
deputies, as is aforesaid, contrary to the tenor, true meaning, and effect of
this present act, or of the said former act, That then every such offender;
and offenders, shall forfeit for every such bag, chest, vessel, parcel, and
remnant, of the spices, drugs, and Merchandise, ten pound sterling, and not
above, and for every bag, chest, vessel, parcel, or remnant of spices,
drugges, and Merchandise, being under the vallue of ten pound, to forfaite such
pain and penalty for the same, as is contained in the said former Act,
mentioned or contained, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And further be it ordained, and enacted, by the said authority, That if any
person or persons, at any time hereafter, do mingle or mix, or intermeddle any
manner of kind, part or parcel of garbell or garbels of the spices, drugges,
or Merchandise aforesaid, to the clean spices, drugs, or merchandise, after
that the same spices, drugs, and merchandise, or any of them have been cleansed
and garbelled by the common garbeller, or by his deputy or deputies, to the
intent to deceive any of the kings liege people therewith, that then every
such offender, and offenders, shall cleerelie lose and forfeit, al such spices,
drugges, and merchandise, so mixed or mingled, and forty shillinges more, for
every such offense, to the uses and intents heervnder expressed.

Provided also and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid; That if any
manner of person or persons, at any time hereafter, do convey or bring, or
cause to be conveyed or to be brought, to the said City or the liberties
thereof, any manner of garbell or garbels, of any of the said spices, drugges,
or Merchandise, by it self, from any of the parts of beyond the seas, to the
intent to utter or fell the same within the said City or liberties thereof,
That all and every person or persons so offending, shall forfeit and lose all
the said garbell and garbels, and also ten pound sterling, for every time so
doing, and to be employed and divided as hereafter shall be declared.

Provided also and be it enacted, that all and every the forfeitures, pains
and penalties, as well of spices, drugges, and merchandise, as of the sommes of
money above mentioned and expressed within this present Act, or within the
said former Act, before, in and by this present act, or within the said former
act before remembered and confirmed, shall at all times from hense forward be
recovered by action of debt, bill, plaint, or information to be commensed,
within any of our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Courts within the said City
of London, in the name of the Chamberlain of the same City of London for the
time being, wherein none essoigne or wager of law shall be admitted, and shall
be employed, distributed and bestowed, as hereafter is and shall be appointed
and declared, That is to say, the one moitie or half deal of every fuch
pain, penalty, and forfeiture, to be to the use of the taker and presenter of
the offender and offenders, and the other moitie to be and remain to the use
of the poor, for the time being, maintained and relieved in the new Hospital
in West-smithfielde in the suburbs of the said city. And also provided, and be
it enacted, that it shall be lawful at all times hereafter, to and for the Lord
Mayor and aldermen of the of the said city for the time being, to cause by
their discretions, all such garbell of the said spices, drugs and merchandise,
as at any time herafter shall be brought unto the Guild Hall aforesaid,
according to the tenor, form, and effect of the said former act, made in the
18. year of the reign of our said late King, which may be lawfully and
conveniently conveyed and put to any good and reasonable use and occupation to
be retained, uttered, sold, and spent by it self, within the said city,
and elsewhere within the realm of England, any thing within the same former
act, or any other act or ordinance mentioned or contained to the contrary in
aniwise notvvithstanding.

And also, be it enacted and ordained by the authority aforesaid, that in
case any person or persons at any time hereafter, do, or shall refuse or deny
truly to content or pay to the said garbeller for the time being, or to his
sufficient deputy or deputies, by the laws and ordinances before remembered
shall be due and belong, as it has been accustomed for the garbelling and
sealing of any of the said spices, drugs, and merchandise: when, and as soon
as the same shall be so garbelled and sealed: that then it shall be lawful for
the said Garbeller, his deputy, or deputies, immediately to pluck of and to
take away every such seal, so by him or them before put to the same spices,
drugs, and merchandise, and that then and from thensefoorth the said spices,
drugs, and merchandise, and every parcel thereof, shall be taken, deemed, and
adjudged, as not garbelled, cleansed or sealed, but remain and stand under the
danger and penalty above in this present act mentioned and expressed, any
thing in the same act comprised to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if at any
time hereafter, any of the said spices, drugs, wares, or merchandise, which
ought to be garbelled and cleansed as is aforesaid, be found so full of stones,
so wet with water, rotten, bruised, worm eaten, or otherwise full of filthiness
and unclean, that they cannot be garbled and cleansed, as is aforesaid, in
such reasonable and convenient time and space, as other drugs, spices, and
merchandise of like kinds and sorts for the most part may be, That then it
shall be in the ellection of the said Garbeller his deputy or deputies, for
the time being, to have the fee therefore used and accustomed, or else to have
and take for every such person as shall work about every such Garbelling, for
every whole days work, after the rate of viii. d. by the day.

The oath of the common Garbeller.
YOu shall swear that you shall well and lawefullie behave you in the office
of Garbeller, within the city of London, without any favor or partiality
showing to any person, taking reasonably for your labor.

And all the powder or order within the Bales, and of merchandise by you to be
garbelled, wholelie ye shall bring or deliver to the Chamberlain of this
City, for the time being, to the intent that the said powder or order after
that, shall not be mingled in any such merchandise.

And after that you have garbled any bale or merchandise, you shall mark and
sign the same bale by you garbled, with a mark to the intent that the Common
weigher may have knowledge thereof. And in this and in all other things, that
to the office of Garbeller apperteineth, you shall well and truly behave your
self, as God you help.

FINIS.
An Appendix declaring, that for so much as the request of the authors, do lie
dispersed in this book, and least it should seem to carry abroad, an
unserviceable mention of matters therein: therefore they, for a careful refining
thereof, have collected as ready (for such Commissioners as may be appointed,
or if any such hap to be) for the due examination of the necessity of their
said petitions, the contents of the said book, and the brief of such things,
as they do sue to have reformed, and to have passed to an Act of Common
council in London, the rather, for that these presence may bear the better
credit, by a conference with such commission, whereby the same Art of
Garbelling, may be endued with the life of some law, for the benefit of the
Commonwealth.
The brief Contents of the Book.
INprimis, they show that King Henry the sixth, did give the office of
garbelling of spices, to the Lord Mayor and Comminaltie of London for ever, to
the end that the spices brought into this realm, should be made clean, and
the corrupt to be divided from the good, for the health and good of the
subjects of this Realm.

That thereupon the Marchantes owners of such spices, and the Grocers
retaylors, of the same did at a meeting for that purpose, concord and agree
upon the manner of clensing of such spices, and also of the sorts that every
kind of such spice should be divided and made into.

That by force of this agreemente, certain Acts were made by the said Lord
Mayor and Comminaltie, whereby the Merchants are enjoined not to sell any
spice, before the same be garbelled: and the Retaylors Grocers are enjoined,
not to alter nor mix the said sorts of spices, so made and garbelled, upon
pain of forfeiture of the said spices.

The ground of the Abuses.
For So Much as in the said acts, the said manner of garbling of the said
spice, so then agreed upon, nor the said sorts likewise, that the same spices
should be divided and made into, were not expressed in the said Acts, nor
sufficiently recorded in any court, Therefore the Garbeller under the Lord
Mayor, garbelleth the said spices as it pleases him: and the retaylors grocers
by force of the said acts, are enforced to put the same to sale in such
manner, as the said Garbellers do handle them, and in such sort:

That her majesty is deceived in the goodness and price of the said spice, to a
great value in the year.

The merchant and owners before their faces are defrauded and deluded, with
their own goods.

The Retaylors are discredited, and their spice in markets and faires are made
forfeit, by reason of their corruption, and are in the said book at large
expressed.

The price is nothing abated.

And all the people are deceived.

The conclusion of the book, and the matters therein required, to be enacted
and to be for ever observed, if it shall be so thought requisite by the
Committees appointed.
THat the ancient manner of garbelling of spices before agreed upon, may be
observed, and all others to be rejected.

That the said ancient deuisions of such spices, may be also kept, and the
same so divided, to be severally put up.

That none do work but men of skill, in that office, as is in the ninth
Chapter of the said book set forth, and the same persons to be nominated and
elected, by the company of Grocers, out of the decayed brethren of that
company, as often as such place shall fall void, with one of that company, to
survey the orderly putting up, of the said deuisions with their marks.

That the rates for the common garbeller be reexamined, and made equal to his
pain.

That the orders devised and set forth, by the workmen in that office, and in
the book expressed, may be examined, and so much thereof allowed them, as
tends for the better preservation of the said goods, and their concord in
working in merchants houses.


