THE Joy of JERUSALEM: AND Woe of the Worldlings. A Sermon preached at Paul's
Cross the 18. of JUNE. 1609.

By WILLIAM LO Bachelor of Divinity.

LONDON Printed by T. Haueland for C. Knight and I. Harrison, and are to be
sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1609.

A SERMON Preached at PAVLS Cross the eighteenth of June. 1609.
JOHN 17. 9. I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou
have given me; for they are thine.
WHat the Almighty God purposed in David the fathers heart, he performed in
Solomon the sons hand. David voweth, his head shall take no rest, nor his
Psalm. 132.
temples any repose, until he had found out an habitation for the God of
Jacob. This project was perfected by Solomon, who built the Temple; and having
built it, consecrates and dedicates it with 1. Reg. 8.
prayer and praise unto Iohouah. God the Father, in the secret counsel of his
heavenly Consistory, chooses a mystical Temple unto himself, the erecting
whereof was manifested in his son Christ Jesus. David vow and purpose, a
figure of God the Fathers election and preordinate counsel: Salomons
performance, and erection of the Temple, a type of Christ Jesus declaration,
full accomplishment of the promises, and perfect demonstration of the
predestinate will of his heavenly Fathers secret purpose. So that, what was
Propositum in God the Father, is Depositum in Jesus Christ the son, 2. Tim* 4. 8
and Repositum in expectation of the faithful, quibus imponetur, in that
glorious day of his gracious doom. Behold now then, O ye Christian people
(blessed and beloved in Jesus Christ; for I cannot give you a more honorable
title, be you honorable or otherwise, if I should give you ten thousand)
behold (I say) your real and royal Solomon, dedicating this mystical and
spiritual temple with prayer and praise unto his righteous father, as in this
whole Chapter it appears, wherein he prays, first, for himself; secondly,
for his Disciples; thirdly, for all the elect. And not only prays, but also
as a judicious Solomon, utters that absolute and most wise designation and
distinction, by way of prophecy, of these different generations (the blessed
and cursed) which the womb of this wretched world brings forth; and being in
the world, are not only diverse, but contrary in their actions, and affections.

He prays, and prays not. 1. The division.
I pray for them. 2. I pray not for the world. In his praying four things
remarkable. 1. The person, I. 2. The pious and powerful practice, I pray. 3.
The parties designed, ( for them.) 2. distingushed, ( but for them.) 4. The
reasons why he prays being two. 1. Donatiue, (which thou have given me.) 2.
Possessiue, (for they are thine.) In the person, 2. things obseruable. 1. His
name. 2* his Nature. In the pious practice, two things also. 1. The power of
prayer in others. 2. The peculiar property thereof in him, in whom all other
had their power. In the parties. 1. We will consider their designement by the
titles of favor and honor set down in holy scripture. For them: that is, who
are my Sons and my Saints: my Princes and my priests: my beloved and my
Baptized mine illuminates, and mine Associates. Psalm. 87. 3.
For these glorious things are spoken, as of the city: so of the Citizens of
God. Secondly in the parties distinguishment, or separation, ( but for them:)
discerned and notified from the world by three inseparable notes, and
remarkable tokens of distinction. 1. A Catholic faith toward God. 2. Newnes
of life in themselves. 3. Evangelical charity toward others. In the reasons.
1. Consider the donation, how we are given unto Christ by God the father (
which thou have given me:) that is, to be my servants In four severed and
singular suits and services. 1. In religious devotion toward God. 2. In zealous
affection toward our brethren. 3. In humility. 4. In bearing the Cross. 2.
Consider the possession, how we are the fathers ( for they are thin) even thy
Saints, whether we look backwards, or forwards. Backwards, thine they are. 1
By Election. 2. By Creation. Forwards, they are thine. 1 By Sanctification. 2.
By Glorification.

In the second general part, I pray not; Three things memorable. 1. The person
I. 2. The exception, I pray not. 3* The designation, for the world. In the
person, his offices are to be considered; as he is a king, Priest, and
Prophet: and how in every of these, it is consonant to his person and office
that he does not pray: wherein the objections shall be answered, and the text
cleared. 2. In the acception, we will attend the revealed reasons why he
prays not for the world. And lastly in the Designation, let us mark. 1. who
are desined by the world. 2. Why they are so described; and in conclusion take
a survey of this present age, and world wherein we live: which I fear, upon
the view, will appear unto us to be that world, and those worldlings that
Christ prayed not for.

But let us return to the first general head, his praying: whereunto I
earnestly desire you to attend as to one of the Songs of Sion, and the Joy of
Jerusalem: and therein I shall pray you to watch and wait the first hour, to
the joy of your hearts, who truly seek, and serve the Lord. As for the second
hour, the woe of the worldlings ( his not praying) shall be denounced, that
all flesh may tremble, and all people perceive the glorious salvation of our
God, and be resolved why the world is so wicked, namely because Christ prays
not for it.

First of the person. Many have prayed and not obtained: but now I pray says
Christ, whose name is Salvation, and whose power is safety, my name is
Salvation, an Angel Mat. 1. 21.
spoke it. Thou shall call his name Jesus; the reason being added, for he shall
save his people from their sins. From which Angelical assertion, the Disciples
conclude an Apostolical: and peremptory corallarie: There is salvation in no
other (neither Pope nor Priest, Principality, nor power) for among men there
is no other Act. 4. 12.
name given under heaven whereby we must be saved. My power also is safety,
for who so delights in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow
of the Almighty. Psalm. 91. 1.
Neither is this Salvation temporary, as that of Sampson or Samgar, Gideon or
Iepthah, but I am a Savior once for ever, I alone for every one, both
effectually, and eternally.

The use of this is; that we must invoke this name only, and reverence this
power: this name being our city of refuge. The name Pro. 18. 10.
of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous run unto it, and are secured.
This power being our flag of defiance against the Lords, and our enemies;
Faithful David being a fruitful president in this resolute direction. All
nations compassed me about, but in the name of the Lord Ps. 118. 10 11. 12*
I shall destroy them. They compassed me again, and again: but in the name
of the Lord I shall destroy them: yea, when they came and swarmed about me like
Bees, they are quenched as a fire of Thorns that choaketh them; for in the
name of the Lord I shall destroy them. I pray, that have both a Divine, and
humane nature. A divine nature, to help, and a humane to commiserate and
condole therein, having a simpathy of our misery, and moan I came out of the
land of the living; to bring you happiness that sit in the shadow of death. I
bring you rich promises, and precious of the glory and grace of God the
father, whereby you are also made partakers 2. Pet. 1. 4
of that heavenly nature, not in substance, as Seruetus grossly imagined, but
in quality, whether therefore you respect my name, or my nature, says Christ,
I am both willing, and able to succor, and save them that seek me. Only
this you must duly remember, that your glorious name of Christians, avails
not, unless you be also partakers of the gracious nature: for every one that
calls on 2. Tim. 2. 19.
the name of Christ must depart from iniquity. And thus much of the person.
Now let us go on to the pious practice.

Secondly I pray. He prays as a man: he gives as a God: says Saint
Augustine upon this place. August. in Johan.
Much might here be said of prayer, and not to much: for it is the precious
Jewel, and peerless pearl of our christian profession: but I tie my self
to my parts proposed, to wit, to show the power thereof in others, and the
special property in him, by whom, and through whom, others had, and have
their power. The power of prayer in others, both in the old Testament, and in
the new, is as myraculous as marvelous. In the old, Moses and Aaron are called
upon by Pharaoh a reprobate, at that time when the plagues and punishments of
God lay upon him, and his people, that they should pray unto their God for
him, and their prayers were the means to take away, and ease those distressed
people from those vexations, and torments. No charming of his fanatical
Enchanters, no violence of his desperate soldiers, no magnifience of his vain
Pyramides, although advanced to heaven, could ought prevail, but prayer only:
yea, powerful prayer in the Faith of Gods servants, Exodus 8. 9.
stands in the gap, and turns away the plagues even from Aegipt. It rained not
in three years and a half, and the prayer of Elias opens 1. Reg. 18.
the buckets of heaven, loses the bands of Orion, and the bottles of the
clouds, as Job calls them, when no other remedy nor means could be found
under heaven. A seely and distressed, yet faithful woman, Anna the Mother of
Samuel, opens not 1 Samuel 1.
her mouth in vocal prayer, but in mental elevation unto her God, and she
obtains the desire of her heart; even a Son at the hands of God, when as
Ely the Priest imagined she had been drunk, and rebuked her, but she yet
continued in her earnest and powerful petition, and prevailed.

In the new Testament also, another reprobate Simon Magus, paraleling Pharaoh
in the old, had this knowledge of the power of prayer; That when Peter had
denounced against him the fearful threats of Gods judgments; Oh says he,
Pray you to the Lord for me, Act. 8. 24
that none of these things which you have spoken, come upon me. See, Simon
Magus went thus far in religion, that he knew there was no spedier harbinger of
trust, could be sent to stay and stop the passage of those fearful plagues,
but the Prayer of Gods servants. Peter is caught; put in prison; delivered to
four quaternions of Soldiers, by mighty and malicious Herod. He sleeps
between two soldiers, bound with chains, the keepers before the door, yea,
the very night before he should be brought forth to the people. What means
is there now for Peter to escape? Behold the power of prayer; Earnest prayer
was Act. 12.
made of the church to God for him, says the Scripture. This so prevails,
that it procures an Angel to be sent from heaven: chains cannot detain
him, nor Prison, nor Soldiers co^fine him: nor keepers restrain him: nor the
Iron gate of the city stay him, but it opens of it own accord, and Peter is
brought safe to his friends. Marvelous art thou O Lord, and glorious in thy
works, but above all in thy mercy which thou show us in the priuiledeges
Act. 4* 31.
of thy Church and chosen. The Apostles being joined together in hearty and
holy prayer, the very place where they were assembled shook, and trembled,
for the majesty of Gods presence was there. Consider then that the very earth
whereon we live and move, quakes at the powerful operation of prayer.

If then prayer be so powerful in those who had their power by Christ, who
here prays; How much more powerful and precious is his prayer? who is so
gracious with God his Father, that a voice was heard from heaven saying, This
is my well-beloved Son Matt. 3. 17
in whom I am well pleased. And again, a second time a voice from heaven
answers, I have glorified Ioh. 12. 28
it, and I will glorify it again, when as the people that stood by, thought
it had thundered. Yea, and an Angel is sent from heaven Luke 22. 43
to comfort him, when he was to enter into that great and grievous conflict of
his bloody agony: yea, right powerful must his prayer be, that was justified
even Mat. 27. 19 24
by his enemies. Pilates wife writes, Have nothing to do with that just man.
Pilate himself washes his hands from the guilt of that innocent. The
Centurion inured to carnage blud, and butchery, pronounces, Assuredly this was
54
a just man. The very variable and hundred headed giddie multitude return
knocking their breasts in remorse of conscience, for shedding that pious and
precious guiltless blood of Jesus Christ.

For our knowledge then, hence we infer, that this prayer of Christ, is the
Foundation, Firmament, and Perfection of the Church. The foundation of the
Church, if we look backwards, for it was elected in Christ before the world
was. This Chapter witnesses it, verse 5. That Christ was with the father Ioh.
17. 5
before the world was. That he came out from the father verse. 8. And that the
father loved him before the foundation of the world. verse. 24. It is the
firmament and assurance of the Church, if we respect the time present, for the
calling of God is without recalling: the Golden Chain testifies it, Whom he
has elected before all time, he calls, justifies, and sanctifies in time.
So in Romans 8
the 15. verse he prays not, that the father would take them out of the
world, but being in the world, preserve them from the evil thereof; both, a malo
culpae, from the evil of sin, a malo penae, from the evil of punishment for
sin, and also, ab illo malo, from the devil, and all his designements.

Lastly, it is the perfection of the church, if we respect the time to come;
for he is the ancient of days, not to be antiquated by length of time. He is
the perfection of our souls and bodies, in the resurrection; and in a word,
our exceeding great reward. So he prays verse. 24. That we may be where he
is, that we may behold his glory which was from everlasting.

Of this knowledge of the power of Christ's prayer, manifold is the holy, and
divine use and practice. 1. Of hope which quickneth us. For while we pray here
on earth, we know, and believe assuredly, that Christ prays for us, and
pleads our cause as an advocate in heaven.

In his humiliation he prayed for us: in his exaltation then assuredly: oh
Angelical Manna! 2. Of reverend boldness, which the spirit of God exhorts.
Seeing Heb. 4. 14. 15. 16.
then that we have a great high Priest which is entered into heaven, even
Jesus the Son of God, Let us hold fast our profession, for we have not an
high Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but
was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin. Let us therefore go
boldly unto the throane of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace
to help in time of need. 3. Of resolution: if the prayer of Elizeus was
powerful to restore 2. Reg. 4. 36. Act. 20. 12.
to life the Son of the Shunamite, and of Paul, to bring again the breath of
Eutychus; Why should not we resolve to trust in the Lord, albeit he kill us,
for he kills and makes alive again; he lays us in the dust, and raises us
up to everlasting and everliving glorious felicity. 4. Of confirmation, for
here are all the blessings of Garazim and the dew of Hermon, which falls
upon the hill of Sion, (which is Gods Church) where the Lord promises his
peace and blessing for Zach. 2. 5.
evermore: this is not murus aheneus, but murus igneus, not a wall of Brass,
but of fire; wherein is not only protection, but terror and utter
destruction. Protection to Gods Children: a terror to their enemies, even a
far off, but if they be so fool hardy, as imagining their skins to be
thunder proof, and approach to hurt his church, they and theirs shall be
utterly consumed. 5. Of precedent. we ought also to pray for our selves, and
for our brethren, for that is a countermure against all assaults of Satan, and
therefore Christ our Savior so advises us, Pray continually. Luke 18.
Lastly of direction. Christ prays to God the Father immediately, we
therefore in his name only ought to send out our prayers, not to Saint or
Angel, for that is an injury to the whole Trinity. First, to God the father,
who is the object of our prayers, so himself speaks: Call Psa. 50. 15.
upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear you. 2. To God the Son, for
he is the one, and only mediator of our prayers. There being but one God, and
one mediator between God and man, 1. Tim. 2. 5
which is the man Christ Jesus. 3. To God the holy Ghost, for he is the breath
of our prayers, We in our selves knowing not what to pray for, Romans 8. 26
nor how to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes request for us
with sighs unutterable.

Now let us descend from the person, which is the Son of God, unto the
parties, which are the Sons of men. First, as they are designed by titles of
favor and honor. Secondly, as they are distinguished by notes of separation
from the world. I pray for them which are my Sons by adoption, my Saints by
calling, my Princes and Priests by conversation; my beloved by decree: my
baptized by institution: my Illuminates by purpose, and mine Associates by
promise.

His Sons: so Saint John styles John. 1. 12.
them: As many as received him, to them he gave prerogative to be the Sons
of God. An heavenly privilege. The Sons of men, become the sons of God by
knowing and acknowledging Jesus Christ. The same divine, in words of admired
demonstration, points this out, saying, Behold what love the father has
given to us, that we (wretches) should be called the Sons of God. And
because the Evangelist thought it not enough, that we should be so called, he
adds further: Dearly beloved, now are we 1. Io. 3. 1. 2
the Sons of God, but yet it is not manifest what we shall be. If then we
be sons, some virtue together with the seed is transfused. Bonus sanguis non
mentitur. Honorable blood cannot counterfeit. Whereupon the spirit of God
warns us that we show our selves as Sons, not as bastards, for Heb 12. 8
whom he prays not.

2 I pray for them which are my saints by calling, whom I have purged by my
blood, and sanctified by my spirit: The blood of Jesus 1. Ioh. 1. 7
Christ purging us from al our sins. And Paul testifies that Jesus Christ
was declared mightily to be the son of God by the spirit of sanctification,
Romans 1
not only in himself, which was powered out on him without measure, but also
upon every one of his in some measure. We ought therefore to be holy, as our
heavenly father is holy, we believing also a communion of Saints, which is
seen by faith, and not by eye.

3. I pray for them which are my Princes, and my Priests by conversation. So
Peter entituleth 1. Pet. 29
them: ye are of the Royal Priesthood. Royal, therefore Princes: Priesthood,
therefore Priests. Princes in swaying their affections; Priests in sacrificing
their pleasures, and in offering their daily sacrifices to God, for themselves,
and others. In every true christian there shines a certain princely
majesty, seasoned and sorted with a Priestlie modesty, and humility.
Chrysostom says, they are known by their gate, by their look, by their
vesture, by their voice: Their going princely; being shod with the Ephesians. 6. 15.
shoes of preparation of the Gospel; Psalm. 131. 1
Their looks Princely; being lifted up unto the hills, from whence comes
their help: Their vesture Priestlike, al glorious Psa. 45. 13.
within: Their voice Priestlike, soft and mild, as Jacobs voice: and these are
those for whom Christ here prays.

4. I pray also for them, which are my beloved by decree: Beloved before they
were: Jacob have I loved. Beloved when they were children: Hos. 11. 1
when Israel was a child, I loved him. Beloved when they were men: Zorubbabel,
the son of Shealtiel, shall be as the signet upon Hag. vlt.
my right hand. Beloved, when they are not, Right dear in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints: yea albeit Beggars, yet beloved, for angels
attend them, in, and after death Luc. 16, 22
to carry and convey them to rest.

5 I pray for them which are my Baptized outwardly by institution. Inwardly
being washed from their blood with that clean water which Ezekiel speaks of,
washed Ez. 16. 9.
in mine own precious blood, which makes their garments white, contrary to
al other blood which staineth: for so have the Saints washed themselves: and
Apoc. 7. 14
their robes washed also in the lauoure of the new birth, whereby Tit. 3. 5.
they are regenerate to life everlasting.

6 I pray for them, which are mine Illuminats by purpose, which once were
darkness, but now are light in the Lord, for I enlighten every one that
comes into the world, but not any that loves the world. These dwell in
Goshen where is always light: and all other sit in darkness, and in the
Aegiptian shadow of death. These mine Illuminates are pure in heart, being
purified by faith: they therefore, see God in a three-folde mirror. 1. They see
him in his word in the mirror of Jesus Christ. 2. They see him in his works,
(with Mat. 5. 8
another eye then the worldling does) in the great displaied book of heaven and
earth. 3. And lastly, hereafter shall see him face to face in heaven with
Jesus Christ, and the holy Angels.

7 I pray for them which are mine Associates by promise, partaking of mine own
name, being Christians. Act, 11. 26
At Antioch they were first called Christians; now here, and in all the
Christian world. Saint Ambrose his judgment of these Associates was so dear,
that he reads that place, Gal. 5, 24. Qui sunt Christi, in the nominative
plural, not as it is vulgarly taken in the genitive singular: As if he should
observe, that so many Christians, are so many Christ's, by reason of this holy
and heavenly union and Association.

The use then ( blessed Brethren) is, that we seek, and endeavor by all might
and means to correspond these gracious, glorious, and ennobled titles.
Otherwise, what are we with these precious titles, but like the boxes and pots
of the Apothecarie, which outwardly have some goodly exotique inscription,
when within, is some unwholesome, unsavory drug: or like the Mahumetanes which
at this day call themselves Sarasins, as if they came of Sara the free woman,
when as indeed Zozom. Eccles. Hist. 6. 38.
they are Hagarines of Hagar, and Ismael (as Zozomen a thousand years ago
observed:) which appears even yet by their wicked and dissolute condition at
this day. Or like those that row in a boat, sit with their faces toward you,
but row the boat backward: so some make semblance of going on in a direct
course, and christian carriage, when their actions and proceedings are
directly contrariant.

With such I may expostulate and say, what have thou to do with the name of
Son, when like a bastard thy condition is to shame thy father, and dishonor
thy mother? Thou causest God, whom thou boastest to be thy father, to be
contemned, and the Church thy mother to be despised. What have thou to do with
the name of Saint, when as thou art a Slave to sin, and a bondslaue to
satan? what have thou to do with the title of Prince, or Priest, when as thou
can find in thine heart, nay boast of it, that thou art an age^t against
Prince, and Priest in the vilest actions. Or why boastest thou of the honor of
beloved, when as thou art hateful to God and good men? or of thy Baptism,
seeing thou art of that folish Pro. 30. 12
and fond generation, that are pure in their own conceit, and art not cleansed
and baptized from their uncleanness? Or of thine Illumination, when as thou
gropest at midday, as did the ancient heretics, the Gnostikes, who imagined
that they had an impropriatio^ of Gods spirit, that none had true knowledge but
they, and as the Anabaptists and Jesuits with the late founded order of the
confounded congregatio Oratorij, who at this day in this glorious light of the
Gospel of Christ, grope in Cymmerian darkness, and gape after unwritten
revelations. Lastly, what have you to do with the name of christian when as
ye are indeed Cretians, of whom that of Tit. 1. 2.
Epimenides is fully verified: The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts,
slow bellies.

But I am persuaded better things of you, my brethren. Attend you therefore as
Sons: and if ought afflict you, call and cry unto your heavenly father, who
does tender you as Sons, and as Saints: resolve that here we have no abiding
City, but we seek one to come: let your conversation be therefore as they
that look for so glorious an estate in heaven. And as Princes and Priests,
Psalm. 119. 164. Dan. 6. 10.
with David seven times a day: and with David three times a day Pray, and
praise the Lord. You that are the beloved of the lord: let neither life nor
death separate you from that unspeakable love: nor the power of darkness,
nor the gates of hell, for none of all these prevail against the beloved of
the Lord. And, as truly Baptized children, and washed in the righteousness of
Christ, say with the spouse in the Can. 5. 7
Canticles, I have washed my feet, how should I defile them? I will by no
means wallowe again in the mire. You are illuminated of the Lord by the
precious eye salve of his truth, being blind and darkened before through the
ignorance that was in you. Give glory therefore unto the Lord, as the blind in
the Gospel, who were restored to their sight. And lastly, as true christians
associated to Jesus Christ, be zealous in the Lords service, as were the
Christians in the primitive church, who being in persecution, and daily
subject to bloody butcherie, yet prayed and praised the Lord in the dens and
caves of the earth, as Plinius Secundus even their adversary in the time of
Traianus the emperor testifies of them. But you, blessed brethren have your
oratories open, your pulpits frequented, with free and gracious passage; let
not the feruencie of these distressed Christians rise up against you in the day
of judgment, who are thus blessed every way, and beloved every day of the
Lord of heaven and of earth, that he may pray for you, and so you may be
evermore blessed in the surpassing favor of Jesus Christ.

Remember also that as you are thus designed, by titles of favor and honor,
that you also show your selves both to your own souls, and to others, as the
people that are distinguished, and separated from the men of this world. For
our Savior here in this place, says, I pray not for the world, but for them:
which discretiue But, distinguishes, and demonstrateth that you are not of the
world, albeit you are in the world.

That you are not of the world, three infallible notes of separation must
declare. And here let no man traduce this word Separation, for I understand not
thereby any Anabaptisticall or Brownish separation, but the same that Paul
meneth, though in a diverse matter. For as he speaks of Separation, or setting
apart of Preachers, (...): To. 11. 19
so I say, here is a Separation of true Christians, (...).

The notes of this divine Separation are three. 1. A Catholic faith toward
God. 2. Integrity of life and conversation in themselves. 3. Evangelical
charity toward others.

By a Catholic Faith, I understand, not a Romish, rotten, ragged, nouel
profession: nor as these rare illuminated Jesuits understand Catholic, who
among many, and manifold other their traversing the point how to understand
Catholic at last conclude very holy (God wot) that none are Catholic
professors, and of that faith, but such as are under the Catholic Bishop, the
Pope of Rome, in the government and tie of their souls and consciences, and
under the Catholic King of Spain, in the regiment Sparing Discovery of Eng.
Jesuits.
of their bodies and goods. And this device was then hatched when they intended
to have raised that Phillip of Spain to have been the western Monarch of this
part of the world. Thus do these Jesuitical impostours abuse and abase these
sacred mysteries of Faith, and the service of God, to damnable and detestable
policy. But we (beloved of the Lord) understand a catholic faith, either as
the current of the fathers, that is, the orthodoxe Faith, or as Vincentius
Lyrinensis Vincent. Contr. Hor. Ca. 3.
thirteen hundred years ago interprets Catholic, to wit, That which has
been received and believed every where in the christian world, in all places,
at all times, and of all true confessors. Heb. 12
And without this faith, we conclude with the Apostle, That it is impossible
to please God. The resience whereof is in the heart: for with the heart we
believe to righteousness. To. 10. 10
So Philip the Evangelist teaches the Eunuch. If thou believe with Act. 8. 37.
all thine heart thou may be baptized.

The effects of this Catholic faith, are four, manifested in the word: 1. A
resolved trust in God. 2. A reverend boldness toward him. 3. An evidence of
things not seen. 4. A plenarie persuasion and full settling of the heart. The
two first are revealed in one verse: Seeing then that we have such trust, ^.
Cor. 3. 12
says Paul, we use great boldness of speech. The fourth is verified, as of
Abraham's faith, which is a perfect pattern, so of all the faithful, That he
was fully persuaded, that he Romans 4. 24
which had promised, was able to perform it, and therefore it was imputed to
him for righteousness. The third is positiuely set down of the spirit of God:
That faith is the ground of Heb. 11. 1
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not evident.

Thus may we discern a Catholic Faith by the style, and by the effects.
Furthermore, we may descrie it by looking upon those half faced christians,
which have not this true character and stamp upon them. As first, those are not
of this Catholic Faith, who observe part of the commandments, and reject the
other part, as an Hypocritical Faith does. For the hypocrites are precise in
the observance of the first table, but remiss in the cautions of the second
table. And this is Sans question, an infallible note of a precise Hypocrite, if
you mark it. Secondly, those that willingly believe part of the Articles of our
creed, and neglect the other part, are not of this Catholic faith. For whereas
the whole sum of our Faith is referred to those three heads. 1. Ad esse
Matura. 2. Ad esse Gratiae. 3. Ad esse Gloriae. The christian partee perpale,
as the heralds speak, condiscendeth to the credit that God made the world,
which is the first general head, and willingly hears of the promised glory
in the world to come but when he is brought to the humiliation, death, and
resurrection of Christ, and is bound hereby to humble, mortify, and conform
himself according to the Image of the son of God, there he fails, and
leaves off his procession, and going on in this Catholic Faith. Thirdly,
those are not of this Catholic Faith, who think they may serve Idols
outwardly: so they keep their Faith to God inwardly, like unto Peter in the
Palace of the High priest, and the ancient Heretics the Helchisitae who
imagined they might do as others do in the outward worship, so that they kept
their consciences and hearts to God: as though God were not the Creator of
their bodies, as well as of their souls; and required not the whole man to
serve him. Fourthly, they are not of this catholic faith, who serve God only
outwardly, as do all worldly christians. Fifthly, they are not of this Catholic
faith, who serve God only in their time of prosperity; for both these sorts
are condemned and rejected by our Savior in the parable of the seed. Lastly,
they are not of this Luke. 8.
Catholic Fath, who serve him in certain places, as in the court, and not in
the country, in the country, and not in the court. These are such as Christ
prays not for, but are excluded from the holy Communion of his blessed
intercession. David's spirit and faith was other wise: for he says, I will
Psalm. 119
speak of thy testmonies before kings, and will not be ashamed. What an
hideous shame was this, even in the time of Christ's Incarnation, That among the
chief Rulers many believed in him; but because of the Pharisees they did not
confess him, lest they should be cast out of the Synagogue: but the reason
ensues; Ioh. 12
They loved the praise of men, more then the praise of GOD. O foolish and
faithless people, be ye Governors, Rulers, Judges, or Inferiors, hear your
doom; with what measure ye mete withal, shall be measured to you again*
christ avouches it, whosoever, says he, shall confess me before men, Mat.
10, 32 33.
him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in
heaven. And Luk, 9, 26
again, whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the
Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his glory, and in the glory
of the father, and of the holy angels. Thus much of the first note of true
christianity; which is a Catholic faith toward God.

The second is Sincerity, and Newnes of life and conversation in our selves.
And herein appears the wonderful power and majesty of our God, in that we
have strength, through him, to sanctify in some measure our wretched and
accursed nature. For as the true Christian, for whom Christ here prays,
lives two lives, a natural life, and a supernatural, so has god given him two
forms whereby those lives are sustained. For first, as by the soul, which is
the natural form, we live a natural life, in all our powers and senses: so
of grace which is the supernatural, form proceed all the virtues, and gifts of
Gods spirit, whereby we live a supernatural life. This was Paul's life after
he was converted, when as he testified, That he lived not, but Christ lived in
him. In like manner the spouse also in the Canticles expostulateth with
temptations: I have put off my coat, how should I put it on again? that is,
she had cast away the works of darkness; how should she take them again? I
have washed Can. 5. 3.
my feet, how should I defile them? that is, I am become clean in being
purified by faith in the blood of Christ, and have done away all my former
filthes, how can I now, that rejoice that I am thus delivered, return into that
bondage and slavery again?

The use of this then is (because I hasten) that we deceive not our selves: for
what semblance soever we make outwardly of christian profession, yet if we do
not sanctify our selves in some measure, there is no truth in us; and we do
but cosen our own consciences, and become traitors to our own souls. For
this is positive; That Psalm. 19. 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
the fear of the Lord is clean. And, he that has a hope of heaven, does
purge himself. If I might crave of you (blessed people) to remember but this
parallel of scripture, it shall be sufficient for me to bless (all the days of
my life) this my poor labor and travel. And so I will descend unto my third
note of Separation, whereby those, that here Christ prays for, are
distinguished from the world: to wit, Euangelical Charity, which is indeed the
Cognizance of a true Catholic Christian.

So our Savior testifies, saying, By this shall all men know you to be my
Ioh. 13. 35
disciples, if ye love one another: which Love is not in the mouth and tongue
only, but in truth and verity.

That this is the true outward distinction 1 Ioh. 13. 3.
of a true Catholic Christian, it appears to all of us here present. For it
is common to all professors, to be received into the Church by Baptism: to
enter into the assemblies to prayer and preaching: to bold up their hands, and
cast up their eyes to heaven: to cry, Lord have mercy upon us: and in
conclusion to say, Amen. Yet many of these are counterset Christians, fained,
and false dissemblers: but Charity, and Love Evangelical notifieth unto us
the faithful professor, from the fained and false dissembler.

There are four fountains from whence Love springs: the. 1. of Nature, and
that even is also the instinct of brute beasts. The. 2. of Blood, and that is
of Natural men, as they are merely natural. The 3. of Reason; and that is
the league and amity of Philosophers, who take Reason to be their Pilot; and
Love no farther than they have Reason. The. 4. of Grace; and that is properly
of true Christians, and that I call Evangelical Charity. The properties
whereof are: 1. To sympathize with others in their distress: Bear one
another burden. 2. To pray for one another: The Christian Sacrifice. 3. To
suffer, bear and forbear, even with the conditions of them that hate us, yea,
and do good unto them, and this is indeed the exaltation of Christian charity:
which Evangelical and gracious charity is twofold, either in affectu, or in
effectu. In affection only the poor show their love, from whom the Lord
accepts the will, even as the deed: for he requires not that of them, which he
gives not unto them: but in the rich this charity must be effectual in
distributing, and despersing the blessings and benefits of the Lord to his
poor people.

Witness therefore (blessed auditorie in the Lord Jesus) this day; that it is a
slander and calumniation of the Papist, who says, that we teach you negative
doctrines only, and not affirmative. For we eft-soones proclaim unto you
from this place, and all other the like in this kingdom, that your Catholic
Faith is a dead and desperate folly if it work not by love, for love is the
evidence to your selves, and to the world of your Faith to God. But alas, with
horror and amazement be it spoken, how many are there that make profession of
this Catholic faith, and Evangelical charity, and yet are degenerated
beneath brute beasts in the course of nature and blood, as becoming a cruel
Oedipus to their father, and a cursed Nero unto their mother! Yea, even in
their reason become more unthankful then Judas, and that to those, to whom
they owe Phil. v. 19.
in all right and reason, even their own souls: yet are they inhumane as the
Dog, and cruel as the Lioness, whereas Evangelical charity, as has been
said, is extended even unto our enemies, after the example of our God, who
shines with his sun upon the good and bad, and of Christ Jesus our Captain,
and of the Protomartyr Saint Stephen, our fellow soldier, who prayed for their
tyrannous persecutors; but much more then to our brethren, to the distressed,
needy, and afflicted members of our Lord Christ. Let it be then a brand of
impiety against that soul in the day of account, who hears this, and
regards it not, seeing it is the peremptory and positive assertion of the
Son of God, That by this Euangelical charity, Ioh. 3. 35
all men shall know who are his.

And thus much for the person, prayer and parties both designed and
distinguished. Now let us proceed to the reasons, why he prays for them. 1.
Donatiue, which thou have given me.

This giving of us to God the father, is nothing else but a manifestation of
the determinate purpose of God in Jesus Christ: for as God the father has
predestined us to the end, which is his glory, everlasting life: so also has
he predestinate us to the means, to bring us thereunto, and they cannot be
eluded. The father has given us to his Son, to serve him in four especial
suites and services: 1. in devoted religion, even as the son himself does,
who says here in this chapter, verse 4. I glorify the father, so must we
that be Christ's servants; Let our light so shine before Mat 5. 16.
men, that they seeing our good works may glorify our Father which is in
heaven. 2. In the zeal of souls. For the zeal of the Lord must even Psalm.
69. 9
eat us up. Monica the mother of Augustine is a rare President herein. What
prayers, sighs, and groans did that godly mother Aug. Confess.
make for her son Augustine yet being a Maniche, that he might become an
Orthodox? Such was the zeal of that pious mother for the soul of her dear
Son. Paul also became all unto all, that he might win the more: who was
weak, and he was not weak? Thirdly in humility: Mich. 6. 8.
for the Prophet Micheas expostulating this point, wherewithal he should come
before the Lord, in the end concludes, that a man must humble himself to
walk with his God, showing that there is no other means whereby man may tread
the steps of the holy service of God, but by an humble deiectment of himself
to the majesty of God. So also our Savior himself teaches us when he says,
Learn of me, for I Mat. 11, 29
am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
Lastly, in bearing the Cross, not a wooden Cross, or a golden crucifixe, or
an Agnus Dei, or any such Romish rudiment, or guileful merchandise, but a
constant purpose of holy life, which is indeed the bearing of the Cross: for
2. Tim. 3. 12.
whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, and have
cross as much as his back will bear, which cross we must take up, not
avoid or shun, and follow Christ Jesus.

The second reason is taken from God the fathers possession of us, in these
words ( for they are thine.) We are God the fathers, whether we look
backwards or forwards; backwards both by Ioh 15.
Election, and also by Creation. By Election: for so it is said, You have Ephesians.
1. 4.
not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and that before the world was. By
Creation: so says the Psalmist, Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me, and
in such an admirable Psa. 119. 73
manner, as he has denied to all others his creatures, for he has made us
after his own Image. If we look forward, we are his by Sanctification and
Glorification. By Sanctification: for so he says to the church of Laodicea*
Behold I stand at the door and knock: If any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I Apoc. 3. 2^
will come in unto him, and banquet with him, and he with me. What is this
knocking, but his calling unto us by his word, works and benefits? what is
this door, but the closet of our hearts? what is this hearing, but our
obeying? what is this opening, but the readiness of our souls? My heart is
ready, says David. This coming into us? but his being in us by his holy
spirit, whereby he takes livery and seison of us? What this banqueting, he
with us, and we with him, but the continual feast of a good and a godly
conscience? And by Glorification we are his: for his we were, we are, and
shall be for ever and ever. All the promises in Christ 2. Cor. 1. 20
being Yea, and Amen. Attend then the sum of both the reasons. We are the
gifts of GOD to his son, therefore his freely, supremo iure in the highest
right. Paul precheth it in one verse by a most heavenly and divine speech of
degrees, where he says, All things are ours, and proves it by enumeration
of particulars in an admirable gradation: Whether it be 1 Co. 3. 21. 22. 23.
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, whether they be
things present or things to come, even all are yours, and you Christ's, and
Christ Gods. Oh holy honor! oh divine consolation! Behold, I say, and look
with your eyes of faith unto this angelical dignity, and be ravished in the
spirit with this surpassing and exceeding favor of God, in giving us
(wretches) unto his Son, as if his Son were not complete without us: as if
there were no better things to bestow in the whole frame of nature upon his
beloved, then us miserable and dust-creeping creatures. And as though he had
forgot all other creatures of heaven and of earth, and set his eye of favor
and affection upon us only: Man and Angels fall; the Angels Iud. ver. 6.
are reserved in chains of darkness, unto the great day of the Lord. But for
man he ordained a Savior, remembered whereof he was made, and according to his
tender compassion, and multitudes of his mercies saved him, and gave him to his
Son, that through him he might have favor toward man, delight in him, and
be one with him.

O ye blessed of the Lord, note then in the first reason, that God gives to
his Son no profane Atheist, cursed Achrist, or irreligious wanton, or that
person who shall say in his heart, religentem esse oportet, religiosum nefas;
as if it were a piaculum to be devoutly religious. 2. Nor any remiss and
careless companion, who has as much care of his brothers soul, as of his
own, and says in Cains cursed voice, Am I my Brothers keeper? no indeed, how
can he be his brothers keeper, when he has no regard of his own keeping? who
can suffer Christ to be crucified daily before his eyes, and not be moved
therewith? 3. Nor any imperious ruffian, for God resists the proud. 4. Nor
any such as fly the Cross, who would with Balaam die the death of the godly,
but will not live their life: would have Angels in their end convey them into
Abraham's bosom, but all their life care not for God, nor Angel, Saint nor
Devil.

And further, learn out of the second reason: 1. Of your Election: That he
has elected you in Christ, which excludes all merit. Ephesians. 1.
2. That he has chosen you in himself, therefore he found nothing in us
worthy of election or remembrance. 2. Of your Creation: that we wholly give
over our selves unto him, who has made us that we may be guided and ruled by
his holy and heavenly directions. 3. Of our Sanctification: that we quench
not the 1. The. 5. 19
spirit of Gods good motions that he kindles in us, nor despise that blessed
grace whereby we are sealed to Salvation. 4. Of our Glorification, that we set
our affections on heaven and heavenly things, and not Col. 3. 2.
on earth and earthly things, but seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God. Thus by degrees have we ascended
Jacobs ladder, and lifted up our thoughts unto the highest heavens, even to our
holy and heavenly Mediator Christ Jesus. And now I must end this Song of Sion,
the divine solace of the religious soul; and descend from heaven to earth,
even unto the second general part, the woe of the worldlings, in these words,
I pray not for the world. Wherein note three obseruances. 1. The person I. 2.
The exception, I pray not. 3. The designation, for the world. First of the
person. As in the former part we considered him in his name and nature, so now
let us look upon him in his offices, to clear the objections of Cauillers,
namely, how it is consonant to his divine offices of King, Priest and Prophet,
that he should not pray for the world.

First then of his kingly office: How sorteth it therewith, that he being a
King, should come into the world, and not pray for it? Indeed some erroneous
Jews dreamed that the kingdom of the Messiah should be a temporal estate.
And there were a rout of heretics called Herodians, flatterers in Herod's
Court, who pretended Herod to be the true and undoubted Messiah. Yea the very
Disciples of Christ also were in a quandarie of this surmise, when they asked
Christ whether now he would restore the Kingdom to Israel? Act. 1. 6
But Christ himself answers this objection very plainly, where he says,
That his Kingdom is not of this world. Therefore it is consonant, that he as a
King prays not for the world.

As touching his Priesthood, many and manifold are the objections; but they may
be reduced briefly to these four heads: The first drawn from the power of his
passion. The second from the equity of his will. The third from his own
practice. And the fourth from Apostolical exhortation. 1. From the power of
his passion is objected that of Saint John: He 1. Ioh. 2. 2.
is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins
of the whole world. Why therefore does he not pray for the world, seeing he
is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world? The same Evangelist
elsewhere answers it: He came indeed unto his Io. 1. 11. 12*
own, but his own received him not. But to as many as received him, to them
he gave this prerogative, to be the sons of God. Their destruction and
desertion therefore is of themselves, because they do not receive him. The
second objection drawn from the equity of his will, is that of S. Peter,
where 2. Pet. 3.
it is said that he would that all men 2. Pet. 3.
should be saved. How then can that be, seeing here he prays not for all
men? The answer hereunto is, that his will is twofold: to wit, voluntas Signi,
and voluntas Beneplaciti. His revealed will, and his concealed will. He
prays, says Saint Augustine: that's his Aug. in Johan.
mercy. For he has mercy on whom he will have mercy. He prays not: that's
his justice. For there are vessels Romans 9.
of wrath prepared for destruction. The third objection is taken from his own
practice, for he prayed for his enemies, father forgive the^. The answer:
Christ was then the Lamb of God, and in his deepest humiliation, wherein he
showed all tokens of meekness and mercy, but here in the distinguishment of
the sheep from the Goats, he is the Lion, of the royal blood of Judah, that
rendeth in pieces his adversaries, and divides the spoil. The fourth
objection from Apostolical exhortation, is, that of Saint Paul, who exhorts,
1. Tim. 2. 1
That prayers and supplications be made for all men. The answer: This word All
is not to be understood de singulis generum, but de generibus singulorum: as
that also in our Liturgy, That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men:
which some have made an nicetie of, is not understood collectiue, but
distributive, as Master Perkins consents.

But that of Cyrill meets al objections, and descends to the third office
of Christ, as he is a Prophet. For that ancient Father says, Christ speaks
here spiritu prophetic^; for observe the manner: In his passion he prays for
his adversaries; not mentioning his Disciples: here he prays for his
Disciples, and excludes his enemies. Neither is this dissonant from David his
tune, when he said, Let their Table be made a Psalm. 6 9.
snare, bow down their backs, and let that which was for their wealth be unto
them an occasion of falling, and the like: for this is no imprecation, but a
prophecy, that so it shall befall the accursed, the Lords enemies. Augustine is
of the same judgment. Christ might (says Augustine) have prayed in silence
unto his heavenly father, but he would not: First, because he might be an
example unto his Disciples that they might also pray. Secondly, that he might
make known unto them the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to whom they
belonged, whereof this was not the least; to wit: That the ungodly had no
portion with them of the prayer of their Lord and Savior. But let us hear
Christ himself: First excluding the reprobates in general in this verse, I
pray not for the world: and secondly in particular, excepting Judas, as you
see, verse 12. Where you may observe that he prays not for his confusedly,
but particularly: for the Lord knows who are his.

Now then ye see that as he is a king, he answers, My kingdom is not of this
world. As he is a Priest, all receive him not, albeit he profer and offer
himself unto all, and as a Prophet he foretells what shall be the portion
of the wicked to drink. But if any shall be yet curious, and object that the
person of the Son of God, suffered which is sufficient. I answer that the
Pascall Lamb profited the Israelites only, and not the Egyptians.

The use of all this is, First, that the promises of God do only concern
the faithful. And therefore let men remember that of Saint Augustine: Sperando
and desperando misere pereunt homines, by hoping wickedly, and wantonlie all
their life in the mercy of God, and desparing worse in their death, by
forsaking the living Lord, men miserably perish. The second use is, that albeit
Paul preach, yet Christ is indeed to some the righteousness of God, but to
others the Rock of offense. So that the effect is not in the Preacher, but in
the disposed auditour. Lastly, that a Prophet must as well denounce Gods
judgments, as pronounce his mercies. So did Hosheah to the Clergy, when he
cried, O ye Priests, Hos. 5. 1.
hear this: and to the Laity, Harken O ye house of Israel: and to the kings
Court, Give ear O house of the king: for judgment is toward you, because ye
have been a snare in Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor. In like manner also
do all the Prophets. Fitly therefore here does Christ Jesus, the very spirit
of Prophecy, proclaim the wicked world to be excepted in his holy and
heavenly mediation. He therefore says, I pray not.

Durus est hic sermo, quia cor nostrum durius. Did the sun stand still at the
prayer of Joshua? did it Josh. 10. 12 2. Reg. 20. 11. Mat. 26. 45.
retire ten degrees in the Dial of Ahas, at the word of Ezechias? And was it
darkened at the passion of Christ Jesus? No marvel then if now it had stood
still, and never again moved, or retired to the utmost corner of the world,
and never returned, or been utterly darkened, and never given any light
again, seeing the light of the world, and the Son of God said, I pray not
for the world. Ex. 19. 18.
Did Mount Sinay tremble at the giving of the Law, and the walls Josh. 6. 20
of Jericho fall down, when the Priests sounded their Trumpets? and did the
earth quake at the passion of Jesus Christ, as fainting under such an hideous
burden, Mat. 26. 51
that the wicked and accursed sons of men should execute the Lord of life? No
marvel then if the whole frame and fabrik of heaven and of earth had not been
dissolved into their ancient Chaos, when Christ Jesus by whom all things were
made, shall say, I pray not for the world. But the heavens and the earth are
reserved unto 2. Pet. 3. 7.
the second and glorious coming of the Lord, and are now preserved, and
sustained only for the good of the elect, for whose sake only this world
continues, that their number may be full, and accrue unto the Lord. Blessed
be the majesty of our God for evermore.

But O Lord, may we be so bold as to enquire a reason why thou that did
sacrifice thy self for the sins of the world, wilt not pray for the world?
Surely (blessed and beloved in the Lord) I will not conceal that from you
which the Lord has revealed: He prays not for the world, the first reason
may be drawn from a mandatorie prohibition. The second from the Communion of
Saints. The third from distinction of divine knowledge, and the fourth from
Christ's own foreknowledge. First therefore as Mat. 12.
there is a sin irremissible, so there are sinners not to be pardoned nor
prayed for. Concerning which sin, the prohibition is, 1. Ioh. 5. 16,
There is a sin unto death. I say not 2. Cor. 4 4
that thou should pray for it. Secondly, it is said, That the Devil is the
God of this world. What Communion then has Christ with Belial, or light with
darkness? 1. Ioh. 5. 19
Thirdly, GOD has given this knowledge unto his Children, that they know
themselves to be of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness. What then
has 1. Cor. 4. 9. 13.
Christ to do with the stool of wickedness? Fourthly, Christ foresaw that
this world should murder his Saints, and make the^ the gazing stock of the
world, and account them as the riffe raffe of the world, and tread them under
foot, as the of ^couring of all things. Secondly, Christ foresaw that the
wicked world should deal more cruelly with the coat of maintenance of the
Church, then did the Romish Soldiers with Christ's coat, who cast lots for it;
but this world diuides, and rents, and tears it into pieces, and well is he
that can get a piece, albeit it profits him not: nay, although all the rest
he has be cursed for it. That coat which the soldiers cast lots for, was
without seame, wouen from the top to the bottom. The soldiers were wise, who
saw if it were divided, it would roue, and be to no benefit; they therefore
became adventurers, who should have all. But this politic world which seeks
to devour religion, delaieth not the time in lotterie, but every one snatcheth
and catches, some by violence, as wild beasts and Boares of the forest, and
cormorants of the world: some by craft and subtlety, as Foxes nip the blossoms
of the Lords vine, until it die again. Thirdly, Christ foresaw that the
wretched world should not only vnmannerlie exclude the Lord of life out of
door, albeit he knocks and desires entrance, but also that it would deal
clownishly with him, as did the inhumane Gergesens, who willed him to depart
out of their Coasts.

The use of this exception is, that we enter into no associations and leagues
with this wicked world, for it is delivered up into three fearful traditions,
or rather desertions. First, unto the lusts of a wicked heart. Secondly, unto
vile affections. Thirdly, Romans 1.
into a reprobate sense. The Psalmograph therefore bids us have nothing to do
with the stool of wickedness, which imagines mischief as a Law. And the
Apostle proclaims the Lords will, saying, Come 2. Cor. 6. 17. 18.
out from among them, and separate your selves (says the Lord) and touch none
unclean things, and I will receive you, and I will be a father unto you, and
you shall be my Sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. But let us
consider farther: First, who are here designed by the world, and secondly why
they are so described. Concerning the first, who are signified by the world.

As the passion of Christ: so the prayer of Christ sufficient for all, but not
effectual to all: sufficient for all, it is the current of the fathers. That
one drop of the blood of the son of God, was sufficient to expiate the sins
of the whole world* but albeit, the son of God did sweat blood in an Agony,
yea, not drops, but clots of blood, and that in such quantity, that it
trickled down to the ground, to bless the earth, which was accursed: Yea, and
seas of precious blood issued in his glorious passion from his hands and feet,
yea, and from his very heart, yet there is a cursed and wretched He. 10. 29.
generation, which tread under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of
the Testament as an unholy thing, and despise the spirit of grace. Of these the
blessed Apostle tells the Church Phil. 3* 18. 19.
of Philippi weeping, That they are are the enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, whose end is fearful
damnation, which mind worldly things. Rightly therefore are they designed by
the world.

So do the ancient interpret world. For I will not detain you with the
manifold acceptions of this word world, and the promiscuous usage thereof. I
pray not for the world: That is, says Bernard, for them that wholly addict and
address themselves to the world: I pray not for the world. That is, says
Jerome, for the wicked, and evil men of the world. I pray not for the world:
That is, says Augustine, for these that follow and pursue the concupiscence of
the flesh. In all this we may infer, that the world here is directly opposed
to the disciples, and followers of Christ Jesus: and so Saint John takes the
world in his Gospel, where he says, Christ came into the world, and John. 1.
10
the world received him not. So that nothing can be more contrariant to Christ
and true Christians, then these that are here designed by the world: which
will appear unto us most evidently in the part following, wherein we may
examine the resemblance why they are signified by the world. Which is, first,
in respect of the parts. Secondly, in regard of the cause^ of the world. First,
in the parts, both Firmamentarie, and Elementary.

In the Firmamentarie parts of the world, they are fitly resembled unto the
Eclipses and Meteors. In the Elementarie parts to their corruption and
rebellion. Secondly in the causes, to two only: the Material, and the formal
cause. As for the other, as they know not, so they care not to know or consider.

But let us return to the Firmamentary part. In the Firmamentary world, there
be Eclipses of Sun and moon. For whereas the Moon receives her light from
the sun, it happens that in the full, the Moon being in the head or tail of
the Dragon under the Madix of the sun, that the Johannes de Sacro busto de
Sphaera.
earth will be enterposed between the sun and the Moon, so that the shadow
of the earth falling upon the body of the Moon, causes her not to be seen
in our sight. Such is the Eclipse of the wicked in this world. For by the Moon
is resembled the church, which is always eclipsed unto the ungodly, by the
shadow of earthly things, for they are put between their sight, and the
Church. So says Saint Paul. If our 2. Cor. 4. 4.
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds of the infidels, that the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, which is the Image of God, should not shine unto them. Note,
that the God of this world blinds them, and so they suffer a fearful
eclipse. The Sun is Idem in tract. desphaera.
eclipsed when the body of the Moon is interposed between our sight and the
body of the Sun, not that the Sun loses any light, but is thereby shadowed
from our sight. In like manner, the son of GOD is eclipsed to the wicked
worldlings by the offense that they take of the churches meandness. This is
apparent by the speech of the Pharisees, Does Ioh. 7. 48. 49.
any of the Rulers or the Pharisees believe in him? but this people which know
not the law are accursed. The offense they take at the church is the meannes
and deiection thereof, which yet is confirmed by our Savior, That the poor
receive the Gospel. Fitly also are they resembled by the Meteors: for the
Philosophers Aristot. de meteor. l. 1.
term them the passions of the Elements, so likewise are these
distemperatures of the world. In the Church they are Heretics and
Schismatikes: In the Commonwealth Traitors and Combustions: In societies and
corporations, the fire brands of hell and dissension. They are Meteors of
every element: of the fire, as tailed Meteors; for if they be great and
honorable in the world, they draw a great train with them of Seruitors and
Retainers, all which must be at their beck, and insist in the steps of their
insolency and devilish policy, many of which sort of Meteors do fall from
the firmament, and so do these, and the fall of them is great. And some of these
Meteors are not indeed of the fire, but seem to be, having in them neither
illumination nor heat, but only a false glimmering, and these the Naturalists
call ignes fatui, walking fires in the night season. So these wretched
worldlings have no goodness neither effectiue nor formaltier, neither in
themselves reallie, nor toward others indeed and verily, but only a false
and feigned gloss of goodness and hypocrisy. Like also to the Meteors of the
Air: For Bernard calls them venti furentes, raging and blustering winds,
throwing down, and violently ouerturning whatsoever occurreth them. And
Augustine calls them venti Aug. in soliloquio.
adurentes, winds scorching and drying up by their unthankfulness, the
crystal stream of Gods mercy and grace, which would flow unto them. Like
also unto the watrie Meteors, even to those Nubes pendulae, which promise
rain, but give neither drop nor dew. So Saint Jude styles them, Clouds they
are without water Jude 12.
carried about of every wind. Lastly among the Meteors of the earth, to lead
are they resembled by the Prophet, for he says, Iniquity is as Zac. 5. 7. 8.
a talent of lead, which if they do not look unto, it will weigh and sway
them down to the bottomless pit of hell, and heaviness. You see now how
fitly the wicked are resembled to the eclipses, and Meteors of the
firmamentarie world. Now let us descend unto the Elementarie: and herein they
are like unto them in their corruption and rebellion. First unto the fire in
unkind blastings: so these in their wilful and wicked blasphemies. Secondly,
unto the Air, when it infecteth: so they by their evil examples and
misperswasions, corrupt and taint all those which are near unto them. Thirdly,
as the water by uncouth and vnvsual inundations does run over the land, and
destroieth both the corn and cattle: so do these cormorants and wretched
worldlings depopulate whole countries by enclosures, and by racking their
miserable tenants. Lastly, they are fitly resembled* unto the Briers and
Thorns of the earth: for the spirit of God says, as is the Lilly among the
thorns, so is my spouse among the Can. 2. 2.
daughters. As for the causes of the world, they know but two, and thereafter
they work accordingly. The 1. is, the material cause. They happily credit and
deem the world to be made of nothing: for they desire to reduce and bring it,
and themselves to nothing. And in living here without Christ, it to the^, and
they to it, are nothing, for as much as without him was made nothing. For if a
worldling be deuote, Ioh. 1. 3.
his religion is an Idol, and an 1. Cor. 8. 4.
Idol is nothing in this world: and if he be irreligious, and an Atheist,
his belly is his God, and the end thereof is faeda annihilatio, filthy
nothing. This being the difference between a superstitious Plutarch. (...).
person and an Atheist, the one (...) thinks there is no God: the other (...),
wishes there were no God to punish his Idolatry, so that the world to them,
and they to themselves are nothing: Their life only being a mere fantasy,
and their liuelihood a mere fopperie. And as the world is said to be round,
which is the formal cause, so these wretches run arou^d temporizing in the
world, doing. Omnia pro tempore, nihil pro veritate.
Al things to fit the time, nothing for the truth. Optat. li. 1 (...). Chrysostom
2. Tim. 3. 7
Always about the way, never in the way: like those silly women that Paul
speaks of, Who are ever learning, and never come to the acknowledgement of
the truth. For if you respect their practice, they are like unto the Hedgehog
which has two holes, one toward the South, the other toward the North, and
when the wind blows in the north, she shuts that, and opens the other
toward the South, and turns her self that way. If the wind blow in the
South, she opens that to the North, and that way reposeth herself.
Semblably do these, for with every wind they turn, and with every note tune
accordingly. If you respect their heart, it is like the cart wheel which
always turns round in the dirt; so their affections are turmoiled in the
vilest and basest conditions. If you mark their thoughts, they are like a
rolling axe-tree, ever devising mischief and misery even upon their beds: for
there is no piece to the wicked. In a word, if you consider their whole life, it
is like unto a Mil-horse, ever moving round, and never going forward, but at
night in the same place as in the morning: so these, as religious, as godly, as
well disposed at thirty as at twenty, at sixty, as at sixteen: at the
evening of their death, as at the morning of their birth.

And for other causes besides these two, they neither know nor desire to
learn. For as touching the efficient cause which is God, they have said with
the cursed in Job: Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
And as for the enforcing cause which moved God to make the world, Job. 21.
which was his goodness, they bid the Lord keep the heaven to himself, for they
purpose not to trouble him; as for the earth, it is their portion, and they are
content therewith. Concerning the isntrumental cause, whereby the Lord made
the world, which was the personal Word, the Son of God Christ Jesus. They
are like to the Disciples of Ephesus, Who had Act. 19. 2.
not heard whether there were an holy Ghost or no. So these have not heard
whether there be a Jesus Christ or no; or if they did hear, they regarded it
not. And lastly for the final cause, wherefore God made the world, that herein
men should serve and glorify him, they are either mad with Empedocles, that
there shall be more and more worlds; or dote with Democritus, that this world
was ex Contingenti, and so by chance and chaffer, they do and devise al their
business whiles they are in the world.

These are such as Christ prays not for, forasmuch as they never speak of
him, or think on him. But it may be verified of Grafion in his Chron*
them, as Queen Mary said of herself lying upon her deathbed, to her friends
and comforters, that if they did rip her when she was dead, they should see
Callis stamped in her heart, intimating that she conceived such sorrow at the
loss of Callis, that it pierced her heart and killed her. So these are in such
love with this world, that they only hear it, they talk and think only
thereon, that if they were opened, you should see the world engraven and
written in their hearts. But this is the condemnation of the world, That light
John 3. 19.
is come into it, and men love darkness more the^ light. Yet be you of comfort
all ye blessed and beloved of the Lord, for you shall be the Judges 1. Cor. 6.
1.
of this world. And with the residue Saint James shall expostulate: and so I
will conclude the examination of the resembance why the wicked are likened to
the world. O ye Iam. 4. 4.
adulterers and adulteresses, do ye not know that the amity of the world is
the emnitie of God. Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, makes
himself the enemy of God.

And is not this world wherein we now live full fraught with such enemies of
God? Is not this the world that Christ prayed not for? behold, the ataxie and
disorder of all things. The last Lords day from this place, you heard the plea
of the Lord against this age of the world, and this land, wherein is no truth
nor mercy, but Hos. 4. 1. 2.
swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, with breaking out,
and blood touches blood: now you hear the reason thereof, because these are
the people whom the Lord Christ prays not for. Hence is it that the life of
some is a loathsome stie of impuritie and impiety, and they lie wallowing in
the dung and draft of their sinful filthiness. Of others, their life is a
Corban of unjust guiles, which they falsely call Gains. And of others, whose
life is an Acheldama of blood and oppression, for they care not who wants nor
starve, so they may epicurize, gourmandize, and spend it on their vain and
vile lusts, and wilful affections. But alas, what do I intend to capitulate
the wretchedness of this time and age, wherein we now live, which is rather to
be detested then commemorated, especially seeing a godly brother did so
earnestly and so ferue^tly touch and tax the particulars the last Lords day?
to which I refer your remembrance, and at this time only desire you to
look to one only mischief and villainy, whereof this world is too too
guilty, and wherein it does directly oppose the Church of Christ Jesus, and
subjects it self to this fearful exception, that Christ prays not for it.
And that is in those things which are consecrated by well disposed minds out
of the world, to the service of the Almighty.

The misery whereof, and mystery of ungodliness now busily works, and is
seen, first, in this worlds affection toward God in the things that belong
unto him. And secondly, in the use thereof intended to perpetuity. For the
first: The affection of the former world has been to give the best things to
God: so did Abel give of the fat of the earth in his devotions unto the Lord;
and Solomon the flower of every sacrifice: yea, the very heathen observed in
their Idolatrous worship, to give the things that were, First, Pura, without
blemish: Secondly, Proba, sound, Thirdly, Profana, not given before: And
lastly, Sua, truly their own. But the affection of this world is clean
conrrariant. For in dedicating your children to the Lord, if they be deformed
or foolish, then ye say they are good enough to become Priests. Of our years,
the worst we give to God, as our old and withered age; as for the flower of our
life, we wholly address that to the slavery of Satan, to spend it in vanity
and wantonness, counting it a prejudice to our youth, and a disparagement to
our estate, to give our selves to our beads before we be decrepit, and good
for nothing else. And as for the things we offer unto the Lord, ye make
choice of the worst, the vncleanest, the vnsoundest, or some pittance perhaps
of a great mass which ye have unjustly scraped, or violently, or craftily
gotten, of other men's goods. Or else some taking a poor remorse of what
infinite wealth, he has robbed the Church of, does in his miserable pity
bestow some part of her own upon her again, and thinks he has bound God unto
him, to be beholding unto his bounty for ever. And this, beloved in the Lord,
is the affection of this world, unto the glory and service of the most High.

Now as touching the use which is intended to perpetuity, two things are
principally to be noted. First, are Temples built for the public service of
God: and secondly, the endowments of Churches; and revenues for the
maintenance and perpetuating of that sacred service: not that the Lord of
heaven and of earth wants any thing that we have, but this is his ordinance
whereby we may and ought to be exercised in the imploiment of those things,
wherewith he blesses us to the promotion of his glorious service. Concerning
Temples, the Elders of the Jews thought they could not come to our Savior
with a more forcible motive, when they entreated for the Centurion, Luke 7. 5.
6.
then to say, He is worthy thou should do this for him, for he has loved
our nation, and has built us a Synagogue. Few either are in this our age, for
whom we may thus plead: but it it* be in the building of a fine house, or
the devising of sundry vanities and foolish pleasures* thousands are thought
little enough to be bestowed. Witness those manifold fabrikes, and
structures in this land, whereof many seueralls have buried as much treasure as
would erect and found several collegiat or cathedral Churches. This age
therefore wherein we live, admiring all these Temples and Colleges which are
built, and see none built now do say and often affirm, looking but upon one
of our Churches, If this were now to be built, the whole land could not erect
the same. Whereas if they cast their eyes upon the houses of many Noble men,
Knights and mean gentlemen, they might easille discern where the affection
rests. For you shall see their houses like palaces advanced up to heaven
pompous -- and specious to behold, every smokey chimney ouertopping, and
ouerpeering the Lords temple, which happily obscurely stands stooping and
drooping beceath like a rude heap of stones, being made the receptacles of
Owls and Ostritches, Zim Ohim, and dancing Satyrs. Or if they would look upon
the vain maskes and shows and frantik pleasures upon which thousands are
employed, to drive away the darkness and teadiousnesse of winter, they might
easily conceive that this woeful world is directly opposed to God, and al holy
goodness. This is contrary to David's affection, for it was his heart grief
that he might not dwell in the Courts of the Lords house, and it was his
especial wish, That he might behold the beauty of the Temple of the Lord. And
this is also far different from the devotion of the christian Emperors and
estates of the primative Church, who erected Churches, built Colleges and
Schools, endowed them with maintenance, and left them to posterity, and they
like cormorants have devoured the church revenues, and left the children
thereof to live like Gideans soldiers in the lapping cold water.

Furthermore, as concerning Judge. 7. 6
the endowments of the Church, this world holds it as a granted proposition,
that non oportet christum ditesc^re. Contrary to the practice of the first
church, which was founded and framed by the finger of God, whether you respect
it in the tabernacle or in the temple. In time of the tabernacle being yet in
the desert, the ordinary treasure of the Church was 2400. shekels of silver,
and 120. shekels of gold, every shekell weighing half an ounce. Yea, the
treasury was even then a Nemo scit, as may be gathered out of the book of
Numbers. The treasury of the temple was valued to be at one time laid up in
store 8000. Cichars of gold, and seventeen thousand Cichars of silver, every
Cichar weighing 1800. shekels, beside the oblations and gifts at the building
again of the temple in the time of Nehemias. Yea eue^ in the time of
Sanhedrim, Mithridates had at one time 800. talents Cic. orat. pro L. Flac
Joseph. antiq. l. 14. c. 12
of treasure of the temple, as Cicero in his Oration for Flacous records. And
Crassus a Roman Captain had at another time of Eleazar the Priest, a beam of
treasure weighing 700. talents and more, as Josephus testifies. But what do I
insist upon the Jewish Churches treasury, seeing the Christian Church
affords so pregna^t testimony how devilish this device of the world is, and
that the end thereof (as of the possessed) is worse then the beginning. But I
may not longer detain you with looking far back. Recount but from the time of
King Edward the first, when the world was enforced to enact the statute of
Mortmaine, whereby it was provided that none should give to the church without
an especial license from the king: which statute is yet unrepealed, but I
think it may be repealed without prejudice to the Kings Crown, or dignity,
or disparagement to the state, seeing the affections and dispositions of this
world are not toward the Church, unless it be in some good words from some
certain specious word-mongers. But what may be the cause that many of the
houses of the Nobility and gentry of this Land, prosper not, nor bear the
part and honor that their forefathers did, seeing some have attempted al
means both direct and indirect to advance their fortunes to the utmost? as
namely: First, by improuements, and racking of Tenants, that Jesuitical
device, and popish practice, saluing it with this hypocritical plaster: It is
lawful for every man to make the most of his own. Whereby they endeavor to
shadow al their unconscionable, and unchristian dealings. Secondly, by the
favors of their prince, which has not a little lifted up the conditions of
some. Thirdly, by all forfeitures, morgages, perpetual suites and turmoiles in
the law, wresting it out of the hands and hearts of the lawfully possessed.
And lastly by their practice in claiming from the Church, by impropriations,
concealements, frauds, and other infinite strange devices and practices. And
yet all this will not serve, but they are yet more greedy then before, and
far more needy then their ancient^ie. Surely, beloved and blessed in the Lord
Jesus, I know no other cause but this: your forefathers were never well but
when they were bethinking themselves what they should give unto the Church and
maintenance of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and therefore GOD blessed all that
they possessed: but you as directly contrary, seek by all means to have from
the Church you care not how; whereof it comes that all you have is thereby
accursed, neither can you enjoy it. Do you see a Representative Church upon
the earth? who founded it? did not your progenitors? If the same mind had
been in them, which is in you, what face or fashion of a Church had there
been at this day in the Christian world? Nay, furthermore, because
covetousness, and Prodigality cannot sweep stake with the Churches goods in
that poor remainder which is left, after which the world yet most greedily
gapeth, and vnsatiablie lusts, the Sons of religion stand up like the
agents and advocates of desperation, and plead that the fullness of bread has
made the Church to wantonize, therefore they must be so bold as to take it from
them, for fear they should surfeit. And further, that Endowments has poisoned
religion, and therefore they have prepared an Antidote. And lastly, that our
hearts and affections we may bestow upon God, but as for our goods, we may
employ them otherwise, yea any ways they think well, but to the Church and
Gods word: So that you see now (beloved) the worldlings themselves fear not to
surfeit and die with fullness, nor to be poisoned with these Endowments, but
such is their charity and care of Gods Church, that they would not it should
thus miscarrie, and therefore they will carry what they may from it. Hence is
it that your faith is so little, that were our Savior living on earth, he
might truly say unto you, O ye of little Faith. For what tokens remain of
your being Christians in this world? but even as the cursed complain, their
life is like a ship that passes through the water, and makes a noise with the
violence of wind, carrying her sails, but when she is past, no token
remains of her passage: or as a bird that flies, parts indeed the air with
her wings, and swift flying, and as an arrow which is shot at a mark, leaves
no token or note of their going through, so your life is spent in a dream, and
you leave no print or signification that you have lived thankfully to your God.
Hence is it that your hope is less, either being like the vain hope of
Absolon, who reared up a pillar in the kings dale, so you some pompous Pyramid,
or gay tabernacle of clay in the earth: or like the hope of the Hypocrite,
which is resembled to the flower of the poppie, which every blast scatters,
so all your hopeful proiects in this world, are prostrated by every blast and
tempest of adverse casualtie. Hence is it that your charity is less then
little, either toward God, or toward your Brethren. Frst, toward God.
Heretofore the King of the earth came to Cottages of the men of God, and called
them Fathers, Oh 2. King. 13. 14.
my Father, my Father, the Chariots of Egypt, and the horsemen of the same.
But now the servants of Christ must be suitors to the vassailes of Princes, to
be admitted unto the^. Secondly, toward your brethren, nothing but envy,
malice, and all uncharitableness, against which we may truly pray, as the
Church does, Good Lord deliver us.

The conclusion then, if you will be pleased attentively to hearken, yea, but a
very little, shall instantly follow in this one illatiue, That whatsoever is in
this world, if it be not enjoyed in Christ Jesus, is anathematized and
accursed. A view hereof we may behold in Jericho: at the sacking of which
city, Joshua is enjoined to beware of the execrable thing; for the whole city
and all therein was accursed, saving that only which was consecrated to the
Lord: and the thing was not only execrable in it self, but it made them also
accursed that touched it. Semblably are all the things of this world, which
are possessed without Christ, execrable, both in their possession, use,
employment, and end, and the owners also thereby anathematized. What then,
beloved in the Lord, 1 Cor. 10. 11.
shall we do, upon whom the ends of the world are fallen? The spirit of God
has not left us either 1. Cor. 7. 8
comfortles or councellesse. Paul's counsel and exhortation is, Use the world
as if you used it not, and that both in action and affection, not in action, no
not so much as Romans 12. 2.
in fashion. Fashion not your selves like unto this world: for you see the
fashio^s of this world has undone many, and caused them to forget God their
Creator, their country and comely fashion, yea, themselves and their
posterity, so sick and frantike have many been of the fashions of this
world, which are accursed, as it is apparent by their witless and wicked ends,
who have turned themselves into all fashions like the Camelian, save the good
and honest fashion.

Neither in your affection cleave unto the world. For the beloved Disciple
forbids you to love the 1. Ioh. 2. 15
world or any thing therein, unless your love be in God, and for his sake. The
reason he yields, is, a map or view of the world, which he capitulateth in a
Hypothesis. 1. Io. 2. 16
If any love the world, this love of the father is not in him. For all that is
in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life) is not of the Father, but is of the world. And lest either fashion, which
now is accounted the form of the world, as if it gave that being (for many
think they are not, unless they be in the formal fashion of the world) or
lust, which is esteemed the frame of the world, should annihilate or vilepend
this divine Council, the spirit of God urges further: First, to the
fanaticall fashionable, That the 1. Cor. 7. 3
fashion of this world vanishes: Secondly, 1. Joh. 2. 17
to the lustful, That the world it self passes away, and the lust thereof.
Will any object that this is but hearesay? Why then, attend to an eye witness:
I have seen the wicked (says David) flourish like a green Bay tree: (there
is one in the fashion) and I passed by, and lo he was gone, and his place knew
him no more: there is the fall of the fashion. The life of these being a very
dream, even like unto a hungry Esa. 29. 8.
man dreaming: for lo he eareth: and when he awaketh his soul is ^^^ptie: or
like as a thirsty man dreameth, and lo he drinks, but when he awaketh, his
soul is faintie. Even so is the issue of fashion and lust, vanity of state,
and Imbecillitie of strength. All the followers and favorites whereof put their
gains as the unthrifty servant did his earnings, Hag. 1. 6.
even into sacculum pertusum, a bottomless bag, no sooner in but out. Fitly
therefore is the state and condition of this world resembled to Jonas gourde,
quae statim statim perijt. And Saint Paul concludes, That while we are in the
body (that is attending the body only as if we had no souls) we wander 2.
Cor. 5. 4
a Pilgrimage from the Lord. We must therefore pray that we may go out of the
body, and so rest with the Lord eternally. But if Paul were in the flesh, and
did preach this doctrine, 2. Tim. 4. 10.
yet Demas will forsake him, and Christ to, and embrace this present world: as
his dear darling, and sole delight. Many and manifold are the multitudes,
which make such account of this world, that they can by no means be wooed from
it, let the melancholy scholars say what they will. And therefore is it that
so many have turned religion into policy, whereby that proverb is verified* The
Daughter has devoured the Mother. Religion has bred peace, and peace prays
and tires upon religion. Hence is it that so many church-robbers, tyrannize
upon the revenues and goods of the ^. Danaeu^ ^n Aphorism. Politic. lib. 1.
Church, being indeed no better, flatter themselves how they lust, but Pirates
by land mother murderers and usurpers of others goods. Pirates by land more
inhumane and tyrannical unto the Christian Church, then the Pirates by ^ea Ward
and Dansker to the Report of ^o ^ota* ^le p^r^ts*
Christian commonwealth. Those taking by open violence: these encroching and
entering by cunning practice and sinister pretense. Mother murderers they are
also. for if the church be our mother and they take away the bread and
liuely-hood from her, whereby she faints, sickneth, and dies. What are they
but mother murderers, and of the generation of Vipers? Lastly, they are
usurpers of others goods: for he is a Usurper that appropriateth others goods
unto himself. But these Church robbers do claim not only interest but also
lawful possession and use of Christ's goods, in that they rob him in tithes and
offerings which he calls his, what are they then but Usurpers, and encrochers
upon others tenures and interest? But their precedent generation has denounced
a woe against saying, Woe be unto them that either wash or clippe the coin
whereon the Lord has set his stamp. Yea, your ancestors commonly used these
words in their donations: Let their Ex aribiuis ^alleg Gland.
account be without favor in the day of the Lord, whether they be our heirs or
successors, who shall dare to diminish or alter the lands revenues and
inheritance that we have consecrated to the Lord. If the judgment of your
elders be required, this impious and injurious surprising of Church estates,
has been condemned both by Christian bishops, and also by Christian Emperors,
who ever were willing rather to lay down their lives, then that the prosperity
of the church should be impeached, or the goods thereof wickedly imbeazeled,
or diuerted from the godly intendments of her well disposed benefactors. But
you see beloved that Christ's Church has been surprised, and dispoyled of her
possessions, that whereas the Psalmist says, The earth is the Lords, The men
of the earth with their earthly minds have left our Lord, as the Jews, no
place to rest his head so they, no land to set his foot upon. Hence are your
lacklatines, and your lacklearnings which you fondly and furiously object unto
the reverent Beaupeers of the church, the Bishops, whereas you your selves have
made such priests by robbing the Church, as church-Pyrats by famishing the
Churchmen in taking away their bread and liuelihood, and by usurping the
possession of others. For who should serve your four pound, five pound,
twenty nobles cures? if such were not ordained to hold your plough, your
Church and parish would lie fallow, yea, that poor pittance which is left to
maintain a few better qualified persons is so caught and daily undermined by
bare weather beaten desperate courtiers, forlorn Gentlemen, and Cyclop^cal
scatizers, that al wisdom and godly policy of the reverend Bishops and
faithful councellers of state, using their best endeavors and utmost fidelity
is little enough to retain it: so far are they from any hope of a succession
or godly devoted generation, who would study to promote the wealth of the
Church.

But let this generation know, that the world is given up to a reprobate sense,
and if they follow it, they also are in no better estate. Good Lord, where is
the blessing and fruit of the ancient time? Happy is he that preaches to an
attentive ear, and to an intelligent heart, and an obedient soul. Worthy
Ridley in one sermon to that famous renowned Christian Prince Edward the sixth,
prevailed that Christ-Church hospital, the Hospital of Saint Bartholomews in
Southwarke, and Bridewell were at once erected. But now in an hundred Sermons
the ministers of Christ, must become like to the Friars Mendicants, and yet not
so far prevail, even in this place with this Hono. city us to purchase
entertainment. I hope I shall be the last that ever shall mention it. And to
conclude (my blessed brethren) seeing that all the things of this world are
accursed without Christ, se^ before your eyes Paul and David as presidents and
motives to exhort you to resolution. Paul was crucified to the world Gal. 6. 14.
and the world to him, and accounted all things as loss and dung for the lucre
Phil. 9. 8
of Christ. And David wondered That any man should desire ought in heaven but
the Lord, or esteem any thing in earth, in respect of his God. Let us not then
be like sucking babes, who rather cleave to their nurse then to their own
natural mother. This world is our dry nurse, the Church is our true mother.
Let us then that are able to receive strong meat, learn to distinguish. But if
for all this you despise this counsel, and set at naught these aduertisments,
and addict your selves wholly to the world: listen and hear how the world will
deal with you in the end. Serve it never so long, yet as Churlish Laban dealt
with Jacob in bringing foul Leah to his marriage bed instead of fair Rachel,
so the world will promise you gladsomnes, but will perform loathsomeness: will
promise you the finest and gaiest speciousnes, but will perform with you in
deceitful spitefulnes. Let the experienced say, if by the world they found any
thing but worldly care in gaining the world, wordly fear in retaining it, and
worldly sorrow in losing it. Yea, this is the meede of their life, and in their
death instead of Tumulus give them cumulus, an heap of stones, as had Achan,
who touched the execrable thing, so these have some painted Sepulcher, or some
specious or pompous funeral, and there is Catastrophe and the guerde^ that the
world affords them. But you beloved and blessed in the Lord, lift up your
hearts to him that prays for you, in whom you are the Sons and the saints,
the Princes and Priests, the Beloved, and the Baptized, the Illuminates and
Associates of the highest: by whose sufferings you are separated and
distinguished with works of salvation from the residue of the world, and
through whom God dwells in you by the liuerie and seison of his gracious
spirit in this life, and will after this life is ended, be in full possession
of you both in soul and body eternally in the glorious rest of heaven.

To move you now therefore to are solution to leave this world, and all worldly,
fleshly, and devilish practices of the worldlings, and such as are ex diamet^o
contrariant to all hearty and unfeigned Christians, and to cleave unto the Lord
that does thus pity you in praing for you, honor you in making choice of you
from among others, and in gracing you by vouchsafeing to receive you as pledges
of his fathers love, and accounting you as his own. I cannot propone a more
forcible motive to stir up and quicken your hearts to a sad and serious
thankfulness, then to put you in mind that you certainly are the people that
Christ has prayed for, even you I mean, the faithful of this Land and state;
who have sought the Lord in sincerity and hearty devotion. And that I may not
now in the Epilogue of this my weak endeavor send you far back: I shall
desire you to look, and with open and displaied eyes, behold the loving
kindenes of the Lord toward our kingdom and country, even in the memory and
view of our whole nation and all Christendom. How escaped we the furious and
mischeeuous complotments of many weighty and malicious deadly enemies in all
the peaceable reign, and most happy and never enough admired government of
that dear Lady, our late sovereign Qu. Elizabeth of precious memory? Did not
Christ pray for us when all those secret designements, popish thunder, Cardinal
conspiracies, Jesuitical proiects, and domestical treacheries were
discovered, and set upon the stage? Did not Christ pray for us when our state
tottered at the decease of our late Sovereign, and to the wonder of all the
Christian world, did as an earthquake shake and settle in a moment? when all
nations about us stood looking at the things likely to ensue?

What frustrated the Popish prophecy of Worthing to^ the Jesuit, when
forespeaking as he (hispaniolized traitor) wished, That the fall of one Lady
would be the raising of an other. Meaning that the death of Lady Elizabeth
would be the Diadem of Izabella Infanta Eugenia Clara? who brought to scorn
also the surmise of Weston the Jesuit, another false prophet, who seeing his
fellow Worthingto^s spel take no effect, went on, and took longer time, as the
manner of bankrupts is; and said, That the sins of England were not ripe at
the death of Weston de tripl. offic.
Queen Elizabeth. But when England had fulfilled the measure of her sins as
the Ammorites did, then would the Lord utterly destroy us. Which Genesis 15. 16
prophecy of his doubtl^s intended the powder Treason, which if it had been
effected, then had Weston deserved to have been notified with a red letter in
the list of Anabaptisticall prophets. But then even then also Christ Jesus
prayed for us, and Worthington with his coopse-mate Weston are found liars, and
we, our prince and people are maruellously, and miraculously delivered from the
sulphurous blast complotted at Rome, proiected at Rhemes, fortified at Doway,
practiced in England, yea and that which was some certain years in intendment
and purpose was frustrated in a moment. Oh then seeing not only the whole land
but even the very particular person here present can capitulat in specie, what
great things the Lord has done for them, where in we now rejoice; let it be
sufficient for me to commemorate in general, and for every one of us in
indiuiduo, to commune with his own heart, and write this lesson there, with
the pen of a Diamond that neither day nor night, tide nor time, weal nor woe
may obliterate or blot out the character of his divine lesson, and angelical
consolation, but resolve that our whole life be a devoted sacrifice of
thankfulness and service to the living God of eternal majesty, through Jesus
Christ, our faithful intercessor, to whom with God the father, and God the
sanctifying spirit, be rendered al power praise, might, and majesty this day
and evermore. Amen.

The very God of peace sanctify you 1. These. 5. 23.
throughout, and I pray God that your spirits, souls and bodies may be kept
blameles unto salvation, through Christ Jesus, this day and evermore.

FINIS.

