A MANVAL OF PRAYERS NEWLY GATHERED OVT OF MANY and diverse famous authors
as well ancient as of the time present.

Reduced into. 13. chap. very commodious and profitable for a devout Christian.

PRAYER, IS GOOD, WITH FASTING AND ALMS.

TOB. 12

1. Pet. cap. 4. Be wise therefore and watch in prayers. But before all things,
having mutual charity continual among your selves.

CVM PRIVILEGIO. 1583.

Aug. in Psalm. 42. This is the Justice of man in this life, Fasting,
Almes-deedes, Prayer.

PRAYER IS GOOD WITH FASTING AND ALMS

TOB. 12

Ibidem in sermon. 59. He that will have his prayer to fly to heaven, must make
it two wings, Almes-deedes, and Fasting, and it shall spedelye ascend and be
hard.

THE COLLECTOVR AND traunslatour of this present Manual, to the Catholic and
Christian Reader.
MOst dear Cou^tryme^ whose desires are to serve God in holiness of life,
craving aid for the acccomplishment of your religiouse intentes at the hands
of his Majesty, by the merits of Christ, and intercession of the blessed
virgin Mary, and all Angels and saints: to the intent that you may proceed
daily from one virtue to another, and to be helped by the labors of God his
servants and saints, (who from time to time to increase the devotions of
the people, have left many holy prayers and exercyses, as a treasure for to
comfort and strengthen the dull soul of man) I have thought good to collect
and translate certain devout prayers very fit and conueniente for this
time, vhich is done the more willingly in respect of the great and zelouse
desire that many of our poor country has, rather to occupye them selves
devoutly by begging pardone for their sins, the^ curiously by searching the
secret mysteries of God, to spend their time in unprofitable and insolente
contradictions, tendinge to no other end, but only to roo^e out of the minds
of christian catholics all true faith, firm hope, and perfect charity,
which daily by devotion and other spiritual exercyses is wonderfully
increased, to the great admiration, even of the very adversaries of all piety
and catholic religion, as does well appear to the whole world se^ce the
time that some virtuous, holy and learned men have applied some part of their
time in compyling, translating and collecting particular works of devotion,
which in the judgment of many are presently more necessary, than farther to
treat of any controversy, secinge that heresy is grown to such rypenes,
that the simplest man of all, can now discypher the poison hid under her: but
devotion is so decayed that the learned themselves have need of helps for to
attain thereunto: yet is it not my mind that any man should so tie him self
to any devout prayer, or to any number of prayers here colected, that thereby
he should omit the accustomable public prayers of our holy mother the
Catholic Church, as hereafter more at large I have noted. Farther good
Christian Reader I am to let thee understand, that thi^ little Manual has been
collected and translated in great haste, and upon earnest request of diverse
godly and virtuous catholics: yet not without the judgment and opinion
of some number of the learned sort in this study, who find it very
convenient and necessary for this time, specially for that they are collected
and translated out of diverse famous and holy Authors, as well ancient as of
the time present, and are to the great increase of devotion published in many
countries and in diverse tongues, before this my collection and translation:
which if I may request to be gratefully accepted of thee good catholic and
christian Reader, it shall give me the radiar occasion, to take the like pains
in any such profitable action, which hereafter may be offered: and thus
vvishing, that increase of grace to the reader, which I desire to my self,
and desiring hartye repentance to be wrought in the hearts of all my dear
countrymen, I bid thee gentle reader heartily fare-vvell.

Thy hearty welwiller to command in Christ Jesus. G. F.

THE ARGVMENTE OF THE Chapters.
Having expressed the causes that moved me to the collection and translation
of this manual, I am now to lay down a direction whereby thou may with
more facilitye find out such particular prayers as seems best to thy
discrete devotion: that seeing the particular prayers of this book divided
into certain chapters, thou may as time, place and necessitye requires,
use these kind of prayers, which shall be most to Gods glory, thy own
souls health, and the profit of thy euen-christian.

The first and second chapters are such, as whereby the Christian Catholic
may learn and know how to crave the aid and succor of God in all his
endeavors, enterpryses and actions, which that day he purposes and means to
take in hand: and before he go to bed, to thank God for his benifites
received that day: and to know how to examine his conscience, calling to mind
his sins committed the day past: but specially in the second chapter, the
catholic man may learn how to behave him self at the time of the dreadful
mysteries, which christian people commonly call the Mass. Further he may there
learn what to crave of God, and what kind of meditations to use in the
Church, and withal how to move him self to spiritual devotion.

The rest which are ten chapters, are put in a several Index, whereby the
catholic shall easily find what prayers are thought most convenient for
every day in the week: that so he may as leisure and devotion serves him,
read either the whole, or part, as they are set down in this Index following.

Read upon. Soundaye these chap. 10. Prayers to the holy Trinity. 8. Of
thankesgyuing to God for his benefits.

Upon. Moundaye these chap. 11. To the B. Virgin Marie and to the holy Saints.
3. For obteyning remission of sins.

Upon. Tewesdaye these chap. 4. For aid and comfort in tribulations and
afflictions. 5. For obteyning of God necessaries for body and soul.

Upon. Wednesday these chap. 9. For the Church, our friends, and others. 13.
For the departed souls.

Upon. Thursdaye these chap. 5. For obteyninge of God, necessaries for body and
soul. 8. Of thankes-gyuinge to God for his benefits.

Upon. Fydaye these chap. 3. For obteyninge remission of sins. 6. Prayers of
the life and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Upon. Saturdaye these chap. 13. For the departed souls. 9. To the B. Virgin
and to the holy Saints.

THe first week shall be read the chapters which are put in the first ranks
for every day: and the next week after, the chapters put in the second
ranckes: So shall thou read over all the within named ten chapters in the
Index twyse every month, and some of the said chapters four times: As for
the other three chapters they are convenient at certain times, and for
certain persons, for which cause they are not meet to be put in order with
the other as above named.

But those that have neither time nor leisure to read every day a whole
chapter, may yet read of the same chapter some of the said prayers, and such
as they think conueniente for the advancement of God his glory, their profit
and for the profit of others: notwithstanding, in no wise may they omit their
daily prayers, or those prayers which they ought to say in Mass time.

Also when any holy day falls, that you have no saint by name in your
chapter of Saints, then must you take one of the prayers which be common to
any Apostle, Martyr, Confessor or Virgin.

Further it is necessary for all devout Catholics to know, that the
accustomed prayers used in the Church according to the ancient and laudable
manner of our forefathers, and observed by continual practice of both the
learned and unlearned, (to the great glory of God, and increase of devotion,
religion and piety of life) are not to be omitted for the desire that any may
have to any special prayers either in this or any other pamphlet, translated
or collected by any private persons, which is done to move men to devotion, but
not to withdraw men from obedience or any received Catholic custom or
tradition.

And therefore I counsel the Catholic Reader that of devotion has
accustomed him self to these prayers following, not to omit the^ in any case
(for they are not devised by the wit and private devotion of man, but by the
holy spirit of God, the Author and delyuerer of all truth) which are the seven
canonical hours in the Breuiarye or in the Primer, commonly called our Ladies
mattins: the seven penitential psalms, with the lytanies: the dyrige for the
souls departed: the hours of the holy Ghost: the hours of the Cross:
prayers of the passion: the fiftiene graduall psalms: the beads which
consists in a certain number of pater nosters, angelical salutations, with
the Creed of the Apostles: commonly is called the Rosarye of our Lady.

Thus having given thee an order (gentle Reader) to understand this little
Manual of prayers, with my opinion touching the use of the same: I will
conclude with earnest request and humble supplication unto thee, desiring thee
to remember me in thy vndistracted devotions, saying this prayer folowinge for
me and others, whose helps I used in collecting this said work out of many
authors, and translating many prayers out of latin and french into this our
vulgar tongue.

O Omnipotent almighty and euerliuinge God, have mercy upon thy servant N.
for the love of thy sweet son our savior Jesus Christ, the true light and
life of all that shall be saved: O Jesus the second person in Trinity, equal
God with the Father and the holy Ghost, conserve and keep him in thy grace,
favor and love, and suffer him not to be drawn from thee through any subtle
persuasions of the enemy: O holy Ghost proceedinge from the father and the
son, the comforter of the elect: the inspirer of all good gifts: the only
schole-maister and teacher of all truth: grant that through thy gifts he
may evermore dwell in thy truth: replenishe his heart with all charitable
desires and heavenly inspirations necessary to his salvation: grant this O
holy Trinity for the bitter passion of our Savior: by the merits and
intercession of the gloriouse Virgin Marye and all Angels and saints. Amen.

S. Peter. 1. cap. 4. Be wise therefore: and watch in prayers. But before all
things having mutual charytie continual among your selves, etc.

PRAYER, IS GOOD, WITH FASTING AND ALMS.

TOB. 12

Aug. in Psalm. 42. This is the Justice of man in this life, Fasting,
Almes-deedes, Prayer.

THE FIRST CHAPTER CONTLYNINGE QVOtidiane or daily prayers, accommodated and
prescribed to certain hours or times both for the day and night.
A brief exhortation to pray continually extracted and taken out of Saint
Chrysostom. In lib. De orando Deum.
IT is very meet and profitable, that we occupy all the course of our life in
prayer, that thereby our hearts may receive continually the sweet dew of gods
grace: of the which all persons have no less need, than trees and herbs have
of the moisture of waters. For as trees can not bring forth fruit except the
roots be comforted with moisture: in like manner, it is impossible for us to be
replenished with beautiful fruits of piety, if our hearts be not refreshed
by prayer: for which cause we ought to forsake our bedds, and prevent the
sonne-rising, in gods service.

The like we ought to do when we go to meat, and at night when we must of
necessitye take our rest: yea it behooves at all hours, to offer some one
prayer to God, to the end both day and night together, might be spent in
prayer: especially in time of winter, it is convenient to imploye the most
part of the night in prayer, and so to spend the time upon our knees in
divine service.

Tell me I pray thee, how can thou behold the son, if thou do not
honor him first, that made thine eyes to see that most beautiful light? How
can ye go to the table to eat, if you do not first honor him who gives and
furnishes us daily with such great benifites? How can thou trust to pass
the darcke night, and to avoid such dreams and thoughts as may come to thee,
if thou defend not thy self by prayer. If thou be not countergarded by prayer,
thou shall easily yield thy self to wicked spirits, which goes continually
about us, espying if they can perceive any one unarmed, that soudainly they may
devour him.

But if they see him furnished with prayer, they retire presentlye, even as
wicked thieves when they see the sword toward them.

Hoolsome meditations and exerfice for the morninge.

1 First presently in the morninge when thou art awake, thou shall pray to God,
that he would so lighten the eyes of thine heart, with the holy light of his
holy spirit, that thou be not allured or entyced to consent to sin, and so
consequently seduced to death.

2 Secondly after thou art risen, bless thee with the sign of the cross,
saying the prayer that follows.

3 Thirdly when thou art appareled, goue not thy self presently to babbling or
ianglinge, or to vain thoughts or fancies: but lift up thy heart unto God in
silence, and prepare thy self to say these prayers following.

4 Fourthly after prayer, thou shall purpose firmelye and constantly in thy
self, not to committ willingly that day any thing, whereby God or thy
neighbor might be offended.

5 Fyftly it shall be very necessary besides these afore-sayed, to call to
mind thine affairs, and with quicknes of spirit set down with thy self
how thou will spend the day to come.

A prayer in the morning when ye awake. David in Psalm.
LIghten mine eyes O Lord, lest at any time I ouersleepe in sin, and lest
mine enemy do say, I have prevailed against him.

When ye do arise. F. Son. 5. tract. 11. Christ. Inst for.
IN the name of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified, I do rise: he bless me,
(...) me, ^eepe me, save me, and bring me unto everlasting life. Amen.

Pater noster. Aue. Credo. and Confiteor.

A morning prayer when ye are risen. Ex Viridario spirit.
O Heavenly Father, omnipotente and everlasting God, unto thee I yealde
innumerable thanks, which haste vouchsafed to keep me this night through
thy great mercy, and I beseech thy aboundaunt, clemencye, that thou grant me
so to spend the day to come, in faith, hope, charity, patience, fear and
carefulnes of mind, that my service may please thy heavenly Majesty.

A morninge prayer whereby to commend thy self to God. B. Aug. cap. 40.
Medit.
O Holy Trinity hear me most miserable sinner, and keep me from all evil,
from all occasion of evil, from all mortal sin, from all the deceptes and
wilynes of the devil, and of mine enemies visible and invisible, by the
prayers of the Patriarchs, by the merits of the Prophets, by the suffrages of
the Apostles, by the constancy of Martyrs, by the faith of the Confessors, by
the chastity of Virgins, and by the intercession of al Saints, which have
pleased thee from the beginning of the world. Amen.

A prayer to he said goinge out of the house. Joan Fab. in prec. Christ.
O All ye holy Angels and saints of God, I beseech you, that your intercession
may give me aid and power, that no enemy may hurt me in the way that I shall
walk, neither sleepinge nor wakinge, and that neither fire, nor water, nor any
other noisome thing, do oppress or harm me. Amen.

A prayer desiring God to order and direct us. De imit Christ. li. 3. cap. 16.
LOrd God thou know what thing is to me most profitable to do, this or
that, after thy will. Give me what thou will, as much as thou will, and when
thou will. Do with me as thou know best to be done, and as it shall please
thee, and as shall be most to thy honor: put me where thou will, and freely do
with me in all things after thy will. Thy creature I am, and in thy hands,
lead me, and turn me where thou will. Lo I am thy servant ready to all
things that thou commau^dest: for I desire not to live to myself but to thee,
would to God it might be worthily and profitably to thy honor. Ame^.

A prayer to persevere in goodness. Imitatio Christ. li. 1. cap. 19.
Help me my Lord Jesus Christ, that I may persevere in good purpose, and in thy
holy service unto my death, and that I may now this present day perfectly
begin, for it is nothing that I have done in time paste.

An exersise to be daily used in meditating the passion of our Lord and
Savior. An Exhortation.
If thou will profit and grow in the love of God, thou must have an often and
frequent memory, and as it were an Image before thine eyes, of thy Lord and
Savior crucyfied for thee: and it shall be very profitable for thy daily
exercise, to call to thy mind (with a devout and diligente attention and
consideration) one or more of these fiftiene little meditations, and in the end
of the same meditation, say the prayer following for the same purpose

O mylde and innocent Lamb^. etc.

Medita. 1.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou being highest and almighty God, of the
infinite charity wherewith thou louedst me, would be made man, thou did
vouchsafe, to be borne in a stable, to be laid down in an ox stall, and
after that to be circumcised, and to flee into Egipte. Thou did vouchsafe to
be baptized, to fast, to be tempted, to watch, to teach to preach, and to heal
the dyseased. Thou did vouchsafe to suffer manifold labors, painful
cares and persecutions three and thirty years, and at the length to come to
Jerusalem and to suffer death for me.

This prayer following is to be said after one or more of these meditations, as
the leisure of the devout person shall serve, according to the time and
devotion that the party shall have.
O Myld and innocent Lamb of God, thus heartily thou did love me, these
things thou did for me, these pains most meekely, most patiently and
lovingly thou sufferedst for me. What shall I render again unto thee? I
adore, laud, and glorify thee, I praise thee, and give unto thee thanks as
heartily and as well as I can. All hail sweet IESV, the son of the living
God king of all kings, the very king of glory. All hail the precious stone
of the divine nobility, that quickneth and gives life, the flower that never
fades of mankinds high dignity. O merciful and kind redeemer, have mercy
upon me for thy goodness sake. Put away all my sins. Destroy and mortify
in me what soever displeases thee. Make me one according unto thy blessed
heart, making me like unto thy holy humanitye, Grant, my Lord, that I may to
my little power, most diligently follow thy blessed life and virtues. O blessed
father celestial, I offer unto thee, the most holy incarnation, conversation,
and passion of thy most dear beloved son Jesus, for my salvation, and for the
salvation of all men, as for full amendmente and purgation of all our sins
and offenses. Grant most merciful father by the same only begotten son
of thine, unto them that are alive, mercy and grace, and unto the souls
departed, rest and life everlasting. Amen.

Medita. 2.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou dideste eat the pascall lamb in Jerusalem
with thy dere-beloued disciples: and arising from supper, thou did gi^dd^
thy self about with a Towel, and powredst water into a basin, and kneeling
upon thy knees, thou meekely did wash the feet of thy disciples, and
wypedst them with a Towell.

Medita. 3.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou, before thou should suffer, did bequeth a
most excellent good thing unto thy children, leauinge for us thy most sacred
body to be our meat, and thy most precious blood to be our drink. There can
no wit nor understanding penetrate and thoroughly see the bottomless deapth of
this thy charytie.

Medit. 4.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou cominge unto the garden of Oliuet, begannest to
fear and to be heavy: whereupon thou saidest unto thy disciples.

My soul is sorrowful until death. And then divided and sondred from them,
thou set thy self upon thy knees: and fallinge upon the earth flat on
thy face, thou prayedst unto thy father, and fully and wholly thou resignest
and yeldest thy self unto him saying: Father thy will be done.

And at length through most paynfull agonye (wherewith thou was greuouselye
oppressed and afflicted) thou swettest throughout all thy body a bloodye sweat.

Medita. 5.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou kindled and burning, with the ineffable desire
to redeem me, thou wentest to meet thine enemies, and suffered Judas the
traitor to kiss thee: and suffered thy self to be taken, and to be bound with
all confusion and shame: and most indignely to be ledd with bonds from thence,
and that of most vile and wicked persons, unto Annas: where thou suffered most
mekely, a very sore stroke on thy face, most iniustly given thee of a most
vile manciple and slave.

Medita. 6.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou being fast bound like a notorious malefactor,
wast led unto the house of Cayphas the high Priest: where the Jews most
unjustly condemned thee, and most filthily and vily all bespetted and spauled
thy royal and most amiable face, and most spitefully they laid on thee many
a sore buffette and blow, and skornefully in mockage they did blindfolde and
cover thy face, and strykinge thee, they with mock and scorn said: Prophecy
Christ, who is he that stroke thee? doing unto thee innumerable injuries all
that night.

Medita. 7.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou in the morninge was brought before Pilate: and
with most sweet and pleasant countinaunce, casting thine eyes down, stoodest
before him in the judgment hall. And when thou wast most falsely accused of
the Jews, and many a rebuke and reproach was given thee: thou most meekely
heldest thy peace and made no answer.

Medita. 8.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou was sent from Pylate unto Herod: This Herod
of a vain and curious mind, couetinge to see some miracle at thy hand, asked
and demanded many things of thee. And the Jews sturdilye accused thee still.
But thou among all these, most wisely heldest thy peace. For this cause
Herod and all his, despised and contemmed thee, put upon thee a white garment,
a dezerds cote: and like a sot he sent thee thus again unto Pylate, O how
unmeasurable is this humility and obedience? At the will and pleasure of thine
enemies thou wentest forth, and thou returnedst again without gain saying,
suffering the^ to do to thee what soever they would.

Medita. 9.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou in the judgment hall stripped naked, and
without all compassion being bound fast to a pillar, was most cruelly
scourged. There was thy virginal and tender flesh, cut with whippes and
torn with stripes, all together mangled and deformed, with black and blewe
and many a wound, so that the streams of thy most precious blood, ran
down on every side upon the earth.

Medita. 10.
O Good and gracious IESV, after that sore and sharp scourgyng of thine, to
put thee to more shame and vilanye, thou was clothed of Sathanas soldiers
with a purple read garment vile and torn. They also making a crown of
thorn, painefully pressed the same upon thy most holy head: And while the
sharp thorns pricked grievously, and wounded sore thy head, thy most pure
blood ran down abundantly over all thy lovely face and neck. Then they
putting a reed into thy right hand, and kneelyng down before thee in
scorn, saluted thee saying: All hayle King of Jews. And then took they the
reed, and with many a sore stroke they smitte thy venerable head. They also
spette in thy mellifluous visage and stroke thee on the blessed face.

Medita. 11.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou was brought forth by Pylate unto the furious
Jews, to be gased and looked upon, wearinge thy crown of thorn and purple
garment: but they cried out with more cruelnesse to have thee crucified.

Medita. 12.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou was delivered up unto the will and pleasure of
the Jews, which by and by led thee to be crucified, layinge the heavy cross
upon thy sore and bloody shoulders. Thus did thou bear most mekely thine
own cross, whose great weyghte payned thee full sore: and coming unto the
place, all werie and breathless with pain, for my sake thou dydst not refuse,
to taste wine mingled with gall and myrre, which was there given unto thee.

Medita. 13.
O Good and gracious IESV, when thou was stripped naked, then were thy sore
wounds by the violent pulling of thy clothes, renewed.

Oh what a bitter and cruel pain dyddest thou suffer, when thy tender hands
and undefiled feet were with blounte and rough nails, fast nailed unto the
cross, and when the ioinctes of thy limbs were loosed. Oh with what love and
sweetness of charity, did thou offer thy hands and feet to be bored
through. Then out of the wounds of thy hands and feet, as it had been out of
wells, thy precious blood plentifully gushed out.

Medita. 14.
O Good and gracious IESV, thou hanging upon the cross in the mids between
two thieves, was assailed with blasphemies: but thou praydst unto thy father the
while, saying: Father forgive it them, they wot not what they do. Then did
thou promise paradise unto the thief. Then gave thou thy deere-beloued
mother (who persed with the sword of sorrow, stood by the cross) unto thy
disciple John, and unto us all to be our mother. And after that thou hadest
suffered three long hours intolerable pains, and thirsted very vehemently,
they gave thee eysell to drink, which when thou hadest tasted, bowing down
thy venerable head, thou yeldest up thy spirit.

Medita. 15.
O Good and gracious IESV, O good shepherde, thus thou bestowedst thy life for
thy sheep, and the right side of thy dead body was opened with a spear, out of
the which flowed both water and blood for us. Thou would that thy tender and
louinge heart should be wounded for my sake. Afterward thy immaculate body
taken down from the cross, thy most blessed mother took it in her lap,
she kissed it, and wett it with tears: At the length Joseph and Nicodeme
wound it up in Sindon, and laid it in the sepulcher. My dear beloved, yea
the dear beloved of all my desires, thou did vouchsafe thus to die, and to
be buried for my sake, which lyuest and reygneste blessed and glorious for
ever, and ever world without end. Amen.

These asperations and ghostlye sighinges and prayers are needful for devout
Christians to have by heart: (and often times to reuollue in mind some of them
at the least) for attayning to a ghostly and perfect life.
O Good Jesus, o gracious Jesus, o sweet Jesus, o my hope, my refuge, and my
health, have mercy, have mercy, have mercy upon me, I am poor, nedy, and weak,
I am naught, I have naught, I know nothing, I can do nothing of my self but
sin, help me therefore sweet Jesus.

O Lord be merciful unto me most vile, most abominable sinner, unworthy
to live on the earth, verily it is but right, that every man should despise
me, persecute me, afflicte me, and over tread me with their feet. I resign
and surrendre me, yelding me wholly unto thee. Thy most blessed and thankeful
will, be ever done upon me and in me.

Grant me (O good Lord) full remission of all my sins, washing me in thy
precious blood.

Grant me perfect mortification and denyinge of my self. Destroy in me mine
own will and the sekyng of my self.

Grant me true humilitye, perfect patience and charity, and of my tongue and
of all my senses perfect temperaunce.

Grant unto me, the purity, simplicity, nuditie, and liberty of mind, and
also an exact and essenciall In-turnyng, that I may be one according to thy
hearts desire.

Lo, my singular beloved Lord, lo, I salute and honor thy roseruddy and sweet
wounds.

All hayle all hail most pleasant and healthsome wounds of my Lord.

All hayle most bountiful heart of my dear lover, wounded for my sake: of
all goodness, of all bliss the most pleasant treasure house.

O My Lord Jesus Christ, I most humblye thank the for thy venerable wounds.

Oh Lord drown me in them, hyde me in them: write and prynte them deeply in
my heart, that I may burn al together in thy love, and that I may take
compassion upon thee from the heart.

Grant that all frail creatures may be vile and of small estimacion with me:
and that thou only may please and be sweet and delectable unto me: Make me
like unto thy holy humanity.

O derely-beloued, derely-beloued, derely-beloued: O the most derely-beloued of
all derely-beloued: O my only beloved. O my fresh and flourishinge spouse: O
my mellifluous and hony-sweete spouse: O the sweetness of my heart, and the
life of my soul: set me on fire, burn me, make me a new, and transform
me, that nothing beside thee, live in me.

Oh, wound very depely my heart, with the darte of thy love.

Then turn thy mind to the godhead of Christ, and quyetly think or say
thus.
O My Lord God, o my delectable principle and beginnynge, O amiable depth
bottomless, O the clear light of my intrailes, and bottom of my very heart:
O most sincere and delectable goodness, my very and incomparable goodness: O
my God and all thing: what desire I besides thee? Thou art my high and full
contentacion, and only enough for me. Oh when shall I luckely find thee? when
shall I ardently and most fervently love thee? when will thou rauishe me all
together into thee? when will thou consume me all wholly into thee? when will thou most fast and sure knytte me unto thee.

Oh remove away mercifully all impedime^tes, and make me one spirit with
thee, to the laud and praise of thy name.

All hayle glorious, shyninge, and everlasting quiet Trinitye, father, son,
and holy ghost, one God. Oh vouchesafe to feed my soul with thy gostly
influence.

In like manner to the blessed mother of God say thus.
HAyle MARIE full of grace, our Lord is with the: hayle sweet Virgin, the
blessed mother of God: The very excellent Queen of heaven: Hayle bright
shinynge star: Rose very delectable and pleasant: The Orient white lyllie
of the Trinitye: O blessed lady, take pitye upon me most poor banished man.

In like manner to such a Saint of God as thou have special devotion unto, and
to thy holy Angel.
ALhayle derebeloued of God, blessed and holy saint. N. or all hail noble
spouse of Christ, holy and blessed saint. N.

Hayle holy Angel of God, my faithful keeper. All hayle all ye blessed
saints of God, and all ye blessed spirits Angelical, which are fulfilled
perpetually with the vehemente stream of all divine voluptuousness and
heavenly pleasure: pray for me now, and at the hour of my death.

O merciful IESV, I beseech the, for thy most venerable Passion and death,
grant unto the quick, mercy and grace, and unto the dead rest and
everlasting light.

An other brief exersice to be used daily according to the choice of the
devout christian, as his opportunitio shall serve.
O Good IESV, be merciful unto me abominable sinner, I have sinned, I have
offended, I have done amiss before the: Lord perdon me. All my iniquitye, my
negligences, and all my immortifications, I put the^ all into thy most
derebeloued wounds, and I cast them into the bottomless depthe of thy mercy
and merits. O would to God I had never offended thee: would to God I had never
let thy grace in me: I purpose now (by thy help) to correct and amend my
self. Oh Lord, put away all my sins, wash me clean with thy precious
blood: Make me whole with thy precious wounds Sanctify me with thy bitter
Passion and death: Cleanse me perfectlye: Restore again unto me the
innocencye, which thou gave me in baptism, that I may truly please thee:
I worship, I laud and glorify thee, I praise and give thanks unto thee my
Lord IESV CHRIST for all thy mercies and benefits. I thank thee (O son of
the living God) most highest GOD: which for thy exceeding great charity,
that thou didste bear toward me, have vouchesaffed to be made man: Thou
wouldeste for my sake be borne in a stable, and an infant bewrapt in clothes,
to be laid down in a manger, to be fed with the little milk of the maiden thy
mother, to suffer nedinesse and pouertye, to be sore troubled thyrtie three
years with manifold labors and careful pains. Thou would for very
inward pain and agony, be all in a bloody sweat, to be apprehended and
taken shamefully, to be bound unworthily, to be condemned, unjustly, to be
defiled with spettle, to be stricken with buffettes and blows, to be clothed
and scorned as it were a mad man, in a white garment in mockage: Thou
would be beaten and torn most cruellye with stripes, most cruellye
crowned with thorns, ouerlode^ with a painful and heavy cross, furiously
and boysteoufly nailed unto the cross with sturdie nails, unkindly to have
offered to thee in thy thyrste, eysell and gall.

Thou, the noble clother and garnisher of the stars, hangest all naked,
despised, wounded, and with innumerable sorrows afflicted upon the cross for
my sake.

Thou shedst for me thy most pure and precious blood, thou dyedst for me. I
embrace in the arms of my soul thy venerable cross: and for the love and
honor of thee I kiss the same. Grant that I may with whole and full desire
attain unto thee, and that I may pause and rest in thee, most sweetest of
all. Lo my Lord lo, I repute and set my self in the lowest place under all
creatures. For I am unworthy, that the earth should bear me. I cast my
self down, and putt my self under the state of all men: I sincerely love all
men as well as I can: I forsake and leave all corruptible things for thy sake,
I refuse what soever thou art not: I forsake and renounce all sensual
pleasure and delight. I renounce all vanity and impuritie: I forsake all the
sekyng of my self and all immortifications: I resygne and put me wholly into
thy hand and pleasure: All my whole will' I change into thine: Thy only will
(Lord) thy only will be done in me, and on me: thy blessed will be done in
all times and ever lastyngly. I offer me ready to suffer, (with the help of
thy grace,) whatsoever it shall please thee.

Oh most sweet and merciful IESV, mortify whatsoever lives naughtillie and
sensuallye in me, and what soever is vicious and inordinate in me, what soever
displeases thee in me: mortifye in me all propertye: Garnyshe and adourne me
with thy merytes and virtues. Oh prepare (Lord) a delectable, and a pleasant
habitacion for thy self in me. Renew my spirit, my soul, and my body, with
thy excellent grace: Make me like unto thy holy humanity: Make me one unto
thy hearts desire: Rid and make clear, my mind and soul and make it syngle,
and lyghten it: Grant me free inturning unto thee. O my Lord God, O my very
and unchangeable goodness, fulfill me with thine own self. Lead me into the
clear bottom of my soul, and bring me from thens into thee my original.
Knitte me unto thee most nerely, and chaung and tra^sforme me altogether into
thee: that thou may have thy delight in me. Here me graciousely, Lord here
me graciousely, not at my will, but at thy blessed pleasure. Oh Lord teach,
illumine, direct, and help me in all things, that I may do nothing. I may
speak nothing, I may think nothing, nor desire nothing, but that, which
may be acceptable before thee.

Then to have in mind our blessed lady.
O Blessed MARIE, O most sweet Virgin, have pitye upon me most vile sinner:
I salute and I honor thee. Oh blessed lady, optaine for me, of thy blessed
son full remission of all my sins: optaine for me, perfect mortification
and forsakinge of my self, Optaine for me, very and true humility, patience,
charity, refrainyng and temperance of my tongue and of my senses: Obtain for
me, purity, simplicity, and freedom of mind, and that I may be once
according to the hearts desire of thy son.

Take in mind all Saints.
O All ye blessed saints of God, and blessed spirits Angelical, whom God
with his melly fluous countenance and blessed presence, makes joyful and
euerlastingely glad, pray ye for me: I salute and honor you. I give lauds and
thanks unto our Lord, which has chosen you, and has prevented you in his
benedictions: Oh obtain for me forgiveness, obtain for me grace, and to be
made one with God.

O Most benign, and most merciful IESV, have mercy upon thy church, have
mercy upon this place and congregation: Grant that here be cotinuallie,
humility, peace, charity, chastity, and purity: Grant that we all may
worthily amend and correct our selves, and that we fear thee and serve thee
faithfully, that we may love thee and please the. I commend unto thy mercy
all our business and our necessities. Lord have mercy upon all, for whom
thou haste shed thy most holy blood. Oh Lord, convert, turn, and call
again all miserable sinners: grant unto the quick, forgiveness and grace,
unto the dead rest and light everlasting. Amen.

A prayer for schollares before they go to school, for obtaining vvisdome,
learning, and knowledge.
COme O holy spirit replenishe the hearts of thy faithful: lighte^ in us the
fire of thy love, which by diversity of all languages haste assembled and
gathered the people in the unity of faith.

O God which by the brightness of the holy Ghost, have instructed the hearts of
the faithful, grant us, that in the same spirit we may know that which
is right and truth, and always to be joyful in his consolation. Amen.

Wholesome Meditations which you may use at night, before you go to rest.
1 When thou would go to bed, thou shall yield thanks to God for his
great mercy, that he has so preserved thee that day, wherein diverse through
their sins hane fallen headlonge into hell.

2 Then after, reuolue, and call to mind diligently all the sins whereby any
way thou have offended God, or thy neighbor that day, and ask God mercy for
them.

3 Finally, thou shalt pray to God with thy heart, that he would vouchsafe to
have care over thee, and that he would not suffer thee to perish in works of
darcknesse, and by these (or other like) prayers folowinge, thou shalt call
for the aid and succor of our Lord and Savior.

An Eueninge prayer to be said as thou go to bed. Ex viridario spirituali.
A Lmyghtye and everlasting God, I render thee most hartye thanks, for that
thou haste vouchsafed of thy great mercy and goodness to preserve me this day
from all evil. And I beseech thee more-ouer for thy bitter death and passion,
most mercifully to pardone me wretched sinner all mine offenses, that this day
I have committed by thought, word, or deed: and hereafter to preserve and
keep me from all danger, as well of body as of soul, to the end I may rise
again in health, to praise the name of thy majesty, and joyfully serve thee
in thanks gyuinge with a chaste body and a clear heart Amen.

Our Father. etc. Hayle Marye. etc.

O Mary the mother of grace,
And of mercy mother also,
Defend me from the cruel foe,
And at my death my sou'e e^brace.
I Believe in God the Father. etc.

An other prayer for the night.
O Lord God and my heavenly Father, forasmuch as by thy divine ordinance the
night approaches, and darkness begins to over whealme the earth, and time
requires that we give our selves to bodylye rest and quietness, I render unto
thee most hearty thanks for thy loving kyndnes, which haste vouchsaued to
preserve me this day, from the danger of mine enemies, to give me my health,
to feed me, and to send me all things necessary for the comfort of this
my poor eand nedye life, I most humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake,
that thou will mercyfullie forgive me all that I have this day committed
against thy fatherly goodness, either in word, deed, or thought, and that
thou will vouchsafe to shadow me this night under the comfortable wings of thy
almighty power, and defend me from Satan, and from all his crafty assaults,
that neither he, or any of his ministers have power over either my body or my
soul. But that although my body through thy benefyte enjoys sweet and
pleasant sleep, yet my Soul may continuallye watch unto thee, think of
thee, delight in the, and evermore praise thee: that when the Ioyefull light of
the day returns according to thy godly appointeme^t, I may rise again
with a faithful soul, and undefiled body, and so afterward, behave my self
all my life time according to thy blessed will and commandment, by casting
away the works of darkness, and putting on the armoures of light, that men
seeing my good works, may thereby be provoked to glorify thee my heavenly
Father, which with thy only begotten son Jesus Christ our only savior, and
the holy Ghost, that most sweet comforter, lyuest and raignest one true and
everlasting God, world without end Amen.

A prayer to thy good Angel thy gardiane. Ex hortulo animae secu^ vsum
Leodiens.
I Beseech thee O holy Angel, to whose protection and custodye I wreched
sinner am committed, continually to defend, aid, and guard me, from all
invasion and assaults of the devil where-soeuer I be, both waking and
sleepinge, drive away from me through the virtue of the holy Cross all the
temptations of Satan, and that which through the deserts of mine own merits I
can not do, by thy prayers obtain at the hands of the highest and dreadful
ludge, that he may have no place in me. Amen.

A prayer as thou entrest into thy bed. F. Sonnius tract. 3 Cathe.
IN the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that was crucified for me, I go into
my bed: let him bless me, govern me, and defend me, and bring me into
life everlasting Amen.

A prayer to be said as thou seitleste thy self to sleep. L. Viues in
precibus general.
O Jesus Christ our safegarde, receive me into thy protection, and grant that
when my body is a sleep, my soul may watch to thee, and that it may ioyfullye
and gladlye behold that blessed, most joyful, and heavenly life, where thou
art governor together with the Father, and the holy Ghost, and where the
Angels, with the blessed souls are citizens for ever and ever. Amen.

An exhortation to watch taken out of holy Scripture.

The day of our Lord shall come as a thief in the night.

These. 1. v. 5. Watch ye therefore because ye know not the day, nor the
hour.

Math. 25. v. 13. And that which I say to you I say to all: watch.

Marc. 13. v. 37. The end of the first Chapter.

Most wholesome meditations, which we ought day and night to have before our
eyes, and alvvayes to have in remembrance.
We onght continually to remember these three things: that is to say: Time
Paste. That we have unprofitably spent. That good which we have left
undone. That evil which we have committed.
Time Present. Of the shortness of man's life. Of the difficulty to be saved. Of
the small number that shall be saved.
Time To come. Of death most miserable. Of the last Indgement most horrible.
Of the pains of hell intolerable.



THE SECOND CHAPTER CONTEYNINGE GOODly and devout prayers, to be said before,
at and after the holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
A prayer when thou do enter into the church. Ex hortulo animae.
OH, take from me (most merciful Lord) all mine iniquityes, to the end I
may with a pure and contrite heart enter into the holy of holyes. O Savior of
the world which lyuest and reignest with the father and the holy ghost.

A prayer to stir up the mind to devotion before Mass. Io. Fab. ex. Aug.
33. medit.
ALmightye and most merciful Father, unto thee all the heavenly company of
the celestial city, all the blessed orders of saved spirits, do incessantly
with due reverence sing continual glory and everlasting praise. Thee O Lord,
all saints and souls of holy men do laud and magnify, with most worthy
and condign honor, as to whom all praise, honor and glory is most justly
due. Nor there is any creature, be he never so worthy, that can sufficiently
according to thy worthynes, give unto thee worthy and sufficient praise. For
thou art that unspeakable incomprehensible and everlasting goodness. Thou
good Lord have made me, thou haste through the merits of the bitter passion
of thy most blessed Son, which he vouchesafed, to suffer for mankind,
restored me to the state of salvation. To thee only is due all laud and
honor, if any good thing be found in me. Oh good Lord, I miserable wretch,
a creature of thy making, a poor woorme of the earth, have good will to laud
and magnify thee, with all my mind and whole intent, but without thy special
grace, I find my self fainte and wonderful weak, wherefore I come to thee my
God, my life, and my strength, my hope, and only comfort, to crave thy
mercy and grace, to give me power to praise thee. Grant of thy unspeakable
mercy that I may worthelie praise and honor thee, and that what I do therein,
may be pleasing and acceptable to thee. Grant me the light of thy grace, that
my mouth may speak, and my heart study thy glory, and my tongue may be
occupied only in the song of laud and praise. But because all praise in a
sinners mouth is vile, and I must of force confess my self manifoldelie to
have offended with my lips, cle^se thou o good Lord my heart from all filthe
and sin. Sanctify me most mighty Savior both inwardly and outwardly,
and make me worthy to magnify thee: receive of thy infinite goodness the
sacrifice of my lips, and make it acceptable in thy sight: let the savor
thereof be plesaunte and well smelling unto thee: Let thy holy swetenes
possess wholly my mind, and feade my soul with the fulness of invisible
things: let my soul good Lord, be quite cut from visible things, and all
wholly given to the study of invisible things: clean seperat from earthly
things, and wholly addicted to heavenly meditations, and make my soul see the
wonderful sight of thy Majesty. O almighty God, enspire thou my heart, that
I may continually give thanks unto the, and honor thee for ever. Grant me
the grace, that in my pilgrimage, and vale of misery, I may so praise thee,
that through thy mercy and grace, I may be associat to their holy
fellowshippe, which see the everlastingly, and singe praise to thee world
without end. Amen.

A devout prayer necessary to be said every Sunday. Cornel. Donters in his
contemplations of the Passion.
MY most loving God and Lord and my creator, I miserable sinner do present
my self this day before thine eyes, beseeching thee humblye, that through
thine infinite bountye, thou wouldeste vouchsafe to give me grace, that I may
keep holy this Sunday, according to thy commandment, and the precept of our
mother the holy Church, giving me true contrition of all my sins that I have
committed against thy divine Majesty, and against my neighbor, by thoughts,
words and deeds, and by omission of good works which I ought to have done:
And I most humbly beseech thee most sweet Jesus, that thou would not
consider the multitude of my sins, but remember thine infinite mercy, and
vouchsafe to grant me grace to spend this week following, without mortal
sin: and for the honor of thy death and passion, to give to al sinners
knowledge and grace to do penance in this world, and generally to have mercy
of al those that our mother the holy Church desires (this day) to pray for,
that with her we all may be partakers of thy sorrowful passion. Amen.

A prayer to be used before confession, or before Mass if time serve.
OH maker of heaven and earth, king of kings and Lord of Lords, which of
nothing did make to thine image and lykenes, and did redeem me with
thine own precious blood, whom I a sinner am not worthy to name, neither to
call upon, neither with my heart to think upon, humbly I desire thee, and
mekely pray thee, that gently thou do behold me thy wicked servant, and have
mercy on me, which had mercy of the woman of Canane, and Mary Magdalene,
which did forgive the Publicane and the thief hanging on the cross: unto
thee I confess (most holy Father) my sins, which (if I would) I can not
hide from thee. Have mercy on me O Christ, for I (wretch) have sore offended
thee, in pride, in covetousness, in gluttony, in lechery, in vainglory, in
hatred, in envy, in adultery in theft, in lyinge, backebitinge, in sporting,
in dissolute and wanton laughing, in Idle words, in hearing, in tastinge, in
touching, in thinking, in slepinge, in working and all ways in which I frail
man and most wretched sinner might sin, my defaulte, my most grievous default.
Therefore I most humblye pray and beseech thy gentleness, which for my health
descendedst from heaven, which did hold up David, that he should not
fall into sin, have mercy on us (O Christ) the which did forgive Peter
that did forsake thee. Thou art my creator and my helper, my maker, my
redemer, my governor, my Father, my Lord my GOD, and my king. Thou art my
hope, my trust, my governor, my help my strength, my defense, my redemption,
my lyse, my health, and my resurrection. Thou art my steadfastness, my refuge
or succor, my light, and my help. I most humbly and heartily desire and
pray thee, help me, defend me, make me strong, and comfort me, make me
steadfast, make me merye, give me light, and visit me, revive me again which
am dead: For I am thy making and thy work, (oh Lord) despise me not. I am
thy servant, thy bondeman, although evil, although unworthy, and a sinner.
But what soever I am, whether I be good or bad, I am ever thine: Therefore to
whom shall I fly, except I fly unto the? If thou cast me of, who shall or
will receive me? If thou despise me, and turn thy face from me, who shall
look upon me, and recognize and knowledge me, although unworthy coming to
thee, although I be vile and unclean? For if I be vile and unclean, thou
canste make me clean: If I be sick thou can heal me: If I be dead and
buried, thou can revive me: For thy mercy is much more than mine iniquity:
Thou can forgive me more, than I can offend. Therefore (O Lord) do not
consider nor have respect to the number of my sins, but according to the
greatness of thy mercy forgive me and have mercy on me most wretched sinner.
Say unto my soul, I am thy health, which sayedst I will not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he live, and be converted, and turn to thee. O Lord
be not angry with me. I pray thee most meek father, for thy great mercy.
I most humbly deseech thee, that thou bring me to the bliss that never shall
cease. Amen.

THESE PRAYERS FOLOVVINGE are to be said at Mass.
Confiteor Deo omnipotenti. etc.

Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus. etc.

When the Priest is at Confession.
O Lord God almightye, long suffering and much merciful: I have sinned
without mesure, and still mine iniquities do daily increase: I have provoked
thine anger by committing evil wilfully in thy sight, as it were determininge
naughtiness, and multiplyinge offenses: I have sinned (O Lord) I have sinned:
and I acknowledge mine iniquity: But thou (O God) of thy great goodness have
promised to the penitente remission of their sins: I therefore now bow the
knees of my ^arte, beseeching mercy of thee (O Lord) and willingly detecting
and detesting the sinfulnes of my conscience. I say with the penitent
Publicanne, say this thrice: [*Be merciful (O God) unto me a sinner:*] Do not
destroy me together with my iniquities, nor reserve my punishment to be
perpetual, but save me thy unworthy servant, according to the multitude of
thy mercies, and I shall praise thee all the days of my life, because all the
powers of heaven praise thee, and to thee belongs honor and glory for ever
and ever. Amen.

When the Priest goes to the Alter after Confession.
TAke from us all our iniquities (O Lord) that we may be worthy to enter into
heaven: say this thrice [*Haue mercy*] on thy people (o Christ) whom thou haste
redeemed with thy preciouse blood.

Lord have mercy upon us. Christ etc. Lord etc. Amen.

When the Priest says. Gloria in excelsis Deo
Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace to men of good will: we praise
the (o Lord) we worship thee, we magntfie the, we adore the, we glorify the,
we thank the for thy great glory, o Lord God, heavenly king, God the father
almighty, Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten son, and the holy ghost,
Lord God, Lamb of God, son of the father, which take away the sins of
the world have mercy upon us, who take away the sins of the world hear
our prayers, who sit on the right hand of God the father have mercy upon
us, because thou only art holy, thou only art Lord, thou only art most
highest Jesus Christ with the holy ghost, in the glory of God the father. Amen.

Almighty and everlasting God I most humbly beseech thee vouchsafe to look
upon this congregation, and mercifuly accept the prayers of thy church, made
unto thee for us all by the ministry of this Priest, and thereby, for thy
mercies, sake give us remission of all our sins, integretie of mind, health
of body, necessary suste^tatio^, peace in our days, temperate air,
fruitefullnesse of the earth, unity of faith, rootinge out of all heresies,
destruction of all wicked councels, increase of true religion, earnest
charity, sincere devotion in prayer, patience in troubles, Joy in hope, and
what soever is for our souls health needful and most belonginge to thy
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

At the Epistle.
O God which have fully accomplished in perfect verity that which the law
did foretell, and under a wounderfull Sacrament have left us the memory of thy
Passion: Grant us we beseech thee, so to worshipp the holy mysteries of thy
blessed body and blood, that we may always feel the fruit of thy redemption
in us who live and raignest with God the father and the holy ghost in
perfect unity for ever. Amen.

After the Epistle.
O Glorious Trinity, o venerable unity, by the we are created, to true
eternity: by the are we redeemed, to true charity, defend, save, deliver:
protect and cleanse all thy people, O God almighty: we adore thee O God the
father: we praise thee O God the son: we thank the o God the holy ghost to
whom three persons and one God, be all honor and glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

O Lord deal not with us according to our sins, nether reward us according
to our iniqui-quities, Lord remember not our former offenses: but thy mercies
spedely prevent us, because we have great need thereof: help us O God our
savior, and for the glory of thy name deliver us, O lord, and be merciful to
us for thy name sake.

After the Gospel. Credo in Deum Patrem. etc.
GOod Lord grant that we may all contine we in the true and sincere profession
of the holy Catholic faith, to the end of our lives, and that we may therein
fight a good battle, exercisinge our selves in all holiness and godliness,
to the end that after this life we may receive of thee O Lord a crown of
righteousness, which thou haste laid up for all thine elect. Amen.

At the offertorie.
O lord holy father, who through Jesus Christ thy only son, haste taught a
new oblation of a new testament, which the Church receauinge of thy holy
Apostles, offers through-out the whole world to thee O God the creator of all
things, offering under a hidden mystery, the first fruits of thy creatures and
gifts, to wit, bread and wine mingled with water, streight-wayes to be
consecrated into the flesh and bood of thy well-beloved son, that by the same
oblation, he may represente him, who is the lively bread descendinge from
heaven, giving life to all the world, who by the blood and water which flowed
from his side did wash us from our sins: vouchsafe almighty God mercifully
to accept this oblatio^, which thy Catholic Church offreth to thee by the
Priest for all thy people, whom thou haste purchased with the pretiouse blood
of thy deare-beloued son our lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

When the Priest turninge desires the people to pray for him.
Our Lord send thee help from heaven and protect thee. Our Lord be mindful of
this thy sacrifice, and receive it at thy hands, to the laud and glory of his
name, and to the health and comfort of our souls, and the souls of all
faithful living and dead. Amen.

O Lord which Iustyfiest the wicked and gyuest life to the dead, quicken and
raise me o Lord: give me compunction of heart and tears to my eyes, that I may
ever bewail the wickedness of my heart with humilytie. Let my prayer come
before thy presece O Lord: If thou be angry with me (o god) what helper shall
I seek? or who shall have mercy upon mine iniquities? remember (O Lord) that
thou did call the woman of Cananea and the Publicane to repentance, and did
receive Peter after his tears. Receive also my prayers (O God) my Savior, who
live and raignest for ever. Amen.

When the Priest says. Sursum corda.
O God father most high, lift up our hearts and minds (I beseech the) from
the cogitations of earthly cares, to the meditation of heavenly loyes, that we
may think, and speak of thee only, and may in all our life express thee,
and after may enjoy thee for ever. Amen.

Then say with the Priest.
IT is meet and just, right and necessary that we always and in all places
give thee thanks (O holy Lord) Father almighty, everlasting God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord: by whom the Angels praise thy Majesty, the
dominatio^s adore the, the powers tremble, the virtues of heaven and the
heavens, and the blessed Seraphin with mutual gladness give praise unto the
with whom we beseech the that thou will command our prayers to be received,
sayeing with humble confession. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaothe. The
heavens and earth are full of thy glory. Glory be to God on the highest,
blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord, O sanna in the highest.
Amen.

At the holy Canon.
O Most high Priest and true Bishop Jesus Christ, who have offered thy self
to God thy father, (upon the alter of the Cross,) a pure and immaculate Host
for us wretched sinners, who have left unto us thy flesh and blood in a
Sacrament which is made by thy divine omnipotency, and have ordained this
Sacrament, which thou commaundest to be offered in remembrance of our
salvation, by the same thy almighty power, I beseech thee, that thou will
grant me poor sinner, worthily to remember thy blessed Passion, and to
resign and consecrate my self, and all that I have, wholly to thee, who art
my Lord and redemer, and to be present at this heavenly sacrifice with fear
and reverence, with puretie of heart, and plenty of tears, with spiritual
gladness, and heavenly Joy, let my mind taste the sweetness of thy blessed
presence, and perceive the troops of thy saints and Angels which are about
the. Amen.

Speak with me (o blessed Virgin Mary) that my prayers may take effect before
thy son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Entreat for me O ye Apostles:
make intercession for me O ye Martirs: pray for me all ye Confessors and all
the holy company of heaven: the prayers of such O Lord thou despisest not:
Inspire the^ therefore to pray for me O Lord which live and raignest one God
for ever and ever. Amen.

Here meditate with your self till the Elevation.
ANd think your self unworthy to be present among so many thou sand of
Angels and saints, as are there (although invisibly to us) tending upon him
(with all reverence) whom we (through our sins) caused to die a most bitter
death, and whom (through our evil life) we from time to time (as much as in
us lies) do crucify. Think how great his love is to us, which by this daily
oblation would preserve us in that estate whereunto he once brought us. These
benefittes and others (as time will suffer) considered: let us examine our
selves and our behavior to so gracious a Lord, and say with the Publicane, O
God be merciful to me a sinner.

O Most merciful Lord Jesus Christ, in the remembrance of thy most blessed
incarnation, death, Passion, wounds, sorrows, greeues, sighs, tears and drops
of thy most precious blood, and in remembrance of thy most infinite love to
mankind, and in the union of this oblation, and of that sacrifice by the
which thou did offer thy self on the Altar of the Cross, I do offer my
self to thy laud and glory: humbly besechinge the to give to the lyuinge
grace, to the deceassed peace and rest, and to us all, mercy and life
everlasting. And I commend unto the O Lord my soul and body, and all that is
within me, most humbly beseching thee to have mercy upon me, and upon all
those whom I am bound in respect of nature or frendshippe to pray for: as N.
and N. etc.

At the Elevation of the Host.
I Adore thee, and worshipp the (O Christ) with all praise and benediction. For
by thy bitter death and Passion, thou haste redeemed my soul from endless
affliction. Have mercy upon me dear Jesus, and grant that thy death be
never found frustrate in me, I most humbly beseech thee. Amen.

At the Elevation of the Chalice.
AL hayle most precious and blessed blood, flowinge out of the side of my
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, washinge away the spots both of the old and
new offense: cleanse, sanctify, and keep my soul I beseech thee to
everlasting life.

WE thank the O Lord God merciful father, that thou did vouchesafe to send
thine only begotten son Jesus Christ, into this wretched world to die for
us all, the most shameful death of the Cross, to the end that he might offer
him self to thee, through the holy ghost, a most pure, clean, holy and
acceptable sacrifice for our sins: and might so purge our wicked conscience
from all spots of uncleanness. By this thy exceeding great love to us, and
by these most cruel torments of thy son our Savior: we most humbly
beseech the that thou will preserve in us co^tinuallie those most noble fruits
of his redemption, and make us also daily to die with him to the world, and
to be crucified to the lusts and desirs of the flesh, and to live to thee
only all our life: So that in the end we reign eternally with him: where
thou with the same thy son, and the holy ghost, live and raignest one true
and living God for ever and ever. Amen.

When the Priest says the Pater noster say with him.
Let us pray. Being admonished by wholesome precepts, and being taught by
divine institution, we dare be bold to say.

Pater noster qui es in caelis. etc.

Aue Maria gratia plena. etc.

When the Priest kissethe the pax.
O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world have mercy upon us.
O Lamb of God that etc. have mercy upon us. O Lamb of God that etc. Give us
peace and quietness.

Deliver us we beseech thee (O Lord) from all our evils paste, present, and
to come: and by the intercession of thy blessed and glorious mother the virgin
Mary, and of thy holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all thy saints,
mercifully grant us peace in our days, that we being aided by the help of
thy mercy, may continually be free from sin, and safe from all parturbation
of mind and body. Amen.

When you kiss the Pax.
GEeue peace in our days (O Lord) because their is no other that fights for
us, but only thou O Lord God.

When the Priest receives.
O Sacred feast wherein Christ is received, the memory of his passion is
revived, the mind is replenished with grace, and a pledge is given us of the
glory to come.

O Mostmercifull Lord God father of mercy, grant I beseech thee, that this
unbloody Sacrifice of the blessed body and blood of thy son our Lord Jesus
Christ, which here and euery-where throughout thy holy Church, is offered, to
the great benefit of us al, (for a continual and daily memory and thanks
giving) may entreat for us at thy hands, mercy and remission of all our
sins. Amen.

Then blessing your self say.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the virtue of his most gloriouse
Passion, the sign of the holy Cross, the integrity of the most blessed
Virgin Marie, the blessing of all Saints, and the prayers of all the Elect of
God, be between me and all my ennemies, visible and invisible, now and in the
hour of my death.

In nomine patris and filii and spiritus sancti. Amen.

A prayer after the divine Sacrifice of the Mass. Cornelius Donters in his
contemplations of the passion.
O Most louinge Lord and almighty God, I beseech thee most humbly vouchsafe
to receive for acceptable, the divine service which I have done this day, to
thy honor and glory, and to the honor of thy blessed mother, and to the
honor of all saints, whose feasts we celebrate in remission of our sins,
and for all our friends and benefactours, as well those that live, as those that
be departed: most earnestlye requestinge, that thou would louinglye receive
these our devotions, in this time of thy divine service, and to forgive me
mercifully, that which I have done without devotion, in deeds, words, and
thoughts. Give us thy grace always to walk in thy holy commandments, and
to serve thee loyally, to the end thou may be honored and glorified in us.
Amen.

A prayer to recommend your self to God. In Eucholo Ecclesiast.
O Lord I recommend into the hands of thy inestimable mercy, my soul, my
body, my senses, my words and my thoughts, my counsel, my works, and all
the necessities of my body and soul, my entering and goinge forth, my faith
and my conversation, the course and end of my life, the day and hour of my
departinge, my death, the rest and resurrection of my soul with thy saints
and thine elected. Amen.

A prayer to be said before a Catholic Sermon or exhortation.
O Lord Jesus Christ, open the eyes and ears of my heart, to the end I may
hear and understand thy holy word, and to obey it, according to thy holy
will. I am a pylgrime upon earth, keep not hidden thy commandments from me.
Open mine eyes that I may understand the maruelouse things of thy law.

Give me wisdom, to lighten my understanding, to purify my heart, to inflame
my affection, that I may love thee and know thee, in all and above all
things. Amen.

The end of the second Chapter.
THE THIRD CHAPTER CONTEYNINGE Wholesome prayers for remission of sins.
An humble bevvaylinge of sins for a sinner that has compunction. Joan. Fab.
in precat. Christian.
O Most heavenly king and most merciful Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, here
do I come to thee being very fainte with the infirmity of sin, and far
from the perfection which thou requirest to be in me. My conscience does daily
accuse me, and more and more I find the imperfection and fraveltie of my
flesh. I do continually offend thy Majesty. All the imaginations of my heart,
all my words and deeds whatsoever I do, or leave undone, whether I eat,
drink, sleep, or watch, all my thoughts, all my senses are wholye bent to
wickedness: whether shall I turn me O Lord? Thou requirest of me integrity of
life, and justice, and that I should walk in thy holy commandments,
whereto thou promisest me thy gracious help: But O Lord I feel my own will
so perverse and ouer-thwart that I can not hartelie wish and desire those
things which be requisite to my salvation: I have no will to bewail my
sins, ne yet repent my wickedness from the bottom of my heart: I am so
carried away with the vanity of this life, that I do quite forgette the
benefits of thy death and Passion, which thou of thy bountiouse liberality
bestowed upon me most vile and abominable wretch. My offenses be so many
in number, and so grievous, O most gracious God, (wherewith I offend thy Divine
majesty,) that were not thy most merciful pity, I had been long agoo
drowned in the deep dongeon of everlasting tormente. Wherefore I most humbly
thank thy unspeakable goodness and mercy, that I am not alredie sounke^ into
the botomles pit of hell. But what shall I do? shall I despayer? shall I
say with cursed Cain the murderer of his brother, my offenses are greater
the^ can be forgyuen me? No: God forbid that I should have any such
thought: no but this will I say, my God is merciful and full of pity, he is
my comfort, my strength and consolation, my refuge, and defense, he will not
despise the work of his own h^^d, n^^ will cast from before him me poor
wretched sinner: wherefore most merciful Savior, I come to the, openinge in
thy sight the thoughts of my heart, for thou never fayleste me with thy
graciouse help. I confess most merciful Lord before thee, my weakness,
acknowledginge my own imperfection, and bewaylinge the multitude of my
offenses. O everlasting and endless swetenes, o unspeakable mercy and most
louinge Father, I have sundry times, and manies ways offended against heaven
and thee, so that I am not worthy to be reputed for thy child. For I have
abused thy fatherly clemency and merciful pity to mine utter undoing.
Accept me o Lord for one of thy hired servants, and feed me with the
comfortable bread of thy heavenly grace, that I being refreshed therewith,
may humbly serve the in thy house, in cleanes of life, and purity of
conscience, all the days of my life. O sweet Savior Christ I humbly beseech
the for thy bitter Passion and blessed mothers sake, by that Marie Magdalene,
which so fervently loved thee, whose sins all though they were many, yet
thou forgauest them, and made her pertaker of thy heavenly glory, receive
me under the wings of thy mercy, and take compassion upon me. Take from me
the fond love of this transitory world, and quenshe in me all fillthie lusts
of the flesh, and enkindle in my soul a burninge desire of thy gloriouse
bless. Grant me almighty God true repentance for my sins: grant me thy
grace to lame^te in me my want of sorrow for my offenses: make my heart pure
and net that my soul being clean, may utterly abhor and hate sin.
Grant me reconciliation to thee, through the comfortable Sacrament of
penance: and to be received into the blessed company of thy chosen. Give me
an earneste desire to amend my life, that I being holden up with thy grace,
may continue in holiness of life to the end of the same, and lastelie may
attain to thy heavenly tabernakle, where I may praise and honor thee,
world without end. Amen.

A prayer of penitent sinner acknovvleginge his vileness in the sight of God.
Imit Christ. lib. 3. ca. 9.
SHall I Lord Jesus dare speak to the that am but dust and ashes? verelye if I
think my self any better then ashes and duste, thou st^ndest against me, and
also mine own sins bear witness against me, that I may not with say it:
but if I despise my self, and set my self at naught, and think my self but
dust and ashes, as I am, then thy grace shall be nyghe unto me, and the light of
true understanding shall enter into my heart, so that all presu^ption and
pride in me, shall be drowned in the vale of meeknes, through perfect
knowledge of my wretchedness. I have lost thee, and also my self by
inordinate love that I have had to my self, and in seking of thee again, I
have found both thee and me, and therefore will I more depelye from
hencefourthe set my self at naught, and more diligently seek thee, than I
have done in time paste: for thou Lord Jesus, thou do to me above all my
merits, and above all that I can ask or disire. But blessed be thou in all
thy works, for though I be unworthy any good thing, yet thy goodness never
cease to do well to me, and also to many other which be unkind to thee, and
that are turned right far from thee. Turn us Lord threfore to thee again,
that we may henceforward be louinge, thank full, meek and devout to thee: for
thou art our health, our virtue, and all our strength in body and in soul,
and none but thou. To thee therefore be joy and glory everlastingly in the
bliss of heaven. Amen.

A confession of a man's own ungratefulness toward God, vvhereupon the
sinner being turned unto pennaunce, prescribes to himself a certain course
of life. Margarita euangelica, ca. 3. li. 4.
O God I am the prodigal child, which has sundry ways offended thee, who
being created of thee, in the state of innocencye, have notwithstanding that,
without all shame most vily given my self over to all devilish and lewd
conversation. Thou wast crucified and did dest humble thy self for me, and I
have swelled up with pride. Thou haft showed thy self naked and nedy, and
covetousness has overwhelmed me: Thou suffredst smarte and pain, but I live in
wanton delicatenes: Thou wast served with esyll and gall, but I lie in bestely
drounke^nes: Thou wast always well occupied in virtuous exercise, but I
always idle and never well occupied: Thou did pray for thine enemies, and I
have been so far from the prayinge for mine enemies, that I care little for my
friends. But alas what shall I do? shall I fall in despair? No, God forbid.
Iron that is rustie may be cleansed and skowred clean from rust, and I will
cleanse my self from the ruste of conscience with contrition, confession, and
satisfaction. And as I have through pride lift up my self, so will I pluck
down my heart by humility, and become a mockingestocke and skorne to the
world: And because I will avoid couetousenes: I will quite abandone all
desire of worldly and transitory things, and against the wanto^ones of the
flesh, I will hamper my flesh, with continual sobbing and sighing for my
sins. By the burning compassion of thy brotherly love, and fervent charity
and the denyinge of thine own will, and for thy bitter Passion have mercy
upon me. Amen.

An humble confession of sins with desire of mercy and grace.
O Lord creator of heaven and earth, king of kings and Lord over all dominion
and power, which haste made me of naught even unto thine own likeness by
memory, understanding, and will, whereby I may know, worship, and love
thee, and have also redeemed me with thy most precious blood, whom I
detestable wretch and wicked creature am not worthy once to name, much less
to call upon thee: the rather, for that I do acknowllege, and confess my
self. I have been and am an horrible and greuouse sinner: and have so
haynouslie transgreffed in the sight of thy Divine majesty, that I a^ not
worthy to be called thy son, no not so much as to have the name of thy
meanest or simplest servant, nether yet that the earth should bear my
footesteppes, but rather for my wickedness to open her mouth to devour and
swallowe me up, to be eternallye tormented in the bottomless pyt of hell.
How much less then may I presume to offer up unto thee any sacrifice of
praise or thanks giving? For if thou have not spared the natural braunshes
and creatures of so great excellency, that is to say, Lucifer and his wicked
favorers, but for the offenses of one rebelliouse and proud thought and that
scarce of so long continuance as the minute of an hour, thou haste thrown
them down from the high habitatio^ of heaven and everlasting joy and
felicity, (unto which they were created,) into the vale of everlasting
darcknes, there to be eternally tormented in the flames of vnquenshable fire,
Alas, what shall I then most wretched sinner say, or what just excuse may I
allege, which have not offended in one sin only, but in many, and that in
heapinge sin upon sin from day to ^^y without any repentance? But yet
most merciful father because thou art the father of mercy, and that it is thy
property always to take mercy, and despisest not the sighing of such as are
vnfeynedlie cotrite in heart, and willeste not the death of a sinner, but
rather that he may be turned again unto thee and live: therefore I cheeflie
having assured confidence in thy superabundaunt mercy, do humbly prostrate
my self before thy mercie-seate, instantly beseeching thee to grant me
pardon, and remission of my wretched wickedness, and great offenses, with which
I have so greuouslie offended thy eternal goodness, wittinglye or ignorauntlie,
as thou best knoweste, from the beginning of my life until this present,
and specially with such a person, in such a place, these many times, in this
manner, this suggestion mouinge me, this long continuing without repentance,
and by my evil example geuinge such and such occasion to sin.

Here call to mind particulerly in what thou haste offended God: With whom
thou have sinned: Whom thou haste iniuryed: How often, and how long thou
haste continued

Of all which, most merciful Father, it may please thee to perdon me most
fillthie sinner, and abominable liver, and also all other sinners which
either I have entised unto sin, or given example of sinning, and likewise all
those which have given me occasion of sinninge: absoluinge and delivering us
from the grievous heavy bands thereof, through the merciful merits of the
most bitter Passion of thy only son and our redemer Jesus Christ, who
suffered most cruel and vile death to save sinners. For otherwise what
should become of me in that most dreadful iudgmente day, when the book of
conscience shall be opened, when it shall be said of me, behold the person and
his works: at which time all the iniquity that I have committed, from the
first day of my life, both in heart, word, and work, shall be made open to
heaven and earth, and all those my sins shall be there present to accuse me:
moreover the dyuell and conscience redye to bear wittnes thereunto, also thou
my wratthfull judge upon their just accusation, thy justice enforcinge the
same, ready to give the terrible sentence of eternal death against me, and
finally the horrible pit of hell continually gaping and opening his
insatiable mowthe, desirous to swallow me, the dreadful consideration whereof
would make me, O Lord, to despair, if I did not call to mind the
infiniteness of thy mercy, my most merciful redeemer: For the sins of
men, be they never so many, are to be numbered: but thy mercy Lord God is
infinite and without number, and thy mercy great above all thy works: for
thy exceeding great mercy through effusion of thy most precious blood and
voluntary death, has purchased pardon, and forgiveness for us, before we were
suitors for it, yea when we were thine enemies, and gonne far away from
thee, how much more rather shall we obtain it, when we through thy grace
now being reconsiled unto thee, with our unfeigned repe^tante hearts
incessantly do sue, and with bitter tears humbly crave it? Wherefore O
Lord of mercy, deal not with me after my deserts, but according to thy
great mercy: remember not, sweet Jesus, thy severe Justice against the sinner,
but be mindful of thy long sufferinge goodness toward thy creature. Remember
not thy wrath against the offendour, but be mindful of thy mercy toward
the repentant sinner.

Remember not my disobedience which has provoked the, but respect him which
in great sorrow and heuines of heart, for his offenses calls upon thee. For
what is Jesus but a Savior: Therefore O Jesus for thine own sake I beseech
thee, rise up to help me, and say unto my soul, I am thy saving health. I
presume much of thy goodness O merclfull Lord being there unto imboldened,
forasmuch as thou thy self teach me to ask, to seek, and to knock.
Wherefore being admonished through thy teachinge, I ask, I seek, and I
knock, and thou Lord which commaundest me to ask, grant me to obtain:
and thou which counsaylest me to seek, grant me to find. And thou which
teach me to knock, open unto me at my knockings, and make me being
sick in soul, to be whole: restore me again being as one forlorn, and a
caste-awaye: Raise me up being dead through sin, from death, and
vouchsafe to govern and direct all my senses, thoughts, words, and acts,
so as they may be pleasant in thy sight, that from henffourthe I may truly
serve thee, live to thee, and commit my self wholly unto thee, and to delight
in nothing, but in thee and for thee. For I know O Lord, that forasmuch as
thou have made me, Low unto thee my self: and because thou haste redeemed
me, and wast made man for me, I owe unto thee more then my self, if I had de
it, by so much as thou art more worthy then I, for whom, thou being the
son of God and second person in Trinity, wouchsafest to suffer for my sake
most grievous torments and shameful death. Yet Lo, more the^ my self, I have
not to give, neither yet I can give that unto thee without thee, wherefore do
thou receive me, and draw me through thy grace unto thee, that I may as well
be thine by love and imitation, as I am thine by calling and creation. Which
live and reignest for ever and ever: unto whom be all honor and glory
world without end. Amen.

A prayer for a penitent sinner after his relapse or falling to sin again.
Antonius Hemert. in Speculo perfectionis.
O Lord Jesus Christ I unhappy sinner most vile and unthankful: Lo, now
again I have offended thee, by this word N. or by this sin N. I have
dishonored thy majesty, and have rejected thee, which above all things ought
to be to me most dear and agreeable.

Thou know (O Lord) how much I am yet Carnal, how little mortyfied, how
full of evil concupiscence, how I am flootinge in external pleasures, how
often enwrapped in vain fansyes, how negligent in spiritual exercises, how
light in laughing and dissolution, how hard and difficult in wepinges and
co^punction, how evil advised in speakinge, how impatient in kepinge silence,
how much given to eating and drinckinge, how deaf and dull in hearing godly
admonitio^s, how atte^tife to babbling, how sluggish to hear dyuine service,
how sodaynlie I am troubled and let to do good, how many things I purpose
whereof I accomplish none.

O my Lord my God, I am full of Sorrow and grief, for that I have sinned, and
also for that I have too-to little compunction: I desire with all my heart, that
thou wouldeste wound my heart with the sorrow of most perfect contrition. And
for as much, as perdition and offense proceeds from me, and grace and mercy
from thee, I purpose from this time forwards (being assisted by they grace)
from hence forth to keep my self, from all misdeedes, and to avoid all
occasions of sin. Amen.

A most profitable protestation to be made vvhyles we are yet in health and
prosperity, Cornelius Donters in his contemplations upon the passion.
O Lord God almighty to whom all things are manifest and known: O eternal
Sapie^ce which preserves all things, I poor wretched creature in despite of
mine enemy make protestation, whiles I am in good health and perfect memory,
wherein I stand at this present through thy grace, that although it happen or
come to pass that by any temptation, illusion, deceipte or variation coming
of grief of sickness, or by weakness of body, or by any other occasion
whatsoever, I come in danger of my soul or prejudice to my salvation, or in
error of the Catholic fayty in the which I am regenerated in the fountain
of Baptism, there promised to resist all temptations of the devil and all
errors of faith: and at this present I do resist and renounce as I did then,
and then as now, protestinge most fervently with all my heart to live and dye
in the faith of our mother the holy Church thy spouse: and in witness of this
protestation and confession I offer (the articles of our holy christian faith
which thy holy Apostles has left us) in recommendinge unto thee my faith,
life and death. Amen.

I believe in God the Father etc.

The end of the third chapter.

THE FOVRTHE CHAPTER CONTEYNINGE VERY goodly prayers, for comfort, strength and
delivery (by Gods assistance) in all sorrows, tribulations, afflictions and
adversities.
When thou feel thy self tempted, say as follows. Imitatio Christi li.
3. ca. 7.
O Thou Satan, the devil, enemy of mankind, I adjure thee by the name of our
Lord God, and by the sign of the holy cross that thou depart and never
hereafter enter into me. O thou wicked spirit avoid from me, and be thou
ashamed for thou art foul and ouglie, that would bring such things into
my mind. Go from me thou false deceyuer of mankind, thou shalt have no
part in me for my Savior Jesus stands by me as a mighty warrior and a
strong champion, and thou shalt fly away to thy confusion. I had lever
suffer the most cruel death then to consent to thy malicious stirringes: be
still therefore thou cursed fyende, and cease thy malice, for I shall never
assente to thee, though thou vex me never so much, our Lord is my light and
my health, whom shall I dread? and he is the defender of my life, what shall
I fear? Truly though an host of men arise against me, my heart shall not
dread them, for why? God is my helper and my redeemer. Amen.

A prayer of any captive according to the form of David, when he was hid in
the cave. Psalm. 142.
With my voice I cry to thee, before thee I open my lamentations, in thy bosom
I disclose the secret word of my heart, my dolours and griefs I show unto
thee, my heart is almost like to bruste, so great is my discomfiture. Thou
know all my dealinges O Lord: and thou see well enough how the ungodly
have laid their snares for me. Lo I cast mine eye on this side, and that
side, as well on my friends as kinsfolks, but all is in vain, none of them al
helps me. And again I can not run away, I am so loade^ and over charged
with irons. O Lord my maker and father, now unto thee I cry, thou art mine
only Shot-anker, defense and help. Thou art my porcio^ and heritage which I
possess in all countries, yea, I have none other possession but thee only: To
thee therefore I stick altogether, knowinge certainly that nothing can go
amiss with me. Consider then my lamentable complaynte, behold how I am
brought low: From the cruel pursuers which be much more of power than I am,
defend me: Deliver me from this prison, and horrible fear of sin and death,
that I may set out thy name, all thy saints as well Angels as men, make
suit for me, desiring thee for my comfort. They shall not cease until they
obtain their request, I mean until thou forgive me my sins, and send me
comfort in this distres with patience and long suffering. This once obtained,
the godly folk shall flock about me, and shall not stynt to give thee
thanks, when they see that thou riddest me forth of these dangers, to the
high praise of thy name, Lord be merciful unto us, take part with us, then
we shall for ever lift up, and magnify thy glorious name. Amen.

A prayer of Job, in his most grievous adversity and loss of goods. Job. 1.
NAked I came out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again, our
Lord gave, and our Lord has taken away, as it has pleased our Lord, so is
it done now blessed be the name of our Lord. Amen.

A prayer in trouble of conscience. Psalm. 134.
Lord hear my prayer, receive my fupplicacion, harken to my complaint for thy
righteousness. Try not the law with thy servant, for truly then shall no
living man be found vngyltie, yea, not one of thy saints should escape
quitte at thy bar, unless thou grant him thy gracious pardon, in so much,
even the very stars be not pure and fautles before thee, in the Angels thou
foundest sin. Now mine enemies hunte for my soul, they beat and drive it
down, they thruste it into darcke dungeons, where felons conuicte and
condemned to death, were wont to be kept, my spirit is sorrowful, my heart is
heavy and sadd with in my breast, to thee I hold up my hands, requiring the
of mercy. For like as the dry ground lo^geth for a shower of reign, so my
soul thinks long till it has thy help and succor, hear me spedely: if
thou do not? I am in despair, my spirits is al werie of this bondage. I have
bid my life farewell: Wherefore O God, hide not thy face, that I be not like
to those that be hurled into the pyt of damnation: after this night of misery
ouerpassed, let the pleasant morninge of comfort luckyly shine upon me, that
by time I may hear and feel thy goodness, for in thee is all my trust: point
me the way, that I shall walk in, for if thou be not my guide, I must needs
wander and straye out of the way. To thee Lord I lift up my soul, and that
with all mine heart I beseech the, take me forth of mine enemies hands. Thou
only art my succor and sauegarde, teach me to work what soever shall be thy
pleasure, for thou art my God. Let thy good spirit conducte me into the land
of the living, encourage my spirit for thy names sake: forth of all these
troubles, for thy righteousness deliver me: confound mine enemies as thou art
gracious and favorable toward me. Those that will work me sorrow and
grief, pluck forth of the way, for I am thy servant, and for thy sake
suffer I all this hurlye-burlye. As thou art God, so help thou me. Amen.

A prayer for patience. De Imit. Christ. li. 3. cap 20.
O Lord, for as much as thou was found paciente in thy life, fulfillinge in
it most specially the will of thy father, it is requisite that I most
wretched sinner should behave my self pacientelye after thy will in all
things, and as long as thou will, that I for mine own health bear the
burden of this corruptible life: for though this life be tediouse and as
heavy a burden to the soul, yet nevertheless it is now through thy grace
made very meritoriouse, and by example of thee, and of thy holy Saints it is
now made to weak persons more patient, clearer, and also much more comfortable
then it was in the old Law, when the gates of heaven were shut, and the way
thither ward was dark, and so few did covet to seek it. And yet they that
were then righteouse and were ordained to be saved, before thy blessed passion
and death might never have come thither. O what thanks am I bound therefore
to yield to thee, that so lovingly haste vouchsafed to show to me, and to all
faithful people that will follow thee, the very true and straight way to thy
kingdom. Thy holy life is our way, and by thy patience we walk to thee that
art our head and gouernoure. But that thou Lord had gonne before and
showed us the way, who would have endeavored him self to have followed: O how
many should have tarried behynd if they had not seen thy blessed example going
before, we be yet slow and dull, although we have seen and hard thy signs
and doctrines: what should we then have been if we had seen no such light
goinge before us? Truly we should have fixed our mind and our love wholly in
worldly things. Make therefore O Lord that possible to me by grace, which is
impossible by nature. Thou knoweste well O Christ, that I can suffer little,
and that I am anon cast down with a little adversity: wherefore I beseech
thee, that trouble and adversity may hereafter for thy names sake, be beloved
and desired of me. For truly to suffer and to be vexed for thee, is very
good, and profitable, to the health of my soul.

A prayer against the enemies of Christ's truth. Psalm. 139.
Deliver me (O Lord) from the ungodly and stiff necked persons, for thou
see how in their hearts they imagyn mischief, and have great pleasure to
pick quarrels, their tongues be more sharper then any Adders stingge, and
under their lyppes lies poison of Adders, but O merciful Lord let me not
fall into their hands that they handle me not after their own lusts.

Thou only art my God, thou must hear my piteous co^plainte, Lord that
rulest all together, that art the strength and power of my defense, be thou as
a helmet upon my head, whenever the ungodly shall assault me, neither
suffer thou not the wicked thus to prosper in their matters. Suffer not their
canckarde and malicious stomachs to increase and spitefullye to revile me.
Look upon thy poor wretches cause, and ryd me out of these daily greuaunces,
then shall I with an up right heart and pleasant countenance extol and
magnify thy holy name. Amen.

A prayer vvherin is desired freedom of the mind and auoydance of vvorldly
desires. Imitat o Christ. li. 3. ca. 30.
I Besche thee most meek and merciful Lord Jesus, that thou keep me from
the business and cares of the world, and that I be not taken with the
voluptuouse pleasure of the world, nor of the flesh, and that in likewise
thou preserve me from all hindraunce of the soul, that I be not broken with
overmuch heuines, sorrow, nor worldly dread. And by these petitions I ask not
only to be delivered from such vanities as the world desires, but also from
such miseries as grieve the soul of me thy servant with the common
malediction of mankind, that is, with corruption of the bodily feeling
wherewith I am so grieved and let, that I may not have liberty of spirit to
behold thee when I would. O Lord God thou art sweetness unspeakable: turn
into bitterness to me all fleshely delights, which would draw me from the
love of eternal things, to the love of a short and a vile delectable
pleasure: Let not flesh and blood overcome me, nor the world with his short
glory deceive me, nor the fiende with his thousand-foulde crafts supplante
me, but give me ghostly strength in resistinge, patience in suffering, and
constancy in perseuering. Give me also for all worldly consolations, the most
sweet consolation, of the holy Ghost, and for all fleshly love send into my
soul the love of thy holy name. Lo, meat, and drink, clothinge, and all
other necessaries for the body are paynefull and troublesome to a fervent
spirit, which if it might, would always rest in God and in ghostly things,
grant me therefore grace to use such bodily necessaries temporally, and that
I be not deceived with overmuch desire to them. To forsake all things it is
not lawful, for the bodily kind must be preserved, and to seek superfluous
things more for pleasure than for necessitye, thy holy law prohibiteth, for
so the flesh would rebel against the spirit: wherefore Lord I beseech thee
that thy hand of grace may so govern me, and teach me that I exceed not by
any manner of superfluity.

A prayer before we take in hand any Journey. By Arnould Sobin.
O Good God whom it pleased to direct Abraham, Jacob and young Tobias in their
peregrinations, and brought the^ in health and safety into their country:
Grant I beseech thee to be my direct our in this Journey, which I would in no
respect undertake (much less follow and finishe) if I knew it any way
contrary to thy holy will: Therefore (O Lord) give me Raphael for my
conductor, to whose custodye I may be delivered, and thereby be brought with
happy success to the accomplishinge of that work whereunto I prepare and
dispose my self.

Direct my understanding (O Lord) to the end that my feet no where straye
from the observations of thy holy commandments: In the name of thy
well-beloved son Jesus Christ our redeemer, who with thee in unity of the
holy Ghost lives and reigns eternally. Amen.

Here follows (for the use of those that are desirous to read latin prayers)
certain verses collected by Sir Thomas Moore forth of David's psalter: in the
time of his trouble and persecution for the Catholic faith: containing an
invocation to God for his help against temptation, with an insultatio^
against wicked spirits, upon hope and confidence in God.

IMPLORATIO DIVINI AVXILII contra ^enta^^onem, cum insultatione eontra Daemones
exspe and fiducia in Deum.
DOmine quid multiplicati sunt, qui tribula^t me? multi insurgunt aduersum me.
Multi dicunt animae meae, non est salus ipsi in deo eius.

Tu autem domine susceptor meus es, gloria mea, and exaltans caput meum.

Ego dormiui, and soporatus sum: and exurrexi quia dominus suscepit me.

Non timebo millia populi circundantis me, exurge domine, saluum me fac deus
meus.

Psa. 5. Domine deduc me in iustitia tua, propter inimicos meos dirige in
co^spectu tuo viam meam.

Quoniam non est in ore eorum veritas, cor eorum vanum est.

Sepulchrum patens est guttur eorum, linguis suis dolose agebant iudica illos
deus.

Decidant a cogitationibus suis: secundu^ multitudine^ impietatum eorum expelle
eos, quoniam irritauerunt te domine.

Et laetentur omnes qui sperant in te, in aeternum exultabunt, and habitabis in
eis.

Domine vt scuto bonae voluntatis tuae coronasti nos.

Psa. 7. Domine d^us meus in te speraui, saluum me fac ex omnibus perse
que^tibus me, and libera me.

Nequando rapiat vt leo animam meam, dum no^ est qui redimat, neque qui saluum
faciat.

Exurge domine in ira tua, and exaltare in finibus inimicorum meorum.

Persequatur inimicus animam meam vt comprehendat, and conculcet in terra vita^
meam, and gloriam meam in puluerem deducat.

Arcum suum tetendit, and parauit illum: and in eo parauit vasa mortis,
sagittas suas ardentibus effecit.

Ecce parturit iniustitiam, concepit dolorem, and peperit iniquitatem.

Lacum apperuit, and effodit eum, incidit in foueam quam fecit.

Conuertetur dolor eius in caput eius, and in verticem ipsius iniquitas eius
descendet.

Confitebor domino secundum iusticiam eius: and psallam nomini domini altissimi.

Psa 4. In pace in idipsum dormiam and requiescam.

Quoniam tu domine singulariter in spe constituisti me.

Psa 9. Miserere mei domine, vide humilitatem meam de inimicis meis.

Et sperent in te, qui nouerunt nomen tuum domine, quoniam non dereliquisti
quaerentes te domine.

Et factus est dominus refugium pauperi, adiutor in oportunitatibus in
tribulatione.

Vt quid domine recessisti long, despicis in oportunitatibus in tribulatione?

Quo niam non in finem obliuio erit pauperis, patientia pauperum non peribit in
finem.

Exurge domine deus, exaltetur manus tua, ne obliuiscar is pauperum.

Tibi derelictus est pauper, orphano tu eris adiutor.

Desiderium pauperum exaudiuit dominus: praeparationem cordis eorum audiuit
auris tua.

Dominus in te^plo sancto suo, dominus in cae lo seeds eius.

Oculi eius in pauperem recipient: palpebre eius interrogant filios hominum.

Propter miseriam inopum and gemitum pauperum nunc exurgam, dicit dominus.

Domine deus meus in te speraui, saluum me fac ex omnibus persequentibus me and
libera me.

Psa. 12. Vsquequo domine obliuisceris me in finem? vsquequo auertis faciem
tuam a me?

Quandiu ponam confilia in anima mea: dolorem in cord meo per diem?

Vsquequo exaltabitur inimicus meus super me? respice, and exaudi me domine
deus meus.

Illumina oculos meos, ne vnqua^ obdormiam in morte: nequando dicat inimicus
meus, praeualui aduersus eum.

Qui tribulant me, exultabunt si motus fuero: ego aut em in misericordia tua
speraui.

Exultabit cor meum in salutari tuo cantabo domino qui bona tribuit mihi, and
psallam nomini domini altissimi.

Psa. 15. Conserua me domine, quonia^ speraui in te, dixi domino, deus meus es
tu, quoniam bonoru^ meorum non eges.

Psa. 16. Perfice gressus meos in semitis tui^: vt non mou^antur vestigia mea.

Mirifica misericordias tuas, qui saluos facis sperantes in te.

Psa. 15. Prouidebam dominum in conspectu meo seper, qui a dextris est mihi, ne
commouear.

Propter hoc laetatum est cor meum, and exultauit lingua mea, insuper and caro
mea requiescet in spe.

Psas. 17. Tu illuminas lucerna^ meam domine deus meus, illumina tenebras meas.

Quoniam in te eripiar a temptatione, in deo meo transgrediar murum.

Deus meus impolluta via eius, eloquia domine igne examinata, protector est
omnium sperantium in se.

Quoniam quis deus praeter dominum, aut quis deus praeter deum nostrum.

Psa 21. Ego aute^ sum vermis and non homo, opprobrium hominum, and abiectio
plebis.

Omnes videntes me deriserunt me, locuti sunt labijs, and mouerunt caput.

Tu es qui extraxisti me de ventre, spes mea ab vberibus matris meae, in te
proiectus sum ex vtero.

De ventre matris meae deus meus es tu, ne discesseris a me.

Quoniam tribulatio proxima est, quoniam non est qui adiuuet.

Tu autem domine ne elongaueris auxilium tuum a me, ad defensionem meam
conspice.

Et si ambulauero in medio vmbrae mortis, non timebo mala, quonia^ ^u me^u^^es.

Virga tua and baculus tuus ipsa me consolata sunt.

Psa. 24. Ad te domine leuaui animam meam, deus meus in te confido, non
erubescam.

Neque irrideant me inimici mei, etenim vniuersi, qui sustinent te, non
confundentur.

Delicta iuuentutis meae, and ignorantias meas ne memineris.

Secundum misericordiam tuam meme^to mei tu: propter bonitatem tuam domine.

Propter nomen tuum domine propitiaberis peccato meo, multum est enim.

Oculi mei semper ad dominu^, quoniam ipse euellet de laqueo pedes meos.

Tribulationes cordis mei multiplicatae sunt, de necessitatibus meis erue ine.

Vide humilitatem mea^ and labore^ meum, and dimitte vniuersa delicta mea.

Psa. 26. Dominus illuminatio mea, and salus mea, quem timebo?

Dominus protector vitae meae, a quo trepidabo?

Si consistant aduersum me castra, non timebit cor meum.

Si exurgat aduersum me praelium, in hoc ego sperabo.

Vnam petij a do mino hanc requiram, vt inhabitem in domo domini omnibus diebus
vitae meae.

Vt videam voluntate^ domini, and visitem templum eius.

Exaudi domine vocem meam, qua clamaui ad te miserere mei, and exaudi me.

Tibi dixit cor meum, exquisiuit te facies mea, faciem tuam domine requiram.

Ne auertas faciem tuam a me: ne declines in ira a seruo tuo.

Adiutor meus esto, ne derelinquas me, neque despicias me deus salutaris meus.

Credo videre bona domini in terra viuentium.

Expecta dominum viriliter age: conforterur cor tuum, and sustine dominum.

Psa 27. Ad te domine clamabo, deus meus ne sileas a me: nequando taceas a me,
and assimilabor descende^tibus in lacu^.

Psa. 29. Psallite domino sancti eius, and confitemini memoriae sanctitatis
eius.

Quoniam ira in indignatione eius, and vita in voluntate eius.

Ad vesperam demorabitur fletus: and ad matutinum laeticia.

Auertisti faciem tuam a me, factus sum conturbatus.

Ad te domine clamabo, and ad deu^ meum deprecabor.

Quae vtilitas in sanguine meo, dum descendo in corruptionem.

Psa. 30. In te domine speraui, non confundar in aeternum, in iusticia tua
libera me.

Inclina ad me aurem tuam, accelera vt eruas me.

Esto mihi in deum protectorem, and in domum refugij, vt saluum me facias.

Quoniam fortitudo mea and refugium meumes tu, and propter nomen tuum deduces
me, and enutries me.

Educes me de laqueo, que^ absconderunt mihi: quoniam tues protector meus.

In manus tuas domine commendo-spiritum meum, redemisti me domine deus
veritatis.

Miserere mei domine, quoniam tribulor, conturbatus est in ira oculus meus,
anima mea and venture meus.

Quoniam defecit in dolor vita mea, and anni mei in gemitibus.

Infirmata est in paupertate virtus mea, and ossa mea conturbata sunt.

Super omnes inimicos meos factus sum opprobrium vicinis meis valde, and timor
notis meis.

Qui videbant me for as fugerunt a me: obliuioni datus sum tanquam mortuus a
cord.

Factus sum tanquam vas perditum: quoniam audiui vitu perationem multorum
commorantium in circuitu.

In eo dum conuenirent simul aduersum me, accipere animam mea^ co^siliati sunt.

Ego autem in te speraui domine, dixi, deus meus es tu, in manibus tuis sorts
meae.

Illustra faciem tuam super seruum tuu^, saluum me fac in misericordia tua
domine, non confundar, quoniam inuocaui te.

Quoniam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae domine, quam abscondisti timentibus te.

Psa. 32. Ecce oculi domini super timentes eum, and in eis qui sperant super
misericordia eius.

Vt eruat a morte animas eorum, and alat eos in fame.

Anima nostra sustinet dominu^, quo niam adiutor and protector noster est.

Quia in eo laetabitur cor nostrum, and in nomine sancto eius sperauimus.

Fiat misericordia tua domine super nos, quemadmodum sperauimus in te.

Psalm. 33. Accedite ad eum, and illuminamini, and facies vestrae non
confundentur.

Immittet angelus domini in circuitu timentium eum, and eripiet eos.

Gustate and videte, quonia^ suauis est dominus, beatus vir, qui sperat in eo.

Timete dominu^ omnes sancti eius, quoniam non est inopia timentibus eum.

Diuites eguerunt and esurieru^t inquirentes autem dominum non minuentur omni
bono.

Iuxta est dominus his, qui tribulato sunt cord, and humiles spiritu saluabit.

Psa 35. Fill j hom number in tegmine alarm tuarum sperabunt, in ebriabu^tur ab
vbertate domus tuae.

Quoniam apud te est fons vitae, and in lumine tuo videbimus lumen.

Psa 37. Dominene in furore tuo arguas me neque in ira tua corripias me.

Quoniam sagittae tuae infixae sunt mihi, and consirmasti super me manum tuam.

Non est sanitas in carne mea: a facie irae tuae, non est pax ossibus meis a
facie peccatorum meorum.

Quoniam iniquitares meae supergressae sunt caput meu^, and sicut onus grave
grauatae sunt super me.

Putruerunt and corruptae sunt circatrices meae a faciae insipientiae meae

Miser factus sum and curuatus sum vsque in finem: tota die cotristatus
ingrediebar.

Quoniam lumbi mei impleti sunt Illusionibus: and non est sanitas in carne mea.

Afflictus sum and humiliatus sum nimis: rugiebam a gemitu cordis mei.

Domine ante te omne desideriu^ meum: and gemitus meus a te non est absconditus.

Cor meum conturbatum est, dereliquit me virtus mea: and lumen oculorum meorum,
and ipsum non est est mecum.

Amici mei and proximi mei aduersum me appropinquauerunt and steterunt,

Et qui iuxta me erant de long steterunt,

love hartelye without dissimulation, ye and to help all men both with
counsel and good example without pride or vain glory, to be obediente
without grudginge, and patiente without spurninge at adversity. Grant sweet
savior Christ unto me a vigila^t and wakefull mind, that no fond fancy may
carry me away from thee: stedfastnes that no wavering affection may shake:
constancy that no pain, sorrow, or tribulation may daunte, that freedom of
mind that no violence of servile pleasure mave pearse: a straight and true
heart toward thee that no perverse or sinister thought have power to make me
swerve from thee. Give me sweet Jesus an understanding mind in the knowledge
of thee: diligence to search thee: wisdom to synde thee: conversation
acceptable and pleasinge unto thee: perseverance in the sweetenes of thy holy
faith: a sure confidence and trust in thee: to be fastened to thy holy passion
by penance: to enjoy the merits of thy blessed benifites through grace. And
lastly of all to be partaker of thy heavenly mansion in the everlasting
bliss and felicity. Amen.

A prayer most godly and deuou^e which S. Thomas of Aquin used daily to
pray.
Grant me most merciful God fervently to desire such things as may be
acceptable and pleasing unto thee, with wisdom to search after them, not to be
deceived in the knowledge of them, and vnfaynedlie to acco^plishe the doing of
them, to the praise and glory of thy holy name. Direct so my life, and
grant me that I may both have knowledge, will and power to do, that which
thou requierest I should do, in such sort, as is behoueable and most
expedient for my soul. Let my way unto thee O Lord be sure, straight, and
perfect, that I may neither fainte, nor fall from thee: either thorough
adversity or prosperity, that I be not puffed up in pride thorough the one,
nor yet dryue^ down into despair thorough the other: But that I may for the
one give thanks, and be in the other armed with patience. Also that I may
rejoice in nothing, but in that which may allure me unto thee: nor sorrow
ought but that which does withdraw me from thee, that I desire to please or
displease none, but thee, or for thee: and that all things transitory may
for thy sake Lord, be of no reputation with me, and that all things lykinge
unto thee may be delectable unto me, and thou God more then all other
things: and that I may have no reioysinge besides thee, let all labor
delight me that is taken for thee, and all ease be unpleasant that is without
thee. Make me to lift up my heart often unto thee, and when I fall from thee,
grant me to call it sorowfullye to mind with full purpose of amendment.
Grant me that I may be obedient without repinyng, or giving of froward
language: and poor without fallinge from thee: patient without murmuring or
grudging, pure and clean without defiling, or corruption. Make me also
lowelye without counterfeiting, merry without loosnes, sad without lumpishnes,
sobre without dullenes, nimble and quick without lightness of behauior, true
without doblenes, fearinge thee, but not to despair, to do good works, but
not to presume, tellyng my neighbor his fault without flatering, instructing
him both by word and example without scorning, or tauntinge. Grant me
most loving Lord and my God, that my heart may always so wake unto thee
that no vain worldly thought with-drawe me from thee, give me that
constancye that no evil affection or wicked suggestion do pluck me away
from the, and a heart so stable, that no troubles may overcome me, so free
from all vice, that sin may challenge nothing in me. Grant me O my Lord
God understanding to know thee, diligence to seek thee, wisdom to find thee,
conversation to please thee, faithfully to persevere, looking after thee, and
finally thorough hope to embrace thee, and in respect of thy most grieuouse
pains suffered upon the Cross for me, that I may willingly suffer penance
and all tribulation for thee. Also through thy grace to enjoy the graciouse
benefittes here in this transitorye life, and in the world to come to be
partaker of thy reward and heuenlye joys, through the precious blood of
that immaculat lamb our only Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with the father
and the holy ghost three persons and one God, be al honor and glory world
without end. Amen.

A prayer to God that he will vouchsafe to preserve the fruits of the earth.
Joan Ferus in lib. prec.
O Omnipotent, everlasting, and merciful God, we beseech thee consider our
daily needs: show us thy mercy, and give us a sufficient harueste for our
daily necessities, grant that corn, trees, and other fruits of the earth,
may (by thy holy benediction) grow, increase and multyplye: Turn back and
with-drawe from the fruits of the earth, all that may be dammageable, as
tempests, ouerflowing of waters, coldness, hayle and other like things,
which are any way hurtful: Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy son the
everlasting life. Amen.

A prayer to desire that we may use all temporal things, for the health of
our souls only. Thomas de Camp. in lib. de Imit. Christ.
I Beseech thee most inercyfull God, vouchsafe to preserve me, from excessive
cares of this life, that I be not to much encombred with many things
concerning the necessity of my body, and that I be not overtaken with any
voluptuousnes of these things.

O my God, my ineffable sweetenes, change and turn into bitterness all my
carnal consolations, which withdraw me from the love of celestial things.
Suffer me not (my God) to be conquered, not to be overcome of flesh and of
blood. Suffer me not to be deceived of the world, and of the transitory glory
thereof, nor that the devil through his subtlety overthrow me to the ground.
Give me strength to resist: patience to endure: and constancy to persevere:
for, meat drink, clothes, and all necessayrie things to uphold the body,
are painful and troublesome for that person, that has a devout spirit.
Therefore grant me Lord to use these things moderatly, and that my heart be
not to much encombred with the desire of them. The holy law forbids us to
require superfluous things, and such as are more delectable than profitable:
for otherwise the flesh should be over burdenouse to the spirit. And always I
request that thy holy hand may gouuerne and instruct me, that I do nothing
excessyuelie. Amen.

The end of the fifth Chapter.
THE SIXTE CHAPTER CONTEYNINGE WHOLESOME prayers of the life and passion of our
Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ.
A prayer to be said before the Crucyfix. Cuthbertus Tunstall in lib. bell.
prec.
O Merciful crucifix, the redeemer of all people, whose head was filthely
lacerat and torn with a croune of thorn, whose hands and feet extended upon
a cross were through-bored with nails, whose whole feeble body was hanged on
high and two thieves to his ignomie and shame, fastened on his right and
left hand, of the which the one despised thee, the other knowleged thee to be
a king, whose spirit co^me^ded unto the father, was gvuen up to redeem us
withal. And being dead thy side thorwe-pearced, gushed and poured outewater
and blood. What tongue can worthily express, what mind can co^ceyue those
innumerable pains, the which thou an innocente haste suffered? We beseech
thee, for these so exceeding great torments to illuminate our souls with the
light of thy knowledge, to moderat our understanding to strengthen our hands
too good works, to convert our feetesteppes and goinges to thy ways, to
direct our thoughts, words, and deeds, and last of all to bring us
wretches unto thy kingedome: where that we with thy holy Angels, may have
thy fruition the which do live and reign God with God the father and the
holy ghost through all worlds. So be it.

A prayer acknovvledginge that man was the cause of Christ's suffering. Io.
Fab. ex 7. Medit. B Augustine.
What have thou done sweet child, that thou should have this judgment?
What haste thou done, that thou should be thus streitly delte-with? what is
thy offense, what is thy gilte? what cause of thy death? what occasion of thy
condemnation? I truly, I am cause of thy trouble, my fault has made thee to be
slain: my defert has brought thee unto this death: vengeance is taken of
thee for my haynouse gilte: thou art thus tormented for me, and I the occasion
of all thy smart. O marvelous sort of judgment, and order of the unspeakable
divine mystery. The wicked sins, and the just is punished. The gilty
offends, and the innocente is beaten. The sinner transgresses, and the godly
is condemned. That which the bad has deserved, the good suffers: for that
wherein the servant has done evil, the master makes recompense: for that
the man has committed the son of God is plagued: how farfurthe thou son of
God, how farfurth has thine humilytie descended? what has feruente love
enforced the to do? Howfarfurthe is thy mercy extended? how does thy bounty
increase? how far forth has thy love reached? Unto what pass is thy
compassion come? For I have done wickedlie, and thou art punished: I have
committed a grievous fault, and it is laid to thy charge: I am the offender,
and thou art put to the torture: I was pufte up in pride, and thou imbaced and
made of no reputation: I was disobedient, and thou suffer the pain of my
disobedience. I have pampered my self with delicat fare, and thou therefore
ready to perish through hunger. My affection through concupiscence had made me
to do things unlawful, and perfect charity in thee has brought thee to
suffer upon the cross: I presumed to do that I was forbidden, and thou
submittest thy self to receive rebukes and punisheme^ts therefore: I delight
in all banquettinge and pleasure, and thou art put unto miserable pains upon
the Cross. I live at ease, and thy hands and feet are persed with nails: I
taste the plesaunt aple, and thou the bitter gaul: Eua laugheth and reioyseth
with me, blessed Marye lamenteth and soroweth with thee. Behold, O King of
glory, Loo what mine iniquitye is, and how abundant thie mercy is: Loo what
mine ungodliness is, and how meruailouse thy righteousness is. O my King and my
God, with what may I possible recompense thee for the great goodness showed
toward me. Man's heart is not able to think what may be worthelye given in
recompense for so great benefits. For is there any such fines of wit in man,
that is able to make it self equalle with the mercy and compassion of God? Or
can man imagine which way to do such dewtifull service, as might iustlye
requite his ready succoure and provident care continually had for man?
There is trewlie sweet Soon of God, there is thorough this thy meruailouse
dispensacion, wherein manes frayltie may in some thing do that, which may be
acceptable unto the, that is to say, if thorough compunction of heart stirred
up by thy visitacion, he do crucify his fleash with her concupiscences, and
vices, which thoroughe thy grace being brought to pass, then begins he to
be a sufferer with thee, for whose offenses thou vouchsauedst a vile death to
dye. So by the victory of the inward man through thee, being his eaptaine,
he shall be armed unto the outward victory, that after conqueste made of the
spiritual enemy, he shall not fear for thee likewise to dye, and for thy
sake to offer his body to be hewed in pieces by the matteriall sword. Thus
the smalnes and simplicitye of man's condition and state, if it may so please
thy godliness, shall be able according to his little power in some part to be
aunswerable to the greatness of the creators goodness. This sweet Jesus is the
heavenly medicine and a preservative of thy love. I beseech thee therefore,
for thy noble mercies sake, power that into my festred wounds, that may cleanse
me from the corruption of the Serpents venemouse poison, and restore me
again to my former health, that tastinge the pleasant liquour of thy
sweetness, it may cause me to set at naught all the wanton intisements, and
pleasant allurements of the world, and for the love of thee, not to fear
any adversities threatnede by it: and that having in remembrance the
perpetual blessedness, I make none account of the raginge storms of this
transitory time. Let nothing like me, let nothing be preciouse in my sight,
but that which is pleasinge unto thee. Also I pray thee, let all things
besides thee, seem fylthie unto me and of no reputacion, cause me likewise to
abhor all things which is offensive unto thee, and my desire never to be
satisfied in seking to do those things which are pleasing unto thee. Let no
joy delight me that is without thee, and let me rejoice in all troubles I
suffer for thee. Let the remembrance of thee, be my solace, and thy blessed
name my consolation, let my tears be nourishment unto me both day and night,
in seking after thy righteousness. Let the law of thy mouth be more preciouse
unto me, then thousands of gold or silver, let it be delectable unto me to
obey thee, and detestable to committ ought against thy divine pleasure: I
humbly beseech thee (my only hope) for all thy mercyes sake, thou will be
merciful unto me, and pardonne all mine iniquity. From the bottom of my
heart I desire thee to open mine ears to hear that thou command, and
suffer not my heart to decline from thee, nor through words of wickedness to
seek excuses for my sin. Finally I beseech thee, for thy meruailouse
humility, let no pride reign in me: nor the power of the sinner fear me.
But that I may all way keep my self undefiled for thee, which lyuest and
raignest for ever, and ever. Amen.

A prayer wherein man does offer (to God the Father) the passion of his son
our Lord and savior Christ. B. August. cap. 6. Medit.
Behold O holy Father thy derely beloved son so cruelly tormented for me,
behold most merciful king who it is that suffers, and remember for whom he
suffers: Is it not O Lord thy most innocent son whom thou haste given to
death that he might redeem thy feruaunt? is it not the Author of life who
being led as a sheep to the slaughter, and made obediente unto thee, even
unto death, spared not the most cruel kind of death?

Call to mind O distributor and gyuer of al goodness, that this is he whom
although thou haste begotten of thy divine power and virtue, yet
notwithstanding have made him partaker of my infirmity and weakness: verily
this is thy deytie, which being clothed with my nature, ascended the gybbet of
the cross, upon the which he suffered most dolorous death.

O Lord cast the eyes of thy Majesty upon the work of thy ineffable
bounty, behold thy most sweet son with his whole body stretched out:
behold his innocent hands besprinkled with most precious blood, and
mercyfully pardon those faults which with my hands I have committed: look
upon his naked side, pierced with a spear, and renew me with that sacred
fountain which I believe did issue from thence: Consider his undefiled
footesteps, which never stood in the way of sinners, but always walked in thy
law, how with sharp and long nails they are fastened to the cross, and
guide my stepps in thy path, and make me hate the ways of iniquitye, and choose
evermore the way of truth.

O King of Angels and saints, I beseech thee for this holy of holyes, for this
my redeemer to make me run in the way of thy commandments, that I may be
united and joined to him, who has not disdayned to be cladde with my flesh.

O blessed Father will thou not behold the head of thy dear son, with his
neck as white as snow resolved to dye, behold most meek creator the
humanitye of thy beloved son, and have mercy upon the frayltie of thy frail
creature: his white breast is naked, his blody side is read, his stretched
bowels dried up, his fair and bewtiful eyes waxt dim, his royal and
princely visage is pale, his marble-white legs hang down: the streams of
his precious blood, do water his feet quyte perced through.

Behold O glorious Father, the rent and torn members of thy well-beloved
son, and benignely remember what my substance is: behold the pain of God
and man and release the myseryes of man thy creature: behold the punishment of
the redeemer, and forgive the offense of the redeemed: this is he (O my Lord)
whom thou haste smytten for the sins of the people, although he was thy
beloved in whom thou waste well pleased, this was that innocent in whom their
was found no guyle, and yet was he reputed amongst the wicked.

A devout prayer, with the remembrance of the passion of our savior Jesus
Christ, to obtain succor and favor of him. Io. Fab. in preca. Christ.
O Most sweet Lord and my redeemer which was by the heavenly Father sent
down into this world, and haste willingly of thine own accord suffered most
cruel bitter pains upon the cross, and haste carried the same Cross upon thy
blessed shoulders, to the end that this thy patience might be unto us
salvation and a myrrour: and finally thou did consent upon that tree to
dye and redeem us.

I most poor miserable and wretched sinner, most humbly beseech thee, for the
incredible patience which thou did show in the course of thy whole life: and
then especially, when the ungracious Jews did so rage against thee with
villainous and spiteful words: when they did mock thee, and all bespytte thy
vysage: when they did hoode-winke thine eyes, and with their most filthy and
impure hands did smite thee upon the most blessed face: when they did most
cruelly whippe and scourge thee fast bound to a pillar: when they did thruste
upon thy most sacred head a pricking crown of thorn: when with iron nails
they did pearce thy blessed arms stretched alonge upon the cross: when thy
blessed side was thruste through with a spear: when in thy great thirst and
extreme agony they offered thee a sponge full of vinager and gall: when with
thy head inclined down thou said It is consummate, when thou did commend
thy spirit into the hands of God the Father: and all this ended for the
redemption and salvation of mankind, in thy grave thou was buried.

For all these pains, and passions, O most meek Lord Jesus Christ, I poor
and wretched sinner do humbly beseech thy infinite majesty, not to forsake,
nor suffer me to be accused, and condemned in thy terrible judgment: but let
thy dolorous passion so help and aid me, that I may be brought to
everlasting felicitye: let thy holy Angels always be in my company, and
specially at the hour of death, that they may protect, defend, and keep me,
so that the cruel infernal enemy may have no power or part in me.

The end of the sixth Chapter.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER CONTAYNINGE Devout and wholesome prayers to be said
before and after the receyuinge of the B. Sacrament.
Aduertismentes for more vvorthelye receyuinge the holy Euchariste. 1. Cor.
cap. 11.
Verse. 26. FOr as often as you shall eat this bread, and drink the
chalice, you shall shevve the death of our Lord until he come.

Verse. 27. Therefore who soever shall eat this bread, and drink the
chalice of our Lord vnvvorthily, he shall be giltye of the body and blood of
our Lord.

Verse. 28. But let a man prove him self: and so, let him eat of that
bread, and drink of the chalice.

Verse 29. For he that eatethe and drinckethe vnvvorthyly: eats and drincketh
judgment to him self, not descerninge the body of our Lord.

This probation according to the words of the Apostle (Let a man prove him
self) consists principally in four points.

1. Faith, before all things is necessary to him that shall receive the
blessed Sacrament of the Altar, that is to say he must first believe the
presence of the true body and blood of our savior Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament of the Altar: for they that deny it, do as much as thy can, to
deny the omnipotencye of God, and do accuse God with lyinge: for he has
said: ( This is my body: and this is my blood. Also you must of necessity
believe that the body of Jesus christ is delivered to death: and his blood
truly shedd for the remission of your sins.

2. Penance, or repentance, to the end you may acknowledge your sins with
all your heart, and have true repentance for the same, and truly to confess
the^ to the priest your ghostly father: And after you have obtained absolution,
you must firmly purpose not to commit any deadly sin hereafter: and having
forsaken all rancour and malice you must be reconciled to them, whom you have
offended or that have offended you.

3 Honest and decente behavior, and countenance apparteyning to a christian
man, whereby is required that none go to this most blessed Sacrament, and
great mystery, but fasting, and with modesty, humility and feruente zeal:
and not with any dishonest or uncomely behavior.

4. Devotion and a heart not occupied in other business or affairs, that so you
may employ your self wholly by meditations and devout prayers to receive such
an excellent sacrament, in considering and wonderinge at the incomprehensible
humility of almighty God: I mean hereby: that he being a Lord of so great
and infinite majesty, has been obediente unto his heavenly father even unto
death, to give us life. And with all, that by such devout meditations and
prayers, you may be stirred and provoked to love almighty god above al things,
and to give him most hearty thanks for his so great benifites: desiringe him
most humbly, that the merits of his most bitter passion and death may be
applied to the comfort and profit of your soul.

A prayer to be said before the receyuinge of the Blessed Sacrament.
I Adore and worship thee, and give thanks unto thee (my most loving Lord
Jesus Christ) for thy innumerable benefits and gifts given unto me most
vnwhorthy. All those I yield and offer unto thee, into an everlasting laud
and praise. I give unto thee thanks for all the goodness, that ever thou
did show, or ever wilt show unto any reasonable creature. I give thee
thanks for all the mercies of thy most sweet goodness. I give thee thanks for
thy holy Incarnation, Nativity, Infancy, Childhod, Manstate, labors,
sorrowful cares, Passion, Death, Resurrection, and thine Ascension. I most
humbly thank thee, that thou haste vouchsafed, to admit me most vile sinner
to the noble and lively feast of this thy holy table. O gracious Jesus I
beseech thee, for that love that in manner constreigned thee to be incarnated,
to suffer and to die for me, that thou will make me fully clean from all
sin, and make me to please thee in all thing. Adorn and garnish my beggarlye
and poor soul, with thy mercies and virtues.

Grant merciful Jesus, that I may with most humble reverence, with burninge
desire and chaste affection, receive the most venerable Sacrament of thy
blessed Body, in memory of all those things, that thou haste vouchsafed to
do, to speak, and to suffer for my salvation. Grant, good Lord, that I may
perform this thing most purely, to the everlasting glory of thy name, to
the honor of thy most sweet Mother and Virgin Marie, and to the honor of thy
blessed Saint N.

(Here name the Saint of that day.) to the honor of all thy blessed Saints
and Angels of heaven, to the soul health of me, and N. and to the souls
health of all Christen people, quick and dead.

Have mercy, good Lord, have mercy upon thy Church, have mercy, good Lord
upon this place and this compagnie. Grant that here be always humilitye,
peace, charity, chastitye, and cleanesse. Grant, that we all may worthily
amend and correct our selves, and that we fear thee and serve thee
faithfullye: and that we may love thee, and please thee: I commend unto thy
mercy all our business, and all our necessities: be merciful unto all those,
for whom thou haste shed thy precious blood. Grant unto the quick
forgyuenesse and grace, grant unto the faithful departed, rest and light
everlasting.

Another Prayer before the receyuinge of the holy Sacrament.
By Sir Thomas Moore.
O Benign Jesus that would suffer so many grievous pains, yea death it self
for the love of mankind: great and marvelous is thy charity. O good God for
that thy charity, and that thou vouchesafedst with thy precious blood to wash
away our sins, I pray thee gracious Lord, that thou forgive me all the
sins that I have done, thought, or said, in pride, in wrath, in envy, in
covetousness, in gloutonie, in sloth in lechery, in uncleanness of body, and of
soul, in mispendinge of my five wits, in breaking thy commandments, in
wastinge the time of my life in vice, in that I have not followed virtue, nor
done those ghostlye deeds that I might have done. O merciful Jesus with that
precious blood that thou did shed on the Roode for our salvation, wash all
the sins away that I have done since my birth, comfort and make me whole with
the holy Sacrament, which thou have ordained and left here on earth to be our
medicine, and life, through which we should live after thee, and with thee,
and thou in us. For, good Lord, thou saydst at that holy work when thou
made it and gave it to thy Disciples: ( Johan. 6.) Panis quem ego dabo,
caro mea est, pro mundi vita: qui manducat me, ipse viuit propter me, ipse
manet in me, and ego in eo. O thou holy mightfull Priest and Bishop, that by
thy divine might made the worthy Sacrament of thy precious Body in form of
bread, give me grace to receive it this day with purity of heart, and cleanes
of soul, with love, dread and steadfast belief. O benign god, I acknowledge
and confess to thy high goodness, that I am not worthy to come unto thy boorde
to be fed with so royal meat as is thy blessed Body. But gracious Lord, I
believe verily, that thou may make me worthy who haste made all thing of
naught, and of sinful, haste made righteous and holy. O almighty God, for this
thy great might I pray thee, that thou make me worthy and able to receive the
precious Body devoutly with all reverence, with perfect mekenes, and holiness,
with full contrition, and tears of devotion, with spiritual comfort and
gladness of thy presence. O blessed Body in form of bread, come and enter
into my mouth and heart, that by thy divine presence my soul be fed, yea and
fastened to thee with perfect charity. O Lord, fill me with grace, and
stre^gthen me, that I may ever hereafter live after thy will, and that I may
live in thee, and thou in me. Jesus for thy great bounty save me from all
perils, teach and comfort my soul in all doubts and dreads, cleanse me from
all vices, suffer nothing to abide in my heart, but only thy self which art
my souls life and leach. O heavenly meat, O joy of Angels, O souls
strength, O precious Body that gives endless help, merciful Lord Jesus,
thus did thy self say, ( Johan. 6.) Ego sum panis viuus qui de coelo
desce^di: si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane, viuet in aeternum. O thou Bread of
life that did desce^de from heaven, who that eats this bread, shall live
everlastingly: O blessed Jesus, make me now at this time worthy to receive this
Sacrament, that is thy precious Body, that I may live everlastingly with thee
in thy prefence, and see thee face to face, ever to joy in thy goodness in
bliss everlasting. Amen.

A devout prayer to be said at the Elevation of the most blessed and Sacred
Host. Anselm. cap. 2. in specu. sermo. euangel.
WE adore and worship thee O Jesus Christ king of Israel, light of the
Gentiles, and prince of the kings of the earth: Lord of Sabbath, and most
strong power and puissance of the omnipotente and almighty God, we worship
thee O precious price of our redemption, O peaceable Hooste, which by thy
smellinge sweetness only, did inclyne thy Father which reygneth in heaven
to behold our poor estate, and did reconcyle him to us, his children.

O savior Jesus Christ we praise the multitude of thy mercies: we plentifully
sound out the memory of thy sweetness, we offer unto thee O savior Christ the
sacrifice of laud and praise, for the greatness of thy bountye which thou haste
showed unto us sinners, being a wicked seed and ungracious children of
perdition.

A prayer to be said before the blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Io. Fab. ex
cap. 2. soliloq. B. August.
O Mnipotent and most merciful God, thou art truly good, and in deed I am
evil, thou art holy, I am wretched, thou art just, I am unjust: thou art
the light, I am blind, thou art the life, I am dead: thou art a convenient
medicine, I am weak and sicklye: thou art joy, I am heuines: thou art the
sovereign verity, I am the universal vanity, and so is every living man.

What shall I say then my creator? hear me my maker, I am thy creature and
the work of thy hands, but O Lord, I am now brought to nothing, and I am
dyeing daily, thy hands have made and framed me: even those hands I say
which were nailed to the Cross for my sake.

Most benign redeemer despise not the work of thy hands, but look upon the
wounds of thine own hands: lo my Lord God thou haste written me in thy
hands, read the wrytinge and heal me, behold I thy creature do sighe unto
thee, thou art my creator comfort me: I cry unto thee, thou art the life,
quicken me, and give me life: to thee I lift up my voice help me and restore
me.

Spare me O God for my days are nothing, what is man that he can thus speak
to God his creator? pardonne me thy servant which presumes to speak to so
great a Lord, need has no law, grief and sorrow compel me to speak, the
calamity and miserye which I endure, enforce me to cry out: I am sick,
therefore I call to the physician: I am blind therefore I hasten unto the
light, I am dead therefore I sigh after life.

To thee O Jesus of Nazareth I hasten, thou art the fountain of life: O Jesus
son of David have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me O fountain of mercy,
thou haste hard me being sick calling upon thee, reach me thy hand O most
gentle Father: bring me to thee, that I may come to thee, and in thy light,
may see that everlasting light: spare and pardonne me O Lord, I am the
unhappy man borne of a woman, lyuinge but a short time, and yet replenished
with much misery: I am earth and ashes, and by and by in grief and anguishe I
must dye, and then I shall be but worms meat.

What other thing is my life O my Lord God, then a shadow which soudenly
vanishes away, like as the flower which does florishe and is green, and by
and by does wither: even so my frail and deceiptfull life passes away, and
yet notwithstanding, it is on every side hedged in with the snares of death, I
know assuredly that I must dye, but when or how I can not tell.

I therefore beseech thee O meek and merciful God to help me: hold me up
and stay me in thy power and strength: appear unto me O everlasting light,
and shine in my heart that I may rejoice in thee: come unto me O my life most
noble, and most sweet, that through thee I may live in thee, and with thee in
thy kindome for ever: hear me O Lord God to the glory of thy name, and the
felicity and bliss of my soul. Amen.

A prayer to be said after the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
By Sir Thomas Moore.
I Adore and worship thee, and give my humble and hearty thanks unto thee,
most merciful Lord Jesus Christ, which haste vouchsafed to admit me most
vile sinner, unto the noble and lively feast of thy most holy table. Alas
poor wretch that I am. For I have received this most venerable Sacrament
to-to unworthily.

Lord, have mercy on me, Lord forgive me. I comme^d that which I have done,
unto thy Divine heart, there to be amended, and to be made perfect. Receive (I
beseech thee Lord) these most holy mysteries of thy blessed Body, which I
have received to the everlasting glory of thy holy name, to the honor of thy
most sweet Mother the Virgin Marie, and to the honor of thy blessed Saint N.
(Here name the Saint of that day.) to the honor of all thy blessed and holy
Saints and Angels of heaven, for my soul health, and for the soul health of
all Christen people quick and dead. Receive (good Lord) this most excellent
Sacrament in full amendment, purgatio^, and satisfaction for all my sins and
negligences, and for the sins of all the world. Restore by it, and make up
again all my ghostly ruins and decays, and supply my needy poverty.
Mortify, by it in me, what soever does displease thee: and make me one
according to thy hearts desire. By it, make my spirit, my soul and my body,
conformable to the spirit, soul and body of thy holy Humanity: and lighten
me altogyther with the light of thy Divinity.

Grant by it, that I may be stablished in thee, that I perfytly with
perseverance love thee, that I may be incorporate unto thee, and most nerely
united unto thee: and that I may be changed all whole into thee, to the laud
of thy blessed name. Amen.

Convert (Lord) miserable sinners, call again heretics and schismatikes.
Lighten the infidels that know not thee, help all that be in any necessitye
and trouble, help all them that have commended them selves or desired to be
commended unto my prayers. Have mercy upon my parents and benefactours. Have
mercy upon all the^, for whom I am bound to pray, and that thou would be
entreated for. Have mercy on this place and company.

Grant, that here be always humility, peace, charity, chastie, and purity.

Grant, that we all may worthily amend and correct our selves, that we may
fear the, and serve thee faithfully, and that we may love thee, and please
thee. I commend unto thy mercy all our businesses, and all our necessities.
Lord, be merciful unto all people, for whom thou have shed thy precious
blood.

Grant unto the quick forgyuenes and grace, and unto the faithful departed,
reast and life everlasting. Amen.

Another Prayer after receiving of the Sacrament.
By Sir Thomas Moore.
Thanks be unto thee, O holy Father, God almighty, that thou did
vouchesafe of thy greatpitie to send thy only Son from thy high Throne into
this vale of woe and misery, here to take our nature and shape, and in the same
to suffer most sharp pains and bitter death to bring our souls to thy
kingdom, and to leave that precious Body here to be our strength, and comfort:
I thank thee most merciful Lord Jesus with all the might and strength that
thou have given me: I offer to thee thanks: that thou this day haste fed me
with thine own precious Body, by which I hope to have health of soul, and
everlasting life, with joy when I depart hence. O holy Ghost come good Lord
and inflame my heart with thy brenninge beams of love, and make me with
virtuous swetenes continually to yolde acceptable thanks to the holy and
glorious Trinity. O ye three Persons and one God, glory, laud, and honor,
with all reverence be offered to you of all creatures without end. Amen.

The end of the seventh Chapter.
THE EIGHT CHAPTER CONTAINING LAVDES, PRAIses and thankes-gyuing, for the
benefits that God has bestowed upon us.
A psalm in which a sinner yeldeth thanks to God that his enemies have not
prevailed against him, nor gotten the vpper-hand of him.
I Will magnify and praise thee, O Lord God, for thou haste exalted me and
set me up: and mine ennemies have not gotten the over hand of me.

O Lord of hoastes, I have cried unto thee, and thou haste saved me.

Thou haste brought my soul out of hell: thou haste holden me up from
falling into thee deep lake, from whence no man retourneth.

Thou haste not closed me up, in the hands of mine ennemies: but thou haste
set my feet in a place both wide and broad.

I have sought thee, and thou have heard me, thou haste brought me into
liberty out of great distress.

Thou haste turned my sorrow into gladness, thou haste ceased my mourning, and
compassed me round about with mirth.

Thou haste declared thy great magnificence in helpinge thy servant.

Thou haste done meruaylouslie with me in my miseries.

Thou haste regarded the pain of the poor: thou haste turned away thy face
from me.

I will be synging and speaking of thy mercyes: and I will publishe to other
thy fidelity and truth, so long as I shall live.

My mouth shall never cease to speak of thy rytghteousnes, and of thy
benefits: which be so many, that I can not number them.

But I will give thee thanks till death take me away, I will sing in the
praise of thee so long as I shall continue.

I will triumph and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou haste looked upon my
necessityes, and regarded my soul in great dystresse.

Thou haste been my sure refuge, and the strength of my trust and hope.

I thank thee Lord for thy goodness always: and for thy exceeding mercy.

Thou haste been my comfort in the time of my trouble, thou have been merciful
unto me. O Lord, and haste revenged the wrongs that mine enemies have done to
me.

According to the multitude of the heavy thoughts that I had in my mind, thy
co^fortes have cheared and lyghtned my heart.

Thou have sent me now joys, for the days wherein I was in sorrow: and for
the years in which I suffered many a painful storm.

Thou haste called to remembrance the rebuke that thy servant has been put
to, and how furiously mine enemies have persecuted me.

O Lord God of hosts, who may be compared unto thee? thou art great, and
greatly to be praised.

Thou art high upon all the earth, thou art exalted far above all gods.

Glory and honor before thy face: holiness and magnificence in thy sanctuary.

With justice and judgment thy royal throne is stablished: mercy and truth
go before thy face.

Blessed art thou (O Lord) which haste not holden back thy mercy from thy
servant.

After that I had long looked for thee O Lord, at the last thou did
attend upon me, and heardest my cry.

Thou haste taken me out of the lake of misery, and set my fete upon a rock,
and made my steps sure.

Thou haste given me my desyer, I have seen thy joyful countenance.

Thou haste stricken all my adversaries, and haste abated their strength.

Thou haste rebuked the rablemente of them that vexed me, and haste plucked me
forth of their hands.

Thou have cast them headelong into their own pytte, their feet be wrapped in
the net which they laid priuilye for me.

Mine enemies are retired back, they are fallen down and destroyed from thy
sight.

Thou haste been the poor man's defense, and his helper in tribulacion, when
most need was.

Thou haste done judgment for me: thou have dese^ded my cause against my
accusers.

And although thou was very angrye with me a little while, yet now I live
through thy mercy and goodness.

Verily I supposed with my self that I was clean cast out of thy favor.

But thou haste hard my prayers: and according to thy great mercy haste
taken me again into thy favor.

O Lord of thine own mind and will thou haste given strength unto my soul:
but when thou hiddest thy face from me, O Lord, how greatly astonyed was I?

When I was in adversity, then I cried unto thee, and thou did answer
me: when my soul was in great anguishe and trouble, then O Lord I remembered
thee.

I have tasted and seen how sweet thou art: truly blessed is the man that
trusts in thee.

According to thy name so is thy commendation and praise, but thy counsayles
touching us be without example, and greater then with words can be expressed.

Dominion, power, and glory be thine, for thou haste made all things, and
because thy will is so, they do still continue.

Thy name be blessed, praised, and magnifyed, both now and ever: and world
withoure end. Amen.

A Psalm in which the goodness of God is praised.
O Lord our gouernoure how wounderfull is thy Majesty through out the whole
world: which haste set thy glory above all the heavens.

What is man, that thou magnifiest him so greatly? or the son of man that
thou do visit him?

O Lord thou art great and much to be praised in thy holy hill.

Praise be unto thee O Lord God, let our vows made to thee be always
performed.

Confession and magnificence are thy work: and thy righteousness continues
for evermore.

Thou haste done many things (O Lord God) both maruailous and great: and
there is none that can be like unto thee in thy works.

Thy ways be just and true, who will not fear and dread thee, and magnify
thy name.

I thank thee (O Lord God) with all my heart, and I will sanctify thy name
for ever.

O Lord thou art my strength and my praise.

Thou haste brought down mine enemies which art a judge even from the
beginning.

Thy right hand is exceeding strong: thy right hand works many great
acts.

Thine arm is mighty and strong: and be cause it has pleased thee, thou have
strengthened mine infirmitye.

I will praise thy great and dreadful name, for it is holy.

Although I have fallen, yet I am not crushed in pieces: for thou have
sustained my hand.

I have opened and showed my way unto thee, and in thee I have trusted, and
thou at length haste accomplished my desires.

Thou haste broken the heads of mine ennemies, and haste made them to stoop:
which walked proudely in their sins.

Thou haste dominion over their power, and when they be exalted and set alofte
in their ways, thou abatest their courage, and destroiest them with thy mighty
arm.

In thy name I will ever rejoice, and in thy mercy is all my glory.

Thou love righteousness and judgment, the earth is replenished with thy
mercy.

Thy eye looks favorably upon them that dread thee, and trust in thy mercy.

There shall no good thing be lackinge to them that seek thee, and they that
fear thee shall not be helpelesse.

For thou directest their ways, and hear them when they cry unto thee.

That thou may deliver their souls from death, and swage their pains, when
they be grieved.

For thou helpest them, whose hearts be broken with sorrow, and bear up with
thy hand them that be contrite in spirit.

Thou fauest the souls of thy servants: and all they that trust in thee,
shall not be dystroyed.

Wherefore my tongue shall sing thy praise: O Lord God, I will always magnify
thee.

I will love thee (O Lord) which art my strength, my stay, my might, my
Savior, and my refuge.

My God, my defend our and, my buckler, the strength of my salvation, and my
supporter.

After that I had called upon thee with due laud and praise, thou have saved
me from mine enemies.

When I was in trouble I called upon the, thou have heard my voice out of
thy holy temple, and my cry has entered up into thine ears.

Thou haste saved me from mine adversaries, that rose up against me, thou haste
delivered me from wicked enemies.

Thou haste taken me from the compagnie of evil men, and mine eye has seen
upon mine enemies the things that I desired.

And therefore if it should fortune me to pass through the dark vale of
misery: I will go without fear, for thou will be with me, thy rod and thy
staff shall comfort me.

Thou shall delvuer me from tribulation, thou shall keep me from them which
seek to destroy me.

Mine eyes be upon thee (O Lord,) for thou shall bring my fete forth of the
snare.

Unto thee O Lord God I will perform my vows, I will give thee thanks both
now and evermore, and world without end. Amen.

A Psalm of the benefytes of God, with thanks for the same.
MY soul prayseth thee O Lord, and all that is within me, prayseth thy holy
name.

My soul gives thee humble thanks, and thy benefits I will never forget.

Which forgyuest all my sins and healest all mine infirmities.

Which haste saved my lyse from destruction, and showed in me thy grace and
mercy.

Which haste satisfied my desire with good things: and shalt once restore my
youth again.

Thou haste entreated me mercifully at all times, and haste revenged me of mine
enemies,

Thou haste been a defense to me (O Lord) and a sure foundation of my wealth.

Thou haste guyded me with thy counsel, and taken me to thee, through thy
mercy.

Thou haste many ways declared in me thy great might and power, and after
thine anger has been paste, thou haste turned again and comforted me.

Thou haste sent me many grievous troubles, but at the length thou haste
brought me out of the bottomless depenesse.

Thou haste made me preuye to thy ways, and haste not hid thy counsayles
from me.

Thou art full of mercy and grace (O Lord) slow to wrath and ready to
goodness.

Thy displeasure lasts not always, and thou kepest not back thy mercies in
thine anger for ever.

Thou rewardest us not according to our sins, nor punishest us according to
our deserts.

Look how high the heaven is in co^paryson of the earth, so great is thy
mercy toward us.

How far as the earth is distaunt from the west: so far (O Lord) remove
our sins from us.

Like as a natural father has pity upon his children, even so (O Lord God
thou haste had compassion upon us.

Thou haste not forgotten thy creature, thou remembredst that we are flesh,
yea all men living.

And that the age of men is like unto grass, and may be compared to the
flowers in the field.

Which as soon as the sharp wind has blown upon them with his blastes,
wither away and dye, so that no man can tell where they did grow.

But thy mercy O Lord, and loving kyndenesse is always upon them that fear
thee, and thy ryghteousnes endures for ever.

So that we keep our promise and conuenaunt with thee: and so remember thy
commandments that we do them in deed.

O Lord thou haste stablished thy throne in heaven: and thou gouernest all
things by thine imperyall power.

I will magnify thee O Lord, and praise thy name world without end.

I will give thanks always and make thy name glorious fo ever.

O Lord thou art puissant and great, and thy magnyficence is unsearchable.

One generation shall show to another thy works, and they shall declare thine
ancient noble acts.

They shall ever praise the magnificence of the glory of thy holiness, and the
memory of thy great goodness.

For thou art good and gracious to all men, and thy mercy excedeth all thy
works.

The eyes of all men behold and wait upon thee, that thou should give them
their susten aunce in time convenient.

Thou openest thine hand, and fillest every lyuinge creature, with necessary
food.

O Lord thou art ryghtfull in all thy ways, and holy in thy deeds.

Thou kepest all them that love thee, and the tourmente of malice, shall not
touch them.

My mouth shall speak thy glory and praise, and all lyuinge creatures shall
honor thy holy name for ever.

Praise our Lord, oh ye his Angels mighty in power, which do his
commandments, and obey the voice of his word.

Praise ye altogyther God, O all ye hosts, you his ministers that do his will
and pleasure.

Praise our Lord as I do, and let us magnify his name together.

Praise our Lord, oh all ye his Saints, for his name is glorious and his
praise goes about heaven and earth.

Praise our Lord together, O all ye his works: every thing that lives
praise our Lord. Amen.

A thanks-giuinge to God for his innumerable benefits bestovved on man from his
infancy. B. August. can. 18. Soliloq.
I The son of thy hand-mayd in these my poor confessions do confess to
thee my redeemer, with all my heart, and will call to mind all the benefits
which thou haste bestowed upon me all the time of my life even from mine
infancye, for I know well (O Savior) that thou art greatly displeased with
ingratitude: for it is the root of all spiritual evil: and a certain wynd
dryenge and burninge all good, stopping the fountain of thy dyuine mercy
toward man.

But I O Lord will give thee thanks, least I be ungrateful to thee my
redeemer, because thou have delivered me: how often had that dragon swallowed me
up, if thou had not taken me from his mouth? how often have I sinned, and
he was ready to have devoured me? but thou my Lord God haste defended me: when
I wrought wickedly against thee and did break thy commandments he would
have drawn me to hell, if thou had not let him: I did offend thee, and
thou did defend me: I did not fear thee, and thou did preserve me: I
departed from thee, and offered my self to mine enemy: but thou did
affraye him that he durst not take me: thou did bestow these great
benefits upon me (O my God,) yet I poor wretch did not know it.

Thou have often times delivered me from the jaws of the devil, thou have
taken me out of the mouth of the lion, and haste brought me many times from
hell I not knowinge it: for I went down to the gates of hell, but thou haste
stayed them that I entered not in: I did hasten to the ports of death, but thou
did not suffer them to enclose me in, thou haste also often delivered me
from bodyly death O my savior.

When I have been sore vexed with sickness, and in great danger by land, and
sea, by fire and sword, thou haste stood by me, and mercifully delivered me
from all: for thou did know (O Lord,) if death had then overtaken me,
hell had received my soul, and I had been damned for ever: but thy mercy and
grace prevented me, and delivered me from death both of body and soul O my
Lord God.

These and many other benefits thou haste heaped upon me, but I being blind
did not perceive it until thou dyddest illumynate me. Now therefore O the
light of my soul, O my Lord God, O my life by whom I live, O the light of
mine eyes by the which I see: lo thou haste illuminated me, and I know thee,
for by thee I live. And I give thee thanks, although insufficient and nothing
correspondente to thy benefits, yet such as my frayltie is able to afford, I
offer unto thee: I confess and acknowledge thy goodness, for thou haste
brought me from the lower hell once, twyse, thryse, yea a hundred and a
thousand times: I was every day going down to hell, but thou did bring me
back again: and justly thou might a thousand times have condemned me, if it
had been thy pleasure: but thou would not because thou louedst souls, and
dissemblest the sins of men expectinge their repentance.

O my God, my savior, in all thy ways their is great mercy, now I see and
manifestly know through the light of thy grace, and my soul does faynte in the
contemplation of thy great mercy toward me, because thou haste plucked me
from the lower hell, and haste brought me back again to life. It is then by
thee wholly that I live, and therefore I wholly offer my whole self to thee, my
whole soul, my whole heart, my whole body, my whole life, let it live unto
thee O my sweet life: for thou haste wholly delivered me, that thou might
wholye possess me: thou have wholly made me: that thou might wholly have me
again: Therefore I will love thee O Lord, which art my strength, I will love
thee O my ineffable joy and comfort, so that my wholle life shall live no more
but for thee, which life was lost in my misery, and now reuyued again in thy
mercy: for thou art a God merciful to thowsands that love thy holy name. Amen.

A praise and thanks gyuinge to God for his great benefits. Io. Roffe. psalm.
13. lib preca.
MY soul does praise thee O my God, and all that is within me does laud thy
holy name: my soul does render thee humble thanks, and I will never be
vnminful of thy benefits, for thou do pardonne all my sins, and have
healed all my infirmities: thou haste redeemed my life from death, and haste
showed unto me mercy and grace.

Thou haste multiplied in me thy magnifice^ce, after thine anger thou haste
comforted me: thou haste showed me many tribulations and adversities, but in
the end thou have brought me back again from the depth of deapnes: thou haste
made known to me thy ways, and from me thou haste not hid thy counsels.

Thou art merciful and full of grace O Lord, slow to anger, prone and ready
to goodness: thou will not alwaie be angry, and thou do not for ever hold
back thy mercy: thou rewardest us not according to our sins, nether do
thou punish us according to our iniquities.

As the father does pity his children: so thou haste compassion of us O God
our Lord: thou forgettest not thy handy-worke, thou remembrest that every
living man is flesh, and that the days of man are as grass, and as the
flowers of the field, which with a blaste of cold wind vanishe away, so as
none can find the place where they grew.

But thy mercy is everlasting to those that fear thee, and thy justice
remains always, so that we keep thy law and fulfill thy commandments.

I will extol thee my God, and praise thy name for ever and ever: I will
render thee thanks at all seasons, and I will make thy name famous for ever,
and longer if longer may be: for thou art good to all, and thy mercy
exceeds all thy works.

The eyes of all things look up unto thee that thou would give them
meat in due time: thou openest thy hand and fillest with thy blessinge every
living thing: thou preseruest all that love thee, and no tormente of malice
shall touch them: my mouth shall show forth thy praise, and every living
thing shall celebrate thy holy name for ever and ever.

Praise our Lord O ye Angels mighty in power, which do his commandments,
and are obediente to the voice of his word: praise our Lord O all ye Armies
which do his will: magnify our Lord and let us extol his name in it self.

Praise our Lord all ye his Saints, whose only name is most high: whose
only praise does exceed heaven and earth: Praise our Lord all ye his works,
through all his dominion in every place: every thing that lives praise our
Lord.

The end of the eyghte Chapter.
THE NYNTH CHAPTER CONTAYNINGE Necessary prayers for the prosperity of our
brethren friends and neighbors. Timoth. 2. and Jacob. 5.
A prayer for the Church afflicted. Franc. Tittel in para. Psalm. 78.
O God the gentiles, barbarous Nations, and Infidelles which have no faith in
thee, nor knowleadge of thy name, are entered into thy heritage, they have taken
thy people by force of arms, and as vanquishers they occupy our cities, they
have defiled with their abominations thy temple dedicated to thy honor and
service, they have polluted the vessels consecrated for the service of the
temple, and used them profanely.

We are become a reproach and laughing-stocke to our neighbors, in such sort
that they scorn, despise, and make a ieste of us, rejoicing at our
afflictions, and in their mirth they upbraid us: but thou O Lord upon whose
will we wholly depend, how long will thou be angry with us.

And wherefore do thou so deliver us into the hands of our enemies, as though
thou had shaked us of, and hereafter would have no more care over us:
wherefore do thou show the furye of thy wrath toward thy people, which
are the sheep of thy holy pasture, whereof thou art the ruler, sheppard,
defender and protector.

Be myndfull O Lord of thy holy Church, and leave it not in the hands of thy
enemies, but deliver it by thy strong power behold, and consider, the league
and testament made with the elect. Remember thy promise made unto the^, that
thou would not forsake them that were contrite in heart, but would save them
that were humble in spirit.

For in truth we are kept under, afflicted and brought to nothing, we are
contemptible, abject and miserable, in such sort that we are a gasing-stocke
and ignominy to all nations: wherefore O Lord do thou not turn thy face
to us thy poor servants? why do thou turn thy face from them, and suffer
thy enemies so cruellye to rage against them? why do thou not behold the
misery and affliction wherein we thy servants (destitute and desolate of all
help, and having no comfort but in thee) are afflicted and tormented of our
enemies;

Awake O Lord God, dissemble no longet but come to succor thy people, and
make have to help thy faithful servants, and save us from the hands of our
enemies (we humbly beseech thee) for thy most glorious names sake, for thine
own self, and for thy infinite mercy: that we the posterity may a little
taste the sweetness of thy promises, which our for fathers have so abundantly
felt.

But we that are thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture, which worship no
other God, which seek no other sheppard and governor besides thee, which put
our whole trust and confidence in thee, and desire to be fedd, ruled and
governed, by thee only, we will render thee most humble thanks, and set
forth thy glory for ever and ever.

We will declare and show thy praises from generation to generation, for thou
of thy mere good will, haste restored us to the liberty which we have
required: we therefore (in adversity as well as in prosperity, or how so ever
it shall please thee to dispose of us) will serve thee with joy and gladness:
we will contine we still in thanks gyuinge, attendinge patientlye thy aid and
help. Amen.

A prayer for our parents. Io. Ferus in lib. precat.
O Almightye and omnipotente God, which haste strictly commanded us, next unto
thee to honor our father and mother, and to pray for their happy and good
success: grant unto my parents, and the whole familye, health, and peace:
keep them in the piety and truth of thy faith: defend them from all dangers
bodily and ghostly: give them grace (I humblye beseech thee) that they offend
not thee in any thing, but that they may always find thee, a loving, gentle,
and merciful father and God. Amen.

A prayer to be said for them that are fallen from the Church. Io. Fabius in
preca. christ.
OMnipotent benign and most merciful father, we most entierly beseech thee,
that it will please thee to visitt with thy fatherlye affection, all those that
are fallen, and departed from the pure Catholic and christian Church: or doubt
in any article thereof: and are seduced or deceived through any false
persuasion, to illuminate their hearts O Lord, with the beams of thy divine
light: stay them and bring them back to acknowledge their error, that being
in such sort converted, they may with the whole universal Church, confess
with mouth, and show in works, one true, catholic and christian faith, and
remayninge in it, they may work their own salvation: so that they and we
being of one mind and will, in one foolde may hear and follow thee our
shepparde, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

A prayer that chilldren may be instructed in virtue and in the fear of God.
Joan. Ferus in lib. precat.
O God grant that not only we our selves cleave to thy holy word and
doctrine, but also that we may instruct and bring up our children in thine
honor, in thy fear and discipline, in virtue and obedience, and that they may
increase and grow in comelynes, faith and piety, that we may have perfect joy
without any sorrow, and that we may laud and praise thee all the days of our
life. Amen.

A prayer for a friend and generallye for any that is commended unto our
prayers.
O Most sweet savior Jesus, I most humbly beseech thee to vouchsafe to
illuminate with the light of thy grace, the heart of N. thy servant and my
heart also: and to comfort and replenishe our hearts, with thy most loving
charity, to the end that we may wholly seek thine honor and blessed will,
and thee alone with all our hearts to search and love: and wholly and altogyther
to leave our selves and our own wills, and to resign them wholly to thee, so
that always, and at all times, we may live according to thy holy pleasure, in
observing and sulfilling thy holy will.

Jesus for thy holy name and for thy bitter passion, save us from sin and
shame and endless damnation, and bring us to the bliss which never shall have
ending. Amen.

A general prayer for the lyuinge and the departed in the Catholic faith. Ex
lib. veterum orat. groecorum.
O Sweet savior Jesus forgive those that hate us, and handle us
ou^tragiouslye, render good to them that do us good: grant unto our brethren
those necessaries which they do ask, and life everlasting: comfort the
sick: direct sailors: and keep the passengers in their right way.

O Lord according to thy great mercy, have pitye upon those that are
recomme^ded, unto our unworthy prayers: remember our fathers and brethren
departed this life, bring them to that place where they may behold the light
of thy countenance: call to mind our brethren which are in captivity, and
deliver them from their affliction. Assiste all those that do good and labor
in rulinge of the Church, grant them their just requests, and give them
everlasting bliss: be not unmindful O lord of us poor wretched sinners thy
unworthy servant, power into our hearts the light of thy knowledge, and keep
us in the path of thy commandments, by the intercession of the most holy,
sacred and blessed virgin Mary, and of all the saints of heaven, for thou art
blessed for over and ever. Amen.

The end of the ninth Chapter.
THE TENTH CHAPTER CONTEYNINGE WHOLESOME prayers to the holy Trinity.
A prayer or thanks geuynge unto the holy Trinity.
O Blessed Lord Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three persons and one God,
my Lord, my God, my maker, my redemer, my nourisher, my defender, my swetenes,
my mercy, my refuge, my stre^gthe, my victory, my joy, and my glory
eternal, I laud thee, I glorify thee. I honor and worship thee, O blessed
Trinity for that thou art in thy self, for thou art the hiest good, from
whom flows all goodness, thou art gracious eternity, thou art eternal
felicity, thou art only God, and there is none without thee. I laud and
honor thee o blessed Trinity that mightfully haste made of naught heaven and
earth, son and moon, and althinges that be in them and for that it pleased
thee to make the holy Angels to laud, and to praise thee eternally, and that
they might assiste us faithfully in this exile and bannishement, with there
good counsayles and helpings, and to declare thy in effable goodness, thou
made all things for man, and moreover thou made man, with thy propre
hands to thine own image and similitude, only for thee: and thou formedst in
him understanding, and adornedst him with free will. I laud and glorify thee
for that great gift. Thou did set him in paradise flowing with delites,
that he might have the things that are above to enjoy, and gouuerne the
things inferioure, and to possess all things, and to worship thee for
evermore. And thou made not these noble creatures Angels and men for any
necessity thou hadest of them, for truly all thing was sufficient in thee to
thine eternal joy and glory: but of the feruoure of thy charitys thou wast
moved to create them, that such creatures should be partakers of thy
ineffable joy and glory. I laud and honor thee good Lord for that it
pleased thee among all thy blessed works to make me a reasonable man, and
have given me wisdom, reason, understanding, and free liberty, and haste
fourmed me with all right lymmes, and features of body, and haste given me
many blessed gifts spiritual and temporal, and also meat, drink, clothe,
and all things necessary, which many a good creature that has served the
better than I have done has wanted, and for that thou have visited my heart
many times with many graces, and spiritual motions, delivering me often from
many perilles both of body and soul, and from slanders, shames, and rebuks
of this world, into the which for my sins I might have fallen: and for that
also thou have suffered me in all mine iniquity, and all mine horrible and
abominable sins, patiently always abydinge for my conversion, and
amendment, whereas at innumerable times thou myghtest have slain me, and of
right have putt me to eternal pains and dampnation. I laud and glorify
thee O Lord God for all thy mercy, which always thou haste showed to
sinners, pacientlie abiding for them, mercyfully calling them, beninglye
receyuinge them, abundantlye giving grace to them, and to such familiarity
admittinge them, as though they had never sinned. O merciful Lord and paciente
God, what shall I say to thee for all these benefits? What lauds and
thanks shall I yield to thee? What and all my sins were clean taken a way
from me, truly yet were not I worthy for the least of thy benefits and
mercies to give thee condign land. But as a wretched sinner can, with all my
heart I laud thee, I praise thee. I thank thee, I honor and worship thee,
yea all honor, laud, and praise be given to thee, now and evermore. Amen.

A prayer to God the father S. Cyprianus author esse scribitur
O God father of our Lord Jesus Christ thy son, God of Patryarckes, God of
Prophets, God of Apostles, God of Martyrs, God of Virgins, God of all
believers: I beseech thee O father of majesty, which without limitation of time
haste taken pity upon us, sendinge unto us Jesus Christ thy son our Lord
and savior, borne of the virgin Marye by the operation of the holy ghost, by
the annunciation of the Angel Cabriel: by whom thou haste delivered us from
iminente and present death.

I beseech thee O Lord to succor and help me, and judge me not according to
my works, for I have not been obediente to thy commandments, but thou which
love repentance have mercy upon me, which before thy face make confession of
all my sins: and as David prayed: O Lord for the love of thy holy name wype
away my sins: so I beseech thy divine Majesty to blotte out all my offenses.

Make me to abide in thy holy Catholic Church, with an undefiled faith, a pure
heart, firm devotion, continual love, and to persevere in good works: deliver
me from the eternal fire and everlasting pain, and from all torment which
thou haste prepared for the wicked: grant this, for our good and blessed
Saviors sake, by whom to thee al laud, honor, power and glory be for ever
and ever. Amen.

A prayer to God the Son called, O bone Jesus.
O Bountiful Jesus, O sweet Jesus, O Jesus the son of the pure Virgin Marie
full of mercy and truth, O sweet Jesus, after thy great mercy have pity on me.
O bening Jesus I pray thee, by the same precious blood, which for us miserable
finners, thou wast content to shed on the altar of the cross, that thou
would vouchsafe to avoid clean all my wickedness and not to despise me,
humbly asking pardon, and calling upon thy most holy name Jesus. This name
Jesus is the name of health: what is Jesus but a Savior? O good Jesus that
have created me and with thy precious blood redeemed me, suffer me not to be
damned whom of naught thou have created. O good Jesus let not my wickedness
destroy that which thy almighty goodness has made and formed in me. O good
Jesus, reknowlege that which is thine in me, and wipe clean away that which is
not thine in me: O good Jesus, while time of mercy is, have mercy on me, and
confound me not in time of thy terrible judgment. O good Jesus if I wretched
sinner, for my most grievous offenses have by thy very justice deserved
eternal pain, yet I appeal from thy very righteousness, and stedfastlye
trust in thine ineffable mercy: so as a mylde father and merciful Lord
ought, take pity on me. O good Jesus, what profit is in my blood since I must
discende into eternal corruption? they that be dead shall not magnify thee,
nor likewise all they that descend to hell. O most merciful Jesus have mercy
on me, O most sweet Jesus deliver me, O most meke Jesus be unto me comfortable,
O Jesus accept me a wretched sinner into the number of them, that shall be saved.
O Jesus the health of all them that trust in thee, have mercy upon me. O Jesus
the sweet forgyuenes of all my sins, O Jesus the son of the pure Virgin
Marie, endue me with thy grace, wisdom, charity, chastity, and humility:
yea and in all mine adversities with steadfast patience, so that I may
perfectlye love thee, and in thee to be glorified, and have mine only delight
in thee, world without end. Amen.

A prayer to the holy ghost. Io. Fab. cap. 9. mechta.
COme O holy spirit the most sweet comforter of the sorrowful and desolate,
the love of the divine puissance, the holy communication of the almighty and
omnipotent father, and of his most blessed son, descend with thy mighty
power into the entralls of my heart: lighten and bewtifie the dark closetts of
my desolate heart with thy clear brightness, and that which with continual
filth of my unfruitful life is dried up, vifit thou and make fruitful with
the abundant dew of thy grace.

Touch and wound my heart with the darte of thy love, inflame my dull and
slothful heart: lighten the inner parts of my soul with the heat of thy
holy fire: make me to drink of the river of thy sweetness, that hereafter I
may feel no taste in any worldly delight which is venomous.

O holy spirit, O excellent workman, whomsoever thou do inhabit, thou
buildest a lodginge for the father and the son: come therefore O most sweet
comforter of my sorrowful soul, defend me in all tribulation: come O purifier
of our sins, and saluer of our deadly sores: come O strength and fortitude of
the weak, and guide of the humble: come meek father of the fatherless, and
sweet Judge of the widows: Come O sovereign hope of the poor, and comforter
of the weak: come O bright star of faylers, and sure port of the shipp
wracte: come O singular beauty and ornament of the living, and only salvation
of the dead: come most holy spirit, come and have mercy upon me, make fit
and accomodate me to thee: condescend benignely to me according to the
multitude of thy mercy, that my littlenes may be agreeable to thy greatness, and
my imbecillitye and weakness to thy divine puissance: through Jesus Christ our
Savior. Amen.

The end of the tenth Chapter.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER CONTAYNINGE CHRIstian Catholic prayers to Saintos and
citizens of the glory of heaven.
A prayer unto the holy virgin Mary. Cuth. Tunstall in lib. prec. Luke. 1.
ALl hayle undefiled Virgin Marye mother of the son of God, elected and
chosen above all other Virgins, the which even from the womb of thy mother
Anna (a woman most holy) have been of the holy Ghost so fanctified,
illuminated, and so, greatly defended with the grace of God almighty, that
unto the conception of our Lord Jesus Christ thy son, and whilst thou
did conceive him, and unto the time of his birthe, and whylest thou did
bear him, and continuallye after his birth, thou continuedst, and remaynedst a
Virgin of all other that be borne most chaste, most incorrupt, and of body
and soul all thy life most immaculate and unspotted. For truly thou haste
far passed all other Virgins, how many soever have been hitherto syns the
beginning of the world, or ever shall be to the later end thereof, in a sincere
conscience of an impolluted mind. By these thy most excellent gifts of
heavenly grace, infused into thee, by God very singulerly, O Virgin and mother
Marie, above all other women and Virgins, we pray thee which art unto us
(miferable mortal men) a merciful patroness, that thou will voutchesafe to
make intercession to God the Father omnipotente, and to his son Jesus Christ,
(begote^ certainly as concerning his Divinity of the Father before all worlds,
and borne of thee, concerning his humanity, and to the holy Ghost proceeding
from the father and the son) that our sins may be forgeuen us, and that
we, through thy intercession may merit continuallye to rejoice with thee O
holy Virgin, and to praise thee in the kindome of heaven, without end. Amen.

A prayer to our Lady the blessed virgin Mary and S. John Evangelist. S.
Edmundus Arch. Cantuarienfis author scribitur O intemerata.
O Undefiled and for ever blessed, singular and incomparable Virgin Marie
mother of God, his most pleasant Temple, the noble Shryne of the holy Ghost,
the Entree and Gate of the kingdom of heaven: by whom next after God all the
world lives. Bow down thine ears (O mother of pitye and mercy) unto my
poor prayers, and be to me (wretched sinner) a pitiouse helper in all thing.

O most Blessed Ihon Evangelist the farnyliar friend of Christ, which of the
same Jesus Christ our Lord was a chosen Virgin, among all others much
beloved, and above all others instructed and learned in heavenly Secrettes and
mysteries: thou was made his Apostle and Evangelist most excellent: therefore
I call upon the and Marie the mother of the same Lord Jesus Christ our Saniour;
that thou and she would vouchsaf to help me. O ye two heavenly Gemmes Marie
and Ihon. O two divine Lamps, ever shyninge before God, drive away with your
blessed bearnes the dark clouds of my sins: for ye are the two in whom the
only begotten son of God, for the merit of pure virginity, confirmed the
privilege of his singular love, while he was hanging on the cross, saying thus
to the one of you: Woman behold thy son: and after to the other: Behold
thy mother: Therefore (in this sweetenes of such sacred love, wherein ye were
then conjoined (by the mouth of our Lord) as Mother and Son) to you two I
most wretched sinner commend this day my body and soul, that in every hour
and momente, inwardly and outwardly, ye would vouchsafe to be my suer keepers
and pitiful intercessors to God for me. Ask I beseech you health of body and
soul for me: Help I pray you, help with your gloriouse prayers, that the
holy Ghost the noble gyuer of graces, would wouchsafe to visit, adorn and
inhabit my heart, to purge me from all filthe of sin: to bewtifye me with
all holy virtues, and make me stand perfectly and persevere in the love of God
and my neighbor: And after the course of this life, I may be led to the
joys of the elect by the same holy Ghost, who with the father and the son,
eternally lives and reigns one God almightye world without end.

Amen.

A prayer to all the holy Angels. Victor. Vticensis. libr. de persecutione
Vandalica.
Hear us O holy Angels of our God, whose aid never fails, for you are
constituted (in your service) for them that shall be heirs of everlasting
salvation: watch and take heed, and behold how Sion the City of our God is
become of little estimation, and as it were polluted with infection amongst her
enemies: the enemy has abused and wastfully occupied all her pleasant and
beautyfull orname^tes, for he has seen infidelles and unworthy persons
assail and enter within the gates who our Lord had commanded should not
enter into his Church.

Say unto God our protector, (even as those which have a sure trust to
obtain that which you require) that his Church is afflicted and traveled,
and her womb sore troubled with her outcries, for she is set amongst infidels
and does find no rest, and not any to comfort her. She has sought who would
mourn with her, but could find none; she has sought who would give her
comfort but no person was to be found, even when she did eat Gaul in her
meat, and in her thirst took vynager for her drink folowinge the Passion of
her spouse and Lord who suffered for her, to the end, that she might follow
his steps.

A prayer to S. John Baptist. Ludo. carthusianus li. de vita Christi.
O Most blessed John the forerunner of Christ, the crier of the Judge, friend
of the spouse, voice of the divine word which haste deserved to declare and
fortell the joy and comfort of our redemption: obtain for me poor and
miserable sinner of the same Lord Jesus, by thy most holy prayers, that my
heart, being cleansed from vice and adorned with virtues, I may according to thy
hoolsome admonitio^s prepare the way of our Lord, and make straight his paths
in such sort, as in the last and final Judgment, when he shall cleanse the
floor of his Church, and shall separate the good corn from the chafe, I may
deserve to be found amongst the wheat, and his elect, and with the^ may be
laid up in the barn of his heavenly mansion. Amen.

A prayer to any of the Apostles.
O Lord God which amongst al and above al thy other saints, haste most
maruelouslye chosen thy most blessed Apostles, to be the first pillars and
foundation of thy Church, and before all other haste first sent them to preach
thy Ghospel through the whole world, confirminge and establishing their
doctrine, by marvelous works, wounders and miracles: and thou more-ouer by the
same Apostles haste sought, allured and invited us Gentyles, to the knowledge
and praise of thy holy name.

We humblye beseech thee O Lord, mercyfully to grant, that we being by
thee founded upon the rock of the Apostolic confession, and in the union of
the same faith, are chosen and called to obey and praise thee perpetually, be
never separated from thee, through any error or temptation: make us pertakers
of the intercession of S. N. and of the twelve Apostles in the strength and
fortification of a true faith, amendment of our life, and avoiding and
eschueing of all evil, through Jesus Christ our Lord

Amen.

A prayer to any of the holy Martyrs. Hora B. virgi. secund. us. ord. D. Been.
O God which haste so strenghthned in thy faith and love thy blessed Martyr S.
N. as no fleshlye delites, no threatninges of tyrants, no sword or torture of
tormentors could withdraw him from the worshipping of thee: grant unto us
miserable sinners, by his worthy merits and intercessions, help in
tribulation, comfort in persecution, that we may manfully fight against all
the deceites of the devil, despise the world and all that is in it, that we
may fear no adversity, but may obtain that, which by thy holy inspiration
we do desire, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer to any Confessor. Petrus Canisius li catho. prec.
ALmightye and everlasting God which art the wounderful light of thy beloved
saints, and principally thou haste appointed for us blessed bishopps, pastors,
doctors and confessors as burninge lights in thy house: and by their doctrine,
exhortations, writings and testimonies, recallest and reducest sinners from
evil to good.

We humbly beseech thee, that thou will undo and lose the bonds of our
sins, and although we be unworthy, yet make us partakers of that
intercession of blessed S.N. and all thy holy confessors, that we forsakinge
our sins, and walking in true faith and charity, folowinge them in good
works, may at last enjoy their company in the eternal beatitude, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer to any holy Virgin. Idem in eodem lib.
O God which amongst the other miracles of thy power and might, do give and
grant in a frail sex to all virgins, wydowes and matrones, the victory of
martyrdom, and immaculate chastitiye: mercyfully grant that we which
amongst thy other holy virgins and widows, do celebrate the memory of thy
blessed saint N. may by her example and intercession, despise the allurements
of the flesh, the pleasures of the world, and in true faith to pass all
perrils of soul and body, and exercise our selves daily more and more in thy
service in such sort, that with them afterward we may have the fruition of
joy and solace eternal.

Amen.

A prayer to any of the holy Saints. Ex tabella quadam Coloniae in templo S.
Vrsul.
O Holy and blessed S. N. I humbly beseech thee that thou will have me (poor
and wretched sinner in remembrance, before the face of my God and savior,
that by thy merits and intercessions I may be preserved from all dangers
bodyly and ghostly, that I may daily more and more increase in virtue and good
works: and at the hour of my death and departure out of this world,
vouchsafe to succor and defend me, against the assaults and deceites of mine
ennemies, and bring my soul delivered and made free from all tribulation, to
the joys of the heavenly paradyse. Amen.

Pray for us O holy S. N. that we may be made worthy of the promises of
Christ.

We humblye beseech thee O Lord God father omnipotente to receive the prayers
of thy servants, that we worshipping the memory of thy blessed S. N. by his
merits and intercessions may be delivered from al bodyly adversities: and that
our hearts may be cleansed from all evil and idle thoughts, through Jesus
Christ our savior. Amen.

A prayer to all the blyssed Saints in heaven. Ex herae B. M. ad vsum Sarum.
O All ye holy and elect of God, unto whom almighty God has prepared his
eternal kingedome from the beginning: I beseech you through the charity, by
the which God did love you, that you do sucker me most miserable sinner,
before death do take me away out of this wretched world: and reconcile me
unto my creator before that hell devour me. O blessed Marie mother of God,
the mediatrix for sinners unto Christ, hear me, keep me, save me: O thou
sweet Lady obtain to me right faith, firm hope, perfect charity, true
humylitie, chastity, and sobriety, and after the course of this life the
fellow ship of the everlasting blyssednes. Thou also holy Michaell, with all
the thousands of Angels pray for me, that thou may take and keep me
from the power of my adversaries, help me, obtain for me the love of God,
pureness of heart, strength of faith, and the pleasure of heavenly glory. Also
ye holy Patriarchs and Prophets, procure for me of God pardon, penance,
continency, and godly perseverance, and also life everlasting. O ye blessed
Apost'es of God unloose me from my sins, defend me from the pains of hell,
and take me from the power of darkness, and bring me unto the everlasting
kingdom. I beseech you also ye holy Martyrs of God, that perfect charity,
sincere love, a pure mind, a chaste life, and remission of my sins be given
of almighty God unto me.

O ye glorious Confessors of God, pray for me, that through you the desire
of heavenly things, and reverence of manners and washinge away of my misdeedes
be of God granted unto me. Likewise I pray you all holy Virgins of God,
that you do aid me, to the intent I may have a good mind, and health of body
and soul, humility, chastity, and after the course of this my miserable life
fellowshipe of the perpetual blessedness. O all ye Saints of God I do pray,
and also do make humble supplication, that you will woutchsafe to help me,
and have compassion upon me most pytyfully, and pray for me insta^tly, that
through your intercession, a pure conscience be ingrafted within me, with
compunction of heart for my sins, and laudable endinge of my life, so that
through your merits I may be able to come unto the country of eternal
blessedness, almyghtie God grant it. Amen.

The end of the eleventh Chapter.
THE TWELFTH CHAPTER CONTAINING ADVERtisments and consolations with prayers
and suffrages for the sick.
An aduertisment for the sick, diligently to prepare him self to dye well.
Lud. Blosius cap. 1. posterioris li. Ench. paruulorum.
Who soever doethe love God dutifullye, being at any time overtaken with
sickness, whereby death is feared to be at hand: let good heed be taken that
with diligence thou prepare thy self to end well: discharge thy heart of the
cares and troubles of this world: receive devoutly the Sacraments of the
Church, to the end thou may purchasse succor and strength to pass through
thy journey: and wholly recommende thy soul to God.

Remember the passion of our sweet Savior and redeemer: embrace in thy heart
his wholesome cross kiss his ruddy wounds, and thrust thy self with all thy
power into them, that being hidden in them thou may be safe, and happily
escape from all the snares and entysmentes of the devil: humblye beseech our
Savior Jesus Christ, that he would wouchsafe to wash thee with his precious
blood, and that he would whollye abandonne all thy sins.

And for want of meritoriouse good works, offer to God the father the merits
of Jesus Christ: offer him his most holy and sacred conversation, death and
passion: offer him the merits of his most sweet mother the wirgin Mary, and
of all Saints: for so it shall come to pass that thou which art poor, naked
and miserable of thy self, shall appear maruelously adorned with spiritual
ornaments: recommende thy self also to our blessed Lady the glorious virgin
and mother of God, and to the other Cytizens of heaven, and principally to that
saint which thou haste accustomed most to pray unto, hoping and believing
certainly that they hear thy prayers, and that if thou call upon the bless
virgin with all thy heart, and turn most humbly and assuredly thy self to
her, she will without doubt make thy entrance into the kingdom of heaven,
where otherwise it may be (through the divine justice of God) that thou can
not enter, because of thine iniquity, for she is the mother of mercy, and the
Port of of heaven.

Then follows this protestation or such like, very profitable to be made by
the sick. Lud. Blofius cap. 3. lib. sup.
I wicked sinner most unworthy, (redeemed with the preciouse blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ) do confess openly, that with an entyer and pure heart I
forgive all those that have at any time ever offended me, or done me iniurye,
in what manner soever: desiring most humblye all and every one that I have
offended, iniuried, grieved, or any way angered (whyther they be present or
absent) that they would vouchsafe also to forgive me.

Here let the sick call to mind his sins in particular, and ask God
forgynenes, purposing firmly by God his grace never to commit sin again:
and though his sins be never so many, and the manner of his offenses never so
horrible and grieuouse, yet he is to trust in the omnipotency of God whose
mercyes are innumerable, and to take hope and comfort in the passion of Christ
our redeemer: Saying.

I believe in God the father almighty. etc.

A prayer for the sick person to say after his belief.
O Holy Trinity I beseech thee. keep and preserve this pure religion of my
faith, and grant that it may ever be sounding in my conscience until my
spirit depart.

O almighty and merciful Jesus, I protest before thee and before all the
court of heaven, that I have a will and desire to finishe my life in this
faith, wherein of necessity every child (obediente to our Mother the holy
Church) ought to dye.

Further my sweet Savior I protest to believe wholly and universally all that
which is contained in the Catholic faith, and that which a true faithful
christian ought to believe: that if it happen by the assaults of the devil, or
by violence of sickness, I come to think, say, or do any thing contrary to
this purpose, I do revoke it at this present, and protest that I give no
consent to any such thought, word, or work.

I rejoice and render thanks to my louinge creator and redeemer, through the
maruelouse goodness of his bounty, by the which I hope undoubtedly to dye in
the holy Catholic faith: and so I recommende my soul and body into his
most holy hands now and at the hour of my death. Amen.

Prayers in sickness. Dionys. Cart. in dial. de part. iudicio animarum.
O Swet Jesus, I desire nether life, nor death, but thy most holy will. Thee O
Lord I look for, be it unto me according to thy pleasure. If thou will sweet
Jesus, that I dye, receive my soul. And albeit I come to thee even at the very
eueninge, as one of the last, yet grant that with thee, and in thee, I may
receive everlasting rest. If thou will sweet Jesus that I live longer on
earth, I purpose to amend the rest of my life, and offer all into a burnt
sacrifice unto thee, for thy honor and glory, according to thy blessed will:
and for the perfoorminge of this I desire the assistance of thy holy grace.

Another prayer. Nieron. in Agone mortis, auctore Eusebio.
O Merciful Jesus, my virtue and power, my comfort and ease, my receyuer, and
my redemer, in whom I have hoped, in whom I have belyeued, and whom I have
loved, my sweet delight. my tower of strength, my hope from my youth, the
guide of my life, call me, and I will answer thee. O creator of heaven and
earth, stretche forth the power of thy mercy, unto the work of thy hands,
which thou createdst of the slyme of the earth, and tiedst together with bones
and synowes. Command O Lord, stay not, for it is time, that dust may return
into dust, and my soul may return to thee his Savior, who did send it
down into this world.

Open unto me the gates of life: for thou did hang upon the Cross for my
sake, and made me promise to receive me.

Come my sweet Lord, let me embrace thee, let me not leese thee. Bring
me into thy heavenly palace. Thou art my receyuer, my glory, mine
aduauncer, my habitation, and my benedictio^. Receive me most merciful Lord,
according to thee multitude of thy mercies. For thou dyinge on the Cross
receyuedst the thief, returninge unto thee.

Another prayer. Ibid.
I Am sick: my life is weak in this poor state, and therefore to thee O Lord
I run, as to my only phisitio^. Heal me O Lord, and I shall be healed. And
for that I have mine affiance reposed in thee, let me not be confounded. But
what am I, O most merciful God, that speak so boldly to thee? I am a sinner,
begotten, borne, and brought up in sin: I am a rotten carkas, a stinckinge
vessel, and meat for woormes. What victory O Lord shall it be, if in
conflict thou overthrow me, who am less than a little straw before the face
of the wind? Forgive O Lord forgive all my sins, and lift up a poor man
from this durty dounghill of earth. Certes good Lord, this will I say, if it
please thee, thou may not refuse him that has his recourse to thee. For
thou art my Lord God, flesh of my flesh, bones of my bones. For to this
intent, thou not leaving the right hand of thy father, did assumpte my
human nature, and becamst God and man, remaining in one person the self
same, which thou wast from thee beginning. And why did thou work this
so hard and wounderfull mystery, but that I should boldlye have recourse to
thee, as unto my brother, and thou would mercifully so cover thy divinity,
that I should not be afraid of thy heavenly power. Wherefore arise, O Lord,
and help me, arise, and put me not back for ever.

Another prayer. Ibid.
Let my request enter into thy sight, O Lord, and let thy hand be made to
make me whole. Behold I am the man that cominge down from Hiericho, was taken
and wounded of thieves, and left half dead. Do thou receive me O merciful
Samaritan. I have sinned excessiuelie in my life, and wrought much iniquity
in thy sight. From the sole of my foot, even to the top of my head, there is
no sound health in me. Verily unless thou dying on the Cross had assisted
me, my soul had been worthy to dwell in hell. I am, (sweet Jesus,) a part of
that dear price: for me, thou did shed thy precious blood, cast me not
away. I am the sheep that went a stray, seek that sheep, O good shepherd,
and put him in thy fold, that thou may be justified in thy word. For thou
did make me promise, that at what soever hour a sinner did repent him of
his sins and return to thee, he should be saved. I lament O Lord and moorne
for my sins, I acknowledge mine iniquities, my wickedness is in my sight, I
am not worthy to be called thy son. For I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, thou shall make me hear that, which halbe great joy and gladness
unto my ^eart. Turn away thy face O Lord from my sins: blotte out mine
iniquities, according to thy great mercy. Cast me not away out from thy
sight. Deal not with me according to my sins, nor reward me after the
desert of mine iniquities. But help me O Lord, my God and my Savior, and for
the glory of thy holy name deliver me. Deal mercifully, as it femeth best to
thy holy will, that I may dwell in thy house all the days of my life, that I
may praise thee for ever more, as they do that dwell there, world without
end. Amen.

Prayers and suffrages to be said for one lyinge in death bed.
Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Holy Marie pray for him.

All holy Angels, and Archangels pray for him.

Holy Abell pray for him.

All the company of the just pray for him.

Holy Abraham pray for him.

Holy John Baptiste pray for him.

All ye holy Patriarchs and prophets pray for him.

Saint Peter pray for him.

Saint Paul pray for him.

Saint Andrewe pray for him.

Saint John pray for him.

All ye holy Apostelles and Evangelists pray for him.

All ye holy Disciples of our Lord pray for him.

All ye holy Innocents pray for him.

Saint Stephen pray for him.

Saint Laurence pray for him.

All ye holy Martyrs pray for him.

Saint Siluester pray for him.

Saint Augustine pray for him.

All ye holy Bishops and Confessors pray for him.

Saint Benet pray for him.

Saint Francis pray for him.

All ye holy Monks and Eremites pray for him.

Saint Mary Magdalen pray for him.

Saint Lucie pray for him.

All ye holy virgins and wydowes pray for him.

All ye holy Saints of God make intercession for him.

Have mercy, and spare him O Lord.

Have mercy: and hear him O Lord.

Have mercy: and deliver him O Lord.

From thy anger, deliver him O Lord.

From an evil death deliver him O Lord.

From the danger of death, deliver him O Lord.

From the pains of hell, deliver him O Lord.

From all evil, deliver him O Lord.

From the power of the devil, deliver him O Lord.

By thy Nativity, deliver him O Lord.

By thy Cross and Passion, deliver him O Lord.

By thy death and burial, deliver him O Lord.

By thy glorious resurrection deliver him O Lord.

By thy wounderfull ascension deliver him O Lord.

By the grace of the holy ghost the comforter, deliver him O Lord.

In the day of judgment; deliver him O Lord.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us.

That thou would spare him, we beseech thee to here us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

O thou Christian soul, depart thou out of this world in the name of God the
father almighty, who has created thee; In the name of Christ Jesus the son
of the living God, who has suffered for thee, In the name of the holy ghost,
who was powered into thee, In the name of the holy Angels and Archangelles, In
the name of the Thrones and dominations, In the name of the Powers and
Potestates, In the name of Cherubin and Seraphin, In the name of the
Patriarchs and Prophets, In the name of the holy Apostelles and Evangelists,
In the name of the holy Martyrs and Confessors, In the name of the holy
Monks and Eremites, In the name of the holy Virgins, and of all the Saints
of God. Let thy place be this day in peace, and thy habitation in holy Sion,
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer.
O Merciful God, O benign God, O God who according to the multitude of thy
mercyes do blott out the sins of such as are penitent, and with thy
remission and pardon do clean purge the blame of offenses paste, mercifully
look upon this thy servant. N. and for our prayers grant him his request, who
with all his heart confessing thy name, does most earnestlye crave for pardon
of all his sins. Renew in him, O most merciful father, what soever is
corrupt through the frayeltie of the flesh, or that which has been defiled
by the craft of the devil: and join again unto the unity of thy body the
church, the member which thou haste redeemed. Have mercy O Lord upon his
sighs: have mercy upon his tears, and admit again unto the Sacrament of
thy reconciliation him, who has no hope but in thy mercy, through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Another prayer.
Dearly beloved brother I commend thee unto almyghtie God, and to his
protection I commit thee, whose creature thou art, to the end, thou having
paid by the means of thy death, the debte of all mankind, may return
again unto thy maker, who has framed thee of a piece of claye. Let therefore
the noble compainie of Angels meet thy soul departinge out of thy body. Let
the whole Senate of the Apostles, judges of the world, come unto thee. Let
the triumphant army of the gloriousse Martyrs come against thee. Let the
flourishing company of the shining. Confessors compass thee about. Let the
whole quire of the singinge Virgins receive thee, and with embracing, settle
thee fast in the bosom of the Patriarchs, which is the place of blessed
rest and quietness. Let Christ Jesus appear unto thee with a mild and
chereful, countenance, and adiudge thee to be emonge those, who always attend
upon him. Be thou ignorant of all that quaketh in darkness, that crashed in
fire, and houleth in torments. Let the most cruel fiend Satan, with all his
souldiars give place unto thee: let him tremble at thy coming, thou being
accompaigned with the holy Angels, and let him fly into the huge pit of
everlasting darkness. Let God arise, and let his enemies be dispersed, and
let all that hate him, fly away from his face. Let them vanish away as the
smoke vadeth: as the wax melts before the face of the fire, so let all
sinners perish from the face of God: and let the just make merry and rejoice
in the sight of God. Therefore let all the legions of hell be confounded and
ashamed, and let not the ministres of Satan, be so bold as to stop thy
journey. Christ deliver thee from all torments, who was crucified for thee.
Christ deliver thee from death, who has vouchsafed to dye for thee. Christ the
son of the living God, place thee in the garden of his paradise, which
always is pleasant and flourishinge: and he that is the true shepeherd,
agnise thee among his sheep. Let him absolve thee from all thy sins, and
place thee at his right hand, in the inheritance of his elect. God grant
thou may see thy redeemer, face to face, and that thou may be always
present at hand, and with thy blessed eyes behold the most manifest truth.
God grant therefore, that thou being placed emonge the compagnie of the blessed
souls, may enjoy the swetenes of the countenance of the divine majesty,
for ever and ever. Amen.

Receive O Lord thy servant into the place of Salvation, which he must hope
to have of thy mercy. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant from all dangers of hell, and from
all snares that may entrappe him to pain, and from all tribulation. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou haste deliured Enoch and
Elias from the common death of the world. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst Noe, from
drowninge in the general fludde. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst Abraham out
from Vr of the Chaldees. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst Job from his
passions and pains. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst Isaac from
being offered in Sacrifice, and out from the hands of his father. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst Loath from
Sodom, and from the flame of fire. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst Moses out from
the hands of Pharao, King of the Egyptians. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst Daniel out from
the den of the Lions. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst the three
Children out from the fiery fournace, and from the hands of the cruel and
unmercifully King. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst Susanna from
the crime with which she was falsely charged. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst David, from the
hands of king Saul, and Golias. R. Amen.

Deliver O Lord the soul of thy servant, as thou deliueredst S. Peter and
Paul out of prison. R. Amen.

And as thou deliueredst that blessed Virgin, and Martyr Tecla, from her most
cruel torments, so vouchesafe to deliver the soul of this thy servant, and
make him partaker of the everlasting joys in heaven with thee. R. Amen.

Let us pray.
WE commend unto thee O Lord the soul of thy servant, and beseech thee
sweet Lord lefu Christ, Savior of the world, that thou do not refuse to
place him in the bosom of thy Patriarchs, for whom thou desce^dedst
mercifully into the earth. Acknowledge O Lord thy creature, created not of any
straung gods but of thee alone, the true and lyuinge God, for there is no other
God, but thou O Lord, and there is none according to thy works. O Lord make
his soul rejoice in thy sight: and remember not his old iniquity, and
drunckenesse, which inordinate concupiscence and raginge lusts did raise in
him. Albeit he sinned, yet he denied not the father, the son, and the holy
Ghost, but belyeued steadfastly in them: and he had the zeal of God in his
heart, and adored the God, that created all of naught. R. Amen.

Let us pray.
Remember not, we beseech the O Lord, the sins and ignoraunces of his
wylfull youth, but according to thy great mercy be myndefull of him in the
glory of thy eternal deytie. Let the heavens be opened unto him. Let thy
Angels rejoice of him. O Lord receive thy servant into thy kingdom. Let holy
Michaell the high messenger of God, that has deserved to be the chief all
the holy company of Angels, receive him. Let all the holy Angels of God, come
forth and meet him, and conducte him into the heaue^lie City Jerusalem. Let
blessed Peter the Apostle, who had the keys of the kyndom of God delivered
unto him, receive him. Let the holy Apostle S. Paul, who was worthy to be a
chosen vessel, receive him. Let S. John the elect Apostle of God, to whom
the heavenly secret mysteries were revealed, receive him. Let all the holy
Apostles who received of Christ power to loose and bynd, pray for him. Let
all holy Saints who have sustained torments for the name of Christ, pray for
him, that after he is loosed out of the prison of this mortal flesh, he may be
found worthy to come to the glory of the heavenly kingdom, by the
assistance of our Lord Jesus Christ, who with the father and the holy Ghost,
lives and reigns, world without end. Amen.

Into thy hands O Lord we common his soul. O Lord God of truth, thou haste
redeemed him Let that sweet voice of thine O Lord Jesus, sound in his ears.
This day thou shall be, with me in Paradise. Amen.

The end of the twelfth Chapter.

THE THYRTIENTH CHAPTER CONTAINING DEVOVT prayers, healthful for the departed
souls.
An exhortation by the which we are shevved and admonyshed to pray for
souls, departed in the Catholicque Church. Clemens I. Ponti. Max. Ca. 47. lib.
8. constit. Apostol.
MY brethren, let us pray for our brother that rests in Jesus Christ, to the
end that our good God which has recieued his soul, may forgive him all his
sins willingly or unwillingly committed, and that he obteining forgyuenes may
be received into the kingdom of the blessed: in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac
and Iacobe, with all those that from the beginning have pleased God, and have
done his will: from whom all sorrow, grief and pain is secluded.

Commendations of the soul that is lately departed. Albertus Castella. Sacer.
Romans part. 1.
O Lord we commend the soul of thy servant that being latelye departed this
life, he may live in thee, and according to thy mercy, pardone him his sins
which he has committed through humayne frayeltie.

We commend O Lord the soul of this thy seruante, into the hands of the
holy and most gloriouse virgin Mary, the mother of mercy and clemency, Also
into the hands of all the holy Archangels, Angels, and celestial court of
heaven, into the hands of the holy Patriarchs and prophets: into the hands
of the blessed Apostles, Evangelists and disciples: into the hands of the
martyrs and confessors: into the hands of the virgins, widows and all
votaryes who-soeuer.

And finally we commend the soul of this thy servant into the hands of all
such thy blessed saints and servant, as have pleased thee from the first
creation of the world, that by their intercession and succor, he may be
delivered from the prince of darkness, and from all dreadful torments: grant
this O God almightye, omnipotente and full of mercy, through the bitter passion
of thy sweet son our savior Jesus, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer for the faithful soul departed. Precat. Ecclesi. in Missa.
O Eternal and almightye God, to whom we never pray without hope of mercy:
Have mercy of the soul of thy servant N. and make him to be united to that
company of Saints, which is deceased from this life, in the confession of thy
name: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer. Pontifical. Romans part 3.
O God by whom all things lives, and through whom our bodies diminishes not
in dyeng, but are changed into better: we most humblye beseech thee, to
command the soul of thy servant to be received by the hands of thy holy
Angels, to bring him unto the bosom of thy friend the Patriarch Abraham, to
rise again at the last great judgment day, pardonning him mercyfully all
his sins which he has committed, through the false deceiptes and suggestion
of the devil: through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Another prayer. Clemens Aposto. discip. lib. 8. cap. 47. constit. Apostol.
O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, which art God of the living and
not of the dead, for as much as all souls of the righteouse lives with thee,
and are in thy hands: they shall not be touched with any pain or torment.

Look bountifully upon this thy servant, which thou haste received into
another life, pardone him that, which he has committed through the frayeltye
of his will: Appoint him thy loving Angels, to carye him into the bosoms of
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, and of all those that has pleased thee
from the beginning of the world, where is neither sorrow, grief, nor horror,
but an assemblye of Saints which are rejoicing in the country of the happy
and just, seeing the glory of thy Christ: through whom be to thee glory,
honor, service and adoration in the holy Ghost eternallye.

Amen.

A prayer for the soul of thy father. Io. Damase in historia barl. and Iosa.
O Lord God of insearcheable, and ineffable bountye, bring my father to the
place of rest and refreshing: where the light of thy countenance does
gloryouslye shine: do not remember his former offenses, but according to thy
great mercy, blotte out and cancel the obligations of his sins, tear and
rent them asunder, for thou art worthy of all glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer for the soul of thy mother. B. Agustinus ca. vlti. li. 9.
confessionum.
O The God of my heart, my life and my praise, I humbly desire thee to pardone
the sins of my mother: graciously hear me for his sake, which is the
medicyne of our wounds, which did hang upon the tree, and now sitting on thy
right hand makes intercession for us sinners: I know that she has dealt
charitably, and from her heart has forgyuen all her debtors: release also unto
her all those sins what soever, since her baptism, she has fallen into.

Release them O Lord, release them I beseech thee, and enter not into
judgment with her: let thy mercy exceed thy judgment, for thy words are
true, and thou haste promised mercy to the merciful.

For my mother (when the day of her death approached) did request and desire
this, that we would remember her soul, at thy holy Altar where she had
served thee: whereby she did know and believe, that the holy oblation of the
body and precious blood of our savior Jesus Christ, was made: whereby the
obligation made against us, was cancelled: whereby the enemy was vanquished,
counting our sins, and searchinge what he might obiecte against us, and
finding nothing in us by the means of Jesus Christ in whom we have victory:
who shall render to Jesus Christ his innocent blood? who shall requite the
price wherewith he has bought us, that he might pull and draw us, from our
enemy.

To the misterye of the which price, thy servant has united and bound her
soul by the bond of faith: let no man withdraw her forth of thy protection:
let not the dragon nor lion intrude him self neither by force nor deceit:
neither as yet, will thy hand-mayd answer that she is not in debte, lest she
be convinced and possessed of that crafty accuser: but she will answer, that
her debtes are released by him, whom none ca^ repay that, which he owinge
nothing has paid for us: let her therefore rest in peace with her husband,
before whom and after whom, she was never married to any other, whom she has
served, and brought forth fruit to thee with great patience, to the end she
might gain him to thee.

Inspire O my Lord God, inspire thy servants my brethren, thy children my
superiors, whom with voice, heart and pen I do serve: that, who soever
shall read these, they may remember at thy Altar thy servant Monica, with
Patricius her late husband: by whose flesh thou haste brought me into this
world, by what means I know not how: let them remember with devout zeal my
parents in this transitorye life, and my brethren under thee their Father, in
the lapp of their Catholic Mother, and my countrye-men in the eternal
Jerusalem, which thy people in their pilgrymage, from their departure until
their return, desire to attain unto, that she may attain by the prayers of
many, those things which she required at my hands when she departed.

Amen.

A prayer for the soul of thy parents.
O God which haste commanded us, to honor and reverence our father and mother,
have mercy I beseech the on the souls of my father and mother: and of all my
other parents, forgive them their offenses, and grant that I may see them in
the joy of thy everlasting bliss. Amen.

A prayer for thy friend departed.
O God the gyuer of pardon and lover of man's salvation, we beseech thy
clemency, through the intercession of the glorious Virgin Marie, and of all the
holy Saints of heaven: that thou will grant, that the brethe^ sisters and
friends departed (in the unity of the Catholic Church) with all our
benefactours, may come to the bliss of thy everlasting kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for the living and the dead.
ALmighty and everlasting God, Lord of the lyuinge and the dead thou show
mercy to all those, whom by faith and good worcks, thou know to be thine:
we humbly beseech the, that those for whom we have determined to pray, whom
either this present world yet retayneth in flesh: or the world to come has
alredie received, may through the clemencye of thy bountye, and intercession
of all thy blessed Saints, obtain full remission of their sins. Ame^.

A prayer for the departed to be said at mass. B. Ambr. praecatio. 1. praepa.
WE humbly beseech thee O holy father for the souls of the faithful departed
this life, that the holy Sacrifice of the mass may be to them eternal
salvation: perpetual health, joy and rest everlasting. O my Lord God, let
this wounderfull and excellent mysterye of pyetie, and bounty, be unto them
this day, full and perfect joy: grant that they may be replenished with
thee, the living and true bread, which desce^dest from heaven, and gyuest life
to the world: and with that holy and blessed flesh of thee, the immaculate
Lamb, which take away the sins of the world: and make them to drink of
that fontaine of thy pyetie, which by force of the souldiars lance issued from
the side of our Lord Jesus Christ crucified, that so being comforted they may
rejoice in thy holy laud and glory. Amen.

The end of the thyrtienth Chapter. FINIS.
Aug. in Psalm. 42. This is the Justice of man in this life, Fasting,
Almes-deedes, Prayer.

PRAYER IS GOOD WITH FASTING AND ALMS

TOB. 12

Ibidem in sermon. 59. He that will have his prayer to fly to heaven, must make
it two wings, Almes-deedes, and Fasting, and it shall spedelye ascend and be
hard.

A TABLE OF PRAYERS MEDITATIONS, EXHORTAtions and aduertismentes, contained in
this present Manual of prayers.
The first chapter containing quotidiane or daily prayers, accomodated and
prescribed to certain hours and times both for the day and night.
A Brief exhortation to prayer contynuallye, extracted and taken out of S.
Chrysostom. folio 1. A prayer in the morning when ye awake. folio 3. When ye
do arise. folio 3. A morning prayer when you are risen. folio. 3. A morning
prayer whereby to commend thy self unto God. folio 3. A prayer to be said
goinge out of the house. folio 4. A prayer desiringe God to order and direct
us. folio 4. A prayer to persevere in goodness. folio 5. An exercise to be daily
used in meditatinge the passion of our Lord and Savior, (with an exhortation)
containing fiftiene meditationes with a prayer belonginge to them, or to every
one of them. folio 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Certain asperations, ghostly
sighinges and prayers, to be daily used. folio 12. 13. 14. An other brief
exercise to be daily used, more shorter than the other before, as thy leisure
shall serve. folio 15. 16. 17. 18. A prayer for scholars before they go to
school, for obtaining wisdom, learning and knowledge. folio. 19. Wholesome
meditations to use at night before you go to rest. folio 19. An evening
prayer to be said as thou go to bed. folio 20. An other prayer for the
night. fol. 20. A prayer to thy good Angel thy guardian. folio 22. A prayer as
thou enterest into thy bed. folio 22. A prayer to be said as thou setlest
thy self to sleep. folio 22. An exhortation to watch taken out of holy
scripture. folio 23. Most wholesome meditations which we ought day and night to
have before our eyes, and always to have in remembrance. folio 23.
The second chapter containing goodlye and devout prayers to be said at the
holy Sacrifice of the Mass as also both before and after.
A Prayer when thou do enter into the Church. folio 24. A prayer to stir
up the mind to devotion before Mass. folio 24. A devout prayer to be said
every Sounday. folio 26. A prayer to be used before confession, or before Mass
if time serve. fol. 27.
These prayers following are to be said at Mass.
When the priest is at confession. fol. 29. When the priest goes to the
Altar after confession. folio 30. When the priest says Gloria in excelsis
Deo. folio 30. At the Epistle. folio 31. After the Epistle. folio 31. After the
Gospel. folio 32. At the offertory. folio 32. When the priest turning
desires the people to pray for him. folio 32. When the priest says Sursum
corda. folio 33. At the holy Canon. folio 34. How to meditate before the
elevation. folio 35. At the elevation of the Host. fol. 36. At the elevation of
the Chalice. fol. 36. When the priest says the Pater noster. folio 37. When
the priest kisseth the Pax. folio 37. When you kiss the Pax. fol. 37. When
the priest receives. folio 37. A prayer in blessing your self. fo. 38 A
prayer after the divine Sacrifice o^ the Mass. folio 38 A prayer to recommend
your self to God. folio 39 A prayer to be said before a Catholic sermon or
exhortation. fo. 39
The third Chapter containing wholesome prayers for remission of sins.
AN humble bewayling of sins for a sinner that has compunctio^. f. 40. A
prayer of a penitente sinner acknowledging his vileness in the sight of God.
folio 42. A confession of a man's own ungratefulness toward God, whereupon
the sinner being turned unto pennaunce, prescrybethe to him self a certain
course of life. folio 44. An humble confession of sins, with desire of mercy
and grace. folio 45. A prayer for a penitent sinner, after his relapse or
fallinge to sin again. folio 49. A most profitable protestation to be made
whiles we are yet in health and prosperity. folio 50.
The fourth Chapter containing very goodly prayers for comfort, strength, and
delyuery (by God his assistaunce) in all sorrows, tribulations, afflictions
and adversities.
A Prayer when thou feel thy self tempted. folio 51. A prayer of any
captive, according to the form of David when he was hid in the cave. folio
52. A prayer of Job in his most gryeuous aduersitye and loss of his goods.
folio 53. A prayer in trouble of conscience. folio 53. A prayer for patience.
folio 55. A prayer against the enemies of christ his truth. folio 56. A
prayer wherein is desired freedom of the mind, and auoydance of worldly
desires. folio 57. A prayer before we take in hand any journey. folio 58. A
collection of the psalms in latin, to call on God for help against
temptation, with an insultation against wicked spirits upon hope and
considence in God. folio 59.
The fifthe Chapter contayninge diverse prayers, very commodious for obtaining
that which is profitable both for body and soul.
A Prayer to obtain faith, hope and charity. folio 69. A devout prayer to
obtain of God fervent love toward God, our neighbors and our enemies. folio
70. A prayer for obtaining of heavenly wisdom. folio 71. A prayer most godly
and devout which S. Thomas of Aquine used daily to pray. folio 73. A prayer to
God that he will vouchsafe to preserve the fruits of the earth. folio 76. A
prayer to God that we may use all temporal things for the health of our
souls only. folio 76.
The sixte Chapter contayninge wholesome prayers of the life and passion of out
Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ.
A Prayer to be said before the crucifix. folio 77. A prayer acknowledging
that man was the cause of Christ his suffering. fol. 78. A prayer wherein man
does offer (to God the Father) the passion of his Son our Lord and Savior
Iesu-Christ. folio 82. A devout prayer with the remembrance of the passion of
our savior Jesus Christ, to obtain succor and favor of him. folio 84.
The seventh Chapter contayninge devout and wholesome prayers to be said,
before and after the receiving of the B. Sacrament.
ADuertismentes for more worthelye receiving the holy Euchariste. folio. 86. A
prayer to be said before the receiving of the B. Sacrament. folio 88. An other
prayer before the receiving of the B. Sacrament. folio 89. A devout prayer to
be said at the eleuatio^ of the most blessed and Sacred Hooste. folio 91. A
devout prayer to be said before the B. Sacrament of the Altar. folio 92. A
prayer to be said after the receiving of the B. Sacrament. folio 94 An other
prayer after the receiving of the Sacrament. folio 96.
The eight chapter containing lauds, prayeses, and thankesgyuing, for the
benefytes that God has bestovved upon us.
A Psalm in which a sinner yeldeth thanks to God that his enemies have not
prevailed against him nor gotten the upper hand of him. folio. 97. A psalm in
which the goodness, of God is praised. folio. 100. A psalm of the benefits of
God with thanckes for the same. folio. 103. A thanksgyuing to God for his
innumerable benefits bestowed on man from his infancy. folio. 106. A prayer
and thankesgyuing to God for his great benefits. folio. 108.
The nynthe chapter containing necessary prayers for the prosperitye of our
brethren friends and neighbors.
A Prayer for the Church afflicted. folio. 110. A prayer for our parents.
folio. 113. A prayer for them that are fallen from the Church. folio. 113. A
prayer that children may be instructed in virtue and in the fear of God.
folio. 114. A prayer for a friend and generally for any that is commended unto
our prayers. folio. 114. A general prayer for the living and the departed in
the Catholic faith. folio. 114.
The tenthe chapter contayninge wholesome prayers to the holy Trinity.
A Prayer or thankesgyuinge to the holy Trinity. folio. 116. A prayer to God
the father, folio. 118. A prayer to God the son called, O bone Jesus. folio.
119. A prayer to the holy Ghost. folio. 120.
The eleventh Chapter containing Christian Catholicque prayers to Saints and
Cytyzens of the glory of heaven.
A Prayer unto the holy Virgin Mary. folio. 122. An other prayer to our B. Lady
and to S. John Evangelist called. O intemerata. folio. 123. A prayer to all the
holy Angels. folio. 124. A prayer to S. John Baptiste. folio. 125. A prayer to
any of the Apostles. folio. 126. A prayer to any of the holy Martyrs. folio.
126. A prayer to any Confessor. folio. 127. A prayer to any holy Virgin. fol.
127. A prayer to any one of the holy Saints. folio. 128. A prayer to all the
blessed Saints in heaven. folio. 129.
The twelfth chapter contayninge aduertismentes and consolations withdraw
prayers and suffrages for the sick.
AN aduertisment for the sick, diligently to prepare him self to dye well.
folio. 131. A protestation very profitable to be made by the sick. folio. 133.
Prayers in sickness. folio. 133. Another prayer. folio. 134. Another prayer.
folio. 135. Another prayer. folio. 136. Prayers and suffrages to be said for
one lyeing in death bed. folio. 137. A prayer for the same. folio. 139.
Another prayer. folio. 140. Another prayer. folio. 143. Another prayer. folio.
143.
The thyrtienth chapter containing devout prayers, healthful for the departed
souls.
AN exhortation by the which we are showed and admonyshed to pray for the
souls departed in the Catholicque Church. folio. 145. Commendation of the
soul that is lately departed. folio. 145. A prayer for the faithful soul
departed. folio. 146. Another prayer folio 146. Another prayer. folio 147. A
prayer for the soul of thy father. folio 147. A prayer for the soul of thy
mother. folio 148. A prayer for thy parents departed. folio 150. A prayer for
thy friend departed. folio. 150. A prayer for the lyuinge and the dead.
folio. 150. A prayer for the departed to be said at Mass. folio 150.
The end of the Table.
Certain differences between love toward God and love toward creatures,
and what love he has and will have, to those that will perfectlye love and
serve him.
1. IF I love a creature, it can not know how much nor in what manner my love
is: but if I love God, he knows better the love of my heart then my self.

2. If I love a creature, oftentimes I receive no reward or recompense: but if
I love God, he rewards a hundredth fold.

3. If I love a creature, I find it not at al times, nor so often as I would,
and I can not speak to it so often as I desire, and as need requires,
neither does it harke^ to my words as I wish: but if I love God, I have him
at all times with me: I may speak with him as often as I please, and at all
times he harkeneth to my words, yea and to the desires of my heart.

4. If I love a creature, often times it puts me to trouble, and is
hindrance to me in my prayers, for that I think of it: but if I love God, he
brings peace into my heart and conscience, and if I think on him as I ought
in my prayers, he gives to me him self which is sovereign sanctitye.

5. If I love a creature, oftentimes I have care of it: but if I love God, he
has a care over me.

6. If I love creatures I know not their secrets: but if I love God, he
opens often to me the truth of all hydden and secret things.

7. If I love a creature, it yeldeth not my hearts desire: but if I love God,
he will give me wholly all my desires.

8. If I love a creature, it is out of me: but if I love God, he dwells in me
and I in him.

9. If I love a creature, it knows not all my affairs nor the things to me
appartaining: but if I love God, he knows the^ better then I do my self.

10. If I love a creature, sometimes it deceives me: but if I love God, he
will truly assure me.

11. If I love a creature oftentimes it moves me to heaviness and grief: but
if I love God, he gives me joy and consolation.

12. If I love a creature, it seeks at my hand a profit and gain to it
self: but if I love God, he wishes my profit and commo^ytie.

13. If I love a creature often it departs from me, and for that cause I have
short joy and pleasure of it: but if I love God, he remains with me (so long
as I am without deadly sin) from whom I have all joy and pleasure.

14. If I love a creature, I know not if I be loved of it: but if I love God,
I am assured of his love.

15. If I love a creature, it perishes or decays: but if I love God, he
dwells with me everlastingly.

16. If I love a creature, I find it often a liar, variable and inconstant:
but if I love God, I find him most true, and his will firm and constant.

17. If I love a creature, I see often in it that displeases me: but if I love
God, nothing that I see in him can displease me.

18. Therefore I take and choose for my Lover and Spouse our Lord Jesus Christ,
who through his own pleasure is mine, and so am I his, and none is to me so
good, so fair, so sweet, so rich, so noble, so mighty, so wise, so piteouse,
so benign, nor so amyable, as is my hearty lover Jesus. Who lives and
reigns with the father and the holy ghost world without end. Amen.

CERTAIN DEVOVT AND GODLY Petitions, commonly called. JESUS PSALTER.

Nomen datum Non est aliud hominibus.

Act. 4. IHS



There is none other name under heaven given unto men, in which we must be
saved.

Act. 4. CVM PRIVILEGIO. Anno. 1583.




