The description of GILES MOMPESSON late Knight censured by Parliament The 17th
of March.
A0. j620.
This crafty GILES through fair and false prete^ces
Committinge, for redressinge foul offenses
From Tapsters tubs, from Innes moist droppi^ge quill
And other crafts, with Coin his cofers fills
For greedy gain he thrust the weak to wall,
And thereby got himself the devil and all,
His name MO-EMPSONS Annagrame does make
And Empsons courses also did he take;
Oppression sore he used where he went
As yet not thinkinge of a Parliament
^

Your sign shall down for (...)

Ye Patent for Innes

But Parliament once called then Giles was brought
Unto account, contrary to his thought:
There to the Sergeants ward he was committed,
Which made him much to fear, he should be fitted
For all those former wrongs, that he had done;
Which from his keeper made him here to run;
He outlawde therefore was and ba^nish't quite
And also judged to be no more a Knight:
Not only so but jnfamous inroul'd,
Although (before) he Justice seat controlled.
Shrift for thy self

Now being censured bannished and gone,
With pensive speech, thus may he mourn alone;
Woe worth the time when first on Innes I thought
For private gains when I their hindrance sought;
Those Monopolies cursed be with shame,
Which have my reputation thus made lame:
My Honors which has turned to other styles
From Sr. Mompesson unto poor lame Giles;
Yett haultinge now before, me thinks I see
Some in the way of haultinge after me.
Hoe fellow Giles stay for us yett a while
For here we come, although behind a mile.


E^^pton and Dudley

In ^i^st ^ea^^ of Kings Henry list
By Parliament to death (...) ^^st.


All you which Monopolies seek for gains,
And fair pretenses turn to other strains;
Example take by Giles Mompessons fall,
Least honey sweet soon turn to bitter gall.
Which to prevent, see that you undertake
None other thing, but such as sure may make
A benefit to common wealth and King;
Which will you wealth and honor also bring.
For why you know, our gracious King is bent
To give his faithful subjects all content;
Where love is dive, he lovingly does show't,
Where mercies meet by pardon many know it,
By rendringe Justice unto great and small,
The small ones trippe and great ones down right fall,
Oh what more needs a Loyal Subject crave
Then mercy, love, and justice choice to have.



