A TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENTS According to the Doctrine of the Church of England
touching that Argument. Collected out of the Articles of Religion, the Public
Catechism, the Liturgy, and the Book of Homilies. With a Sermon preached in
the public Lecture, appointed for Saint Paul's Cross, on the feast of Saint
John Baptist, June 24. 1638.

By T. B. Pr. Pl.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop, for Abel Roper, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the black spred-Eagle in Fleetstreet, over against S. Dunstans Church.
1638.

REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI ac Domino suo Colendissimo Dno IOSEPHO, Divina
providentia Episcopo Exoniensi, Diocesano suo; viro vere (...).

Cui pro eximia sua and singular. benevolentia and favore plurimum se debere
fatentur quotquot pacis and Ecclesiae Filii

Tractatulum hunc De Sacramentis, una cum Apprecatione salutis, and
foelicitatis in Testimonium Gratitudinis, and Observantiae

Humillime Dedicavi T. B.

Ad Amicum and Symmistam suum charissimum, Tho. Bedford, S. Theol. Bacch. and
divini verbi apud Plimouthienses Concionatorem Orthodoxum.
DVm sensu veteri, sacra-pandis ad Osti^ Plimmi,
Deque Sacramentis quae mage sana doces:
Dogmata, nil mirum tua displicuisse popello,
Et tibi conflictus conciliasse graves.
Scilicet hic caecus furor, haec insania vulgi.
Affectu, minime vi rationis agi.
Cumque sibi vitulum semel instituere colendum
Efflictim Idolum deperusse suum.
Tu tamen, ut duris detonsa bipennibus ilex
Crescit, and ex ipso vulnere ducit opes:
Macte tua virtute, and contra audentior ito,
Elicitamque tuis vim tibi sum malis.
Intumeant fluctus, spinasque ad Littora volvant,
Et repleant rauco murmr quaeque suo:
Tu pertende viam, quo te Cy^osura vocabit,
Nec metuas tumidi vimque minasque maris.
Scilicet in coelis sedem, compescere fluctus
Et rabiem populiqui been novit, habet.
Add, Sacramentis quos tu pius addis honores,
In nomen recident tandem aliquando tuum.
Aaron Wilson Arch. Exon. and Vic. de Plymouth.

TO THE COURTEOUS Christian Reader whosoever, whether of the Clergy, or of the
Laity. More especially, To my loving and beloved Auditors of the Town of
Plymmouth, Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
I Have now at length sent abroad into the world, what I intended many days
ago, but could not compass till this present time. Many, the most of these
Notions touching the Sacraments, have I preached now and then, in the course of
my Lecture, as the Text in hand presented an occasion to me. In the delivery of
which, because I could not be so happy, as to give that clear, that full
satisfaction which I desired, at least, not to all my Hearers, I set pen to
paper, and out of those several Notes dispersed here and there, but especially
out of some explications upon the Church Catechism, have I concinnate and
fitted up this Treatise, which I now present to your view.

The last year, after that by the advice of some judicious Friends, to whom I
imparted the sight thereof, I had altered, and amended what was thought
needful, I presented a Copy thereof to our Reverend Diocesan, with this
intention, that to his Censure it should stand, or fall: if he thought fitting,
it should pass abroad; if not, I should commit it to the Dust and Moths, the
just destiny of unhappy scriblings. To whom should I give an account of my
studyes, rather than to Him, by whose favor and permission I enjoy my License,
the liberty of my Lecture, and Ministerial labors?

It pleased his Lordship after the perusal of my papers, to redeliver the Copy
to me, with that Approbation, of which I confess my self to be still
ambitious, viz. That he conceived the substance of my Book to be ^ound and
orthodoxall, agreeable to the Truth of God, and consonant to the doctrine of our
present Church. Nor did his Lordship spare to advise me, and put me upon the
Publication of it: alleging that tho the same things are already published:
yet to see them laid together, (as here they be) and brought into a frame, and
uniform discourse, would quit the cost, and be worth acceptance.

A willing mind is soon persuaded: to say the truth, I was easily induced to
send it forth into the World. In general: for the public benefit of the
Church of God; as conceiving the Argument to be no less needful, than useful
to advance that respect and honor which is due to this sacred Ordinance. In
special: to plead my Cause, to give satisfaction to some of my Hearers: whose
Ey perhaps, may now resolv them, in that wherein their Ear, has hitherto (tho
unjustly) detained them doubtful. I blame not not any, who does not presently
receiv what is suggested by the New-come Preacher: I commend the inquisitiv
Bereans, who will examine the Doctrine of S. Paul himself, before thy will adhere
unto it: Only I would pray the Hearer, I would entreat the Reader, not therefore
to neglect the truth of God, nor less regard the Doctrine of our Church, because
the person that now presents it to the public view, is not of greater place,
of better parts, of more ability. Even Goats hair was useful, and Badgers
skins accepted toward the erecting of the Lords Tabernacle. And this poor
Treatise of mine, may through Gods blessing, be profitable (I hope) to some,
and do some good in the Church of God. Howsoever: I have done what I could: The
rest I leave to God.

How needful the Argument is, you shall find observed and breefly touched in
the preface; which when you have read, the rest of the discourse is subdivided
into three general parts. In the first of which I have endeavored to show what
a Sacrament is: The end and issue whereof is, to determine the Number of
true-born Sacraments.

Particularly:

Cap. 1.
The definition of a Sacrament: The Essential parts, and Original thereof. A
sign. A visibl sign. The Element. The Author of the Sacrament; Christ; His
Word of precept: of promise. The word of Consecration.

Cap. 2.
The Essentials and Original of Baptism. viz. the Element, Water: the
Ceremony, Washing: the form of administration. Where is showed, what therein is
Essential, and what therein is Accidental.

Cap. 3.
The Essentialls and Original of the Lords Supper. sc. the elements, Bread and
Wine: the Original, Christ's Institution: The Cup unjustly taken from the Laity
by the present Church of Rome. The mixture of water.

Cap. 4.
The inward grace signified by the Elements. sc. The Body and Blood of Christ.
Both Sacraments have Relation to the passion of Christ.

Cap. 5.
A Corollary: If either of the parts be wanting, there is no Sacrament. Hence
an Argument against Transubstantiation. Hence Arguments to prove that those
five, sc. Matrimony, Ordination, Absolution, Confirmation, and Unction, are not
legitimate Sacraments. The right use of those Ceremonies touched.

In the second general part, I show the end why Sacraments were ordained; the
Issue whereof is to manifest the Benefits that we gain by the Sacraments: And
consequently the necessity of Receiving.

Particularly.

Cap. 6.
The general end why Sacraments were instituted. This twofold. A mean of
Conveyance: A pleadg of Assurance: Sacramentarians confuted: Sacramental
Union. Hence the efficacy of the Sacraments, and the Translation of Phrases:
Real Presence: A note touching the spring of Heresies, the right use to be
made of in-explicable Mysteries: Something touching Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation.

Cap. 7.
The special end of either Sacrament: the choice of the Elements: Baptism the
Sacrament of our Admission: Persons having right to Baptism. An Argument
prooving the lawfulness of baptising Infants. Anabaptists objections against
the Arguments answered. The Lords Supper the Sacrament of Preservavation: with
the use thereof.

Cap. 8.
The Benefits of the Sacraments in general. sc. Incorporation into Christ:
hence the secondary Benefit of Baptism. 1. Remission. 2. Regeneration. How far
Baptismall Remission extends: whether to sins future?

Cap. 9.
The Benefits of the Lords Supper: sc. Incorporation and Union continued.
Consequently strengthening and refreshing of the soul. Spiritual diseases and
maladyes: They their own greatest enemies, who absent themselve.

Cap. 10.
Corollaries drawn from the premises. 1. The Reason, why Baptism is received
but once, and the Lords Supper often. How often we are to receive the Lords
Supper. 2. The Necessity of the Sacraments, what and how great it is.

In the third general part, I set down the Qualification of the Receiver. The
end, and usefulness whereof is to prevent, if it may be, the prejudicate opinion
of Opus operatum, which is so usually cast upon the former Doctrine, and
Defenders thereof.

particularly:

Cap. 11.
The Qualification required of them that come to the Sacraments. The equity of
a Qualification pre-required: Particularly: what is required of Men: what of
Infants.

Cap. 12.
Of Repentance. The first Branch of Qualification, common to both Sacraments.
The nature of Repentance. The Name thereof: the Acts of it in the Heart,
Tongue, Hand. Touching Confession and Restitution.

Cap. 13.
Of Faith, the second branch of Qualification common to both Sacraments. The
nature of Faith seen in the Act and Object. How Faith is a mother-Grace.
Sacramental Faith: the promise in either Sacrament: these two meeting
together, make a kind of Omnipotency. Answer to an Objection touching
Transubstantiation.

Cap. 14.
A special note touching these two branches of Sacramental Qualification: what
if profession be counterfeit: the case of Simon Magus: the School-tenet De
obice posito.

Cap. 15.
A Digression, handling the case of Infants Baptism: An Examination of the
Anabaptists Arguments against baptising Infants. Their first Argument [No
Precept, nor President] answered. Their second [they have no faith] answered.
Showing that there needs none actual faith to qualify Infants. Profession
of faith is made by their Suretyes: Interrogatories in Baptism how understood:
Good reason to admit Infants to Baptism, and yet not to the Lords Supper.

Cap. 16.
Of Qualification peculiar to the receiving of the Lords Supper, viz.
Thankfulness, Remembrance of the Death of Christ. The Name Eucharist. The Means
how to stir us up to Thankfulness. The manner how to express it.

Cap. 17.
Of Love and Charity: what is meant thereby; Reconciliation: the Name Communion:
a Patheticall exhortation to it.

Cap. 18.
Of Examination: what it is: what is required to it: Persons employed in it.
The Object of Examination. 1. Repentance, the marks thereof: 2. Faith, marks of
true Faith. A note touching the Vniversallity of Sacramental Charity: The
Necessity of this Sacramental preparation, seen in the danger of unworthy
Receiving.

And thus have you the sum of this Treatise: By which you may guess whether
it be worth the reading, yea, or no: I have been (as you see) larger in the
practical part, than in the Theoreticall: this third general part being
equal to the other two. And yet I have not been so large as some Readers would
think fitting; neither in this later, and much less in the two former parts
thereof. My Apology is: This is not an age to blot paper in: They that most
commonly bestow time in reading books, are of the Clergy; and to them five
words spoken with reason, and understanding, are better than five thousand
tautologies, and iterations. Among the Laity, if any one find not full
satisfaction by what I have written, the Minister is at hand in every parish,
of whom he may inquire. And I humbly entreat my brethren of the Ministry (what
I faithfully promise to them in the like occasion) to do me right, in helping
their people, that desire it, to apprehend the best construction of what may
seem doubtful: imitating therein that of Saint Austin, lib. 2. c. 2. De Anima,
ad Renatum, Vbi mihi animus ergame hominis ignotus est and incertus, melius
arbitror meliora sentire, quam in-explicata culpare. As for the truth of what I
have set down doctrinally, and positively, I know my Brethren of the Clergy
(if Ministers of the Church of England) may not desert me, much less oppose me,
except they will desert their own subscription, in as much as what I have
written, has been collected ( totidem fere verbis) out of those books to which
they no less than I have heretofore subscribed.

To this Treatise I have subnected, and printed with it the copy of a Sermon,
preached lately ( sc. Iun. 24. 1638) in the public Sermon appointed for S.
Paul's Cross. So much the rather, because, as the Subject Matter is an argument
cosen-german to the former treatise: so in it I have the more largely insisted
upon that doctrine which is most doubted, and discussed, viz. The efficacy of
Baptism.

In this Sermon (to give you a taste thereof) After the division of the Text,
and the explication of the phrases: you have something interserted touching
this Doctrine, That death does free us from the dominion of sin. The which, tho
a truth, and very useful, as there I show for consolation against the fear of
death: yet is but briefly touched, and passed over, as not being that which the
text in hand does chiefly aim at. This is indeed, as then I come to show That
Christians are dead men and therefore freemen. Dead, while they are alive, not
in sin, but to sin, as Theophylact ( which I pray the Reader to set down in
the margent) does out of verse. 2. supply the text, thus reading: Qui mortuus
est peccato, justificatus est a peccato. This is by being baptized into the
death of Christ, i.e. either into the profession of conformity with Christ in
his death, or else into the participation, and communion of the power, and
efficacy of Christ's death.

The first is a Truth, and the ground of a good Doctrine, viz. That by the vow
of Baptism Christians are dead to sin. An Argument of confusion to
carnall-Gospellers. But the second I pitch upon, because, as Beza well notes:
Non ex conformitate communio, sed ex communione conformitas; because we partake
of the power of Christ's death: thence it is that we are conformable to him in
mortification.

Now, to be baptized into the Communion of Christ's death: what is it else, but
by Baptism to be partaker of his death, and consequently discharged from the
Dominion of sin: So the Doctrine.

Doct. Christians howsoever before their Baptism, they be servants of sin, yet
by Baptism they are freed from the service, and dominion thereof.

The uses of this Doctrine are threefold.

First, for instruction, showing the efficacy of Baptism; touching which, two
cautions: 1. That the efficacy of the Sacrament is but isntrumental. 2. That
it pre-supposeth a right Qualification in the Receiver.


Secondly, For consolation to Parents in respect of their children dying in
infancy.

Quest. Whether all infants be regenerate in Baptism.

An Answer set down in two conclusions.

An objection taken from the usual phrase of Preachers in pressing the duty of
attendance upon the means of grace.

The answer to it.

Thirdly, for exhortation, And this directed: First, to Parents, To watch
carefully over their children, that they be not reenslaved.

To acquaint them with this benefit: to call upon them etc.

Secondly, To all Christians.

In general: to walk as Freemen.

In special: to hinder the reign of sin in themselves.

Object. I fain would do so, but am not able.

Sol. Christians have helps to subdue the power of sin; sc. An interest.

First, In the blood of Christ streaming in the Sacraments.

Secondly, In the Communion of Saints: the Churches Prayers.

A Caveat. That if Christians desire this benefit, they must not forfeit their
interest by running into tentation.

Hitherto the copy of the Sermon.

These two little books, not much unlike to the poor widows two mites, have I
cast into the Treasury of the Church; I pray God they may be no less accepted
with God, and all good men; that so the succesfulness of these my poor
endeavors may encourage me to go on cheerfully in the work of my Ministry, and
to bestow some bigger volumn upon the Library of this Church, and Nation. I
know we are not born for our selves alone, not for this present age alone. I
should choose rather to be too busy (in this kind) and to over-do, rather than
to be wanting to my place, and people.

I cannot hope to live (at least not here where I am) til I see the harvest of
my seeds time, the fruits of my labor here bestowed. We of the Ministry,
commonly our greatest comfort is, in the happy growth of grace in those, whom
at our first entrance we find to be of tender years. Nor do I doubt but that
amongst these, there will be found some, that hereafter will rejoice in the
remembrance of those holy truths, which they have heard, received, and gathered
up in their attendance upon my poor labors: and they will say, this, and this
did I then hear, and learn: and tho for the present I felt no great sweetness
in it, yet do I now taste it, and know it to the holy truth of God. In
particular, this Doctrine of the Sacraments, and their efficacy, which seemed so
strange, and uncouth in the ears of diverse of the elder Audience, will by the
younger sort be received now, and hereafter remembered with happy congratulation.

Now then for their sakes that they may keep fresh in memory what they have
heard, that they may recall to mind what perhaps has slipped, and is forgotten,
have I sent abroad these, and if God say amen, I shall send abroad some other
of my notes. For their sakes, I say, that they may have wherwithall to persuade
others what themselves do know: viz. That those things (to use the phrase of the
Disciples to Saint Paul in a case not much unlike) that those things whereof
diverse have been informed concerning me, are nothing, but that I also walk
orderly, and keep the Law: The law I mean of holy teaching, and edification;
not wasting the time in curious, and needless speculations; but endeavoring (
pro posse meo) both plainly to explicate, and profitably to apply, what the
text of Holy Writ has led me to.

In the prosecuting of which, if I have proceeded otherwise (as some say) than
others have done before me; let the indifferent Reader do that, which those
Hearers should have done, sc. try, and examine which of us does most nearly
follow the steps of the holy Scripture, and tread in the path of our
Mother Church. To me I confess, it is a scruple to depart from the pattern of
wholesome Doctrine, to the which I have subscribed: if it be not so to others, it
is not my fault if I dare not follow them. But there is a generation of men,
who have learned to pretend the authority of such Worthies, and such grave
Divines, merely to countenance what themselves have pitched upon, in prejudice,
and opposition of the present Ministry. This was (say they) the Doctrine, this
the opinion of such, and such; when, upon due examination, their judgment was
nothing so, but clean contrary. That this may not hereafter befall me, this
Treatise shall be a witness to the world, what I beleev, what I have taught as
touching this Argument. The scope whereof in brief is to show: That the effect
of the Sacraments is ou^ union with Christ: The fruit is communion in his
Merits, and Graces; in his merits for Remission, in his Graces for
Regeneration: both which are begun in Baptism, and perfectly consummate in the
Lords Supper. This is all: Farewell dear Christian Reader; pray for him, who
has devoted himself, and the strength of his labors to the advancement of thy
spiritual welfare. Let thy prayers commend me and my labors to the blessing
of our heavenly Father.

In whom I rest, Thine.

The Lords unworthy servant in the work of the Ministry. T. B.

A TREATISE OF THE SACRAMENTS
The Preface.
GReat was the love of our blessed Savior to the sinful race of the sons of
men: Greatly did it appear by that Redemption, which by his death is
purchased: This has recovered to us the favor of God, which is to us the deep
and inexhaustible fountain of all goodness: yet has not the love of Christ
our Savior stayed here; he thought not this sufficient, but has added the
Revelation of this benefit for our Comfort; Yea he has also wisely invented
the way, by which this benefit might be conveyed to us, and we put in full
possession of the same: Nor is the later a less demonstration of his singular
love than the former. Without the Redemption purchased, what are we, but a
mass of misery, borne to endless woe, and irrecoverable destruction? Without
the Revelation of this Redemption, and the means by which it may become ours,
what is this life of ours, but a perpetual disconsolation? Wherefore, so often
as we bless God for the benefit of our Redemption purchased by the blood of
Christ; so often let us remember to praise him for the Revelation of it made
unto us by his spirit.

The way and means by which the spirit of Christ does acquaint us with this
Redemption, is the ministry of the Word, and Sacraments. And here is the
business, and malice of Satan that grand enemy of our Salvation. He could
not hinder the work of our Redemption, but he will do what he can to hinder
us from the knowledge, and comfort of the same: For this end, one while he
seeks to darken the light of the Sun, otherwhiles to oppress the heat
thereof: sometimes to trouble the pure streams of knowledge running in the
word, sometimes to turn aside the waters of comfort streaming in the
Sacraments. Here then is the office of the Church and the members thereof, to
preserve (as much as they can) the text of holy Scripture, and the Doctrine of
the holy Sacraments free from all Corruption: To preserve I say if it may be;
or else to vindicate both the one, and the other from that which is contracted;
that in them, and by them the Children of the Church may be able to comprehend
with all Saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to
know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge* that so they may be filled
with all the fullness of God.

Since the time that Popery (truly so called) has been discovered to be mere
delusion rather than true Christian doctrine, by the light of the glorious
Gospel in this later age, breaking forth like the Sun from under some cloud;
It may be worth our labor to note how by little and little, one point after
another has been purged from corruption, and by the labors of of the
industrious learned brought to that light, and perfection, that we cannot
readily see what more can be added. If any thing be yet wanting, it is time
that the labors of the faithful Ministry be applied to the doctrine of the
Sacraments, that it also may be yet further cleared from the misconceits of
error, and ignorance; and the people taught to yield that respect, and honor,
which is due to that sacred ordinance.

For this cause have I (tho the unablest of many) set pen to paper, that what
light my self have gained by perusing the doctrine of our Church touching this
argument, I may not envy it to others (a fault too frequent in this age) but
rather present it to their view, that others also may see the same, and so
receive more fruit, and comfort by the Sacraments than hitherto. At least, that
hereby they may be stirred up to dig deeper, and seek further, than happily as
yet they have done, into the doctrine, and usefulness of these sacred
mysteries.

To come to the knowledge of the nature and use of the Sacraments, three things
are especially to be learned, viz. What a Sacrament is: Why it was instituted:
and what qualification is required in the Receivers. To these three heads may
well be reduced whatsoever is needful (especially for the vulgar, for whose
sake I undertook this task) needful I say to be known.

In the handling of which I will precisely follow the doctrine of the Church of
England, not only because by subscription I am bound to acknowledge it for a
truth; but also because ind^ed it does best agree with the text of sacred writ,
and does most fully, and clearly explicate the sacred truth of this most
useful doctrine.

CHAP. I. What a Sacrament is. Part. 1.

THE Notation of the word we leave to Critics, together with the common use
thereof in humane Authors; As it is used by Divines we are to speak of it.
Articles of Religion cap. 25.
And so the Church defines Sacraments to be not only badges of Christian men's
profession, but rather they be certain sure testimonies, and effectual signs
of grace, and Gods good will toward us: By which he does work invisibly in us,
and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in him.

Thus in the Articles of Religion enacted and established Anno 1562. Afterward
in the second book of Homilies, Chap. 1.
viz. in that of Common Prayer and Sacraments, out of Saint Augustine is
confirmed the common description of a Sacrament, which (says the Homily) is,
that it is a visible sign of an invisible grace; that is to say, that sets
out to the eyes, and other outward senses, the inward working of Gods free
mercy, and does (as it were) seal in our hearts the promises of God.

A little after, distinguishing of Sacraments according to the exact
signification of the word, from the general acception of the same; it shows
that in the exact signification of the word, Sacraments are visible signs
expressly commanded in the new Testament, whereunto is annexed the promise of
free forgiveness, and of our holiness, and joining to Christ. To the same
effect, and almost in the same words, has Mr. Nowell in his larger Catechism
set down the definition of a Sacrament: Out of all which (when in the
conference at Hampton Court Anno 1603 in the first year of King James of
blessed memory, it was motioned, granted, and appointed, that something should
be added to the Catechism in the Communion book for the doctrine of the
Sacraments) this definition was collected, viz. That a Sacrament is an outward
visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given unto us, ordained by
Christ himself as a mean whereby we receive the same, and as a pledge to
assure us thereof. In which description beside the end of the Institution,
which I reserve to speak of by it self in the second part, we have a clear
expression of the Quiddity and Essence of the Sacraments together with the
Author and Original of them; Of which in order.

The Essence of a Sacrament.
THis is contained in the Genus, and Species. The Genus, or common nature of a
Sacrament is, that it is a sign; The Specificall nature or difference of a
Sacrament is, that it is external and visible.

A SIGN: This I say sets forth the common nature of a Sacrament: The word is a
note of Relation, and puts us upon this question. Whereof is it a sign? The
answer is ready; A sign of grace: The Article adds signs of grace, and Gods
good will toward us. What this Grace, this effect of Gods good will to us ward
is, we shall best determine, when we find it in the several Sacraments: For
the present, the Church says, it is Inward, and spiritual, that is, such a
Grace, as rests not in the body, but reaches to the inner man, the Soul, and
Spirit; Moreover, it is a grace given unto us, not only reported, or proffered,
but also given, and put into our possession.

OUTVVARD and VISIBLE. This word puts a difference betwixt this, and other
signs of grace. This is a sign for Representation, and therefore must be
obvious to the senses. By these is knowledge conveyed into the understanding:
Thus is the Body a loving yoke fellow, and helper to the Soul: Neither is this
sign only outward, but also visible and subject to the Eye: Herein differing
from the word: Grace makes way into the Soul, by the Ear, by the Eye: By the
Ear in the word, by the Eye in the Sacraments. The Sacrament is a visible
representation of grace; Thus has God provided for Credence, and Confidence;
for Faith, and Assurance: What we hear we do believe, but what we see, we
know. Wherefore as in the word, we use our ear to hear; so in the Sacrament,
we use our eye to see, and behold; else are we justly blamed. Has God set up
the brazen Serpent, and will not Israel turn themselves to behold the same?
Note that this outward visible sign by a peculiar name is termed the Element,
which puts us in mind that it is a material substance, and differs therein
from the Ceremonious Actions, which attend the Administration; And which by
their visibility might put in to be accounted signs: but indeed are not, as in
the sequel will appear.

The Author and Original.
THis is intimated in those words of the Catechism Ordained by Christ
himself. The Sacrament is a sign by institution, not merely by natural
signification. Truth there is in the sign a natural Aptitude to represent
what is signified; yet because it has a resemblance to other things also, the
institution does restrain it to this individual: Hence there is need of a word
to be joined to the Element to make it a Sacrament: Yea a twofold word, Lombard
and Bonadventure Sentent lib. 4. Did. 3. Aquin. part 3. qu. 606.
and both from Christ himself, viz. a word of Precept enjoining the use of
this Sacrament, and a word of Promise to enjoy a benefit by the same.

This is that word whereof Saint Austin speaks saying, Take away the word,
Detrabe verbum and quid est Aqua nisi aqus? accedit verbum ad Ele nentum and.
fit Sacrame^tum. Aug. in Ioh. tract. 80.
and what is the water of Baptism but water? his meaning is; what more virtue,
and efficacy in the Font than in the Fountain water. But, says he, let the
word be joined to the Element, and then it is made a Sacrament: which to
understand of a bare, and naked recitation of the words, which the Schoolmen
call the form of the Sacrament, is too jejune, and barren: Most true it is,
that the right, and due form of Administration requires, that there be made a
plain and audible recitation of the precept, and promise both. And this in our
Church-Liturgy is the matter whereof the prayer of consecration consists. Yet
not our formal Recitation of them is that which does give virtue to the
Element, but the institution of Christ, i.e. the precept which he gave for our
warrant, and the promise which he added for our encouragement. He I say: For
who else durst give such a precept? who else can perform such a promise? Such
a precept, if not given by Christ, is a direct breach of the second
Commandment, which as it forbids all Images of God, made by man for this
end, to convey honor to God; so also all Images of his grace ordained for the
conveyance of holiness to man. Such a promise by which in the use of this, or
that creature, Grace may be expected, who can perform but Christ alone? of
whose fullness we do all receive grace for grace: If the^ none but he can
perform the promise of grace, it is fitting that he alone should appoint the
sign: And in this do all agree: That Sacraments are Ceremonies of Christ's own
immediate ordination, Bellarm. Tom. 3. de Sacrament. lib. cap. 23.
and institution: The Author of every legitimate and true born Sacrament is God
himself: Thus it has been from the beginning. To Adam God gave the tree of
life; to Abraham Circumcision; to Israel the Passover: In the new Testament
God spoke by his Son, and by him ordained Sacraments.

Ceroll: By this that has been said touching the origiginall of the
Sacraments, Bellarmin. Tom. 3. de Sacrament. lib. 1. c. 20
see what to hold touching that question disputed betwixt Bellarmine and
Chamier. viz. whether to the consecration of the Elements, it be sufficient to
make a bare recitation of the words, which concern the Element; or whether some
further declaration of the first Institution be required: Ex gr. Whether the
pronouncing of these four words: This is my Body, over the Bread, be enough
to change the Bread, if not in nature, yet in use, and make it Sacramental.
Bellarmin, and his fellows contend, that that word, which makes the
Sacrament, is, Verbum consecrationis, by which he means a form of words
pronounced over the Elements; And thereupon bequarrelleth Calvin, and others,
who (says he) require Verbum concionis, a sermon to go before the Sacrament.
Contrarily Chamier Tom. 4. de Sacr. l^b. 1. cap. 15.16.
Chamier stoutly defends, that the word by which the Element is made a
Sacrament, is Verbum concionale, not a sermon, as the vulgar counts a sermon,
but a plain, yea an audible recitation of the first Institution. By which the
people may take notice of the sacred action in hand: of the Author, intent, and
scope of the Administration; of the Precept that gives warrant; of the Promise
that gives encouragement. This he and many other of our Protestant Divines,
count that word, that must be joined to the Element, before it can be
acknowledged for a Sacrament.

CHAP. II. The manifestation of both these in the Sacrament of Baptism.
COME we to the particular Sacraments; that so we may further manifest the
truth of that we have set down touching the Essence, and Original: And first
for Baptism

IN BAPTISM, the outward visible sign (says our Church) is water wherein the
person baptized is dipped, or sprinkled with it in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: where note. First, Chap. 2.
the Element: secondly, the Administration consisting of a Ceremony, attended
with a form of words.

Nulla distinctio mari quis, an stagno, flumine, an font, lacu, an alveo
diluatur. Tertull. lib. de Baptismo.
The Element (that is the outward visible sign) is Water. Any ordinary water
may be used; rain, river, or fountain, no great matter in that, so it be water;
and for religious-manners sake, as pure water as may be: none other liquor may
be used, but water; herein all agree. The reason hereof see cap. 7. The custom
of the Iacobines that baptize with fire, is far wide. That text of Matthew.
3.11. on which they build, must be expounded metaphorically, or rather
prophetically, with reference to the history of the fiery cloven tongues, the
visible representation of the holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. Act. 2.2.3.

The Ceremony used in Baptism is either dipping, or sprinkling: dipping is
the more ancient: At first they went down into the rivers, afterward they
were dipped in Fonts: In colder climates, and in case of weakness, the custom
of the Church has been to pour water on the face. The substance is washing:
Hence Baptism is termed washing Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5.
to wash the body either in whole, or part, and so that this be done, the
manner is dispensable by the Church. So for the number of dippings, i.e.
whether it should be done once, or thrice, Lombard and ^onav: Sentent, l. 4.
Did. 3. Aquin: part 3. Qu. 66.8.
is held indifferent, and in the power of the Church; as experience has made
it good: for why? the power, and efficacy of the Sacrament, does not stand in
the quantity of the Element, but in the nature and true use thereof.

Use.
Well, the body must be washed; all washing does presuppose uncleanness: here
then take notice of the state of nature, wherein we are born, or rather see
how Baptism does teach us Repentance: viz. By showing us our natural
corruption, which must be washed, before we be acknowledged for members of
Christ: meditate of this, when thou see the Infant baptized; and see it (I
advise thee) so often as it is done, that so thou may often take notice, of
the spiritual pollution of the soul: of the soul I say, for this washing in
Baptism, is not in respect of the body, but of the soul in the body: he that
rests in the washing of the body, loses al.

The form of words used in the Administration of Baptism has in it something
essential, and something accidental, and alterable.

Essential it is, that with the name of the Action, Lomb. and Bonav: Senten:
lib. 4. Did: 3. Aquin. part 3. Qu. 66.5. and 6.
there be joined a recitation, and rehearsal of the several persons of the
blessed Trinity: The reason of this will appear if we once understand what it
is to baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: Note here, that
the word NAME used in this place, may have three significations.

1 To signify the authority by which the Minister does baptize: The phrase
(...) does most usually signify, authority and commission: Mat. 7.22. Acts 3.6.
As we say in the Kings name, that is, by authority from the King. Thus the
phrase is used in Mar. 16.17. John 5.43. Acts 4.7.10. So that this phrase, I
baptize in the name, is as much as Authoritate mihi commissa. The construction
of the verb (...) with the preposition (...), shows that the verb has a
transitive significati^n; q: d: baptizando adoptare in familiam. Thus the word
(...) is used in construction with (...), and (...), ^n the Act. of the Ap.
By that authority which I have received, do I baptize thee.

2 To intimate the service of the persons named, and so to baptize in their
name, is to dedicate, and consecrate to their service, to adopt into their
family: So the Minister prays, Grant that whosever is here dedicated to thee
by our office and ministry: To dedicate unto God, what is it, but to adopt
into the family? to consecrate to the service of God?

3 To remember the faith, and profession of this Article of the Christian
Religion, and consequently the whole profession of Christianity. And well may
this Article be given for instance of the whole, because it is the first
point, wherein the Christian religion differs from others: It is also the
sum of the whole, and virtually comprehends all the residue: This is the
substance, and method of the Creed, whereof, not the Church, but Christ himself
was the Author: Now according to this, the phrase to baptize in the name, does
note forth the end of baptising, viz. why he does baptize him, even to enter
him into the faith, and profession of the Christian Religion; and this may
seem to be the sense and meaning of the phrase in the judgment of the Church;
for after the solemn profession of the Christian faith, according to the
articles of the Creed, which is exacted of the party baptized, the Minister
demands of him, will thou be baptized in this faith? to which when he has
answered, this is my desire: he is baptized in the name of the Father etc. So
that by submitting himself to Baptism, he does subscribe to the Christian
faith: add this also, that when the Minister does cross the child's forehead,
he uses these words, In token that he shall not be ashamed to profess the
faith of Christ crucified* which words do plainly express the end wherefore it
is done: neither doubt I but that the Church appointed this to be done, in
imitation of the other ministerial Act: and so by the variation of the phrase
showed what they conceived, to be the meaning of that phrase used in Baptism,
viz. to bind the party to the profession of this Faith. By this now we see the
reason, why it is Essential to the form of Administration, that with naming
the action, there be a recitation of the Trinity, viz. because the mention of
the holy Trinity does determinate the end and use of the act, which being of it
self indefinite, and appliable to many other ends, is by these words limited
to this alone.

Consequently, such a form of words, wherein this is omitted, is not to be
allowed: It is objected out of Acts 2.38. there is another form of words
delivered: Be lap^se^ (...) one (...) in ^he name (...) the Lord Jesus.
But we answer, that these words do not set down the form of Baptism, but the
end and use of it, viz. to assure them of Remission of sins by Christ; or if
they do intimate the form, yet not the whole form, but only part of the form
used by the Apostles; and that either by Apposition of the name of Christ to
the second person [as thus, in the name of the Father, and of his son Jesus
Christ, and of the holy Ghost.] or else by a Ceremony superadded (as does our
Church) for explication of that faith, which was required to be placed in the
second Person, under the name of Jesus Christ. Whatsoever it was that they did,
or said: it must not be received that they left out the names of the other
persons: doubtless they did expressly name them all: both because that else
the words had been less plain, and distinct, than the sign it self; and also
because that else they had transgressed the precept of Christ, Matt. 28. thus
much for the Essentialls in the administration.

ACCIDENTAL in the form of Administration it is to insert the Pronouns I and
THEE, yet useful, and profitable, to note the different persons, Minister, and
Receiver.

EGO I, notes the Person baptising, who must be a lawful Minister, such a one
who has received authority to preach, or publish the Gospel. A troublesome
question there is among the Schoolmen, and their followers about the Minister
of Baptism: whether a Layick, a Woman, yea an Ethnic might not well, and
lawfully do it, in case of Necessity. The Anabaptists also dispute this
question, against their brethren of the Separation. Something also there has
been to do in our Church about it: see Cartwright denying women, and Layicks
any power; Whitgift, and Hooker, pleading for it: at last King James determined
the question, in the conference at Hampton Court, and caused the Rubric of
private baptism in the Communion book, to appropriate the act of baptising to
the lawful Minister; and that justly, it being most properly the office of the
Minister, to stand in the place of God, and to seal his children in their
forheads.

TE, THEE; notes the party baptized, which is another, not the Minister: so
that no man may baptize himself, wherein is detected the folly of Smith the
Se-baptist, who having run the wild-goose-chace, separating first from the
Church of England, then from the Brownists, came at last to the Anabaptists,
yet not as a disciple, but as a Father, and founder of a new Church, and
therefore baptized himself, which neither John Baptist, nor any other did
before him.

To end this discourse, we see what is Essential in the form of
Administration, what is accidental: we in our Church retain that form of
words, which has been used in the Church of Rome; and justly too; it being
confessed and acknowledged to be as well as it could be framed: wherein we may
do well to note the providence of God over his Church, who even in the
corruptest time, has preserved entire this form of Administration, together
with the proper element of Baptism: by which even the Priests of the worst
times baptized Infants into the true faith of Christ: and like a leprous, and
infectious mother, is the present Church of Rome; she bears, and brings
forth sound children, but presently hazardeth the infection of them with her
milk, as it were with deadly poison.

That this Element together with the Ceremony, and the form of words used in
the Administration, were all of them, ordained by Christ, is so plain by that
text, Mat. 28. that it cannot be denied: thus have we manifested both the
Essence, and Original of Baptism.

CHAP. III. The manifestation of the Essence, and Original of the Lords Supper.
TOuching this, our Church says, that the Element, or outward part in the
Lords Supper, is Bread and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received:
thereby teaching us, both the number, and names of the Elements, and also the
Original of this sign, or which is all one the ground, of our receiving.

For the NVMBER of Elements, there are two, yet not two Sacraments: no; both
make but one Sacrament, Chap. 3.
for which they are joined together in this sacred action, to teach us the full
sufficiency of spiritual nourishment, which is in Christ. Corporal
nourishment must consist of something moist, and something dry; and he that
partaketh not of both, has not sufficient; so here we have both in Christ, and
therefore need not seek elsewhere.

The NAMES of these two Elements, are Bread, and Wine; not Flesh, and Blood,
(which happly would have carried a greater resemblance of that, which is
thereby signified) lest it might have been impiously thought to have been
prepared for Cannibals, not for Christians: but Bread, and Wine, which have an
excellent proportion, and Analogicall Representation of what is here remembered,
as shall be showed in the seventh Chapter.

The ORIGINAL of these Elements, and the ground of our receiving is the
command of the Lord, expressly mentioned by S. Matthew, Mat. 26.^6
Mark, Mark. 14.22
and Luke, Luke 22.19 Cor. 11.23.
and out of S. Luke repeated verbatim by S. Paul. Whence appears the
abominable impiety, and horrible sacrilege of the present Church of Rome,
which has not only appointed new ends, and uses of the Sacraments,
Circumgestation and Adoration, which Christ, and his Church never did once
dream of, but also has deprived the Laity of the Cup altogether. And whereas
Christ says, drink ye all of this; She says no, Articl: 30.
not all of you, but only the Clergy must, the rest must be content with their
wafer cake, for more they get not.

Object. That word Omnes, All of you, is to be restrained to the Apostles, who
alone were present.

Sol: And to whom must the other Omnes, which tho not expressed, is yet
understood in the precept of eating; to whom I say must that be extended? To
whom does Saint Paul direct that Canon, Cor. 11.28. Let him eat, let him drink.
Why do they not also take away the Bread from the Laity, as well as the Cup,
since none but the Apostles were present? But to let these bellies pass; all
that desire the benefit of the Sacraments, must know it to be their duty, to
eat, and drink, the Bread, and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be
received.

Ob. But blood was never used for nutrition, nay the eating, or drinking
thereof is directly prohibited, Genesis 9.4. and Levit. 7.14. and much more the
blood of man: why then are these men blamed, that forbear to drink that in its
type, and figure, which manifestly was forbidden to be drunk, in its proper
substance.

Sol: We are not to depart from the letter of Christ's Precept, because we
cannot untie the knots of humane Curiosity: Blood indeed was never lawfully
drunk, much less the blood of man; but always shed for expiation; and
therefore it might (to carnal reason) seem as incongruous to drink it in its
type, and figure, as it is congruous to eat flesh, in its figure, which was
allowed for the proper food, and nourishment of the body: yet since Christ has
commanded us to drink that Wine, which he himself has called his blood, we
must do what he bids, and leav him to stop the mouths of Cavillers: when God
calls for obedience by the letter of his word, we must not stand to ask him the
ground, and reason of his Commandment: Duties belong to us: Reasons to God.

Note, that as the Bread accidentally was unlevened, that Bread I mean, which
Christ our Savior used, at the first institution; so also the wine in the Cup,
was not intentionally provided for this new Sacrament: our Savior took such
ordinary provision, as the custom of the country used in the Passover:
happily also the wine that he used was mingled with water; it being the custom
of the country to dash their wine to prevent Drunkenness: which things are fit
to be noted, lest we should place any superstition in the imitation or not
imitation of those things whih were but accidental. The Catholic Church has
appointed Wine to be used, yet indulgence was granted to the Norwegians to use
other drinks. The reformed Churches some of them put leaven into the bread, and
some of them banish water out of the wine. And in these things tho the text of
Scripture impose no necessity, but leav a liberty; yet is it fitting that men
should in conscience use their liberty according to the Canons, Chap. 4.
and Constitutions of the Church.

CHAP. IV. The inward Grace signified by the outward Elements.
THE Sign in either of these two Sacraments (as we have heard) is external,
and visible: now what is signified by these Elements, comes to be enquired;
this is called a Grace, and it is said to be inward, and spiritual:
Particularly, the inward part, and thing s^gnified by the Bread and Wine, says
our Church, is the body and blood of Christ: by the bread is signified the
Body, and by the wine, the Blood; both which being found in Christ, do set
forth the truth of his Humanity: but being considered in their separation, that
is, as separated really one from the other, they do set forth the truth of
Christ's death. A real separation of the blood from the body is here (in the
Sacrament) represented, and set forth in the local distance of the two
Elements, the bread in one vessel by it self, the wine in another by it
self: for which cause, the Elements ought not to be mingled together. The
Elements are bread, and wine: See Doctor John ^u^gess in ^is Rejoinder, cap. 1.
Sect. 15. p. 60.
Not a sopp, because not the blood of Christ, while it was running in the
veins, but when it was shed upon the ground is signified in the Sacrament; so
much is plain out of the words of our blessed Savior, touching the Cup; This
is my blood of the new Testament which is shed for many: plain also it is out
of the special end of the Institution of this Sacrament, which (says our
Church out of Saint Paul) is for a continual remembrance of the death of
Christ, etc. But of this hereafter.

Now for the Sacrament of Baptism, that which is signified by the water (to
speak exactly) is the blood of Christ, not the blood in the living body, but
the blood that was spilt, and shed upon the ground: prefigured in the Law by
the blood of the sacrifices, which was sprinkled upon the unclean, for the
purifying of the flesh. The blood of Bulls, and Goats were shaddows of
prefiguration, but the body is Christ; whose blood does wash, and cleans the
soul from sin, and is signified by the water in Baptism.

Q. How can this be (may some say) when as the blood of Christ is signified by
the Wine in the Lords Supper?

For answer hereunto, we shall do well to remember, what Saint John has
related in his Gospel, viz. That upon the pei^cing, and goring of Christ's
side, See this noted by Calvin, Beza, and ^sttus, on the text of St. John. ^o
also by Bishop Andrews in his 13. Sermon on Whit-sunday.
there came forth blood, and water: what water was this? not any miraculous
humor, much less the corruption of blood in Pleuritick bodies; but that
watery substance, which Anatomists do find in the Pericardium, placed there by
nature, as it may seem for the refrigeration of the heart. Now for the full
manifestation of the death of Christ, it pleased the providence of God, to make
use of the malice of the Soldier, to pierce the Pericardium, and gore the
heart, which being done, it is impossible for any one to live. And this watery
substance is that, which the water of Purification, and the water of Baptism
does properly signify, the which, t^o in propriety of nature, it differ from
the blood of the vital vessels, viz. the heart, and the liver, running in the
veins, and arteries, yet in common phrase it is called the blood of Christ;
which blood of Christ is represented in both the Sacraments. Hence there is a
different respect of the blood of Christ, shed for expiation, and a twofold
use of it after the effusion, viz. partly for Nutrition in the Supper: partly
for ablution and purgation, as in the Sacrament of Baptism: hence are those
phrases of washing, and cleansing so Act. 22.16.
frequent in the new Testament; this is that fountain, which is set open for
sin, Ephesians. 5.26
and for uncleanness: Tit. 3.5
thus in the new Testament, as well as in the old, all things are purged by
blood, Hebrews 9.22. Heb. 1^.22


Thus both Sacraments have special Relation to the death of Christ, which the
phrase of Scripture does manifest: for of Baptism it is said, that by it we are
baptized into his death, and buried with Christ, Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. and the
Supper is the remembrance, and commemoration of the death of Christ: 1 Cor. 11
26. and this does fully manifest unto us, what that grace is, which is
signified in the Sacrament, and how the word Grace used in the definition of a
Sacrament is to be understood. Doubtless hereby is meant not a quality
infused, but a gracious gift bestowed upon us: Now of Gods gracious gifts, some
are corporal, and reach no further, than the body; Others are spiritual
touching the state, and welfare of the soul, and such is that Grace, or
gracious gift presented in the Sacraments. Again, whereas there be diverse sorts
of these spiritual graces, that Grace which is the groundwork of the
Sacraments, is not any among the Gifts, and Graces of the Spirit, but the
gracious Gift of the Father, who gave his own Son for us; indeed Christ
himself is that gracious gift of God, which is presented to us in the
Sacrament. Christus qua passus, the body and blood of Christ given for mankind
in the work of redemption, Christ the grace signified in the Sacraments.
are by the Sacrament given to mankind, for the application of that redemption.
Bellarmin is deceived, while in the heat of his scholasticall discourse, he
will needs have the Grace of Justification (or as we do better style it,
sanctification) to be the thing which is principally signified in the
Sacrament. That is an effect, and consequent, but Christ crucified is the
special signification of the Sacrament: Reason gives it, for it is against
the nature of the cause, especially of the isntrumental cause, to represent
the effect which it self produces: Add this; the nature of a sacramental
sign consists in analogicall proportion: now this is most apt betwixt these
Elements and the body and blood of Christ: so also of the operation of the one
upon the body, and of the other upon the soul: but no similitude at all betwixt
these Elements, and the grace of Justification. To conclude this: both the
doctrine of the Schoolmen, and that common saying of the ancients, received
from Saint Augustine, Ex Christi latere fluxisse nostra Sacramenta: vide
Calvinum and Estium, ut supra.
does show that Christus passus, Christ on the Cross, is that grace, which is
primarily and principally signified in either Sacrament.

CHAP. V. A Corollary drawn from this part of the Definition.
Now from this first part of the Definition wherein we have heard the Essence,
and Original of the Sacrament, we may justly collect this Corollary, viz. That
if either part be wanting (that is, if either there want a visible sign, or an
invisible grace,) there can be no Sacrament: And thus does the Church teach her
children, that the parts of every Sacrament are, and must be two, the outward
visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace. Chap. 5.
How can this be (might some curious Critic say,) is the Genus, and and common
nature of a Sacrament, the sign of grace, and is grace now become part of the
Sacrament? Is not this all one, as if the man should be called a part of the
picture which is the representation of the man? in very deed to speak properly,
grace is no part of the sign, but Subjectum, or Substratum praesuppositum, the
groundwork thereof: but when we speak in the vulgar phrase, we call those
things parts, which are any way Essential, and so grace is a part of the sign,
that is, essential to it, for except it be a sign of grace, it is not a
Sacrament; add this also, that howsoever the School says, that the sign is
properly (as indeed properly it is) the Sacrament, and does relatively oppose
it to the grace signified: yet the Church speaking to the capacity of the
simple, calls the whole sacred action of Baptism, and of the Supper, by the
name of the Sacrament: which taken in this larger signification, is (as it
were) compounded of two things, one earthly, the other heavenly: and these
vulgarly are called the parts of the Sacrament, as being both of them
essential, to the constitution of a Sacrament.

Hence is an argument fetched to overthrow Transubstantiation, which by changing
the bread into the very body of Christ, has taken away the sign, and so
spoiled the Sacrament; for as the soul departed, and the body separated is not
the man; so neither the sign without the grace, nor the grace without the sign,
but being both together considered relatively, do make a Sacrament: there may
be therefore no change of the one into the other.

Hence also fetch arguments to convince those five obtruded by the Roman
Church, to be no true born Sacraments, properly so called; which is thus proved
by induction.

MATRIMONY does conferr no grace, nor make the married ever a whit the more
acceptable in the sight of God; consequently is no Sacrament: nay more, it does
not signify that grace, which we find to be specially signified in the
Sacrament, viz. the Passion of Christ. Saint Paul indeed does show, that it
signifies the mystical union betwixt Christ and his Spouse, the Church; and
our Church does grant further, that God has consecrated the state of
Matrimony, to such an excellent mystery that in it is signified, and
represented the spiritual marriage, and unity betwixt Christ and his Church:
And indeed, it has a fair analogy in respect of this particular: But the
mystical union is not that, which Sacraments are born to signify. So then
since Matrimony does neither signify the Passion of Christ, nor conferr any
grace, or if any, not the grace of justification nor forgiveness of sins, we
conclude it to be no proper Sacrament. To this might be added, that Matrimony
has no sign, and therefore how should it signify? for what should be the sign?
not the parties contracting, for then where be the Receivers? nor the consent
that passes between the parties by words, and signs: for what Analogicall
Representation have these with the Grace of justification? allow it therefore
(as does our Church) for an honorable estate, which God has ordained for the
benefit of this life, for the mutual comfort and assistance of the man and
woman; but not any Sacrament properly so called.

ORDINATION does indeed conferr a certain grace, so may that spiritual and
ghostly power be not unfitly called, wherein consists the dignity of the
Ministry (thus understand those words of our Savior, breathing on his
Disciples, and saying, receiv ye the holy Ghost, John 20.) but this is not the
grace of Justification, and Remission: consequently it is no Sacrament properly
so called.

ABSOLVTION seems to come something nearer to the nature of the Sacrament, in
respect of the effect thereof, which (say they) is Remission of sins: and
indeed so much the words used by the Confessor saying, I do absolve thee, do
seem to import: neither may it be denied, but that this Authority of the
Ministry, which Saint Paul calls the Ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18
is grounded upon those texts so often alleged, viz. Matt. 16.19. and 18.18.
and John 20.23. which do plainly speak of a certain power, and authority in
remitting, or reteining sins, which the Minister has received: neither is
this peculiar to the Episcopal Jurisdiction, but common to the Presbyteriall
function: Bishops indeed are said to have the keys in special manner, and
consequently a peculiar kind of absolution, which consists in removing, and
taking away the censurs inflicted: but beside this, there is a power of
Absolution delegated to the Ministry in their Ordination; not imperial, or
Prince-like, for so that of the Pharisees is true, none can forgive sins, See
his Sermon entitled, of the power of Absolution page 58.
but God alone: but ministerial, and Judge-like: This power being primarily in
Christ as Mediator, it has (to use the words of the Reverend Bishop Andrews)
it has pleased him out of his Commission to grant a warrant and Commission to
the Ministry, and thereby to associate them to himself, and to make them
Co-operatores workers together with him. So that now by virtue of this their
Commission, they have power not only to publish the conditions of Peace, and
Reconciliation to the sonns of men, viz. credenti remittentur peccata, if they
beleev, they shall receiv remission; but also to apply the comfortable
assurance of remission to this and that man in particular, and upon the sight,
and approbation of Penitency, and unfeigned sorrow, to say to him, as did our
Savior to the Palsiesick-man, tibi remittuntur peccata: Be of good cheer, thy
sins are forgiven thee. Thus as the Schools do speak; clave non errante, as
sometime it does or may do through the hypocrisy of the Poenitentiary, if the
Minister fail not in the key of knowledge, that is, in discerning, and rightly
judging of the penitential sorrow, and contrition of the peccant, (contrition
I say, for Absolution belongs not to them, who feel not the burden of their
sins) if he fail not in that, his key of power, and Authority delegate is
found effectually operative, and has in it the stamp of God, for the quiet and
content of the troubled conscience.

A great power doubtless; and for which the people may very well (as we find in
Mat. 9.8. they did) glorify God, which had given such power unto men, yet is
not this enough to make Absolution a legitimat and proper Sacrament, because we
know it to be essential to a Sacrament, not only to conferr grace, but to do
it by a sign, a visible sign, a material Element, which naturally having an
aptitude to resemble, by Institution is appointed to represent, and convey
Christ to the worthy receiver, this sign is wanting in Absolution; as before in
Ordination: words we hear, and gesticulations we see, as namely the Imposition
of hands: but we have been taught by the Schoolmen, and do beleev it for a
truth, that Sacraments do consist of things and words, Sacramenta constant
rebus ut ex materia and verbis ut ex forma.
as it were of matter and form: of things (I say) not of words, nor gestures,
which have no analogicall representation of the grace of justification, much
less of the Passion of Christ. Consequently they can make no Sacramental
sign, and without a sign there can be no proper, and legitimate Sacrament.

CONFIRMATION has a material and visible Element indeed, viz. Chrism: which
in the former has been wanting, but not of divine Institution: we may not
deny, but the use of their Chrism is ancient, as appears by the records of
the Church: See Fathers, and Counsels alleged by Bellarmin, examined by
Chamier.
very early did it creep into the Church, but wanting divine Institution, it is
no sacramental sign, and therefore Confirmation is no Sacrament properly so
called. As for those texts of Scripture, sc. 2. Cor. 1.21. and 1 John 2.20.
which they contend to be allusions to the Sacrament of Confirmation, they must
know that allusions are too light to be the foundation of Sacraments: how much
more when the allusion differs from the main scope of the Sacrament, and so
from the use of the sacramental sign? as in both these places it is manifest:
who knows not, that this unction now used by the Pontificians, is made to
resemble that old custom of Wrastlers, or Race-runners, who used this uncting
of their limbs, to fit them for their intended exercise? to which custom and
use, neither of the text (...) make any allusion (...) these reasons. (...)
Element does (...) represe^^ (...). 2. (...) they (...) is not immediate
Communion, or partaking of the death of Christ, and of Justification, but the
subsequent gifts, and graces of the Spirit. 3. That the ceremony used in it, is
not peculiar to it: Imposition of hands is, we grant, a Ceremony used in the
application of an intended benediction, but not peculiar to any one form and
special manner of blessing; take it as a separate Ceremony (tho in this, use
Chamier shows that it is not appointed at all, but only taken up lately by
some private spirits, but admit it as a separate Ceremony; It is used also in
Absolution and Ordination; take it, as a relative Ceremony, i. e. as it is:
used to apply the Element to the party: so it is used in Baptism, at least when
in case of necessity the water is powered upon the child's forhead. Lastly add
this, that every Sacrament of Christ's Institution, is common to every Minister
of the Gospel; this therefore, (say the same of Ordination) being reserved to
the Bishop of the Diocese, can be no Sacrament properly so called.

UNCTION has a material Element: grant it also to have been of divine
Institution; for the text of Saint James (as Interpreters do agree) is a
repetition of what was done, See this in Chamier.
by the command of Christ himself, Mark. 6.13. yet can it be no Sacrament,
because it was temporary, not perpetual. And whilst it lasted, it was
appointed for the cure of the body, not of the Soul: It signified not the
Passion of Christ, nor does it conferr the grace of Justification; consequently
is no Sacrament.

Ob. Yes, Saint James says, if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven
him.

Sol. True, but he says before, the prayer of Faith shall save the sick, and
the Lord shall raise him up: this pertains to the body, which was the
principal end of appointing that Ceremony; the benefit of the Soul was
adventitiall: and consequently, tho for the time. i.e. so long as the power of
miracles lasted in the Church, there might be something extraordinary in this
Ceremony, yet no proper Sacrament: not then, much less now, since miracles
have ceased: To conclude, these five Sacraments, (as the Papish call them;)
were they purged from superstition and abuse, might happily (at least some of
them) be tolerated for ecclesiastical rites, and are excellent and profitable
customs. Thus the Church of England reteineth them all, having cast away those
adulterate Elements of Chrism, and Oil, and finds the use of them profitable
for the furtherance of that religious care that ought to be found in all that
profess themselves Children of the Church, and members of Christ. But never may
these hope to be acknowledged for the great Sacraments of the Gospel: no more
Sacraments but two generally necessary to Salvation, one for Admission, another
for Preservation; sc. Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which is further
manifested by the end why Sacraments were ordained.

THE SECOND GENERAL PART. Part. 2.

CHAP. VI. The end why Sacraments were instituted.
THis does our Church express in those words of the Definition: to be as a
means by which we receiv the same; that is, the Grace signified: and as a
pledge to assure us thereof. Note here two Branches of this end, Chap. 6.
why they were ordained.

1. A MEAN OF CONVEYANCE; and so of receiving the Grace signified. Herein
differ Sacraments from other signs, in that they do not only signify and
represent to the understanding, and memory, that gracious gift of God, but also
as Instruments do convey the same: Like the Turf, and the Twig, in Livery and
Seiz in; like the Sergeants Mace in receiving his office: Such are the
Sacraments; not unfitly compared to Chanells, and Conduit pipes, which derive
the water from the Spring to the Cistern, for even so do the Sacraments convey
Christ with all his benefits to the worthy receiver.

2. A PLEDGE OF ASSVRANCE; to assure us thereof: note that word [therof] must be
referred to the verb Receiv, not to the noun Grace. Sacraments do not only
assure us that such a benefit there is, but that it is received by receiving
the sign; and indeed this does depend upon the former: for as by that legal
instrument of Livery, and Seizin, the full possession of the purchase is known
to be taken, in taking and receiving that Instrument; so here, whosoever does,
(as all must, and ought) acknowledge the Sacrament to be an Instrument of
conveying, a mean of receiving, cannot choos but acknowledge the same Sacrament,
to be a pledge of assurance: Briefly they are first Instruments of conveyance,
and means of receiving; consequently seals, and pledges of assurance: Prove
the first, and the later does follow without constraint. Excellently therefore
has reverend Master Perkins, in three words, set forth the nature of a
Sacrament, only I would a little invert the order of his words, and fit them to
the true meaning of our Church thus; that Sacraments are signs to represent,
Instruments to convey, and seals to confirm the conveyance of Christ with all
his benefits. Come we to particulars: Baptism does convey the blood of Christ,
and the other Sacrament both body and blood.

Hence, and hereupon is the Necessity of receiving the Sacrament, even because
the Elements do not transferr the grace as they are consecrated, but as
received. The Turf, and Twig: the Mace must be received, else nothing is done.
Nor to the Spectator, but to the Receiver does water in Baptism, the Bread in
the Lords Supper instrumentally convey the body, and blood of the Lord Jesus.

Use. They therefore are deceived who make no more account, Sacramentarian^.
nor acknowledge any further end of the Sacraments, than to be naked signs of
representation, and Commemoration; Or to be badges of our Profession to
distinguish the Assemblies of Christians from the Synagogs of Jews, Turks, and
Pagans, to unite the members of the Christian Church into an holy society.
Truth it is, that all these are considerable in the Sacraments; they are Signs,
Badges, Cognizances, Ligaments, external Ceremonies of Religion, and
testifications of our piety toward God: But all these come short of that
special and prime end, for which they were ordained: Distinctive badges they
are in respect of the public Administration, which is the act of the Church:
Uniting badges they cannot be, except first they be instruments: for we are
not united to Christ mediante Ecclesia, that is, in being first united to the
Church, but rather we are united to the Church, the body of Christ, mediante
Capite, in being first united to Christ the head, and by him one to another: So
then consider the Sacraments in their Administration, and so they be Badges,
and Cognizances: but in respect of their ordination and institution, and so
they are Means and Instruments.

Q. Whence is it, that Sacraments are means of receiving.

Resp. Even from that Sacramental union of the sign, Sacramental union.
and the thing signified; which being inseparable, hence it is that in
receiving the sign, we receiv the grace also: As by virtue of that personal
Union of the two natures, he that entertained, and worshipped the son of man,
did also entertain and worship the son of God: he that blasphemed and
persecuted the son of man, did the same to the son of God: So here, by reason
of this Sacramental union, who so worthily receives the sign, receives the
grace; who so unworthily handles the sign, does also dishonor, and dedignifie
the grace it self.

Hence also is the translation of phrases, that what is peculiar to the sign,
is translated to the signified, and what is proper to the signified grace, is
applied also to the external sign. Thus Baptism is said to wash the soul from
sin, and the Lords Supper to feed the soul with grace: because it is united,
and conveigheth that grace to the soul, which indeed can work upon the soul;
and the blood of Christ, is said to wash; the body, and blood are said to feed:
because they are united to, and conveyed by these Elementall signs, whose
proper operation is to wash, and feed.

Qu. Does not this then prove the Real Presence of the body, and blood of
Christ in the Sacrament.

Ans. A Real presence the Church of England holds, Real presence.
if we rightly understand the phrase, and against the Sacramentarians, we
maintain that the body and blood of Christ are verily, and indeed taken, and
received of the faithful in the Lords Supper. Nor do we fear to say, that as
in Baptism water washes the body, and as in the Lords Supper the bread feeds
the body, so also does the blood of Christ wash the soul, and the body of
Christ feed it to eternal life: Nor do we understand this to be a truth only
thus, that as the one washes and feeds the body, so certainly does the other
wash and feed the soul; nor thus only, that at the same time, when the one does
wash, and feed the body, the other does wash and feed the soul: both these are
truths, but neither of them enough to express the whole truth; The first
notes no relation at all betwixt the sign, and the grace; the other only a
relation of time, not of causality more, or less: But thus we understand it:
That, in that the body is washed with this water, and nourished with this
bread, the soul is also cleansed by the blood of Christ, and nourished with his
body. Thus I say: and in this sense we grant a real presence according to the
Scriptures: our Savior says of the bread this is my body, and Saint Paul does
well explain the meaning of it, in that Quaere of his: The bread which we break
is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? as who should say, it is so
indeed: the same may be said of the water in Baptism, that it is the Communion
of the blood of Christ, that is, more than a bare sign of representation, even
a mean of receiving that grace, which to the faithful is really present, and
of them verily received in the Sacrament.

This is confessed of all both Romish and Reformed, and had not the Curiosity
of men's brains proceeded further, to determine preremptorily of the special
manner of this Real Presence, we might in this have held Communion: But as in
other matters of Religion, and mysteries of Godliness; so also in this, man's
restless head and curious brain, ready enough to pry into things reserved, and
rash too much to determine of them, and to defend his determinations, has put
the Church to much toil, and labor, and to continual vexation.

The nurse and spring of Heresies.
And here by the way, it may be worth the noting, that the most of those
heretical pravities, which have always vexed the Church, have been not of the
truth of the thing, but of the manner of explication. The Articles, Non de re
i^sa, s^d de mod^ e^pl^candi.
of the Trinity, of Christ's Incarnation, Descens^on, Ascension, personal
Union, Sacramental presence; The article of the Procession of the holy Ghost,
of Justification by faith, of the concord and cooperation of Gods grace, and
man's will: these and others of the same nature, have not been so much denied or
questioned of their truth, as of the manner of truth. And had not Curiosity
been seconded by pertinacy, we might happily have filled the Schools with
questions, not the Church with Heresies. How much better had it been to have
followed the modesty of our Church, in this question, which sets down, what
is received from Scripture, but wadeth no further? Certainly as touching these
modalities, better it is Christianly to beleev, than curiously to inquire.
Prestat d^bitare de occ^ltis quam litigare de incertis: August. de Genesi ad
literam l^b. 8. cap. 6.
And the use which we ought to make of all mysteries of Godliness, when we meet
with them, and their inexplicable difficulties is, 1. To admire the infinite
and incomprehensible wisdom of God, The right use to be made of inexplicable
mysteries.
whose ways are past finding out: so Saint Paul Romans 11.33.2. To be humbled in
the sight, and sense of our own Ignorance: thus Agur, Prove. 30.2.3. To sigh,
and long for the time of Revelation, saying, Oh when shall I come thither,
where I shall see, and know, as I am known. 4. To cleav fast to the truth that
is revealed, blessing God for it, and striving to gain the benefit thereof.
Would men take this course, when they meet with intricate positions, they
should provide much better for the practice of Piety.

Quest. What then must we sit down, and rest with a general, and implicit
faith? Implicit Faith.


Resp. Certainly an implicit Faith were it joined with an explicit Obedience,
would be more beneficial to many; to whom it would be much more profitable, if
less time were spent in seeking knowledge, and more in practicing what they
know. But further I add, that the Church and Ministry may, yea ought to
examine the curiosities of them that will determine, and to censure them
accordingly. Thus because the Papist will peremptorily determine his Real
presence, to be by the way of Transubstantiation; The Lutheran his, by the way
of Consubstantiation, we stand bound to examine what truth or falsehood is in
either of them: This the Reformed Churches have done; particularly the Church
of England has done, and finds; Articles of religion. cap. 28.
that Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of the bread and wine)
in the Supper of the Lord: that this I say, cannot be proved by holy writ, but
it is repugnant to the plain words of the Scripture, overthrows the nature of
a Sacrament, and has given occasion to many superstitions. The same may be
said of Consubstantiation, yea the Church finds, that this kind of real
presence does overthrow the grounds of Reason, and Religion.

See the Latin copy of Synodus Londinensis. Anno 1552.
1. Of Reason, and Philosophy. Quoniam naturae humanae veritas, etc. Seeing that
the verity of humane nature requires, that the body of one, and the same man
cannot be present in many places altogether, but must needs remain in some
definite and certain place: therefore the body of Christ cannot be present in
many and diverse places at one, and the same time.

2. Of Religion, and Divinity. Quoniam ut tradunt, etc. Because according to
the Doctrine of the sacred Scriptures, Christ was taken up into heaven, there
to abide till the end of the world, therefore no faithful Christian, ought
either to beleev, or profess any (as they call it) corporal presence of
Christ's flesh and blood in either Sacrament: upon these grounds the corporal
presence of Christ, in the Sacrament is refused: yet is not therefore the
Sacramentarians naked signification admitted, because it comes far short of
the full nature of a Sacrament, which serves not only to represent, but
instrumentally to convey Christ, and all his benefits. So that well may the
Church determine, that verily and indeed Christ is present, and consequently
verily, and indeed taken (yet after an heavenly manner) and received of the
faithful in the Sacrament: Verily, tho not carnally; Really, tho not
corporally, but spiritually in in the Sacrament, that is, in the exercise of
that sacred action, not otherwise; Provided also that we understand this
efficacy of the Sacraments, to have place in them only, qui sibi non ponunt
obicem, as the School speaks, which do not bar themselves; or to speak more
plainly in the phrase of the Church, only in the faithful. But of this
herafter. viz. cap. 11.

CHAP. VII. The special End of either Sacrament.
THE special end of Baptism, is to communicate unto us the blood of Christ,
for washing the soul from the guilt of sin; and consequently our Admission
into the Covenant of Grace. The special end of the Lords Supper, to
communicate the body, and blood of Christ for feeding, and nourishing the soul
unto eternal life; and consequently our Confirmation in grace, and holiness.
Hence we have the ground of that choice of Elements, which our blessed Savior
made, viz. not merely the analogy, Chap. 7.
which is betwixt the sign, and the signified; but also the excellency, and
exquisitness of that analogy, and proportion. The excellency of the analogy
betwixt the sign, and the signification in either Sacrament.


In Baptism water is used, and none other liquor, because none other so proper
for washing: none other does wash so clean, as does water, and therefore none
other so fit to signify the blood of Christ, which cleanses the soul from all
sin. In the Lords Supper, bread, and wine is used to represent the body, and
blood of Christ; and see I pray you the excellent proportion that is betwixt
them, specially in the effects: bread, and wine nourish the body, nothing
better; the body and blood of Christ nourish the soul, nothing better, yea
nothing else: So also in the manner of their preparation; The bread is made a
food for the body, of many grains of corn bruised, and baked; the wine of
Grapes trodden, and pressed: So the Body, and blood of Christ became our
spiritual food by being bruised, and broken upon the Cross: Add this: bread,
and wine do no good, nay much harm, except the stomach be prepared to digest
them, nor does this spiritual food profit the soul, nay it does much hurt to
the soul, except the soul be worthily prepared.

BAPTISM is the Sacrament of our Admission, nor is there any other ceremony or
rite of admitting any into the Covenant of grace, but only by Baptism: The
Church of Israel was admitted by Circumcision. But since the time of Christ,
which we call the time of the new Testament, all that will be admitted, must be
baptized: hence that of our Savior to Nicodemus: John 3.5.
Except a man be born of water, and the spirit etc. that is, except by
submitting himself to Baptism he do receiv the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of heaven: for which cause, when he sent forth his Apostles, he gave
them charge to join Baptism with their teaching: Go teach and baptize, Matt.
28.

The Persons that have right of admission, Persons having right to Baptism.
are (as of old) Believers and their children: The Ceremony of Admission is
altered: but still as the Covenant is the same; so the parties are the same
believers, and their children: this is plain Act. 2.39. You, and your children

By believers we understand such as are converted to the faith; 1. Believers.
Converts, and Proselites: these have right of Admission, because faith is the
condition of the new Covenant, Mar. 16.16. and John 3.16. You will happily say
to me* that if they beleev, they are already in the Covenant partakers of it by
faith, and therefore need no further admission: yes; they are not completely
within the Covenant, till baptized: Faith gives them title, Faith may give jus
ad rem, but we cannot ordinarily have jus in re without Baptism.
and interest, but the Sacrament admission. Add this, that it is one part of
their faith to beleev the necessity of the Sacrament, as a means to give them
full possession of Christ: And this does cause them to seek for it in the
Sacrament.

Children of Believers also have a right of Admission, 2. Children of believers.
because they are part of their Parents, and heirs of the promise due to their
Fathers: The faith of the parent intitleth the child unto the Covenant; so much
the more unjustly do the Anabaptists deal with believers, and their children in
shutting Infants out from Baptism; thus questioning that See in Pamelius notes
upon Cyprian Ep 59. the names of the Ancients sc. Origin. Tertullian Ireneus,
Justin, Clemens, Dionysius, and others who referr it to on Apostolical
tradit^on.
ancient, and long approved custom of the Church in all ages ever since
Christ, and his Apostles: Traditions Apostolical are authentical, and not to
be refused (because not written) if found to be Apostolical See Doctor Field
of the Church lib. 4. cap. 20. It is not the writing that gives things their
Authority: but the worth and credit of him that deli^ereth them, tho but by
word and live-ly voice only.
. Apostolical customs mentioned in the Scripture have a more unquestioned
certainty, than traditions but not greater authority: Neither is this to set up
Tradition, as do the Papists to the prejudice of the Scripture: because we
admit none as Apostolical, which either are contrary to the customs
mentioned in the Scripture, or which may not be confirmed, as reasonable from
the Scripture.

And such is the custom of baptising Infants, which thus we confirm against
the forementioned Sectaries.

The infants of Christians are as capable of present Incorporation into Christ,
An argument proving the lawfullness of Baptising Infants.
and Admission into the Covenant of grace, as were the Infants of the Jews: and
if so (which we prove out of Cor. 7.14.) who shall bar them, whom God has not
barred? If not; then has not grace abounded in the new Testament, but is
rather shortened in comparison of the old, as being restrained only to the
Parent, whereas before, Infants also were comprehended and admitted: The
strength of this argument will appear more fully, by taking away the cavills,
which they make against it.

Object. 1. That text of Cor. 7.14. shows indeed, that children are holy: but
how? As the wife, not otherwise, viz. as she is sanctified to the use of her
husband; so the children to the use of their Parents: Thus they; but they
falsify the text: for the text says not of the children, as it does of the
wife (...), is sanctified, but they are (...) holy, which is more emphaticall:
neither does the text, speaking of the wife, say, she is sanctified to the
husband, but in, or by the husband: Nor is the text to be understood of the
legitimation, (...)
but of the sanctification of the bed, namely of federall sanctification, or
the holiness of the Covenant; for it appears that the pretense of them, that
repudiated their wives, was a fear lest the infidelity of the wife should
deprive the husband of the covenant of grace, which he had embraced: Saint Paul
denies this, and shows that rather the faith of the Believers should so far
prevail, as to draw the other (after a sort) within the Covenant: his reason
is, because the children of such are holy, that is, heirs of the Covenant: Now
I pray you mark well; suppose that one of the Corinthians should have been so
wilful, Chap. 6.
as to deny this medium, this argument of Saint Paul: what is there to confirm
the argument, and to convince the gainsayer, but only the practice of
Infants Baptism; this must of necessity be here presupposed, else does the
Argument fall to the ground, and overthrow it self.

2. Object. Circumcision was but a seal of the old Covenant, even the law which
was made to Abraham, and to his children after the flesh: this fleshie covenant
had a seal in the flesh, viz. Circumsion* but what is this to the covenant of
Grace touching life, and salvation, which is made only with believers? thus the
Anabaptist, to the end he may elude the argument drawn from the Circumcision of
Infants; and whereas the text of Saint Paul does directly cross this his base
esteem of circumcision, honoring it with that worthy title, A seal of the
righteousness of faith; Romans 4.11.
The Anabaptist expounds it thus, A seal of his faith, not in the Messiah,
but in that promise, That he should be the father of the faithful. Wherein he
bewrays a twofold ignorance: Ignorance in the Anabaptist.
First, in disjoyning these two, viz. his faith in the Messiah, and his faith
in the promise, which are subordinate; For in Genesis 12.1.4. diverse promises are
made to Abraham, to wit, of the land of Canaan, of a numerous offspring, of
the Messiah, in whom all nations should be blessed: these does Saint Paul in
Romans 4.13. join in one, and calls it the promise, that he should be the heir
of the world; Of these three the first and second only are mentioned Genesis 15.
but questionless the third, included, and ratified by a formal Covenant to
Abraham, who believed, and was thereupon justified: Afterward in Genesis 17. the
second alone mentioned, but questionless the other included, and all ratified
by the Sacrament of Circumcision, which was to him, the seal of the
righteousness of faith, which Abraham had before he was circumcised. That all
are included in both places, tho not all mentioned, may yet further appear by
this, that in Genesis 22. when God would lastly manifest, how his covenants, and
seals had built up Abraham in faith by that sore trial, they are again all
three repeated, his faith accepted, and commended. This did not, or would not
the Anabaptist receiv, but disjoyneth those which should be conjoined, as being
all apprehended by the same faith.

Another part of his ignorance, is the misinterpretation of that phrase, The
righteousness of faith. A phrase twice used in that fourth chapter, equivalent
to (and therefore to be expounded by) that phrase, The righteousness which is by
faith; and that also, Romans 9.30. and 10.6.
the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. Both which are joined in one Romans 3.22.
The righteousness of God, which is by faith, which betokens not the
Essential righteousness of God, but the benefit of justification, or imputed
righteousness, which he bestows on believers for their justification. This
benefit God having bestowed upon Abraham, did seal it up to him afterward by
circumcision; which is therefore called, not the seal of his faith, as the
Anabaptist speaks full ignorantly, but the seal of the righteousness, that
is, of justification, which comes by faith, and not by works.

We conclude therefore, that infants of believers may be lawfully baptized; that
by Baptism they may be admitted into the covenant of grace. Nay, inasmuch as
Baptism is the Sacrament of admission, and no time fitter to incorporate the
buds of Christians into Christ, than while they are buds, (that so betimes
grace may prevent the growth of natural corruption.) Infancy is the fittest
time for Baptism, nay, the only time in the successive ages of the Church. So
far is God from barring infants from Baptism, that he may rather seem to have
allotted them to it, and it to them.

We conclude also touching Baptism, that it does not only admit the baptized
into the roll of Christians; this indeed is done in Baptism, whereupon there is
a necessity of witnesses, and a conveniencie of public administration: but
this is not all, it is also an admission into the Covenant of grace: here is
the ground of Assurance, that they are indeed within the Covenant, and to be
dealt withal by the ministry, as men in covenant with God.

The LORDS SUPPER is the Sacrament of our preservation, and confirmation in the
covenant of grace. Not enough that men be born living, and lively, except a
care be had of their preservation: so in the case of spiritual life, not
enough that we be admitted into the covenant of grace: except we be confirmed
in grace, we may lose our former hopes of future glory; to begin in the spirit
does not profit them who end in the flesh. For which cause as the Scripture is
full of exhortations to constancy and perseverance, to make our calling and
election sure: So has God ordained also a Sacrament for our preservation, and
certain confirmation in grace, and holiness: This is to us the tree of life,
and immortality: here is provided for us that bread of life, John 6.
of which who so eats shall live for ever: here is that true Nectar and
Ambrosia, which does continually renew the youth, and the strength of the
spirit of grace within us.

But of this more when we come to the benefits. Now let this only be added;
That this Sacrament being ordained for this end, it will hence follow, that all
those are to be barred from this Sacrament, which without breach of charity may
be thought as yet not admitted into the covenant of grace. Such I count all
persons unbaptized: these must be sent first to the Laver of Regeneration,
before they be admitted to this Sacrament of confirmation. In vain is food
sought where there is no life. This also must be thought upon by them that
address themselves to this Sacrament: This Sacrament was ordained to this end;
Api^us medit^tion of one preparing to go to the Lords Supper.
Do I propound the same end to my self in my partaking? if not, what good can I
expect thence? Should I propound to my self another end, than that which God
has propounded? Is then mine end to gain my confirmation in the state of
Grace? Does not preservation presuppose admission and initiation? How does it
appear to me (further than by Register) that I have been incorporated into
Christ? What fruits of my Baptism do I find and feel in my self? Were I
unbaptised in the flesh, the Church would bar me, shall I not bar my self
till I find and feel my soul baptized with the blood of Christ? Such
meditations as these, would help to dispose the soul, and fit it for the
Sacrament, and for the benefits; This is the next thing that we are to speak of.

CHAP. VIII. The Benefits of Baptism.
THe Church in the book of Articles does thus explain her self, touching this
particular, That by Baptism, as by an instrument, the promises of Remission,
and of our Adoption, to be the sonns of God by the holy Ghost, are visibly
sealed faith is confirmed, and grace increased. In the second que^tion of the
Catechism, thus; I was made a member of Christ, the child of God, and
inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven. And afterward in the questions of the
Sacraments. To this question; What is the inward and spiritual grace in
Baptism (which we are to understand, not of the grace that is signified by the
water, Chap. 8.
but of the grace which is conferred in Baptism.) To this question the Church
subjoyneth this answer. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness,
for being by Nature born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are herby made
the children of Grace. Where note, what we are by nature, what we are made by
grace.

Psalm. 51.6. Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 3 5. and 11.32.
1. By nature we are born in sin, and the Children of wrath. We, that is, all
of ^s, not a man, but only Christ, excepted. By nature, that is, in the state
of the first birth. Borne in sin, that is, polluted, and defiled, even from the
birth. Children of wrath, that is, liable to destruction, yea, worthy to die
for that native, See Articles of Religion, cap. and 10.
and natural corruption: this corruption of nature is in every one that
naturally is ingendered, and propagated from Adam: Hence it is, that by nature
man is inclined to evil; yea, such is the condition of man since the fall of
Adam, that by his own natural strength he cannot turn, and prepare himself to
faith, and calling upon God much less is he able to walk in the commandments
of God, and to serve him, that is, to do good works, pleasant, and acceptable to
God. Of himself, that is, without the grace of God, by Christ, preventing us,
that we may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will.

2. By grace we are made the children of God, and consequently inheritours of
the Ki^gdome of Heaven; if sons, then heirs, is Saint Paul's own argument, Romans
8.16.17. But how come we to receiv the adoption of sons? Is it not by virtue of
our incorporation into Christ? Ephesians. 1.5.6. In him we are accepted, and adopted.
Thus is our state, and condition altered; we were aliens, and enemies, but now
made nigh by the blood of Christ, and reconciled to God the father, yea
received into covenant again. This is the privilege of our incorporation into
Christ, and this incorporation is the primary grace and effect of the
Sacraments, and particularly of Baptism: hence that phrase of Saint Paul,
baptized into Christ; Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27.
the meaning whereof, what is it but this? That by Baptism we are incorporated
into Christ, and made one with him; as also that phrase, baptized into one
body, betokens our incorporation into the mystical body of Christ, Cor. 12
13.
which is the Church, which is done in Baptism; for being by it united to
Christ, we are also incorporated into his holy congregation.

From this our incorporation into Christ, flows a twofold benefit, which for
distinction sake, we may call the secondary grace of the Sacrament, and the
more peculiar grace of Baptism, namely, Remission, and Regeneration.

REMISSION is intimated, or indeed rather presupposed in these words of the
Catechism, A death unto sin. Romans 6.2. and 11.
The phrase is borrowed from Saint Paul, and Saint Peter, Pet. 2.24.
not a death in sin, but a death to sin: properly signifying the mortification
of the old man, the crucifying of the flesh, and the lusts thereof: but withal
importing the act of Remission, which in order of nature goes before, as
Divines do teach. The act of Remission respects the guilt of sin, which
binds over to punishment; Mortification respects the power, and pollution
of sin: both are the benefits of Baptism; sin is remitted, the guilt removed,
the power subdued: hence we are said to be baptized into the death of Christ,
Romans 6.3, 4 Col. 2.12.
and buried with him in Baptism, and purged from sin, Ephesians. 5.26. 1 Ioh. 1.7.
yet some difference there is in the efficacy of Baptism in respect of the one,
and of the other: Remission of the guilt is done at once; hence there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; no, Romans 8.1.
not any, tho still the power, and pollution may remain in them, and sometimes
lead them captive to sin: But now mortification of the power and sway of sin is
not finished but by degrees, as the Cananites; so neither the lusts of the
flesh are not subdued but by long and many conflicts: pollution does still
remain, concupiscence still has place, not only as the fuel, and occasion,
but even as the mother, and seed of sin; and consequently has in it the proper
nature of fin. This is the doctrine of our Church: whence it may appear, that
Bellarmin does fight with a shadow, Bell. Tom. 3 de Bapt. l. 1 cap. 14.15.
whiles he proposes such Tenets as these to be confuted; Non ^^^ri
impeccabiles.
That men by Baptism are not free from the possibility of sinning, nor from the
observation of the Law: we disclaim all such errors: and it is so much the
more absurd for him, and his fellows to oppose these; because they elsewhere
defend, That by Baptism sin is not only covered, but quite taken away; that
concupiscence in the regenerate (such with him are all baptized) is no sin.
Vere tolli, non tantum tege.
Contrarily we hold this for a truth, that by the blood of Christ applied in
Baptism, sin is mortified in part, tho also in part it still lives, so that a
man is neither completely holy, nor wholly sinful: but as light is mingled
with darkness in the dawning, so grace is intermingled with corruption in the
truly regenerate. Thus has he in him matter of cautelous admonition, as before
of comfort, and consolation. The guilt is remitted, this is comfort: The
corruption remains, this must provoke to watchfulness.

Note here touching this Baptismall remission, how far it extends it self:
whether to sins past, and present only; or to future also: Two sorts of persons
do oppose the truth, yea, and themselves in this point: Some there be, which
teach bluntly, that all sins are pardoned in Baptism; all at once, whether
past, present, or to come. A dangerous doctrine, the unhappy nurse of liberty
and Epicurism. Papists deny all future efficacy of this Baptismall Remission,
opposing this as an error, See the arguments o^ Calvin and Chemnitius
exagitated by Bellarmine, De Baptismo lib. 1. c. 18. confirmed by Chamier. Tom.
4. lib. 5. de Bapt. cap 6. August. de Nupti^s, and concup. li. 1. cap 33.
To hold that future sins are pardoned by the Remembrance of Baptism joined
with faith, and Repentance. This they do to prepare a ground for their
Sacrament of Penance, which, say they, is the Sacrament of remission for sins
committed after Baptism. Our Divines do dispute against the Papists for the
future efficacy of this Baptism, in this sense, That tho the act of Baptism be
done but once, yet the virtue and force of it is perpetual: so that there
needs not any repetition of the act, nor the institution of any new Sacrament
to recover the efficacy thereof; but that by faith, and repentance the force of
former Baptism is applied to future sins for their Remission. I will affirm
nothing rashly about this question. But against Epicures, and libertines we
deny that any sin is remitted in Baptism, but such whereof the soul in present
stands guilty: To say, that sins yet to come are pardoned in Baptism as it
were by an ante-dated pardon, is dangerous; no, no, we may not say so: what is
past before Baptism is pardoned, and mortified, viz. original sin in children,
actual in men-grown; not sins to come, and uncommitted, these are not pardoned
(we speak not of the intention of God to pardon, but of actual Remission) not
actually remitted, till by repentance the soul of man be (as it were)
re-baptised in the blood of Christ: Briefly then to the question, propounded, I
would give this Answer: that Baptism does profit us in respect of sins
committed afterward, not because they are pre-remitted, or that in Baptism,
there is an ante-dated pardon granted; but because in Baptism the blood of
Christ is communicated, to be a remedy at hand ready for application: which
application must daily be made by the hand of faith, if we desire daily pardon:
hence we are taught in the fifth petition, to pray for our daily pardon: wherein
doubtless we pray for what we want, and not for what we have already: yet
because this remedy is not de Novo, given every day: but once for all in
Baptism: therefore we say, That the Efficacy of Baptismall Remission does in
some sense, extend it self to the sins of afterward. This for Remission.

REGENERATION is intended in those words of the Church, A new birth to
Righteousness. As sin is purged away: so also the Spirit of grace bestowed in
Baptism, to be, as the habit, or rather as the seed, whence the future Acts of
grace, and holiness, watered by the word of God, and good education, may in
time spring forth. This Spirit is promised to be conveyed by Baptism, Act.
2.38. whereupon Saint Paul calls Baptism, Tit. 3.5.
the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost. This was
confirmed visibly in the Baptism of Christ. The holy Ghost descended on him,
coming up out of the water, Matt. 3.16. Nor only then, but in the Acts of the
Apostles, we find the sensible manifestations of the Spirit still mentioned,
with relation to Baptism: which doubtless the providence of God did so order,
and dispose of, that by their sight, and sense, their faith might be
established touching the efficacy of the Sacrament. This is that immortal
seed, whereof Saint Peter speaks, Pet. 1.23
and which Saint John mentions, 1 John 3 9.
as the preservative of the faithful, from the sin of final Apostasy: the
sin unto death.

Hereupon our Church remembering that our Savior joyneth water, and the spirit
in the work of Regeneration, does in her Liturgy of Baptism, Ioh. 3.5.
pray for the Infants, that they may be baptized with water, and the holy
Ghost; that God would please, to sanctify them, and wash them with the holy
Ghost; that they may receiv Remission of sins, by spiritual Regeneration;
that God would give his holy Spirit to these Infants, that they may be born
again; that not only the old Adam, and all carnal affections may die in them,
and be buried; but also that the new man, and all things belonging to the
spirit may be raised up, may live and grow in them; that so they may have power
and strength to prevail against, to triumph over the Devil, the World, and the
flesh: finally, that they which are then baptized, in this water, may receiv
the fullness, of his grace: hereupon our Church looking upon the gracious
promise, does after the act of Administration of Baptism, give thanks for this
benefit, that it has pleased God to regenerate the Infant with his holy
Spirit. Thus much for the Benefits of Baptism.

CHAP. IX. The Benefits of the Lords Supper.
AS by Baptism we are incorporated into, and made one with Christ: So by the
Lords Supper, is this Union continued: It is the exhortation of our blessed
Savior to his Disciples, Chap. 9.
whom he compares to branches ingrafted into the Vine; John 15.^.
says he, Abide in me, and I in you: using this as a Motive; As the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye,
except ye abide in me. And his prayer for them, he concludes with this, That
the love wherewith thou (O righteous Father) have loved me, may be in them, and
I in them. John 17.
By which places, and passages is intimated a mutual and reciprocal
incorporation of Christ in us, and of us in Christ. Now if we ask how this is
wrought, and how discerned: hear Saint John: 1 John 3.
hereby says he, we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has
given unto us: and again more fully: hereby we know that we dwell in him, etc
4.13.
and he in us* because he has given us of his spirit: It is then the spirit,
which is the immediate worker of this mutual union betwixt Christ, and his
Church. But further, would we know how, and by what ordinance the spirit does
work this union: The Apostle Paul helps us, saying, by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one body; Cor. 12.13
and have been all made to drink into one Spirit: Thus plainly manifesting the
Sacraments, to be the Instruments of the Spirit, in working this Union and
Communion: but of all the rest most full is that text of our blessed Savior:
he that ^ateth my flesh, Ioh. 6.56
and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him: that is, becomes one
with me, and I with him: This is so much more manifest in this Sacrament, if we
mark the analogy betwixt the sign, and the thing signified: bread and wine, the
food of the body, becomes one with the body: So is it here: Christ's body, and
blood united to us, and made one with us by an un-speakable and unseparable
conjunction. Only here is the difference: that bread of Earth is changed into
thy body because thou art more excellent than it: but this bread which came
down from heaven, is more excellent, and active than thou art, and therefore by
little and little does spiritualize and as it were change thee into it. By all
which it is evident, that the primary grace, and benefit conferred by the
Sacrament is, as I said before, our incorporation into Christ, our union with
him.

The secondary, and so the peculiar grace of the Lords Supper, is (as the
Catechism has well expressed it) the strengthening, and refreshing of our
souls, by the body, and blood of Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and
wine. Bread does nourish, and strengthen the body, Psalm. 104.15. Hence that
phrase, the staff of Bread: because as a staff does uphold, and strengthen the
weak and feeble knees: so does bread strengthen the drooping spirits. So does
the body of Christ, well and worthily received, strengthen the soul in grace,
and holiness. Wine cheareth the heart, Judge. 9.13.
and quickneth the spirits. So does the blood of Christ revive the drooping
soul: Cant. 7.9.
gladdeth the heavy heart: causes spiritual joy, and exultation. Thus that
natural quality, which God has placed in the Elements to work upon the body,
does most excellently manifest that spiritual efficacy, which is in the body,
and blood of Christ to work upon the soul: even to produce a spiritual
strengthening, and refreshing of the soul, to cure those spiritual diseases to
which the soul is subject.

Spiritual diseases in the soul.
These diseases are spiritual weakness, and weariness: faintings, and
defectiveness: Apostacy and declination: That this is so, not only the
frequent admonitions, and exhortations in sacred Scripture do pre-suppose: but
also is confirmed by reason, and evidenced by too woeful experience. Reason to
confirm this, may be drawn from the nature of grace it self, which is no part
of the soul, nor any faculty in the soul, but only a quality dwelling in the
soul, as light in the Air, heat in the water; or rather as sap in the branches:
for as they dry up, and wither, if either the union of them to the root be cut
off, or the passage of the sap be hindered, and interrupted: so is it here (that
is) except there be a conscionable use and attendance upon the word, and
Sacraments, we cannot expect, that grace should live. The seed of the New Birth
is termed incorruptible by S. Peter, Pet. 23.
because by using the means appointed, it is preserved from decay: Not so is it
in the natural birth; no use of means, no food, nor physic can preserv the
liveliness of that, beyond an appointed time. Nay even the preparation of a
Remedy is the supposition of a malady. As therefore the ordination of Baptism
to incorporate us first into Christ, does prove that by nature we are wild
Olives: so the ordination of this Sacrament, to continue this Union, and from
this Union continued to convey spiritual strength, and refreshing does
sufficiently prove what would become of us after we are in the state of grace,
if God should leav man to himself.

Behold then the goodness of our God, who knowing our malady, has provided a
Remedy: this Remedy is to partake of the holy Sacrament of Christ's most blessed
body, and blood: for which cause our duty is to frequent the same; both to
prevent, but especially to repair the decays of grace in the soul; so then,
do thou keep thy standing in grace? have thou as yet not failed, nor
faultred? yet be not high-minded, but fear the worst; thou know not what
tentations may encounter thee; nor how much strength thou shall need: Go
therefore to the Sacrament that thy soul may be strengthened, thy strength
increased; prevent a mischief: But now, have thou failed, stumbled, fallen, oh
then make haste to this blessed Ordinance, that thou may be refreshed and
recovered. See then how much they are Enemies to their own souls, who suffer
themselves to be hindered, and kept away from this blessed Ordinance, whether it
be through covetousness, or consciousness. While men covet revenge (or as they
use to speak) while they desire to right themselves, by following the Law, they
lose the benefit of Receiving; not that they must needs forbear, but Satan
does so disturb the passion in them, while they prosecute the Law, that they
cannot settle their thoughts to so holy a work. Consciousness also keeps many
back from the Sacrament; when sin has gotten into the soul, and guilt has
crept into the conscience, we dare not present our selves before God, but like
our father Adam do hide our selves, and prove the greatest enemies to our own
souls.

To shut up this point: see how each Sacrament does work as a convenient means
to produce that end for which they were ordained. Baptism is appointed to admit
us into the Covenant of grace; to give us our first title, and interest in
Christ: and in it we have wrought in us Remission, and Renovation, a death unto
sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness. The Lords Supper does strengthen, and
refresh our souls, and therefore fitly appointed, and designed to this end: to
be the Sacrament of our Confirmation. By Baptism (as we heard) the soul was
regenerate, and made partaker of the seeds of grace: These seeds being watered,
and as it were hatched up by the Ministry of the word, are strengthened,
ripened, and confirmed by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and now is the
faithful soul confirmed in the state of grace, and certain expectation of
eternal Salvation.

For the close of all that has been said, touching the efficacy of the
Sacraments, peruse those few lines, which our Church has set down in the first
part of that Homily, which entreats of the worthy receiving, and reverend
esteeming of the Sacrament of the body, and blood of Christ. The words are
these.

We need not to think that such exact knowledge is required of every man, that
he be able to discuss all high points of the doctrine thereof: But this much we
must be sure to hold, that in the Supper of the Lord there is no vain ceremony,
no bare sign, no untrue figure of a thing absent. But as the Scripture says,
the Table of the Lord, the bread and cup of the Lord, the memory of Christ, the
annuntiation of his death; yea, the Communion of the body and blood of the Lord
in a marvelous incorporation, which by the operation of the holy Ghost (the
very bond of our Conjunction with Christ,) is through faith wrought in the
souls of the faithful, whereby not only their souls live to eternal life, but
they surely trust to winn their bodies a Resurrection to immortality. The true
understanding of this fruition, and union, which is betwixt the body, and the
head, betwixt the true believers, and Christ; the Ancient Catholic Fathers
both perceiving themselves, and commending to their people, were not afraid to
call this Supper, some of them, the salv of immortality, and sovereign
Preservative against death; Others a Deificall Communion; Others, the sweet
dainties of our Savior, the pledge of eternal health, the defense of faith,
the hope of Resurrection; Others, the food of immortality, the healthful
grace, and the Conservatory to everlasting life. All which sayings both of the
holy Scriptures, and godly men, truly attributed to this celestial banquet,
and feast, if we often call to mind, oh how would they inflame our hearts to
desire the participation of these mysteries, and oftentimes to covet after this
bread, continually to thirst for this food.

CHAP. X. Corollaries drawn from the Premises.
FRom the observation of the particular, and special ends of either Sacrament,
may the reason be give^, why Baptism is administered, and received but once, and
the Lords Supper oftentimes: Reason, why not Baptism, but the Lords Supper i^
often received.
The ground of which practice binding us to obedience (under correction I speak
it) I take to be not any direct text of Scripture, either commanding the one,
or prohibiting the other; but the tradition of the ancient Church, received,
and approved by the constitution of the present Church: Neither is this
therefore in the liberty of the Church to alter, Chap. 10
both because the Antiquity and Universality of it does prove it to be
Apostolical; and also because the original of this custom, may in a certain
sense be said to be Divine. This original is the analogy, and proportion,
which holds between the Sacraments of the old Testament, and the new: they
had two, so had we; one for admission, the other for preservation; so have we:
circumcision was for infants, so is Baptism; the Passover, and Lords Supper
for men grown: circumcision once administered, the Passover often; and so
Baptism once, and the Lords Supper often; add to this, that the same reason
holds in the Sacraments of either Testament for the frequencie of
administration: for why Circumcision but once, and the Passover often? but
because one birthday is enough, not one day of feeding: so here, once
baptized, because it suffices to be once admitted into the Covenant of grace:
but often do we receiv the Lords Supper, because we do often merit expulsion,
and so need a frequent confirmation. Baptism does seal to us the remission of
original guilt, which is but once contracted, and so once remitted: The Lords
Supper does seal to us the remission of actual transgressions, which being
often committed, must be repented, and so often remitted. Baptism is the
Sacrament of our Regeneration, when the seed of grace is conferred upon our
souls; this needs to be done but once: The Lords Supper is the Sacrament of
our confirmation, whence those seeds of grace are to receiv increas of growth
by the dews of heaven; and this is necessary to be done more than once; often
therefore do we come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Now, if any demand, how often we ought to approach to the Lords Table; How
often we are to receiv the Lords Supper.
it must be answered, the Church has power to stint the smallest number; but
only man's conscience can direct him in the multiplication of that number. Fewer
times than thrice a year may no good Christian in the Church of England receiv
the Lords Supper, because it is so ordained by the Church; but how oftener, is
left to the direction of his own conscience, and the advice of his spiritual
Physician.

So much the more to blame are they, that neither by the Law of the Church, nor
by the necessity of their own souls are persuaded to frequent the Table of the
Lord, but rest themselves within the customary compass of once a year.

It may be objected, Object.
that once a year was as much as Israel did eat the Passover: nor would God
doubtless have neglected to command expressly the more frequent receiving of
it, were it necessary.

But (for answer herunto) what authority have we to inquire, or to assign a
reason, Sol.
why God did not command this or that? His Laws, and Ordinances are to us a
light of direction, not his Omissions: God appointed to the Church of Israel no
Sacrament for the spiritual incorporation of femals, no more public, and
general fasting days, but one in the year; no Ember-weeks at all, that is, no
time of solemn fasting, and prayer, before the Ordination of their Priests;
does it therefore follow, that we must have none? or shall we say that such
things are not needful? ought not we in the new Testament, having received
greater grace than they, super-abound, and go beyond them in the practice of
Piety? Apply it thus to the objection, passing by the reasons of policy which
might be assigned, why the Passover was celebrated but once a year: let us
say, that inasmuch as it is plain that the Sacrament is the Ordinance of God,
for the preservation of us in the state of grace, and the way to strengthen,
and refresh our souls, whereof we have continual, and daily need; therefore it
is a point of Christian wisdom to be as frequent in the receiving, as possibly
we can, the oftener, the better.

As on the other side, since Baptism is administered but once in the life time,
(a point so firmly believed, and acknowledged by all, that even the
Anabaptists, whom we tax for re-baptising those, whom our Church has baptized,
since that learned Beza, and others after him, have wrung from them that Text
of Act. 19.4.6. will rather deny our Baptism to be a Sacrament, than grant a
necessity of rebaptising.) Since, I say, Baptism is done but once, how much
does it concern them, who are employed in that sacred service, to see that all
things be done according to the rules of the holy Spirits direction? Lest, what
is not then done, peradventure hereafter be never done at all, and so the guilt
of this carelessness press the soul down to hell. What is required of the
Receiver, is handled in the next chapter. In the Minister honesty is commended,
but authority is required. Some question there is touching his intention, that
is, whether the action be not Sacramental, except the Minister intend it so to
be. Doubtless in this, as in Prayer, and Preaching, his roving thoughts, and
distempered passions may defile them to himself, and not make them ineffectuall
to others.

A second Corollary deducible from the former premises, is the Necessity of
the Sacraments, Necessity of the Sacraments.
concerning which the Doctrine of the Church is, that the two legitimate, and
true born Sacraments, are generally necessary to salvation.

This is plain out of the first question answered touching the number of the
Sacraments; How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church? Two only,
as generally necessary to salvation: which words, as they do intimate, at least
do seem to intimate a superduality of Sacraments in some certain sense ( In the
Homily, wherein is declared, that Common Prayer, and Sacraments ought to be
administered in a known tongue; after that, is showed what is a Sacrament. The
question, how many Sacraments, is thus explained: f^r the number of them, if
they should be considered according to the exact signification, there be but
two, etc. But in a general acception, the name of a Sacrament may be
attribu^ed to any thing, whereby an holy thing is signified: In which
understanding of the word, the ancient writers have given this name* not only
to the other five, commonly of late years taken, and used for supplying the
number of seven Sacraments, b^t also to diverse, and sundry other Ceremonies,
as to Oil, Washing of Feet, and such like: not meaning thereby to repute them as
Sacraments, in the same signification that the two forenamed Sacraments are.
see this explained at full in the Book of Homilies;) so do they fully deliver
the Doctrine of the Church touching the necessity of the Sacraments, viz. that
as (I said) they are generally necessary to salvation: this, all grant, but all
agree not in the manner of their necessity; explicate it thus: First, they are
necessary, ex praecepto, as being appointed, and commanded by God, the author
of them. Secondly, because this is not enough, we say that they are necessary,
ex natura rei, even in respect of that nature, which God has put upon them,
being appointed, as means, and instruments to transfer, and convey that
grace, without which no salvation: and indeed this kind of necessity is the
ground of the other; for therefore are they commanded to be used, because they
are ordained to be as means, whereby we receiv grace. Thirdly, add this also,
that they are necessary as means without which that grace is not ordinarily
conferred.

Thus understand those texts of Scripture, which are alleged for this
purpose. viz. Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, Ioh. 3.5.
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And, except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, Ioh. 6.53.
and drink his blood, you have no life in you.

Thus may we understand that phrase of the Catechism, generally necessary, that
is, commonly, and in ordinary: So that if the Spirit (who being an Omnipotent
Agent, is not tied to any means: being a spiritual Agent is not tied to
external means) if he, I say, do convey grace to any without the use of the
Sacraments, this is to be accounted extraordinary.

Hitherto referr the cases of un-avoidable extremity, in which doubtless, Ioh.
3.5.
the spirit works without these means. But generally and in ordinary they
are, necessary and so commanded.

Wherefore let it be thy care, to take heed of neglecting the use of the
Sacraments. When God makes them ready, and calls thee; be thou ready. Say
not: Another time I may receiv them, if not now. Or if not at all: yet I may do
well without them, This is presumption unpardonable.

And so much for the second general part.
THE THIRD GENERAL PART. Part. 3.

CHAP. XI. Of the Qualification required of them that come to the Sacrament.
WHAT a Sacrament is, we have heard; and for what end each Sacrament was
ordained: and so have learned the efficacy of the Sacraments, and the benefits
thereby obtained. Chap. 11
It remains that we proceed to enquire, whether this efficacy of the
Sacraments depends only, and wholly upon the operative force, and active virtue
included in them; or whether this efficacy be only found in them, when they
work upon a subject fitted, and pre-disposed: or (to speak to the capacity of
the vulgar) whether there be any thing required of the Receiver, to fit him for
the benefits of the Sacrament; so necessarily, as that the want of this
preparation, does bar him from the benefit of the Sacrament.

In the answer to this question, there is a direct opposition betwixt the
Romish, and reformed Churches. They hold the efficacy of the Sacrament to be so
great, that there needs no preparation, and qualification of the Receiver. We
of the Reformed Churches, contrarily mantain: that except the Receiver be thus,
and thus qualified, he loses the benefit of the Sacrament.

Not as if the Qualification of the Receiver does concur actively to produce
the grace of the Sacrament; but because in all the works of God, wherein he is
pleased to make use of the creatures, as the instruments of his own right hand,
he has allotted to each of them a certain measure of activity, beyond which
they cannot extend their efficacy: consequently there must be a certain
previous disposition in the matter whereon they work, which, if it be wanting,
their activity proves ineffectuall. Instance in the fire, God has placed in
it a certain power of heating, and burning, yet because this power allotted to
it, is finite, therefore it cannot heat the snow, nor burn the water. Things
must be dried before they are apt to kindle; so that the former question
touching the efficacy of the Sacrament, is not much unlike to this; whether
there be in the fire so great activity, as to burn all materials whatsoever it
touches, or whether the fuel must be first dried, and fitted for the fire,
before it will catch the flame? We teach, that the fuel must first be dried:
nor can we conceiv but that there was more than ordinary vigor in that fire
which, Kings 18.38
upon the prayer of Elijah, fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the
wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the
trench: so here such an efficacious, and working power we acknowledge in the
Sacrament, as to produce the work of grace in the Receiver who is fitted, and
prepared, but not otherwise. Let no man stretch this comparison further than it
is expressed: we do not say that this activity is in the Element, as heat is in
the fire, we know that a corporal substance is no more capable of inherent
grace, than a spiritual substance is capable of heat and cold. But the
efficacy of the Sacrament is from the Spirit, which, by an Almighty word,
having united the thing signified to the sign, does by the one convey the other
to work upon the soul, as has been showed.

Now that something should be required of them that come to the Sacrament,
Equity of a qualification prerequired.
by way of qualification, is but just, and equal: God will be sanctified of
all them that draw near to him: Levit. 10.3.
and hereby does he stir up the slothful soul of man to look about, lest by his
wretchlesness he do bar himself of that benefit, which is to be gained in the
Sacrament. What that thing is which is required, we must find out, by taking
notice of the age of the Church, whereof we speak, and of the Sacrament whereof
the question is framed: for if we speak of the Church in fieri, in the first
plantation; then, because it consists of them that are men grown, at least,
past their infancy, there is required of them Repentance, and Faith to fit them
for Baptism, no less than to the Supper of the Lord. But if we speak of the
Church in facto, in the succession, and propagation; then (because it consists
of infants, as well as men grown) if we speak of men-grown, who heretofore were
baptized, there is required of them to fit them for the Lords Supper (which is
that only which they need,) Repentance, Faith, and other graces. But if we
speak of infants, who are only admitted to Baptism, and not to the Supper of
the Lord, the most that is required of them, is no more but that they be holy;
not by any inherent holiness, for how should that be discerned? but by a
federall sanctity, that is, that they be born of Christian parents: I say this
is the most that is required of them, or rather, the most that we look at in
them: if they have a Christian to their Parent, either father, or mother, this
is enough to entitle them to Baptism; nor is there any question at all touching
this, save only with the Anabaptists.

Whether the infants of heathens may be lawfully baptized, may be a question,
in as much as father, nor mother, are within the Covenant: Some light, for
answer to this question, may be taken from the law of Circumcision, Genesis 17.12.
and the practice thereof in Israel. For infants of eight days old, The Church
in such cases supplieth the place of a parent
whether born in the house, or bought with money, must be circumcised:
Proportionably it may seem lawful for a Christian, if he have bought, or
adopted the infant of an heathen, to present him to the Sacrament of Baptism.
But letting that pass, there is no doubt, but the infants of Christian Parents
may be baptized: nor is there any thing more than this passive capacity
required of them, or respected in them; and this I take to be the readier way
to deal with the Anabaptist, than to show it possible, that infants also may
have the spirit of grace, and that in charity we may think so of them, and
consequently admit them to Baptism. Which miserable shift did specially arise
from the opinion of them, who denied the Sacraments to have any isntrumental
efficiency in the conveying of grace, allowing them only to be seals to
confirm, not instruments to convey: whereupon, when the Anabaptist objected the
defect of grace in infants, to bar them from the Sacrament, in as much as to
set a seal to a blanck, is to no purpose; they, of whom we speak, defended
their practice by the judgment of charity. In which respect I may prais their
zeal: but I do suppose this to be the readier way to deal with the Anabaptist;
to say that children are to be baptized, not to confirm them in grace, but to
conferr grace upon them; that they are presented to Baptism, rather to be
initiated, than to be confirmed in the possession of grace. But, in as much as
my purpose is not to dispute with heretics, but to set down the Doctrine of our
Church, touching the Sacraments, which our Church has done, with respect unto
the use of the Sacraments in the plantation of the Church, and first conversion
of men to the faith; following herein the lines of the Scripture, the passages
whereof do still look that way, as may appear by all those texts, which the
Anabaptists (ignorant of this) have mis-applied, to cry down the baptising of
infants; Since, I say, this is my purpose; let me proceed in the search of that
qualification, which is required of them that come to the Sacraments.

Touching Baptism, the Catechism says, this is required of them that come to
be baptized, Repentance, and Faith: Touching the Lords Supper, the same
Catechism says: It is required of them, To examine themselves, whether they do
truly repent them of their sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life;
whether they have a lively faith in Gods mercies through Christ, with a
thankful remembrance of his death, and whether they be in charity with all men.

In the Homily teaching the worthy receiving of the Sacrament, says the
Church; we must certainly know, (...) Devil, Chap. 12
still in use ever since the Primitive Ages of the Church.

What Repentan^e is.
THe nature of this Repentance will appear in the Name, and in the Act thereof:
both expressed in the words of the Catechism.

The Name does in our language betoken sorrow: to repent of any thing, is to be
sorrowful for it: so that Repentance may not unfitly be called a godly sorrow
for sin.

Note here first, 1. Note.
it is not Anger, but Sorrow: hence it is, that humiliation more or less is a
perpetual adjunct of Repentance. Joel. 2.12.
David mourned, Peter wept; all penitents do griev, and mourn for their sins:
So that tho all sorrow be not Repentance, yet all Repentance is sorrow: this
affection is indeed the very root, from whence all the branches of Repentance,
and Reformation do spring: This affection we know to dwell in the heart, as it
is fit it should; the heart is the proper seat of grace, and therefore of
Repentance; that which is true, and saving Repentance, is, and must be in the
heart, an hearty sorrow, not hypocritical.

Secondly, 2. Note.
Repentance is not every sorrow, but sorrow for sin: The proper object of
sorrow is Evil: of all evils sin is the greatest: of all sorrow, the sorrow
of the penitent soul is the greatest; fittherfore, that the greatest sorrow
should be placed upon the greatest evil: Repentance therefore is sorrow for sin.

where note, that this confession must be made, A note touching Confession.
always to God; many times to the Minister: and in some cases to the Church,
and congregation. Thirdly, In the hand, persuading men to Reformation, and
Satisfaction: Reformation respects the practice of righteousness, toward
God; Satisfaction has reference to the wrongs of man, which is made by
submission in case of detraction, and slander; by restitution in case of fraud,
and violence: Touching Restitution, note the persons, and things: for the
persons, all are bound to make restitution, A note touching Restitution.
who have had any hand in causing the losses, damages, and injuries of their
neighbors, Lev. 24.18.21. these ought to make restitution to the person
damnified, if it may be, to his heirs if he be dead; to God himself in case the
other parties be not known, or cannot be found, Number. 5.5.8. For things: the
thing it self would be restored in kind, if it be to be had; or else the full
value of it, if it be altered, together with sufficient recompense for the
wrong sustained, Lev. 6.5. Number. 5.7. The necessity of satisfaction is great,
for we cannot be assured in conscience, that our Repentance is sound, and good,
except we make satisfaction, if it ly in our power. Say the same of Reformation.

Chap. 13.
CHAP. XIII. Of Faith, the second Branch of the Qualification, common to both
Sacraments.
THE Nature of this grace, will appear in the Act, and in the Object; The Act
here mentioned, is steadfastly to beleev: The Object is, the promise of God made
in the Sacrament: So that hence we may gather, what faith is, even a steadfast
belief of the Promise of God. Where is to be noted, that this definition does
not comprehend the whole nature of faith, but only that use, and exercise of
it, which is Sacramental, yet hence we may discern the nature of it in
general: for if instead of this word, the promise, we substitute this word,
the truth of godliness, whereof the promise is one branch; then have we a full
definition of faith, The full definition of Faith in general.
viz. That faith is a steadfast belief of the truth of godliness. By the truth
of godliness, we understand, that holy truth, which in the word of Scripture is
revealed, whether for knowledge, as the history of the Creation, Redemption,
etc. or for practice, as the Precepts, Threatenings, Promises; all which by
faith, we steadfastly beleev; and then is it manifest that our belief is
steadfast indeed, when the truth of godliness does leav an impression upon the
soul: for this is the property of this holy truth, that where it is received,
and believed as it ought, there does it new mould, and frame the soul, and
change it into the image of it self; ^ote the phrase of Rom 6.17. (...), q.d.
c^o^ding to which you were n^w molded.
ex. gr. Belief of the precept, if steadfast, frames the soul to obedience; of
the threatenings, to fear, and trembling; of the promise, to trust, and
confidence: Thus we say, that belief of the precept is an obedientiall assent:
belief of the promise is a fiduciall assent. This fiduciall assent, or steadfast
belief of the promise, the Scripture does other while express by these phrases;
To rest, and rely, or lean upon God, to stay, to roll upon, to trust, to place
confidence in him, etc. The reason whereof is, because in Scripture phrase, he
is not accounted to beleev the promise of God, who does not thereupon put
confidence in God. Say the same touching the precepts and threatenings. Not he
that subscribeth to the truth of them, but he that fears, and obeys, is the
believer. Thus we see how Faith is a mothergrace, viz. the Mother, and Nurs of
Reverence, Obedience and Confidence. So then steadfastly to beleev the promise,
is but one act of faith; and so the Church says, Faith, by which we steadfastly
beleev the promise; This is one act, but not the only act of faith.

Note further, that the Church adds; The promises made to them in that
Sacrament; which is no less true in the Supper, than in Baptism. Sacramental
faith, that is, the exercise of faith, as a qualification to fit us for the
Sacrament, must specially look upon the Sacramental promise, and steadfastly
beleev that special promise, which is made to the Receiver in the Sacrament.
As in the Sacraments, so also in the duty of Prayer, humiliation, and every
particular occasion, wherein our faith ought to have a special relation to the
promise, Man's duty is to look to that promise which in special respects that
duty, and by faith to lay hold upon it; else does he deserv to lose the benefit
of the Promise.

The promise made to us in Baptism comprehends the exhibition of grace, Act.
2.38. the remission of sins, Act. 22.16. consequently, the salvation of the
soul, Mar. 16.16. The promise made to us in the Supper, is intimated in those
words, This is my body, this is my blood, which is shed for you; which Saint
Paul explicateth thus: The communion of the body, and blood of Christ, i.e. as
we have heard, an effectual means to convey the body and blood of Christ, even
Christ and all his benefits to the worthy Receiver.

Hence give answer to that question, viz. How it comes to pass, that the
faithful do receiv the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament; the Church
says, they are verily, and indeed taken, and received of the faithful, but
how comes it to pass?

Answ. That it is done by virtue of Christ's promise, and the Receivers faith
meeting together: The promise of Christ is, that the elements thus blessed, and
received, shall be to the Reeciver, the body, and blood of Christ; the Receiver
therefore does look upon the signs, as instruments of conveyance, means of
receiving. Now these two, viz. the promise of Christ, and the faith of the
Receiver meeting together, do make a kind of omnipotency: Christ can perform
whatsoever he promises; and faith can beleev whatsoever he reveals: so to
the believer this, yea, and all things else are possible.

Object. Possible therefore is Transubstantiation, since Christ can do what he
says.

Sol. We question not what Christ can do, but whether he does so indeed, as the
Romish Church says; their assertion of Transubstantiation we dare not receiv,
lest we should forfeit our eyes, and other senses, which God has given us, to
inform our understanding in their several objects.

Object. But blessed is he that believes, tho he see not.

Sol. True, and therein we trust to have our part, because we firmly beleev,
that in the Sacrament we do indeed receiv the body, and blood of Christ, tho we
see it not: yet dare we not receiv Transubstantiation, because we see the
contrary: neither do we find any miraculous Transubstantiation, in all the
Scripture, but what was sensible, yea subject to the eye. Moses rod turned into
a serpent, the water changed into wine at the marriage, were visible, and
sensible transformations; so would this in the Sacrament if there were any at
all.

Chap. 14
CHAP. XIV. A special note touching both these branches of Sacramental
qualification.
WHen we teach the necessity of these two graces in the way of qualification to
the receiving of the Sacrament, we understand it not in respect of the act of
the Church, administering the element; but of God bestowing the benefit: and so
are we to understand the words of the Catechism, which says, that these two
graces are required of them that come to be baptized: speak we of the
administration of the Sacrament, there must be a profession of these: speak we
of the benefit, there must be a real performance of them, else nothing done:
Except men profess them, the Church may not admit them; except men perform
them, God will not make them partakers of the benefits: the Church may refuse
none that professes, God will refuse none that indeed performs.

Quest. Quest.
What if the profession be fained and counterfeit, shall that suffice?

Answ. Answ.
It is not in man to search the heart. The profession of Simon Magus gave him
admission to Baptism: nay, our Savior tho he knew the false heart of Judas, yet
forbade not his presence at the Passover: but tho man admit him to the
Element, yet upon his want of Faith, God will bar him from the benefit of the
Sacrament.

Object. If then Simon Magus had afterward repented of his false profession,
See Saint Austin touching this l^b. ^. De ^aptismo contra Donatistis. cap. 12.
yet it should seem that he had remained extra Christum, without Christ, except
he be rebaptised, in as much as at first his want of faith did bar him from the
benefit of Baptism.

Sol. This is a case, which we may with reason beleev, that the providence of
God does watch to prevent: but suppose it possible, yet neither is there any
need of rebaptization, nor shall he remain disunited from Christ. Sacraments
are means of union in ordinary, but God is not tied to them. Besides, tho
Baptism be the first Sacrament of incorporation, and union; yet not the only
one: Add this, that, as Repentance can, after a sort, undo what has been done
in the way of sin: so may it in such a case supply the defect of former times,
and cause that to be now done, without any ceremony, which at the ordinary time
was not done. Lastly, in such cases we may distinguish between the benefit of
Union, and Incorporation, and the benefit of Remission, and Regeneration; these
later may be suspended for the present, tho not the former: but by
extraordinary dispensation, the man who hereafter shall perform what is
required, in the way of qualification, tho for the present he do it not, yet
may be incorporated, and united unto Christ; because in such a man Repentance,
and Faith, are in actu signato, and radicali, tho not in actu exercito,
secretly lodgging in the heart, and seen to God, tho not sensible to the man
himself. And mark that I say the Incorporation of such a one is by
extraordinary dispensation, Note.
for in this we may conceiv a difference betwixt Gods dealing with men in
Baptism, and in the Lords Supper: the Lords Supper being often received, except
there be a real performance of repentance and faith answerable to the verbal
profession [ in actu exercito] God may suspend all benefit of that Sacrament,
without irreparable harm, the next time may repair what the former did not; but
Baptism being but once administered: because it may seem that who so is not then
incorporated, must remain for ever disunited; therefore tho there be not in
present a real performance of Repentance answerable to the profession, yet
will not God suspend all benefit of Baptism, but notwithstanding their
carelessness, grants to them, who belong to the Election of grace, present
union with Christ, and implantation, but not Remission, and Regeneration till
afterward: Neither is it absurd to conceiv an union with Christ, without any
present fructification; for if the plant ingrafted into the stock does not
presently draw sap from the root, which yet is a natural Agent, and cannot
suspend its operation: how much more may Christ, who is a voluntary Agent,
suspend his influence for a time, tho the party be truly united to him.

According to this may we explain that position of the Schools, Sacramenta
conferunt gratiam non-ponenti obicem, i.e. that if man be not a hindrance to
himself, the Sacraments are not empty signs, but real instruments to conferr
grace: Now that bar, which alone hinders, is impenitency, and infidelity:
Who so does not profess repentance, and faith, may not be admitted; who so with
his profession does not join real performance, ordinarily, does not receiv the
benefit of the Sacrament: much less they, who profess, and practice the clean
contrary. Note that all this is spoken only, De Adultis. The case of infants
follows in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XV. A Digression, handling the case of Infants Baptism.
THis that has been delivered touching the necessity of Faith and Repentance,
by the way of qualification, is willingly received by the Anabaptists; and the
authority of our Church, in this particular, is by our infected Countrymen
alleged against our practice of infants Baptism; the lawfulness of which
custom we proved, cap. 7. and satisfied their objections made against our
Arguments: It remains that we now examine their arguments, and see what
strength they have to prove that Infants ought not to be baptized: Chap. 15
Say they, there is no warrant for it in Scripture; They have not faith, (Ergo)
they ought not to be baptized. Insist we a little upon them both.

The Anabaptists first Argument.
THe Testament of Christ (say they) is so perfect, and he so faithful, that
nothing ought to be practiced of Christians, which is not there warranted: But
no warrant therein for the baptising of Infants, neither Precept, nor
President, (Ergo) it ought not to be done. This is the triumphing Argument of
all Schismatics, which mislike the Ceremonies of the Church, whether
National, or Catholic.

Note the Answer.
First, To the Major, flourished over with that text of Saint Paul, Heb. 3.2.6.
Christ was faithful, so was Moses; he as a son, Moses as a servant; his
testament is therefore as perfect as that of Moses: True, but know we not that
the faithfulness of a man, in his office, is to be measured according to the
Intent, and Scope of his office imposed? in which if he fail, he is
unfaithful, if he fail not in that, then is he not unfaithful, tho he look
not to other things; The Minister may be faithful, tho he meddle not with the
sword of Justice; The Magistrate, tho he fight not with the sword of the
Spirit: So then, what was the office of Moses? of Christ? of the Apostles? The
office of Moses was to plant a National Church in the Commonwealth of Israel:
The office of the Apostles, to propagate the Church, and to make it Catholic
throughout the world: The office of Christ was to work the Redemption of
mankind: See the particulars in Dan. 9.24.27. If any of them fail in these,
then are they unfaithful; else not hence it was Moses office, to set down
particular orders for that National Church: Contrarily the office of the
Apostles to appoint general Rules, and Orders for the Catholic Church: Christ
by himself did neither of these: but both these, and whatsoever else was
necessary for the welfare of Church, and Commonwealth, by his Magistrates, and
Ministers in several ages: But by himself in his own person he established the
Covenant of grace, and salvation, gave the Word of life, ordained the Seals,
and instituted a Ministry, and so was faithful in his house as a Son, and
worthy of more honors, than either Moses, or the Apostles. Thus we give answer
to the Major.

2. To the Minor thus. We grant, that neither Precept, nor Pattern formal, and
explicit, is to be found for infants baptising; but both Precept, and Pattern
virtuall, and implicit; which if found, is not to be neglected: That both may
be found in the new Testament, comes thus to be proved.

First, PRECEPT VIRTUALL and IMPLICIT: The precept of God to Abraham, and
Israel, for the incorporation of their Infants, by a Sacrament, was not
repealed by Christ, but rather confirmed, and consequently, tho not expressly
written by the Evangelists, yet nevertheless delivered by Christ; the Ceremony
indeed of Initiation is altered, but the duty it self does stand still; for
what was not repealed, ought to remain: Again, this is to be marked, that God
by Moses establishing a national Church, has drawn a perfect pattern, and
model thereof to our hands. Now therefore as no better laws for the
Commonwealth, than those, which from Moses may be transferred; So no better
Orders for the Church, than such as may from thence justly, and without wrong
to the time of truth, and grace in the new Testament be translated: Some
judicial Laws were peculiar to that Nation, at least to that age of the world;
some Ecclesiastical rites were also peculiar to that age of the Church, and
may not now be allowed: but others there were more moral, and so more
perpetual. And indeed no better directions than what may be fetched from
amongst these. Our Savior has gone before us, and given us an example. All
grant that the spiritual Courts, the Censures of the Church, the proceeding in
the Censures are by our Savior, fetched from the Church of the Jews, Mat. 18.
from thence does Saint Paul argue for the maintenance of the Ministry. Cor.
9.13.14. Laws touching the liberty of women's partaking of the Lords Supper,
are thence enacted. Times, places, persons, consecrated to the service of God,
are, and were ordained by the Church, in the Imitation of Israel: and so also
do we conclude, the perpetuation of incorporating Infants into the Church of
God; which in that Church having been enacted, was not repealed in respect of
the substance of the duty, tho the Circumstance, and Ceremony be altered: for
we read in Act. 1.3. that our Savior in his 40. days conversation, taught the
Apostles things pertaining to the kingdom of God, and Matt. 28. he bid them
teach all Nations to observe all things that he had commanded them. It being
therefore manifest by tradition, that Pedo-baptism has ever since been
practiced in the Church of God: doubtless it had not been admitted, had not the
Apostles, by this Commandment of Christ, appointed the observation of it. Thus
we find a precept virtuall, and implicit.

2 PATTERN VIRTUALL and IMPLICIT, is in the baptising of whole families, as of
Lydia, Crispus, Gaius, Stephanus, and others, in which who doubts, but there
were Infants also. What say we to those three thousand souls mentioned, Act. 2.
Is it probable that they were all present at Saint Peter's Sermon, it being in a
private house? is it not rather probable, that the men being present, and
converted, they brought also their families to be baptized? so that the total
sum of men, women and children, might be 3000 souls: And here doubtless the
proceeding of the Converts was answerable to that in Genesis 17. no sooner is the
Covenant made with Abraham, but all the males in his house were circumcised,
young and old: So doubtless no sooner was the Covenant of grace ratified,
betwixt God and the Parents by Baptism, but the Infants also of the family,
were accounted holy, and so baptized. Doubtless what Saint Peter said to them
in Act. 2. The promise is made to you, and to your children; the same did St.
Paul preach to the Gentiles, when they were converted. And how should they
confirm the truth of this to them, but by baptising their children: Neither by
children can we with the Anabaptist, understand their youths of discretion
only, but their Infants also: for in Act. 2.39. and Cor. 7.24. the word is
general to comprehend all their issue and offspring. (...) of (...) pario:
Nomen originis, non aetatis.


Another Pattern is probably collected out of Mar. 10. the gospel read in the
Liturgy, at the Administration of Baptism. The children there mentioned were
[(...)] Infants, such as men do hold in their arms: Christ indeed baptized them
not, but probable it is, that he might deliver them to his Disciples to be
baptized (as some think) or rather that they had been baptized already:
doubtless it was a pious act of the Parents to bring them to Christ; and who
can much doubt of this, but that the Parents having been by John's Baptism
directed to Christ, when they knew him, brought children to him to receiv a
further blessing from him; and thus much for answer to the first, and main
Argument of the Anabaptists.

The second Argument of the Anabaptists.
WIthout Faith (say they) none ought to be baptized, Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Act.
8.36. Which also the English Catechism does allow. But Infants want faith, (
Ergo) they ought not to be baptized.

Let the Minor be granted, tho if a man deny it, (as some do) I see not how
they can prove it: but gratify them in this, the Major is utterly falls, for
neither do these texts prove it, nor the English Catechism. Besides there are
good reasons against it.

The texts prove it not; indeed they prove the Affirmativ, That whosoever
believes, may be baptized: But from thence to draw a negative conclusion is
against Reason; Thus out of John. 3.16. it is manifest, that whosoever
believes, shall be saved; but will the Anabaptist thence conclude, Infants
beleev not, ( ergo) they shall not be saved. God forbid.

Reasons are against it.
First, In respect of Infants; There needs none actual faith in children, as
a previous disposition, to fit them for the grace of Baptism: for why? In the
Baptism of Infants, the spirit works not as a moral Agent to proffer grace
to the will, but as a natural, or rather supernatural Agent, to work it in
the will, to put grace into the heart, conferring upon them seminall, and
initiall grace, which does not presuppose faith, but is it self the seed of
faith; To Parents converted, Baptism conveyed (as did Circumcision to Abraham)
a superaddition of further grace, to what they had extraordinarily received:
But to their children Baptism conveyed (as did Circumcision to Isaac) the first
seeds of grace, and Regeneration. Add this, that the faith of the Parent is
sufficient to qualify the child for Baptism, yea, for the grace of Baptism;
the child I say, in whom as yet corruption of nature, being scant active,
calls for no act of Personal grace to remove the bar of guilt: polluted he
is, but by the act of another, not by consent of his own; therefore the faith of
the Parent suffices to procure for the child the Sacrament, and the benefit
thereof: They cavil, and say, every man must live by his own faith, and not by
another: True, we say so to; only the words of the Prophet are misalleaged,
and misapplyed; the text does not add that clause [ not by another,] nor does
it speak simply of the benefit it self, gained by faith, viz. Justification,
Salvation, Preservation, but of the preassurance of it: But not to strive
hereabout; we see in Matt. 9.3. the sick man fared the better for the faith of
his friends, even in the remission of sins: Parents are nearer to their
Infants, and have more interest in them, than one friend in another: Infants
are a part of their Parents; so that the promise of grace mentioned in the
Covenant, betwixt God, and the Parent, is not ratified to the whole Parent,
except also it extend to his Infant: It is then the faith of the Parent, laying
hold of the promise, which qualifieth his Infant for incorporation into the
mystical body of Christ. And this is a point of good comfort to the parent,
Comfort to parents.
to consider the goodness of God to him, having provided for him, that as he
has been a natural instrument to convey* to his child the guilt of sin, and
seminall corruption; so may he also, challenging Gods Covenant by faith, be
made a voluntary instrument, to procure pardon of sin, and seminall grace; a
just remedy for the former malady.

The consideration whereof, were it well and advisedly thought upon, might cure
that supine negligence found in Parents, who seldom think of this; and
consequently, shall one day hear the just curses of their condemned children,
crying, woe worth the negligence of our careless Parents, who having begotten
us for their pleasure, thereby conveyed to us guilt, and corruption, but never
took care to cure us of this malady; yea the consideration of this, might
provoke them to intend the act of their faith, and not only in the Church
cursorily of custom, to present their children to God; but also actually by
the prayer of faith, challenge Gods promise, for the good of their Infants: for
doubtless even in this, as in all other occasions, the more intentive man's
faith is, and earnestly set upon the promise to challenge it, the sooner does
it prevail, and obtain the desire. To return to the Anabaptist! since the faith
of the Parents suffices, since the spirit works in Baptism as a
supernatural Agent, there needs no actual faith to be found in children;
consequently they are deceived, who defend, that none may be baptized without
faith inherent.

Secondly, In respect of Men grown, the want of faith does not bar them from
Baptism, i. e. the Church may not deny water to them, that desire the
Sacrament, if they profess to repent, and beleev, tho peradventure their heart
be naught. See then herein the unreasonable dealing of the Anabaptist, who will
bar Infants from the water of Baptism, for want of Faith, when (as has been
showed) not so much the actual Inexistence of these graces, as the formal
profession of them does qualify even Men grown, sufficiently for what the
Church can do, in the administration of Baptism.

Two things are usually objected against this in the heat of contention,
Objections framed against this truth.
which I shall briefly touch for the satisfaction of sober minds, and so return
to the former doctrine of preparation.

First (say they) children are as far from Profession of faith, as from
performance, consequently to be barred from Baptism.

To which I answer, that Profession is either actual, or virtuall: An actual
profession of Repentance, and Faith is required of them, who by the acts of
reason formerly abused, have multiplied their personal transgressions; but for
Infants a virtuall profession is sufficient, and such a profession we find in
them, in respect of their Propagation: They are not unfitly termed Believers,
because they are born within the Profession of Christianity: As also the
Infants of Pagans, are justly accounted Infidels, because they are born in the
Profession of infidelity: And if Saint Paul had disputed the cause, I doubt
not, but as he said of Levi, that in Abraham he paid tithes to Melchisedec; so
he would have said, that the seed of the faithful do in their Parents profess
the faith of Christ; Add this, that this virtuall profession is actuated by the
promise of the Sureties, and Parents at Baptism; And this is the answer of our
Church, to the former objection; And it is plain, that that Ab-renunciation, is
the profession of Repentance, in the name of the child: so also the Recitation
of the Articles, a profession of Faith, and reputed his, according to that well
known saying of Saint Austin, peccavit in alio, credit in alio, as his offense,
so his profession is the act of another, but his by Imputation.

Yea, but says the Anabaptist, this is the blasphemous Invention of Pope
Higinius; where, mark I pray you the spirit of Envy, Note.
and Detraction, that can speak well of nothing, that is not framed in the
model of his own brain. Higinius is said indeed to have appointed Godfathers,
and Godmothers: But the Interrogatories in Baptism were yet more ancient, and
might be the sponsion and profession of Parents, in behalf of their children,
in use long before Higinius. The profession of faith, as it appears by
records, was at the first direct, and plain, by recitation of the Creed, and
forms of Confession: Afterward it seems, that for help of memory, and to
provide a remedy against bashfulness, that which the party repeated, was put
into questions propounded by the Minister, and answered briefly (as now the
form is) by the party; And what the Men grown answered by themselves, the same
did Parents for their children before the time of Higinius: But why does his
blackmouth call this custom blasphemous? why calls he Higinius by the name of
Pope? had it not bin enough to have styled this custom of Interrogatories in
Baptism, answered by deputed Sureties, to have styled it I say, (as some others
do) ridiculous, and unreasonable? had it not been enough to have styled, this
Higinius Bishop of Rome, as he was indeed, but he must call him Pope? But this
is the vehemence of the Anabaptisticall spirit, to lay on load of railing
words, when there wants weight of solid reason. By the Anabaptists own
confession, the custom is very ancient: for Higinius was the eighth Bishop of
Rome, lived in the year of Grace 150. long before the Pope was bred and born,
ever since when, it has continued in the Church. Boniface in his Epistle to
Saint Augustine, seems to acknowledge, that in his days it had Antiquity only
to plead for the continuance. But neither he, nor any since, till of late
years, counted it ridiculous, much less blasphemous: But pass we over the
bitterness of words, examine the matter: Why should Infants be catechized, and
asked for a profession of their faith? Answer out of Lombard, Non ut
instruerentur, sed ut ob^igentur. Lib. 4. Did. 6. Qu. 1.
and Bonadventure, that it is done, not for their instruction, but for their
obligation: not as if the Infant should thereby be taught, but that thereby he
may be bound to the profession of Religon: So that this is the meaning of the
words, I forsake, I beleev, that is, I bind my self to do these hereafter: And
this interpretation I prefer before others, Aquinas to this effect, Credo,
i.e. buic fidei aggregatus sum ^er fidei Sacramentum.
as being more reasonable, and more agreeable to that which our Church does
resolv upon: for the Minister speaking to the Sureties says, This Infant must
promise; and afterward, has promised; Austin thus, Credo, i.e. fidei
Sacramentum percipio vel. praesto sum percipere: Ep stola id Bonifacium.
In the Catechism they did promise and vow; and again, they did promise, and
vow them both in their names: Hence the Church does style Godfathers, and
Godmothers, not by the newfangled name of Witnesses, but Sureties, which does
intimate an obligation: the which is so much the more apparent to be the intent
of our Church, because that in private Baptisms, where there is a present
expectation of death, neither are these interrogatories used, nor sureties
appointed. By all which, it is manifest, that this is the sense, and meaning of
interrogatories, in the judgment of our Church; which Lombard, and Bonaventure,
dici potest, ibi sponoeri pro parvulo, quod fi ad majorem aetatem venerit and
renuntiabit, and fidem tenebit. Iibidem.
Lombard, and Bonaventure do give, and confirm out of Dyonisius: Hard it may
seem, and harsh, (I grant) thus to explain these phrases, which being of the
present tense, are strained to the future: Thus also Dionysius cited by
Bonaventure, Sensus verborum, quae dicunt Patrini est, quod puer ille cum in
sen^um venerit tenebit sacras professiones
but he is oversqueamish, which will not bear with the harshness of a speech,
when the explication of it given cannot be rejected. To shut up this point,
since partly in their propagation, partly by their Sureties, a profession of
Repentance, and Faith is made, the want of actual profession is no bar to
hinder infants from the Sacrament of Baptism.

The second thing objected, is this; that there is no more reason, why children
should be admitted to Baptism, than to the Lords Supper, in as much as if the
profession of faith made by Sureties may admit them to the one Sacrament, it
may also qualify them for the other. True indeed, so it might, Good reason to
admi^ infants to Baptism, but not to the Lords Supper.
if this were all that were required; but there is much difference betwixt the
two Sacraments, and so diverse reasons, why infants may be admitted to the one,
and not to the other. Baptism is for Admission, and Regeneration: the Lords
Supper for Confirmation, and Preservation: they are fit to receiv the
beginnings, that as yet are not fit to receiv the ending, and consummation:
Baptism requires no Sacramental actions from the party, so does the Lords
Supper: Chap. 16
in that he is a mere patient, in this he must be an agent; he must take, and
eat, which the infant cannot do. Lastly, tho Repentance, and Faith be required
in the way of qualification to both Sacraments: yet to fit a man for the worthy
partaking of the Lords Supper, other graces, and gracious actions are required,
which are incompatible with the age of infancy. To the handling of which I now
return, having thus fairly rid my hands of these brainsick, and froward
spirits, the Anabaptists, and their Abetters.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Qualification peculiar to the Lords Supper, and first of
Thankfulness.
Thankfulness for the Death of Christ, is a special branch of our
Qualification, for the right and worthy receiving of the Supper of the Lord:
for which cause, the Church has put words into the mouth of the Minister, that
after he has exhorted the people to Repentance, Faith, and new-obedience, he
should add this; See the third exhortation before the Communion.
And above all things you must give most humble, and hearty thanks to God the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the world, by the Death,
and Passion of our Savior Christ, both God and Man. And in the Catechism
amongst other things, touching which a man ought to examine himself, before he
come to the Lords Supper, the Church has interserted this, A thankful
Remembrance of the Death of Christ. Note here.

1. A REMEMBRANCE, The reason whereof is this: because this Sacrament was
ordained for the continual Remembrance of the Sacrifice of Christ's Death: His
Death was a Sacrifice, this Sacrifice must be remembered: God made it remarkable
at the first by those prodigies in Nature, the Sunns eclipsing, Earthsquaking,
Vail-renting, graves opening: But we must remember it in respect of the
Commandment of Christ, Do this in Remembrance of me; yet is not this a
repetition of that Sacrifice, what need that be daily renewed, This is S. Paul's
own Argument Heb. 10.
that was at the first complete, and perfect? whatsoever needs daily
repetition, and renewing, is in it self imperfect, and incomplete: As therefore
this Sacrifice does agree with the legal propitiations in this, that it was a
bloody Sacrifice; so in this does it differ, and super-excell them, that it
being at once complete, needs not (as did they) daily renewing, and
reduplication.

2. A THANKFUL REMEMBRANCE must there be, that is, so must we remember the
Death of Christ, as that thereby we be stirred to thankfulness for it: The
reason whereof is, because the Death of Christ was not only a mere separation of
the body, and soul, but a sacrifice, yea, a propitiation, that is, a sacrifice
for expiation of sin, and reconciliation: See for this Ioh. 1.29. and 1 Ioh.
2.2.
Indeed it was the substance of all the legal shaddows, the perfection, and
accomplishment of all the Typical expiations under the Law: Nay more, it was
the grand, and great deliverance of the Church. If therefore the Exodus of
Israel out of Egypt deserved a yearly feast of thankful remembrance: if the
Reduction of the Church from the captivity of Babylon was so thankfully
acknowledged, as that it almost drowned the memorial of their Exodus; ought
not the death of Christ, by which our Redemption from sin, and Satan was
wrought, ought not this I say, to be thankfully remembered? The practice of the
Church does plainly manifest it: whence had the whole sacred action that famous
name of the Eucharist, Eucharistia.
so frequent in the writings of the Fathers, and Doctors of the Church, but
from the sacrifice of thanks, and praise, at that time offered to God the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the world, by the Death, and
Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ: For this cause it is, that in the Liturgy
of the Church, this is so carefully remembered, that by the Minister, the whole
Congregation should be exhorted to give thanks to our Lord God; adding, that,
as it is meet, and right, and our bounden duty that we should at all times, and
in all places give thanks to the Lord God our heavenly Father, so for the
present, with Angels, Archangels, and all the holy company of Heaven, we laud,
and magnify his glorious Name, etc. But to proceed.

The way, and means to stir us up to thankfulness for the Death of Christ,
Means to stir us up to thankfulness.
is seriously to consider of the benefits which we receiv thereby: Here is a
large field of meditation; here cannot the devout soul want matter, wherein to
enlarge it self, if we take notice of these particulars: First, what we had
been without it. Secondly, what our hopes are by it. Thirdly, how unworthy we
either were of it, or as yet are. Fourthly, by how worthy a person this was
wrought. Fifthly, how bitter the cup was which he drank, how painful, and
shamfull the Death was which he suffered. Here therefore, and in these
meditations let the soul dwell, till admiration of the benefit, so good, so
great, so freely, so undeservedly bestowed, cause the heart to burst forth into
that of David; Lord, what is man, that thou art so mindful of him? Oh dear
Savior! who would not love thee? Oh heavenly Father! who would not bless thee?
Oh blessed spirit! who would not obey thee? Oh eternal God! who would not
devote himself, soul, body, all, to the honor, and service of this glorious
Trinity, that has done so great things for so unworthy, so wretched sinners?

Well, Thankfulness is a branch of the Qualification of our souls for the
worthy partaking. How to express our thankfulness.
But how is it to be expressed? Answer briefly, by bearing our part in the
Psalms, and Alms of the congregation. For the first, we read, that after the
Passover, our Savior, and his company sung a Psalm: Psalms.
It is Saint James his rule, in the time of mirth to sing Psalms: when have we
more cause of spiritual mirth, than at this sacred banquet? all dull, and
earthly is that heart, that is not now even filled with holy, and heavenly
raptures. Did Moses sing, and Miriam dance; and shall not we sing forth the
praises of our dearest Savior?

For the other, viz. the Alms of the Congregation, Alms.
we have the laudable custom of the Church in all ages, and the ground thereof
is taken from that of David, Psalm. 16. My goodness extends not to thee, but
to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my
delight. What we cannot therefore return to our blessed Savior himself in token
of thankfulness, (and who would not in this kind, even part with all that he
has?) that must we, for his sake, bestow upon his poor members. Collections
for the poor, are perpetual attendants upon Communions; the illiberall hand
is the evidence of an unthankful soul: freely we have received, freely let us
give, and Christ shall thank us, Mat. 10.42. and 25.34. To say nothing of
Deo-dands, most proper also upon this occasion.

Chap. 17
CHAP. XVII. Of Love and Charity.
BY love, and charity we do not in this place understand that loving affection,
which we owe to God, our heavenly Father, by virtue of that great commandment
Matt. 22. nor that general act of love to our Neighbors, enjoined in the
second Table, which manifests it self in a mutual, and reciprocal
interchanging of affections with them: viz. that we rejoice with them in their
causes of joy, and greev with them, when God calls them to it: nor yet that
special act of sanctified love, which is terminated in, and upon the holy
brethren; Signs to discern the truth of brotherly love.
whose truth is thence discerned, if it be, (as it ought) indifferent to all
without respect of persons, and constant without respect of times; if neither
penury and necessity, nor trouble and adversity, can cool the heat of our
affections, but notwithstanding these we love them, in whomsoever we find
grace, and holiness: this is brotherly love indeed: yet is not this, nor any of
these that love, which is here properly understood; all these are prerequired:
But by love and charity we do properly understand, Reconciliation to others.
a reconciled affection toward all, even our enemies, much more toward others,
which is indeed the perfection of all love, and the Nil ultra of that
affection: So much we know is intimated by that phrase, to be in Charity:
malice and heartburning must be laid aside, when we address our selves to the
holy Communion: If in hearing the word Iam. 1.21. Pet. 2.1. if in praying Tim.
2.8. how much more when we approach the Table of the Lord? God has appointed
this Sacrament, in a special manner to nourish love, and spiritual friendship
amongst the brethren while they see themselves all jointly admitted to the same
Banquet, and all made partakers of the same Bread: Hence has it received the
name of Communion (as some think) because it is (at least should be) communis
anio the common union, Communion.
i.e. the uniting of their hearts in common. So that he which forbeareth this
Sacrament, because he is not in charity, is like the patient, that throws
away the plaster, because his leg is sore, when as for that very cause he ought
to keep it: Even for that cause ought we to agree with our Adversary, and lay
aside all rancour, malice, yea all heartburning, that we may be thought fit to
partake of this holy Sacrament.

Note that this Reconciliation stands in the practice of satisfaction, and
restitution to others, whom we have wronged, and of remission to others upon
their confession, Mat. 5.23.
and acknowledgment: at leastwise there must be a readiness of mind to both;
so says the Church; And if ye shall perceiv your offenses to be such, as be
not only against God, but also against your neighbors, then ye shall reconcile
your selves to them, ready to make restitution, and satisfaction, according to
the uttermost of your powers for all injuries, and wrong done by you to any
other; and likewise being ready to forgive others, that have offended you, as
you would have forgiveness of your offenses at Gods hand; for otherwise the
receiving of the holy Communion does nothing else, but increase your damnation:
Conclude we this with that patheticall Exhortation of the Church, grounded upon
these words of Saint Paul; We being many are one bread, and one body, for all
are partakers of one bread. Declaring thereby (says the Homily) not only our
communion with Christ, but that unity also wherein they that eat of this Table
should be knit together, for by dissension, vain glory, strife, envying,
contempt, hatred, or malice, they should not be dissevered, but so joined by
the bond of love, in one mystical body, as the corn of that bread in one loaf:
In respect of which straight knot of Charity, the true Christians in the
Primitive Church called this Supper, Love, (...)
as if they should say: none ought to sit down there, that were out of love,
and charity, who bare grudg, and vengeance in his heart, who did not also
profess his love, and kind affection, by some charitable releef for some part
of the congregation: And this was their practice. Oh heavenly banquet then so
used! oh godly guests who so esteemed this feast! But oh wretched Creatures
that we be in these days! who be without Reconciliation of our brethren, whom
we have offended; without satisfying them, whom we have caused to fall; without
any kind of thought, or compassion toward them, whom we might easily releev;
without any conscience of slander, disdain, misreport, division, rancour, or
inward bitterness; yea being accombred with the cloked hatred of Cain, with the
long-coloured malice of Esau, with the dissembled falsehood of Ioab, dare yet
presume to come up to these sacred and fearful mysteries! Oh man whither
rushest thou unadvisedly? It is a table of peace, and thou art ready to fight:
It is a table of singleness, and thou art imagining mischief: It is a table of
quietness, and thou art given to debate; It is a table of pity, and thou art
unmercifull: Do thou neither fear God the maker of this Feast? nor reverence
his Christ the refection, and meat? nor regardest his Spouse, his welbeloved
Guest? nor weighest thine own conscience, which is sometime thine inward
accuser? Oh man! tender thine own salvation, examine, and try thy good will, and
love toward the children of God, the members of Christ, the heirs of heavenly
heritage, yea toward the Image of God, that excellent creature thine own soul:
If thou have offended now be reconciled: If thou have caused any to stumble in
the way of God, now set them up again: If thou have disquieted thy brother, now
pacify him: If thou have wronged him, now releev him: If thou have defrauded
him, now restore to him: If thou have nourished spite, now embrace friendship:
If thou have fostered hatred, and malice, now openly show thy love, and
charity: yea be pressed, and ready to procure thy neighbors health of soul,
wealth, commodity, and pleasure as thine own: Deserv not the heavy, and
dreadful burden of Gods displeasure for thine evil toward thy neighbor, so
unreverently to approach this table of the Lord.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Examination.
THat the preparation of Receivers should consist in Examination, is the plain
doctrine of Saint Paul, Cor. 11.18
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, etc. Examination
is a duty of Christians, needful at all times; a good preparation to every
other religious duty, specially to the blessed Sacrament: what it is we do
easily understand: An act of the soul reflecting upon it self in a certain kind
of judicial proceeding, to pass censure upon it self, and its own actions:
wherein this is material; that it be done diligently, and therefore it is
compared to the (...) cannot search the heart, Chap. 18.
but thou can. Many things are in thy soul, which a stranger does not, nay
cannot understand.

Quest. Is not then the care of the Minister superfluous, in examining his
Parishioners, since every man must do it himself?

Answ. Nothing less: Saint Paul in that text shows what must be done, not
what must not be done. Too much consultation, and diligence in matters of such
moment cannot be used, nor too many eyes and hands employed. Add this, that the
object of the Ministers examination, that is, all that he can examine them
about, is only matter of knowledge, or of criminal conversation: But beside
this, inquiry must be made by each man, touching himself in respect of inward
grace, and secret corruptions; consequently as they that rely upon the
Ministers examination, so they that neglect it, are justly to be blamed: join
both together, specially in cases extraordinary, and scruples of conscience.

The OBJECT or MATTER of Examination is not mentioned by Saint Paul: but by the
Church reduced to these heads, Whether a man have Repentance, and Faith;
Thankfulness, and Charity: In each of them note the reason of Necessity, and
the mark or cognizance of Discovery.

REPENTANCE, what this is, we heard before, cap. 12. Now accordingly must each
Receiver examine himself, whether he do truly repent, and be heartily sorrowful
for his former sins. And reason good it is, that by contrition and sorrow, the
heart should be purged, which by lust, and wrath, and other inordinate
passions, so often sinned against God. The mark to discern this godly sorrow is
a steadfast purpose of the heart to lead a new life, to change the former
courses into better. A purpose, a steadfast purpose, that is, a purpose of the
heart settled and grounded upon reason, and deliberation, to lead a new life, to
reform all former errors, and aberrations; this is a certain, and evident mark
of true repentance, and godly sorrow. By this examine thy self touching thy
Repentance: In vain is sorrow for sin, where there is no purpose to amend in
time to come.

FAITH, what this is, we heard, cap. 13. The reason, why it is required that we
examine our selves touching it, is, that it may be tried, refined, and quickened
against the time of use. Great need of Faith to l^ft up the soul above sense,
and reason, and to cause it to see in the external signs, that heavenly, and
spiritual food of the soul. Add this also touching the other act of Faith,
which consists in Reliance upon Christ: when is it fitter for us to renounce
our selves, in whom is nothing good, and to cleav fast to our Savior, in whom
is all sufficiency, than now when we desire to feed upon him, to satisfy our
hungry souls with goodness.

Marks, Marks of Faith.
or Cognizances of true Faith may be taken from the Generation, and from the
Operation thereof.

For the Generation, it comes by hearing, is the effect of the Spirit, in our
hearts working it by the Word; not the spawn of Nature, nor the fruit of
Reason, much less of Sense; but the Word of God is that from whence it
springs, whereon it feeds, by which it lives, without which it dies.
They, whose faith feels no decay, in the dis-use, and neglect of the
Ministry, may justly fear their faith was never right and sound.

For the Operation, Faith is fruitful in good works, in all, but specially in
the best works, Piety, Charity; at all times, but then does it exceed it self,
when we draw nigh to God: a fruitless faith is dead, a name, a picture, a
shadow of faith, but nothing else: nay, there is not all sound in it, if it
grow not daily, if it still seek not, labor not to exceed the state of
yesterday.

Now for THANKFULNESS and CHARITY, nothing more have I to add to that, which in
cap. 16. and 17. has been delivered: There is set down the reason of their
necessity, together with the effects of them, which are the best signs of
discovery; This only would I have added touching Love and Charity, that it must
be universal: and indeed the universality thereof is a good mark to discern the
truth, and sincerity of it: for if it be right, it will extend to all men, even
our Enemies, even to those that hate, and persecute us: This is indeed hard,
Matthew. 5.44
yet Christ our Savior will have it: his reason is, That ye may be (that is,
known to be) the Children of your heavenly Father. God has done so, Christ
has done so, and therefore we must do so.

Object. Must I then forbear my right, and suffer my self to be trodden down by
every one?

Sol. Every small matter, tho it be our right, must not provoke men to Law;
Cor. 6.7.
matters of moment, in point of credit, and profit, may be prosecuted, so that
we make use of the Law, as of a Judge to determine the question; Note this.
not as of an executioner to reveng the wrong, and satisfy the spleen.

Thus we have seen wherein stands the Qualification of our souls for the blessed
Sacrament, particularly the duty of Examination, both what it is, and wherabout
it is conversant. Add in the close of all, the Necessity of this preparation,
Necessity of Sacrame^tall preparation.
which is seen in the danger that comes by neglect; for, as the benefit is
great that comes by the Sacrament, if with a penitent heart, and prepared
soul we receiv the same; so is the danger great, if we receiv unworthily, if we
discern not the Lords body, if we consider not the dignity of the holy mystery,
if with unwashen hands, with unprepared hearts, we presume unto the Table of
the Lord: Saint Paul says, That he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself, which is well expounded by the Church; He
kindles Gods wrath, and provokes him to plague him with diverse diseases and
sundry kinds of death.

You will happily say, why should there be more danger here, Quest.
than in the other Sacrament?

I answer, Answ.
the danger is not greater here, than in Baptism; for even there also is it
great, if men do break their vow, and solemn promise made to God: But the
penalty is more specially mentioned here; because this Sacrament does always
presuppose discretion in men, to know what they do, before they come unto it:
besides, he that abuses this Sacrament, does indeed violate, and profane them
both. Let me close up all with the exhortation of the Church, which is twofold.

1. If there be any Blasphemers of God, This taken out of the third exhortation
before the Communion.
any hinderers, or slanderers of his Word, any Adulterers, any in malice, or
envy, or any greevous crime, let them bewail their sins, judge themselves, amend
their lives: else let them not presume to come to this holy Table, lest after
the taking of the holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into them, as he entered into
Judas, and fill them full of all iniquities, and so bring them to destruction,
both of body and soul.

2 If there be any one, which by these means cannot quiet his conscience, This
taken out of the second
let him for further counsel, and comfort resort to some discreet, and learned
Minister of Gods Word; specially to his own Pastor, that he may receiv such
ghostly counsel, and advice, as whereby his Conscience may be relieved: that by
the Ministry of Gods Word, he may receiv comfort, and the benefit of
absolution, to the quieting of his conscience, and for avoiding all scruple,
and doubtfulness: So shall he be found a meet partaker of these holy Mysteries.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

