SIVQILA.

Too good, to be true.

OMEN.

Though so at a vewe,
Yet all that I told you,
Is true, I uphold you:
Now cease to ask why?
For I can not lie.
Herein is showed by way of Dialogue, the wonderful manners of the people of
Mauqsun, with other talk not frivolous.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Printed at London by H. Bynneman, dwelling in Thames streate, near unto
Baynards Castle.

Anno Domini. 1580.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.



TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, sir Christopher Hatto^, Knight, Captain of her
Majesty's Guard, Vizchamberlaine to her Highness, and of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel.
ALTHOUGH I CANNOT (right Honorable) procure my Countries commodity as I
would, for that my power is not to my pretense, my might to my meaning, nor my
ability to my industry: yet I cannot choose but utter my goodwill, in showing
what I wish to the same. But because I would not be thought to counsel
others, that have more need my self to be taught: to set forth orders for
others that ought rather to be guided: and to direct others that am more meet
to be led: therefore what I have written to that end is none other thing than
that which now is obeyed, and most diligently followed throughout that most
civil country called Mauqsun. The like whereof is not elsewhere so universally
practiced. And though the things thereof written, will be hardly credited (but
more faintly followed) for that they are so rare and strange, and in such an
unknown place: yet they are not to be rejected as false, considering it is
harder for the reporter thereof to tell a lie, than for a common liar to tell a
true tale, which must needs be granted, if his name called OMEN, and the name
of his Country called Mauqsun (before mentioned) be advisedly marked and
considered, especially e conuerso construed. And now* for that the marvelous
manners, the honest behavior, the faithful friendship, the courteous conditions,
the commendable customs, the plain meaning and true dealing, the Lords
liberality, the Ladies great courtesy, the husbands fidelity, the wives
obedience, the maidens modesty, the masters sobriety, the servants
diligence, the Magistrates affability, the Judges equity, the commons amity,
the preferring of public commodity, the general Hospitality, the exceeding
mercy, the wonderful Charity, and the constant Christianity of that Country
is such: I hope the honest affectioned will hereby take no small pleasure and
profit. Not ignorant, that there are not a few of an other sect, that loath
they ought to love: disdain, they ought to desire: fleere at that they ought
rather to favor: and discommend that they cannot amend. Which if every Writer
should have weyed, many good things had lain hid, that now are uttered: great
knowledge would have bin kept close, that now is discovered: and many
profitable things unknown, that now are practiced. And therefore, as they
respected rather to pleasure some honestly, than to please many foolishly: so I
mean hereby rather to content the well minded with things commendable, than to
flatter fools with unnecessary matter. Trusting your Honor will rather weigh
my good will and zeal, than my rude rashenesse: in that I presume to present
unto you such a simple gift. Comforted herewith, that seeing the Persian Prince
was content to accept a poor man's handful of water, (which had no better
thing to give him) I hope your Honor will take in good part this handful of
paper, not without something in it, which is the best thing now I am able
to give you. And though this is not the first book that has been dedicated
unto you: yet your Honor is the first man to whom I have dedicated any. Whose
wisdom has willed me, whose modesty has moved me, whose clemency has
encouraged me, whose love to learning has allured me, and whose common
commendations has enticed me to offer it unto you. Thinking my self happily
recompenst, if you receive it but half as thankefully, as I do give it
faithfully and willingly. Thus omitting any further herein to trouble your
Honor, desires God earnestly to guide you in goodness, to defend you from
dangers, to fence you from foes, to lend you long life, and to bring you to
bliss,

Your Honors most obedient to command. THOMAS LVPTON,

The Preface to the Reader.
AS I have published this (gentle Reader) to pleasure and profit many, so I
wish the meaning thereof not to be hyd from any, which though I have described
at large in my former Epistle, yet for that I think many will not read the
same (as I wish they would,) herin I have displayed the effect and discourse
thereof, which is, that one SIVQILA, a man that lived godly, loved honesty,
and esteemed equity, was so weary with the wickedness, naughtiness,
falsehode and other great enormities of his own Country, that he traveled to
find out a Country and people that were agreeable to his own affection. Who,
at the last, when he had traveled thorowout the whole world, as he thought,
chanced to meet with one whose name was OMEN, dwelling in a country there
called MAVQSVN: wherein, as he said, generally be such blessed Bishops, such
perfect Preachers, such virtuous Ministers, such godly Governors, such
merciful Magistrates, such just Judges, such worthy Laws, such charitable
Lawyers, such honest Attorneys, such pitiful Physicians, such friendly
Surgeons, such liberal Lords, such lowly Ladies, such gentle Gentlemen,
such loving Husbands, such obedient Wives, such humble Children, such modest
Maids, such diligent Servants, such good and plain Dealing, such
Hospitality, such wonderful Charity, such practizing of Godliness, and such
stryuing to Do well, that the same SIVQVILA did wonder at it, saying, It is TOO
GOOD TO BE TRVE: whereof this Book has his title, which if the Discourse
thereof be well marked, I doubt not but that it will like the Godly, please the
Honest, and warn the Wicked. And therefore, as I have taken long pains in
framing it, so I beseech thee take a little pains to read it thoroughly, which
is all that I wish. And thus I end.

THOMAS LVPTON.

Too good to be true.
The whole discourse whereof does follow, and is declared by two, whose names
are, OMEN and SIVQILA.

OMEN. I Marvel what fellow this is that commes toward me thus speedily:
he thinks belike to have some succor here, but he is much deceived: for we
never go to trouble any: neither any shall trouble us. What art thou sir?
what is thy name? from whence do thou come? and what would thou have?


SIVQILA. O sir, I am come from the furthest parts of the world I think,
there is no place nor Country but I have bin in it I believe, (except this
where you dwell) my name is SIVQILA, a sinner I confess, but one that fears
God, loves his word, esteems equity, and abhors wickedness: my chief desire
is to find out such a country and people, as are altogether affectioned as I
am.


OMEN. You may go round about the whole world, and through and through it
again, ere you shall find the least villedge (much less a whole country) of
such as you name your self to be: I pray you of what Country are you?


SIVQILA. Forsooth I was borne in a famous and most fertile Island called Ailgna.


OMEN. If I do not mistake it, there are some of your countreyme^, that would
have rapt out half a dozen oaths, in a great deal less talk than you have
uttered.


SIVQILA. That is true, God amend it, which vice with many other, too
commonly frequented, was the chief occasion of my coming from thence.


OMEN. What? and could you find between that and this no good and meet
place to rest in?


SIVQILA. No truly, notwithstanding I have bin since in diverse Countries,
where gods word is truly preached, and many godly professors thereof. But
because the most part was given to greedy gain, to fraud and flattery, and
to wickedness and mischief, there was no place for me.


OMEN. Are you so virtuous, y^ you may not dwell with the wicked? are you so
holy you may not abide among the haughty? and are you such a Saint, you
may not settle your self with sinners? Then truly, either you must get you
a place in Paradise, or a house in Heaven: for I think you mean not to harbor
in Hell.


SIVQILA. The Lord keep me thence; and the most enemies I have: But sir, I
would not have you think, that I take my self to be so virtuous, y^ all other
are too sinful to be conuersaunt with me. For so I might seem to be more
Pharizaical than faithful, more wicked than witty, and more deu^^ish than
godly: for the Fathers could not flee from the^, the Prophets were present with
them, Christ the son of God was conversant with the^, y^ Apostles were
always among the^, the Martyrs remained still with the^, and the Saints in
this life cannot shun them. But truly sir I loath and detest such vile and
abominable sin so much, as is commonly used with many of the^ at this
present, that my heart did even sink for sorrow, while I was among them.


OMEN. Why did not you return into your own country seeing you could find no
fit place for your purpose?


SIVQILA. Truly because I hoped the further the better: but I found by
proof, the further the worse. For after I departed from y^ carnal Gospellers,
I came among the perverse Papists, among whom was such Superstition, Idolatry,
and massing, with other abominations: besides the imprisoning, racking,
punishing, killing and burning the true professors of Christ: that I could
not choose, but openly tell the truth and their faults. Which in no wise they
could abide to hear. Whereby quickly I was imprisoned, and there so punished:
that the unchristian Turks would not so have used me.


OM. How cha^ceth y^? for they name themselves Christians.


SI. They are christians in name: but devils in their deeds.


OMEN. It is marvel you escaped their hands: if they be so cruel as you say
they are.


SIVQILA. It was against their wills, you may be sure. But as the Lord
delivered Peter out of his chains: so he of his mere goodness delivered me
myraculously, and so you would say, if I did tell you how. And thus (as Daniel
says) the Lord never fails them that put their trust in him. And when I was
escaped their hands, I traveled further, until I come among the Heathen
Idolators, from whence I wished my self with a good will: but to say truly, I
found more love among them, not knowing God, than among y^ Papists professing
God. Who though they would not believe my religion: yet they liked it a great
deal better tha^ y^ Papisticall religion, after I had revealed y^ manner thereof
to the^. And then through long travel, I happened amongst y^ Canibals, who use to
feed on men's flesh. But God so guided my feet, that I fled from them, and
through his great providence escaped them.


OMEN. You that are men of God, ought neither to fear death, nor flee from
persecution.


SIVQILA. No sir, and why so? did not Christ the son of God which was without
sin) fear death himself? and have we that are most wicked sinners, a greater
prerogative therein than he had? And does not Christ say also: if they persecute
you in one City, flee into another? then if we may lawfully flee from Christ's
enemies for fear of killing, we may well flee from the Canibals (that know
not God) for fear of eating.


OMEN. You have spoken well for the defense of your own life.


SIVQILA. I have spoken but reason I hope: Sir all the sort of us, yea the best
of us all, are frail flesh, rather given to defend our life, than to amend
our life: you must think us to be earthly sinners, not heavenly Saints.


OMEN. What will you do now, do you mean to go into your Country again?


SIVQILA. I intend to proceed further this way, perhaps this country of
yours may be something better than where I have traveled, worse it can not
lightly be.


OMEN. Nay, you came never in the like since you were borne.


SIVQILA. What, for goodness or euilnesse?


OMEN. Nay, for goodness, godliness, obedience, equity, virtuous living,
plain dealing, and true meaning, that in all the earth is not the like: for we
have such commendable customs and excellent orders, and so well kept and
observed, that you would think the^ incredible if you did hear them.


SIVQILA. Well, though my travail has bin troublesome, painful and dangerous,
yet I repent not my iorny: for now I hope I have found the place that will
please me: I pray you let us make haste, I think long until I be in it.


OMEN. You were best to know first, whether you shall be welcome thither or
not.


SIVQILA. I trust I shall behave my self in such order, that none there shall
mislike me.


OMEN. Well, to be plain, you cannot come there, for we keep none but such as
are borne and bred in our own Country, therefore no stranger can dwell with
us, for if they should, we should rather learn their vices than they follow
our Uertues.


SIVQILA. As you are to be praised for keepyng away the wicked, so are you to
be misliked for refusing the godly: for you could learn of them no harm,
but goodness.


OMEN. Speak better than we they may, but offend so little as we they cannot.
And yet if we should receive any being never so godly and honest: would all
the brood they breed be so godly as they? no not so, for the godlyest fathers
in the old time, have had godless children.


SIVQILA. I can not deny that: but if you would be so good unto me, as to
suffer me a while to remain in your Country, I would (by Gods help) live in
such order, that I would not increase your number.


OMEN. Are you not flesh and blood? are you not a sinner?


SIVQILA. Yes truly that I am, or else I were a liar.


OMEN. Then we will not trust you, nor put it in proof: as godly me^ as you
have broken as great promises as that: Therefore set your heart at rest, you
may not come there, nor you shall not come there.


SIVQILA. What remedy, I can be but sorry, but my grief is the greater, for that
I am so nigh such a Country, where there is such godly orders, such
commendable customs, equity esteemed, and Virtue so embraced, (as you erst
did tell me) and cannot see it before I go hence: O that I might have bin so
happy, to have seen the manners and orders thereof, whereby I might have revealed
them in mine own country, when I had bin come home, that they might have bin
practiced there: Such a mind I have that my country might excel other in
goodness and equity.


OMEN. It seems, that you being so godly, and of a perfect religion, there are
godly Preachers in your country.


SIVQILA. Indeed there are great store of them, thanks be to God, and are
very diligent in preaching the truth of the Gospel, and do mightily thereby
reprove sin, but either the Devil does so busily strew Tares among the good
seed of Gods word, or the audience are so stony hearted, or else they are
negligent or forgetful hearers, or rather all, that their painful preaching
does little prevail, yet more than some wish, but not so much as I would.


OMEN. Then it were but vain to see the orders and uses of this our Country,
(if you might) for seeing they will not follow Gods word, which they
credit, being among them: then it is like they will much less regard our
orders, being unknown unto them, and that so far from them, unless they be
of the sect of Dives brethren, that rather Mathe.
would believe one that should come from Hell, than the word of God that came
from Heaven. Yet I am of this opinion, that your Countrymen will rather embrace
toys, gawdes, and new vices far brought, than good things and ancient
virtues used nigh home: So that if you heard of our marvelous manners, and
excellent orders: yet you were as good (when you come home) declare them not,
as they to hear them, and follow them not.


SIVQILA. Yea sir, but many of them thinking that none in the world have better
manners, orders, customs, wits, and knowledge than they, and then hearing of
such far passing theirs, and that in a far unknown Country, I think
verily, shame would drive them to follow and practice some of them at the
least.


OMEN. Do you think that your Countrymen will do more for fear of Shame,
than for fear of Sin? truly you Note this well.
do commend your Countrymen very well. But suppose one forbear to play the
harlot for fear of shame, and an other This is worthy y^ noting.
refraines the same for fear of Sin, or for displeasing of God: Do you
think that shame can do the one as much harm in this world, as Sin can do
the other in the world to come? I think not, for Shame can make but one to be
mocked, disdayned, gazed, and pointed at, and perhaps to be whipte a little,
emprisoned, set on the Pillorie, or ride in a Carte, the memory whereof
lasts but a while, who after coming to wealth, shall have as many
courtesies, as they that never did the like: whereas Sin is so horrible in the
sight of God, that eternal damnation in Hell fire for ever is the reward
thereof.


SIVQILA. Yea, without repentance in Christ, amendment of life, and the mercy
of God.


OMEN. Yea, but that is more of Gods goodness, than of your deserving.


SIVQILA. I must needs grant that, blessed be his holy name therefore. Well,
seeing there is no remedy, I mean to go homeward again: for no place that I
have traveled in, does excel it for true preaching, plenty and peace.


OMEN. And I tell you, they are three such dishes, as they that will not be
thankful for them, are worthy to fare worse. I think few people have more and
do deserve less.


SIVQILA. In deed as you say, unless proud apparel, haughty hearts,
dainty dinners, surffetting suppers, detestable drunkenness, solemn
swearing, and other vicious living deserves it.


OMEN. Nay, that is the next way to lose these great blessings of God:
which they are not able to get again, with all the cunning they have.


SIVQILA. They are worthy blessings indeed, if they could see it.


OMEN. If one of them were taken away, they would see Consider this
it: if two of the^ were taken away, they would feel it: but if al three were
taken away, they would lament it: I can tell the^ y^.


SIVQILA. The Lord forbid it: I hope in God never to see that day.


OMEN. As good, virtuous, and honest Countries as yours, have at one time
wanted some one of them: they may think themselves blessed, that have three
such treasures al at once.


SIVQILA. Then what will you say to them, that lack them all at once?


OMEN. They were most unhappy of al other I think: but your Countrymen were
never in that case.


SIVQILA. Yes truly, and that of late days.


OMEN. I think then they can never forget the goodness Mark this well.
of God: that has sent them wealth for want, plenty for penury, light for
darkness, quietness for trouble, peace for wars, and solace for sorrows.


SIVQILA. No more they should, if they would pray as well unto God, as they
prate unto men: if they were but half so good children, as God is a Father: or
if they did not In poverty we remember that we forget in wealth.
wilfully wincke at that they should willingly see. But truly we are made of
such a marvelous moulde, that riches will not make us remember our poverty
past: yet poverty will make us remember the wealth we have had.


OMEN. Such is the nature of witless (not of witty) me^: your going home will
be dangerous, and your getting home as doubtful.


SIVQILA. That God that guided me hither, will, I trust, lead and protect me
thither: but Sir before I go, I beseech you think not much, to let me
understand your name, and the name of your Country.


OMEN. I will not greatly stick with you for that. I am called OMEN, and my
Country is called Mauqsun, therefore A hard place to dwell in.
the place is not meet for you to be in, unless you can live foodelesse, (I
had almost said faultlesse.)


SIVQILA. Well sir, I will now take my leave of you, fare ye well.


OMEN. Stay a little I pray you, have you a desire indeed, to know the state
of our Country?


SIVQILA. A marvelous desire, if I knew how.


OMEN. I like you well, and now for the good will I bear you, I will make a
relation to you thereof, especially as much as I can remember, or as you will
ask.


SIVQILA. I thank you most heartily therefore, and if you stood in need of me
as you do not, and I as able to pleasure you as I am not, you should find as
much willingness in me, as I perceive readiness in you.


OMEN. Your courteous speech does much please me, therefore ask what you will,
and I will answer according to your demand.


SIVQILA. I need not ask you the cause of the good estate of your Country,
for by your former talk, it seems you have a worthy governor, obedient
Subjects, and also good laws well and thoroughly executed.


OMEN. You say true in the three first blessings you spoke of, you may
perhaps compare with us, but in these last three we may compare with you.


SIVQILA. You would not gain so much that way as you think, if our subjects
were to our sovereign: for truly we have more orders than be well observed, we
have very good laws, though evil kept, and not thoroughly executed: therefore
our laws (as Anacharsis says) are like to a Spyders Laws compared to a
Spyders web.
web, which the Humble Be does break and rush through at pleasure, but the
little weak and small flies are catchte therein.


OMEN. I know what you mean thereby: surely laws True sayings.
were as good unmade as unkept. To what purpose serves a Mill, if it be
unoccupied and grind no corn? to what end is a rod, if the child be not
beaten therewyth when it does offend?


SIVQILA. To no purpose at al: and also if laws be evil, then why are they
made? if they be good, why are they not kept. But sir I pray you, do your
Bishops, Preachers, and Ministers live godly.


OMEN. Yea such Bishops, Preachers, and Ministers, as we have, you have not
commonly heard of the like.


SIVQILA. Then I trust they live according to their preaching, teaching, and
vocation.


OMEN. You need not doubt that, for they are altogether Mark this well.
of this opinion, that there is no greater reproach to Bishops, Prechers, and
Ministers, than to praise that way, that they refuse to walk in themselves.
Therefore our Bishops live so godly, our Preachers besides so uprightly, and
our Ministers so modestly, that they do ten times more good with their
virtuous living, than with their godly preaching and teaching.


SIVQILA. I fear it is Too good to be true, which if it be, I would to God it
were so with us: for to tell you truth, I fear there are many with us that do
a great deal more harm, with their naughty living, than they do good with
The more pity.
their preaching and teaching.


OMEN. I remember you said even now, that you feared my words were Too good to
be true: but I believe verily that these your words are Too evil to be false:
For surely I think that some of that worthy function, lives as reprochfully,
as they that are not of such a calling.


SIVQILA. I would it were false: notwithstanding there are diverse of them
through Gods goodness live so godly and virtuously, that the cruellest
enemies they have, are not able to reprove them.


OMEN. It is an evil corn field, that bears nothing but Thistles: and it is
an evil garden that brings forth nothing but weeds. But truly as you say, the
evil living of the Preachers, does much harm.


SIVQILA. I affirm your saying, for the people are more apt to follow evil
deeds than good words.


OMEN. Yea, and more apt to follow evil words than apt to evil every way.
good deeds.


SIVQILA. If they be so given to follow both evil words and evil deeds,
(howsoever they are tied or lyncked) then what say you to that Preacher or
Minister, that says evil and does evil most commonly, unless it be in the
Pulpit or Church?


OMEN. In my indgemente, the one is more meet to a good judge meant.
preach on the Pillorie, than in the Pulpit: and the other is more meet to be
whipped out of the Church, than to minister in the Church.


SIVQILA. I marvel how such dare presume to enter into that place?


OMEN. And I marvel why such are chosen, and put into a good aunsweare.
that place?


SIVQILA. Alas, they counterfaite themselves, until Rightly said.
they get in.


OMEN. And when they vncounterfeite themselves again, why are they not thrust
out?


SIVQILA. I have known diverse such in my Country, displast by godly Bishops.


OMEN. And have not some of them bin plast again in a great living, in another
place, soon after?


SIVQILA. Yes that they were, but how, and by what means I know not.


OMEN. Then I believe I know. For bribes, rewards, Too true.
friends, and letters, helps many a one into that holy and sacred function:
that are meeter to be Swineheardes, than spiritual Sheepeheards.


SIVQILA. The more pity, I would it were not so. I marvel that you have none
such with you.


OMEN. If we did as you, we should have as you have. We have neither Bishop,
Pastor nor Minister, but is long and thoroughly tried before, to be of such
lerning and godliness, and of such qualities and conversation, as is meet for
a Bishop, pastor, or Minister, according to the description of Saint Paul to
Timothy.


SIVQILA. Then I think none is admitted into that function with you, that
intrude themselves into it by gifts or Simonie.


OMEN. No I assure you, for if one should seem to offer himself, or procure
by any ways or means to come into a good order
that worthy charge: he should not only ever after be esteemed to be ambitious
and covetous, (thinking he would have it rather for pre-eminence than for
preaching) but also shall lose half the living he has, and be ever after evil
thought of, until he did increase in virtuous living, that his repentance
therefore might manifestly appear. For we are out of doubt, that he that is an
earnest crauer and suter for a spiritual living cares more for the sleese than
the flock.


SIVQILA. This was and is a common practice among the Romanistes.


OMEN. I pray God it be not used among the Protestants.


SIVQILA. I fear it is used among some of them.


OMEN. Take heed your some be not a great sort, therefore it is too manifest,
that such seek the living, not the office.


SIVQILA. I think if there were now as small living Mark.
joined to the said offices, as was in the Apostles time, there would be as few
crauers of them, as now there be many: And then we should be driven to choose
fit men for the ministry, as they of the ministry choose now fit livings
for themselves.


OMEN. Whatsoever they do with you, they cannot choose the^ so with us: Christ
chose the Apostles, they choosed not him, nor sued to him for office. Steven
and the rest were chosen to be Deaco^s, by ye elders, for their virtuous living
and good conversation: but they did not sue for it, nor made friends therefore.
But Simon Magus, one of another religion (that loved gain more than
godliness) would have come by the holy Ghost at the Apostles hands for money,
as many get spiritual livings now-adayes, whereupon it may rightly be called
Simony. Therefore, if the Apostles and Deacons, came more truly to their offices
(being chosen and called to it orderly, than Simon Magus) which procured or
called himself, even so they that are orderly called and chosen nowadayes, for
their ability and godly conversation, to this worthy ministry, may be
thought to be the true bishops and Pastors: and they that come in by money, or
by any other unlawful means, may rightly be called Simon Magus Disciples: for
as Simon Magus thought to have sold because he meant to buy, so the buying
Pastors and Ministers now, because they have bought, they mean not to give.


SIVQILA. Some have Spiritual livings given them freely, yet use the^ as evil
as the rest, and are rather fleesers, than feeders of their flock.


OMEN. Then the fault was in the giver, before he had just trial of them: but
the Bishop in more fault, for admitting them, before he had true knowledge
of their lerning, manners, and conversation. But if the patron that does
present, the Bishop that does admit, and the Parson that is presented and
admitted, did deeply consider, what a dear They would not do so if they
consider this well.
price Christ has paid for our Souls, what endless torments every lost
Soul shall suffer, the continual entertainment that such Bishops and
Patrons shall have in Hell at the Devils hands, for presenting, admitting, and
suffering such blind bussardes, or careless pastors, and the continual
cheer, besides the howling, gnawing and gnashing of teeth prepared in Hell for
every such Parson, Pastor, or Minister, the Patron then I think would not
present so quickly, the Bishop would not admit so unadvisedly, nor the Parson
or Uicar would not so rashly enter into such a dangerous office, for all the
earth, nor the whole treasure thereof.


SIVQILA. And have they this consideration with you?


OMEN. Yea I warrant you, for as I told you before, none are chosen into the
ministry, but they are well tried and approved, to be godly, well learned, of
a pure and honest conversation and virtuous living: and every such Minister
does consider, that the blood of every soul within his a good consideration
of y^ Ministers of Mauqsun.
charge, that shall perish through his defaulte, that is, for lack of good
teaching, or through want of reproving, or by his evil example of living,
shall be required at his hands. And every Parson or Uicar with us do likewise
consider, a good consideration of y^ Parsons of Mauqsun.
that he shall answer for every Soul so perished, through the negligence of
the minister by him so permitted in his cure. And all the Bishops with us are
so holy, godly, and virtuous, that they weigh and consider, that they shall
answer A good consideration of y^ Bishops of Mauqsun.
for every soul that is perished within their Bishoprike, through the
defaulte of any Parson, Uicar, or Pastor there by them admitted.


SIVQILA. O most happy country, that has such blessed Bishops, O most
blessed people, that have such precious Pastors: if all Bishops, Pastors, and
Ministers had Note this.
such a consideration as they have, there would not be such gaping, snatching,
procuring, waiting, suing, flattering, crowching, writing, riding, poasting,
giving, rewarding, and promising, for spiritual livings, as now is. Nay they
would rather fly from them, than thus to follow them. O mere madness to
desire our destruction, to pay for our He is a noddy indeed that will pay
such a fine for a Farm.
pain, and to seek our own sorrow. If one might have a Farm, for the space
of one and twenty years, without paying of any rent all that while, upon
condition that he should be hanged at the end of the said years: might not
he be counted a very noddy, that would pay such a fine for a This is deep ly
to be considered of many that sue for Spiritual livings.
Farm? truly then he might rightly be thought to be stark staring mad, and
clean out of his wits, that will sue paynefully, and labor earnestly to
have a benefice, to live ydlely and loytringly all his life, to pay the fine of
damnation for ever therefore after his death, in Hell fire, where there is
pain without pleasure, sorrow without succor, mourning without measure, and
misery without mercy.


OMEN. Call you these fines, they are proper fines indeed, they may more
properly be called fines, than the fines now daily given for Farms: for they
make a final end of al. A man were better to pay a good round fine at his
coming in, than Note.
to pay such a fine at his going out: this is the common fine that all
Idolaters, usurers, whoremo^gers, harlots, bauds, swearers, dru^kards, thieves,
and such like wicked persons, shall pay to the Devil after their death, for
occupying of their trade: he is not so hasty in taking his fines, as many
Landlords are now adays. What can a man desire more, tha^ to occupy a thing
freely during his life? the ^surers dare not for their ears lend their money to
interest upon so long a day: for, if they should, y^ borrowers would not be so
bare, nor the lenders so rich. Well, though the Devil suffer so long, yet he
will pintch them home in their payments at length.


SIVQILA. A doleful thing to consider these fines, a lamentable This is to be
well marked.
thing to remember these fines. but a most horrible thing to pay these fines.
There is an end of earthlye payments, fines, and vsuries, but the fines and
vsuries to the Devil, shall ever be a paying, and never paid.


OMEN. A common saying, A day will come shall pay for all: but when this day
comes, it will pay home for all: therefore Mark this well.
seeing the great goodness of God can not move us, the wonderful friendship of
Christ cannot procure us, nor the strange examples of our warning, can allure
us: yet me thinks everlasting damnation with the feendes in hell fire should
fear us.


OMEN. I doubt there are some, which either think there is no Hell at all,
or else that God is so merciful, that he will suffer none (be they never so
Wicked) to come there.


SIVQILA. If any such be, they have either exercysed themselves very little
in the Scriptures, or else they give They that believe Christ must believe
there is a Hell.
very small credit to it. If they will credit Christ, (who is well worthy
to be believed) then they cannot be doubtful, but that there is a Hell: for he
says, Whosoever says thou fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire: and he
says again: It is better for thee, that one of thy members perish, than all
thy body should be cast into Hell: What need I recite the words of the
Prophets or Apostles, that in diverse places name Hell? If any be so
incredulous, that they will not believe Christ, they will hardelye believe
either Prophet, Apostle, or any other. But I will promise them one thing,
whosoever will not believe Christ now, they shall believe him against their
wylles at the last day, at which time he will say, Go ye wicked into
everlasting fire, prepared for you from the beginning. And then with all the
might and power they have, let them prove him a Mark.
liar, or wythstande him if they can. No, no, he will be too hard for them
there: for, though the Jews ouermatcht him here with his will: he will ouermatch
them and al his enemies there against their wills. As there is a God that will
protect and defend the godly: so there is a Devil (yea a master Devil) besides
many thousands of other Devils that will torment and punish the wicked. And
as there is a heaven where the godly and faithful believers shall have
everlasting a pleasant discourse where the devil should be if there were no Hell.
joy and pleasure: so there is a Hell, where the wicked and infidels shall have
endless sorrow and pains: or else, if there were no Hell, where should the
dyuel, with all his under devils keep his residence? not in Heaven I am sure,
for God did thruste him out from thence for his pride, but not to come thither
again. And though heaven be great and large, yet it cannot hold them both: and
to say truth, the Devil is such an enemy to God, that he will not have such an
evil neighbor so nigh him.


OMEN. And on the earth I am sure, he shall not rowste, neither in the water,
air, nor in the fiery region next under the globe of the Moon, neither in any
of the Firmaments above, that are under Heaven, for all these shall be consumed.


SIVQILA. And if there were a Purgatory (as I am sure If there were a Purgatory
yet the Devil could not remain there.
there is none) though some dolts do dream of such a place, yet the Devil
could not be there, for it should likewise be consumed with the earth, for
that it is placed in the center of the earth, as it is imagined. But if their
imagined Purgatory should be saved from destruction, I think the Pope (the
chief protector of Purgatory) would not suffer the great Devil, with such
a rabble of other Devils, to take The Pope would keep the devil from
possession of Purgatory.
possession there: which has bin one of the richest Manors that ever he had.
Nor it could not well stand with his holiness, (though the Devil were his
dear friend) to displace the seely souls that have paid rent for it before
hand: especially such of them as he has pardoned many years Mark these
whole discourse of pur gatorie, and the poor souls that are in it.
after the day of Judgment: for though the date of some of their pardons are
out already, yet many of them will not be expired of a great while after. Now
sir, if any of them are such as are appointed to go to Heaven, they will tarry
there no longer (if they be wise.) And they that are appointed to be damned,
they will not go from thence with a good will. And further, the Pope should
do them much wrong, if they should be put out of their place of privilege
before their lease is expired. And many have this opinion of the Popes good
grace, that he will do never a living man wrong: Then it is to be thought (if
he be of that power as he is taken to be) he will defend the poor Souls in
Purgatory in their right, whereby it behooves him to withstand God, that he do
not consume it at the last day, when all the rest shall be destroyed with fire.
And thus the Pope must needs keep the poor Souls in peaceable and quiet
possession, in despite of the Devil, and all that take his part.


OMEN. But what if the Devil through his great might a question to be asked.
and power, should (by force) get possession of Purgatory? how then?


SIVQILA. The best thing that the Pope can do, is to How the Devil might be
put out of Purgatory.
curse him out again, with Bell, Book, and Candle.


OMEN. Yea, but that will not serve, nor yet fear the Devil, as it has done
many a fond fool on the earth.


SIVQILA. The^ the poor souls are like to go to wrack.


OMEN. Yea, and al y^ money is lost that they paid to y^ Pope.


SIVQILA. Yea truly, if that be lost that does them no good, nay rather
continual harm, for the Pope and his darlings for the greediness of money,
brings y^ simple people into such a fools Paradise, that he will save them:
which is the occasion of their damnation, by believing and trusting to him.


OMEN. Woe be to the^ that do sell and are sold to the devil for money, they
will wish that they had not been borne.


SIVQILA. And therefore if the Devil should get the possession of
Purgatory, then the miserable souls were as good to be in Hell with ye Devil,
as the Devil to be in Purgatory with them. Now, considering the Devil can
not dwell in Heaven, neither in the Earth, Water, nor in the fiery Region, nor
in Purgatory, (if there were any such) then surely he must needs of force
dwell in Hell, for there is no other place for him to be in, unless he be no
where.


OMEN. Nay, he shall not dwell there I can tell him that.


SIVQILA. Therefore if there be any such that say, there is no Hell: Corax,
Da^hon and Abyron (if they were here) would tell the^ there is a Hell. If Nadab
and Abihu were here, they These can witness that there is a hell.
would say that they lie. If Judas one of Christ's Apostles, did hear them say
so, he would reprove them to their face. If Dives that rich glutton were with
them, he would affirm that there is Hell, not by hearsay, but by proof.
Therefore Good counsel.
such were best to believe there is a Hell, least hereafter they feel there is
a Hell. But suppose there were no Hell, and one Mark this saying.
believed there were one, could he have any harm thereby? no truly. Mary if
there be one, and he think there is none: thereby he might reap much harm,
for thinking one being none, would make him shun evil, but in thinking none
being one, would hinder him to do well. Thus no harm Gods children shun
sin not for fear of Hell.
(but much good) by believing there were a Hell, and be none: but much harm and
no good, by thinking there were no Hell, and yet one. But the children of God
will not shun sin for fear of Hell, l^^t for fear of displeasing their
God and most loving heavenly father* for the loving son will shun evil,
rather to avoid his fathers displeasure, tha^ punishment. Meet to be marked.
For the child that shuns evil for fear of beating, the same is obedient in
hope to have something. But our heavenly Father has so created us, our
Savior Christ has so lovingly ra^nsomed us, and the holy Ghost does so guide
and Consider this saying.
instruct us (besides the wonderful benefits y^ he daily does give us) that
our very duty is to love him, obey him, and keep his commandments with all
our power and endeavor: though there were neither Heaven to reward us, nor
Hell for to punish us. Well, we have bin so busy with Heaven and Hell, that we
have almost forgotten the earth. I pray you sir, is there any alteration in the
peoples manners and living of your Country, since the preaching of the Gospel?


OMEN. Alteration (quoth you) tutte it is wonderful, for at the first
preaching thereof, the men came to the Sermons like Maskers, and the women like
Players. Where at the Note here.
Preacher was so amazed, that he was ready to go out of the Pulpit, for he
thought verily (seeing the^ in that order) that there would have bin either a
play, a mummerie, or a Maygame: But when he understood certainly, that they
came to hear the Sermon, he framed his speech in such order unto them,
sometimes with mild and gentle exhortations with the sweet promises of God for
doing well, bringing Christ for an example for the^ to follow, saying: Though he
was the son of A good preacher.
God, and equal to God the father in respect of his godhead, yet he became
pore, humble, meek, gentle, merciful, and charitable, and went daily in simple
and pore attire, and finally dyed to make us live. And therefore whosoever
loves Christ, who would have him their Savior, who thinks they shall stand in
need of Christ, and who would have him their friend at the last day, let them
follow him in humility, love, mercy, modesty, and patience, and going
soberly and decently attired: And sometimes he thundreth forth Gods threatenings
and vengeance of eternal damnation in hell fire, to such as did continue in
pride, covetousness, envy, hatred, unmercifulness, uncleanness, filthi
nesse, drunkenness, idleness, and in other sins and vices, that they were
wonderfully altered immediately after the sermon. A marvelous alteration at the
first hearing of Gods word.
For some went weeping away, lamenting and repenting their sins: some did hold
up their hands, and looked up to Heaven, desiring God to se^d them his spirit
to guide them in a new kind of life. And some seeing their fond and gaudy
going, did hold down their heads, (being maruelously ashamed thereof) the
sequel whereof showed, that it was not fained: for, ye next time they came to
the Church or Sermon, there was such a marvelous change, that the preacher
thanked God and wept for joy: for the richer sort did cast off their too
sumptuous, costly, gaudy, and gazing attire, and came in such modest and decent
apparel, as was rather under than above their degree: Too good to be followed.
and they ripped their costly and gaudy garments, and sold the same to such as
would buy it for other necessary uses, ye money whereof they distributed among
the pore. And the inferior sort that were not able to buy new garments, altered
their old into a decent fashion according to their degree: so that there was
never such a change in such a short time, I believe.


SIVQILA. Such a change God send us, I fear it will An other change but not
so good.
never come, it has bin so long a coming. I have seen great changes with us
between one Sermon and an other in one place: for where the Preacher persuaded
them gently, and cried out against them vehemently for their proud, sumptuous,
and gaudie attire: yea, and in such sort, that it would have made the very
Infidels to have relented: truly at the next Sermon after, they were more
costly, prowdly, and more gawdely attyred, with more newer and fonder fashio^s
than before: And was not this a change as well as yours?


OMEN. But not so good as ours.


SIVQILA. Surely, yours was a wonderful good change. I fear it is Too good to
be true. Note.



OMEN. And truly yours is a marvelous evil change and I think it is Too
evil to be false.


SIVQILA. The more evil it is, the more need to be false, and the more good,
the more need to be true. Well, though commonly there is such excess of
apparel, such gaudy going, and such pecockly and new fashions every day: (for all the preaching and teaching) yet your alteration takes place in some of our
people.


OMEN. It is an evil soil that breeds nothing but sin: It Mark.
is an evil winter that has never a fair day: and that is a mad kind of people
that are al given to pride. Surely, such brave attire, and such shifting
fashions, must needs ask great cost, and great cost will quickly consume. So
that I believe by these your sayings, many thereby are brought into such a
consumption, that they are houselesse and landlesse, their purses penilesse,
and they at length meatlesse, and then they need not fear to faint in their
furs, nor to be sick of surffetings: and one good turn they shall have
besides, they shall not be troubled with taxes and subsedies, nor with paying of
house re^t: and some of them besides may boldly brag, that they have spent as
much in one year, as their fathers got in twenty. A poor brag.



SIVQILA. They that can make these brags, may be bold to beg their bread:
surely, if there were no preaching at all, me thinks reason should rule them,
their own wits should will them, and the want of wasters might warn them, from
being so prodigal, and spending so vainly.


OMEN. What will you say to them that are so bewitched? for unless they were so,
they would never do so. A marvelous A marvelous thing indeed.
thing that they will pay so dear for Gods displeasure, to spend so much to
seek their own sorrow, and to go a while gaye, to beg ever after. But
truly if they knew the price of Gods displeasure, they would rather go naked
than wear such attire, and though they think that they shall be disdayned Note
this.
and mocked if they do not go according to the fashion, yet many do mock them
because they go so out of fashion.


SIVQILA. What more fondness than to bestow money to be mocked? certainly if
the ancient fathers that lived virtuously, that went decently, and fared
temperatly, were alive at this present, they would marvel at the going of many.
Truly our father Adam, which was Lord of y^ whole earth, had but a leather
Pelte to cover his nakedness, and to keep him from the cold, and God thought
it good enough for him, else he would have given him a better to wear: and he
was well pleased withal. But now many that have scante a village of their own,
yea, and a great deal less than that, do so vaunte themselves in their
veluets, and so sway in their s^^kes, that one would take them (unless they
knew them) to be rather superiors than subjects. And whereas one of y^ Mark
here.
causes why Adam did wear his garments, was to hide or cover his indecent
parts: they have turned the use of their garments quyte an other way, and
wears them for plain pride. So that they are proud of that that should make
the^ Mark.
ashamed. Who would be proud of the sheet he wears in doing his penance?


OMEN. None but fools I think, unless he be proud for the offense he
committed. For his offense is the cause why he does wear the sheet. So that
the sheet should rather put It were good reason so.
him in mind of his offense which made him wear the sheet, than to be proud
of the sheet.


SIVQILA. Even so the wearing of our garments should rather make us remember
our imperfections, our indecent parts, and our vileness, the rather to allure
us from pride, than thereby to be proud.


OMEN. You have spoken the truth with much reason. It It is strange indeed.
is strange, that that should puff up our hearts, that should pluck down our
hearts.


SIVQILA. I pray you do your people keep one fashion and order in their
apparel?


OMEN. What else, for if any with us hap to change the fashion of his
apparel, and go otherwise than the ancient custom of our Country does
allow: he shall not only be pointed at, and mocked therefore, but also noted
of such inconstancy, that he shall never after be called into any office or
place of credit. And furthermore, he shall loose half his goods which shall be
distributed for the relief of the poor, for that he seemed to disdain the
fashion of his forefathers. It seems by your former talk, that either you
have no such law, or it is not so kept.


SIVQILA. No truly, we have no such order, for so many So many fa^^ies, so
many fashions.
fancies, so many fashions with us. Or ever one garment is worn, an other new
fashion is come in.


OMEN. That must needs be a great trouble to Tailors.


SIVQILA. It cannot choose, but that they make them pay for their pleasure.
Surely I muse, seeing there is so much crying out against it by the Preachers,
that they are so new fangled and so fantastical.


OMEN. It seems they mean not to follow Christ's example therein, who did
wear as simple and as plain a fashioned garment, especialy of one of his
degree, as ever was worn. And yet he was as able to have had as many new
fashions, and costly suits of apparel (if he had listed) as the best of them
all.


SIVQILA. Well, seeing the King of al Kings was content to go so baselye, and
in one fashioned garment: then why should we that are earth, ashes and dust,
prieke up our selves so Pecockly, we are our garments so gaudely, and that so
costlye and changinglye: I fear, it is so Lucifer-like; that without we
change our copy, (and that with Mark this* well.
speed) we shall rather fall with Lucifer into Hell, than mount into Heaven
with Christ. All Gods creatures from the beginning do keep their order and
fashion, wherein God created them (but only man, for whom GOD made them all)
who though he is the most reasonable creature on Earth of all other: who
though he has the most occasion to keep good order of all other, and for
whom though GOD has done more, than for all other: yet he is the most out
of order of all other. Consider the sensitive creatures inferior to manne,
which are beasts, birds, fishes, worms, flies, and all other such like, and
you shall not see one of them, but are of the self same fashion, order, and
qualities, as they were above five thousand years since, when God first
created them. Yea and all well content therewith, and look for no new
fashion. Mark the Herbs and trees keep their old fashion.
vegetable creatures, whether they keep not their old fashion still or no? has
not y^ Primrose, the Cows^op, the Deasie, the Marigolde, the Rosemarie, the
Lilly, the Apple tree, the Walnut tree, and all other Herbs, Weeds, trees,
and plants, the like flowers, leaves, stalks, roots, fruit, color, smell,
taste, virtue, and qualities, that they had the last year? and have always
had since their first creation? consider the Mineral creatures, as stones,
sulpher, alum, and gold silver, lead, tin, and the other metals, whether
they do not reteyne still their old form and fashion that they have ever had
or no? so that every one may know them by their old fashion that sees the^:
and yet man y^ God has made lord and ruler of al these things, y^ keep their
old order and fashion (that should keep himself and all things in order) does
so disorder and vnfashion himself, that you will not take him that was last
year, to be himself this year: Neither in apparel, countenance,
behavior, gesture, nor perhaps in qualities nor manners, and no marvel though
we do not know them to be themselves, for I fear they themselves do not know
themselves.


OMEN. Truly I never heard of more preaching and less following than is there
by your sayings, but if they Note this.
would do as we do, they would bring forth better fruits than they do.


SIVQILA. How is that I pray you?


OMEN. We do not come rashly to hear ye word of God. Mark this.
For we make a full account that when the Preacher does speak: that then God
himself does talk unto us? And who will not go willingly and reverently to
hear God speak, to avoid our damnation?


SIVQILA. Of truth none unless they be mad, for what if a worldly Prince
should determine to go into a City or Country, all the inhabitauntes whereof
were rebels and traitors, and would with his own mouth not only tell the^ that
he did freely pardon them of their rebellion and treason, but also would give
to every one of them his house, or farm to dwell in during their lives without
paying of any rent, taxes, subsidies, or any other charges? would they not
with great gladness, decentnesse, reioicing and willingness come Worthy the
noting.
thither, and most reverently hear that good King speak?


OMEN. Or else they were worthy to have a rebels reward, that is a rope.


SIVQILA. The^ they are worthy to be hanged eternally in hell, that will not most
gladly, willingly, joyfully, dece^tly, soberly, and most reverently come to
hear the eternal God the King of heaven himself speak, who does pronounce
not only unto us his free and general pardon in forgiving and saving us by the
death of his own only Son Jesus Christ from everlasting damnation in
Hell fire, (which we justly have deserved by our detestable deeds) but also
promises us to dwell with him for ever in Heaven in his own kingdom, in such
continual joy, pleasure, peace, happiness, quietness and rest, as none with
pen can describe, with tongue can tell, nor with heart can think (so that we
will follow and obey his word) which to hear, mark, remember, and observe,
it stands us upon.


OMEN. You have spoken most truly and reasonably. For Mark this well.
if we do willingly and reverently hear an earthly Prince speak for our
short and vain profit: how much more ought we with great joy, desire, and most
humble reverence, hear God speak unto us for our endless profit, joy,
pleasure and felicity? Therefore (as I said before) we make so full account
to hear God speak (for if we hear his word, we hear him: for God is the
word) that before we hear the Sermon, we fall most humbly and reverently down
upon our knees, and do pray most heartily to God, that he of his merciful
goodness will so soften our hearts, that his holy word may take deep root
therein, that he will increase our memory that we may carrye away the good
lessons that we shall hear therein, and that his holy spirit may aid us, guide
us, move us, and procure us to bring forth the fruits of the Gospel, which
shall be taught unto us therein.


SIVQILA. Oh it is that godly and fervent prayer that works this worthy effect.


OMEN. Yea, and at the end of every Sermon we pray in such order likewise, and
in our private houses, we cease not to frequent the same.


SIVQILA. Yea, that is the way for such a seed to grow. This is to be
considered.
For what is it to sow seed upon the grass or green swarde vnploughed or
vndygged? even so what is it to sow such a holy seed in hard and unprepared
hearts? it is for lack of this godly prayer that preaching so little
preuailes.


OMEN. It is possible that many of your Sermon* hearers, do mistake the
Preacher when he wills them to pray.


SIVQILA. Wherein do you think?


OMEN. Perhaps they take Play in stead of Pray: it is but the mistaking of
one letter.


SIVQILA. I know not whether they take it so, but I think they make it so. For
many goes from the Sermon That is very true.
to dinner, and from dinner to play.


OMEN. And why not from y^ Sermon to supper, and from supper to play? It would
grieve them to be half so long a praying, as they are in playing.


SIVQILA. A strange thing to be wondered at, and against Mark well.
al reason, that many do play without weariness, seven or eight hours
together, perhaps a whole night, to displease God and loose: but to pray a
quarter of an hour, would tyer them to please God and win. For want of this
prayer, the proud goes as proud or prouder from the Sermon as before, as is
seen by their stoutnesse, gesture, and Too true.
haughtiness: and the rich covetous, as greedy or greedier than before. For
though they are worth a thousand pound, their ears are so deaffe, their
hearts so hard, and their purse so shut, that one pore penny cannot get out
to succor the poor.


OMEN. Well, I fear God will keep his mercy from the rich that keeps their
money from the poor: and then they Mark.
are in a good case.


SIVQILA. Dives would give all the world if he had it, to be out of Hell, and
rather than they will part with a penny, they will go to Hell. Judas did more for
money, than money will or can do for him: for money has brought him to Hell, but
money cannot bring him out of Hell. Therefore, woe be to that money that makes
them be so mad, to lose the presence of God, for the company of the Devil.


OMEN. Truly you would wonder to see how the people with us of themselves,
immediately after y^ preaching is ended, do come stocking and thronging one
another to ye preacher, to who^ (being a man of such godliness, conscience and
credit) they most willingly, freely, and liberally do deliver money according
to their ability for him to distribute to y^ pore, as he shall think their
necessity shall require: and you will not believe how they prease to be one
before another: and it is no small sum that is thus given at one Sermon.


SIVQILA. Do they thus at every Sermon, and throughout all your Country.


OMEN. Yea truly?


SIVQILA. I never heard of the like. I have seen many godly collections at the
end of Sermons: but they have bin persuaded and moved thereto by the preacher
for some one private person or purpose. But so commonly, universally,
willingly, liberally and so earnestly, I never saw any. In deed there is a
great sort with us, that go hastily, and willingly, and throng one another,
striving who shall pay first.


OMEN. Wherefore? to relieve the poor?


SIVQILA. Nay, skant to so good an use.


OMEN. Whereto then?


SIVQILA. Forsooth to see Bearbaitings, Bulbaytings, Plays, Uanters, and
Tumblers, the most part of which people, I think, are such as seldom hears
sermons. Therefore the less marvel, though they spend the time vaynely, and
consume their money fondely. But the rich Sermon The hard hearted and rich
Sermon hearers.
hearers, before mentioned, which love goods more than goodness, and money
more than mercy, I wonder at them, for thought their greediness will not suffer
them to give one grote, nay nor any thing at al to their naked and needy
neighbor, neither the plaint of the poor can make them take pity, to give
one penny: yet the same perhaps within a while after will not stick to spend
half a crown or ten groates at the least, at the Tavern, on their feyned
friend (perhaps privy ^oe:) yea and will not stick at a dinner or supper, to
spend in great cheer and superfluous fare, for clawbacks, flatterers, and
Sicopha^ts, thirty or forty shillings (I will not say four or five pounds)
without any remorse, grudge of conscience, or any care or remembrance of the
poor, who they saw that day like to perish, the fourth part of which
superstuous dinner or supper would have succored a score of them well a
seuennight.


OMEN. They are Dives diligent Disciples, therefore the They were better suppe
with God than dine with Dives.
Devil will bid them with Dives to dinner.


SIVQILA. Adolefull dinner will that be, where in steed of fine fare, they
shall be fed with furious flames of everlasting fire. Is it not a wonder to see
how covetous and niggardly they are in sparing a penny or a groate, that might
A wonder ^^de^^e.
help them to Heaven: and how prodigal and liberal they are in spending a
pound, to bring them to Hell?


OMEN. Our rich men are so charitable, and so pitiful to the poor, that if
they see any poor, blind, lame, soar or naked in the streets: (as seldom
there is any such) they do not only call them home with them, and give them
food and raiment, but also will get Chirurgians to help, and pay them for
healing of them. And they will not go to dinner or supper, before they
themselves have called their most poorest neighbors to dine or suppe with
them: and when they depart, they will give money to some of them, clothes to
othersome, and food to othersome, as their necessity does require.


SIVQILA. But they sit at their doors, and happy they may do so.


OMEN. Nay they are set at their own table: yea and that above themselves. For
they are assured by Christ's own words, whatsoever they give to the poor,
that give they to Christ. And seeing they feed Christ, they think that Christ
is worthy to sit above them.


SIVQILA. Oh blessed people that are of that belief, for their belief therein
is most true. The poor with us, would think themselves happy, if they
might have a mess of potage, or the scraps that come from the rich men's
tables, two or three hours after they begin their dinner or supper, and to
have the same given them at their door. But The wicked and cruel using of the
poor.
many of the said rich greedy guts, caring for nothing, but for the hilling
and filling of their own back and belly, can not be content to go by their
poor pitiful brethren and give them nothing, but they will most uncharitably,
and unchristianly rebuke them, chide them, rattle the^, yea, and threat them,
that the poor being checked of them that should chearish them, are almost
driven to despair.


OMEN. Well, they shall stand more in need of Christ at Mark this well.
the last day, than the poor stands in need of them at this day. And then if
Christ should rebuke them, chide them, or threate them, it will be wrong with
them: for now, though they will not relieve or help the poor, yet there be
other that can and will: but then, if Christ will not help or relieve As good
he without his help.
them, there is none other that can nor will, except the Devil can help them,
whom they find ready and at hand to do for them as he has done for Dives
and Judas, whose friendeshippe when they once feel, they will be sorry (but
too late) that they refused the favor of Christ for the friendship of the
Devil.


OMEN. Well, the rich with us have a greater respect to the favor of Christ
belike, than y^ rich with you have: for all is too little we think, that we give
to the pore, for Christ's sake: though they think all is too little that they
spend on themselves, for the Devils sake.


SIVQILA. In deed they have a godly respect if they do No money laid out can
bring such a game, as that which is given to the poor for Christ's sake.
so: for, if they give all to the poor for Christ's sake, and leave themselves
nothing, can all the money they have spente on themselves? can all the goods
they have given to their children? can all the fines they have paid for
Farms? can all the presents they have given to great men? can all the money
they lay out for Merchandise? can all the money they lend to Usurie? or can all
the money they spend on feasting their friends, bring the like gain? no I
warrant them. For they shall have no recompense nor gain for that they spend on
themselves, unless for that they spend voluptuously, viriously, excessiuely,
and vainly, which the Devil will reward them for in Hell. And as for that they
give to their children, they may hap have a thank, and peradventure be
suffered to beg if they chance to stand in need. And for their fines, they
have an earthlye Farm for a ^elve years, and perhaps thrust out ere the
years be half ended: and for their presents to great men, they may happily
have something, and give three gifts ere they get one reward: and though they
obtain the thing they require, yet it can be no better than an earthly gift,
that is got painefully, kept carefully, and lost suddenly: And what is gained
by the money laid out for Merchandise? is not the ship and all the merchandise
lost sometimes? is it not sold sometimes to such as never pay therefore? is
not much thereof sometimes consumed by unthrifty servants? nay, is not ye
Mercha^ts throat sometimes cut for the money he took therefore? And though none
of these things chance, the greatest gain that the Merchaunt can have, is to
be rich, build fair houses, fare finely, and go trimly, which, if he use
ungodly, and bestow uncharitably, he shall gain thereby hell fire eternally:
and what will be the gain they shall have for their money lent to usury?
Forsooth they shall not dwell in ye Lords Tabernacle: where then? truly in Hell:
for they that shall not dwell in Heaven, of force their habitation must needs
be in Hell, where they shall pay a greater usury to the devil, tha^ they
received for the loan of their money. And for the feasting of their friends,
they shall have fair words, double thanks, another feast for it, and
counterfayte countenaunces, and if they chance to come to poverty or to decay,
they will recompense the^ with a frowning face, a lofty look, and a
disdainefull speech: and they may be as bold to beg a piece of bread at
their door, as they were bold to sit at their table and fare of the best: but
for that they give to the poor for Christ's sake, they give the same to Christ,
and can that be lost they give unto Christ? no truly, for he will not only
succor them, defend them, and feed them in this world therefore, but also
will give them the Kingdom of heaven to dwell in for ever. And thus for giving
Christ a little worldly trash that he gives us before, he gives us the great
Kingdom of Heaven, far passing all the kingdoms of the world.


OMEN. Spend what they will, lend what they will, and give what they will, al
is but lost in comparison of that that is laid out on this sort to the poor
for Christ's sake.


SIVQILA. Therefore what wicked wretches are they They are wicked wretches
indeed.
that are such niggardes to Christ* that is so lyberal to the^? How would that
man be praised, esteemed, and loved, that should give that poor man a hundredth
pound a year, that Such a one is worthy to be praised and loved.
lends willingly for his love one penny out of a groat which he before gave him?
then how much more should we esteem, honor, love, and obey Christ, and
think al too little that we do or can do for Christ, which does not only
give Mark them that are more worthy of love and praise.
us here all the worldly riches we have, but will give us the kingdom of Heaven,
if we bestow on the pore for his sake part of this vain worldly goods which
he before has given us? What if God should keep the Sun that it should not
heat the earth? the rain that it should not moysten the earth? and should
stay the grass from growing, the corn from increasing, the trees from bearing
fruit, and the fish, Consider this.
birds, and beast? from breeding? What riches should the welthiest and
proudest of us all have? what food should we feed on? where should we have
garments that make us so gay? how long could we live? then (this well
considered) they are far unworthy to have either food or raymente, or any
other things in this world at Gods hand (much less in the world to come,)
that will not give part of that to the pore, for his sake that has given al
before.


OMEN. There is one worthy sentence that Christ spoke that is much
considered, and greatly followed of us.


SIVQILA. What is that I pray you?


OMEN. Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, even so do ye to
them: This sentence is painted on the posts of houses: and there is such a
straighte Law with us, for the doing according to this saying, that if they
follow it not for the love of Christ, they dare not break it for fear of
the penalty that belongs to it.


SIVQILA. How is that?


OMEN. Forsooth as they do, they shall be done unto: for there was with us a
very rich man that came by a poor naked lame soul that lay in the cold, who
though he lamentably and pitifully cried out of the said rich manne, for to
have some relief or succor, he did not only chide and rate at him for asking
some alms of him, but also went away, and gave him nothing at al: whereof,
when the Ruler of the City there heard, he sent for the said churlish rich
man, and asked him what the sentence of Christ was, that was commanded so
straightlye to be kept amongst them: and the said rich man said, Whatsoever
you would that men should do to you, even so do ye to them: then the said
Ruler of the City commanded that he should put off his clothes, and then he
was compelled to sit in such pore, thynne, and beggarly rags, as the poor man did, in the open street, a whole day together, and none could be suffered
to give him A covetous man well served.
all that while, either meat, drink, or clothes, or any other thing to succor
him: and at night he was brought before the said Ruler again: when, he asked
him, whether he had done to the poor man, as he would be done to himself, and
he answered no: and then the Ruler said to him, as you like this your self,
do so to other. And then all the rich man's clothes that he did wear at that
time, was given by the ruler to the said poor man. Which worthy example did
so much good, that what for the love of God, and what for fear of the law, the
pore ever since with us have bin maruellouslye well succored and relieved.


SIVQILA. Truly me thinks it is Too good to be true: but if it were true, he
was as well served as he had deserved. Oh if two or three of our rich, full, and
fat cormorants that are so pitilesse, disdainful, and uncharitable, to poor,
hungrye, naked and needy, were used in such sort, so many would not go so
stoutly, proudly, and carelessly by the poor without giving the^ something, as
they do, if they should be done to as they do to other, they would quickly
cease from doing that they do: they would do more for fear of one days
hunger or cold on the earth than for fear of an everlasting hunger and
burning in Hell. Well, happy are the poor that take their hunger patiently.
But I pray you take the poor (with you) their poverty patiently, or not?


OMEN. The patience of the poverty with us passes, for The patience of the
poverty in Mauqsun.
they are so well instructed in the scriptures, that they know The poor in
spirit are so blessed, that theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, not that worldly
poverty makes them blessed, unless they be withal, humble, meek, gentle,
patie^t, loving, faithful, and godly. And they think themselves in this case,
more richer in their great and extreme poverty, than the richest king on the
earth: For poor Lazarus that is in Abraham's bosom is such a pleasant
pattern, and the rich glutto^ so fearful an example unto them, that the
poorer they are, the more joyful they are: and the richer they wax, the more
sorrowful they are: knowing that riches are snares to pluck them from God, and
Poverty is a mean to help them to Christ. It is as hard to find with us a
murmuring, impacient, or ungodly poor man, as it is easy to find with you a
proud, churlish, and uncharitable rich man.


SIVQILA. Then belike all the impatience, and wickedness, is in your poor
women.


OMEN. As all the Humility and charity is in your rich women. What I said of
our poor men, I meant the same of our poor women.


SIVQILA. Surely I never heard of such a Country as yours, before this day,
for of all other people with us, the poor is the most out of frame,
especially the beggars, for they seldom or never come to the church, neither
hear the The poor most out of frame.
word of God: whereby they are given to such idleness, drunke^nesse,
fighting, brauling, swearing, cursing, and most ungodly living, that it
greeues me to consider their estate.


OMEN. What, have you no laws to bridle them?


SIVQILA. Yes, the idle Roages are burned thoroughe the ears, and if they be
taken after a roaging, they are hanged.


OMEN. Then you are sure that they will roage no more. They that may and can
work, and will not, it is meet they should be punished: but they that would
work, and Mathe this.
cannot have it, they are worthy to be favored. Therefore, as due correction
ought to be for the one, so provision for work ought to be for the other.


SIVQILA. We have very good Statutes ordained for them both: but if the Statute
for the said provision were as well prosecuted, as the Statute for punishing of
Roages in some places is executed, then godly exercise should be more used:
Idleness the root of evil, would soon be banished: the poor and needy the
better chearished: the rich and wealthy a great deal less charged: fewer
Roages and Uagabondes whipped, or punished: the Country and Commons greatly
enriched: and God therewithal very well pleased.


OMEN. I perceive you have many good laws, and evil kept: but we have but
few, and very well kept. I think God does plague your wicked poor, with
churlish and uncharitable rich: for, if your poor were as godly as ours, God
would make the rich as merciful as ours.


SIVQILA. Surely I have seen a godly disposed man with us give twelve pence
equally among four, and delivered A greedy part of a pore man.
it to one, bidding him, that the other three should have their parts in it:
who, after the giver was gone, the vuthankefull wretch kept all to himself,
and would give the rest never a whitte: which covetousness, envy, and
spyghte of the poor, makes many other fare the worse.


OMEN. Yea, at their hands that would feign make an excuse to spare their
pursse: but the godly will not consider the manners, but the need of the pore.
It were a wonder for you to see the marvelous desire that our people have to
help or to relieve the poor: for, if it be once noysed or bruted that one is
in great necessity, or fallen into poverty with us: immediately as soon as
they hear of it, such a company will go thither, some one on horseback, and
some on foot, as though it were to a Fair, and well are they that cannot only
come thither with the foremost, but also that can give the most money to relieve
him withal.


SIVQILA. There are some with us, that make great haste, and run apare when
men are suddenly decayed or empouerished, but not to such purpose as they
run with you.


OMEN. How then I pray you?


SIVQILA. Forsooth, as soon as any are suddenly decayed or empouerished,
they, to whom they owe money* or are endebted, will make haste, or run apace,
to seize the rest of their goods, or to arrest their body, and to cast him in
prison.


OMEN. Oh what vyllainous wretches are these, that is, as though one were
wounded and an other to come after and kill him out right. O merciless misers,
how can they look for mercy at Gods hand when they shall stand in need,
that do show such extremity to their brethren when they do stand in need?
Would they be content to be emprisoned, when they stand in need to be pityed?
or would they be contented to be whipped, when they have bin scourged before?


SIVQILA. I knew one that was empouerished both by the loss of the sea, and
by suretiship, yet notwithstanding, he was cast into prison of his cruel
creditours, who having not sufficient left to satisfy them, offered to give
them all that he had, and to leave himself nothing in the world but the
simple clothes he went in, (which were not worth the value of a noble) and yet
these merciless wretches would not release him out of prison, but kept him
there, saying, they would make Dice of his bones, if they had nothing else. I
believe these will be dear Dice when they dwell with the Devil. I perceive
they had rather be cruel for the feendes favor, than to be merciful to
have the grace of God. But by that time they have line as long in hell, as Dives
has done, they will think they have gotten ^inal gains for the cruelty they
have done. O wicked wretches, how were they bewicht, by keeping him in prison?
He should be poorer, whereby they were never like to have their own, and by
setting him at liberty, he might be the rycher, whereby they might obtain there
own: and furthermore, if he should die in prison, his death did not only
discharge his debt* where* by they could never recover any thing, though he were
worth a thousand pound, but also God would so revenge his cruel death on them
(unless most heartily they repented the same from the bottom of their hearts)
that they should have line in an everlasting prison, in the flames of infernal
fire, and intolerable torments of Hell for ever, which is an other manner of
imprisonmente, than they did or could prepare for him.


OMEN. Well; your cormorants shall never get so much good by there cruelty, as
we shall do by our Charity. As I told you before, all our whole Country is
given to be marvelous merciful, and to be altogether charitable: for they are
of this belief: that Christ, for whose sake they help their poor brother, will
not only bless the rest of their goods the better, and prosper their trade and
doings; whereby they shall be ten times ry^her in this world: but also that he
Mark this well.
will reward them after their death with the Kingdom of Heaven.


SIVQILA O happy people that have this belief, and oh blessed Country that
loves Christ* so well: yet I think if our greedy gatherers did believe, that
Christ would send them ten times as much as they should bestow on the poor,
they would go as thickly, run as quickly, and give as liberally to the
poor, as your countrymen do, for their hearts: but yet by ye way, more for the
greediness of the gain, tha^ for ye love of Christ: and more for the increase
of their goods, than for the kingdom of Heaven. But another thing I have to
ask you: are the wives obedient to their husbands with you?


OMEN. There are no wives on the earth more obedient to their husbands than
ours be. The wives of Mauqsun are most obedient to their husbands.



SIVQILA. Then I believe they have loving and careful husbands.


OMEN. What else? For they will go without themselves, rather than their wives
should lack. And you shall not find in all our Country one, but that is so
careful for his wife and family, that he thinks no travail too much that
he takes for the maintayning of them.


SIVQILA. His wife does her diligence likewise, does she not?


OMEN. Be assured of that, for she is as great a sauer as he is a getter. And
she sees that her servants loyter not, but labor: and the least child she
has, as soon as it is able to do any thing, shall not be suffered to be idle.
And every of Their children well brought up.
them shall be put to that whereto they are most apt: not one of them, but as
soon as they can speak, they are taught to say the Lords prayer, and the
Christian profession.


SIVQILA. And is this generallye used through your whole Country?


OMEN. Yea in deed is it.


SIVQIA. Some with us, whose parents fear God. Children as evil brought up.
are brought up in the same order (thanks be to God.) But truly the most of our
youth, especially the poorer sort are so ^idlingly, fondly, wantonly, and
^^lely brought up, that it is a grief to the godly, anoyance to their
neighbors, a sorrow to their Fathers, a mischief to their mothers, and a
doleful destruction to themselves at the last.


OMEN. Have you not a law for the punishing of the A law for the father that
brings not up his child well.
Father that so brings up his children?


SIVQILA. No truly.


OMEN. Then we have For if any child with us cannot either read or say the
Lords prayer, and the Christian profession at five years of age, so that he or
she can speak. And if any other child be ignorantly, rudely, or
disobediently brought up, the father of that child shall (if he be^^e any
authority or office) immediately be put out of the same. For we hold, that
they that cannot order, rule, or govern their children and family, never will
govern or order any great charge or office in the common wealth. And also
every such negligent Father, if he be rich or able, shall not only put every
such child so ignorantly brought up, into a place there next for such purpose
ordained, called the house of good edution, and pay for their teaching,
feeding, clothing and other necessary charges: but also shall pay for the
teaching, feeding, clothyng, and other necessary charges, and bringing up of
so many of his next poorest neighbors children in the same house of good
education, as he is constrained to put and find there of his own.


SIVQILA. But what if such Father be not able to do thus?


OMEN. Then he shall receive twenty stripes, every month once, until he have
trained his children Christianly and obediently, according to the order of our
Country.


SIVQILA. It may be, that the children so rudely brought up have no Father
living.


OMEN. The^ their mother, or they, in whose keeping they are, shall perform the
same (if they be able) or else suffer the punishment, if they be ^ore.


SIVQILA. And is this good order thoroughly executed with you?


OMEN. Yea indeed is it, and that as well on the rich as on the pore.


SIVQILA. Then it has done very much good.


OMEN. It has done so much good, that it is hard to find in all our
Country, one child of five years of age, that cannot say the Lords prayer,
and the whole Christian profession, or any other that is rudely or
disobedientlye brought up.


SIVQILA. Surely you are to be commended for this worthy order: but much
more to be praised for the general executing thereof. Truly there is neither
penalty for the rich, nor punishmente for the poor with us in this case. For
if there were, so many of our youth would not be in principles of
Christianity so ignoraunte, to their parents so disobediente, nor in their
doings so rude or insolent.


OMEN. If you have such, or as good, I think they would rather be omitted than
observed: as well on their parts that should see it performed, as theirs that
should see it executed. And then as good never a whitte as never the better.


SIVQILA. In deed you have said the truth: for what through favor and
friendship, what through flattery and fear, and what through negligence and
recompense, many good laws and orders are both evil kept, and evil executed.


OMEN. No marvel, for slack executing of laws, Note this well.
makes evil keeping of laws: but execute laws broken severely at first on a
^ew, and the same laws after will be well kept of many. The proof whereof
none knows better than we.


SIVQILA. But what order have you for disobediente children to their parents,
of more riper years? and servants to their masters?


OMEN. Surely there is none such with us now. But our law is, (which if it be
broken it is surely executed) that if any between a dozen years of age and
twentye, are disobedient, and will not be ruled nor do their duty as well to
their Parents as Masters, neither by any gentle or fair means, neither by
sufficient correction: every such a one shall be bound prentise until they
shall be thirty years of age, with such masters as be able and will rule the^.
And if at any time during the said years, they go or step aside from their
said masters: then they, during their lives, shall be the Kings bondmen of our
Country.


SIVQILA. It may be that their masters cruelty may be the occasion of their
going, and then it were against reason that they should be both used cruellye,
and also made bondslaues.


OMEN. You have said well: but if it can be proved that their masters have
used them otherways than they ought, or that they have lackt either meat,
drink, cloth, sufficient lodging or rest: then their master shall forfeyte
the fourth part of his goods, which shall be sold and equally divided among
ten of his most poor neighbors that dwell next unto him: and they shall be
put to other to serve.


SIVQILA. You make your orders ye straighter, that you might have few
offenders. But how use you them that are disobedient, and misuse their father
and mother after they are twenty years of age?


OMEN. If their parents be poor, and they poor; they receive on their bare
skin thirty stripes with a whippe thirty days together: and if they be
poor, and their parents rich, then they shall never have any of their fathers
or mothers goods or lands, neither shall their fathers or mothers relieve them
or cause them to be relieved with any of their goods or living, in pain of
for feyture of all that they have. And if the child be rich and the parents
poor, then the one half of his goods and lands shall be given to his
parents, to help them with all: and the other half shall be sold, and the
money shall equally be given and delivered to ten of their next poor
neighbors children that are most obedient to their parents, and that are of
most honest behavior.


SIVQILA. Truly an excellent good order. For though they fear not to brea^e
Gods commandment in disobeying their parents, yet whipping, the loss of their
lands or goods that they have, or the goods and lands of their parents which
they are like to have, fears the^ to disobey or misuse them. And the giving of
the disobedient persons goods in such order, makes poor men's children strive
to exceed one another in obedience, and honest behauior. But what if any be
rich or wealthy, or come to promotion, and will not help, or relieve, or succor
their Parents, driven to misery or poverty.


OMEN. Of truth, we have such a worthy law therefore, which has been so
straightly executed on three or four offenders, that never any since durst
break the same. One example whereof I will show you, which shall be
sufficient for your understanding and liking I hope.


SIVQILA. Declare it I pray you.


OMEN. A certain Merchant man with us being very rich and wealthy, brought up
one of his children in learning and other special qualities, sparing no cost
for the trayning him up: for he esteemed him above all the rest. Who after
through his wit, learning, and other excellent qualities, grew more and more
in estimation and wealth: so that at y^ last the King did so favor and esteem
him, that he used him in his most secret and weighty affairs, whose father
(the Merchant) partly by evil servants, partly by evil debtors, but chiefly by
great mishap and losses on the Seas, ought a great deal more than he was
worth, and so came suddenly to great poverty and penury. Who, having none
other stay to stick to than his son, that was thus highly promoted, went to
his son, making a full account that he should not lack at his hands
whatsoever he needed. Whom, when his son saw in such a pore case, he did not
only refuse to help or relieve him any thing at all, but also thought scorn to
take him for his father, and gave him a flat answer, that i^ after he troubled
him any more in such sort, he would make him fast for flying. And so he ^lang
away in a fume. Wherewith his pore father was in such a perplexity, that he
knew not well what to do, looking least of all other that this his son would so
serve him, considering he loved him above all y^ rest, bestowed more on him
than of all the rest, and trusted to him more than to all the rest. But being
now pincht with extreme necessity, and taking his sons ingratitude so
earnestly, he was fully determined to complain to the King, being assured that
he would hear him speak ge^tly, judge according to equity, and perform
judgment spedily.


SIVQILA. Yea, but perhaps he might wait there a good while, ere he could
speak with the King.


OMEN. No truly, for commonly one whole hour together in y^ forenoone, and one
other hour in the afternoon, the K. sits openly in his gate, that any may
complain to him there that has cause, for that place and time is only for
complaints.


SIVQILA. If the Kings with ^^ should use this order, it would grow shortly
to a disorder: for there would be so many complaints, that they would go
near to thrust the King out of his Chair.


OMEN. Yea? that is a token that the Rulers and Judges do Mark.
not execute their Offices truly and diligently in the country far from the
King. For, if they did, they would not go so far to complain, that might
have equity near home. But our King is not so troubled, for we have so few
offenders, that we have few complayners.


SIVQILA. Then proceed I pray you: what did the pore Merchant then?


OMEN. He waited against the next day when the King came to sit in the gate,
with whom he was sure his son would come: whom as soon as he saw, he
kneeled humblye before the King and said: Oh King, what is that son worthy to
have, that will not help nor succor his father, being fallen from great wealth
to poverty? neither will acknowledge him for his father, though his father
loved him most tenderly, and bestowed on him liberally, and brought him up
learnedly? To whom the king said: when I see him, then I will tell thee what he
is worthy to have. And, because we wish to have him before us with speed, we
will send one of our servants for him, therefore tell us where he is. Then
said the poor man to the king, your Grace shall not need to send for him: for
he is here already. And the^ he pointed to his so^ and said: This is my unkind
so^, who^ you have thus promoted, which had never come to this, if I had not
bestowed so much in the bringing of him up. But it is often seen, y^ when ye
father does most for his child, y^ child does least for his father. And those
children, whose parents do pa^per most: those parents in need they do succor
the lest. Then the K. turned to the lord, being one of his privy counsel
(which was the said mercha^t man's son) saying: how say you my L. is this pore
man your father, y^ you have refused to succor, and disdain to take for your
father? then he said to y^ king, I know not whether he be my father or not.
Indeed said the K. he is a wise child that knows his own father: but is this
he that brought you up in stead of his son? then he answered the king: I cannot
deny but that this is he that brought me up, and whom I then took for my
father. Was not your mother his wife when you were born (said the king?) yes
truly said the L. The^ the king said to him again, do you know that you have
any erthly father besides him? no truly said he. O varlet said the king, to
excuse thy pride and presumption, into what mischiefs have thou brought thy
self? if this poor man be not thy father, as thou seem to deny as much as in
thee lies: the greatest gain y^ thou can get thereby, is to make thy mother a
whore, thy self a bastard, and thy father a Cuckold, which is but a slender
recompense to him and thy mother for their great pain and expe^ces in their
bringing thee up. If he had bin but thy foster father, and his wife thy foster
mother, being recompensed at full for thy feeding, clothing, and education: yet
thou art bound by the law of God, by the law of nature, and by ye law of
friendship, reverently to use the^, lovingly to receive them, bou^tifully to
reward the^, and in their necessity as a so^ to relieve them: much more thine
own father. What if they had suffered thee to starve in thy youth for lack of
food and raiment? how could y^ the^ have lived? therefore thou owe the^ for
thy life. And what is a sufficient price for ones life, who can truly judge?
and what if they had not brought thee up in learning and knowledge to their
great cost and charges? how should y^ the^ have attained to this promotio^
thou art? Oh vile varlet not worthy to live, how can I persuade my self, but
that thou obeyest me rather for reward, than for love? for, if thou disdainest
and refusest thy most Mark.
loving and natural father in his poverty, where there is no danger, how
quickly would thou forsake me if I stood in need of thee in any great
danger, peril or necessity? therefore how durst thou be so bold to dissemble
with us, and to abuse our Majesty with thy flattering fawning al this while?
for how can thou be faithful to thy Prince, that art false to thy Father?
and therewithal the King cast on him a fierce and frowning countenance:
which when the said Lord perceived, he did fall down before the King on his
knees, and desired his grace to pardon him. To whom the King said, if thou
had perceived, that we had little regarded this thy pore Fathers complainte,
thou would then have fed us with one fable or other, and so faced out thy
pore Father before our face. Or, if we should have posted him over to some
other to declare his cause, and not to have heard it our selves: then thou
would have found such means, that either Truly said.
he should not have bin heard, but put off with fair words from time to time, or
to be threatened or imprisoned for presuming to complain on such a noble man
that is so nigh our person: as though such as you, had authority to do what
wrong you list. But now, because thou see y^ we have heard thy pore father
attentively, and taking this thy vile fact most hainously, and mean to give
judgment without parcialitie: therefore thou humblest thy self upon thy knees
before us, more (I am sure) for keeping thine estate, for preseruyng thy lands
and goods, and for fear of punishment, tha^ for offending of God, angring of
us, or for misusing thy father. Therefore thy kneeling is co^pelledly, not
willingly. And for that we have given great charge and commandment through out
our realm, for the observing of this notable sentence of Christ, As you would
that other shou^de de do unto you, eue^ so do ye to them, between one stranger
and another, the breakers whereof are punished, and well worthy* then thou
ought with great reason to be much more punished, for nothelping, or denying
thy loving father: and because thou have done to him as thou would not have
him do to thee, thou shall be done to, as thou have done to him. Therefore my
judgment and sentence is, that presently thou shall be deprived of all thine
honorable estate and offices whatsoever: al which we The Kings worthy judge
meant.
will bestow on such as we think worthy thereof: and all thy lands and goods,
whereof now thou art possessed, we clearly take from thee, and do give all the same to thy pore father here, whom thou disdaynedst or denyedst:
straightly commanding and charging him, that he shall never give thee, nor
suffer thee to enjoy any part thereof, neither shall suc cour nor relieve thee
therewith: and the apparel that thou do now wear, he shall have, and thou
shalt have this thy fathers pore attire, and wear it likewise: and thou
shalt humble thy self to this thy father, but he shall not only refuse to
relieve thee, but also shall refuse thee for his son. And also my judgment is,
that thou presume not at any time hereafter to come in our presence, neither
within seven miles of our Court, upon pain of death: And this is our final
sentence and judgment, which shall not be revoked. And when the King had thus
said, a great sort did rejoice, that they had such a king, that did give so
severe and righteous judgment of that wicked son, not regarding him, thought
he was of such honor, and so highly in his favor.


SIVQILA. And was the Kings judgment performed in such order, as you have
declared in all points?


OMEN. What else? not one jot thereof was left undone or unperformed.


SIVQILA. Surely I perceive your king respects not the offender, but the
offense: the stricte and severe punishing of the superiors, is a sufficient
warning to the inferiors: for, the pore offender may not look to escape, whore
the rulers that the King loves can find no favor. I perceive the kings
severity Mark well.
tends to a good end, for he punishes the offenders without any pardon,
because none should offend in hope of that pardon* Your country is happy that
has such laws, but more happy I say, that they are so kept, yet much more hap
py that they have such a king, I would al such sons were so served. Me thought
you said, that all the wives with you are marvelous loving and obedient to
their husband.


OMEN. I said so, and I will stand to it, for I assure you, if the love and
obedience of women were lost, it might be found in them, all the wives in the
world may learn to love and obey their husbands at them.


SIVQILA. We have with us many gentle, loving, and obedient wives to their
husbands: but that al are so, I dare not affirm, least happily I might be
found a liar. But what if a rich man we you y^ has a wife, does chance to come
to poverty? will not his wife the^ change her love into hate, gentle speech
into chyding, and obedience into frowardnes.


OMEN. It is impossible to find such a wife with us, for they have learned S.
Paul's lesson too well for that, knowing, that as Christ is the head of the
congregation, so is their husband their head: And they remember the promise and
vow they made to their husbands at their marriage, whereby, neither poverty
nor sickness, nor any other trouble can release the^ of their obedience. But if
they should be disobedient, their husbands may not bear them.


SIVQILA. What then?


OMEN. Her husband must persuade her with gentleness.


SIVQILA. But what if that will not serve?


OMEN. Then the minister there must persuade her by ye scriptures to obey her
husband as well in poverty as in wealth, for whose persuasio^s, if she will not
amend, then she shall be compelled to wear such an attire, as is appointed for
disobedient wives, which when she wears al ye rest of the wives will wonder at
her, which is the gretest infamy to her that can be, and also her husband shall
not be bound to find her neither food nor raiment, until she become obedient to
him.


SIVQILA. That is a very good way to make them obey, if it were but for fear of
famishing. But I pray you sir what remedy has the wife, if her husband beat or
misuse her?


OMEN. There be none now y^ beat or misuse their wives with us: but* I will
tell you how one was served with us long since, that did beat his wife
cruelly, who was as obedient and loving to him as any could be.


SIVQILA. How I pray you?


OMEN. The woman was so godly and honest, that she took it patiently, and did
never complain on him therefore.


SIVQILA. Who then?


OMEN. Her neighbors that dwelled next unto them: and when the Ruler of the
town heard of it, he sent immediately both for the husband and the wife, and
when they were come before him, seeing the wife so pitifully a^ayed with
strokes, he asked the woman, if her husband had beaten her in that order, How a
man was used for beating of his wife.
who said no: and then her neighbors said to the Ruler, sir, we heard him beat
her so cruelly that we came into him and found him beating of her, desiring him
then to leave off* but neither the humbleness of his wife, kneeling to him on
her knees, neither our earnest desiring of him, could once move him to leave
beating of her: and then we made such a noise, that more company came in, and
so by strength we made him to stay, or else I think he would have killed her.
Then when the wife that was beaten heard them say so, she kneeled before the
ruler, and desired him to be good to her husband.


SIVQILA. There be few women with us would have Few women will do so.
taken their beating so patiently, excused their husbands cruelty, or entreated
for their husband so ernestly: nay many of them, rather would not only have
complained of their husbands themselves, but perhaps would have made the thing
worse than it was. Therefore, that woman is worthy to be registered among patient
and loving wives* But what said the Ruler then to the ^ore beaten woman?


OMEN. Forsooth he said thus unto her: O good woman, I lament thy case, thou
love thy husband better tha^ he loves thee: but because thou know thy
duty to thy husband, and he does not know his duty to thee, and for that I see
thou art godly, wise, patie^t, and obedient, and know better how to go^uern
thy house tha^ he: therefore my judgment is, that you shall receive al and pay
al, and be chief ruler of thy house, and shalt take an account of this thy
husband of all that he shall get, until he become a loving husband to thee,
and does use himself in all points as a good husband should do: and
therefore stand up, and content thy self, for thus it shall be. And then he
turned to her cruel husband and said, how can thou love thy neighbor? how
is it possible that thou can love thy dear friend (though he do never so
much for thee?) how can thou love thy parents? or how can thou love thy
children, or any other? or how can thou love thy superiors, or thy sovereign?
that hate thy self: thou think I lie, because I say thou hate thy
self: no, I do not lie: for, unless thou had hated this woman thy wife,
which is thy self, thou would not thus cruelly without all pity have beaten
her: for, by Christ's own words, Man and Wife are two souls and one Mark
these words.
body. If thou did see a man beating one of his hands with his other hand,
would thou think that he loved that hand that he does so beat? for, is not
that hand part of himself? then, how can I be persuaded, that thou love thy
self, because thou have thus cruelly beaten thy most loving and obedient wife,
which is thy self, and one of thy hands, yea, and thy better hand to, unless
thou were better thy self. And because thou have followed Christ's sayings and
the Kings commandment so well, (which is, Do as you would be done unto) it is
meet to do unto thee as thou have done. Therefore, I decree and judge here,
that as thou have used thy wife, so shalt thou be used, that is, thou shalt
be tied fast to a post, and four of the stoutest wives that dwell next unto
thee, and are most angry with thee for giving The judgment of him that did
beat his wife.
such an evil example to their husbands to use them so, shall beat thee with
four good cudgels, till thou be as well beaten as thou have beaten thy wife.
And this shall be done immediately in my presence, for I will not depart hence
until I see this my judgment fully executed. And then presently there was a
post set up purposely therefore, and the cruel husband was fast tied
thereto, and four of the said stoulest wives came with strong cudgelles, by
the Rulers commandment, and did beat him lustily, that he cried out again.
And one of the wives said to him sir, Do as you would be done unto, and
therewith reached him such a blow that made him to shrink: an other of them
said, if strokes be good for your wife, they are good for you, and then she
gave him such a stroke, that she made his sides ache: the third woman (not
forgetting her turn) spoke not so low but that one might well hear her,
saying: Is it good beating? and then she reached him such a remnant, that he
had a cause to remember her: and the fourth woman, for fear of forgetting, so
swinged him about the shoulders, that he conned her little thank, saying: As
you like this my friend, beat your wife again. And when the Ruler saw, that
he was thoroughly and well beaten, he caused him to be lewsed from the post, and
said unto him: Now go your ways home, and see that you suffer the rest of our
judgment to be performed, until you have learned what is the duty of a
husband, and how to behave your self, and use your wife: and I trust you will
remember this lesson: Do as you would be done unto. And then the Ruler
departed, the beaten man sorrowed, all husbands feared, and the wives much
reioiced: and I never heard since, that any man in our country did beat his
wife.


SIVQILA. If there were such a straight order and law with us for husbands
that beat their wives: many a wife would be so unruly, that their husbands
should never live in quiet. But what if a woman should beat her husband with you?


OMEN. What a question is that, there are none such nor never will be with us:
but we have a law therefore, if any should chance to offend therein, for it is
better to have a law without offenses, than to have offenses without a law.


SIVQILA. I pray you declare the same.


OMEN. If a woman should beat her husband with us, that is not able to rule
her, she should have her husbands How women are used that beat their
husbands.
apparel put on her back, with a sword gyrded to her, and so should ride
through every street in the Town where she dwelst and she men that are her
next neighbors shall guard her, and say in the streets as she rides, This is
the woman that has beaten her husband: and then she shall be put into a house
appointed for unruly persons, where she shall have neither meat nor drink
until she have earned it: and at the months end, she shall go home to her
husband again.


SIVQILA. Truly this is a better order in this case than we have: For* in
some places with us, if a woman beat her husband, the man that dwells next
unto her, shall ride on a cowlstaffe: and there is al ye punishment she is like
to have.


OMEN. That is rather an uncomely custom tha^ a good Mark.
order, for he that is in faintness, is indecently used, and the unruly
offender is excused thereby. If this be all the punishment your wives have that
beat their husbands, it is rather a boldning than a discouraging, of some
bold and shameless Dames, to beat their simple husbands, to make their next
neyghbors (whom they spite) to ride on a Cowlestaffe, rather reioising and
^^earing at the riding of their neighbors, than sorrowing or repenting for
beating of their husbands.


SIVQ. Yea, but if one of them should taste of your order in that case, it
would save many ^ husband from many a blow.


OMEN. I^ ^ere be as many such wives with you, as there is few with us, they
would be a great safegarde to your Country if ^ee^^ ^ere: for they would
fight furiously against their foes, that fight so fiercely with their friends.


SIVQILA. It is great reason that they should do so, although perhaps they
would not do so: for many that fight with a coward, wil^^^t from a man.


OMEN. Yea, and many that will not fear to fight with a man, will be ashamed to
fight with a coward.


SIVQI. That is veri^ true, but resolve me of this: wylt one man fight with
another with you for their own private quarrel?


OMEN. No surely* for, seeing Christ has willed them not to resist wrong,
saying moreover, Whosoever gives thee a blow on thy right ^i^eke, turn (...)
the other* mening to suffer* a there as much wrong ^^^^* than to (...) the same:
therefore they will not revenge their own quarrel, neither fight with any* and
for that there is such a straighte law for punishing of fighters, they dare not
fight.


SIVQ. But what if one should meet with his enemy with you, and would needs
fight with him whether he would or no?


OMEN. What if the Element should fall? I tell you there is such peace,
quietness, love and concord with us, that there is no fighting with us.


SIVQILA. I durst lay a wager, that if some of our lusty laddes were with you,
they would sooner bring you to fight, than you could bring them to quietness.


OMEN. I doubt that. But to satisfy your mind of your A law for fighters.
demand, if one would needs fight with us, the other with whom he would
fight, is bound to run and ^lee from him.


SIVQ. Yea, but it is counted a great shame with us for one to flee in that
case. Mark.



OMEN. Whether is it more shame to flee from fighting, than to be hanged for
killing?


SIVQ. To be hanged for killing, is more shame and pain to, if they could see
it. But what if he be not able to outrun him, or if it be in such a place that
he can not shun him?


OMEN. Then he that cannot flee and would, shall have no harm if he kill him
that procured him to fight: and if he hurt or maime him, he shall have his me^ds
in his own hands. And if y^ beginner kill him that would have fled, the^ he shall
be put to death without any pardon (whatsoever he be,) and if ye party that
would have fled be maimed, then he that has maimed him, shall give him the one
half of al his goods and lands, how much soever he has, during y^ life of him
that maimed him, to live on: and if he be but a poor man, or a man of Art or
trade that has maimed him, then he shall give him weekly y^ one half of his
getting, during y^ life of him that maimed him: and if y^ party that would have
fled be hurt, and not maimed, then he y^ did hurt him, shall pay for y^ healing
of him, and shall give him y^ fourth part of all his goods and lands: or if he
be not very rich, then the fourth part of his getting for y^ space of so many
years, as he has hurt him in sundry places of his body.


SIVQILA. Surely it is a very good law: in one point it is like our law, though
unlike in all the rest. Therefore, if Gods law will not make them refrain
fighting, this law will fear them to fight. A marvelous thing, that the
fear of short punishment, and the love of vain trash, shall make us to fear,
that Hell fire can not cause us to shun, and endless riches cannot move us
to do. It is a wonderful thing to consider, A wonderful thing to consider.
how many are blinded and bewitched by that wily and wicked serpent our deadly
enemy the Devil (yea, and that against all reason) for thousands are so stout,
manly, and courageous, that most cheerfully and willingly they fight and
adventure their lives for their own vain and tri^ling quarrels (whereby they
are like to go to Hell) but they are very cowardly dastards, and dare not fight
nor die in Christ's cause or quarrel, whereby they are sure to go to Heaven.


OMEN. If they knew the riches and joys of Heaven, and the poverty and
pains of Hell, and the reward that Christ gives to them that fight in his
quarrel, all y^ whole fighting would be in Christ's cause.


SIVQILA. I am sure of that: the best they can get in fighting in their own
cause, is to come from fighting but as well as they went to fighting, which is
but a very evil match made: for, if one should ask them what they have won
by their fighting, they must needs grant that they have won nothing: then may
not we think them wis^, that hazarded Note this well.
themselves into three great mischiefs for nothing, which mischiefs are
killing, hanging, and Hell fire: For, are not many that fight, killed, and they
have gotten their own death for fighting for nothing? And have not they that
have killed bin hanged therefore? and so they have been hanged for their
fighting for nothing: and if they have dyed in envy and malice, (as I fear
many have done) the^ they have gotten damnation in Hell fire for ever, for
their fighting for nothing. And therefore are not they worthy to be called wise
me^, that make such wise matches, and are such fierce furious fighters?


OMEN. Such fighters know not well what they do, for, if they did, they would be
twenty times advised, ere they did fight once.


SIVQILA. Yea and if they knew the gain that they shall have for fighting in
Christ's quarrel: they would rather fight every day, as long as they liuein
his cause, than The greatest sufferers the best fighters.
one day in their own. But the fighting of Christ's Champions, is contrary to
their fighting. For they that suffer most, are Christ's chiefest fighters: but
they that suffer least, they count the best fighters.


OMEN. Yea but they shall never get so much good by their revenging and
fighting, as Christ's soldiers shall gain by their patience and suffering. For
whereas many of these stout worldly fighters gets double death (I fear) that
is, this worldly death, and the most doleful death in Hell: they that fight for
Christ's cause, are sure for a short death here, to have everlasting life in
heaven: therefore is a great difference in every wise ma^s eyes, between these
two kinds of fighters


SIVQILA. Yea, and as great a difference in that that co^mes of their
fighting: therefore they that are wise will take heed how they fight. Is it not
a strange thing to consider how preposterouslye many use themselves as well
in their talk as in their deeds? for Christ the son of God (the chief of al
goodness, said to one, why calst thou me good? (meaning of his manhood,) there is
none good but God. The^ if Christ y^ Son of God that was sinlesse, most
peaceable, quiet, and loving of all other, refused to be called good: how dare
these sinful, brauling, quarelling, disquiet, hateful, and furious Stout
fighters are not good men.
fighters, take upon them to be called good men. And what witless woodcocks
are they, that calls the^ good men, because they fight lustily, stick to it
stoutely, and would mayme and kill, desperately? never regarding their cause nor
their quarrel


OMEN. Are they called good men with you, that are stout fighters, and will not
shrink?


SIVQILA. In deed they are commonly so called.


OMEN. The^ surely they nickname them, unless evil be Mark th^^.
good, and then must needs follow, that peaceable, patiente, quiet, loving, and
good men, are evil. But I think there is never a good man in deed, that will
call them good men. Woe be to them says the Prophet Esaias, that call evil good,
and Never a drunkard in Mauqsun.
good evil, the^ woe is to these men, that call fierce and furious fighters
good men, for one contrary is known by another. For if Christ call the
peacemakers blessed and happy: then I may safely call the peace breakers
unhappy. And such brawlers and fighters are peace breakers: Ergo the fighters
are unhappy: and unhappy men cannot be good men, then they must be evil men.
And thus these lusty cutters and stout fighters, are sufficiently proved to
be evil me^. Therefore they have had a wrong name a great while. I pray you sir
what law have you for Drunkards?


OMEN. We have a very good and strait law for Drunkards, but there is never a
Drunkard with us to execute the law on. For saint Paul says That drunkards
shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven.


SIVQILA. It seems that you do more for Saint Paul's words, than many with us
will do for Christ's, his Apostles, and all the Prophets words.


OMEN. Well, what for the love of Christ, and what for the fear of the law,
every one lives very soberly with us.


SIVQILA. If there were neither law of God, nor law of man, that did forbid
drunkenness, yet me thinks the reasonable law of nature, and the temperate
drincking of brute beasts without reason, were enough to make us refrain
excess and drunkenness. Why should not nature with reason teach us as well? as
nature without reason does teach beasts, birds, and other sensitive cretures?
Beasts, birds, or other sensitive creatures, will never eat more at that time,
tha^ is sufficient for them: unless sometime through great hunger: Mark.
who as soon as they feel their stomachs ouercharged, they never rest, until
they have avoided al ye which superfluously they have eaten: but Man that God
has created to be now not much inferior to Angels, makes himself far worse
tha^ Beasts. For he, when he has eaten more than he is able to digest, he
goes not about to ^oyd the superfluity thereof, as beasts do, but by and by he
heaps more upon more, going from ba^ket to ba^ket, which breeds fore diseases,
shortneth his life, and perhaps brings present death. But who ever heard, that
birds or beasts do willingly drink such drink, and so much thereof at one
time, y^ they are deprived of their natural se^ses, or y^ their wonted use of
their legs, lims, or body, to serve our turn or theirs, is taken from the^?
consider ye diligent dog or spaniel that waits on his Master most lovingly, ye
horse that serves him so necessarily, the cow y^ ^eedes him so plentifully the
ox that labors for him so painfully, ye sheep y^ clothes him with his own cote
so warmly, ye birds that delight him with their singing so merrily, and many
other dumb creatures, whose need he has daily, whether they drink themselves
so drunk at any time, ye they ca^ neither serve man their Master, nor go on
their feet:? no I am sure. But many a man y^ are their rulers (in who^ most wit
and reason should be found) are many times so stark staring drunk (yea, and
some almost every day) y^ they can neither stand, go speak, see, hear, nor
understand, far more senseless, tha^ ye senselest or brutest beast in the
world.


OMEN. Is there with you any that will be so drunk?


SIVQILA. Is there quoth you, yea that there are, and that not a few. But if
they loved God, his word, or the health of their own soul, as they favor ye
fiend, do devilish deedos, and are desirers of their own dreadful da^natio^,
they would not drink so deep as they do. Oh if Satan would suffer the^ to
consider deeply with themselves, when they are sober, what gain is got by
drunke^nesse: I believe the veriest drunkard of al, and they y^ have most
delight in such detestable drinking, would ^ god^^ gai^ that commes* of
drunke^nes.
quickly abhor it, speedily refrain it, and never after use it. For
drunkenness brings this gain: it spends the time vainly, it consumes money
wickedly, it weakens the stomach, it marres the eye sight, it causes yt
dropsy and other diseases, it brings the body out of fashion, it dulleth ye
wits, it quenches memory, it is ye high way to beggerie, it makes friends
forsake the^, the wise to shun them, the godly to abhor them, their
neighbors disdain them, the youth for to mock the^, the household to despise
them, none to regard them, God to forsake them, the Devil to receive them.


OMEN. A man were better be sober and lose al his goods: than to be a drunkard,
and get all that gain. It seems these drunkardes regard little Gods law: but
if we had them here, they would fear our law.


SIVQILA. Then it must be very straight, else they would not fear it.


OMEN. Yea it is both straight and surely executed without respect of any:
which law you shall understand by the executing thereof on a rich drunkarde
long since.


SIVQILA. I pray you declare it, for I will hear you attentively.


OMEN. There was one with us that was very rich that gave himself to nothing
but to drinking, bibbing and bellichere: who was not only drunk almost every
day, but also when he was sober, he made his brags, that he spent more at the
Tauerns, and in wine every day, than ten of his neighbors spent in a day in
their houses. Of whose behauioure when the ruler heard, he sent for him, and as
soon as he came before him, he said to him: Are you he sir, that is such a
drunken drinker, that spendes more daily at the Tavern and in wine, than ten
of your neighbors spendes daily in their houses? Then the rich drunkard
kneeled down before the said Ruler, and desired him to be good to him, saying
it was not true: with that the witnesses accused him, as well of his words as
of his drunkenness. Then the Judge said to him, how say thou now, think
thou I will believe thee, and discredit so many honest persons? I perceive thou
have enough to spend to hurt thy self, but thou have never a Mark this well.
whit to give to thy pore neighbor to do him good. Thou wicked wretch (said
he) if thou should be constrained to give the fourth part for the defense
of thy country, of that which thou spendest in one year to shorten thy life,
or to kill thy self: thou would think thou were undone. It seems thou have a
pride in thy excess and drunkenness, or else thou would never have so bragged
of the same. Do thou consider what a double mischief grows of thy vain
spending of thy money? if thou do not, I will tell thee, thou killest thy
self by taking too much, and the pore hungry wretch is killed that has too
little. Now if thou should give thy too much, to the pore that has too little:
thou should save both your lives, whereas now thou art a murderer of both.
And now thou art not only proved a drunkard, but a double murderer: and thou
know, that neither drunkards nor murderers shall enjoy the kingdom of
Heaven: then they shall be sure to obtain the kingdom of Hell. Ah wicked
wretch, do thou shorten thy life, to go the sooner to Hell? they that be
there would not make such haste I believe thither, if they were here again. Is
it not a strange thing y^ thou should be so prodigal, to hurt thy self
here, to go to Hell: and art so niggardly in doing good to Christ in his
members, to go unto heaven? A thou thurle, more churlish tha^ a hog or swine,
for though sometimes they drive their fellows from ye meat and eat by
themselves: yet when they have filled themselves sufficiently, they go away,
and leave the rest, eat it who will. But thou greedy cormorant, when thou
haste taken more than is sufficient, thou do not only consume more on thy
self, but also the rest thou kepest from thy pore hungry brother, and wilt not
leave any thing for him, as the swine does. And now seeing Gods law cannot move
thee to go unto Heaven, I will see if our law can stay thee from hell. Therefore,
because y^ have so much wealth, ye thou can not tell how to bestow the same
well, and more living tha^ thou art worthy of: therefore I will according to the
law made for drunkards, that thou shall give yearly during thy life, a prechers
stipend to a godly learned man, for his better maintenance, who shall be bound
every week three times during thy life, not only to attend upon thee one
half hour at a time, then instructing thee (by the scriptures) thy duty to God
and man, and the way to salvation, persuading thee also from drunkenness, and
showing also how detestable it is before GOD, and what is the gain thereof:
But also shall preach three days every week in the parish Church where thou
dwell. And thou shall sit also three market days in the open market with
a pot in thy hand, and a writing on thy forehead, as follows: This is the
Drunkarde that spente as much daily at the Tauernes and for wine, as ten of
his next neighbors did spend daily in their houses. And this being ended,
thou shalt* remain one half year in prison, and there thou shalt be
taught to fast for thy long excess: for every dinner thou shall he allowed
not above a groate, in bread, drink, and meat: and thou shalt be allowed
nothing but bread and drink at night in stead of thy supper, which shall not
be above the value of a penny. And because thou did brag of thy vain
daily spending, therefore thou shalt give daily for the space of one half
year, (that is, during thy imprisonment) as much to ten of the porest
householders next unto thee, toward the maintaining of their houses, as thou
art allowed daily to thy dinner. And this is my judgment not to be called
back, and with all speed to be executed. And then he was committed to the
Officers and things were done and performed accordingly. And thus this rich
Drunkard was served: which wrought such effect, that I never heard of any
Drunkarde in all our country since.


SIVQILA. That severe punishment is well bestowed of one that makes al other to
take heed. Oh happy are those Countries and Cities, that have such
Magistrates and rulers: If a few of our drunkardes were served thus, there
would not so much drink and wine be vainly spent as there is. But how if a poor man be drunken with you, what shall be his punishment?


OMEN. He shall sit in the open Market, as the rich man did, but he shall not be
imprisoned: lest his wife and household (if he have any) or he himself should
be driven to lack. And he shall be compelled to labor daily in his vocation,
and at thd end of every week, during a whole year after, he shall yield a just
account of his travel, labor, and exercise, and how he has bestowed every
day that week to the chief ruler or Officer in the town where he dwells: and
he must not drink in any Tipling-house, or Tavern, the space of one whole
year after. And because he may be known, he shall wear on his bosom the
picture of a Swine all that while, The Drunkards badge.
whenever he shall be out of his own house: and for every day or part of the
day that he shall not wear that same badge on his bosom as is ordered, so
many years after he shall wear the same, and shall perform so long all the
orders appointed in this case for a Drunkarde. And who so ever shall drink
with him, wearing the same badge, either in Tavern or Tipling-house, shall be
used in all points as a Drunkard: and every Sunday during that year, he
shall sit before the Pulpit all the Sermon time to hear the word of God;
and learn to avoid Drunkenness. Have you such a law or order for drunkards
with you?


SIVQILA. I would we had, for then (if the same were rightly or justly
executed) there would not be so much money spent vaynely, so much drink and
Wine consumed voluptuouslye; so many wives and children fed hungerly, nor so
many Drunkardes that live abhominably. For the rich with us may spend what
they will, drink what they will, and how much they will, yea and be drunk
as often as they will, and no law to restrain them, no penalty to fear them,
neither any dare well reprove them, (unless the Preacher in the Pulpitte does
generally threaten them with Gods word, which some of them fear as much, as a
great Bear does the barking of a little whelpe.) And the poorer sort, though
they are not so able as they, nor can not so conuenientlye as they, yet on the
Sunday at the furthest they will be even with them, (if one days drinking will
serve) for they will so tipple almost all the day, and perhaps the next night,
that all their whole weeks work will scantly pay their Sondayes shot: but
some of them (not worth very much) if they work one day, they will loyter and
drink three for it, (I will not say they will be drunk two and a half of the
same.)


OMEN. If three or four of them were used according to our law for drunkardes,
they would loyter less, spend less, and drink less. If one should wear
the drunkards badge with us, every one that should see him, would sh^^^^e him:
they detest drunkenness so much.


SIVQILA. I like your order and law for drunkards so Mark.
evil, that I would it were au^^orized and executed with us. If this monstrous
root were plucked up by the roots, many mischiefs of force must needs wither
away, that spring out of the same, which before at large is declared. Besides
two^ devilish Damoisels that commonly wait on this detestable Dame, which is,
Whoredom and Murder. Therefore such Mistress, such Maids. And now because
such occasion is offered me, I am desirous to know whether many with you are
given to the fir^^ of these two? but I think it is but a folly to trouble you
therewith, for I remember that you so ext^lled before your wives with you, for
their love and obedience to their husbands, that if love and obedience were
lost, it might be found in them.


OMEN. I said so in deed, and I told you no lie And that The order of the
wives of Mauqsun.
this vice may the better be avoided, the wives with ^^ ^oe very seldom go
out of their houses, unless to the Church or Market. And when they go abroad,
their faces are so covered, and all their whole bodies with a lin^en mantell
down to the ground, and all of one fashion, that it is very hard for a husband
to know his wife if he meet her abroad: so that both fair and ^oule,
beautiful and vnbeautifull, go so all alike that none can know the fair from
the foul. Fair women are snares for fools.
And thus they are no shares to catch fools in.


SIVQILA. Some have thought themselves wise that have bin caught in that order.


OMEN. Yea, but Wisdom goes not by thinking, but by doing. I will not say,
but that both before and after they may be wise: but when they are caught in
the Harlottes trappe, Wisdom forsakes them, and leaves Folly with them.


SIVQILA. Well, I know where women go abroad covered in that order all in
black, and as it should seem, at first frequented and practiced to that end
you speak of: but that all such are so loving and obedient to their husbands
as you say your wives are, I scantly believe. A chaste mind is not always
under a modest garmente: the covering of the face does little prevail, where
the woman is wicked, or the mind not modest. And I think some of them if they
might, had rather sometimes show their face, than cover their face. So that
though the old matrons are well content to go in that order, yet I think
many of the younger Ladies and fairest dames, could be content to leave that
order, as I believe many of your wives with you could be.


OMEN. Nay, there you are deceived: for, every one with us, rich and poor,
high and low, both fair and foul, did with one consent desire to have this
order auctorized, published, and practiced, who ever since, most willingly and
diligently, as a commendable custom, do observe the same.


SIVQILA. I know there are with us as godly, loving, and obedient wives to
their husbands, right beautiful, fair, and well favored, as any can be,
that go abroad in their common decent, and known attire, without hiding their
faces.


OMEN. I do not deny that, and some again perhaps, whose faces are mufsted,
are as disobedient, ungodly, and unloving to their husbands. Therefore it is
the inward mind, (not the outward attire) that does make or mar


SIVQILA. But what if one of your wives should be disloyal or false to her
husband, or play the Harlot?


OMEN. Both she that plays the Harlot, and he that commits the offense
with her, shall be both stoned to death, without any pardon at all, and
whosoever does excuse the fact besides the parties, or else speak, write,
entreat, or offer any gift, for the defacing or obscuring of the truth, or for
Now whoremongers and harlots are used.
the ayding, supporting, helping or remitting of the offender, shall forfeyte
the one half of all their goods and lands, all which shall be fold and
equally distributed to ten of the most honest, louingest, and best agreeing
couples, that have the most need of relief, that dwell next unto the woman or
wife committing the offense.


SIVQILA. An excellent good law both for the offenders, and for the aiders,
helpers, and succourers, for thereby the husband of the aduoutresse, and the
wife of the fornicator, may marry (without any breach of conscience) with whom
they shall think good, and the loss of ye half of their goods; is an
occasion that few or none will speak or entreat for them. In my judgment
this is the best diuorcemente for Whoremongers, Harlots, and Adulterers, that
can be: which I wish were allowed, aucthorized, and executed with us.


OMEN. I would have thought that the like offenders with you had had the like
punishment.


SIVQILA. No no, for then how could so many have two or three wives, or two or
three husbands at once? for let the^ lie with as many as they will, either
husband or wife, yet the offenders thereof shall lose neither life nor goods:
perhaps some of the poorest offenders, that lack both money and friends:
shall ride in a Carte, or be set in the Cage, and then after, if both the
parties consent, they shall be divorced, after which it is lawful for either of
them to marry where they list.


OMEN. Shall it be lawful for the fornicator or aduoutresse to marry again,
as well as the husband or wife of the aduoutresse or fornicator?


SIVQILA. Yea indeed.


OMEN. Then is it to be doubted, that many do offend purposely, and confess
the same willinglye, only to be divorced from their husbands or wives whom
they hate, to be married to whoremasters or harlots, whom they love.


SIVQILA. You need doubt it never a whit, for I believe it is too true. Nay,
what say you to a foul and filthy fornicatour, that found the mean to
accuse his wife wrongfully, to defame her most shamefullye, and to be divorced
from her unlawfully, and married a harlot that he kept?


OMEN. Mary I say that the law you spoke of, is as good for that purpose as can
be. And I say further, it is lamentable to hear it, detestable to do it, and
most sinful to suffer it. What if scholars by playing the Trowantes might be
dismissed or released from going to School any more with their Schoolemaister?
Would not some shrewd boys, think you that had rather loyter than learn, play
the Trowants purposely? then you may be sure that Whoremongers and Harlots will
not stick to commit fornication and adultery which is their chief delighte,
to be separated or divorced from their wives or husbands, whom they can not
well abide.


SIVQILA. It is as you say. Therefore if the foonicator, whoremonger,
adultresse, and harlots were put to death: the^ I am sure a great sort would
not so boldly, rashly, so unshamefastly, and so commonly use that filthy vice,
as they do, which (I fear) many take rather for a sweet solace, than for a
shameful sin.


OMEN. Well, though it be sweet here, it will be sour in Hell: though it be
pleasant here, it will be paineful there: and though it be delightful here, it
will be detestable there. Therefore none but fools will choose short pleasures
for long pains, and short solace for endless sorrows. Truly it seems,
that many with you love chiefly that God forbids, and we do hate. This same
vile vice is detested with us so generally, that if one should seem to
rejoice, or be desirous to talk of it, or if one should speak vnchastelye or
vndecentelye, the party immediatelye shall be imprisoned one Month, and the
one half of all their one Months rent, gain, commodity, or increase,
shall be equally given to four of their most porest neighbors, that use
their tongues most soberly, honestly, and godly.


SIVQILA. If you hate such filthy and unchaste talking, it is a great token
you abhor the wicked fact and doing. There is no penalty or punishment with
us for such speaking, but sometimes the porer sort in many places wear a
sheet for committing the deed, or for getting one with child: whereof many
of them are as much ashamed, as a horse that is in the Pinfold for straying in
grass or corn. But I pray you sir, what if a maid with you loose her
virginity, or be got with child before she be married?


OMEN. It is as easy a thing to find a black Swanne with you, as such a one
with us. Mary sir that were such a matter, that it would make all the Maids
there so mad, that if they might get her that plays such a part, they would
tear her in pieces with their teeth.


SIVQILA. If all that lose their virginity before they be married, in some
places, should be torn with maids teeth of their own age: I fear they would
be as able to beat them, as the other to byte them. Though in the most places
through strait looking to, and good bringing up of young Damsels, there would
be scant a bitte for every one. And though heretofore, when Gods word lay hid
and unknown, modesty, shamefastness, virginity, and chastetie, was so
esteemed Consider this.
and used, that it was a wonder to see one maid miscary once in a dozen year
in a whole town: yet now, (notwithstanding Gods word be plentifully
preached) virginity is so little regarded, and chastity so little esteemed,
that four or five in one year is thought no great matter. Oh, if we did
consider deeply the great cause we have to keep our bodies cleanly,
chastely, and godly, we would not feed them so voluptuously, use them so
viciously, nor cover them so costly. For, if our bodies be chaste and holy, God
the holy Ghost will dwell in them, preserve them, and instruct them. But mark the
naughtines of our nature. For, if an earthly King should determine to come
into a pore man's house, to tarry there but one hour, should not that house
be made clean in every corner? should it not be made trim, fine This is to
be noted.
and sweet, as might be? would not the owner of the house rejoice and be glad,
and partly brag of the Kings coming to his house? Yes I warrant you. Then
how much more ought we to deck up this our body, that is, to fasten it with
the foundation of Faith, to place it in the table of Note this.
Temperance, to purify it through with perfect Prayer, to hang it all over
with the clothes of Chastity, to make in the chimney thereof the fire of
Charity, to sweep it clean with the beesome of Bewayling, and to lighten the
whole house with the lantern of Love, where we are most sure, that God the
holy Ghost will come, and be content to inhabit and dwell continually.


OMEN. You have very well said: therefore all wise men and women will keep
their bodies godly and chastely, to be a house for GOD, and all fools will live
vnchastely, and keep their bodies filthily, to be a den for the Devil.


SIVQILA. Woe shall be to them that harborough such a gueste, for he will
harborough them for ever in the unquenchable fire of Hell, with himself, and
the rest of the damned Diuelles: and then they cannot say, but that he gives
them something for harboring of him. Well sir, if all the Maids in our
Country have bin, and are so modest and chaste as you affirm, they excel, I
believe, all the mayds in the world.


OMEN. I am sure they do so: but our Country once, but it is long since, was
spotted with the infamy of a fair An example of two that committed this sin
together.
young woman, which lost her Uirginitie, being unmarried, who did offend with a
man unmarried: notwythstanding, they did both wear a whole year after,
garments made of Goats skins, with the hairie side outward, whereby every
one that saw them thus attyred, might know their offense: and all maids did
wonder and cry out of the woman, when they met or saw her: and al unmarried men
did wonder and cry out of the man when they met or saw him: and at the years
end, he was not only constrained to marry her that he got with child, but also
he was judged to give yearly the value of twenty Crowns during his life,
(for he was rich) to one of the most modest and gentlest poor friendlesse
maids of the parish where he dwelled, to her marriage. And since this was
executed of these two, there was never any lost their virginity with us, before
their marriage.


SIVQILA. I would I could say so, and affirm so much for all the maids of my
Country: but though many of the^ are such, yet I am sure, y^ al are not such.
What law have you for murderers, or for such as willingly kill or poison any
body?


OMEN. We have an excellent good law for such: but we have such excellent
people, that they never break that law: therefore it has been so long
unoccupied, that few or none with us knows that there is any such law. I
heard one say when I was young, that in the old time long ago, two thieves
laid wait by the way for one that they knew would come that way with a great
deal of money, who, as soon as they met with him there, they carried him into
a wood or thick Grove that was nigh to that place, and first they cut off both
his hands, the^ they gave him above twenty wounds: after that they did cut his
throat, and also so mangled his face, that it was impossible to know him
thereby: and they spoiled him of his apparel, and left him dead and all naked:
who after being suspected and apprehended, confessed the murder, and wherefore
they did it: then the Judge said unto them, what is the sentence of Christ,
that the King commaundes so straightly to be kept? to whom the murderers
said: Whatsoever you will that men shall do to you, even so do ye How two
murderers were used.
to them. The^ the Judge said to y^ murderers, rightly said, therefore ye shall
be done unto, as ye have done to the man you have killed: and then he gave upon
the^ this judgment following: you shall have both your hands cut off: then you
shall have twenty wounds given you with a sword: the^ your throats shall be
cut, and your faces shall be so mangled as you mangled his face: and when you
are thoroughly dead, then you shall be cut into small pieces, and they shall
be thrown abroad, for the beasts and Ravens to eat. And as soon as the
Judge had given on them this judgment, they were carried away, and were
immediately killed and mangled in such order as the Judge had appointed. So
that never since any has bin killed or murdered in all our Country, not so
much for fear of man's law as of Gods law, which they are marvelous fearful to
break. And ever since the Preacher said in the Pulpit, whosoever says Thou
fool, is in danger of Hell fire, they have bin very much afraid. For they
well consider, that if they be in danger of Hell fire, for calling of one
Fool, then they think verily, that they shall be cast into Hell fire for
killing of one.


SIVQILA. Truly the reason is good: it seems that you fear Gods law more than
man's law: but I fear many with us fear man's law much more than Gods law.
Well, the murderers had their deserts. I cannot but marvel and muse at those,
that by murdering, stealing, picking, filthing, lying, swearing, deceiving,
usuring, extorting, and consuming, get their goods, procure their profit, and
lay for to live. Surely it is because they think their whole living, gain,
commodity, riches, food, and raiment, dependes only upon their own
travel, labor, wit, policy, and industri^: or else they would never win
their wealth so wickedly, take other men's travel so theeuishly, nor fill their
coffers with coin so couetously: but if they could believe, that Christ is
their savior, and that the most merciful God is their loving Father, then
they would depend only upon Gods Mark well.
providence and provision. Has Christ willed us to call God our Father, saying:
In this manner therefore pray ye: Our father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy
name, etc. Now if he be our Father, we must needs be his children. And who
is so senseless or witless, if he consider with himself, but that God (that
is King over al Kings, and that has made Heaven, Earth, Fire, Water, Beasts,
Fish, Foul, and al other things therein for us his children) will feed us
with food, and clothe us with clothes? Christ is worthy to be credited, which
says: Be not careful for your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall
drink, nor yet for your body what you shall put on: is not the life more worth
than meat? and the body more of value than raiment? Behold, the fowls of the
air, for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into the barnes, and your
heavenly Father feeds them: are ye not much better than they? Which of you
by taking thought can put one Cubite to his stature? and why care ye then for
raiment? Consider the Lillies of the field how they grow, they labor not,
neither spinne, and yet I tell you that Solomon in all his royalty was not
arrayed like unto one of these. Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass, which is
to day in the field, and to morrow shall be cast into the Furnace, shall not
he much more do the same unto you, o ye of little faith? Therefore take no
thought, saying: What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewithal
shall we be clothed? after all these seek the Heathen, for your heavenly
father knows that you have need of al these things,: But seek ye first the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall
be ministered unto you, etc. What Logician could have given us such lessons, to
learn us? what Orator could have made such arguments to al^ure us? or what
Rhetorician could have rendered such reasons to reform us? or what preacher
could have premeditated such persuasions to procure us, as Christ our
comfortable Captain, most cunningly has uttered here, to comfort us in
all our calamities, nay rather compel us to cast all our care upon God our
father? In these words he has named God to be our father twice, besides in
diverse other places. Then seeing he that cannot lie, does say, that God is our
father, how joyful may we be that have such a father? There fore we may be well
assured, that if earthly Fathers and mothers do feed their children: he will
feed his children. If God our father feed the beasts, birds, and fishes that
feed us, will not he feed us then, for whose sake he feeds them? who is so
incredulous that ca^ believe ye contrary. Moreover, Christ bids us ask and we
shall have. Many earthly fathers and mothers will not only be angry with their
children for asking, but also will not, nor cannot give them that they ask.
Then what a gentle Father have we, that will needs have us to ask? and what a
loving Father have we, that will give us y^ we ask? and what a rich Father
have we that is able to give us whatsoever we ask? therefore though many erthly
fathers and mothers are not able to feed their children if they would: we are
sure that God our father both can and will feed us, and give us besides
whatsoever we lack. The^ this well considered, how can the porest creature
that is, the carefullest captive that is, the most miserable prisoner y^ is,
the sickest person that is, the lamest wretch that is, or ye lothsomest Lazer
that is, think themselves in an evil case, or else to be undone, that have
such a gentle, loving, rich, mighty, and friendly father? For, let every one
assure themselves, that God is so loving and gentle, that neither poverty nor
penury, sickness nor soreness, captivity nor misery, can make him forsake
any, that is content to be his child, or gladly will take him to be his
father. Mark what a vehement argument Christ uses to make us not only to
crave of God what we lack, but also to believe that we shall obtain it? Is
there any among you (says he) which if his son asks Mark well.
him bread, will offer him a stone? or if he asks flesh, will he proffer him a
Serpent? If ye then which are evil ca^ give your children good gifts: how
much rather shall your Father in heaven give good things if you ask him? If
this be not enough to make them cast their only care on God their Father: if
this will not allure them to ask what they lack of God their father: and if
this be not able to make them firmly believe, that they shall have that they
require of God their Father: then let them refuse God for their Father, and for
their prouider, and trust to themselves, whereby they must be driven to lie
for their living, to steal for their sustena^ce, to murder for their
maintenance, and to serve for their safegarde: with many other mischeuous
means, which when they have tried a while, they find their new Father will
so prosper their doings, that he will bring some of those his children to the
gallows: some of the^ to rot asunder: some of them to sterue under a hedge:
some of the^ to kill themselves: and some of them to dye in desperation: and
then those some to endless damnation. And this is the great gain they get, by
mistrusting and forsaking God their father, and in trusting to themselves, and
their Father the Devil. Is it not a wonder to wey the weywardnesse of those
witless and wicked wretches, that mistrust in their miseries, this their good
God and heavenly father? if one of these mistrustful misers should see a
Prince, a Kings son and heir, being tenderly and dearly beloved of the King
his Father fear to lack food, mourn for money, or lament for living: would
not he think the same Prince to be peeuishe or almost mad? then may not we
be most sure, that that wretch is more than mad, that thinks he can lack
any thing at his fathers hands the King of Heaven, who loves him so well, that
he has chosen him to be his son and heir with him, in that rich, great,
mighty, and endless kingdom of Heaven?


OMEN. All this that you speak, is so considered of us, that not one in all our
Country, that is of any discretion, but fixes most firmly their whole Faith
on this their loving and heavenly father, as well for all things needful for
this life, as for the endless life to come.


SIVQILA. Though all are faithful with you, the most are faithless with us: and
though al put their trust in God with you, the most put their trust in
themselves with us: for if they did not, they would not so greedily gather
their goods together, and lay lands to lands, houses to houses, and riches to
ri ches, as they do. Some y^ are worth thousands, though they look every day
to die, (being of such extreme age) have so little trust and confidence in God
y^ gave the^ al they have, that they are so sparing to themselves, so niggardly
to their neighbors, and so pinching to the poverty, as though they should
live here ever, or else as though they had not enough to find themselves one
day.


OMEN. Well, though they spare and can not find in their hearts to spend it,
perhaps they will leave it to such that will both spend and end it. It would
rejoice any godly man's heart to see how the rich with us bestows their time
and their goods.


SIVQILA. I pray you sir how is that?


OMEN. Forsooth as soon as they are up, which is very early, they go to visit
their poor neighbors houses, and most gently, lovingly, and willingly, they
give the^ money to relieve them withal, according to their necessity, and their
own ability: and you shall see the rich men's wines (not without their
husbands co^sents) carry their childrens apparel, sometimes before they be
half worn, and give ye same to their poor neighbors to clad their children
withal: so that the rich with us are so godly and charitable to the poor,
that it Mark their great ga^ne.
is a very hard thing to find any poor with us, that wantes either meat,
drink, or sufficient clothes. If a poor body with us should chance to go in
the street something coldly cladde, the first rich man or woman, I warrant
you, that meets them, will not only weep for their going so coldly, but also
will carry the poor party home with them: and if they have but two garments,
as they have not lightly above three, they will give them one of them, and bid
them put the same on to keep them warm, saying: Brother, Christ bids us do,
as we would be done unto, therefore seeing I would have one to give me a
garment if I were naked or went coldly clothed: even so I am willing to cloth
thee with this my garment, to keep thee from the cold.


SIVQILA. Oh happy people, that have such charitable hearts: oh burning love,
that feels the smart of their brother. Your poor people were best to keep
themselves still with you, and not to come into our country to dwell, for if they
should they might hap to stand quaking in the streate in a cold frostie
weather al a whole day, without having any coat or garment given them: yea
though forty rich folks coming As hard hearted as the other are charitable.
straight from a Sermon, should see them, whereof, some of them perhaps have
twenty uppermost garments of their own at ye least, not once weeping at their
want, nor sorrowing at their smart: thinking themselves to be pitiful enough,
if they give the^ a penny: which happily they get not, without a check or a
taunt. I pray God some of the^ leave not their purses at home purposely,
because they would give them nothing. But me thinks these hard hearted
wretches, and these nicknamed Christians, the next time that they should look
on their great number of guarded gowns, their costly cassocks, and their
through furred garments, which are more than ever they will wear, considering
they make new daily for themselves (and all to follow the new fashion) and
especially This is meet to be marked
when they see them moth-eaten, should tremble and quake for fear, at the
terrible words of Saint James, which threatens all such, (saying) Go to now,
ye rich men, weep and howl on your wretchedness that shall come upon you:
your riches is corrupt, your garments are motheaten: your gold and your silver
are cankered, and the rest of them shall be a witness unto you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire etc. But truly, their stony hearts are so flintie
hard, that neither these words, nor yet the most terrible threatenings in all
the Scriptures besides, can penetrate any part thereof.


OMEN. As flinte stones are made of such a matter, that Note here.
neither water can moisten, nor fire ca^ melt: even so such obdurate and stony
hearts as you speak of, are far unlike to soften with y^ heavenly deaw of the
sweet promises of the Gospel, or to fear, at the fierce and furious
threatenings of the Scriptures. But if they that have such stony hearts, would It
is worthy the asking.
faithfully pray unto God to cleanse their corrupt hearts, and to mollify the
same: assuredly he would do it. For he will give them whatsoever they ask
faithfully, tending to his glory and their profit. And he is able, for he can
turn stones into Wax, Beasts into Men, Devils into Angels, and sinners into
Saints. Has not God made man to his own likeness? and himself into man's
likeness? for the soul of man is made in the form and likeness of God: and
the son of God became very man: which wonderful and mystical combination, or
rather cross marriage, was done and performed by that good God, only for man,
without the request or prayer of any man. Then who can be so incredulous, that
the same God that (unrequested) has done so much for man, will not at the
ernest prayer of man, mollify and make soft his obdurate and stony heart?
Faithful prayer is so esteemed and so frequented with us, that neither high,
nor low, rich, nor pore, neither yet young nor old, but makes it their mean
to gain by.


SIVQILA. It is marvelous and almost incredible, that every one with you does
depend upon prayer. Well, as that is the only mean to get: so wicked
practices, and diuelishe devises be the only way to lose. I perceive you do
not as many do with us, which are hearers and small folowers: always learning
and never learned: given rather to Mark.
prating than to practicing: more loathe to be absente from a sermon, than
willing to perform one point of the sermon.


OMEN. No, assure your self of that: for, as soon as a sermon is ended with
us, all the hearers practice it by and by, especially such things as the
preacher persuades. As if he allure the^ to love, then they embrace love in
steed of hatred: if to quietness and peacemaking, then with all diligence they
bring the contentious to concord, and furious foes to be faithful friends: if
to be charitable and merciful, then pre sently the richer sort succors their
needy neighbors, going from house to house, to understand their necessity:
they visit the sick, and comfort them both with counsel and coin: they
resort unto prisons, where not only they persuade the prisoners with Gods
promises to be patient and penitent, but also mitigate their miseries with
money and meat: and what else? truly, they clothe the naked, feed the
hungry, and harbor the harbourlesse. For all their study, endeavor, and
delight is, to do the works of mercy: knowing, that the doers thereof shall
remain in heaven with Christ, and the neglecters thereof shall dwell in Hell with
the Devil. And this is the daily exercise of the rich with us. Is it not so
with you?


SIVQILA. No it is quite contrary: these are too good to be followed of us:
and ours too evil to be liked of you. I will not say, but that some with us use
these orders: but universally (as with you) I am sure they do not. Belike they
spend the vacant times of the Sabbath day in this order.


OMEN. Nay, not only of the Sabbath day, but of all other days.


SIVQILA. I would to God they did bestow the Sabbath day so well with us.
I think verily, if any day be more profaned with us than other, it is the
Sabbath day, that God has appointed to be kept most holy. For I doubt many
do come to the Church that day more to pry, than to pray: more to look, than
to learn: more to show themselves, than to shun sin: more to mark others,
than to amend themselves: more for custom, than conscience: and more to hear
a fine preaching, than to follow the godly teaching. And if many of them do
thus, that come to the Church, what may be thought of them that come not to
the Church? Many are constrained to labor for their living in the week day,
whereby they avoid idleness the mother of mischief, whereof many I fear,
though they are not idle on the Sabbath day, they are not well occupied. For
that day they give themselves to Drinking, Dicing, Dancing, Swearing,
chaffing, Playing, Bowling, Beare-baiting, and to other vanities: and this is
the regard that they have to God, using themselves that day most wickedly, that
God would have them live most holily.


OMEN. Surely they are such fools, that I am not able to rehearse their folly.


SIVQILA. Yea, but none with us but are thought to be wise enough as long as
they have Wealth. But I pray you is Wisdom preferred before Wealth with you,
or no?


OMEN. Yea in deed is it.


SIVQILA. It is not so with us, for truly y^ people are so peeuishly addicted,
that they esteem Wealth above Wisdom, and as it seems, they think that the
wealthye are wise, and the poor are fools. For every word y^ the rich
speaks is soothed and counted for an Oracle, (be it never so fond) but let
the poor speak never so wisely, he is tript before It is true.
his tale be half told, and is fleered or iested at therefore. But if the said
rich man does fall into poverty, and the same poor man chance to be rich, then
Totnam is turned French, and then the fool is suddenly become wise, and the
wise man a fool. So that hereby it must needs appear, that it is Mark.
Wealth that makes Wisdom, and poverty makes fools, For, when Wealth is
gone, all Wisdom is gone: and when Poverty is gone, then all Foolishness is
gone.


OMEN. It is not so with us, for if a wise rich man do chance to come to
pouersie, he is not only provided for, that he shall have sufficient to live on
during his life, but his Note here
counsel is required and taken in vrgente affairs and wayghtie matters as
well as it was before: for God, not Wealth gives Wisdom.


SIVQILA. I would it were so with us: but truly I have seldom seen, that
their counsel is craved being fallen in decay, that have in their Wealth
borne great authority, though they were well worthy for their wit and
honest behauioure. Therefore we may see, that Wealth, more than Wisdom:
goods, more than goodness: and authority more than ability is preferred:
which me thinks is very preposterous. For, who will esteem a Horse the worse
for having nothing but a halter on his head? and who will esteem a jade the
better for his saddle and trim trappers? The^ if we esteem a horse for his
goodness and agility, should we not accept a man for his knowledge and honesty?
Wealth cannot make a fool the wiser, nor Poverty cannot make the wise man
foolisher. For the fool cannot tell how to use himself in wealth: but the wise
man can tell how to behave himself in poverty. Where wisdom wants, wealth may
wast: and where wisdom is (though worldly wealth may decay) the mind cannot
choose but be rich. Therefore it is better to have a rich mind with Wisdom,
than a full purse with Folly.


OMEN. Your words are to be affirmed for truth: and as it is commonly said,
they have never an evil day that have a good night: so they have never an
evil life that have a good death. Poor wisdom dies always richly: but rich
folly dies poorly. Therefore as one cannot think himself happy before his
happy end: so cannot one think himself unhappy that wisdom leads, who
assuredlye will bring him to an happy end. Me thought I heard you say, that
many with you do pro^a^e the Sabbath day, with much wickedness, as with
swearing, and other execrable vices. May I believe you?


SIVQILA. Yea, as well as I may believe you in many things that you have
spoken. Nay, I tell you, they will not stick to swear and for swear
themselves on that day.


OMEN. Then I think they will not spare to do it on other days.


SIVQILA. Be sure of that: if sinful swearing might make the Sabbath day,
then every day in the week would be a Sabbath day with us.


OMEN. Then it is very like they will swear as well for toys and trisles, as
for the trial of Truth. But either you have no law for such, or else you
execute not the law on such. But if such swearers were with us, we would make
them leave their swearing, or else we would bar them of their speaking.


SIVQILA. Which way?


OMEN. We would cut out their tongues, if no ways would warn them. If one
should swear with us (as it is impossible to find a swearer in all our
country, the first time, he should be admonished by a Preacher or Minister:
but if he should swear the second time, he should then presentlye be put out
of his house, least he should bring the plague of God among his neighbors:
but at the tweluemonths end, if he has lived honestly and without swearing
all that while, he shall be suffered to enjoy and dwell in his house again.
But, if he should swear the third time, he should then (without pardon) have
his tongue cut out, and then we are sure, he may well think an oath, but he
cannot swear an oath.


SIVQILA. Oh that we had that law and well executed. Well, though there be no
law for punishing such swearers with us, yet God with horrible and soddaine
death has oftentimes plagued such Swearers with us. Whereof one being in
high favor with his Prince, thoroughe envy and malice procured the King to
put his own brother to death, for whose death the King was afterward
very sorry: Which noble man after sitting with the King at meat, and spying
the Kings butter stumbling (bearing a cup of drink in his hand) recovering
himself again quickly with the other foot, said: There one brother helped
an other. Which, when the King heard, he said: So might my brother have
helped me if he had bin alive: blaming him then for his brothers death. At
which time, the said noble man went about to excuse himself to the King, by
for swearing himself before God, and took a piece of bread and said: so
safely might I eat this piece of bread, as I am guiltless of your brothers
death: and therewith he dyed sodaynely, choked with the said piece of bread.
Thus was this for sworn wretch with horrible and sudden death plagued by God,
that thought himself safe from the punishment of man.


OMEN. He had been better to suffer the penalty of our law a great deal.


SIVQILA. It was credibly reported, that a lusty ladde with us, (a solemn
swearer,) loosing his money at Dice, had ^lasphemed God with many terrible
oaths, saying: If I had the Devil here, I would eat him: who had no sooner
spoken these words, but a Spider (or else the Devil in the likeness of a
Spider) came down over his mouth: which, as soon as he saw, he snatchte into
his mouth, and so dyed presently.


OMEN. A fearful example, and enough (me thinks) to Mark.
make every one cease from swearing. If it were a Spider, then it was
sufficient to destroy his body: but if it were the Devil, it was enough to
destroy him and a thousand such both body and soul. Surely it is for want of
punishing of offenders, that you have so many offenders: and because we punish
without pardon, we have no swearers to crave pardon. Nay, Lying is so much
detested with us, that if one lie in sport, he shall be punished in earnest:
for, if one make a pleasant lie, though he hurt no body therewyth, for the
first such lie he shall be reproved, for the second such Lie he shall be five
days imprisoned: and for the third such Lie, and every other such Lie
after, he shall be banished from the place he dwells in for the space of three
months* but if one with us should make a Lie to the deceyuing or hurting of
any, or speak a Lie before a Magistrate or a Judge, then the party for every
such Lie, shall be constrained to hold his peace, and to speak never a word
to any person the space of three months after, unless he shall be required
of some Ruler for some urgent matter: and he shall wear on his Sleeue all that
while, an H. and an L. for a Hurtful Liar.


SIVQILA. But what if any shall receive harm, loss, or damage by his making
of that lie?


OMEN. Then the said Liar shall restore out of his own goods, lands, or
living, as mucle to the party so hurt or en^ omaged, as will fully satisfy the
same: if al his goods, lands or living are able to do it.


SIVQILA. But shall the Liar have no more harm if any should chance to be
hurt, wounded; or maimed, by his said lie?


OMEN. Yes, be bold of that: for, if any be hurt, Mark.
wounded, or maimed, through the false report or Lie of any body, the Liar
immediatelye shall be hurt, wounded, or maimed on the same part of his body,
and in such order, as the party was hurt by means of the said Lie. And I
will show you how such a Liar was served with us.


SIVQILA. How I pray you?


OMEN. There was one (but it is a great while since,) that owing one of his
neighbors evil will, and unable to hurt him himself, went and told a
lusty fellow, a shameful Lie of him, who, he was sure, would not only soon
believe him, but also would pay him home for it, saying: Sir, did you ever
hurt or harm such a man? No truly, (said he) that I wot of, and to tell
you truly, I scantly know him if I see him. Then said the Liar, he has
much misused you, for he said, that you are both a common Drunkarde, and
such a common Liar, that never a word you speak can be credited. Then said
the other, I would I knew where he were, for then I would be revenged on him
for thus misusing of me: mary (said the Liar) yonder he is, you can have no
better time than now to deal with him. At which time immediatelye the other
furiously did fly upon him, and by chance (thrusting at his face) he
did quyte put out one of his eyes.


SIVQILA. Then what was done to the man that did so hurt him.


OMEN. Forsoothe he had the law therefore in all points, as before is
described. But my whole tale tends to this naughty Liar, which was the
occasion he was so hurt.


SIVQILA. I pray you sir, what reward had he for the making of that lie?


OMEN. Such a reward as did stick to him as long as he lived: For he was
brought before the Ruler there, who caused imediatelye the like eye of his to
be put out: and then he was commanded to silence for three months, and he
did wear the badge of H. and L. so long.


SIVQILA. Oh such a law with us, and so well executed, would teach many a one
to tell truth, that do now almost nothing but lie.


OMEN. What? is lying thought so small an offense with you, that there is no
law nor punishment for it?


SIVQILA. Yea indeed is it. Nay, merry and pleasant lies we take rather for a
Sport than for a Sin. Lying with us is so loved and allowed, that there are
many times gamings and Prises therefore purposely, to encourage one to out lie
another.


OMEN. And what shall he gain that gets the victory in lying?


SIVQILA. He shall have a silver Whetstone for his labor.


OMEN. Surely, if one be worthy to have a Whetstone Consider this.
of Silver for tellyng of Lies, then one is worthy to have a Whetstone of Gold
for telling of Truth: truly me thinks a Whip of Whitleather were more meet for
a Liar, than a Whetstone of Silver.


SIVQILA. In my judgment he was either a notable Liar, or loved Lying better
than Saint Paul did, that devised such a reward for such an evil desert. I
marvel what moved him* that the lewdest Liar should have a Silver Whetstone
for his labor.


OMEN. I know not, unless he thought he was worthy for his lying to go
always with a blunte knife, whereby he should not be able to cut his meat:
and that he should have no other Whetstone wherewyth to sharp his knife, but
the same of Silver which he had won with lying.


SIVQILA. What his fond fancy was therein I know not: but I wish^, that every
such liar had rather a sharp knife, and no meat, tha^ to have meat enough,
with a blunt edged knife ^ until they left their lying. Saint Austine would
in no wise have us to lie, though it might do good. For, if a man lay at the
point of death (says he) that has a son dead by travailing into a far
Country, yet we ought not to say unto the sick man, that his son is merry and
alive, though thereby we did know he should revive or recover his health.
Now, if we may not tell hurtlesse lies to do good: then we may not tell
hurtful and wicked lies to do evil. Saint Paul says, we may not do evil,
whereof good may follow: then we may not do evil whereof mischief may
follow. Christ is truth, and they that mean to resemble Christ: they that
mean to follow Christ: they that mean to have Christ their Captain: they
that mean to have Christ their Savior: they that mean to rise with Christ:
they that mean to dwell for ever in Heaven with Christ: let such learn to
tell truth with Christ. And they that mean to be exempt from the presence of
God: they that mean to lose the endless joys of Heaven: they that have lust
to lie in the furious flames of Hell fire: they that desire the fellowship of
the Devils in Hell: and they that would gladlye be tormented of the Devil for
ever without any mercy, let them lie and spare not: and if they be not fully
instructed in lying, let them learn to lie of their father the Devil, who is,
and has bin the head Captain of liars from the beginning.


OMEN. Well, such as do serve under this Captain, were best now flee from
him. For now in this life they may, but if they be once his hired and pressed
souldioures in Hell, then they cannot.


SIVQILA. I think it is better by telling of truth to go unto Heaven, than by
telling of lies to go unto Hell. But I pray you, what if any with you should
chance to forswear themselves, called as witnesses before Rulers,
Magistrates, or Judges?


OMEN. As soon as they are proved perjured, their tongs a law for Perjury in
Mauqsun.
are cut out, without any pardon, whereby we are sure, they will never
commit perjury any more: and half of all their goods straight-waye is
converted unto the Kings use. But in this case the king has never y^ more
goods, nor they fewer tongs.


SIVQILA. Why so?


OMEN. For there are none with us y^ will once swear Mark the godly conside
ration of the men of Manqsun.
an oath, or take the name of God in vain: much less, that will for swear
themselves. For, every one with us does think verily, that if they should
but once take the name of God in vain, that then Gods plague would continue
in their house: but if they should forswear themselves, they believe
faithfully, that then God would send fire from heaven, and burn both them and
their house.


SIVQILA. And truly there are some such shameless Mark.
swearers with us, and that are so Godless and Faithless, that, if God
himself should warn them over night, and say: If thou will not leave thy
swearyng, look to morrow for thy consuming: yet I think verily, they would
scantly regard it, or swear any one whitte the less.


OMEN. Well, I doubt that such do fear more the short punishing of their
bodies here, than the continual tormenting of their souls in Hell. For I am
in this opinion, that, if a few of your swearers were brydeled with our
Bytte, and were punished without pardon, (as they in our Country are, if they
doe-cha^^ice to offend) their great oaths would be turned into Yea and Nay.


SIVQILA. I have such good lyking to your law, that I wish it, or such like,
were executed with us as a Law. But sir, I pray you, what if any be troubled,
sewed, or imprisoned by false report or wrong information with you?


OMEN. What if Fire be turned into Water, Birds into Fishes, Tabers and Belles
into Buckets? I tell you there are none with us that will once tell a lie, or will
give any wrong information against any.


SIVQILA. You dwell in such a Country as I never heard of* you have not so
few such, but we have as many such.


OMEN. Yea, but if you did use such, I durst lay a wager, that shortly you
should have none such.


SIVQILA. How would you use such, if you had any such?


OMEN. If any with us should falsely suggest or molest, a law for false
informers.
or give any wrong information against any, the party that has wrongfully
suggested or informed, shall incur the like danger, penalty and punishment, as
the party against who^ the information was made, should have done, if the
suggestion or information against him had bin true. As if the party complained
of, should have lost his eyes, ears, hands, or tongue (if the information had
bin true) then the false suggester, or wrong informer shall lose his eyes,
ears, hands, or tongue, And if the party complained of, should have lost his
life, (if the information had bin true) then the informer or suggester shall
lose his life, if his information be false. And so of loss of lands, goods,
prisonment, or any other punishment. A rare example I will tell you of one with
us, how he was used that gave wrong and wicked information against one, only
of malice and spite, and the rather because he thought to have begged his
living.


SIVQILA. Tell it, for I will hear you attentively.


OMEN. There was once in our Country, a very wicked a strange example of a
wicked informer
fellow, that dwelled nighe unto a very godly and honest man: who, as the
Devil does not love God, so this diuelishe fellow could not abide his godly
neighbor: and as he hated him, so he hasted to work his destruction. And
because he sought no more but his life, he devised words of high treason,
that he should speak against the King, and he informed y^ Ruler there, of his
own devised words, saying, that he himself heard him speak the^. And to make
the thing more cock sure, he hired two witnesses to affirm, that they heard
him likewise speak the same words of treason: which, when the Ruler heard, he
sent for the party that was co^playned of, to whom when he was come, the ruler
and Judge said: Sir, here is one of thy neighbors (as I understand) has
informed, that thou have spoken words of high treason against the king: and he
has not only heard thee speak them, but here are also two witnesses that did
hear thee also. Which, when this goodman heard, he was so astonished, that he
could scantly speak one word, to whom the Ruler said: Sir, you were best
speak your self, and to excuse your self: for here are three come to accuse
you. And then y^ man remembering himself, kneeled down and said: O my God and
heavenly father, thou know whether I am guilty in this that is laid to my
charge or not: as thou deliueredst Daniel out of the Lions den, the three
children out of the ^ierie furnace, and chaste Susanna from the two wicked
Judges: Deliver me Lord for thy mercies sake at this present, from these
ra^enors that seek guiltless my spoil and destruction: and with that he rose
up, and said to the Ruler as follows: I beseech you to examine them
severally by themselves, what were the words I spoke, where I spoke them, and
when I spoke them, and the Judge did so. Which, when he had done, he found
every one of them agree in one tale. And then the Ruler said to the accused
man, these men do all agree, that in such a place, and in such a day, and how
thou did speak such words against the King: therefore, as far as I see, I
must be constrained to give judgment against thee, according to the law. At
whose words the accused man kneeled down again, and said with weeping tears:
Oh Lord, as I am guiltless, so let me not be helpless: in thee is al my hope,
thou never deceiuest them that put their trust in thee: thou art able to
plead in my cause. The^ the Ruler had him arise, and said unto him: I
perceive thou have a seruent trust in God. Well, I will charge these thy
adversaries a little straighter. Well Masters, this good man whom you have
accused here of high treason, is judged of all that know him, to be as faithful
to God, as obedient to his Prince, and as loving to his neighbors, as courteous
to strangers, as liberal to the pore, and as commodious to his country, as any
of us al, and a great deal more than any of you three that have accused him.
But, for that we are to do Justice, we mean not, but according to your
accusations, to proceed against him. Notwithstanding, I will say to you by the
way, that if he die guiltless through your false accusatio^s, God will not only
plague you, as long as you live, with a troubled and tormented conscience, but
also with desperate minds at your deaths, which is the very line that leads
you to hell. Let Judas be a pattern to you, that falsely betrayed Christ his
Master: for as soon as he had taken the money y^ he betrayed him for, did he
not straitways despair, whereby he never asked pardon of God for his fault,
and so desperately hanged himself, and his vowels gushed out? and so he is
become the child of perdition, whereby he has lost heaven for Hell, pleasure
for pain, gladness for sadness, and God for y^ Devil. Is not this a proper
gain, that his money has brought him? Therefore you that are witnesses, if you
have taken money for the betraying of this accused man, your money will bring you
Judas gain, unless you repent you otherwise than Judas did, which gain, is
to be for ever in the torments of Hell fire, with the Devil and his Angels, and
to be expulsed from the presence of God. And thereat the accused man kneeled
down and said: Oh Lord defend me, Mark how God defends y^ righteous.
and plead now my cause. And as soon as the accused man had spoken these
words, there came one man in great have, and preased to come before the Judge,
saying as follows: Oh worthy Judge, you sit here in the place of God the most
high and greatest Judge, and the Judge of al Judges, to hear the truth without
any partiality, and to judge according to right and equity: whose faith is so
firm, whose godliness is so great, and whose truth is so tried, that I am
assured, that nothing can make you wrye from the right way. To whom the
Judge said, thereof assure thy self, for I know, and it is always in my mind
when I sit in this place, that though I cannot see God in heaven, yet he sees
and beholds me on earth. Do you not think, that if the King of our Country,
were here now in this place, but that I would examine all things appertayning
to this matter so exactly, go about to boulte out the truth with such
diligence, and judge the same without favor or affection according to
equity, whereby to please the King? yes verilye. Then how much more ought I
to examine with equity, try out the truth diligently, and judge without
partiality, seeing our good God the King of all Kings, and Judge of Judges, is
now present in this place, and will not only hear all the whole matter from
the beginning to the end, but also will pour his vengeance upon you, if you
witness falsely, and on me, if I judge not uprightly, who hears what we say,
sees what we do, and knows what we think. For, if the painter can see, that
makes an eye that cannot see, then God must needs see, that made our eyes
that can see. If he can hear, that makes an ear, that cannot hear, then God
of force must needs hear, yt has made our ears that ca^ hear. And shall not
he also that made our hearts likewise, know what we think in our hearts? yes
doubtless. Therefore take you great heed, al ye that have to speak before me in
this case, for whatsoever you speak unto me, either true or false, you speak
to God: and if you speak true, God will protect you, if you will speak false,
then God will detest you. Which of you al, if the Kings Majesty were here in
the next room or chamber, durst utter a lie so loud, that the King knowing it
to be a lie, should hear it? Then what is he that dare once presume to bear
false witness against his neighbor, in the hearing of God the great King of
all, that makes Kings and puts down Kings at his pleasure, who is present here
before us all in this place, (though not personally, yet spiritually:)
therefore now my friend, I am determined to hear the truth, to try out the
truth, and to Judge according to truth, and therefore I charge thee speak
nothing but the truth. Then said the same fellow that came to speak with
the Judge so hastily: my Lord, I heard but even a while since (as God would)
that one is accused before you of high treason. Then said the Judge, in deed
here is such a one, do thou know him? there he stands besides thee. Then
said the fellow: of truth my Lord, I know him not, but I have heard him
as much commended for his goodness, as this his accuser is discommended for
his euilnesse: so it may be (said the Judge) and yet he never the better, nor
the other the worse: for perhaps you never heard him commended, nor the other
discommended. Yes truly my Lord (said the fellow) I have heard both, and
that not of a few, which I speak here unfeignedly, both before the
Majesty of GOD and you. And for that we are all bound to tell the truth, and
to defend the innocente as much as it lies in us. I am come now in the
fear of God, and in singleness of heart, to utter so much unto you, as
thereby you may the better suck out the soothe, and try out the truth. But
first I pray thee, said the Judge, do thou know his accuser? yea that I
do (said the fellow) more of his seeking than of my desiring. Well now tell
on thy tale, said the Judge, and I will hear thee attentively. Then said the
fellow to the Judge, this accuser here that has accused this man for high
treason against the King, was very importunate four or five times at the
least with me, to be a witness against him therein, and if I would affirm
when need should stand, that I heard him speak the words, he would give
me a great sum of money, and said moreover, that after his death, he hoped
to have great part of his living, whereof, some lay very nigh to his house (but
I hope he shall have as much good of it, as Iesabel had of Nabothes Uineyard.)
And he promised me also, that if he fared well, that I should fare never the
worsse. But I liked his fare so well, that I said his fare was too ^ne for me to
feed on: and so by no means I would consent to his most wicked purpose,
saying moreover to him at my departing, take heed, for you think this is the
very way to win, but believe me, believe me, it is the very high way to
loose. If he loose his short life here guiltless, then he shall find his life
in heaven endless. And though by his death you seem to live the richer here:
yet by this your wicked life, you shall procure your eternal death in Hell,
where you shall never see God, nor shun the Devil. And then he went very
sorrowfully from me, more (as it seems by the sequel) for that he could not
procure me to his purpose, tha^ that he was sorry for his sin. Then said the
Judge, I fear this fume is not without fire, it smells somewhat of the smoke:
what say you that are his accuser to this? then said the accuser, O my Lord,
this man that is the traitor, has procured this man with money to save
himself by slaundring of me. Consider this man speaks on the behalf of a
Traitor, and I speak on the behalf of a King. Is the King (said the Judge)
so desirous of his subjects wrongful death, as he would have none to tell
truth in y^ defense of their life? We do the King no wrong to try out the
truth, and to save an innocent: neither do we the King right, if we hear not
true witnesses against a Traitor, and judge him according to the law: but
assure thy self, that thy naming of the King, (whom I reverence) shall neither
let us from doing of right, nor yet constrain us to do any wrong. We have a
heavenly King here present, though our earthly King be absente, whom I honor,
fear, and reverence, more than I may or ought my earthly sovereign: for he
is mortal, and can kill but the body, nor that neither, unless God give him
leave: but God our heavenly King that is here present, can kill at his pleasure
both body and soul for ever in Hell fire. Well sir (said the accuser) I have
two witnesses to affirm my tale, and he has but one to speak on his side: and
yet that that he has spoken, is nothing with him if it be well considered, for
he does not say, that he that we accuse did never speak such words of
treason, but he has invented a frivolous matter, only to discredit me.
Therefore I beseech you (oh worthy Judge) to consider, that the traitor neither
has said, nor can say any thing for himself, nor this fellow (hired by him as
it seems) has said any thing to the purpose. Then the man that was accused
said to the Judge: oh my Lord consider yt truth and the innoce^ts cause: as I
stand here before God and you, so I will not lie neither to God nor you, the
truth is, when I was presented to come before you, I knew not the cause
thereof, which being true, as God knows y^ is here present, the time is very
short, as your Lordship and all the rest here may very well judge, to
premeditate, procure, or practice any such policy. And as for this man, which
y^ lord I am sure has sent on my side, I never saw him, or spoke with him in
all my life to my remembrance. Therefore my Lord, think that I am here as
guiltless Susan, and this man God has raised up instead of Daniel, which I
doubt not at length, but will be able to counteruaile against these two false
witnesses, that are in stead of two wicked Judges. And GOD that is here my
perpetual patron, is sufficient and able to counteruaile this my wicked
accuser. And then as soon as this honest accused man had said these words to
the Judge, an other strange manne came in hastilye, and preaced very much to
speak to the Judge, and said: oh my Lord, I fear that here are three Wolves
determined to devour a simple and innocent Lamb. How know thou that, said
the Judge? truly then said the man, I was going even now within this hour
three or four miles from home about certain urgent business, and as I was
going, I met by chance, (nay rather by Gods providence) with one that asked me
if I knew such a man, to whom I answered and said that I knew him not, but I
have heard a good report of him, to be both honest, godly, and charitable.
Well then said he again to me, he is like to be cast away this day for high
treason against the King. What is the cause, and who is his accuser, said I:
and then he declared unto me, the words of treason that he should speak, and
named this man (that stands here) to be his accuser therein, which when I
heard, hearing so much good of the man accused, and knowing so much evil of
the accuser, I cut off my needeful journey, and came hither with great speed,
to tell a truth, and to save an innocent, if by any means I may. Then said the
Judge to him, think thou that this man that is accused of treason, is
guiltless therein? Yea that I do, said the fellow, or else this his accuser
would never have hired me to bear false witness against him therein. Is this
true that thou say, said the Judge: yea my Lord that it is (said the
fellow) he cannot well deny it, for I am sure half a dozen times at the
least, he was very importunate on me to bear witness against him in thus
same matter that he has accused him of, and offered me money therefore
largely: and understanding partly my need, he thought I could no more refuse
his money, than he could resist the Devil when he moved him to mischief. For if
I would have consented to him herein, this good man had not bin so long
vnaccused as he is: therefore I beseech your lordshippe to consider well of it,
for I am neither desired, hired, brybed, nor procured to come hither now, to
speak this that I have said. Tell me truly, said the Judge, do thou
know the man that is accused? no sir (said the fellow) I never saw him in all
my life that I wot of, but I have heard of his good name, and honest fame:
but I know his accuser very well, for he offered me money to be a false
witness against him half a dozen times at the least, as I said before. Did
not I tell you said the Judge, that after this fume fire would follow? and
then the accused kneeled down upon his knees with weeping tears, saying: O
Lord now I perceive thou have heard my prayer and performed my petition: in
stead of my accusers, two false witnesses, thou have sent me two true
witnesses, by which two witnesses (and al through thee) my truth shall be
tried, and their falsenesse shall be found. And then the Judge said to the
accuser, how say you to this sir? here are two witnesses stirred up by God,
against your two witnesses, procured by the Devil: Mark the Judge.
I perceive thou lokedst for nothing less, tha^ that these two should have come
hither to declare the truth as they do. Well, it is the Lord our God that has
sent them, and none else. What can thou say to this? Then said the accuser,
oh my Lord, both these are hired for money, for the delivery of this Traitor,
and for my destruction. A vain excuse (said the Judge) for this man has
protested before God that he knew not the cause he was sent for, when I did
send for him. Which if it be so, it is very unlikely, that since I laid the
matter to his charge, he should procure this practice, and find such friends
that he never knew before, in so short a time, especially seeing he never
spoke nor once whispered to any since his coming hither: but seeing (said the
Judge) the truth of every matter ought to be tried by the oths of the
informers or witnesses, therefore I will have every one of you in this case
deposed. And first, will you two that came of your own motion, or rather by God
procured, (as I think) swear now before the Lord, without malice,
affection, envy, spite, hatred, or without any other sinister means, only
for truths sake, that this accuser of this man of high treason against the
King, would have hired you for money, to be false witnesses against this
accused man in this same case whereof he now is accused? Then said the same
two men to the Judge, yea my Lord, that we will with all our hearts: for as
the Lord knows the secrets of all our hearts, we have said nothing, nor
will say any thing, but only the truth. Then said the Judge to them, now
take your oaths thereof: and so they were deposed and sworn, and then the
Judge bid them stand aside, and commanded the accuser and his two witnesses
to take their oaths before him, that the accused man did speak such words of
treason whereof they accused him. And as they were taking their oaths, the one of
y^ witnesses could not speak, for the Lord did make his tongue to swell in his
mouth, that it was horrible to see. The other witness immediatelye fell down
before them stark lame, and the wicked accuser was then stricken blind. At which
sudden change and righteous stroke of God, ye Judge and all the rest were
amazed. Then said the Judge: oh wicked wretches, did not I warn you of this
before? do you think that God that is all truth, will wincke at wickedness or
favor falshod? what say you now, is this man guilty in that whereof you have
acused him? why do you not speak? though one of your tongs is swollen by the
right judgment of God, yet I believe god has reserved some of your tongs to
utter the truth, and to excuse this innocent lamb appointed to the slaughter.
Then the false witness that was stricken lame, said to the Judge, we have
worthily deserved the wrath of God, which now is iustlye fallen upon us: we
might have taken heed before by your good admonitions, profitable persuasions,
and witty warnings, but that we lacked the good grace of God. Therefore as one
yt is compelled by the great God (ruler of al things) I will open unto your
Lordship all the whole truth. This good man that is accused, is most falsely
and unjustly accused: and this man whose tongue is thus swollen in his head, as you
see, and I that am so suddenly become lame, for greediness of money given unto
us by this now wicked blind man, have acused this good man, and witnessed that
he heard him speak such words of treson, whereas the Lord knows, we never
heard him speak any such thing. And even as this blind wicked wretch did
entice with money and fair promises these two good men (but all in vain) who
have helped to save this innocente: even so he gave us money with many fair
promises of great rewards to condemn most unjustly this innocente. Whereat
the manne with the ^wolne tongue made signs with his hands looking toward
heaven, affirming thereby, that all was true yt his lame fellow had said. The^
y^ Judge said, oh vile varlets not worthy to live: what say thou (thou
wicked accuser) to this? whom God most righteously has stricken blind: are
not thy diuelishe devises come to a trim drift? Then the blind accuser kneeled
down upon his knees and said: I am worthy to dye, it is only I, that for
spite and malice, and hope of worldely gain, have mused this mischief, and
procured this practice against this godly, virtuous, and innocent man. Then
said the Judge to ye innocent man, give God the praise, for it is he that has
wrought this wonder: then said the innocent man, kneeling upon his knees: O
Lord, I thank thee, that thou have not only heard me, but also have delivered
me, blessed be thy name for ever. Then the accuser and the two false witnesses,
by the judgment of the Judge, were tied in four several parts to four
strong horses, that is, either arm to a horse, and either leg to a horse: and
then when the horses were ierked, every one of them was torn a sunder, and all
their lands and goods were sold and given to the relief of the poor.


SIVQILA. Surely herein God wrought wonderfully, and the Judge very godly and
truly. If this law were so executed with us as it is with you, many that are
troubled should live more in quiet: many should have right, that now have much
wrong: and many should be vnaccused, that now are falsely accused.


OMEN. Where Gods word is plenty, there Justice should not be dainty. I muse
that Sin is so suffered, where Gods word is so preached. I perceive, with you
there are mo Professors than Followers.


SIVQILA. I would it were not so. Is there any with you that use to play at
Dice?


OMEN. None at all: but, if there were any, they would Never a Dicer in M^^qsun.
not be swearing Dicers, that will eat the Devil at a bitte in the likeness
of a Spider, (according as you told the tale of late) we have a law with us,
that every one that plays at Dice or Cards for money, or for any other thing
of any value, the winner shall forfeite so much and twice as much more as he
wins: and the looser shall forfaite as much more as he loses: which
forfaiture shall be divided into three equal parts, one part whereof shall
be to the use of the King, one other part thereof shall be to the use of the
reuealer, and the third part thereof shall be equallye divided among ten of
the poorest neighbors, dwelling next to the house or place, where the said
money is won or lost. And for every hour that they play, at one time,
both the winner and looser shall be imprisoned one month.


SIVQILA. If this law be as strictlye executed, and as narrowlye looked to, as
the rest of your Laws: then there is not so much money won and lost with
you in a whole year, as there is with us in one day, nay in one hour.


OMEN. Whether it be executed or not I know not, but there is not one Dicer nor
yet Carder in all our Country. Our Rulers, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen
(wishing rather to profit other, than to fill their purses with other men's
pence, and to solace their wearied minds by honest The exercise of the higher
sort.
pastimes, tha^ to get greedy gain by devilish and detestable Diceplaye) do
use diverse times (when they do play) to play at Chesse, the Astronomers
game, and the Philosophers game, which whettes their wits, recreates their
minds, and hurts no body in the mean season.


SIVQILA. These games you speak of are too busy for many of our heads: and
many of our heads are otherwise too busy to follow your good orders.
Diceplaye is so commonly used with us, that many boys, seruingmen, and other,
are more expert in playing at Dice, than in David's Psalms.


OMEN. Have you no laws against such unlawful games?


SIVQILA. Yes, we have Laws to forbid them, and Mark well.
licenses to allow them.


OMEN. That is as though a Father should command his son to go to School,
and immediately give him leave Mark this well.
to play the Trewant. Those laws shall never be well kept, that are licenced to
be broken. Nay, if we have laws, we keep laws.


SIVQILA. And if we have laws, we break laws. If men would consider, what
per^lles Diceplaye procures, what mischiefs it maintains, and what driftes
it does This is to be noted.
drive: then many would loath it, that now do love it: many would detest
it, that now delighte in it: and many would forsake it, that now do favor
it. Have not many lost in one year at Dice so much, as their friends were
getting all their whole life? Have not many lost at Dice in a week, that that
would well have served them a whole year? How many honorable and worshipful
houses have been so overthrown by Diceplay, that they are utterly unknown at
this day, and perhaps some now beg their bread, whose ancestors have
had Lordly livings, and utterly consumed by Diceplay, and other unthrifty
games. Has not Diceplay driven many a one to borrowe, that else had bin able
to lend? Do not many lose so much at Dice in an hour, as they cannot get
honestly and truly in a whole Week? Whosoever shall play at Dice or at any
other game for money or other gain, the best is, he can but win, and then one
or other that he plays withal, must needs lose. Then consider, God says:
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: which, if I ought to do, then I
must not have my neighbor to lose, to make my self to win. For, his losing
by that means, can not be my winning. Therefore, though I seem to win by
his loss: yet I lose as well as he. Love bids me rather lose to make my
brother win: and Hate bids me win with my neighbors loss: therefore, if I love
my neighbor as my self, then I cannot win with his loss, though I seem to
win: the^ I must needs lose if he lose. Thus it is proved, that he that does
win at play is a loser. And also he that wins at Dice or at any other game
(whereby any has loss that plays with him) leeseth the favor of God,
because he favors not him (that he plays withal) as himself, and does
laughe with his loss: which shows he does rather loath tha^ love his
neighbor. And further, he that wins at Dice or at any other kind of game,
loses Time, a precious treasure, not to be recovered again, in which time,
whiles he was doing of evil in playing, he should have used some godly
exercise. Thus he that wins at Dice, or at any other game, is a threefold
loser. Now, if they that think themselves winners, be such They that win are
three fold loosers.
great losers as I have proved: then I count them more fonder than fools, that
will play at Dice or at any other game, where the loser is hurt or hindered
thereby. Therefore, if the winners must needs make an account, that they are
such great loosers: then the loosers by no means can prove they are winners.
So that if these Diceplayers and other greedy gamesters would be ruled by me,
they should leave Diceplaying and such like (which are the games of the Devil)
and fall to perfect prayer, the exercise of the son of God. If Diceplayers and
other vain gamsters, did deeply discern The gain of Diceplay and such like.
what gain Dicing, Carding, and other covetous gaming do bring, they would
shun them as a Serpent, and detest them as the Devil. For first this Diceplay
and such like, does kindle Gods fury, it spendes the time vainly, it enticeth
to envy, it consumes goods immoderatly, it makes me^ swear horribly, it freats
the mind wonderfully, it brings age untimely, it makes a needelesse
necessity, it brings the rich to poverty, it tempts a great sort to
theeuerie, it helps many to hanging speedily, it makes many live miserably,
and I fear it drives some to dye desperately, al which do please the Devil
exceedingly,


OMEN. These are branches that such Brambles do bear. If this be ye gain
that grows of Dicing or gaming, a man can not well put his son to a worse
occupation than it. Well, if you would execute the law for Dicing and such
other gaming that we have, you should have as few Dicers and other vnthrif^ie
gamsters as we have.


(...) to mark it so. I like your laws exceeding well: and I like the
executing of them as well. I pray you sir are the Lords and Ladies, and such
like, courteous, gentle, and affable with you?


OMEN. Marvelous as ever you knew: the more higher of degree with us, the more
courteous, affable and gentle, (if there may be any exceeding therein.) The
Lords, Ladies, The curteousnesse and affability of the nobility of Mauqsun.
and other higher powers with us, have always in their mind, that Christ the
son of God was as well borne as they (especially on the fathers side) and is
of as high a degree as the best King or Emperor on the Earth, none excepted.
(If I said one degree higher, I lied not.) And they seeing, that he (being the
son of God) was most humble, gentle, and meek of all other, do think that
it were a mere madness for them to be haughty, stubborn, proud, and stout.
They remember h^^ words very well* which said: Learn of me, They learn of a
good scholemaister
for I am humble and meek. And because they know, that they can learn of
none better than of him: therefore they do learn by him to be humble and
meek. And I believe they shall gain more at length by learning humbleness
and Be hold of that.
meekness of him: than by learning proudnesse and stoutness of the Devil.


SIVQILA. Are all your Nobility of that humility you speak of?


OMEN. What else? For it is as hard a thing to find with us a haughty heart
in the Nobility, a lostie look in the Ladies, or a disdainefull countenance
in the Gentlemen, or their wives, as it is to find a meek mind in a froward
woman, a chaste heart in a Harlot, or liberality in a niggard ^or S^udge.


SIVQ. Truly there are many such noble men, Ladies, Gentlemen and Gentlewome^
with us: but I will not say, that all are so, least happily I may be found a
liar. Then Mark well.
belike they brag not of their blood, are not stout of their stock, or
proud of their progeny.


OMEN. That were as though a scuruy jade should brag because he came of the
race of Bucephalus, Great Alexanders Horse, none do win estimation with us
by the exploytes Mark.
of other, but by their own deserts, (as good reason is) else might many
lewd lozels look loftily, because they descended long since of the live of
some Lord. Nay, with us, he that will have praise himself, must win
praise himself: and he that will be counted a Gentleman, must use himself
like a Gentleman: and I think there is none so fond with you, that means to
merit by other men's manners, that will prate of their parents, that tread
not in their steps, and will brag of that thing they never did.


SIVQILA. Think you so in deed? then you are much deceived. I tell you there
are such with us, and that not a few.


OMEN. Then I must needs count them fools, that brag of burdens that other
men bear.


SIVQILA. I will assure you, that many with us will boaste of their birth,
that cannot boast of their life: that will Note here
blaze out their Pedigree, that know not Gentilitie: and that wil-prate of
their Progeny, that is shame to their kindred.


OMEN. Such kind of persons, is vanity of Uanityes. What praise can it be to
a Pear tree to bring forth a Crab? and what dispraise for a Crab tree to
bring forth a Pear? Truly the Crab is a discommendation to y^ Pear tree
that bare it, and the Pear is a commendation to the Crab tree that bare it.
Even so a proud and statelye son, is a dishonor to the gentle Parents:
but a gentle son of good and worthy qualities is an honor to his ungentle
Parents. And truly one borne of a poor parentage, that does chance to
aspire to promotion by Learning, Virtue, and good qualities, is to be
reverenced and esteemed: and he that proceeds from a great parentage, and
falls to poverty, misery, or mischief, thoroughe riot, wickedness, or his
own folly, is not to be esteemed, but rather to be reproved: For, as the one
brings the first fame to his pore kindred: so the other brings the f^^ste
shame to his rich progeny.


SIVQILA. You have spoken both truly and wisely: but I pray you Sir, what if a
pore manne should come as a suter to any of them, will they be content to
talk with them presently, hear their tale gladly, and help their suit
speedily?


OMEN. For talking with them presentelye, and hearing their tale gladly, I am
sure they will: and if they can conveniently, they will likewise perform their
request: for they think it is the most dishonor to them that can be, that a
suter should go sad from them.


SIVQILA. But what if any of their servants through disdainfulness or
spite, do not tell their Lord, Lady, or Master, that such a suter would
speak with them, being required thereto?


OMEN. Forsooth, every such servant shall be emprisoned one month after, and
all that while whatsoever he sues for, shall be denied him.


SIVQILA. Truly a very good Law and order for all stout and stubborn
servants, against needy and simple Suitors. Then I perceive, seeing they are
wyllyng to help their Suitors in that that is no gain to themselves, then I
do believe they will not deny to help their poor Suitors in that that has
been profit unto themselves,


OMEN. You may be sure of that: for, if any noble manne, Lady, Knight or
Gentleman with us, do take or borrowe any thing of any upon their trust or
credit, they will either send them their money at their day, or else, if they
require to have it before their day (standing in great need) they will make
very hard shifte but they will help them to it, not only then most
willingly and gently thanking them for the good turn they have done them in the
forbearing of it so long, but also will do them some manifest pleasure
therefore if they can and never after will be unmindful thereof.


SIVQILA. Our Merchauntes and Artificers with us, would give a good deal, that
al with us were such as would use their creditors so courteously, perform their
promise so surely, and accept a good turn so thankfully. But that was never,
nor never will be: yet there are many such with us I dare boldly affirm. Many
will speak fair, to bring themselves in credit, and promise much, until
they ca^ get it: but neither pay, nor keep promise when they have got it.


OMEN. There was one with us long since, that of a base An example of one that
misused his creditors.
parentage came to great wealth and promotion, who, as he increased in
prosperity, decayed in honesty: as he augmented in goods, so he decreased in
goodness: and as he abounded in wealth, so he abandoned wisdom: and thereby he
became so proud, that he had forgot al his old friends, and no marvel, for he
had quite forgot himself. He was more bold to borrowe, than hasty to pay: and
because he was of great wealth and living, many did willinglye lend him, for
that they knew he was able to pay them: but his ability and fidelity were
far unlike, he never kept touch with his Creditors, and he loved them so
well, that he would never have his name out of their Books. If Promise were
paymente, he paid as well as any man, for all his paymentes consisted in
promises, but his Creditors had rather had few promises and good payment, than
many promises and slack payment. So that his credit at first, was turned into
discredit at last, for none would trust him of the value of a groat: and why?
because he would not only, if one asked it, threat the^, but also many times
beat them.


SIVQILA. That was but a homely kind of payment, the creditors were scantable
to live on it. He was a bountiful Gentleman I warrant you of his own goods,
that was so Mark.
greedy of other men's goods: belike he kept a good house for the pore. He that
would beat men for asking for their own: belike he would beat the pore if
they craved ought of his. The common wealth (no doubt) had a great commodity
of him. Proceed now in your tale, for I will advisedly hear you.


OMEN. Many of his creditors had bin so often with him for asking their own,
who^ he so threatened and misused, that they were so weary thereof, that they
let him alone wythal: but one among the rest, more stout tha^ the rest, more
pincht for want of his money than the rest, and to whom he ought more than to
any of the rest, watched his time, and met with Mark the words of the poor
creditor.
him (though he had rather have shunned him tha^ seen him) to whom he said
very gently and mildely: Sir, it is not unknown unto you, that you have ought
me a great deal of money so long, that I am much endebted and endamaged
through the want thereof. If I could as well spare it as you may well pay it, I
would be content to suffer you so long again to keep it in your hands as
you have done. But for that you know my case does compel me, necessity does
enforce me, and very poverty does procure me, therefore I ask and crave of you
for Gods sake, that sum of money which you owe me. And though it be a little
to you, yet it is a great deal to me, which small sum if you pay me, will
make me to swim, but if you withholde it, it will cause me to sinck. Therefore my
swimming or sinking lies in your hands, trusting, that whereas with lending
and forbearing of my money A homely answer.
I have helped you: you will not by withholding of it hinder or hurt me. To whom
the welthy debtor said both frowningly, frettingly, and furiously, away thou
varlet, have I nothing else to do than to wait to pay thee money? Call you it
waiting? (said the poor man) you were very wol content Note here.
to wait to receive my wares, and why can you not as well be content to wait
to pay me my money? Away thou knave (said the gentleman) or my fist shall wait
on your ear: to whom the pore creditor said: It were much against reason to
fight Mark.
with him with your fiste, in whom you have found such friendship and
favor: to threate him so furiously, that has lent you his wares so lovingly:
and to offer to beat him so rashly, that has forborne the money you owe him so
long. Which ungentle gentleman, before the man had full ended his words, did so
hurt and beat him, that thereby he was lame ever after of one of his arms. And
so he went away in a great rage, giving his friendly creditor strokes for
silver, evil for good, and punishment for payment. And this was all that he
could get on him for that time. And then the manne that was thus hurt or
beaten, as well as he could, went to the next Judge or Ruler, to whom he
declared all the whole cause, and how he was used for asking of his money,
which when the Ruler heard, he sent for the said Gentlemanne immediatelye,
who came to him presentlye, for he durst do none other, to whom he said with
very great grief: If Gentlemen, whose life ought to be a Lantern to lighten
their inferiors, whose lowliness ought to be a line to lead the lewder
sort, whose gentleness and goodness ought to be a guide to ye baser degrees,
and whose perfect keeping of promises should be a pattern to the rest of the
people, be most lewd in their living, most currishe in conditions, most false
of their Faith, most haughty in their hearts, and most unthankful for
benefits: how is it possible that the common or inferior sort, should be
any other? for, as it is said, such Sovereign such Subject: such
Superior, such inferior: such Master, such Manne: such Maistresse, such
Maid: such Schoolemaister, such Scholier: such Pastoure, such Parishioner:
and such Sheepehearde, such Sheep. The most Writers agree, that the Moon
receives her light of the Sun: then if the Sun be darkened, the Moon
must lack her light: Even so, if the Superioures and Gentlemen, have lost
the light of lowliness: be berefte of the brighte beams of bountifulness:
do want the glistering gleames of gentleness: be not furnished with
faithfulness, nor yet adourned with thankfulness (which are the very marks
and true badges to know a Gentlemanne by,) then must the inferiors of force,
want all kind of Virtue, honesty and goodness, because the light that
should lead them in the superiors, is quite extincte and put out. What a
horrible tale have I heard of you? You have ought this poor manne money a
great while, and he can not get it of you, though most lamentably and humblye
he has diverse times required it of you: which money you do not only keep
forceably from him, but even now lately you have maimed him for askyng hy^
own a good reward for his crediting of you, and a preatie paymente for
profyting of you. What? do you think you have a righteuus GOD in Heaven? a
Uertuous King on the Earth? and a just Judge here nyghe, that will revenge
this fact, punish offenders, and do equity and right as well to the poor
as the rich? as well to the high as the low, and as well to the mean as the
mighty? Then the Gentleman said to the Judge: my LORD, I neither owe this
man any money, neither have I beaten him, maimed him, or misused him. To whom
the Judge aunsweared: can you make me beeleeue that, as though a Gentleman
cannot lie, and as though your words were here of such credit, that the
poor man should thereby be driven out of countenance? do you think that this
poor man would ask you money, if you ought him none, especially being so
liberal, patiente, and gentle as you are? Can you make me believe, that this
manne durst be so bold to say you have hurt or maimed him, if you did it
not? he had been very well occupied to Father such lies on you. I am sure that
he had rather be at home about his business, than here, unless necessity
did urge him thereto. You know that we execute Justice equally and justly,
respecting no persons: he may well know, that if we punish rich and mighty
offenders, we will not suffer the poorer malefactoures to escape uncorrected.
And where you say that you owe him no money, here is your hand (which I
know very well) at his debt book. And therein you have offended the law for
lying, which (assure your self) shall be executed on you. You that will deny
such a manifest thing, you will not stick to lie in a secret thing. You that are
wealthy have aucthoritye to lie belike, but the children of God have
aucthoritye only to say true. And whereas you have said before me, that you
have neither hurt, maimed, nor misused him, if beating and mayming, be well
using of a man, then you have used him well. But if it be proved that you have
hurt or maimed him, then you have made another lie, the penalty of both which
lies you shall surely pay. Then said the Judge to ye maimed man, have thou any
witnesses here that he thus did beat thee and mayme thee? yea (my Lord) said
the man, I have three witnesses here ready to be deposed thereof, which three
the Judge deposed, and they affirmed the same. Then the Judge said, have you
not used this honest man that was so good unto you, more like a foe tha^ a
friend? truly it greeues me that such a one as you should be called by the
name of a Gentleman: you have not only kept this pore ma^s money from him a great
while, whereby he is much impouerished: but also you have maimed him, whereby he
is like to live the worse. But it is no matter, you are like to pay for that:
for though you know not the price of maiming, I will tech you y^ price of
mayming. Consider, the wares that you had of this man were his, and not yours:
but it seems that you have made the^ yours, and not his: but if they were his
as you cannot deny, and if you will not pay him for them, as you utterly refuse,
then you mean to deteine them by force, and to keep them as your own. Which,
though you are loath* I should call robbery, yet I cannot say that you have
them justly and truly, which signifyes as much as you have them falsely. As you
now hold the name of superiority, so ought you to take Considert his well.
heed you deserve not the contrary. I know you abhor the name of Theeuerie,
then why have you done that that belongs to such infamy? There are two kind of
thieves, one that steals for necessity, secretly, and fearfully, and another
that steal needelesse, openly, and boldly: truly I think that these second
kind of thieves that steal, needelesse, openly, and boldly, before God and
good men, are a great deal worse than the poor simple thieves that steal of
necessity, secretly and fearfully. Then the said Gentleman (fearing least
his offense should be revealed to the King if he stood any further in it,
knowing also that both the law in this case was very straight, and that the
Judge was so just, that nothing could make him halte from doing equity and
Justice,) when he heard the Judge say so, he began to relent, and said: I am
sorry my Lord that I have misused this man as I have done. Then the Judge said,
I pray God your sorrow may be such, that therefore you may mourn in your
mind. But if I had been such a one as would have been flattered with fair
words, have been procured with pleasant promises, and would priuilye have
taken gentle rewards (more rightlye called Bribes,) I fear that then this
your sudden sadness would have been turned into joy and gladness. Then the
Gentleman said, no my Lord, I beseech you take it not so. And then with that
came in one that was a very friend of the said Gentleman's, and thought he
might do much with the Judge, seeming by his attire, to be of a great
countenance and credit, who preased to speak with the Judge priuilye: to
whom the Judge said: Away, I will talk with none secretly, until this
matter be ended and judged: Yes good my Lord (said the suter,) it is for no
harm: Then you may tell it openly (said the Judge) if it be for good: the
matter (said the suter) is such, that it may not be told openly. Will you
(said the Judge) promise me by your credit and fidelity, that it touches
nothing this matter now dependyng before me, and that it requires such
speed, that my hearing Mark this well.
of it may not be delayed: Be well advised what you do, for I assure you, if
you shall lie unto me, you shall have the law executed on you, according to
the lie you tell. Wherewith the suter stayed and said nothing. To whom the
Judge said, is it not strange that he is now become dumb, that even now was so
desirous to speak? If your matter appertain not to this, I will hear you
priuilye: if you have ought to say in this your Friends cause, speak it
openly. At which words he would say nothing. To whom the Judge said
then, I must needs now think that you meante to offer me a bribe
secretly, which you were afraid to give openly: and therefore now because
you are like to incur a mischief whether you speak a lie priuilye, or the
truth openly, (for that you see I am not bente to shoot in your Bow,)
therefore wiselye (as you think) you hold your peace. But every wise manne
may consider, your sudden silence does show your naughty and subtle
suit. And if you will have me and all the rest here to think the better of
you, utter here openly what you would have spoken so privily to me. Then the
Suter said, Good my Lord judge better of me, for my meaning was not so evil
as you make it. Then tell out your tale, that I may take it better. Forsooth
my Lord (said the Suter) my words to you in secret should only have been
to desire you to be good unto this Lord my friend. Then said the Judge, was
not that as much to say, as to be evil to this poor manne, that he misused
as his foe? Forsoothe a preatie suit: as though this poor manne had not wrong
enough, but I that only am appointed by GOD and my king to do him right,
should for your sake do him more wrong: but truly, if these were the
words that you meante to speak to me, it had been better, both for my
credit (if I would have been allured) and for your honesty, (if you had
meante to seduce me) to have spoken these words openly, rather than
secretelye: for the secret talk between us among all this company, might
have bredde a suspicion, where none was: whereas the open telling thereof,
could never have done it. Mary I will not say, but that I and many other have
the worse opinion in you in speaking for your friend in so evil a cause.
Well, here is never a witness that can tell whether these were the very
words that you meant to speak to me in priuitie or not, but only GOD
which is witness good enough, and will be found true in his witnessing when
all other shall be found liars: and though you may now escape the worldly
punishment for lying, because we have no worldly witnesses against you, yet
assure you, you cannot escape the punishment in Hell without repentance for
lying, if GOD be a witness against you, (who says) that Liars shall have
their portion in the Lake that burns with fire and Brimstone, Well, suppose
that these were the words that you meant to tell me in secret, (which I can
hardly believe,) do you think that I would do more at your request for
this Gentlemanne in an evil matter, than I would at Gods request for this
poor man in a good and righteous cause? Do you think that you are able to
do me as much good for doing These words of the Judge are to be noted.
of wrong, as GOD ca^ne and will, for dooyng of right? believe it that list,
for I will not. GOD my heavenly Father and of all believers, that has made
me, that protectes me, that feeds me, that has saved me, and has prepared
for me his Kingdom of Heaven after my death (the like pleasure none other
has or can do for me) does say unto me and all other Judges, Audite parnos
ita vt magnos, Hear the small as well as the great: and says also, Just
iudicate, Judge justly or uprightly: and you come to me and say, which stand
as much in need of Gods help as I, I pray you to be good unto this my
friend, never a whit regarding the matter but the man. Might not I be thought
wise to loose the favor of GOD, for the friendship of you? to refuse his good
request, to perform your evil desire? and to loose Heaven for displeasing of
GOD, to win Hell for pleasing of you? Therefore content your self: I mean
not to go unto Hell, for the dearest friend I have in the world. Therefore
you have offered me great loss to endaunger my self so, for the plasuring
of your frinde, as I would not wish to my most mortal foe. What if our
worthy and Uertuous King were here now, and did bid me himself to do
iustelye and truly in this case? do you think that I would not do right
at his request, before I would do wrong at yours? Now seeing I would do
equity and right, at an Earthlye Kings desire, which is mortal and subject
to death, you may be sure (unless I were more than mad) that I will judge
instelye, and maintain Equity, at my Gods request, the King of all Kings, who
is immortal, and does live, reign, and rule for ever. But if our king were
here at this present, and did command me to favor this wicked
Gentlemannes cause, should I do it? no, I will rather do right at GOD my
Heavenly Kings desire, than I will do wrong at my Earthly Kings request.
Then seeing I will do no wrong at my Kings request, which may kill me for
disobeying him, if he list: then assure your self, I will favor no
falshoode, nor do unjustly at your desire, which are not able to hurt me if
you would. Therefore go your way and trouble me no more herein, your friend
shall find such favor as be has deserved. And if you use me again as you
have done, I will use you then as I have not done. And the said Suter went
sorrowfullye away, and as soon as he was gone, there came in an other with a
letter very hastilye, and delivered it straightwaye to the Judge, which the
Judge receyuyng, perceived it weighed very heavy: It is very like to be a
very heavy matter, said the Judge: for the letter is very heavy: and said
moreover (to the^ fellow that brought it,) who sent this letter to me? Forsooth
(said the fellow) that did my One brought a letter to the Judge.
Master, and named him: go thy way quickly (said the Judge) to thy Master,
and give him most hearty thanks for his loving letter, the contents whereof I
know well enough, therefore bid him in any wise come to me with speed: and
tell him like wise, that for his friedlinesse, I will show him what
friendship or pleasure I can do in all the world. Of which gentle answer
of the Judge, the fellow was glad and so went for his Master. Which letter
the Judge put into his bosom, and would not open it. And the Judge paused a
while until the Gentleman came that sent him the letter, and then immediately
in came the Gentleman both pleasantly and merrily that sent him the letter,
saying* I am here my Lord, according to your commandment; you are come in
good time (said the Judge:) you are he that I looked for: I thank you for your
loving letter. Have you read it then, said the Gentleman, no, I have not read
the words, said the Judge* but I have conceived the contents thereof: such
letters are good for blind men to read* for, as long as they can feel with
their hands, they may scan at these letters well enough. I pray you, said
the Judge to the Gentleman, Good letters for blind men to read.
wherefore did you write this letter to me? I beeseethe your Lordshippe to
read it, and then you shall know said the Gentleman: then said the Judge to
him, I have other business now than to read your letters* you see I have a
weighty cause in hand here to be dispatched between these two persons, and
when I have weyed the matter without partiality, and judged the cause*
according to equity, I shall be at the more leisure to peruse your letter. Then
said the Gentleman, I beseech your honor read it before you pass^ in
judgment on this my friend, or else your reading of i^ will do me no pleasure:
Then you think said the Judge, my not reading of it before, will do this
poor man pleasure. Now I perceive you have not only written this letter to
me on the behalf of this your friend, but also you have sent therein some
bribe, which belyke you thought that my hands The words* of a good Judge.
did so tickle to touch, that I would wring with the wrong and flee from the
truth. But if you so thought, you are much deceived, for God (whom I fear,)
has commanded me: and the King (whom I honor) has charged me: Justice in
whose seat I sit, has willed me, if I will have God my merciful Judge, to
defend the innocent, to help the wronged fatherless, and widow, and to relieve
the oppressed, and to do nothing but equity and truth, which words of the
Judge when the Gentlemanne heard, he sodainelye was mute, and had never a
word to say: Tell me (said the Judge) why you sent me this letter* then said
the Gentleman, the letter will show you, which I will not crave you to read
before your honor be at leisure. Ah, said the Judge, there is some matter that
the malt is moldy, there is some mystery in it, that you give me leisure
now to read the letter, which before you would have me to read in all the
haste: you thought before that I was inclined to your purpose, but now you
perceive I am declined from your purpose. Which when the Gentleman heard, he
began to mislike the matter, and wished the letter in his hands again: but
because he thought that would not be, he meant to make the best shifte he
could, saying to the Judge, I beseech your honor to peruse my letter when
it please you, and then if it please your honor to send for me, I will come to
you at your commandment: therefore I crave at this time to be gone, for I
have very great business: then the Judge said to him* seeing you have given
me leisure to read your letter, I will give you leisure to tarry here whiles I
have read the same. I sent you word by your servant, that I took your letter
thankefully, and said I would do for you whatsoever lay in my power,
desiring you therevppon to come to me with speed. Which when you heard, you
thought all that was bright was Byrrall, and all that did glister was Gold.
Which only was the fetch to fetch you unto me. A good policy of the Judge.
Therefore if I had not used this policy, you had not come to me speedily. And
now seeing you are here, you are Welcome, but before you go hence, you will
think your self evil welcome: as I am not at leisure now to read your letter,
so you shall not be now at leisure to go: therefore I commau^d you to stay until
I appoint you to depart: which grieved the Gentleman, who again wished the
letter in his hand, and himself at home. Then said the Judge: Oh wicked
world, oh traitorous time, oh enemy to equity: will not this friendship fail
y^ so filthily feeds falsehood? will not these letters be lest that make law
thus to languish? and will not these bribes be brideled, that bereave the poor
of their benefits? Oh enormities that increase much mischief. If wily words
may find a witless Judge: if great men's letters may leap in fearful Judges
laps: and if bribes or gifts be given to covetous and Note here* and that does
follow.
gredy Judges: the^ I am sure that Might ouercomes Right, then the poor man's
cause (though right) shall be wrong: and then is falsehood most sure to
flourish. Oh poor maimed man, if I would have favored false flattering
fables, if I would have accepted gentle and friendly letters: if I would
receive bribes or rewards, then thy cause had been cold; thy matter had been
marde, and thy labor had been lost. But comfort thy self, there is nothing
on the earth that shall trip me from y^ truth, cause me to wink at wickedness,
or to judge unjustly: to whom the poor maimed creditor said, the Lord will be
merciful to you therefore: and whereas br^bing Judges shall dwell with the devil,
godly and upright Judges shall dwell in heaven with God, whereas Judges that
favor falsehood, shall be exempt from gods presence: Judges that maintain
Equity and Truth, shall be alwais in Gods presence: and whereas the Judges that
give wrong judgment for y^ favor of their friend, shall have Hell for their
portion: Judges that give judgment without all partialitte, shall have* Heaven
for their inheritance. Therefore thou worthy Judge which haste God always
before thy eyes, God will have thee in Heaven before his eyes: ^and as thou
respectest neither the poor nor the rich, but only the truth in this world.
even so God which is truth it self, will regard thee hereafter for doing of
truth for ever in the Kingdom of Heaven. The^ said the Judge to the wicked
debtor, forasmuch as you have done this your creditor manifest wrong in
withholding his money from him, therefore I judge according to our law, that you
shall pay him for every month since the same was due unto him, so much as
the whole debte comes to. This is the law (you know well enough) for
Superiors, Mark what judgment the Judge did give.
that will not pay their debt to their Inferiors, which I will not mitigate in
one point. And before all this be paid, you will wish you had paid him his due
at the first, rather than to pay him so much more at the last. And for as much
as you have made before me two manifest hurtefull lies, (which might have done
much harm to your poor Creditor if I would have believed you) therefore my
judgment is, that you shall not speak one word to any body for the space of
six months, that is, for either lie three months: and you shall wear so
long H. and L. on your Sleeue, for a H^rfefull Liar. And because you have
maimed this poor man wrongfully, and violently, he shall have forthwith half
of all your goods given him, and he shall receive likewise the one half of
the rentes of all your lands, for his better maintenance during your life.
And this is my full judgment irr^uocable: and by that time you have performed
all this that I have enjoined you, you will not only (I hope) use your
Creditors better hereafter: but also will be an example for other to take heed
by. And the Judge turning him toward the other Gentleman, said: Now sir I
am at leisure to look on your letter, but I fear the date of your des^^s
therein ^s ^nt. I doubt I have done as a certain Judge did that received a
letter from his friend for the saving of a thief, who first hanged the
thief, and after read the letter* And now, when the Judge had opened this
letter, he found in the same twenty pieces of Gold, the effect of which
letter was, that the Gentlemanne required the Judge of his lawful favor
toward the Gentleman his friend* and though it was n^ sufficient reward,
yet he had sent him (as a pledge of his good will,) twenty simple pieces of
Gold. Yea marry, said the Judge* such letters thus lyned, do make many a
crooked matter straight: many a false Too true.
matter (...) many a poor (...) perish: many a Widow to be wronged* many a
(...) and fatherless to fast: and many a true little falsely to be tried. O
thou vile man, thou have learned that Munera peruertunt Iusticiam; Gifts do
peuert Justice. Yea with wicked and corrupt Judges, with such as have* their
fowls to sell for money, and with them that more favor the Feend* than they
fear God* You had a very good opinion i^^ne, that thought I loved Gold better
tha^ God, goods more than goodness, and money more than equity. You will say
(I believe) that this is the worste gift that ever you gave in all your life:
this gold is mine by the law, for whosoever gives any bribe or gift; to any
Judge, or to any other, on the part and behalf of any, whose matter or cause
does depend, or after to depend before the said Judge: the same bribe or
gift, is lawfully his y^ first reueales it. And now, because I have first
revealed it, therefore it is mine own. But because you shall not say that I am
greedy of your gifts, I will not have it to mine own use. And for that you
have given this Gold to the hurting of the poor, I will (God willing) give it
to help the poor: For, as soon as I am gone from this seat, I will deliver
these* xx. It were good that al b^thes were bestowed so.
pieces of gold, to. xx. of the poorest and needye householders next to this
place, the better to relieve them, their children and family. And now because
you have given me here a manifest bribe* therefore my Judgment is, according to
the law in that case provided against bribe-giuers, that the one half of all
you goods moveable and immovable shall be sold, the money whereof shall be
divided into iiij. equal parts: one part whereof shall be to the use of the kings
Majesty: another part thereof shall be to the use of this poor maimed man, for
whose hinderance or harm this bribe was given: and the third part shall be
equally distributed among the poorest inhabitants of the Town or Parish
where you that gave the bribe do dwell: and the fourth part is due to me the
reuealer thereof: which I will not have to my use, but it shall be equallye
distributed among my poorest neighbors. And further* my judgment is,
according to the law made for such Bribegiuers, that you shall suffer
imp^^^onment one whole year without any bail. And now* as you like this, give
bribes in your friends behalf another time: see that all these my judgments be
presentlye performed. And then the Judge said to the Gayler, take this
Gentleman Bribegiuer with you, and see that you keep him in prison a twelve
month: and this righteous and virtuous Judge rose up and went his way w(...)
whose ^inistring of equity and justice, every one did rejoice. This worthy and
true justice of this good and virtuous Judge* did so much good, y^ never since
any of our superiors have misused their inferiors, nor any has since that
time, spoken, written, or given any gifts in the behalf of their friend, or
of any other.


SIVQILA. No more I think they would do with us, if we had such laws, and
so strictly executed with us. Surely your Judges are to be extolled, your
Superiors to be reverenced, and al your Country to be commended. You have the
best Judges that ever I heard of. I pray you sir, are there many Lawyers with
you?


OMEN. No truly, but those few that we have, are both learned and very
Godly. It is a wonder to see, if a poor man without money do come into the
Court of any Judge, how y^ Attorneys and Lawyers will flock about him, and
strive (as it were) among themselves, to be the poor man's Attorney or Lawyer,
saying, if you have no money I pray you be my Client: for they are more glad
to be a poor man's Attorney or Lawyer without money, than to to deal in a rich
ma^s cause for money: and why? because they firmly believe that god will give
them greater fees, than the rich man will or can.


SIVQILA. The most of our Attorneys and Lawyers (I think) are not of that
opinion, for if they were, the rich should not have so many, and the poor
so few. The poor man may go up and down long enough, ere the Attorneys or
Lawyers will flock about him, or once ask him such a question. Mary some
godly Lawyers there be with us, that counsel the poor without money: but if
those that have their counsels freely given, have not money besides to go
through withal, and to pay the fees of the Courts, whereof some are so
great, and the delays so long, that rich men thereby many times are made
pore, they may go home and whistle, for any matter that shall be tried on their
side.


OMEN. We have such orders with us, y^ whether a poor man have money or not,
his Attorney shall proceed as orderly, equally, and speedily, as the rich man's
shall, and shall have his cause ended as justly and truly as though he had money.


SIVQILA. That is another manner of matter: that is the choose that there are so
fowe oppressors with you.


OMEN. Nay we have never an oppressor with us. It may be, that such doubtful
matters may arise sometimes, and yet neither party thinks that they do other
wrong, which is meet to be tried before learned Judges.


SIVQ Are the pore constrained with you to go an hundred or two hundred miles
to have their matters tried in law?


OMEN. No nor the rich neither: For as Market towns are appointed something
nigh to every parish or village, for the ease of y^ people to buy their
necessaries: so we have certain Courts and Judges appointed in such order for
the trial of matters and causes, for the easy travel and small expenses of
the people, that none with us shall need to go above ten miles for the trial
of any matter or cause.


SIVQILA. Surely these two things are very needful, specially for the pore,
that is, that the pore may sue at al times for his right, whether he have money
or no money* and that he may have his matter tried so nigh his habitation,
truly it was done of a godly consideration. Many are constrained with us to
^^o^ upon their feet two or three hundredth miles, and perhaps have not so
much in their purse as will bear their charges the one half of y^ way. Is not
he like to speed well when he comes to his journeys end, that shall neither have
law nor ^odging without money?


OMEN. It had bin better for him to have tarried at home.


SIVQILA. Yea, and many perhaps are constrained to go, by arresting through
surmised matter, and that often times by such a one as wrongfully keeps their
living from the^, and only tire and trouble them, that they the more quietly
may keep their right from them.


OMEN. There are none such with you I hope.


SIVQILA. Yes, more than there are good Judges with you I believe.


OMEN. Oh, if such cruel cut-throtes were with us, they would be so hampered,
y^ they durst not for their ears oppress the poor.


SIVQILA. Well, if we had such good orders, and as well kept as you have, we
should not have so many oppressors as we have. But sir, I beseech you tell
me, do the matters hang long in your Courts, before they be ended?


OMEN. Two months is the most, which, if they be not ended and determined by
that time, (unless there be some great reason to the contrary) he that is the
cause thereof shall surely pay for it, yea, if it be the Judge himself.


SIVQILA. Some would be glad with us if their matter might be ended in three
years. I heard one say that he had a matter in trial in Law above eighteen
years, and as far as he saw then, it was as nigh the ending as it was at ye
beginning. There have two prosecuted the law together for a Cock or for a
Goose, and they have both bin almost undone, and y^ matter untried, whereby they
have bin enforced, when al their money was consumed and spent, to have their
matter dayed and ended by arbitrament.


OMEN. What fools were they? they had been better to have had their cause
dayed and arbitrated, before they spent Wise men.
their money, than after they spente their money: that is the A great deal
better.
next way to make the Lawyers and Officers rich, and themselves poor. Which
soever of them had had the matter judged by law on their side, they had got
but a Cock or a Goose for his labor.


SIVQILA. Yea, and look which of them spent least, spente above twenty
pound, and had neither Cock nor Goose for his labor.


OMEN. Well, by my consent, the one of them shall be a Coakes, and the other a
Goose. They had bin better to have eaten the cock or the Goose between them at
the first, than to spend all that money and put it to dayment at last.


SIVQILA. Surely it is a common practice with us, to spend all the money they
are able to make in the Law* and then to have their matter ended by
arbitremente without the law.


OMEN. The more such, the more fools.


SIVQILA. Our Courts are so costly, the fees so great, Note this.
the expenses so much, the delays so many, the travail so far, the trial
so long, and the obtaining so doubtful: that poor men cannot, nor many wise
men dare not begin or prosecute the law. They had rather take half before
they begin the law: than to lay out their money in hope to have all at the
end of the law. Our law with us passes building, which building is found to
be such a privy thief, that many unwise builders have bin much impouerished
thereby: For look, what many thinks will frame up the whole, will scantly
finish the half. Yet are they sure to have half a house for their money: and
if they bestow so much more, they are certain to have a house. But he that
goes to the law with us for the obtaining of his right (as he thinks) and
makes an accounte that twenty pound will try his matter to the end: it may
chance cost him an hundredth pound, yea and sell all the houses, lands, and
living he has, and yet go without that, that he sues for.


OMEN. It is good reason he should go without it, if he have no right to it.


SIVQILA. Even so it is as good reason he should have it, if it be his right.


OMEN. That is true, but me thinks their Lawyers, before they have spente the
fourth part of so much money, might perfectly know whether their Clientes
cause were right or wrong, which known, they should persuade their Clients to
proceed no further.


SIVQILA. Truly if their Counselors should do so, (as I believe many of
them toe) yet some of their Clientes are so witless and wilful, that they will
never give over until their overthrow, to their utter undoing. And some of
their Counselers, I fear, are of such conscience, that as long as these sooles
can feed them with fees, they will procure the^ to proceed, saying: assure you
the matter must needs go on our side, as some that will clappe their hands, to
set dogs together by the ears, not caring (so they may laugh) if one dog
tear out an others throat. And those witless and wilful fellows, that will
not be advised by their honest Counselors, but will needs proceed in the law
to their empouerishing, I compare to unthrifty and peeuishe players at Dice,
Cards, and other games, whose friends cannot dissuade a good comparison.
them, whose unskillfulness and oversight in play can not teach them, and
whose evil luck can not warn them to cease off from play: until the loss
of al their money must needs make them to leave.


OMEN. You have applied the^ very rightly: but me thinks the su^me that you
spoke of, for y^ trial of one matter, is much more than sufficient for the
trial and ending of ten matters.


SIVQILA. Nay I knew two rich Cobs, that went to the law for the trial of a
matter between them, either of which spent a thousand pound at the least, and
yet their matter and cause was untried by the law.


OMEN. I perceive by your sayings your law is more like to make a rich man
pore, than to make a pore man to obtain his right. Be like your law is more
intrica^e tha^ ours, or else is not so orderly used as ours.


SIVQILA. If they that appertain to our law, had no more fault to be found
in them than there is in our law: many things would be amended that now are
amiss. We have an old Proverb with us, That the law is ended as a man is
friended: and the chief friend and friendmaker is Mark well.
money. Then if they that have much money can make many friends, and they that
have little money can make few friends: then how shall the poor do for
friends, that have no money? truly he is like to have a cold suit, though
his matter be never so good: for the poor with us, for want of money, either
dare not begin the Law, or else of force are driven to let their matter
fall after they have begone the law. Yet there are diverse noble men with us,
and many other, so godly addicted, so charitablye given, and such patrons to
the poor, that if the poor complain unto them that they are oppressed or
wronged by any body, they will A marvelous good deed of noble men and other.
never cease until they have sent for the parties complained of, and so will
help the pore wro^ged or opprossed, and make a final end of the matter,
without any expenses of money in the law.


OMEN. Surely it is very well done of the^, they deserve y^ name of nobility
and gentlemen: they show themselves to walk in true Christianity, and God will
bless the^ for helping the oppressed in their necessity. Nothing does please
God better than to help the friendlesse, Fatherless, the wronged widow, and
the innocent, and the oppressed.


SIVQILA. Is there good provision with you for the poor that are lame, sore,
blind, and impotent?


OMEN. Yea that there is* you never heard of the like, our Hospitals with us,
exceed the number of Abbeys with you.


SIVQILA. If you have no mo Hospitals, than we have Abbeys, then you have very
few, for we have none at all.


OMEN. Then I mean so many as you have had.


SIVQILA. That is something more like, for we have had great store of Abbeys,
whatsoever you have of Hospitals: we have (thanks be to God) some worthy
Hospitalles with us, erected, continued, and increased, by good, virtuous, and
merciful men, I would they were as well increased as our Abbeyes are
decreased. But I marvel how or which way Mark.
you have erected so many Hospitals, with sufficient lands requisite for the
same.


OMEN. Through the Preachers and ministers godly persuading of the rich, at or
before their death, especially such as have great lands and goods, that die
without issue* whereby daily and weekly the rich gives plentifully of their
lands and goods, to this godly use, and to many other, as hereafter I will
declare unto you as occasion shall serve.


SIVQILA. It is godly bestowed.


OMEN. In our Hospitals also are nourished, educated and brought up poor young
Orphans, that are left fatherless, motherlesse, and friendlesse, and are
trained up in learning, in virtuous manners, and in other good exercises.


SIVQILA. Surely if your rich men bestow their lands and goods in this order,
they are much to be commended therefore. Many with us spends their goods, and
leaves their lands scantly to such good uses. A marvelous thing: not long
since, the Devil did so delude them, the Monks did so move them, the Channons
did so enchaunt them, the Friars so flatter them, and the Papisticall Priests
so persuade them, that well was he that might give his lands and disinherite
his heir, to the erecting and maintaining of Abbeys, Priories, and Frieries,
to succor, feed, and relieve Monks, Channons, Friars and Nuns, the open
enemies of God, the subuerters of his word, the derogaters of Christ's merits
and passion, and the utter destroyers and slayers of their souls. And what was
he the^, that did not give at his death or in his life long before he died,
either money or lands, for Chantries, for Tre^tals, for Dirges, for Masses, for
Copes, for Crosses, for Chalises, for lights to Aulters, to Images, and for
many other such toys, which God does detest, his word does not allow, and
all true Christians do utterly contemn? and now having the light that leads
us to life, Gods wonderful favor cannot once move them, Gods holy word
cannot once stir them, godly preachers cannot procure them, nor the sweet
promises of Christ can once allure them, to give one penny (to godly and
charitable uses, which may work their salvation,) for a pound which they most
willingly bestowed of devilish and superstitious Idolatry, which wroughte
their damnation.


OMEN. It seems the Devil can do more with them than God, they loved
superstition more then, than they do Gods true religion now. They were liberal
in giving, to bring themselves to Hell, but they are very niggardes to help
Mark.
themselves to Heaven. Then I perceive you have not so many such godly and
needeful Hospitals as we have.


SIVQILA. No, if it be as you say.


OMEN. I have told you no lie, we have as many such Hospitals as you have
Market Towns.


SIVQILA. And we have more Market towns than such Hospitals. I pray you sir
will the Physicians with you help the pore that are sick, and that have not
wherewythall to go to Physic?


OMEN. Our Physicians may be a Lantern to all the Physicians in the world:
they have such watches and spies* whom they fee privily, that a pore body can
not so soon have their finger ache, but they shall have knowledge thereof: and
then presently in all the haste, though a Lord or Lady should send for them,
they will go to the said pore sick body, whom they will not only comfort,
but also counsel, taking nothing for their pains, but will give them money to
succor and relieve them withal. They take of the rich for helping them, that
that is reason, but surely the greatest part thereof, they bestow in this godly
order. I have seen in such a pore man's house, five Doctors of Physic at
once, and they that came the last have bin very angry with them selves for
tarrying so long. You would wonder to see how fast our Physicians will run
to the people that are sick, after they once know it.


SIVQILA. In this case your Physicians are not so swift, Note he^^
but many of our Phisitio^s are as slow. I never saw at once five nor four
Physicians, with any pore body that was sick: but I have seen four or five
Doctors of Physic at one time with Lords and other that were wealthy and
rich, that would pay them well for their pains.


OMEN. Well, ou^ Phisition^ ^^e ^^ glad of Gods reward Mark this well.
for h^^^^^g and visiting the sick, at the last day: as your Physicians are
glad now of reward, for helping the rich that are sick at this day. And they
are sure that they shall have all their reward to receive then, which never
shall cons^^^^o^ decay: where all the rewards that your Physicians have
received for helping the rich, will quite be consumed and gone, and they can
show them never a penny thereof. Therefore if your Physicians were wise, they
would do as our physicians do, and not to receive al their rewards here, but to
leave someth^ng in Gods* hands to receive hereafter*


SIVQILA. It were very good if they did so, I trust there are some Physicians
with us that do so.


OMEN. Yea, but I am sure that all the Physicians with us do so*


SIVQILA. I think verily that our Physicians that are now alive, would
think, that all the Physicians that are dead, had done very well* and wrought
very wisely, if they had comforted and counseled the pore that were then
without any reward, and relieved them with some of their money: then it they
think so, why is it not as good for the^ now to use the same tra^e against
they be dead? I pray you sir do your Surgeons use themselves in that order to
the pore?


OMEN. Yea truly do they: if our Surgeons do hear that any pore body is
wounded, hurt, lame, sore, or in any Mark the Surgeons of Mauqsun.
great grief or pain: there is no body can stay them ^^suche a love and zeal
they have to help their pore brother. And when they come to them, they do not
only give them freely, without receiving any reward of them, the Salues, Dyles,
playsters, waters, and al other things that belong to healing or during of
them, (besides their own travel, pain ^ labor) but also ^o give them money
and other things; to relieve them withal. I have seen four Surgeons* all at
Note here.
once in a pore man's house that was hurt, that neither did send for them,
neither had any money to pay them for their pains: every one of which were so
desirous to be the poor man's Surgeon, that they did fall out among*
themselves, and were like to have fought one with an other. But at the last it
was concluded, that he that came first of them four, should have the said poor man in cure, and so the other three departed very sorowfully away, because they
came so late.


SIVQILA. You shall take few of our Surgeons with that fault* it is possible
they will be sor^e if they come late to a rich man, but as for a poor man, they
think they may tarry their leisure well enough. I^ our Surgeons should do as
your Surgeons do, they would think that they should not be able to find
themselves and their (...)


OMEN. Though they think so, yet ours think not so, for our Surgeons believe
verily, that God prospers them the better, and makes them the richer, because
they are so ready to cure and relieve the poor.


SIVQILA. Though it be so ^^^^^de, yet it is hard to ^ea^ that into our
Surgeons heads. They had ^ather have on^ bird in their own hand, than two in
an other man^ hand.


OMEN. But our Surgeons had rather have one bird in Gods hand, than two in
their own: for they think that the one bird that is in Gods hand, is better
than two birds in their own hand. And that one bird in Gods hand* will bring
forth more increase, than twenty such birds as theirs will do, which they
have in their own hand.


SIVQILA. In deed God which at first made ^^rdes of ^^^ birds, is able to
increase birds of birds. I trust there are some godly and virtuous Surgeons
with us, that only profess, and live of the same, that help many pore
without money, but whether they relieve them with their own money or no, I
know not: and yet these Surgeons whom I praise with us, if a rich man and a
pore should both chance That is li^^ enough.
to send for them at once, I fear they would go to the rich, man, and leave
the poor man.


OMEN. Yea, but I am sure ours would go to the pore in that ^^^^, and leave the
rich.


SIVQ. Yet your Surgeons should not altogether be so addict to the pore, that
thereby the rich should want help.


OMEN. And your Surgeons should not have such ^eale Rightly answered.
to the rich men's money: that thereby the pore should perish. Assure your
self that our Country is not so destitute of Surgeons, but there are ynow
both for helping the rich, and for curing of the poor.


SIVQILA. And are all the Surgeons in your Country such as you speak of?


OMEN. Yea every one. And what makes them to be so? forsooth because God does
prosper their doings, and increases their riches. There was a Surgeon with us,
that was sent for by a rich man and a poor man both at one time, who would
neither for much money that was offered him, nor great rewards that was
promised him, go to the rich man, saying: I am sure that the rich man may have
Surgeons ynow for money, but I am not sure that the poor man can have so many
without money: therefore God willing I will go to the poor man with as much
speed as I may. Which Surgeon did not only cure the poor man freelye for Gods
sake, but also he help^e* him with such money as he could spare, to relieve
and succor him withal. And as the same Surgeon, on a ^^^e was going from
home, from the said poor man's house, there chanced into his company a man
which asked him what trade he used, (truly said he) I am a Surgeon. Oh sir
said* the man, I have a master that lies in extreme torments both night and
day of an impediment in his leg, whom if you could cure the same, I am sure
he would give you an hundredth pound for your pains: besides that, you should
find a daily friend of him so long as you live. To whom the Surgeon answered
again, sir, if I might see your master* whereby I might know the cause of
his grief, I would then ^^^ him by Gods grace, whether I could help him or
not, until which time, I can say nothing: but I will put you in thus much
comfort: if his malady require to be helped by Surgerie, and be curable, I do
not doubt by Gods grace, (whatsoever it be) but to heal him thereof
perfectlye, with as much speed as is possible. For by Gods assistance I helped
a poor man hereby lately, that I think was more hardly to be cured than he.
Sir said the manne, the Lord I hope has made us two meet: my master will be a
glad man of such a one as you: therefore if it will please you to go with me
to my master which dwelles not far hence, your pains shall not be
vnrecompented although you should not take him in hand. Then the said
Surgeon said, I will gladly go with you, I pray God I may do him good. And when
they were come to the rich Gentleman, his Master, the servant said, Sir, I
hope God has bles^ you this day by my going forth: I met with this good man by
chance, who was going home from a poor manne hereby, who^ he has cured of a
grievous infirmity, who thinks it was harder to be cured than yours: and when
I knew that he was a Surgeon, I desired him earnestly to see you: who is come
hither more at my entreating, than at his own desiring. To whom the Gentleman
said, Sir, you are welcome: and to make few words and be plain with you, if
you can help me of this my intolerable grief: and of this infirmity in my
leg, I will give you for your labor an hundredth pound, and twenty marks
yearly, during your life. Sir, said the Surgeon, it is a great deal too
much, it Some Surgeons would not have said so.
is more than I shall deserve. Well, content thy self, said the Gentleman, if
thou cure me, thou shalt have no less. And the said Surgeon seeing his leg,
and perceiving the cause of his grief and pain, was content to take him ^n
cure. And so to conclude brieflye, he helped the Gentleman with in a short
space, who according to his promise gave to y^ Surgeon for his labor an
hundredth pound, and twenty marks yearly as long as he lived. Now, who is it
that will not believe, but that it was only God that led (as it were by a
line) this good and charitable Surgeon to this rich man in pain, and did not
only prosper him in curing of him so speedily, but also opened his heart to
give him therefore so liberally, by cause he was so diligent and willing to go
to help the poor without money* and refused the rich for much money.


SIVQ. It was the Lords doings I am sure: there are manne richemen with us,
that in their pain and grief would have promised as much more: but when they
had bin well, they would have given a great deal less. Well, I will tell you
another example which was with us. A rich and a poor man chanced both at one
time to send for a Surgeon, which Surgeon, preferring goods before God, money
before mercy, and the rich man's gift before Gods reward, without any long
pawsing of the matter, went to the rich man, and refused to go to the poor
man, who, when he came to the rich man, he took him in hand, and with much
ado he cured him at the last: who gave the Surgeon a great reward for his
labor: and as the said Surgeon was coming homewarde, certain thieves met
with him, who did not only spoil him of all the money he had, but also wounded
him very sore, who with very much a do, got home, and falling into a
consideration with himself, said: God has worthily plagued me, because I
refused the poor, and went to the rich: because I trusted to my Mark.
self, and mistrusted God? and because I thought the rich man's payment was
better than Gods payment.


OMEN. Here we may see the great difference of the godly, whom God does
blrsse, and the ungodly that God does not prosper. The godly Surgeon that
refused the rich, and went to the poor for Gods sake, did enjoy great riches
that he never looked for: and the other Surgeo^ that refused the poor and went
to the rich for moneys sake, had no good of his money that he was sure of, nay
it was the cause that he was so hurt and wounded.


SIVQILA* And though this Surgeon was robbed of his Note here
money, and wounded of his body, yet I believe all that cannot make our Surgeons
to go to the poor where they shall have no money, and refuse y^ rich where they
are sure of great rewards


OMEN. It is pity that there are not appointed throughout al your Country,
sufficient skilful and learned Surgeons, with necessary yearly stipends allowed
them for the only helping and curing of the pore, that have no money to help
themselves withal.


SIVQILA. It were very well if it were so: but I fear in haste it will not be
so: yet commonly in our Hospitals there are such stipendarie Surgeons, for the
helping of the pore and miserable wretches there. But I pray God, that they It
may be doubted.
that can make the best friends and fees, be not better attended, gently or
handled, and so^er cu^ed, than the other that are friendlesse and monilesse.


OMEN. Surely, if there be any such with you, it is pity they live,


SIVQILA. Well, I fear there have bin such with us, and yet have lived without
trouble or harm.


OMEN. If such a fellow were with us, and should use himself so, we should
learn him such a lesson, that he should not dare do the like as long as he
lived.


SIVQILA. And I dare undertake for him, whatsoever he is, he would not do it
after his death.


OMEN. I will tell you how such a spiteful Surgeon, a very money man, was
handled long since with us. He was An example how a wicked Surgion was used.
a stipendary Surgeon in an hospital, in which hospital was a very poor man,
both monilesse and friendlesse, that had a great wound on his arm: which poor man was committed to this same Surgeon to be cured. And though the wound was
but a green wound, which might have been helped more speedily, and with
less pain than if it had bin an old sore: yet this hard hearted Surgeon,
applied unto his wound such pinching plasters, both evening and morning, y^
almost night and day the poor man was in perpetual pain, who then with great
grief of mind said to the Surgeon: Oh sir, for Gods sake have some compassion
on me, and heal me with more ease, for I am never able to abide this. Then
said ye surgeon, you must give me some money to buy milder medicines, for the
house allows me none other than these: to whom the pore patient said, I
hardly believe y^, for the chief Rulers of the house are so godly, that they
will allow rather such things as you think meet which have knowledge, than
such as they think meet that have no knowledge. Truly, if every one in
this house be cured in this order as I am, they will rather go out of the house
unhealed, than tarry here still in hope to be healed. What? said ye Surgeon,
have you found your tongue, I will punish you a little better for your prating:
then said the poor man, I beseech you sir, use me rather better than worse,
and I would (if I had a messenger) send for some money for you. Mary, said
the Surgeon, you shall not want for a messenger, I will get one that shall do so
much for you: and forthwith the said Surgeon brought one unto him: how much
will serve your turn, said the patient to the Surgeon: a Noble, said ye
Surgeon must be the least. I would give a thousand Nobles, said the
Patient, if I had them, rather than I would be in these torments and pains. I
pray you, said he to the messenger, go to my mother dwelling in such a street
of this City, and desire her, if ever she will do any thing for me, to send
me a Noble presently, to give to my Surgeon; for until he has it, I shall be
in such torments, that during the same, I would gladly forgive him that will
kill me. Go quicklye said the Surgeon, and tarry not, for I mean to tarrye
here with my patiente until you come again: then the messenger said, I will
go and not tarry. Ah sir, said the poor wounded Note here an ^^that that
follows.
man, you call me your Patiente, nay I am rather your Impatient, for small
patience can be in them that are so impatiently handled. If he, to whom your
plasters are applied, is patient (as you term him) then he that never feels
them, must needs be more patient I beleeue-But truly this name Patient in this
case is more ancient than true, and more commonly in words used, than in
effect performed. For Surgeons (I speak by proof) make patient men impatient:
then who will believe, that they make impatie^t men patient? and therefore to
hate this your poor patients name hereafter better understood, and the more
verified, I think it is rather of suffering, (and that against their will)
than to be meek and patient with their will. Then said the Surgeon, you have
made a very Clearkly collusion: to whom he said, I pray God at length you
make no worse conclusion. I perceive, said the Surgeon, you are Bookishe: then
said the patient: if I were as rich as I am poor, I think then you would
have termed it otherwise. Well, all rich men are not learned, nor all poor
men are not unlearned. The state I am now in, is far unlike to my education.
God does all things for the best to them that he loves, therefore I thank
him most heartily for this change. Then said the Surgeon, your messenger tarries
very long, whereby I think he brings no money with him. But if he bring no
money, I tell you one thing, you are like to have a change within these two
hours, such a change as you will not like. The Lord forbid said he: I hope I
can have no worse change at your hands, than I have had: and presently the
messenger came, saying: I have spoken with your mother, who has no money now
to send you, but she says you shall have it to morrow without fail. Then
said the Surgeon, I will tell you more to morrow, for when I have money, then
you shall No money no case.
have ease, for I cannot buy things with nothing. Then said the patient, I
beseech you take some pity of me: you know my mind, said the Surgeon,
remember me, and I will remember you. Then said the poor wounded fellow,
seeing money will ease me I will go my self and fetch you money: you shall be
sure to have it before my next dressing: then said the Surgeon, bring me the
money, and you shall find me ready to show you what pleasure I can. Then the
fellow (understanding, that the Judge and Ruler of the City was a godly,
virtuous, and an upright Judge, who utterly abhorred such devilish dealers as
the Surgeon was) went immediately unto the Judge, and complained of the
Surgeon, telling him in all points how the Surgeon had used him: to whom the
Judge said, see that you tell me nothing but truth, and if this fall out
according as you have told me, I will make him an example to all Surgeons that
shall come after him. Yea, it is too true, said the poor man, I have witness
of it if need be: then the said Judge commanded, that the said Surgeon
should be brought before him immediately, and two or three other cunning
Surgeo^s besides, to judge therein: and when the Surgeon came before the Judge,
and saw his pore impatient there, his countenance maruelously changed. Sir,
said the Judge to him, are you a Stipendarie Surgeon appointed to such an
Hospital? yea my Lord, said the Surgeon: Know you this fellow here with the
sore arm, said the Judge? I know him well, said the Surgeon. And I fear he
knows you too well, said the Judge. Were not you appointed to be his Surgeon
for the curing of his wound? yes truly, said the Surgeon, and I trust I have
used him as an honest man ought to do. Your countenance and color said the
Judge, is as good as two witnesses, that you have rather misused him. How long
is it since you took him in hand? forsooth, said the Surgeon, a month, and
something more. Then the Judge commanded the other Surgeons to look upon the
said poor man's sore arm, which, when they saw, they said to the Surgeon
that had it in cure, this is a great sore, and will not easily be cured: was it
a green wound or an old sore, when they took it in hand at the first? for
sooth it was a green wound, said the poor man's Surgeon, but it was in an
evil case, because he came no sooner to me than he did. Take heed thou lie not
said the Judge, for I will assure thee, for every lie thou tellest before me
here, I will make thee pay full dearly: then said the poor wounded man, I
could not well come sooner to you, nor to any other, for you were appointed to
be my Surgeon, and to cure me within two hours after I was wouuded. Did not I
(said the Judge) bid you beware of lying: I hold you a wager, your lie will
neither gain you lease nor land. Then said the Surgeons, alas poor fellow,
thou haste not bin well used, for being a green wound, the worst of us three
would have taken upon us by Gods grace (if thou had come to us a day after
thou camste to this surgeon) to have wholly and perfectly healed this wound,
being in this place, within three weeks at the furthest. How long has this
man had you in hand, said they? Forsooth a month and odd days, and now I
am a great deal worse than I was at the first: and what pains he has put me
to ever since, both night and day, it would lament you if you knew it. We
believe thee, said the Surgeons. Then belike (said the Judge) he has given
him some corrosiues to put him to pain, and keep him longer from healing,
either to get some money of him, or else to try some maisteries and practices
upon him, or rather both. Truly, said the Surgeons, it is not unlike, for, if
he had used him orderlye, honestly, and according to our Art, he might have
put him to small pain, and healed him perfectlye before this time. Then the
pore wounded man said, I know not how he practiced with me, but ever when he
dressed me, most commonly morning and evening, I was in such extreme pains,
and intolerable torments, for eight or nine hours after at the least, that I
had bin almost as good to have sit in the fire saving for burning my body and
bones: The^ said the Judge to the wicked Surgeon: Oh cruel cutthroat, O
tyrannous Note the Judges words.
tormentor, and seed of Satan: had thou none to prove these paineful
practices on, but on this thy Christian brother? For he is thine own brother,
if thou ever mean to have God to be thy father: surely an honest heart, or a
merciful mind, would never have tried such painful practices on a Turk or
a Jew, nay scantly on a Dog if he loved him, much less on thy brother,
whom thou art bound to love as thy self. My Lord, said the poor man, it
seems he put me to these great pains to get some money of me* for he said
to me, that if I would give him some money, he would use me easily and
gentlye, and upon that, I sent this messenger that is here, to my mother for
a noble to give him (which was his request) was it so said the Judge to the
messenger? Yea in deed said the messenger: but when the Surgeon saw that I
came again without money, he was very angry, as it seemed: and this poor man
most pitifully desired him to be good unto him, and to let him have some ease,
but he answered him churlishely, and said, when I have money then you shall
have ease. Indeed my Lord said the pore wounded man, these were his very
words, and he tells nothing but the truth, What was the cause, (said the
Judge) wherefore he would have a Noble of thee? Forsoothe, said the poor
man, he feigned to me, that y^ house did allow him none other medicines than
such as he dressed me withal: therefore you must give me money (said he) to buy
more milder medicines. As though, said the Judge, the house allowed no salues,
but such as would put pore men to pain, and keep them long from healing.
Come hither sit Surgeon, said the Judge, how like you this gear? what can
you say for your self? To whom the Surgeon said nothing, but hanged down
his head, and was ashamed. Then said the three Surgeons, sure ly my Lord, if he
said so, he has shamefully s^aundered that famous house, and the merciful
Masters of the same: For doubtless, no Surgeon belonging to the same, nor to
any such other house, but are allowed to the vttermoste for any thing which
they shall desire or think meet for the easy and speedy curing of their
patientes. I know it is so, said the Judge, or else these houses might more
worthily be named tormentors of men than helpers of men. And then he spoke to
the pitilesse Surgeon, saying, what horrible heart had thou, to tormente
this poor fellow, and to be quiet thy self? how could thou crave money of
him that had none, which was more meet to ask thee which had some? What a
marvelous displeasure have thou wroughte unto this poor fellow? thou haste
not only tormented him like a Tyraunte, but also thereby haste brought his
wound into such a case, that if it be possible to help i^, yet it will be
long a curing. Then said the Judge, I commit the curing of this poor man into
one of your hands, that belongs to that Hospital where this poor manne is
allowed to be sut coured and helped. Then one of them said to the Judge (that
was a stipendarie Surgeon of that house) I will be content to do my diligence to
him, as much as I am able. Then said the Judge to him: I need not bydde you
use him well, for here is one (mening the cruel Surged) ere it be long, will
teach you how to use him, and also he will be a sufficient warning to al other
Surgeons hereafter, to help their patients, as quietly, as orderly, and as
speedily as they may. And because (said the Judge to the wyeked Surgeon) thou
would have had a noble of him to set A good judge meant.
him out of pain into ease. I Judge now, that thou shalt give him four
nobles, because thou did put him out of ease into pain. Saying further to
him, aunsweare me to one thing that I shall ask thee, what is that short
sentence of Christ, that the King commaundes so straightlye to be kept? to
whom the Surgeon aunsweared, Whatsoever you would that men should do to you
even so do ye to them. Then said the Judge, thou have said wet, and better
than thou have done. Haste thou of thy conscience done to this poor man, as
thou would have bin done unto, if thou had been in the like case? No truly
said the Surgeon: if thou had said otherwise (said the Judge) every one
here would have thought thou had lied. And now because thou have done unto
this man, as thou would not be done unto, therefore thou shalt be done unto
as thou haste done unto him. So that I do here openly Judge, that the
executioner shall give thee such a wound on thy arm, and in the like place,
as this poor man had at the first. And I command you that are the other
two Surgeons here, to dress him every Evening and Morning with such
pintchyng plasters, and extreme corrosiues, that he may be in cruel
torments and pains eight or nine hours after every dressing, and continue
thus with him a month at the least: mary have respect in the mean season,
through your good knowledge and discreations, to use the wound in such order,
that after it may be perfectly and well cured: and he shall be at the only
costs and charges for the curing of it. And if he be not then able to do it,
you shall be allowed therefore out of the Hospital of this City, where this
poor man succored, helped and relieved, not thinking they shall be much troubled
again to pay for the cures. And also I judge, because he did make a manifest
lie before my face, y^ he shall not speak of three months after he is
perfectly healed, unless through some urgent matter he be called or willed to
speak before any Magistrate, Ruler, or Judge, and all that while he shall
wear on his sleeue, an H. and L. which signifies a Hurtful Liar. And this is
my full and determined judgment in no wise to be revoked: and because I would
have my judgment herein the more straightly done, I will my self see the
wound made in his arm: therefore let the executioner come hither with speed.
And when the executioner was come, the Judge forthwith commanded him, to make
a wound according to his judgment in the said surgeons arm: and then he
committed him to the other two surgeons, to be used and ordered in all points
according as he before had judged.


SIVQILA. Truly, the cruel cut-throate Surgeon was used according to his
deserts: the pore misused men in your Country are marvelous happy, that have
such good and vprighte Judges, that will incline to neither hand: that will be
allured by neither friend, letter, nor bribe: that will hear the pore as well as
the rich: and favor the matter, not the manne: and that will have al things
tried only by truth, and that with speed, and without delay. I fear many
pore impatient patients with us, that have no pence to pay, are many times in
the like perplexity: but if such orders as you have, were observed for such
with us, they would be advised twice, ere they used their patients so once Well,
though all the Physicians and Surgeons with you are so godly charitable, and
had rather help the poor for Gods sake without money, than the rich for
money: yet we have diverse noble women, with many Ladies and Gentlewomen, who,
though they are not so learned as many are that profess the same, neither can
talk so woll as some of them can tatle: Yet God so protectes them in their
proceedings, that they do good to many* help many, and cure many, not only
being at all charges themselves, but also most charitablye relieve and succor
the poorer sort, with meat, drink, and money. But we have a great sort of
runnagate Physicians and Surgeons, whose chief knowledge is in their tongues,
and will talk much, and promise much, and yet perform little, nay rather,
which is an occasion, that honest, learned, and expert Physicians and
Surgeons, coming in strange place, and known to be of that prhfession, are
as well credited, as they that do barrow of every one, and do pay to never
a^^ne. Pedlers are preferred before them, and Tincke^s are taken to be the
honester men: and why? because the Peddler peehaps through smoothe words, and
two or three lies, deceiues them that he deals with, of two or three
shillings, and warrauntes that for the best, which is not the worste, yet
they enjoy that they buy, and have that they lack: and if the Tinker mende
one fault, and make two faults, yet a groate or two is able to recompense
the wrong he has done. But these fair flattering Physicians, and these in
vtile suckers, surnamed Surgeons, through pleasant persuasions, will get of
them that be in pain and grief, twenty or thirty pound, for so much
stuff, as perhaps did not cost them a groate, which happily killes them
outright, or else puts them in great danger of their life. And then they are
enforced to fly into another Country for new credit, for their old is gone.


OMEN. If such runnagate Physicians and Chirurgions be suffered to do so, it is
no marvel though thereby the honest and learned Phisitio^s and Surgeons be
much discredited: truly I think you have either no laws for these and such
mischiefs, either they are too weak to shoot at such marks, or they are like
to a Bow that is set up in a corner and never shot withal.


SIVQILA. Indeed as you say, our laws are too mylde for such mischiefs,
and also are not executed to extinct such evils. But I beseech you, may I he so
bold to know of you, whether any of your Merchant men or any other, may
lawfully convey or carry out of your Country, any of your chief commodities
which your soil of it self does breed?


OMEN. We have laws and statuts, wherein are expressed, what things are not to
be sold, carried, or conveyed out of our Country into foreign Nations.


SIVQILA. But what is the punishment of the offenders in that case?


OMEN. He or she, whosoever it is, shall be torn in pieces for the first fault,
with four strong horses: and if he commitie the like offense again, he shall
have the Kings pardon for it.


SIVQILA. He may have so well enough.


OMEN. And the eldest son of every such offendour, shall be compelled to
wear on his sleeue, a Uiper formed in some metal, signifying, that as the
Uipers are destroyers of their mother, and gnaws out their mothers bellye: so
the Father of this man that wears the same, was a destroyer of his Country,
that did nourishe and breed him up. And his son shall never after bear
any office, or be accepted to any charge appertayning to the Common wealth.
And if he have never a son, then his eldest daughter shall wear the same,
until she be married: and if he have no daughters, or if al his daughters be
married, the^ his wife (if he have any) shall wear the same during her
widowhed. And if he have neither son, nor daughter unmarried, nor wise, then
there shall be a sign of the Uiper set at the door of the offender, where he
dwelled at that time, when he was apprehended for the fact, which shall remain
there untaken down, twenty years at the least: and he shall forfeit al his
goods, the one half whereof shall be to the kings use, and the other half to
the use of y^ reuealer. And whosoever shall know of his said offense, and
shall conceal the same four and twenty hours after he first knew it, every
such offendour shall loose his right hand, and the fourth part of al his
goods, and every one of them shall wear the badge of the Uiper on their
sleeue during their life. And the same goods shall be employed to the uses
aforesaid. And if any of them that is accessarie with him, or made privy to
the fact, do reveal it within four and twenty hours, he or she shall not
Mark.
only be pardoned of his offense, but also shall have the forfeyture that
belongs to the reuealer thereof.


SIVQILA. Yea marry this law is something like, if it be well executed.


OMEN. Nay mark this one thing, we are well advised before we make laws, but
when they are made, we had need be double advised ere we do break the same
laws, or else we shall be sure to pay the penalty thereof.


SIVQILA. Yea so it should: then you take no gaudes for good stuff, trifles
for your treasure, nor vain needelesse things for your necessary and
substanciall wares.


OMEN. No I warrant you: but if there were no such law with us, or it were
winckt at as yours is, and not severely executed, truly all our merchauntes
are so godly, charitable, obedient, and so commodious to their Country, that
they would not (though they might have never so great gain thereby)
conuaye or carrye any commodities out of their Country, nor bring any
discommoditie into their Country.


SIVQILA. Truly I dare not say so much for all our Merchants, for (verilye
I believe) some of them, for their own private profit, their greedy gain, and
to gather goods, could be content to convey and of their Country. Wool for
worse wares, Leather for La^ans, Lead for Lemmo^s, Honny for Hobbyhorses,
Corn for Calves, butter for Babies: Beyre for Bracelets, Tallow for Trifles,
Money, for Marmesets, and if they could, God for the Devil: but though the
law of God cannot teach them to obey their Note this.
Prince, the law of nature to love their Country, nor the law of the Realm
can testraine them to spoil their commonwealth, yet if we had your severe
law, and as well executed on two or three of ye first offenders without any
pardon, as yours is, we should have as many good mercha^ts against their will,
as you have, by your report, with their will.


OMEN. I doubt not that.


SIVQILA. Is there any with you sir that will break their promise?


OMEN. No not one in all our whole Countreye: we have the faithfullest
meaners, and truest dealers, that are in all the world. We take great
aduisemente, before we speak or promise, and what we speak or promise: but
when it is once spoken or promised, it is as sure to be kept or performed, as
though the party that promised it were bound in a thousand pound.


SIVQILA. Perhaps the party that promised the thing, was able at that time of
the promise, and yet unable at the day of performance.


OMEN. Then he must go before his day, to the party to whom he promised the
thing, showing him his misfortune or loss: who doubtless will be so
charitable and pitiful, and be so sorry for his neighbors mishap or loss,
that he will grant him whatsoever he will reasonably require. For we have a
charitable love one to another, that we count our brothers or neighbors
loss to be our loss.


SIVQILA. What if he should be so hard hearted that he would not grant him his
reasonable request? a matuellous love.



OMEN. Then the party that promised, must bring sufficient witnesses to the
Judge of his loss or hinderaunce, or of his disabilitie to perform his
promise, since he promised it: whereupon the Judge will take order, therein,
as he shall think good. And the Judge shall commit the or^ell and hard
hearted man to prison for three months, to whom none shall grant any
request or petuton all that while.


SIVQILA. Truly I would all such stonye hearted wretches were so serudd.
But what if the party that promises, be able to perform it, and yet breaks
his promise?


OMEN. Every such promise breaker shall be compelled How promise breakers are
used.
to perform it, by the award of the Judge, whether he will or no: and all the
promises, that have bin made to him a year before, shall not be performed nor
kept to him and that they be to any commodity thereof, one half thereof shall
be employed to the use of the King, and the other half thereof shall be
bestowed on the relieuing of his next poorest neighbors: and he shall wear
on his sleeue a twelve month after, these words following: (a promise
breaker.) giving men warning thereby, not to deal with such a discrodible
person.


SIVQILA. But what if one promise more than he is able, and take money for that
he is not able to perform?


OMEN. Then he shall be whipte three several times, and shall pay to the
party deceived, three times as much money as he received, and he shall wear
on bys breaste a twelve monthe after in Parchment, these words, (this is a
deceyuer.) And every one that is a deceyuer or coosiner, shall be thus served.


SIVQILA. But what if he have consumed and spent the money, and be not able to
pay the same forfeyture?


OMEN. Then he shall serve either the party deceived, or some other, until the
said money be run out or dyscharged.


SIVQILA. If deceivers and coosiners were so used with us, we should not have
half so many wtin a while as we have. There are a great sort with us, y^ care
no more for coosining and deceyuing of their very friends, (much less their
enemies) than a horse cares to run from his master and let him come after
on foot.


OMEN. If they care no more, then they care not very much. Surely there is
such credit and trust between one and another with us, that there is almost
never any writing made between party and party.


SIVQILA. And truly there is such evil meaning, and Note this.
false dealing with us, and so little credit and trust between one and
another: (yea though the matter be never so small) that there must be writings
and bonds, and all little enough. For let the writings be never so firmly
framed, so advisedly drawn, nor so perfectly pende, yet some more curious to
do harm, than careful to do good, will pry in the same so narrowly, that
will find such a hoale, that the parties (if they be not the wiser) shall
pour through the same more money than they shall ever be able again to put
in their pouch. Truly men are maruellouslye altered, for in old time when
they knew less truth than we do, they used less falshoode than we do. And
why? truly ten lines then, was sufficient for a thousand pound a year: but
a thousand lines now, is scant sufficient for ten pound a year. Well, I am
enforced to say, that truth and simplicity did dwell then together, but
curiosity and falschoode, are now joined in fellowship. But I pray you sir
tell me, will any with you sell their lands, or let their lands twice, or not?


OMEN. What mean you by that? how can one sell or let his lands more than
once?


SIVQILA. An honest man can not, but a crastie Harlot may. Belyke it is little
used in your Country, because you make such a maruayle. There are many with
us more false than faithful, more crafty than credible, and more shameless
than shamefast, that would, if they could, sell or let their lands to ten
several persons one after another, so that they might have money for it so
many times.


OMEN. I muse what such mischeuous men do mean. They little remember the
worthy sentence of Christ, which is, Whatsoever you would that men should do
to you, even so do ye to them. I am sure they would be loath that other should
handle them in that order.


SIVQILA. Be bold of that: for though they are content to sell so: yet they are
not content to buy so. They show themselves of whom they are: the godly and
charitable do live faithfully, and fearfully here, and refer al to God at
a great difference.
the last end: But the wicked, crafty and deceitful, care not how they live
here, and refer all to the Devil at the last end, who will show them such
friendly favor in Hell fire, that they shall be always in torments, and never
in ease, ever a broyling and never burned, and always a dying, and never dead:
and then they will wish, (but to late) rather to have given their lands once to
the releeuing of the poor, for nothing: than to have sold the same so often for
much money, or for some thing.


OMEN. Truly we have such excellent orders with us, that none, except they
list, need buy or hire any entangled lands* then you may be sure none (though
they were so minded) can sell, or let more than once.


SIVQILA. That is a very good way, how is that?


OMEN. For sooth all deeds and writings of any lands, tenements, houses,
woods, or such like, that are sold, given, or mortgaged, upon what estate
soever it be: and also al coppie holds and leases of any manner of ground,
house, tenement, or any thing whatsoever, and all other writings of any
importance, are truly examined, registered, or recorded in the City or Market
town, next to the land, ground, or houses* or any thing sold, given,
mortguaged, let or demised, which is not only a great ease to every one, to
have quickly and with small charge the coppie of any writing they desire, but
also a marvelous commodity, if any deed, evidence, or writing, be lost,
burned, defaced, conveyed, or stolen, for that they may have the same writing
there registered and recorded, written fair, sealed with the Seal of the
Office, which sealed writing shall be then of as great force, as the writing
was, that was lost, burned, defaced, conveyed, or stolen. And there the
Recorder does keep a true and brief note in a Book appointed, for every such
deed, writing, copy hold, or lease, whereby any may perfectlye learn,
whether any lands, tenementes, houses, or any other thing is sold, given,
let by copy, or leased, and by whom, and to whom, and at what time, which,
if he perceive to stand free, then he may buy it, or take it by copy or lease,
if not, then he may refuse the same.


SIVQILA. But what if the parties do not, or will not register the same?


OMEN. Then every such deed of gift, writing, coppye, lease, and the thing
teherein sold, given, occupied, leased, or otherwise conveyed, is utterly
void, and of none effect in the law, until the same be perfectly examined,
and registered, or recorded, in the place therefore appointed.


SIVQILQ. Yet the coosiner may deceive the true meaning man herein, for, if
the Register be of a corrupt conscience, and take a bribe of the coosiner, he
may lie to the party that comes to enquire or search, and say, there is no
such things sold, given, or otherwise conveyed, by any such party as the
enquirer did move.


OMEN. Yea but we have a salve will heal that sore: for ^ good way to prevent
such a mischief.
the Register then presently must deliver to him that comes to enquire, a
brief note written in Parchemente, of the thing searched for, the name of the
thing, where yt lies, the name of him or her that the enquirer desires to
know, whether he or she has sold, given, or otherwise conveyed the same
thing searched for, the name of the enquirer, and the name of him or her for
whom it is searched: and besides this, the examiner shall write under all the
same, that no such thing searched for, is registered of that time in his book,
with the year, month, and day, of the same search: and further, shall
subscribe his own name with his own hand, which writing shall after
witness against the examiner (if need be) if any such thing searched for,
should after befounde to be registered.


SIVQILA. This is such a hedge, that a These cannot well leap over. Truly,
this general registring or recording of writings, is both a common commodity
to your Country, and a great overthrow of a number of mischiefs: it clean
cutteth of deceyuers or coosiners, from selling or letting their lands twice,
much less thrice. It fullye, as it were with one stroke, suppresseth all
forgerye of evidences and writing. For, who wyil forge any wrytings unless
they may suck some gain thereby? what do wrytings prevail if they be not
lawefull? they may counterfayte them if they list, but they cannot confirm
them if they would. For, no writings (as I perceive) can be registered or
recorded with you, unless the seller and the buyer, the giver, and he to whom
the thing is given, and the letter of the lease and the taker of the lease, do
both consent before the Register or Recorder, and seal the wrytings as their
deeds: and no writings are of any force, until they be perfectly examined
and registered. And you may be sure, that no rounterfaite or forged writing
will be perfectlye examined, and registered though the deceyuer and coosiner
could be content therewith, unless the party that should be deceived and
coosined do grant unto the same before the Register, why^he I think neither
the coosiner will go about to procure, nor he that is to be deceived, will
affirm or allow. And though many Babes have been beguyled, Wydowes wronged,
fatherless defrauded, the poor prevented, the guiltless beguilded, and the
simple deceived, right overthrown, and Truth trod under foot, by filching,
purloyning, stealing, burning, spoiling, tearing, and other crafty conuaying
of writings, to their utter vndooyng, to the displeasing of God, and to the
maintenance of mischief. Now all this, your worthy ordering of registring of
Writings has plucked up by the roots. For if your people were as wicked as
they are godly, yet which of them would go about to filtch, purloyne, burn,
spoil, or convey any writing from any body, if it would do them no good, and
the other no harm: or if they were sure, that the party from whom they took
it, should have the same again. Who would steal a horse from any if he wist he
should have no good of him? or, if he knew certainly that the owner of the
horse should have his horse again, whether he would or not?


OMEN. None I think. Well, what with the godly disposition of your people, and
what with this good order of registring of writings, there is not one in all
our Country that does take away, filche, spoil, or convey any writing from
any, neither does forge or counterfayte any deed or writing.


SIVQILA. No more there would or could be with us (as wicked as they be) if
we had your order, and so executed for the registring of writings as you have.
We have laws for the punishing of such offenders, but how many fewer there
are thereby, I know not. But how many I would there were, I know.


OMEN. Whether were it better (if it were possible) to have your goods safe
from stealing, or to have them stolen, Note this.
and to have the thieves hanged for the same?


SIVQILA. In my conceit it were much better, that no goods should be stolen,
nor no thieves to be hanged therefore, which is a double commodity: but in
the other, men loose their goods, and thieves loose their lives, which is a
double mischief.


OMEN. You have said very truly.


SIVQILA. Even so it were a great deal better, to have never a co^ueyer,
purloyner, spoyler, nor forger of wrytings, as you have, and never one
therefore to be punished: than to have writings stolen, spoiled, defaced, and
forged (to the hurt of many) and to have the offend^^ a punissjed there ^^^^^
which so^e being thought incurable, your souer aigne falue in registring would
quickly heal.


OMEN. I have told you what it has done with us.


SIVQILA. Yea, and I would it might do so with us. Surely, though we have
merciful Magistrates, godly Governors, sage Superiors, politic* Ru^ev^,
and wyttie Counsailours: yet we have a great sort that are so guee^y of gain,
as mad of money, and so mindful of mischief, that they are so much ashamed
to commit these offenses, as a horse is loath to eat his meat when be
comes newly from labor.


OMEN. Then I date boldelye say, a little small sin will not make them to
shrink, This one thing does make me muse, we that are more godly and
charitable, have more straighter and severe laws than you* and you that are
more wicked and envious, have more milder laws than we.


SIVQILA. It is so, but I could be content that it were not so. Sir I believe
you have never an Usurer in all your Country,


OMEN. The name is so strange unto me that I know not what you mean thereby.


SIVQILA. You are the more happy that you know the^ They know not what Usury
me ancth in Mauqsun.
not: yet the more happy you feel them not* but the most happy of all, that
you follow them not. If you had been as well bitten with such beasts, as well
st^ng with such serpents, and as well gnawne with such Uipers as we, you
would have known them by their name as well as we. By their name they signify
Biting, but by their deeds they procure altogether Killing and may I trust
you? have you never an Usurer among you?


OMEN. No truly, you are as good talk to me in that tongue that I know not,
as to speak that word to me.


SIVQILA. Though it be not well known with you, it is a little too well know^^
^yth us, every ^oy or girl with us can tell you what an ^^^irer is ^ they are
such pin^hers, that What Usuters can do.
they are able to make Lords without lands, Gentlemen without goods,
Merchants without money, and themselves without honesty.


OMEN. These fellows are more fit for the Feende, than to inhabit among
honest men: we stand in need of none such, but if we had any such
(whatsoever they be) we would make them do otherwise. I pray you what kind
of persons are they?


SIVQILA. Forsoothe we call them Usurers that lend out their money for their
gain: who will be sure to have an unreasonable interest therefore, or else they
will have the parties that borowes money of them, wrayte in Statutes and Bonds,
that if they break their day, they will so pinche them, that they will have
perhaps ten times more, than the value of their money which they lent.


OMEN. But will they have no remorce of the party, if he chance to forfaite
his bond?


SIVQILA. Yes perhaps some will, and some will not.


OMEN. Then belyke these Usurers you speak of, live ^dlely, of the spoil of
other?


SIVQILA. I must needs confess they do so.


OMEN. Oh detestable trade, oh drifte of the Devil, oh snare of Satan, these
Usurers I perceive are they that David speaks of, saying* Who shall dwell in
the Lords Tabernacle? He that is innocent of hands, etc. And has not put his
money to Usury: Then they that put their money to Usurie, must needs dwell in
the Devils den, where there is nothing but woe, sorrow, dole, mourning,
howlyng, It is good to take heed of this place. Mark.
torments, pains, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, and that for ever and ever
wor^^ without end.


SIVQILA. All the devises you have, cannot drive it into some of their heads,
that it is devilish or damnable.


OMEN. And all they cannot make me believe; that it is godly and charitable. If
it had bin good, Christ would have commended it in his Gospel, and because it
is evil, GOD has forbidden it in the old law.


SIVQILA. There are some Usurers, that, though they take it to be a great
offense, do light so much of their own repentance, and of the mercy of
God, that I pray God they dye not without both. Christ bade his holy Apostles
Watch and pray least they should fall into temptation. Now, seeing it behooves
the good and godly to Watch and a good proof.
Pray (if they mean to be saved) then can the detestable and wicked Usurers,
whom the holy Ghost says shall not dwell in Gods Tabernacle, look to be
saved by sleeping and slumberyng still in Sin, and to watch and pray never
a whit at al? These are the delectable dreams that the Devil deludeth them
withal. Which of the godlyest and perfectest men of the Earth can warrant
himself from sudden death? Which of them all can say, that they can not
repent when they will, and be forgiven when they list? Which of them is able
to loath his leude life at This is worthy the noting.
any time? Which of them can sighe and* sorrow for his sins at such time
as he shall appointe? Nay, which of them can say, (and that truly) that
they will such a day, and such an hour, do such a thing, and think such a
thing: for though it be easy to say it, yet they are not sure to do it: for
perhaps the party may be lame, sick, or else dead, whereby he can not do
it: and perhaps the party may be a sleep, whereby he can not think it: yea
and perhaps neither lame, sick, dead, nor a sleep, and yet may have clean
forgot it. Now seeing the godly men can make no warrauntise hereof, then how
can the vile and wicked Usurer, and other abominable Sinners, be safe from
sudden death, repent when they list, be forgiven when they will, or do what
they determine, or think what shall please them? Therefore I beseech GOD that
these wicked Usurers, and all other careless sinners, may repent their
sins here in time: may ask mercy here in time: may be forgiven through^
Christ here in time, and not to drive till after they be dead, which will be
out of time: which the Devil that lulleth them here asleep in their sins
knows well enough.


OMEN. ^^^* and they may sleep long enough ere he will once awake them.
Well, let them be sure of one thing, though he suffer them to sleep as long
as they list: he will let them sleep in He^ never a whitte. Why do you
suffer these Usurers in your Country, wherefore do you not cut them off^*


SIVQILA* We can not if we would.


OMEN. Nay you will not if you might. Now I remember, a law for Usurers.
that we have an ancient law against Usurers, but it was clean out of my
mind: which, if it were au^hori^ed, and throughlye executed with you, I
would lay a wage^, if you had ten thousand Usurers now in your Country,
you should not have one at the tweluemonethes end.


SIVQILA. At al adventures I would we had it, what is it I pray you?


OMEN. Our law is, that if any lend money and receive any thing for the
loan thereof at the lending of the money, or shall or ought to receive any
thing over and above the sum lent, at any time after, then the lender of the
same money shall have his right han^e cut off for the first ^^^^used and shall
for^en the one half of all his goods, which shall be equallye divided in three
parts, one part whereof shall be to the use of the King, one other part to
the reuealer, and the third part shall remain as a stock in that town where
the Usurer dwells, which shall be lent as occasion serves* to the poor
that shall stand in need to borrowe, upon a sufficient gage, without paying
of any Interest at all therefore. And none, upon pain of loosing of their
hand, shall lend any thing to the said Usurer, for the space of five years
after. And the ^artie that borrowed the same money to Intereste* shall for the
first time so borrowing, have the forefinger of his or her right hand cut off
and shall forfeite the fourth part of all his or her goods, which shall be
divided and employed to the uses aforesaid. And every one that knows of the
same contracte and bargain, that conceales the same four and twenty hours,
shall loose likewise their forefinger and the fourth part of their goods, to be
employed to such use as is before mentioned. And if the Usurer reveal the same
first of all other, then he shall save his hand from cutting off. And if the
party that borrowes the money to interest reveal the same first of all other,
then he shall save his finger and his goods from forfeiting, but he shall have
his right ear cut off: And if any besides, that is privy to the same contract
and bargain, does reveal it before another, then he or she shall save the
forfeiture of their goods, and shall save their finger, besides every such a
one shall have that that is his due to y^ reuealer. And if any Usurer offend (as
is aforesaid) the second time, he shall be devoured to death with Bears, and
then he shall be sure not to commit Usurie the third time, and then also he
shall forfaite all his goods, to be employed as before said. And if any
borrowe money upon Usurie the second time, the same party shall loose his right
hand, and the one half of all his goods, and if he reveal the same (as is
before said) the^ he shall loose but his forefinger. And this is ye penalty
likewise of every one that is made privy of the same, unless he reveal it
(as before is said) and then he shall have as appertains to a reuealer. And
every one that shall borrow money upon Usurie the third time, and that shall be
privy of the contracte, and shall conceal the same, then every such a one
shall suffer death. But if the same borrower does reveal the same first of
all, then he shall save his life and his goods, but he shall have his right
hand cut off. And if any of them that are privy of y^ same contract, reveal
it, then they shall save both life and goods, and shall have the due that
belongs to the reuealer thereof.


SIVQILA. Oh this were a worthy law for our Usurers, if we had this law, and
well executed, the Usurers durst not trust to their starting holes as they do:
this law would so lincke them, that some might be so mad to lend, yet who
would be so mad to borrow? and though the Usurer must needs lament his
loss, yet the borrower could not laugh at his winning: the lender would be
so afraid, that the borrowed Note well.
would bewray him: and the borrower would be so afraid, that the lender would
bewray him: and both the lender and the borrower would be so afraid, that
they that were privy to it, would bewray them: and they that were privy to
it, would be so afraid, that one or other would bewraye them, that surely in
my judgment there would not one Usurer be found in all our Country within
one month: and then I hope, we should have some lend their money for
nothing, though none now almost will lend but for something. And is there none
in your Country, that ever did break this law?


OMEN. No truly, we lead our lives chiefly by the line of Gods law: and we
fear a thousand times more the breakyng of Gods law, than the disobeying of
man's law.


SIVQILA. But with us are such, as never a whitte care for Gods law: and if
they fear any, it is man's law. But if the whippe of the law be not made of
such cutting cords as will fetch the skin from the sides, the flesh from
the bones, and the life from the body, they care no more for it, than a dull
Jade does regard a rod of rushes.


OMEN. Truly they are such fond fools, that they fear that is fearelesse,
but they doubt not that is to be dreaded. For the breaking of man's law, can
but punish the body a while, with some worldly pain: but the breaking of Gods
will, most dolefully, painefully, and fearfully, punish both body and soul
everlastingly in the furious flames of Hell fire Therefore they miss the mark
much.


SIVQILA. And you miss it a little, be not angry though I digress, for you
say the breaking of the law, will make us be punished in Hell: then I am sure
that every one shall be punished in Hell. For every one from the beginning of
the world (except Christ) has broken the law: and though a man may fulfill
one of the ten commandments, which in all points is very hard for him to
do, yet it is impossible for any to keep and fulfill them all. Which law I may
compare to a Ladder of ten steps, whereof, though one go up nine of them
perfectly and well, yet if the tenth burst or break, or if he fall from the
tenth, he is never a whit the better for going up the nine steps, and so he
has such a fall, that he is never like to reach to the top, unless he have
another, and a surer Ladder to clime by, than he had before.


OMEN. You have said very well, and applied the thing very aptly: but I meant
not that every one that breaks the law should go unto Hell, nor every one that
says they can keep the law, shall go to Heaven. Adam at first did break
the law for us all, and brought in death: Christ did after fulfill the law
for us all, and brought in life. Since which time that Adam did break the law,
we that came of him were never able to keep the law: yet for all that whatsoever
he be that believes in Christ, that is sorry for his sins, and heartily repents
the same, earnestly desiring God to forgive him for Christ's sake, and is
assured that Christ will raise him up at the last day, and that through his
birth, life, passion, death, resurrection, and ascension, he is made a member
of Christ, even he I say, though he have broken the law, shall be saved and
not be punished in Hell fire: for Christ's performing of the law shall avail
him as much, as if he had kept the law himself. And thus though the members
of Christ break the law, Christ their head for them has performed the law.
Therefore you mistook me, for I meant the breakers of the law that were not
the members of Christ, should be punyshed in Hell: it is this our Christ
that is the sure Ladder whereby we must clime up to Heaven. For the ten steps
of the law, was either too rotten for us to rest on, or else to weak thereby
to reach unto the top (or rather both) that it was never able to serve our
turn: now if the ladder of Gods own law be not able to guide Note well.
us to Heaven: can any thing invented by man do it? no it is impossible:
therefore whosoever refuses this strong stiere of stone* Christ, and leanes to
ladders made of rotten wood, of their own inventions, or of mad men's
imaginations: surely they will fall into Hell, out of which they shall never get
again, do what they can.


SIVQILA. It is so true that nothing is truer: but says what you will, and do
what you can, there are thousands, that are so drowned in their own drowsy
dreams, so far in favor with their own fancies, so be witched with their
own wicked wit, and so enchaunted with the sorcerie of Satan: that they
will believe neither you nor me, and no marvel, for they will not believe
Jesus Christ the son of God, which tells them the same: and therefore we must
be content to be out of credit with the^, seeing Christ is clean out of
credit with them. And they think they know a better, easier, Consider this well.
and shorter way to heaven, than either God does know or his son Christ. Yet
a man would think that God that made both Heaven and earth, and is now in
them both, does know as perfect and as ready a way to heaven as any other, and
it is very like that our savior Christ the son of God, that was once in Earth,
and is now in Heaven, and that passed from earth to Heaven himself, should
know as good and near a way as any man else to Heaven. If this be true, as it
is most true, then what detestable doltes? what fontasticall fools? and what
mere mad men are they that never were yet in Heaven, nor are never like to
come there, as far as I see, (unless they refuse their own way) that
thinks they know a better way to Heaven, than either God or Christ the son
of God does. But when their own way that they think will lead them to
Heaven, has brought them and Mathc.
tumbled them into the dungeon of Hell: then they will cry woe worth the time
that they took their own way, and refused Christ's way, that they trusted
themselves which knew nothing, and mistrusted Christ weich knew al things: and
that they did forsake God their most loving Father, and sled to the fiende
their foe and utter destroyer.


OMEN. They will so, but then it is to late, they may call and cry then their
hearts out, for any mercy they shall find. Because they would not call upon God
when he would hear them: now he will not hear them, though they call upon him I
cannot but compare such self-willed and self-wise persons, to a certain
foolish trauailer, that went to see a dear friend of his, who would, if he
had come to him, entertained him A foolish traveler.
very well, and profited him very much. which traveler not knowing the way,
for that he was never there before, met by chance with oue that dwelled
thereabout, and knew the way very well. Of whom he enquired the way to his
frinds house, and then he said to the traveler, if you keep the way still on
the right hand, it will bring you straight to his house, but in any wise take
heed that you follow not the way on the left hand, for if you do, it will
lead you into Woods and Thickets, where you will be in very great danger to
be devoured of wild beasts: but when the man was gone, the trauellour giving
little credit or none to him that told him the way, and pleased more with the
fair beaten path on the left hand, than with the small trodden way on the right
hand, and therewith all being more wilful than wise, more rash than
reasonable, and more careless than careful, took the way on the left hand:
which he followed so far, that or ever he was aware, he was among the wild
beasts, who presently devoured him. And thus, through mistrusting of him which
knew the way, and trusting to himself that knew not the way, he sought his
own sorrow, and in stead of his good cheer and commodities which he should
have had with his friend, he made the wild beasts good cheer with his own
body, and so for a liking life, he got a terrible death.


SIVQILA. Yea, but whereas this traveler through his folly procured but the
death of his body, if he repented his sins, and asked mercy of God in
Christ: yet these witless and wilful wretches, that walk their own way, and
refuse Christ's way, procure their endless death both of body, and soul in
Hell. I pray you sir, (if I may be so bold to ask you) how are are
unthankful or Ingrate Persons used with you?


OMEN. I cannot well tell you how, for we have never an unthankful or ingrate
person in all our Country.


SIVQILA. Then you are happy, you have not so few of them, but we have as many
of them, the world is grown now to such wickedness, that very few are
grateful for benefits past, marry many are tongue thankeful, until the good
turn be done: but when they have once got the thing they gaped for, they
regard him no more, than some hungry dogs fawning on a stranger for food, do
care for him, after they have filled their bellies. Nay perhaps within a while
after, he will use his friend as a foe, and for his good turn will do him two
or three evil turns.


OMEN. If such a one were handled as there was one with us, he would take
heed how to be unthankful after, as long as he lived.


SIVQILA. Then belike you have a law for the brydeling of ingrate persons.


OMEN. Yea that we have, which if you had, and well executed, I think there
would not be long so many unthankful with you as there are.


SIVQILA. I pray you forget not to tell me how that naughty fellow was used.


OMEN. There was a certain good and charitable man did ride homewarde to his
house, who chanced to hear one make pitiful groaning, and then he drew
nearer and nearer to the noise, and thereby at the last came to the place
where he saw the same pitiful person, saying to him, alack my friend, what
aylest thou? Oh sir, said the man, as I traveled this way, being in perfect
health, I suddenly fell sick, I was constrained to lay my self down in this
place: and now what with the great cold I have taken here, and what with my
sudden and extreme sickness, I think I shall dye, and that within a while,
unless some good and charitable man do relieve and succor me. And to tell the
truth. I have never a penny in all the world, and if I had, my heart is so
fainte, my body so sick, and my legs so weak, that I am not able to go from
this place to succor my self. Which when the pore sick man had spoken, the
good and charitable man wept for the grief of this his pore brother, saying,
good brother be of good comfort, God has commanded us, that we must love
our neighbor as our self, and you are one of my worldly neighbors, though I
know not where you dwell, and therefore I must do for you as I would do for my
self. Christ wills us, Whatsoever you would that other should do to you even
so do you to them. Now, if I were in your case, and you in mine, I would be
glad that you should help me: even so I must be willing to aid and help you
now. And so doing. I do as I would be done unto, and therefore brother help thy
self now as as much thou may, and I will put to my strength as much as I can,
and whereas my horse is too slender to bear us both, thou shall ride and I
will hold thee and go by thee on foot. To whom the sick man said, the Lord
reward you, whereas I am unable: and so with much ado, the sick man was set
on his horse, and at the last he brought him home to his house, where he
looked to him so lovingly, cherished so charitably, and comforted him so
courteously, that he was very well recovered within a while after. And when the
said sick man was perfectly and thoroughly hoale, and determined to go away,
the said good and charitable man said to him, brother I thank God that I was
able to do this for thee: and for that you said to me when I saw you first,
that you had no money, therefore here is a Riall to put in your purse, for so I
would be glad to be done unto if I did lack. And then the said fellow
departed away, having good luck to hap on such a friend.


SIVQIA. I perceive the first man of all that came by him after he fell sick,
did thus charitably use him. But one might have lien sick so with us in an
open high way, and should not have had the twentieth part of this
friendship, though a hundred had come riding, seeing him never so poor or
sick. I will not say, but happily he might have got a great among that
hundredth, and some perhaps would say, that he had spedde well.


OMEN. Yea, but if he had none other help but that grot, It is to be mused at.
and so lien in the cold al night, he might hap to have been found dead in
the morning. Truly I muse how these men can ride so merrily away, for fear
their brother should perish for want of their help.


SIVQILA. Tutte, that is the smallest matter of a thousayde. That is one of the
most that they count least. But it is to be feared, that if a man should die
for want of succor in that case, God would require the blood of that manne of
every one that so rode or went by him, because they might have saved his
life, and would not. Yet I think verilye, that these hundred persons, that
should ride or go by him, would spend a great deal more in wast, and
excessiuely that night, than would have paid for the succouring, comforting,
and recovering of the same pore sick person, and one or two more. But sir, you
were telling me a tale, which (I guess) was scantly half told, whereof, if
you speak no further, you had been as good not to have Note.
begun it at all, as to have spoken ever a whitte, considering your tale
tended (as you said) of an unthankful person, and how he was handled
therefore. Mary in the beginning of the same, you have displaced a perfect
pattern of a pitiful person.


OMEN. You have fed me with such talk since I left, that I was constrained to
answer you: and you have also spoken of such unmerciful and uncharitable
Christians, that I had almost forgote the ingrate and unthankful person. But
now I will proceed with the same. Within a while after the said poor man
was gone, the said good and charitable man having occasion to ride about some
bussnesse, in his riding his horse did stumble, whereby he was cast off from his
horse into a little shallowe ditche, where there was no water, and his horse
fell upon him, so that neither he, nor his horse could stir: yet he lay
quietly* and without striving, in hope to be helped by the next person that
should come that way: and as he looked up a little* he espiyd the poor man
coming on foot thither ward, that he had done so much for of late,
whereof he was very glad, and when he came something nighe him, he called him
by his name, and said, good brother help me, for I am not able to help my
self, my horse is fallen so upon me, and in such a place, that, neither I,
nor he, are able to stir. But this unkind wretch, knowing both the man and
the horse well inoughe, said unto him, and that churlishly: I have to great
haste to tarry now to help you, Then the same man said to him again: Ah my
friend, I did not use you thus. I care not for that said he, Do you think
that I have nothing else to do, but to tarry here to help you? let them that
come next after help you if they will* and so the vile varlet went his way
apace, and left his dear friend that had done so much for him, in that
danger: then by and by came a stranger, whom he knew not, to whom, as soon
as he called, he helped both him and his horse up presently: the^ they both
rode a preity way together, to whom this godly and charitable man showed how
unkindly the poor man had used him, and how much a little before he had done
for him: then, said he, it was the churlishest part that ever I heard of
before, and especially to such a friend, as you were lately to him. Truly,
if I were as you, said he, I would reveal the whole matter thereof to the
Judge, who is such a favorer of Truth, and hater of Uice: such a defender
of the Innocent, and such a punisher of the wicked: and such a patron to the
pore, and such an enemy to the evil, that he will make that most ingrate
villain, to be a spectacle to all other that shall come after him. Well, said
the godly man, though he has showed me such vn^^^^^nesse, yet I would be
loath to bring him before the Judge, for surely he would use him extremely,
which I would be sort to see: to whom the other answered, not so extremely
as he has deserved: and seeing you are loath to do it (said he) I my self
wit reveal it to the Judge, trusting, if I tell it to him, I shall declare no
lie: to whom the godly man said, no, be sure of y^. And so presently these two
men departed one from another, and immediately after, the man came home that
helped the godly and charitable man that was fallen under his horse, not
forgetting the marvelous churlishness and ingratitude of the fellow that
would not help him a little, that had done so much for him, went to the Judge
and told him all the whole matter: to whom the Judge said, me thinks this
tale you tell, is not like to be true. For, I believe there is not such an
ingrate person on the earth. Take heed my friend you do not feign this of envy
and spite, only to hurt the poor fellow withal. My Lord said the man, I
know not that fellow for I never saw him in all my life that I remember,
neither ever did hear of his name, before the honest and charitable man told
me whom he so misused. Well, said the Judge, if it be true, such an
unthankful wretch is not worthy to live: and then the Judge commanded one
of his officers to bring that unthankful fellow unto him in all the haste
possible, and also sent for the honest and charitable man to come before him,
and when they were come, the Judge said to the honest and charitable man: Do
you know this fellow? Yea my Lord, I know him, said he: By what occasion
were you acquainted with him, said the Judge, tell truth, and look that you
do not fable with me in any wise. Well, said he, seeing your Lordship
commaundes me, I will do it, which otherwise I would be loath to do. As I
rode by the way, not very long since, I heard one groan pitifully, by the sound
whereof I came to the place where this fellow did lie on the ground both
extreme cold, and very sick, whom I carried home to my house, and there
with such as I had, I did nourishe and cherishe him, and by Gods help got
him his former strength again. And this is the very occasion that I was
acquainted with him. Then said the Judge, every one finds not such a
commodity at their first acquaintance as he did. How sayste thou, said the
Judge to the poor fellow, is this true? Yea my Lord I can not deny it: thou
had better luck, said the Judge, than It is true.
many an honester man than thou has. But had thou never occasion to show
him any fryendshippe or pleasure since that time? No my Lord, said the
fellow. Take heed, said the Judge, that you lie not, for if you make a lie
before me, I will make you that you shall neither lie nor tell truth of a good
while after. Then the Judge said to the godly man that was so friendly to him:
tell me whether it lay in his power since to have showed you pleasure or not.
Then he said, indeed my Lord, it lay once in his power since to have done
me pleasure: to whom the Judge said, then there is no doubt but he did it.
Why do you not tell me, did he it or not? then he said to the Judge, as I could
be content not to utter the truth, even so I am loath to tell your Lordshippe
a lie. Truly he did it not. Then said the Judge to the fellow: How say thou
to this? then the fellow said, truly (my Lord) as I went hastily by the way,
upon great and weighty business, I saw one lie under his Horse in a little
shallow place, but I did not know that this manne was he. Then said the
Judge, Did thou never speak with this man since that time? No forsooth my
Lord, said he: to whom the Judge aunsweared: How dos^e thou Ma^^^^*
know now more that it was he, than thou knew then that it was he? then
the fellow hanged down his head, and was ashamed to speak: whereat the
Judge sinyled, and all that were there. This fellow (said the Judge) has
uttered the truth against his will, though he would lie, his tongue will
not lie. And then the Judge said to the godly manne: What answer made he you
when you craved his help? truly (my Lord) I have too great have to tarry now
to help you: to whom I aunsweared again, a^ my friend, I did not use you
thus. I care not for that, said he, do you think that I have nothing else to
do, but to tarry here to help you? Let the^ that come after help you if they
will, and so churlishly he departed. And if this good man, a mere stranger to
me, had not come by, as God would, and helped me, I know not to what
extreamitie I had been driven. Then said the Judge, this man has done good
two manner of ways: the one is, which was duetye in helping you up, being
fallen under your horse: the other is, in uttering to me the intolerable
ingratitude of this pestiferous person: come near to me, said the Judge to
the fellow: Suppose this good man in that distress had been unknown Note
this.
and a stranger to thee, as it is most sure thou did know him, as appears
both by thy answer then made unto him and by thine own words uttered here
before us all: yet is that a sufficient excuse, that therefore thou should
not help him in his necessity, or save his life? this good and charitable man
that found thee almost dead, was a mere stranger to thee, and never knew
thee before: and would thou have thought it a good and sufficient answer,
and bin well pleased withal, if he should then have said unto thee, I am but
a stranger to thee, and know thee not, and therefore let some of thy kindred,
friends, or other that know thee, help, succor, and relieve thee, I have
other business with my mo ney, than to bestow it upon thee? How say thou?
would this aunsweare have pleased thee or not? but the fellow answered never
a word. Then said the Judge, thou do well to hold thy peace, for else,
either thou must incur the danger of lying, or condemn thy self by saying
of truth: thou varlet, pity would have compelled any body that had Mark the
Judges words.
altogether a stony heart, to have stayed so long to help a sheep or a beast,
but much more his Christan brother, but most of al, such a friend, that so
lately had saved his life. Could thou suffer him to perish, that lately, did
preserve thee? could thou suffer him to lie in danger, that so lovingly
did rydde thee out of danger? could thou, to spare thy short labor
without one penny expense, suffer him to die, that both with the labor of his
body, the care of his mind, and the spending of his substance, did make thee
to live? Consider the dumb Dog, whose kindness is such to his friend and
Master, that no gift can procure him, no meat can move him, nor no way can
win him, to forsake his friend or Master, no though he beat him: and
shall we then, that are reasonable creatures, the Image of God, the members of
Christ, the children of GOD, and the brethren of Christ, fly from our
friends, whom our finger may help, that with body and goods did defend us
from death*? shall we make our selves worse than Dogs, that GOD does
prefer before the Angels? have not some Dogs loved their friends and
Masters so well, that they have leapt into great waters, rather endaungering
themselves to be drowned, to follow their friends and Masters, than to tarry
behind them with the safeguard of their lives? Some Dogs have had such a
fervent love to their friend and Master, that after their death, they have
never eaten any meat, and so have dyed for sorrow. Some also have scraped up
the earth where their masters were buried, and so have buried themselves in
their Masters graves: and what say you to that Dog that loved his friend
and Master so alive, that burned himself to death on hot coals, when his
Master was dead. Now, if these dumb Dogs, brute beasts, and unreasonable
creatures, that know not how a good turn should be recompensed, that know
not a meet reward for a bountiful benefit, nor what favor is fit for a
faithful friend, are so loving to their friend, will never shrink from their
friend, and many times will dye with their friend: and we that are
reasonable creatures, that do know all this, and are most false to our
friends, forgetful of benefits, and churlishe to our cherishers, then I
must account these dumb Dogs better than we, and we worse than Dogs. Ah
varlet, may thou not be ashamed to be proved worse than a Dog? Behold,
a little Bird shall make thee ashamed. But how can thou be ashamed? for I
think thou have no shame at all. The little Marlin will not pray on the last
Bird that she catches at night, but holds her in her tallants al night
without hurting her, only to keep her self the warmer, and then in the morning
she lets her go: which Marlin advisedly marking which way the same Bird
does fly, will not fly toward that quarter of all that day for her pray,
least she should hap to catch her, and so hurt her that had done her good,
pinch her that had pleasured her, and kill her that had comforted her. This
little Bird against her will has pleasured the Marlin, and yet the Marlin is
thankful for it: But this honest man, of his mere good will has cherished
thee and saved thy life, and yet wast thou unthankful to him, not regarding his
death. Consider (thou varlet) the love of a Lion, and his recompense for a
benefit received.

There was one Androcles fled from his Master being a Senator of Rome, with
great substance, who traveling in the desert places of Africa, being
beparched with the heat of the Sun, was driven for coldenesse to lie all a
day in a Cave, who forewearied slepte very soundlye: into which Cave at night
came a great Lion, at whose sudden sight the man was afraid: but the Lion
not meaning to hurt him, but rather to have some pleasure at his hands, did
hold out his foot, wherein was a Thorn, which Androcles at last perceiving,
partly by holding out his foot, and partly by his mournful look, that the
Lion would have him to help him: by and by he looked in the Lions foot, and
there he saw the thorn that grieved him, which immediately he plucked out.
Whereof the Lion was not only glad and feign, and fawned on him in such
courteous manner as he could: but also brought into the same Cave daily
sufficient food for him to feed on. And thus in this marvelous manner,
Androcles for his good turn, was friendly used of the Lion two or three
years. But Androcles being weary of this desolate life, departed from the
Lion, and then after by traveling unawarely, was apprehended: and so was
adjudged to be thrown among Lions and other wild beasts into a Dungeon: in
which den or place (by good hap for Androcles) was the self same Lion,
out of whose foot he had taken the Thorn, which Lion remembryng Androcles
better than he did him, and meaning further to gratify his good turn, did
preserve and defend him from killyng of the other beasts, which else would
have devoured him. Thus thou may see how this loving Lion, though he were
otherwise most cruel, and a deuourer of man and beast, did gratify
Androcles, only for plucking a thorn out of his foot: and thou taking thy
self to be a reasonable creature, and a Christian, which ought to be most
merciful, humble, meek, and thankful, would not help him with thy
hand, but leave him in danger of death, that most lovingly, and charitablye
saved thy life: and therefore my judgment is, thou shalt wear both on thy
bosom and back the figure of a Serpente for the space of seven years,
without taking it off at any time, signifying as the Serpente will sting him
when she is warm that preserved her from the cold: so thou haste hurt him
when thou wast strong, that helped thee when thou wast weak. And whosoever
shall show thee friendship, do thee any good turn, or pleasure thee in
any thing during the said seven years, unless in meat and drink, and thy
wages, which thou shall deserve by thy labor (foreseeyng, that none shall be
let or hindered hereby reasonablye to relieve thee, if thou chance to be
sick, being not able to succor thy self) shall wear the like Serpente both
on his bosom and back for the space of one year after, and shall in all
points ^e used that one year, as thou art all the seven years. And thou
shalt four times every year during the said seven years, come to this
godly and charitable man, and offer him for the space of seven days, to do
for him what service he shall require thee to do. And because thou made a
lie before me since thou came hither, therefore, according to the law, thou
shalt not speak in three months after this day: and this is my judgment
^^reuocable. And the Judge rose up, and every one commended the wise and
virtuous Judge therein.


SIVQILA. And were the judgments executed, and did he perform them, as the
Judge decreed?


OMEN. Yea, you may be most certain of that: and we never had any unkind or
unthankful person in our Country since.


SIVQILA. If we had the same law, and so strictly executed with us, we should
not have half so many unkind and unthankful wretches as we have. And as
we have no good and severe law for the punishyng of this Uice, so a great
sort with us think, that Ingratitude is no offense or fault. Well, we must
not measure our faults by their minds: yet the Ingratitude between man and
manne, is almost nothing in comparison of the ingratitude or unkindness of man
toward God: for, if you mark the great benefits of God toward man on the one
side, and the cold love of Man, and his unthankfulness to God on the other
side, then you must needs be constrained to say so. Did not God make Man at
the first to his own image and likeness? Did he not plant him in that
pleasant place called Paradise? Did he not make Heaven and Earth, Fire,
Air, and Water, Beasts, Birds, and Fishes, and all other things, only for
him, before he was created, because that he should have all things as a King
ready against his coming? and what a part did he play within a while after?
God for bade him but one thing of all other, and yet he did it. Do you not
think that this was a kind and thankful man that would not do one thing
at Gods request, that had done so many wonderful things for him unrequested?
and yet the performing of it was for his own profit: whereas the breaking of
it was the utter destruction of him, and all his posterity. Yet consider the
great goodness and mercy of God to man, for all that: for whereas man by no
means could save himself out of the Devils danger, God without the knowledge
of man, healed this helpless harm, even so maruelously and louinglye, as
never the like was heard of. For God his dear and only son, of a mighty and
eternal king in Heaven, became a poor and miserable man on Earth, and so
suffered hunger, was as it were an abject, was buffeted, mocked, scourged,
crucified, and killed, and all to save man, that before had lost himself:
whose death did disappoint the Devil of his purpose: for whosoever repents his
sins earnestly, and believes that sins shall be forgiven through Christ's
death assuredly out of all doubt, he shall be reputed for no sinner, but shall
be a member of Christ, and be an inheritoure of the Kingdom of Heaven with
Christ. Travail into what country you will, and read all the Histories in
the world, and yet you shall never hear of the like friendship to this. Yet
how thankful and loving are the most of the inhabitants of the whole Earth, to
God and to Christ his son, for this his benefit far passing all other,
that is, for bringing of us from the Devil to God, and from Hell to Heaven? let
us consider in our consciences.


OMEN. Truly we do so deeply weigh and consider this great and inestimable
love of God, that every one with us does strive to exceed one another in
thankfulness to Christ, and do those things that he commaundes us, wherein
we are assured we do most chiefly please him. But it is possible in some other
parts of the world, that many that knows it welynough, do never a whit
regard the goodness of God, nor the friendship of Christ herein.


SIVQILA. Nay, I know many, that when they have heard this marvelous and
wonderful mercy, love, and kindness of God to man: yet they have not once in
countenance, or tongue, showed any whit of thankfulness therefore. yet if you
should not name them Christians, they would be angry.


OMEN. Yea, but if they be no better lovers of Christ than so, if they be no
more thankful to Christ than so, and if they show Christ for his pains no
more kindness than so, truly for all their Christian name, Christ may hap
to say to them, Away ye workers of iniquity, I know you not.


SIVQILA. It is a wonderful thing that such a great good turn, should be out
of our mind either night or day. But mark the fondenesse of fools: If a man
were condemned to death, and the King by no means would pardon or save his
life, unless some great Lord would be content to lie for him in prison ten
years fast fettered in irons, and lie hard, and fare evil, as the poorest
prisoners of all do all that while: and then if some good and charitable Lord
should be content so to be imprisoned for him, and then to save his life: what
a clapping of hands would be at that Lord? what commendations would thousands
give to that Lord? what a sort of people would rejoice in that Lord? what a
number would be desirous to see that Lord? and what a multitude would desire
to please that Lord? yea though he saved but one man's life, and did never one
of them any pleasure? The^ seeing Christ the eternal King of Heaven, came
down to this prison of Earth, remaining here thirty and three years and
more, and suffered death in his own person most vilelye on the Cross, to
save all our lives, that otherwise had been damned driuels, why do we not
most joyfully clappe our hands at this King? Then why should not every one
commend this mighty King? why should not we all rejoice in this King? why
should we not desire to see this King? why should not we be most thankful to
this King? why should not all the whole world love most fervently this King?
Therefore because we do it not, what witless, senseless, careless,
churlish, wicked, and ingrate persons are we? We are far unworthy to have
such a friend.


OMEN. Truly I am of your mind: but if the man whose life the Lord had so
painfully saved, should say afterward, that the said Lord did not save his
life, but that he, by some other means of his own, escaped death: would not
every one think you (that should hear him say so) cry out of him, and say,
it was pity he had his life? Besides, the Lord that so saved him, would not
be very well content with him.


SIVQILA. And good reason, but now if this fellow so saying, had been more
worthy to be hanged, than saved in such a sort: then what vile varlets are
they, and what are they worthy to have, that will by all the means they may,
blotte out the merit of Christ, that only with sheading of his blood has
saved them and us al, saying, they can be saved either by their own merits, or
by some other means, whereby they turn out Christ for no body, which has
done al in all.


OMEN. These are the most vile and ingrate persons that can be, in my
judgment, they are not worthy to live on the earth, much less in Heaven.
They are more meet to be firebrands in Hell. And I can tell them one thing,
that Christ will not think very well of them that deface his death, that he
spent for their life: that darken his deeds, to defend their own dreams: and
do rob him of his glory, to extol their own fancies.


SIVQILA. Such unkind and ingrate wretches I fear are reserved to greater
torments and painefuller punishements, than any that be on earth, unless
they repent in time, lay hold on Christ in time, and be thankeful to God in
time.


OMEN. Doubtless Angratitude is a vile vice, and more worthy to be punished
than many thinks for.


SIVQILA. And as God does detest ingrate persons, so he does favor them that
be thankful, as I will show you by a rare example: There was an honest
Gentlemen suddenly had his Thumb stricken off with the shot of a Gunne,
which when he perceived, straightway he kneeled down and said, my Lord and
God I thank thee, for if thou of thy goodness had not preserved me, I
might as well have bin killed with this shot, as to have lost my thumb with
this shot: therefore blessed be thy name, thou know better than I, what is
meet for me, thou do all things for the best to them that love thee. And
within a certain time after, this gentleman was taken prisoner, and was
appointed to be hanged the next day after: and because they would make him
sure for flying, he was manacled to one of his enemies, and (as God would) on
the same hand that lackt the thumb. But in the night, perceiving him that was
manacled with him, to sleep very soundly, he pluckte his hand through the
manacle, which he could never have done, if he had had his thumb. And so by
such shift as he made, he escaped. And thus by Gods great goodness, the loss
of his thumb was the saving of his life.


OMEN. We may see how God does preserve them, that do please him.


SIVQILA. Yea, and suffers them to perish that are unthankful to him: as may
appear by an ingrate Mariner, which climing up to the top of a Ship, slipped
sodainelye down, when if God had not guided, he was as like to have fallen
into the Sea as into the Ship: who when he perceived that he had no harm,
he said mockingly, there my Nose saved me once, (never thanking God for his
safety) but afterward when he thought himself in no danger, a sudden
blaste of wind did blow him out of the Ship into the Sea, and then neither
his nose, his hands, nor his legs could save him. And thus GOD did suffer
this wretch to perish, that did yield that to his nose iestinglye, that he
should attribute to GOD most thankefullye.


OMEN. Me thinks such wonderful and rare examples, should be a sufficient
schoolemaister to teach the^ to be thankful to God, that are delivered out of
such desperate dangers, for without his power and providence, we can neither
incur the same, nor escape the same.


SIVQILA. You say most true, yet there is not one amongst a hundred, I had
almost said a thousand, when they do escape great perils most wonderfully and
contrary to man's expectation, that do then fall down humbly upon their knees,
and give God most humble and hearty thanks for preserving them from that peril
and danger. Perhaps you will say, I had good luck to escape thus, (neither
making any great account that they are escaped, nor how they are escaped) but
if he may be counted a naughty man, that will not once thank him that has
saved him from faling into a pit, then they must needs be most vile, wicked and
ingrate, that do not give God thanks, that delivers them daily from perils and
dangers: I beseech you sir, are such as write against such vices with you
commended? and they that write learned and virtuous works with you esteemed?


OMEN. Yea truly are they, and if their manners and ability be correspondent
thereto, they are had in great reputation, and come the sooner to preferment.


SIVQILA. Yea, but it is with us quite contrary, for they that hope to attain
to any great office, bear any rule, or come to any preferment, think scorn
(though they are able) to pen or publish any Books (though the matter be
never so good, necessary, or honest, and wherefore think you? forsooth because
most peruersely and peeuishly, they should be therefore of the higher sort
disdained, of their equals dispraised, of their inferiors derided, of the
profited thereby not thanked, and of some that can not amend it detracted. So
that (but what reason is in it I know not) the most part with us think it as
unseemly, for one that is in authority, or bears rule, to publish and work,
as it is for a Peddler to preach. But I am clean of a contrary mind: Moses
was the chief Duke of the Israelites, and yet he thought no scorn when he was
in his Dukedom, to write five books, which at this day are called the five
books of Moses. David was a worthy king and one, whom God loved dearly, and
yet for all that he did not disdain to write Divine and mystical Psalms,
which are called until this day David's Psalms, and will be to the end of the
world. Solomon was a sumptuous King, and as wise as the best of them all, and
yet he thought it no dishonor to him to write these excellent books, that is,
the book of Wisdom, Ecclesiastes, the Proverbs, and the Canticles which are
called, the Proverbs and Canticles of Solomon. Dioscorides being a worthy
Knight, did not grut^he to set forth a notable and profitable Book of the
nature and property of Herbs: besides many other noble personages, who are
more tedious to be recited, than meet to be left out, by which their books,
they are more famed, their names more remembered, and they much more commended,
than if they had bin Dukes and Kings without writing any books. S. Augustine
is now better known by his Books, than by his Bishopric. Galen far
inferior to a King, yet an excellent Physician, is fresh in memory at this
day by his learned books: but there have been a thousand kings that have
reigned with great Majesty, that we never heard of. I pray you sir, be any
with you suffered to buy or beg any offices?


OMEN. No I warant you, for we are assured, that they that would buy, do
mean for to sell: and they that do beg, do use seldom to give. Who will buy
an office unless it be more for his private profit, than for a common
commodity? and we believe verilye whosoever begs an office, does it more for
their own preferment than for the executing of it truly: therefore none are
admitted into any office with us, but are called and chosen for their
godliness, virtue, wisdom and knowledge.


SIVQILA. I would all officers were so chosen with us, though some officers
would not so. For many that are meet should then be in Office, and many that
are unmeet should be Jack out of office. Do the rich with you, keep good
Hospitality for their poor neighbors and strangers that shall pass that way?


OMEN. I think you never heard of the like, for there is not one with us, (if
he be rich and able to maintain a good house) but is so loath that any should
pass by their house before they have well refreshed them with good meat and
drink, that they appoint me^ to watch purposely about their house, to will and
desire the travelers that come by, to eat and drink ere they go.


SIVQILA. Such a number of good and free housekeepers as you speak of, are
hard to find: I have heard of few such: I know but few such: and I
think I shall find as few such. In our Country perhaps may be some
niggardly house keeper, that will set one to watch rather to beat them away,
that come for any meat and drink. Yet we have many good and worthy
housekeepers, that do feast their friends, succor many strangers, and
plentifullye relieve the poor: but I will give your housekeepers the prick
and price of all that ever I heard. What if any be maimed with you in the
defense of his Country: shall be have any relief after therefore?


OMEN. You may be sure, that such cannot be suffered to lack, especially in
such a godly and civil Country as ours is: we have houses purposely therefore
erected, with sufficient lands appertayning to the same, in which houses every
maimed person are admitted to be during their lives, and have therein
sufficient meat, drink, cloth, lodging, and other necessaries: and they are
allowed a sufficient and godly preacher, who has a reasonable stipende allowed
to him out of the same land.


SIVQILA. Surely it is a politic order, a charitable deed, and a necessary
thing. I would we had the like with us, for then the Prince would be
profited, the maimed maintained, and the soldior encoraged. For, what pore
soldier will not go to the wars more willingly, and fight when he comes
there more courageously, when he knows he shall have a sufficient living, if
he be maimed when he comes home? Well, there is a hundredth times more spent
in vain in our Country in a year, I had almost said in a day, than would
frame sufficient houses there for that purpose. Is there any maintenance in
your Colleges and Free-schooles for the bringing up of pore men's children in
Learning?


OMEN. Yea truly, and that through the whole realm, for there is never a
College, nor Free*schoole in all our country, but there is sufficient lands
belonging to them for the educating only of poor men's children.


SIVQILA. What? only for poor men's children? may not one rich man's son
creep in and not be espied? may not the Master of the College or the chief
doers for the Freeschooles, help now and then their friends child in, and
keep the pore man's child out? for, it is an evil Cook that cannot lick his
own fingers.


OMEN. I tell you truly, there is none can, nor may be admitted there, but
pore men's children, whose friends are not able to maintain them to learning:
For the Father of every such child, or the mother of the child (if the
father be dead) or the child himself (if both his father and mother be dead)
before the same child be admitted, shall sit at the same College or
Schoolehouse gate, in very pore attire, for the space of three days from
morning to evening, having a writing fixed on his or her bosom, with these
words following in it, This is the poor man or poor woman, that through
great poverty is enforst to have his or her child brought up as a poor
Scholar in this College or School: and the same party shall hold a box,
and receive therein the money and alms of such well disposed persons as shall
pass by them.


SIVQILA. Truly this is an excellent way that the rich men's sons shall not
take up pore Scholars rooms, for the rich disdain to be called poor, and be
much more ashamed to beg as do the pore: but the poor man is double glad
hereof, for he is not only sure thereby his child shall have food, raiment,
and learning for nothing, but also that they themselves shall have some relief
during the said three days of good and charitable persons that shall see them
sit^e there. Hereby you are sure, that the great and rich men's combs are
cut, from being suitors in any of these places for their sons. If the same
policy were used with us, so many rich men's sons would not be brought up in
Colleges with the livings appointed for the poor scholars* I fear y^ a
great sort of rich men have, and do daily, with their heavy powches, either
thrust them out, or keep them out of the Colleges and Schools, where they
ought to be placed* well if they that give such rewards and bribes, knew
what it is to rob the poor, and they that take the rewards or bribes, knew
what it is to defraude the pore, the one would not be half so ready in
giving, nor the other so greedye in taking. Well, I am sure, as godly men as
they, have not done it: as wise men as they, cannot find in their hearts to
do it: and as honest men as they, will never do it. But what if some
shameless, greedy or niggardly rich man or woman, (for other I am sure would
never do it) should by fraud or craft (notwithstanding this policy) place
his or her son* or any other, in any such College or School, in the roomth of
a pore Scholar?


OMEN. Truly he or she shall forfaite to the first reuealer thereof, the
fourth part of all his or her goods, and further, he or she shall forfaite the
one half of all the rest of his or her goods, which presently shall be to the
use of the pore child that should have been admitted by course into that
College or School, where any such is admitted thus fraudulently: (for
every poor Scholar with us is placed in the Colleges and Schools by an
excellent good order and course) and likewise shall forfaite the one half of
all his or her lands, which the same poor Scholar shall have, to him and to
his heirs for ever immediately after his or her death.


SIVQILA. Some perhaps will think, that this is a very hard and straighte
law, that (for such a fault) should make one lose both half of his lands
and goods.


OMEN. Then belike they think it is but a small fault, for a rich man to
rob a poor child. Well, let them think what they will, none in our
Country think so, and the wise will think (whatsoever they think) that this
law is not made to make any lose their lands or goods, but to make many take
heed that they do not loose their lands and goods. And though some perhaps
will think there is no cause why the pore child should have half the lands
and goods of the rich man, the law that wills it, is cause good enough.
Besides it is a great reason, that the pore child should have half the
lands and goods of the rich man that has done him wrong, as the rich man's
son to have all the poor childs living, that never did him harm.


SIVQILA But shall the Masters of the Colleges, and the doers for the
Schools escape free, if they admit any rich men's sons into the pore
Scholars roumes, contrary to this well meante order, or if by their
sufferance, or negligence any is admitted thus fraudulentlye or craftilye?


OMEN. Then you might well think, that we were partial, and not the men
that we are. Nay every such Master of a College, and chief doer for the
Schools, that do so offend, shall quite be put out of their roumes or office,
and the first reuealer or complayner thereof shall have the fourth part of
all their goods, and the one half of the rest of all their goods shall
equallye be distributed, and given among all the poor Scholars of the same
College or School whereof such an offendour was Master or chief doer: and
also they shall be emprisoned therefore one half year.


SIVQILA. I would such as do so, were used so, and then they that do so, I
think sure would not do so. Well, I will now trouble you with an other
matter. If a simple man, not known to any of the higher powers or Magistrates,
pore in comparison, and meanly apparelled, should inuente and draw out some
thing that were good, honest, reasonable, necessary, commendable, profitable,
and possible, (only for a common wealth, and not for his own private gain)
would they receive it thankefully, and peruse it willingly?


OMEN. Yea that they would I warrant you: and if it were such a suit as you
say, they would authorize it speedilye, besides their courteous countenaunces,
and their preferring of him, that it would not a little encorage other to
employ their wits to such good devises: for we consider and respect the matter,
not the man, the goodness, not the garment: the wit, not the wealth: and the
learning, not the living.


SIVQILA. By this means many learned, pregnant and witty men, will be
allured to busy, which else would be idle to labor, which else would
loyter: and to put forth their knowledge, which else should lie hid.
Surely, herein you are much to be commended: and as the inuentors of good
things ought to be cherished: so deuisers of evil are to be punished* You
saice, I remember, that the rich do give through the persuading of
Preachers, Curates, and Ministers, at or before their death, of their goods and
lands to the building of Hospitalls, and to many other good uses: I pray you
what uses are they that you mean of?


OMEN. Forsoothe I will show you, they give it to the feeding of poor
fatherless, to the releeuing of pore wanting widows, for succouring of poor
prisoners, to the helping of pore beginners, to the setting forward of pore
diligent apprentices and servants, to the maintenance of such as are maimed
for the defense of our Country, for the redeeming of imprisoned debtors, for
the helping of poor hindered Husbandmen, for the succouring of poor Scholars
at learning, to the helping of poor Maids at their marriage, to the restoring
of pore decayed Gentlemen (not by unthriftiness) to their lands, to the
repairing of broken bridges, toward the mending of evil and dangerous
ways, to the enriching of decayed and empouerished cities, for the aiding of
decayed artificers: for the setting of the pore and idle persons in work: and
to the erecting of Colleges and Free schools for the increase and maintenance
of Learning, with diverse other such like.


SIVQILA. Truly your rich men are happy and blessed of God, because they
bestow part of their goods and lands to such worthy and charitable uses.


OMEN. Nay, they that have no children give much of their lands and goods to
these godly uses in their life time, and when they are dead, they give all the
rest of their lands and goods to the same, unless they reserve part thereof,
wherewith they help their pore kinsfolks, if they have any, and relieve their
pore neighbors.


SIVQILA. And what do every one of your rich men and women bestow their goods
or part of their goods thus godly?


OMEN. Every one throughout all our Country.


SIVQILA. Truly, I never heard of the like before, I would to God that every
one of our rich men would bestow but part of their goods and lands in this
order. Which, if they did they should never have the like thanks, nor reward,
at their children or friends hands for all the rest, as they should have at
Chrstes hands for that. But yet all this can not persuade them, for the most
of our rich men are so greedy and covetous, that they will depart with none
of their goods during their life, nor give any part thereof to any such good
uses after their death. Nay, there have been some that were so bewitched, that
having some pore kindred and no children, at their death would not give them
the value of a penny, but have given it all to their executors, which had more
than enough before to live on. Were not these more than mad, that gave their
goods to such as needed it not, and that could do them no good therefore,
and would not give it rather to the pore members of Christ? which God would
have paid them again with wonderful interest. Well, though there are many
with us, that spend their money vainly in their life, and leave their goods as
fondly after their death: Yet truly if our Prechers, Parsons. Ministers and
Curats, would earnestly and diligently persuade the rich at their deaths to
bestow part of their goods to such godly uses, I believe verily our country
(and that shortly) would flourish with the like: Notwithstanding for all this,
we have had, and have, some that spend their goods godly in their life time,
and employ much of it to godly and charitable uses at their death.


OMEN. It is a strange soil y^ breeds nothing but Burs. It is an evil corn
ground that bears nothing but Cockle: and it is an evil country that has no
charitable men in it.


SIVQILA. And it is a good Country that has all charitable men in it, as
yours has by your report.


OMEN. Look what I have told you, be bold to tell it for truth: for I have
told you no lie, I will tell you no ly, nor I can tell you no lie.


SIVQILA. Well sir, I have asked you as many things as I can, and you have
told me as much as I wish: So that your excellent discourse of your Country
customs, manners, orders, and laws, has been such a delyghte to me,
(though perhaps tedious to you) that it has fed me as well as any food:
and if all this be true, that you have told me, I must needs confess that
this your Country exceedes all the Countries of the world, for godliness,
honesty, modesty, love, charity, equity, true meaning, plain dealing,
chastity, temperancie, hospitality, liberality, obedience, humility,
patience, and fidelity, and also for your good laws and orders, being so
well executed, and observed. But surely many things are so rare and strange
that I heard you speak: that me thinks they should be Too good to be true.


OMEN. And likewise I have heard you speak many things, that I believe they
are Too evil to be false* Well, if you will ask me any more of the state of my
Country, lo I am ready to satisfy you therein.


SIVQILA. Nay, I have no more to ask you: wherefore though I am not able
otherwise to gratify you, yet I most heartily thank you for your pains in
talking so long with me, for your kindness in revealing all these things unto
me, and for your courtesy in hearing me talk so patiently.


OMEN. What I have done, if you think it well done, I am glad it is done,
being sorry for the troublesome travail you are like to have homewarde.


SIVQILA. Well sir, I doubt not, but that my Lord and God will guide and
protecte me home again.


OMEN. That same God guide you, that you give glory unto. I know you are
faithful, pacient, and given to prayer: and whosoever prays unto him
faithfully, he will protecte him most safely.


SIVQILA. I am certain thereof. And now fare ye well, it is time for me to be
going hence.


OMEN. God bless you, and defend you in your journey.


SIVQVILA. Amen.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman dwelling in Thamis street near unto
Baynerdes Castle.

Anno Domini. 1580.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regia Maiestatis.


