THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN from Master T. M. near Salisbury, to Master
H.A. at London, concerning the proceeding at Winchester; Where the late L.
Cobham, L. Gray, and Sir Griffin Marckham, all Attainted of hie Treason, were
ready to be executed on Friday the 9. of December 1603:

At which time his Majesty's Warrant, all written with his own hand, whereof
the true Copy is here annexed, was delivered to sir Benjamin Tichbourne high
Sheriff of Hampshire, commanding him to suspend their execution till further
order.

Imprinted at London by R. B. ANNO DOM. 1603.



THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN from Master T.M. near Salisbury, to Master H.A.
at London, concerning the proceeding at Winchester, etc.
SIR, I have received a Letter from you, by which I perceive, how much you
desire to be particularly enfourmed of the cause and manner of the stay of the
late Lord Cobhams, Lord Grayes, and Sir Griffin Marckhams Execution, appointed
at Winchester: wherein, although there are many better able to discourse at
large of such an Action then my self; yet I conceive (when you have perused
this plain and true Relation, of that which all men there beheld that day,
and many more since have heard from persons of best quality and knowledge) you
will thank me more, for suffering the truth to show it self unclothed, then
if I had labored to have delivered you a Tale well painted with curious words
and fine phrases.

You must therefore understand, That as soon as the Arraignme^ts were passed at
Winchester, his Majesty's privy Counsel (to the number of fourteen or
fifteen, of which company all of them had either been tryers of the Noble men
as their Peers, or sitten as high Commissioners upon the Gentlemen) were
called before his Majesty (in his privy Chamber) at Wilton, where he
commanded them to deliver (without respect to any person) the true Narration
only, of the order in the Trial of these persons that had been condemned by
the Law, and of the nature and degree of their offenses, as had appeared in
every one of them by their several answers.

All which being clearly and justly reported by them, (each speaking in the
hearing of the rest) his Majesty (for his part) used himself so gravely and
so reseruedly in all his speeches, as well to themselves at that time, as also
to all other persons after in private or public, as neither any of his privy
Counsel, Nobility, or any that attended nearest to his sacred Person, durst
presume to mediate for any, or so much as to enquire what should be the
conclusion of this proceeding.

In the mean time, while the Court was full of variety of discourse, some
speaking out of probability, others arguing out of desire, what was like to
be the fortune of all, or of any of these offenders; His Majesty having
concluded only in his own secret heart (which is the true oracle of grace and
knowledge) in what manner to proceed, (and that without asking counsel of any
earthly person) It pleased him to resolve (between God and himself) that
their Execution should be stayed, even at the instant when the Axe should be
laid to the Trees roots. For the secret and orderly carriage whereof, his
Majesty was careful to prevent all cause or color of suspicion, of that
Judicious, Royal, and unexpected course which followed. And therefore, after
the two Priests were executed on Tuesday the 29. of November, and Master George
Brook on Monday following, his Majesty on the same day, being the fifth of
December, signed three Warants, for the Execution of the late Lord Cobham, L.
Gray, and Sir Gryffin Marckham Knight, with particular direction to the
Sheriff, to perform it on Friday after before ten a clock in the morning.

All these directions being now become notorious, both by the Writs of
execution (which passed under the great Seal) and by the making ready the
Scaffolds at Winchester, His Majesty very secretly (as now appears by the
sequel) drew himself into his Cabinet, on Wednesday before the day of
Execution, and there privately framed a Warrant written all with his own hand,
to the Sheriff, by virtue whereof, he countermaunded all the former
directions, alleging the reasons therein mentioned: Of which seeing no man's
Pen can so well express, as his own, I send you the Copy verbatim, as I
took it out of the Original, which many read in my Cousin Sir Benjamin
Tichbournes hand.

And now to come to the ordering of this business; among many other
circumstances, It is very remarkable, with what discretion and foresight, that
person was elected, which must be used in carriage of the Warrant. First his
Majesty resolved, it should be a Scottishman, being thereby like to be freest
from particular dependancie upon any Nobleman, Counselors, or others, their
friends or Allies. Next he resolved, to send a man of no extraordinary rank,
because the standers by should not observe any alteration, nor the delinquents
themselves should take any apprehension of such a man's being there at that
time: This being his Majesty's special desire, that every one of them (being
severally brought upon the Scaffold) might quietly breath forth their last
words, and true confession of his secretest conscience. And so (to be short)
his Majesty made choice of M. John Gibb, a Scottishman (as aforesaid) a man
that had never dealt with any Counselor, or other, for suite or business, but
one that had (within short while after the Kings first entry) been sent back
into Scotland, from whence he was but now freshly arrived at Wilton some few
days before.

This party being by the King approved for an ancient, trusty, and secret
servant (as a Groom of his Majesty's bedchamber) and a man (as is said
before) little known, and less bound to any Subject in England for any
benefit, receiving the Warrant secretly on Thursday from the Kings own hand,
and telling his fellows (who would otherwise have missed him) that he must lie
that night at Salisburie upon some private business of his own, he rode
directly to Winchester, and there, keeping himself private all night, rose
early in the morning on Friday, and went obscurely to the Castle green, where
the people flocking in all the morning, as the time drew near, he put
himself with the throng, close by the Scaffold, and there leaned till the
Sheriff brought up sir Griffin Markham to the place, who was the man appointed
first to die.

There the said Sir Griffin Markham, having ended his prayer, and made himself
ready to kneel down, M. John Gibb finding it fit time, while the Axe was
preparing, to give some secret notice of his charge, called to my cousin
Tichborne the Sheriff, to speak with him, and then delivered him (privately)
his Majesty's warrant, with further directions verbally, how he should use it.

Hereupon the Sheriff perceiving fully his Majesty's intention, so warily and
discreetly marshalled the matter, as he only called Sir Griffin Markham unto
him on the Scaffold, and told him, that he must withdraw himself into the
Hall, to be confronted (before his death) before those two Lords, that were to
follow him, about some points that did concern his Majesty's service: and so
carrying Markham into the Hall, he left him there, and went up hastily for the
Lord Gray to the Castle, who being likewise brought up to the Scaffold, and
suffered to power out his prayers to God (at great length) and to make his last
confession, as he would answer it upon his soul, when he was ready to kneel
down, to receive the stroke of death, Master Sheriff caused him to stay, and
told him that he must go down for a while into the Hall, where finding Sir
Griffin Markham, he willed him to tarry there till he returned.

Last of all, he went for the Lord Cobham, who having also ended his devotion
to God, and making himself ready to receive the same blow, the Sheriff
finding the time come to publish the Kings mercy to the world, and to reveal
his mystery, he caused both the Lord Gray, and Sir Griffin Markham, to be
brought back to the Scaffold, and there, before them all three that were
condemned, and in the hearing of all the company, notified his Majesty's
warrant, by which he was authorized to stay the execution. Which strange and
undeserved Grace and mercy proceeding from a Prince, so deeply wounded without
cause, or color of cause given by himself toward them in any thing, but
merely contrary (to both the Lords especially) bred in the hearts as well of
the offenders, as of the standers by, such sundry passions, according to the
diverse tempers of their minds, as to some that shall receive those things by
report, which others did behold with their eyes, my relation may rather seem
to be a description of some ancient History, expressed in a well acted Comedy,
then that it was ever possible for any other man, to represent at one time, in
a matter of this consequence, so many lively figures of Justice and Mercy in a
King, of Terror and Penitence in offenders, and of so great admiration and
applause in all others, as appeared in this Action, carried only and wholly by
his Majesty's own direction.

The Lord Cobham (holding his hand to heaven) applauded this incomparable
Mercy of so gracious a Sovereign, aggravating his own fault, by comparing it
with the Princes clemency, wishing confusion to all men alive, that should
ever think a thought against such a Prince, as neither gave cause of offense,
nor took revenge of ingratitude.

The L. Gray, finding in what measure this rare King had rewarded good for
evil, and forborne to make him an example of discouragement, and terror to all
men that hereafter might attempt to break the bo^ds of loyalty, upon the
passions of any ambition, began to sob and weep for a great while, with most
deep co^trition, protesting now, that such was his zeal and desire to redeem
his fault, by any means of satisfaction, as he could easily sacrifice his
life, to prevent the loss of one finger of that royal hand, that had dealt so
mercifully with him, when he least looked for it.

Sir Griffin Marckham (standing like a man astonished) did nothing but admire
and pray. The people that were present, witnessed by infinite applause and
shouting the joy and comfort, which they took in these wonderful effects of
grace and mercy, from a Prince, whom God had inspired with so many Royal
gifts, for their conservation, and would conserve for his own glory.

The cry being carried out of the Castle Gates into the Town, was not only
sounded with acclamation of all sexes, qualities, and affections, but the true
report diuulged since in all parts, has bred in the woorst disposed minds,
such remorse of iniquity, in the best such encouragement to loyalty, and in
those that are indifferent, such fear to offend, and generally such affection
to his Majesty's Person: as persuades the world, that Satan himself can never
so far prevail with any, as to make them lift up their hearts or hands
against a Prince, from whom they receive so true effects of Justice, and
goodness.

To conclude therefore, I have now done my best, to satisfy your desire,
though I feel (to my grief) how short I come to my own wish, because I would
have expressed to the life (if it had been possible) both the matter and the
form of this proceeding; of both which, the wisest men, that have seen and
understood all particular circumstances, are at the end of their wits, to
give an absolute censure, whether of them both deserve greater recommendation,
(this being most assured) that there is no Record extant, wherein so great
wisdom and understanding, so solid judgment, so perfect a resolution, to
give way to no request, or mediation; so inscrutable a heart, so Royal and
equal a tempered mercy, after so clear and public Justice, have ever
concurred so demonstratiuely as in this late Action, wherein this blessed King
has not proceeded after the manner of men and of Kings, Sed caelestis Iudicis
aeternique Regis more, whereof he shall be most assured to reap these lasting
fruits, of being beloved and feared of all men, obeyed with comfort, and
served with continual joy and admiration. And so forbearing ^o hold you any
longer at this time, I end:

From my house near Salisburie, the 15. of December. 1603. Your Loving Cousin
and friend. T. M.

A TRVE COPY OF HIS MAJESTY'S Warrant written with his own hand, and directed
to the high Sheriff of Hampshire for stay of the execution of the late L.
Cobham, L. Gray, and sir Griffin Marckham at Winchester the 9. of December 1603.
ALthouch it be true, that all vell gouernid and floorishing Kingdoms and
common vealthis, air establishid by Justice, and that these tuo Noblemen by
birthe, that air nou upon the point of Execution, air for their treasonable
practices condemnid by the Law, and adiudgit worthy of the execution
thaireof, to the exemple and terror of otheris; The one of thaim having
filthily practiced the overthrow of the quhole kingdom, and the other for the
surprise of our owin Person; Yet in regaird that this is the first year of
our Reign, in this Kingdom, and that never King was so far obleishid to his
people, as ve have been to this, by our entry here vith so hairtie and
general an applause of all sorts; Among quhom all the kin, friendis, and
allies of the saidis condemnid personnis, vaire as forduart, and duetifull as
any other our good Subiectis, as also that at the very time of their
Arrainement none did more freely and reddily give their assent to their
conviction, and to deliver thaim into the handis of Justice, then so many of
their nearest kinsmen and Allies (as being Peeris) vaiere upon their Jury; As
likeuaise in regaird that Justice has in some sort gottin course already, by
the execution of the tuo Priestis, and George Brook, that vaire the principal
plotteris and intisairs of all the rest, to the embracing of the saidis
treasonabill Machinations; Vee thairfore (being resoluid to mix Clemency vith
Justice) air contented, and by these Presentis command you, our present
Sheriff of Hampshire, to superseide the Execution of the saidis tuo Noblemen,
and to take thaim back to their prison again, quhile our further pleasure be
knowin. And since ve vill not have our Lawis to have respect to personis, in
spairing the great, and strikking the meaner sort; It is our pleasure, that the
like course be also taken vith Marckham, being sorry from our hairt, that such
is, not only the heinous nature of the saidis co^demnid personnis crime, but
even the corruption is so great of their natural disposition, as the care vee
have for the safety and quiet of our State, and good Subiectis, vill not permit
us to use that clemency tovardis thaim, quhich in our owin natural
inclination, vee micht very easily be persuadit unto.


