THE GALLANT, DELECTABLE AND PLEASAVNT HISTORY OF GERILEON OF ENGLAND:
Containyng the haughty Feats of Arms, and Knightly Provvesse of the same
GERILEON, with his Loves and other memorable Adventures.

Composed in the French Tongue, by Steven De Maison Neufue Bordelois. And now
newly translated into English.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON FOR Miles Iennynges, Dwelling in Paul's Church-yarde at
the Sign of the Bible. Anno Domini, 1578.

To the right Honorable and virtuous Earl, the Lord Philip Howard, Earl of
Surrey: all happiness, health, felicity, and continuance of honor.
AFTER that I had bestowed both pains, travail and charges (Right honorable)
about the reducyng of this delightful History of Gerileon into this our
mother tongue, and had therein used the advice and conference of sundry my
friends, I was as well by their counsel emboldened, as otherwise of mine own
nature, willing, to present and consecrate the first fruits thereof (by way
of Dedication) unto your good and honorable Lordship. The History it self
being first written in French, was (in deed) for the greater part thereof,
after a kind of sort, translated by a certain young man, more hardy and
venturous in attempt, then luckie and Fortunate in atchieuaunce; whose good
meaning, as it seems to merit pardon, and perhaps some thanks: so upon
further scrutinie, examination, and conference of the copy with his
Translation, it was easy to find where he had tripped, and where (unawares)
he had utterly lost his way. Whereupon I was driven to sustain a double
labor: One in perfectyng his imperfections: The other in finishyng and
supplying that part of the Book, where he had abruptly broken of, and
absurdlie skipped over. And for that the copy thereof (coming at the first
into my hands by chance among other things) was so farced with prodigious
phrases, and so apparauntly halted in sense and understanding, I caused the
same to be repervsed, and looked over anewe, that no diligence should want,
wherein my industry might any thing avail. Which labor and travail I humbly
dedicate unto your Honor: not doubting, but that as the Book it self shall
somewhat dignifie your worthy person, and emblazon your renoumed fame: so
again, that it shall be from the bright beams of your shining virtues, both
the better countenaunced, and the freendlier accepted of all worthy young
Gentlemen, delightyng in Cheualrie, Martial exploites, and such amourous
discourses, as are tolerablie incident to the green Prime of youthful years.
In fine, herein is very aptly shadowed out, a perfect type of Dame Virtues
Pilgrimage, whose natural course, usual trade, and ordinary hap, is
through many sharp dangers, bruntes, and adventures, to purchase the gole of
honor and renoume in this life, and afterward a Croune of immortal Fame and
glory in the life to come: unto the which I humbly beseech Almighty GOD,
after many years here happily bestowed, to bring your good Lordship.

Your Honors most humble to Command Miles Iennynges.

IN AVTHORIS LAVDEM, PETRVS LAVERNIVS BVRDECALENSIS.
I Am iam maternae sileat facundia linguae
Gentis Romanae: sileat veterumque poesis
Ad binos celebrata polos, redimita corona
Victrici: poscit meritam sibi Gallia palmam:
Doctoru^ immensum pelagus, quos docta sub antro
Pallas Castalio teneris nutriuit ab annis:
Inter quos tibi magnus honos, and gloria surgit
O lux Burdegalae, nullum peritura per aeuum.
Mortua qui dudum lethaeos hausta liquores
Corpora, viua facis, gratu^ quoque cernere lumen.
Aeneae Stygijs pene occultata sub vndis
Arma Maro cecinit, medijsque erepta ruinis
Dardamdum sacra, and lustratum nauibus cquor.
Hectora Maeonius, bellum que furentis Vlyssis.
A te Gerileon nigro reuocatus ab orco,
Euasit superas iterum rediuiuus ad auras,
Gerileon, belli, fulmen, tonitruque tremendum:
Qui, quantum timido toruus Leo fortior hirco,
Tantu^ alios superat, nulli aequipara^dus in armis:
Cui nunc belligeri cedunt praeclara Rolandi
Facta, and Amadisij inuicti, fortisque Renaldi.
Hinc procul hinc liuor, suet as repetatque cauernas,
Nullas hic poterit noxas sufferre libellus.
Vtque duces vincit, belloque insignis, and armis
Gerileon, vinces alios sic Pallados art.
Mantua Virgilium iactet, Verona Catullum,
Roma patrem eloquij laudet, Sulmoque Nasonem:
Ast magni tua fama petet regna alta Tonantis,
Teque suo illustris gaudebit Gallia alumno.
Ergo dum caelo stabunt defixa sereno
Sidera, dumque iubar lustrabit lumine mundum,
Gerileon leuibus penetrabit ad Aethera pennis,
Et stabis toto semper celeberrimus orb.
AD ILLVSTRISSIMVM LONGEQVE HONORATISSIMVM HEROEM, D. PHIlippum Howardum,
Comitem Surreium, Tetrastichon.
Quitibi cunque placet, Librum and tibi consecrat vni,
Inclyte Surreio stemmate nate Comes:
Ille quidem cunctis alijs placuisse videtur,
Nam cunctis vnus (clare Philippe) places.
Th. Newtonus, Cestreshyrius

Thomas Newton in Commendation of this Book.
A Perfect pattern of Renowmne, a type of Cheualrie,
An haughty heart, a breast y fraught with Magnanimity,
A Stage of state and stout attemptes, a Theater of Fame,
With each odd circumstaunce of praise, belongyng to the same,
Who list and is dispos'de to see in colors trimly touched,
Mate in this Book be fully stor'de with furniture well couched.
Which though the subject of the same, in feigned matters stands,
With names of persons, places, hills, Mou^ts, Isles, seas, castles, lands:
Yet (doubtless) it affords stuff, right pleasant, fit and good,
To train the minds of noble wightes, and Impes of Mars his blood,
By valiant ventures to atchieue exploites of passing praise,
Whereby their fame may reach beyond the date of mortal days.
Which is and aye has been the spur, which moved has the same.
To pass the pikes through thick and thin, through fire, sword and flame.
To which effect this worthy work, now lately taught has bin,
(Invested erste in French attire) an English threede to spinne,
For very love to Native soil: to move us Englishemen,
To trace the steps of virtues lore, and rouse out of our den
And Cradle of Security, wherein we lulled are,
As men of English prowess erst, not taking any care.
In lieu of pains, the only see that craved is of thee,
Is that thou would judge of the same with singleness of eye,
And freendly make report thereof: so shall thou have the rest,
Of stout Gerileons glorious acts hereafter more expressed.
Thomas Newton.

IN stately style the glorious Greeks displaied
Achilles deeds, and Alexanders fame:
In worthy works the wits of Rome assaied
To spread abroad Dan Scipioes noble name.
So every writer sought to painte the praise
Of such as were their countrymen of yore:
But lo, the French amazde in these our days
At English Acts achieved heretofore,
Bewray at length, by their outlandishe Pen,
Gerileons gestes (a piece of piereles price.)
Causeles therefore shall any Englishemen
So good a guifte reject in scornful wise:
Since seemly Surrey shrowdes it from mischaunce,
And Frenchemen first Gerileon do advance.
W. M.

THE FIRST BOOK of the History of Gerileon.
After the death of the most puissaunt and virtuous king Brandismell King of
great Britain, there succeeded him in the government of the said Realm, a
Son of his, called Floridamant. The which being in his Palace at London,
feastyng his Lords and Barons, and making preparation, one afternoon, to go
course an Heart, in the company of the Princes, Huberte of Scotland, and
Dorian, Son to the King of Spaigne: which Heart he had seen in a wood near
to the Castle of Mirandoll, There entered into the Hall a Damsel, who having
recounted to him a certain adventure, had him away with her.

The first Chapter.
THOSE which have been curious in readyng of ancient Histories, are nothing
ignoraunte how, amongst those Realms, which for their fertility and
worthiness have in times paste merited any Commendations, Britain the Great
has not only matched, but also far surpassed them all: As well because of
natural beauty and goodness thereof, as in that it is the country under heaven,
which of all Antiquity has been more populous, and better stoared of strong
and valiant Knights, then any other, whatsoever: thither drawn and allured,
partly by the excellent and divine beauty of the Ladies there inhabityng:
partly by the merueilous and strange adventures there accustomably found. In
so much that for this occasion it has been often called the Land aduenturous.
Neither might any one of foreign Coasts or Countries name him self a true
and valiant knight, if in it he had not made proof of his worthiness, there
atchiuyng some strange adventures. But especially in the time of the most
Puissaunt and virtuous king Brandismel, which having by his prowess and
valiauncy conquered many Realms and Provinces, as Norwaie, Swethlande, and
Denmark, instituted also the order of the twelve courageous knights of great
Britain, being such, and endued with so great force and valiauncie, that
few their likes were as then to be found in the whole world. Among whom,
for most valiant was the king Ferrande of Norwaie, Dom Grandilaor and Dom
Murcibel king of Denmark. The rest also because of their bounty, dexterity
and boldness in matters of Arms were great praise worthy. For this occasion
was king Brandismel much feared and redoubted of his neighbors and borderers,
yet no less beloved of them for his courtesy, liberality, lenity, and
humanity, with other virtues infinite, which were resplendisaunt in him. And
in such forte, that there was not he which (doing him the most toylesome and
agreeable service he could) did not yet esteem himself most happy to be
insinuated into his good grace and favor, so to gain his gracious amity. But
the fatal Sisters (most impious, and envious of the good success and
felicity of human kind, and of those especially which retain a singular
contentment and pleasure to be in the fellowship and acquaintance of a Prince
so virtuous and debonaire) bereft them the shinyng gleames of nobleness and
myrour of Chiualry out of this world, shreading a sonder the last threede of
this so virtuous a king, the year of grace after the death of our Savior Jesus
Christ, 418. the 66. year of his age, and 32. of his reign. Whervppon I can
not rightly express the dolor and sorrow that the courageous knights his
Subjects received with his most private and best friends. In so much that (as
recounteth us the History) there were such of them as remained two or three
Months, without power to refrain themselves from weeping and lamenting most
bitterly, when as it came to them in mind of the Bounty and Virtue of that
noble Prince. And chieflye the worthy old Candior Duke of Normandy, a Prince
surely amongst the Sage and hardy, much commendable. Nevertheless as there
is noe grief so great, which in course of time (a quite consumer of all
things) is not put forth of remembrance: So for just cause this good Lord
of Normandy, together with the rest which were most doleful for the loss
of a King so debonaire and virtuous, at last made end of their plaintes and
lamentations. And for just cause say I, in that he left them for successor,
a Son of his, begotten by his dear and loyal Spouse and Wife Florixe
(which not many years before had departed this life) which said son after
the death of his Father was Heir, not only of his terreine Dominions and
Possessions, but also of his most rare and singular virtues. For besides that
he was a good knight, prudent and hardy past measure, being of a large
stature, his members well made, formed and proportioned in equality, the one
with the others, of six or seven and twenty years of age* or there aboutes:
he was also had in reputation for the most sage, modest and courteous Prince of
his time. In so much that (to make brief) no man could require or wish any
thing proper or convenient for so great a personage as his, whereof his
valiauncie and invincible prowess was not beautified and adorned. This same
was called Floridamant, the which did never find man (of what force or
puissau^ce soever he were) who daring to Just with him, had not given plainly
to feel and understand, that he was peerless and not matcheable. For this
cause there was no knight in all Brittaigne the Great, which at his new
arrival to the Crown, did not deliberate and determine to convert and turn
the lamentations and weepinges of his Fathers death into joys and gladness,
for having after the loss of a good Lord and Master, recovered and received a
better king. To whom there lacked so little, that he should degenerate from the
bounty and goodness of his predecessor, that by his virtue (which rather more
then less did him illustrate) he did in such sort strive and endeavor in
equality of valiauncie, and good behavior to imitate and counteruale him,
that his Knights, Princes and Barons, with other of his Vassailes and
Servants, thought in no wise to have changed their Master: who unwilling to
omit any jot of his great magnificence, a while after his Coronemente, made
and gave so many fair and Godly Gifts and Presents, not only to the
courageous knights his Subjects, but also to such strangers as were come to
visit him, and to make offer to him of their service (being nothing ignorant
that liberality renders men subject and bound toward those which use it:)
that there was not he, which pricked and provoked with a desire to do him
agreeable service, (so much his lenity and liberality had charmed and
enchaunted their affections,) would not willingly have put his life in
hazard, for the maintenance and conservation of his honor. And for that,
that a little before the decease of the good king Brandismel his Father, he had
espoused the daughter of king Barrachen of Scotland, named Bellizenne, a
Princess as sage and virtuous, as fair and gracious (for few there were) who
then for beauty and good grace, durst compare with her:) There were come to
visit him, the two valiant Princes, Hubert of Scotland, Brother to the
Queen Bellizenne, and Dorian, Son to the king of Spain, which had
aforetymes been Compagnions of Arms, and atchiued many Exploites and haughty
enterprises with him. He determined to address and make ready all sorts of
recreations and pastimes, the more honorably to feast and entertain them,
as to appoint Ius^^^ges and Tourneis for the love of Noble Dames and Ladies,
and to conducte them to the Chase of wild Boares, Hearts, Roebuckes, and other
such like beasts. But as he enforced himself to show them such, and all
other like pleasant recreations and pastimes, whereof he could be advised:
Fortune, which by her mobility and inconstancy, never suffers things in one
esse, nor abiding, but (like to the immutatio^ of the Sun, which sometimes
lends us his Rays and Beams most resplendent, clear and brighte, and his
pleasant smilyng visage, sometimes again covered and overwhelmed with an
infinite number of thick and dark Clouds or Mistes, to us appearyng obscure
and dark, causes to fall upon us a multitude of waterishe and rainy showers)
straight ways is to us friendly and favorable, lettyng us savor and smell the
sweet taste of an infinite number of delights and pleasures, by and by
contrariwise tournyng vpsidedoune the order of human affairs by a change
and alteration of dolours and sorrows, which she mingleth and produces
amongst her voluptuos entisementes, and brings us most often, of anguishes
and dolours, a multitude innumerable: making us feel as much bitterness in
the end, as she has in the beginning brought pleasure) ne permits long
these Princes (which as then had none other care, but to make good cheer, and
too entertain each one (of the Queens Dames and Damozelles which were full
fair and gracious, whom he bare most affection unto) to enjoy these delights
and pastimes, without depriuyng them thereof, shortly, and that by the most
strange adventure whereof ever was made mention. For so it chanced that the
new king Floridamant being in his Pallaice at London in estate and form above
recou^ted, acco^pagnied with the Princes Hubart of Scotland, and Dorian of
Spain, purposing at after dinner to go to course an Heart which he had
seen that morning in a Wood near to Miranaol, which was a Castle of one
miles distaunce from the Town, given by the king to his new espoused wife, at
certain seasons there to recreate, and refreshe her self when she should
think good. The which, besides the Architecture and magnificent buildinges,
with diversities of works, whereof it was framed and wrought, the most
pleasant and rich of all others, as then to be seen, was in like manner so
delectable and pleasant, because of the said wood wherewith it was environed,
more then a miles compass about, that it was impossible to join ought
thereunto, to give enlargement to the perfection thereof, in all that which one
could desire or wish to a place of like pleasaunce, there entered into the Hal
a Damsel of mean beauty, whose countenance, to see to, seemed so bedewed
with tears and dolefulnes, that one would have thought that of long time she
had done nothing but weapt and lamented, in that as yet appeared along her face
the trickling Tears, distilling by gross and great drops. This same
Damsel apperceiuyng the king, whom she seemed well to know, came to prostrate
and fall down on her knees before him, and sighyng bitterly (each one having
pursued her to understand that which she would say) she spoke on this sort.
Most puissaunt king, in whom al bounty and worthiness of Chiualry and virtue
aboundes, more then in any other under Heaven, the same of your prowess,
humanity, courtesy and value (which so often has flowed from the one till
the other side of the world) has caused me to come from far even to these
Coasts, to request and beseech your Royal highness (the which I trust is
not dispuruaied of mercy ne pity) that taking compassion of the most
unfortunate and miserable Damsel that lives, it may please you, in respect
of the order of knighthoode, which you have taken, not to deny me your
succor and aid, against the most presumptuous and wicked wight that lives on
the Earth. For (said she drawyng a sorrowful sigh from the bottom of her
heart) I am of opinion, that none (my Lord) but you, has power to succor me
in this case, so fierce and puissaunt is the disloyal wight, which has
wrought me this wrong. But I having so great confidence and affiaunce in your
bounty and prowess, suppose that you only may match him and give him the
overthrow, which has been cause, that reiectyng all fear and shame through
the necessity which oppressed me, thus ouerboldly and irreverently I have
dared to beseech your Royal highness, to be so favorable to me in this my
so urgent affair, assuryng my self that not forgettyng in any point the
duty of a wise and valiant knight (such a one as you are accounted) which
is to succor Ladies and Damselles afflicted as I am, you will not gainesaie ne
deny me of the request which I pretend to make to you: for that no man ever
heard say, that for cowardice or slacknesse (vices which lodge not in you) you
ever disdained, or discourteously denied any other, who (as I now do) requested
you to give them, aid and succor. After that she had made an end of her
tale, ye king (which had seen her in speaking, weep so bitterlye, and three or
four times to break of with such continual and hearty sighs and sobs, that
there was no heart so hard, cruel and vnpitifull, which she would not have
moved to compassion) took such pity of her, that having caused her to stand
up, where before she kneeled, he made her this answer. Damsel tell me hardly
in what affairs my succor may serve and be favorable unto you: promisyng you
that nothing forgetting my duty, I will hazard my life to sustain your
right, or at the leastwise I will know what therein you have. Then the Damsel
greatly appeased and satisfied, with so good and gracious an answer, thankyng
him for the same with a low reverence, colored her visage with somewhat more
joy then she brought, therein painted a while before, and ceassyng her tears
said unto him: Than I desire you Sir, to give me audience, while I make you a
recital of my ill luck and misfortune, and attentively to understand the
form of mine adventure more unhappy then any other, whereof ever mention was
made since the memory of man. Wherein it is meet you know, that I am by
birthe of the Land of Thrace, and Daughter of a Noble and virtuous King,
named Minoberis, who in his time has been as strongt and valiaunte in Arms,
as any other whatsoever, but so smallye favored of Fortune, that now she
suffers him to consume the rest of his age, so miserably as is possible to
imagine: for that he lives in a Prison made cruel and tirannous, with a
torment ten hundredth times more sharp then the horror of death it self.
And thus it chanced that one day, as he was in the queste and pursuit of
strange adue^tures to make proof of his force and valor, and also to get
praise and honor (the only Guerdon of Illustrious and gentle hearts, as all
wanderyng knights accustomably do) passing by chance through a certain
Forest, he encountered a wild Boar, which being stricken and wounded through
the body with a Darte, came and fell down not far from him stark dead,
which he apperceiuyng, took and charged upon his horse to carry it away: but
as he began to depart, there came toward him another knight of so small
stature, that he exceeded not the height of two or three cubits, but therewith
so strong and puissaunt, that no knight nor Giaunte whatsoever, might endure
his force, and for this cause so fearce and presumptuous, that if he saw any
thing to him not agreeable, were it wrong or right, he would have it. This
fellow seeing the pray which my Lord and Father carried, said to him very
stoutly, that he either should deliver and give to him the wild Boar out
right, or otherwise he would let him understand that it was not for such a
one as him to gainsaie any thing to him agreeable, My father, which had his
Heart so fixed and settled, and who was of so great courage, that he could in
no wise suffer so presumptuous a brag: to him answered, that he should not
have it without conquest made by the point of the Sword. Whereon the little
knight which had to name Nabot, was so chaffed and enraged, that putting
without more words his hand upon his Sword, he stroke my miserable father
so rudely upon the head, that at the first blow he brought him down all
astonished from his Horse to the ground: whereon after he had laid the wild
Boar, he took my Father betwixt his arms and carried him into the most
strange and Butcherous Prison, that ever was heard spoken of. For besides
that, he has clogged his feet with great and weighty Gives of Y^on, he ne
gives him all the day to eat ought else, but a Morsel of most salt Bacon,
without drinking more then once in two days, of the most odious and corrupt
Water that is to be found: and when as he purposes to take his journey any
where on Horseback, he causes him to be brought forth to crouche to the
ground, that he setting his foot upon his back, may make him serve for a
Stirrope to mount on Horseback: then sendyng him back to his Prison again,
causes him to be scourged and tormented most cruelly. I knowing this (my
Lord) have been often before him, to entreat him to have my Father raunsomed,
at what he would require. But he therein has always gainsaide me, manafyng
me with like cruelty, if in fix Months I could not prepare and present a
knight which should be able in iustyng, to bring him from of his Horse.
Which thing I endeuouryng to do, have brought him already, full many: part
whereof he has slain, and part whereof he has put in a prison far more
miserable then that of my poor Father. In so much that now ignoraunte, of
what woodde to frame mine Arrows, I have enterprised to make this rash
request which you have hard. So much hopyng in that bounty and prowes
which above all others, makes you esteemed through each coast of the
universal world, that it shall be you only, who shall have power by puttyng
to death the cruel and disloyal Nabot, to deliver me from the mortal and
languishyng dolor, which for long space has made in me residence, geuyng to
him liberty which has begotten me.

The king having well heard the purpose of the Damofell: and supposing her to
have said true, deliberated to succor her as well for the necessity which she
seemed to have of aid and assistaunce, as to prove himself against that
Nabot, of whom he had often heard speak, and for whom he had searched in
many Countries to do the same, without ever findyng him at all. And seeing
than, when he least thought thereof, the occasion too be ministered so to fit
his purpose, to make proof of the force and valiauncie of his person, by
encountering with that mighty Nabot, he would not let it slip so. Yea
chiefly for so just an occasion as that of the Damoselles. In such wise, that
it was not possible what pithy reasons socuer one alleged to distourne and
stay him from going alone into Thrace, there to combat for so just a
Quarrel. Whereof the Queen Bellizenne was much grieved and discomforted,
praiyng most instauntlie the valiant and hardy Prince, Hubert of Scotland
her brother to bear him company, which thing he promised her to do. Yet ye
king in no wise would suffer nor permit it: but deeply vowed and swear to
travel solelie with the Damsel, to give accomplishment to his promise,
whereof she was much inyous, who instauntlie putting her self in way,
spurryng her Palfrey in the flancke with all diligence possible: And the king
which was furnished of all Armor, necessary for the Combat, and eke well
Horsed, pursued her as fast as his Horse would run a grande gallop. After
whose departure all the Worthies which as then were resident in his Court
retired home, abandoning the same in such sort, that of the xij. courageous
Peers of the said Britain the Great, there remained but the king Ferrande of
Norwaye only, which because of his faithfulness and bounty, was appointed
Governor of the Realm in the absence of king Floridamant: and the prudent
prince Candior Duke of Normandy, the which, because of the sudden absence of
their king were greatly sorrowful and astonished. Notwithstanding taking it
patiently, they made of necessity a virtue, for lettyng cease their late
dolours, they betook themselves to comfort in best wise they could, the
desolate Princes Bellizenne, which for sorrow and yrksomnes tare her hairs,
and committed many such foolish acts of a fra^ticke woman, and one without
sense. Which thing the prudent Prince Ferrande of Norwaye seeing, counseled
her (thereby the better to forget her grief) to go sport her self at
Myrandol, as she did, where chanced to her that which you may perceive in the
Chapters followyng. For we there must now leave her to make recount of that
which hapened too the king after his departure with the Damsel.

Who was the Damsel which led away the King Floridamant, and who was the
Necromancian Minofoll which had builded, by his enchauntments, the superbious
and sumptuous edifice of the red Castle. And also how the king lost the
Damsel in a thick wood, replenished with wild and savage beasts, where his
Horse being dead under him, he hard the lamentable voice of a certain Damsel
which complained most bitterly. Toward whom as he marched to succor her, he
recountered a Knight, whom after a fierce and tedious Combat he slew.

The second Chapter.
WHEN once the desire of vengeance has taken root in a malicious heart, full
of fury and rage, There is no mean, way, nor thing, in human puissau^ce,
nether, as I believe, in the enemy of Nature, that he (which has conceived
this foresaid hate against another) does not inuente, or dare not attempt to
satisfy his will and wish, as may let us vnsterstande the example of the
Necromancian, whom I do mean to mentionate in this Chapter. Therefore it is
to be understood, that in great Britaigne there was an Itande adjoining to
the said Realm, which men called the green I Will. Whereof a knight named
Mynofol was Lord and ruler, who from his infancy had so bestowed his time in
the art of Necromancie and supernatural Magicque, that by the same he
atchiued many marvelous Matters, and impossible to many others who dealed
there with to be less expert then he in his art. In manner that by his
enchauntmentes and diabolical charms he had builded in his I Will a Castle,
the most sumptuous and magnificent that with man's eyes was ever seen. For the
Son thereon gleamyng his bright Rays and Beams from morning till evening,
one would verily judge (so great was the force of his enchauntmentes) that in
stead of Stones, there were placed great Rubies the most fair and beautiful
of the world. And with reuerberatio^ of the same, the Air and Trees of the
I Will appeared as red as Fire, for a Miles compass about. And it was to be
marueiled greatly, how the knight Mynofol could build any so sumptuous and
stately an Edifice, as the red Castle (so did the vulgar sort commonly name
it) seeing that it was not in puissaunce of the greatest Monarque of the whole
earth, to rear and constructe another, which in perfection and sumptuositie
of matter exquisite, miraculous, or artificial, was thereto comparable. And
for what occasion he made the same, full many also were ignorant, but it is to
be presupposed that it was not without cause why. For it behooves you to
understand, that the predecessor of Minofoll, which was somewhat akinne and
of alliance to the virtuous and mighty king Brandismel, pretending some right
to the Realm of great Britain (out of the which by his auncetours he had
been repudiate and rejected, for taking to wife the sister of Grandowine king
of Cornewalle and Irelande, which then as yet held the Pagan laws and
believed on Mahounde, had wrought and before had tended many means and treasons
against the Father of valiant King Floridamant, which never lay in his
power to execute as he pretended, without danger of the total ruin both of
him and his, which was the cause, that his Son Minofol being as then young,
and of tender age, he caused him to learn with great heed and diligence, the
Arts of Necromancy, by studiyng the books of Medea, Circe, Morgue, and other
such. To the intent to revenge himself of king Brandismel, by such means
as Medea took vengeance of the injury done to her, by her unfaithful and
perjured freende Jason. But God which by his bountifulness, does still
regard those which follow the right ways and Paths, which he has
appointed for them, with a piteous and merciful eye, to take away all means
and ways from the traitor Lord of the green I Will of annoiyng the king of
great Britain, suffered that death should send hynt down to hell, there to
serve in the boatman Charons Barge, before he ever saw his son Minofol well
experimented in his art, to bring to an end his perverse pretense and wicked
will. This same Minofol notwithstanding, being once acertained by his Mother,
for what occasion his father had caused him from his tender years so curiously
to be endoctrined, and taught in this diuelishe Art (in the which, since he
was arrived to good age) he was so skillful and expert, that few like to him
were as then to be found. As one that was of his Fathers nature and
disposition, that is to wit, a Traitor, wicked, and reuengeatiue, he imagined
in his fantasy too put in execution the purposed pretense of his predecessor.
And for to bring to pass the same, he still had tarried till after the death of
the good king Brandismel (seeing no means during his life to finishe his
conspiracy, and vengeable falshodde) that having builte the red Castle,
whereof I have before spoken, he addressed the Damsel toward the King
Floridamant, to require him of that you have hard above recited, knowing him
prompt and hardy to give succor, and aid to Dames and Ladies wronged and
offended. And for that he knew, he had often times, searched for Nabot to
combat with him, to the end to entrappe and withdraw him more easily to him,
he appointed him the message, which you have fully seen in the Chapter
precedent. For that the Damzell, daughter to the knight Minoberis, which Nabot
had in prison, had sone perceived him to put in practice, to deliver her
Father, which thing he denied her: And so making his profit of her request,
instructed the Damsel his cousin of the Plot before specified: who played so
well her part that she brought the King alone after her, which pursued her, so
as is before said, as fast as his horse could galoppe, without ever atteinyng
to her. For she had a palfrey possessed with a Devil, which the Magician
there had by his enchauntmentes put: for that he went so swifte, that of all
that day naught did he but trot, without ceassyng, or restyng: and the
Damsel rapped him excessiuely, feinyng to have great haste, until such
time as the nocturnall darcknesse, had chased far into the Weste, the shinyng
chariot of Phaeton: then she arrived in a Foreste thick. and darcke, being
obscured by the manifold branches of mighty Dakes, which there were
innumerable, in so much that one could see there no more (I think) then within
the most darcksome den of the profounde and infernal hell. Wherein being
entered far before, the King who still pursuyng her as nere as possibly he
could, at last lost sight of her: and not knowing where she was become, he
stayed somewhat his horse, to harken if he could any whit understand the
tramplyng of her Palfreis feet, thereby to follow her trace: but that was in
vain. For he heard nothing else, but an infinite noise and yellyng of savage
beasts, as Bears, wild Bores, Lions, and such like, which made so great a
yelling, that there scarce one could have heard the bounsing clapps of soundyng
Thunder. Whereof I leave you, to think if the king had occasion or no, to be
astonished, and greatly abashed. In that I deem none so sure and stable,
which would not have been afraied at that time, to approache and enter a place
so dangerous. Notwitstandyng he was of so magnanimious and haughty a courage,
that, that seemed to himself less then nothing: saving that he could no more
find out his guide and conductresse. But endeavoring himself to search for
her, it was impossible to make his horse either to go forward or backward, what
blows or spurs soever he could use. And whether it was for the wearines and
feeblenes of his limbs, or for fear that he had to see himself in a place
so hydeous, after he had been long time pricked and spurred: he on a sudden
fell groueling to the earth, whereof the good king Floridamant being advised,
and wightly forsaking the Saddle, set foot on ground, and leanyng his Elbowe
against a Tree, with his head against his hand, remained a long space in that
forte, astonished much and merueilously: so ill stood his case, until such
season as he heard far before him in the Forest a voice Feminine, which
complained most bitterly. Then plucking up his heart, he thought to have been,
in no danger at all, and blamyng himself for having remained sad and pensive
so long, was somewhat eased in that he had heard a human voice, in a place so
roughe and savage, wherein he deemed nothing else to have been, but outrageous
and cruel beasts. And deliberated (supposyng that to be his Damsel, which
some one had offended) to go to that place were he deemed her to be. And to
succor her the better: he cook his naked Sword in his hand, and his Shilde
upon his Arm: wherewith marching through the Forest, he encountered a Knight
thoroughly armed, and horsed as well as was possible, which in appearaunce
seemed to be fraught with hardiness. To whom he said with great anger Sir
Knight, wherefore is it that you have so outragiously and cowardlike misused a
Damsel which came in my company, whom not long since I have heard complain
here abo^tes. It well appears, that you care not for that order of knighthood
which you have taken, when in liew of defending Dames wronged, and
outragioussye dalt withal, you enforce your self to damage and injury them
thus. But by my headde I swear, I will give you to know, that it is right ill
done of you, to have committed so great wickedness and villainy. During
which words the knight which doubted little, that after his hot and many
words, he would have used such sharp deeds as he did, for fear lest the
King should kill his Horse: set foot on earth saying. By GOD, vassal, you
have falselie lied, for I know not of what Damsel you spoke, rather I
believe it is your self, which have misused one whom I have heard complain.
But for fear least I should accuse you of that villainy, whereof you speak,
you are come to prevent me: pursuing with your sword to kill my horse, by that
means to make me fall, and to flea me more easily: but yet you are further out
of your account, then you are ware of. Notwithstanding, seeing you are so well
prepared to Combat, I will give you thereof your fill. Then began he to
preasse full bouldly upon the king, who receiving him with marvelous hardines,
after the receite of some of his adversaries blows upon his Shield, which
through the first weight and violence thereof, was pierced in diverse places,
entreated him at last (after a long Combating, without having advantage the
one of the other) in such and so rude a manner, that the knight which thought
himself not matcheable, wished in mind that he had not met with such a
mate. Always (notwitstanding) defending himself the best that he could,
made in a manner that the meddling was so hard and sharp as ever was seen of
two knights only. Whereof the king greatly maruailyng, having never found
knight that made him so long resistaunce, entered into so deep choler, that
yrked with the long duraunce of the Combat, he took his Sword in both
hands, and with the same discharged with all his force, a stroke so violent
upon the creast of his adversaries Helmet, that neither the Shield which he
cast before it, nether the good workemanshippe of his Harness could ward or
warrante it: without being battered and crushed together, and the Sword
passing further, well near cut his head in twain. By this means he was
constrained to fall down all bloody dead thereby. Whereof the king was
exceedyng joyous, as well for having ended a Combat so dangerous, whereof he
never hoped to have had so good a dispatchall, as in that he had recovered an
Horse to carry him forth in quest of his Damozell: But he kept him not long
after, as ye shall hear in the Chapter followyng.

How King Floridamant lost the Horse which he had conquered of the Knight
he slew, of which he was bereued by the subtle fetch of a crafty Thief,
which was resident in the Forest, from which after he had departed, he met
with an Heremit which gave him to eat certain Chestnuttes, and other roots
of Herbs in his Hermitage, from whence being issued, he did so much, that he
arrived on the sea coaste, where he found a Spirit in human form and shape,
which by the commandment of the Magicien Minofoll, after he had made him
enter into his boat, brought him into the Green Island, where he was taken,
and put in prison in the Red Castle.

The third Chapter.
AFter that the noble King Floridamant, was seized of the knights horse whom
he had slain, he mounted on him, to assaie if by trauellyng now this, now that
way, he could find any path, which might conducte him out of the Foreste,
entendyng to seek some lodgyng, to pass with rest the small remnaunte of the
night that was to come: but seeing that where so ever he went, he found naught
but grass for his pillowe, and ground for his bed; and travailed in vain to
depart thence, he was constrained, having tied his horse to the brau^che of a
tree, to couch himself under the couerture of the clear dewy night, within an
hollow Daken Tree which was in the Forest, where al night (which seemed to
him longer then ye Siege of Troy) it was not possible for him to sleep any
whit at all, which brought to pass that he arose in the morning, four hours
before his wo^ted use, at any ever here before. For scarce began the reddish and
fiery messenger of the day, to drive out from the Sky the dareksom shade of
the night to procure place, to the brightness of the clear shinyng Son
beams, but he was already horsed, and had in many places, searched the
Damozell which had caused him come thither, entendyng to finishe his voyage.

But as he turned from one side to the other of the Forest, he arrived by
chance in place where the night before he had tied his horse, which he coueted
greatly, as being far better then that which he had gotten: and looked on
each side if he could see or aperceiue him. But not espiyng him, he proceeded
somewhat further, where as it were in thick of the Forest, he heard a
certain neighing, which sounded to the ear, as proceedyng properly from some
Horse, which caused that thinking, that that was his, he alighted to assaie to
take him, because the place where he thought he had heard him, was so thick
and full of little Shrubbes, that it was impossible for any man to traueli
there, but on foot. Then goinge thus through the Forreste, thitherwarde where
he heard the neighynge (the which the more he went forward, the further
of was it) he was brought into such extremity, that after long and vain
toylyng through hedges and bushes, he lost and dismissed himself from the
Pathe, by the which he was come into the most thick of the Forest.
Notwithstanding he did so much at last by goinge and coming from one place
to another, that within two hours after, he began to find a Pathe which
conducted him straight to the place, where he had left his horse tied to a
little Tree. Whereof he was somewhat joyous, but his joy endured small time.
For when he was arrived, he found him not there. Whereof he became far more
astonished and sorrowful then before, for he had bound him so well, that in no
wise he could escape to flee away, as in deed he was not fled, but (as
writes the Historian Gallarx) he was taken and stolen by the subtle shift and
craft of a good fellow, which was commonly called the wily outlawe, remainyng
in that Forreste. And wyly outlawe might he well be called, in that very
few passed that way, of what disposition or quality soever he were, whom
he had not by some means robbed of somewhat always: as he now did these two
Horses of the kings. For the euenyng before during the time he fought with
the knight, whom he slew, this Thief had filched and stolen him, which in
followyng the Damozelles Palfreie all the day before, was laid down on the
ground for fainte and feebleness: and that morning being determined to get
somewhat by such as passed by, according to his custom, aperceiuyng the king
passing that way, being mounted on an other Horse, had great desire of him to
bear him compaignye, to the intent to get that other horse also. And to
bring the thing he purposed to pass, he went neighing through the Forest
like an horse, feigning so well the matter, that the king hearing him, believed
steadfastly that it was his Horse, whom to pursue he was alighted. But during
the while he was in the rough Forest in quest of the same, the Royster was
come to take away the other, by an other bypath which he well knew.

Whereof the king was so vexed and weary, in that (as a Lackie) it behooved him
to go a foot, that he began to curse and banne the Damsel, which was
wandered and straied from him, repentyng him (but to late) of his folly.
Notwithstanding, he travailed so far a foot (for falling) here and there,
that about Middaie he began to abandon the Forest: a mile from the which, he
met an Heremite in a four cornered pathe, who kneelyng deuoutely before the
Cross, read busily his Mattens, with spectacles on his nose: for he was so
old and feeble, that he saw but little, in so much that the King was full
nere, before he could discrie him. But seeing him armed as he was, the vizier of
his healme being let down, he had of him so great fear, that thinkyng he was
some evil Spirit, or Phantasme, began straightewaies to mark him self with
the sign of the Cross, one while him self, an other while the King, mumblyng
with his mouth many suffrages, and holy Prayers in Latin to conjure him.
Which the king seeing, and knowing his fear, to assure him (...) better, took
his hedde piece of, and having humbly saluted him, reasoned with him in this
sort: For Gods sake Father, (said he) be you nothing astonished of me, for I
am naught else but as you are: also tell me where I might find a place to
repose my self, and take some refection: for since yester day Morning, have I
neither eaten nor dronken, whereby I feel my self so feeble and weak, that with
pain I can uneath sustain my self. The good manne Heremite hearing him speak
of God, having taken courage to him, answered him in Latin with like words:
Manne, I know not what thou demaundest, but if thou will vouchsafe to repose
thy self in my little Celle, I will give thee to drink water of the clear
Fountain, which is there nere unto us, and also I have some Chestenuttes, and
roots of Herbs boiled since yester night, whereof if thou will thou may
eat. The King which understood Latin, knew well that he could speak no
other ways: wherefore he answered him in the same language, that he was
thereof content.

In so much being come into the Heremites Cell, he eat with a reasonable
good appetite certain Chestnuttes, the which the old man gave him very
daintely, deemyng by him self that few would suffice him: after which having
dronken a good cup of the fore said Fountain water he departed, (not without
great thanks to the Heremite given) reasonably well satisfied, with the
sustenaunce of that sumptuous banquet.

Then did he nothing but trauaill till it was nere night. that he arrived on the
Sea cost, where he found a boat, in which was a man slepyng full soundly,
whom, first having awaked him, he required if he could transporte him into any
haven, where he might embarke him self, to go to the Realm of Thrace: and the
manne answered him, yea: and that he was thereof right well content: and that
same euenyng he would bring him, where he should be lodged, in the most
magnificent Castle that ever he saw. The King being joyous, and right well
apaid of so good an hap, entryng the boat, nothing knowing how to take the
words of his Ferie man: but to sone (alas) he knew them to his great damage.
For scarce was he a mile from the shore, when he saw not his man within the
boat, well might he perceive the Oars to move, and traile forward the boat,
upon tke waves of the Sea, with so great celeritie and swiftness, as though
some one had moved them: whereof he was more astonished and abashed, then ever
he was of any other thing, that ever had chanced in his life. Notwithstanding
he yet reioysed somewhat, that the sea was calm, and quiet, having none other
wind to toss or trouble it but a sweet and pleasant Zephyrus. And having
remained in this forte, wandering solely upon the sea, without trouble of any
Tempest, having naught to eat but certain course bread, pieces whereof he
found in the Boat, till such time as he might discover and perceive, in the
morning when the Sun began to shine upon that part, where his vessel
pretended to take Land, a fair Island garnished and munited with a multitude
of fair leauie Trees, and grassie green Meadows, and in the midst thereof,
approaching nearer and nearer, the hautie Towers, of an exceeding fair Castle
which there was pight. And issuyng forth into the I Will, to find some one
which might tell him what Country that was, he saw moreover in one coaste of
the same, the air as red as flaming fire. Then much marueiling what adventure
that might be, determined so still to walk, till he might find one that
might tell him the novelties thereof. But he had not gone paste a Mile, but
he met with twelve knights armed at all points from head to foot, and with
them a mighty band of villains, with Battes and Staves, armed with great
Iackes and oulde rustie Halbertes, whom having courteyously saluted, he was so
hardy as to enquire why the air was so red in that part of the I Will whereto he
drew near: but they answered him, that they were thereof ignoraunte, and
that going somewhat further he should know the certainty thereof. They scarce
had passed him a bowshoote, but yt they came suddenly and encompassed him on al
parts: and so many as were there already before embushed, assailed and
assaulted the miserable Prince on all sides. Who willing to defend himself,
flewe the two first, which were over hasty to lay hands upon him.
Nevertheless the rest leaping altogether upon him with one blow took him,
and depriuyng him of all defense, bound him straightly with great Cheanes of
Iron. Then leadyng him toward the Castle, which he had seen, put him into
a most strange and wretched Prison, where we leave him to lead a long and
miserable life, until occasion serve to show you the mean of his delivery.
To the end that I may set forth to you, that which chanced to the Noble
Queen Bellizenne, his wife, whom he had left great with child at his
departure.

Of the marvelous dule and sorrow that Bellizenne made after the departure, and
also during the absence of king Floridamant her spowse: and how being at
Myrandoll, as she walked forth in the Forest, she travailed of the Infant
Gerileon, for whose birth, the Princes Ferand of Norwaie and Dom Grandilaor
caused and addressed Ioustes and Turnays, wherein they protested to answer all
comers, where chanced a marueilowes adventure, after the which, they
finished the ire Iustinges whereof the said Ferrand and Grandilaor bare away
the price and were victorious.

The fourth Chapter.
NEVER Dido after the departure of the fugitive Trojan Aeneas, felt such
grief in her mind, neither more was the sorrow of Phyllis, after the long
expectation of her dear friend Demophoon: then the noble Queen Bellizenne,
felt of grievous and vudurable assaults, being ministered dailye too her on
all sides, by the violence of a multitude of mortal and unsupportable
anguishes and griefs, than, when she chanced too think of the horrible and
boystrous blastes of wind which sometimes she heard beat against the
Windows of the pleasant Castle of Mirandol, the showers and Tempests, the
mutation of times, perilous Shipwrackes, and innumerable dangers, which her
loyal spowse Floridamant endured. She could he in no place, but (loosing all
countenance and color, were she in her Chamber or in her Garden, were she in
the presence or absence of any one too drive away her dolor and sadness) but
she did sheede and let fall an infinite number of tears, which gushyng from
out her eyes, bedewed with great drops along, the delicacie and pleasauntnes
of the color, wherewith her ruddye and Vermilion Cheeks were polished and
adorned. So that in full short space, she became so lean and difformed, as
well for not having guarded her self at the beginning, from geuyng place to
these griefs and anguishes, as also by fee ling the vnaccustomable anoyes and
gryping griefs wherewith the fruit which she had couceiued in her woumbe daily
encreasyng, did oppress her, that there was none of her Barons nor knights,
which thereof was not greatly abashed and sorry, but espespecially the sage
Prince Ferrand of Norwaie, who greatly forcyng him self, with many good
reasons and comfortable admonitions, to appease the vehemency of her Passions,
seeing in the end that he but lost time, left that trade, and devised to study
and employe his care wholly to ye government, of the Realm of great Britain,
as to his charge belonged: leaving the old Grandilaor Duke of Normandy, for
guard to the Queen and her Damoselles, who never after the departure of the
king, had removed from Myrandoll. Where upon a day as she walked alone in the
Forest, wanderyng from the company of her Ladies and Damoselles, as
accustomably she did, to commence her wonted Plaintes and Lamentations in a
little Cabinet of White Thorn, which with great Artificie and industry she
had purposely caused to be builded, by the most expert crafts men she could
find, there chanced her this pitious adventure, which you shall hear. It is
to be noted, that as the Queen went so wanderyng by the Forest, the term
naturally prefixed and ordained to human Creatures, to abandon and forsake
the entrails of their Mother, to enjoy the light of this world, was expired
and consummate, as soon as she was arrived in her Cabinet, (so as, before that
she began her complaint, she was intentive of hear the delectable and
pleasant murmuringes, and hushing noises of sweet running Brooks, which
were there, which a while before were beecome mute, their Waters stayed of
they course, by the heat and rigor of the little heavenly Dog, which
having removed and given place to the Star most moist, had that day, as it
were deuinely received their flotyng voice, and of Birds which than being
assembled in great number, did marueilously discloase the natural and
melodious Harmony of their Sysuan Braunchye Songs, according so well, that
they seemed of purpose to recreate and bring joy to the instaunte birth, of
the noble Infaunt Royal, or rather if it were possible, to rauishe her heart
with so great gladness, that her Sense of hearing, remaining ravished and
attached with the Echo and resoundyng of their voices, she should feel less
travel in her Childing. She began to feel so grievous a pain, that pressing
her belly, with her two hands, homely restyng her self against the branches
of a Tree, supposing her entrails to be plucked out of her belly, she made
the most merueilous dule and lamentation that could be thought, and betook
her self after a while to cry so shrilly, that one of her Damozelles named
Antiziliane, daughter to the king of Swethelande, so curioussy took regard
unto her, fearing that which had chanced, that whither soever she went, she
never forsook her, and having heard her cry, she ran diligently thither.
But she could not so soon ariue, but that she found her rather dead than
alive, and stretched along upon the grene Grass, whereat she was much
displeased, and yet also joyous, seeing her delivered of a little Babe so
fair, large and well featured, that he seemed not to have come into the world
but to be highly set by. Which she taking in her Arms, after she had washed
and made him clean in a River, there ueere at hand, she kissed and rekissed
more then a hundred and a hundred times. Then presentyng him to his Mother,
which took him sweetly between her two Arms, she gave herself to consolate
and recomfort her the best that she could. But she having left and let pass
the late and painful travail of her childing, said to her with a soft and
mild voice. That she should with all speed go to bespeake an Horse Litter to
transport her to ye Castle, whereto the Damozell sone obeyed, leauyng her sole
and alone in the compagnie of her little Infaunt, who^ she began to busse and
behold with a Million and more, of amiable and motherly looks. And even as
she earnestly beheld him in every part, she perceined in him a thing most
merueilous. That is to wit, a little place in his back drawyng toward the
right side, full of hear, and like in purtrature to a fierce and fell Lion,
having his Tongue out of his mouth, whereby she had hope that he should in
time beecome an hardy and valiaunte Knight. Seeing that there was none other
reason but that nature had brought forth, signed and marked it in such form
for some such purpose.

But during this thought of hers, behold there arrived a troop of Knights and
Damoselles, which brought thither a fair horse litter, all wrought within
with Blewe velvet, who went with great haste toward the place where the Queen
was: and findyng her in the same taking, that the Damsel Antiziliane had
left her, liftyng her up softly, laid her in a good bed which was in the
Litter, with the little baby by her, whom her Damsel wrapped and covered with
rich clothynges, brought ready for that purpose: which done, they quickly
conuaied her to the Castle of Mirandol. Where they no sooner arrived, but the
Prince Ferrand of Norwaie, which was in the City of London, without further
delay, with a great troop of illustrious and valiant knights, came to
visit her, much joyous and pleased of so good an adventure, trustyng that now
the Queen would for ever after, leave of her griefs and complaints: who gave
him in charge to cause the Infant to be baptized whom she would have to
bee-named GERILEON, with the greatest joy and sumptuous preparation, that she
could prepare: not lettyng pass, either Iustes, Turneis, or any other
pastymes, which could be invented. And expressly commanded that those, who
for the loss of their King, were cladde in Black attire, should exchange of
them, for others of diverse colors more gaie, and pleasant: whereto they
with all diligence obeyed.

For after the Baptism of the Infaunte (the which in great pomp and
magnificence, the King Ferrande of Norwaie, him self had holden over the
Font, with the maid Antiziliane: the one in the name of the King Belligent of
France, who was a great friend to the King Floridamant: The other
representynge the Person of the Queen of Scotland) they caused to be made
ready ye Listes win the City of London, in the great place of the Pallaice, and
the next day to make Proclamation of the public Iustynges, on the behalf of
the Prince Ferrande of Norwaie, and his courageous cousin Gra^dilaor, who in
Iusting chale^ged all goers and comers for the price: whereof he prescribed two
gaie Genettes of Spain, white as Swannes, trapped and harnessed with Ueluet of
the same color, all embroydred and wrought with fine gold of Ciprus, wholly
to remain to them, which were not dishorsed at the Iustes. And they
proclaimed that whosoever should take in hand this match, should give to the
victours one of the fairest, and most rich tokens, that ever they had
received of their Mistresses: and if perchance there were found any, who
having fixed and set his affection, in a place too haultie and difficile,
were so unfortunate in his Loves, that he never har received any, he should be
bound, and holden to fast wholly three days, without either meat or drink,
saving bread and water, and he should fulfill his promise.

Moreover it was also said, that all those which should protest that they were
free, and exempte from the flames of love, should go knele down before the
Damsels of the Queen Bellizenne, kissyng their feet, and the stones in their
Rings, which they had on their fingers with all humility. Which thing being
known, every one of the knights, who heard these Iustes proclaimed in so
strange and unusual condition, said to the Heraulde, who had to name
Geliaste the Ioily: What is that (says he) that may be done in lieu of
kissyng the Rings of their fingers, if by chance some of the Dames want them.
It shall be expedient, Sir knight, no displeasure (said the Heraulde) that if
you be of the vanquished side, and want a Mistres with Rings, that you may go
kiss the^, Mum: ye wot where. At this cloked knauishe answer, was great
laughter moved, not only to the bystanders, but also to the knight to whom he
spoke, who (although he saw him self mocked) was little or nothing thereat
displeased.

But (to come to the matter again) the Iustynges being openly Proclaimed, as
is before said, one might have seen knights of all parts, to prepare them
selves to the same, on the one side of the Listes: and on the other side the
two brave warriers Dom Ferrande of Norwaie, and Dom Grandilaor his Cosine,
fully determined to make that day, such a proof of their knightly prowess,
that worth ly they should be judged valiant at those Iustes above all
others. And especially the you^ge Grandilaor, who so felt his force and
strength to redouble and increase, because of a certain white Plume of
Feathers, which he carried upon the creste of his Helmet, given him that day
by the Damsel Antiziliane his Lady and Mistress, (for whose Love he felt
great torments) that under her favor, he should behave him self so well at
the Iustes, that he might become victorious, he entered first into the field,
mounted upon a brave courser of Arabie, so well trained and paced, that to se
him mannadge, carrire, and brave it in the air, one would have judged him of
no less desire to the matter. then his master: who giuyng him the spur
fiuely (as well he could) remained so sure and immovable in the saddle, yea,
and with such a grace, that to view him, there was none of the lookers on,
which thought not verily that for his part, the Price of that Tournay should
not be lost. And the like, said they of that valiant prince of Norwaie, who
pursued him full nere: for in prowess and Chivalry, he surpassed each other
knight of great Britain. But as they were entered within the Barriers to
combat, behold, the heaven began in less then an hour, to wax so darcke,
and too become so troubled with thick and stinking smoke, which remained in
the air, more then a quarter of an hour, that the knights could not see from
the one eude of the Listes to the other: in such sort that there was none so
hardy and valiant, which was not greatly astonished and abashed at this
sudden and strange mutation of time: for never any of them that were in that
company, had seen the like chaunee. But yet they had more cause of marvel,
when after having a while beholden through the the air, which waxed yet more
darcke, especially about the Castle, a multitude of hideous flames of fire,
as red as blood, they heard such a terrible and unaccustomed thu^derclappe,
that one would have said, that Satan with all the wicked spirits of the
infernal Mansion, had been assembled to ruinate and pluck down the Castle,
unto the very foundation: which straightewaies after, having brought there a
terrible-feare upon them all, vanished. And being ceased, the air became in
less then an hour; as clear and bright as before. But those that were
assembled in a troop, found the^ selves far dispersed each from others,
raunged and scattered here and there more then a Bow shoot: because their
horses being afraied of the great brute, which they had heard, did separate
them selves the one from the other on every part. But seeing an old Tower,
which was at the end of the old walls of the Castle park, ouercouered more
then two Foot thick with Juie, some green, some withered, to be no more
there, gatheryng the^ them selves together, they ran hastily toward that
part, to see where it was become. And being there arrived, they found it all
covered with ashes, and plucked in pieces smaller then duste: as also they
perceived before the gate of the Castle, two great pillars of Marble white
and graie, cut and pight four square, the most fair that might be seen,
susteinyng them selves above by an arche, most magnificentlie embossed and
graven with works Damaskinne, under the which was the purtrature of a
Maiden, richely-apparelled like a Nymphe, and so fair that Beauty her self
might not be named, but by her name: having a smilyng countenance, wherein
sparcled and shined so linely, the glimsyng clearness of two fair eyes, that
it was sufficient, to lighten the night before the gate of the Castle, as
though there had been two great Torches, for that purpose: and the residue
so like a living creature, that nothing but only speech was in her wantyng.
And moreover this Maiden had about her neck, a great chain of gold, more of
weight then a thousand talentes, the which hanged down a whole man's height
before her feet. And at the end thereof hanged a Tablet wrought all about, and
in the midst thereof were written these verses following, in letters of gold.

The Lions whelpe being stolen away once by the Dove,
The royal Egle would with his beck cruelly,
Pearce through his heart: but yet tholde Lion then set free,
Being puissante shall him guard, that no mischaunce he prove.
And in her right hand she had a little scrole, wherein was written this
word Oziris, and in her left hand she had a branch of Olive: and upon
one of the Pillars, six foot heigh from the ground, was engraven in Greek
letters, the substannce of these verses.

Once enter did the Wolves the Forest thick into,
With hunger to devour the flock most frail and weak:
Likewise the Pastors of the tender yonglynges eke,
Whereof full many fell, whom preasse did overthrow.
And in the other, after the same manner were these here, which did depend
upon the others, and made perfect the sense thereof.

But the Dragon of whom the Pastor great is father,
Them chasyng him beforne, shall rest as conqueror:
Then shall he be reknowne for son to the Pastor,
Whom from extreme mischaunce he shall help and deliver.
But it never rested in any of the knights powers, who read and reuised it
many times (whereof there was many that were well le^^ered and cunnyng) to know
rightly how to enterprete it. Which was cause that remainyng marueilously
astonished at this novelty, they retired all toward the place where the Listes
were prepared, for to finish their enterprised Tourney: wherein was many a
lance broken, and many a knight cast to the ground, by the valiauncie of the
two courageous knights Dom Ferrand of Norwaie, and his cousin Dom Grandilaor,
whereon many did penance, and that great, for three days space after. And the
two Defendauntes gained much favor of many knights, which there acquired
hate and disdain, in recompense of their Dames. For there was found but one,
which was not amourous, and in Love, called Dom Gillant of Bartage, who was of
the number of the twelve courageous knights of Great Britain, most hardy
and cunnyng in his weapon, but in Iustes he was cast down to the earth by
Dom Grandilaor, after the breakyng of four Staves, without remouyng himself:
but at the fifte he was dishorsed wherewith he was so chaffed and angered, that
he would not perform the decrees of the game. Which thing Grandilaor
seeing, said to him: Knight, will ye not go kiss the Rings and feet of the
Ladies, as it was accorded before we came to the Justes, the one against the
other? No, answered Dom Gillant: for I am not bound to do that against my
will. And presently through the great displeasure he there took, he abandoned
the Realm of Great Britain, to search for strange adventures. Which thing
Geliaste the ioyly seeing, who was there to deliver Lances to them that
lacked, said to Grandilaor. For as much as I can see (sir) this knight will
keep promise, for he will not let it go as yet. Truly he will keep it long,
said Grandilaor smilynglie: for if he frame not him self to accomplish
otherwise, he should have no power to escape from him. But whiles he discoursed
thus with the merry and ioyly Geliaste, he took of him a Spear, which he had
in his hand, for that Dom Haroalt, which also was one of the xij. courageous
knights of the Realm, approached to run against him: who seeing him with
Spear in rest, pricked his Horse with the spurs, and came runnyng upon him
(who did the like) so rightly, that making their Speres fly in shiuers, which
had touched both their Shieldes, they performed bravely their Course without
any manner moving from the Sadles. Wherefore taking new Spears more big and
strong then the first, they came to the shocke again so fiercely upon their
Shieldes, that their Trunchions fliyng on high in the air, their Steedes met
with such a fury, breast against breast, that, that of courageous Heroalt was
constrained (as not being so strong as the other) to fall there down, and his
Master by him. Assuring you that if Dom Grandilaor had not strongly reined the
head of his Horse, he had measured himself also on the Earth. But he hare him
self there so valiauntly, that his Cosen Ferrand and he, remained all the day
victorious, and so well cou^tergarded them selves from being cast to the
ground, that none had the puissaunce to win of them, the two white Steedes.
Whereof (after that the Sun was gone down, and every one retired home) the
valiant Grandilaor made a present to his Mistres Antiziliane, who thereof
thankyng him humbly, felt her self well content and satisfied of so great a
favor, for they loved one an other greatly, because that the said
Antiziliane was the fairest Damozell in all Britain the Great, and Dom
Grandilaor one of the most fine, valiant, and hardy knights: as his deeds
shall give you to understand hereafter.

How the Queen Bellizenne caused the young Gerileon, to be nourished and
taught, and of his childishe gentilitie and noble acts in youth. During
which time, Prince DORIAN of Spaigne, which was gone to seek after King
Floridamant his friend, was driven by Tempeste into the Green I Will, where he
understood that the Traitor Mynofoll did levy an Army too invade the Realm
of Great Britain. Wherefore being gone thither, he slew the say de Minofoll
at one stroke with a Spear, and with the aid of the courageous Knights of
great Britain discomfited all his Host. During which while, the young
Gerileo^, lost himself in the Forest, by pursuyng a Phaisaunte: whereby the
Queen through grieves and sorrow outraged, had slain her self, but for the
sudden arrival of king Floridamant, who disturbed her in the Act.

The fifth Chapter.
THE Iustynges and Tourneys solemnized in the City of London, for joy of ye
late child birth of the Queen Bellizenne, dured the space of five days. In
which season the Princes Ferrand and Grandilaor made such proof of their
valiant prowess and haughty chivalry, that they still rested victours, to
the great co^tentment of the fair Antiziliane. To whom Grandilaor gave all the
Jewels by him conquered, which he had won of the vanquished knights. But at
the end thereof, the virtuous Queen having abandoned, and left her childbed,
caused them to cease: not able wholly to forget the sorrow and anguishe, which
the long absence of her loyal spouse brought unto her, but only at such
times as she taking her little Infant between her arms, to yield some release
to her dolor, she embraced him with a multitude of beholdinges and kisses,
coming of natural love: Not knowing whether she ought to wail the long and
yrkesome absence of her Husband (although not wholly void of hope to see him
once again) or rather to rejoice and content her self with so luckie a
burden. And in this perplexity she remained more then two years, now sad,
now somewhat merry, living still and sustainyng her self by the food of a
certain hope, which yet sometime fed her with some consolation. During which
time, she was so curious, and took so great head, well to nourishe and bravely
to bring up the young Gerileon, that at two years ends, he was so big and
ioyly, that already he could both go and run: and prattled so pretily, that he
could demand and ask for what ere he would have. In so much, that each one
co^iectured much of his future bou^tie and valor, by his young childishe
acts, accompagnied with such a natural gentilitie and magnanimity: which in
him, within process of time, had such an encreasement, that they seemed to
surpass the self same course of his tender and young years. For scarsely had
he arrived to the fourth year of his age, but that if by chance he saw any
one being doleful and sad to lament, he had thereof so great compassion, that
knowing the cause of his dolor, he endeavored to recomfort him the best that
he could, offering him all that he had for his contentmente, and especially to
the Queen his Mother, to whom, on a day when she heald him on her Lap,
hearing her give a profounde sigh, he spoke most gently on this sort, and
said: Madam what ayleth you? I pray you tell me why you sigh? Is there any
that has given you occasion of being angry? For if it be so, I assure you it
shall not be unrevenged. The Queen hearing him speak with so good a grace,
began to smile at his childishe words, who with such and other like matters
yielded often most great lightnyng to her passions and distresses.

Moreover, he never remained idle: and most commonly one should find him,
either near to some horse, wherevpo^ (leadyng him to some block, or such
like thing) he set him self with so good a grace, that at sight thereof a man
would have judged him, to have been the most dexterious squire or knight of
all great Britain: or else taking a Staff, he went to assail some one or
other, to try him self that ways against him: to whom, albeit he surpassed
him in bigness of body, yet he raught him some times, by his nimblenesse and
actiuitie, such hard blows, that commonly he was forced, to play double or
quitte with him. For in the science of Defense they trained, and brought him up
so curiously, that at last he was therein as expert, not only as his
teachers, but also as any other in the world in his time. Then again with a
Darte in hand, he went tracyng through the Forest to find some wild
beasts: without fear of the which, no more then if they had been Dogs, if
perchance he recountred any, he pursued them so fast in the Forest: that
often times the Queen, which never was at ease, he being out of sight, set
and sent folks every way to seek him.

But what should I thus much strive, to discourse upon this point: seeing that
as it is found by the writings of the Chronicler Galarx, one can not recite
any thing fit and convenient, to an heart freight with nobleness and
generositie, to which, this little prince applied not his mind: and behaved
him self so well in all his childly enterprises, that making them tend to some
gentle end, he seemed rather a man of ripe judgment, then a skillesse Child
and Infant.

During the time that the young boy Gerileon thus increased, both in ago,
virtue, strength, and gentleness of Spirit, the Queen his mother had made
inquiry on all parts, as well for her brother Hubert of Scotland, whose
loss brought much annoye to many, as also for the good knights Candior,
Grandilaor, Acciall of Surrye, Sylban of Flanders, Melcior, and many others of
the courageous of Great Britain, to know the cause of the long abode (which
so much anoied her) of king Floridamant, who being sent out to seek him
toward al parts of the earth, could in nowise hear any news of him. Which
thing being come to the ears of Prince Dorian of Spain, he was (by reason of
the fervent love he had to him) so distressed for his loss, that he vowed and
swear, never to sleep quietly, or in good rest, until such time as he might
hear some news of him: in so much that making inquiry for him, he went
first into Thrace, where having heard nothing of him, he put him self on the
sea, to return to Great Britain, or to some other country farther of. But
he was surprised by a marvelous and horrible tempeste, whose blastes after a
while, caused his Bark to be cast on shore in ye Grene I Will: where by a Cloune
of the same coast, he was assured, that for certainty, the traitor
Necromancien Minofol held, and had him in his prison of the Red Castle
enchaunted, and caused him daiely to be whipped, and beaten by five or six
villains, with great and big coardes, all to make him miserably languishe
till the end of his days: and he knew moreover that he addressed a great
Army by Sea, traitorously to invade the realm of Great Britain: but he
failed of his enterprise. For the Prince Dorian being retired from thence, and
having made certificate of all these things to the good king of Norwaie, and
the rest of the courageous of Great Britain, they remedied the matter so
well, and gave so good order to their affairs, that the said Minofol being
slain by the hands of the said Prince Dorian, who in the skirmishe
encountered him, and thruste his Spear through his body, that his folks were
forced, with great flaughter and bloodshed, shame and perpetual dishonor, to
return from whence they came.

And these things thus done, while they for the recovery of their king were
busied, to furnishe and set for the certain ships of war, to pass into
the Green I Will: it came to pass that the young boie Gerileon, of whom none as
then cook guard of, going one morning to walk in the Foreste, having a little
bow of Brasill in his hand, wherewith he occupied himself so well, that he
killed many birds as well great as small, he perceived by chance a Phesant,
which sat not far of: which, as he nocked one of his arowes to shoot at her,
she flewe a little forward. The boy very desirous to have her, seeing her so
fair and bravely feathered above the rest, pursued her: and seeing that she
sat more nere him, and seemed better then before, he set again the head of his
arrowe against her: the bird seeing her self manassed flewe yet a little
farther. The boy, in hope to have her, pursued her still from tree to tree,
and were it with chase or sight, he never left her: till that being gredie of
ye game, the bird having brought him in fine by little and little, far into
the thickest of the Forest, did vanishe away, in so much he knew not where
she was become, for in no place that he could cast his eye, he could not see
her. Whereof he was so sorrowful and vexed, that he brake both his bow and
arrows, rentyng and pluckyng in pieces the quiver, which hanged by his side,
through the great ire and spite he had: as well for that, not having obtained
the Phaisante, as for that he could neither find again the way, by the which
he came thither, nor any other path to return out thence. And seeing this,
after he had remained long pensive, sittyng on the green grass, bedewed with
abundance of tears, he fell on sleep, leanyng his head against a tree. And
so long he remained in that place, that neither the Queen, nor any of her
house, knowing where he was become, for that the Sun drew al ready
dounewardes, and that all the day, since morning he had not been seen of any
body, caused quickly to mount on horseback, the courageous Knights Heroald,
and Accial of Surrie, to go one way, to see if they could find him, and Dom
Candior, with his son Sylban of Flanders, an other way: who having done
great diligence in searchyng him, were forced to return, the Sun having
suffered the dareke and shadie brightness of the Stars, to appear in the
heavenly Vaute, without hearing any thing of him. Whereof it needs not be
showed, if the Queen were passioned and grieved, or not. For of all that night
it was not possible, that she could give place to any one iotte of rest: but
weepyng and lamentyng bitterly, she made such pitiful complaints and
lamentations, accompaignied with such a number of skaldyng Tears, which
issued abundantly out of her fair eyes, that there was no heart so heard,
fell or cruel, that thereof would not have taken pity and compassion.

In so much that for fear which I have to move you to beweene her great
dolor (seeing that I strive not but to stir you to pleasure) I am content to
set my self to show them here: for the severe Medaea apperceiuing her self
abandoned of her friend Jason, or Thisbe in the Bosom of her beloved Pyramus,
finding him dead, did not send so many sorrowful sighs, sobbes, and
pitiful complaints, as that night boiled from the breaste, eyes, add mouth of
this virtuous Princess, for the loss of ye Infant. And I boldly believe,
(that although of magnanimous and haughty courage, yet had it not been for the
Princes Candior and Grandilaor, who pained themselves still about her with
double diligence (as they say) to mitigate and diminishe the vehemency of her
anguish) with her proper hands, like Lucretia, for loss of her chastity, she
had made an end both of her life, and lothesome languishing dolours. But these
wise Princes did so much, that promising her to find him out the next day,
they somewhat appeased these first motions of her anguishe: in so much that
after she was with care couched upon her bead, appareled as she was, she fell a
sleep until the next morning, that Sol was already roused and removed far from
the lodgyng of his Le^man Aurora: at which time she awaked, so weary, wasted
and weakened with the force of the forepassed plaintes, that scarce she could
lift up her heavy head from the painful Pillow. Then demaundyng if her
son were yet found: and being answered by the Damozell Antiziliane (who
kept her self continually nere to her Grace, for fear of her miscariyng
through the multitude of these mischaunces) that he was not as yet returned.
Ah (said she) then let me go se, if I may be more fortunate in findyng of
him then the rest, in hope to have him shortly in the place where my fancy
foretelles me he is: for in sleep it was showed me, where and how he was to
be found, laid under a Tree. And taking secretly a knife, unperceived of
any, she conuaied it under her Kirtle, and framed her foot steps toward the
Forreste, to a Place the most thick* dark and desert thereof. And then with
her two hands rentyng and tearing her yealowe hear, and piteously
complainyng, she began her lamentations on this manner.

Alas, (said she) what may this mean, that then, when I think to se the
brightness of my felicity, I enter and am plounged more further in the obscure
and darksome dompes of my distress and mishap: and hoping to rejoice at one
happy and fortunate navigations, by the gleamyng of a jot of fraudulent and
deceiptfull light, which was to me aparaunt, I feel my self frustrated, of
mine esperaunce, covered and ingulped in the profoundeste place of ioylesse
inundations, and ragyng Rivers, moved and stirred up by the horrible blastes of
the most vehement winds, upon the Seas of the anguishes, sorrows, and
Pittes of mine importable pains. O mutable and inconstaunte Fortune, may it
be, that thou should vomit so vehemently on me the venime and rage of thy
rigorous and naughty nature? that after having been so benign and favorable
unto me, as to make me by birthe the daughter of a king and mighty Monarque,
and joined by the blessed band of Marriage to one most famous and triumphaunt,
and also to be Mother to the fairest and gentlest infant, that ever nature
framed or brought forth into the world. Thou make me to abandon the one,
and depriuest me of both the other, by thy false treachery and Treason, the
more to toss and torment me in the midst of these Mundane Motions, and
terreine enticementes, wherein thou suffer nothing to be durable and
permanent. No no, I assure thee, that thou shall no more abuse me by thy
subtle and deceitful alterations, in this world: For I go in despite of
thee, to receive in celestial things more joy and gladness, then in
terreine and mundane influences, thou have made me taste of forrowe and
sadness, deliueryng me by this means from the Snares which thou layest from
day to day, to make me languishe: hoping that there I may yet somewhat
rejoice in the felicity of seeing my dear Mate Floridamant, and my little
Infaunt Gerileon, who upon his Fathers loss, yet gave me some allegeaunce. But
alas, what is it that I will do, and if peradventure my dear Spowse delivered
from the pernicious prisons, wherein the accursed and traitorous enchaunter
Mynofol has caused him live so miserably, return: and my Son be found by
some one who nourishing and garding him more charely the^ I have done, come in
process of time, as possible it is yt he may, what will they say if I miscary,
desca^ting my inco^ueniences? Do I doubt, but that besides yt they shall be
outraged in grievous dolor and distress, they will not have me in reputation
of a fool, frantic and void of wit? But wretch that I am (said she next,
scriching and groaning bitterly, and taking in her right hand, the Glaine
which she kept covertly under her kirtell) why delay I so long from keeping of
them company, slackyng the advancement of my trespass, by certain frivolous
fantasies, and trifling thoughts: be they in the utter profounditie of Hell,
or in a Mansion more hie eleuate of the Elisian Fields? Seeing that if they
were alive, they would not protract so much time to come see me. Wherefore
that which even now I thought, not being possible to be true, receive O God
pitiful and merciful, receive with hearty prayer I beseech thee, (after that
I shall have pierced my breast with this Blade, dying my delicate and tender
hands in mine own warm blood) my spirit into thy power.

And as she raught her arm back, to give the deadly dinte, she felt one who
forced her to stay the same: and looking back she beheld a knight all armed,
who taking from her cruel hands the knife, courageously embraced her between
his arms, saying: O my good Lady, what is this that you will do, both to
your own great damage, and my great disco^tentme^t: Ah knight (said she) of al
loves, if thou be desirous, of luck and felicity, of Ladies and Damoselles
afflicted, distourbe me not from mine enterprise. But for all that the Knight,
holdyng and embracyng still her neck with his tender arms, stayed not from
kissyng her: which caused her castyng her sight on him, to know that he was
her dear and loial spouse Floridamant: whom she embraced incontinently by the
middle of the body, kissyng and rekissing him above an hundredth times and to be
so danted with the chance and ravished with joy, that she seemed to sound for
gladsomnesse. And not well knowing whether she dreamed, or whether it were
true, yt she held between her hands the thing, which above all other she had
so long desired, and attended for, she could not bring for the one word,
insomuch that the king much marueiled at so strange adventure, demanding of
her the cause of her doloure and distress: which she could not conceal from
him, but made him partaker of all her fortune, from point to point, with the
loss of her little Infant, whereof he was marueilously displeased and sorry.
Nevertheless, as one to whom the valiaunce and magnanimity of courage never
failed, he framed himself to comfort her in the best fashion he could,
saying: And well, my derlyng, seeing that it has pleased God, to take the
Infant, whom he has lent to you, thereby (as it seemed) to reserve pour life
till my return, it stands you upon, with patience to thank his highness
humbly: seeing we have naught in this world, which is not all to him
appertainyng, and which he may not distribute at his divine pleasure and
will: And also that you should think, that (thanks be to him) we have the
tools and instruments, which neither are worn nor wasted, to work an
other withal, when it shall please him to imparte that grace upon us. At these
last words the Queen was ready to laugh, and smilyngly taking him by the
hand, lead him toward the Castle: which was not far distaunte from
thence, where we will leave him for a while, to tell you what hapened to the
young Gerileon, whom we have left a sleep under a Tree in the Foreste.

Oziris a Lady of the Fayries, who having taken the form of a Phaisante, had
led astraie the little Gerileon in the Forreste, sent two fair Nymphs
Naiades to seek him, who kept their residence in a goodly Fountain, which was
in the wooddes of Cypres, the which Nymphs brought him within a gorgeous
palaice where she remained, and laid him to rest upon a bed: from the which
after that he was arisen, the Faierie sent him by her Damozelles into a gaie
garden, wherein was the fountain of the Naiades, who seeing him so fair, made
him great entertainment, and with this pleasure and contentmente, she
nourished him long.

The vj. Chapter.
WHo so shall chance to read the contents of the Chapter aforegoyng,
perchance may be much amazed in that the young Gerileon remained so long a
sleep within the Foreste, where we left him: whereof they might have just
occasion, if so it had stood, that he had been there resident until the next
day, when as the Queen Bellizenne would have slain her self. But the
history says, that after he had remained there the space of an hour,
surpassed with a profounde and forgetful sleep: there were two fair Nymphs
(of those commonly called Naiades, which dwelled and had their habitations,
within a fair Fountain, which was in the midst of a little woodde of
Ciprus, at the side of the Foreste, wherein none durst enter, whatsoever. For
that that those which therein entered, were transformed into saluage beasts,
by the enchauntmente of a Faierie named Oziris, who was Dame and Mistress,
as well of the woodde of Ciprus, and of the Fountain, as also of the Nymphs
whereof we spoke (which by her commandment came quickly, to take the
little youth in place where he slept, and without awakyng, brought him into the
fairest Castle, that ever one could name, wherein the Fairie Ozaris had her
residence: and when they had brought him on this sort, they put him in a
chamber, the most fair that might be imagined, and couched him upon the
fairest and costliest bed of the world (if we may say so). For the
Faierie had with her own hands wrought, and framed all the furniture, and
garnishementes of the same, of the most rich and fair stuff then to be
found.

And after that they had put him to rest, at his ease on this Manner, he so
remained more then an hour, without awaking, but after a while when he opened
his eyes, he was so trasported with admiration, and ravished with marvel: that
he knew not what to think: not for that he found him self now out of the wood
where he was before a sleep, (for why he wished not to be there,) but to see
such store of substance, rare riches and pleasant Pictures painted, and
pight within that Chamber: which curiously too contemplate (without care
either to return to the Forreste Chase, or home to his Mother in that thereof
he had no regard) he settled him self softly to discende from of the bed,
whereon he lay, and setting hand on side (as they say) began to walk
along the Chamber, earnestly vewyng the walls of the same, where at he was
astonished to see ye purtrature wherewith it was embolished and decked much
magnificentlie. For the Fayrye there had framed the fairest Tables and best
made, that ever the excellent Painter Apelles, had portrated. And amongst the
rest, the Effigy of Venus, which he had begone before his death, which
never none durst presume to finish, but only our Painter which the Fairie had
in her society, far surpassing him: who had so adorned it with lively
curiosity of colors, that in seeing the same, one would have affirmed it
alive. In contemplation of the same* rested the little young Gerileon so
ravished with marvel, that he was in doubt whether it were painted or alive,
colored or quick, senceles or sensiue: whereupon he was at last determined
to ask her what she did there: and espiyng enteryng the Hall, a Damozell
apparelled like a Nymphe, who approaching near to him, took him by the hand,
and led him into a great Hall, where she gave him to eat and drink of most
fine victualles, and wines pleasaunter and sweeter, then the very Ambrosia or
Nectar it self, which which the Gods (as Poettes feign) feed themselves in
heaven. Whereof he was so well apaide, and joyous, that he did naught but
skipped, daunced and coursed along the Hall, when as there entered a Damozell
dressed in sumptuous aparell, being of surpassing beauty and grace of
countenance, above the rest: whom the youth having escried, saluted with
humble reverence, and hasting bouldly to embrace her, said to her: Madame,
will you do as I done, and take some repast here with me: I will give you
such bread as I have here in my hand, better I believe then ever you tasted of.
Then the Dame (which was the Fairie Oziris) taking him between her arms,
kissed him most amourously, saying: wanton, and will you not remain with me
still? yes forsooth Madame (said he) and whither shall I go then?

But listen: you must give me a little horse, and a pretty spear and sword,
which is good for me, and some darts, and hounds to hunte withal in the
Foreste: Truly my Son (said the Faierie) you shall have all this and more,
and then she made her Damozell to take him, who led him to walk in a fair
garden: wherein being come, he began curiously to vewe and behold, the sundry
shows of works, wherewith the plottes of the same were finely enterlaced,
and covered with all kind of good herbs, which continually kept their
natural verdure and greenenesse: and of fair flowers so odoriferous and
sweet, that it was a singular solace to smell them, and a passing pleasure to
beeholde them. And after that he had a long-while suruewed them, the
Damozelles houlding him by the hand, brought him to the brimme of a fair
Fountain, the which continually cast up water by more then twelve
Conduites, which wattered all the Garden, passing so pleasauntly by an
infinite number of galaunt rivers, that with their murmuring fall, they gave
great reioycement and recreation to the ears of the hearers. Within this same
were the Nymphs Naiades, Ministers of Madame Ozyris, the fairest of whom (who
was called Aegle) came and took the Infant between her arms, and kissed him
more then a thousand times. The youth finding her fair in perfection,
misliked naught thereof, but putting his little Youry hand within her
Alablaster bosom, rekissed her still in such forte, that the others then
being desirous of such wantonness, came swiftly to catch him from those sweet
Arms of hers, covered with a little crespe fastened there, through which there
appeared a Skin surpassing the Snow in whiteness. One of the which, bound
upon his head a Nosegaie of Azure color: another a purple flower, the third
gave him a gallant Shirte, composed and wrought with her proper hands, the
best that could be made. To be short, I know not, neither can I well
discloase to you, or here recount the half (without thereon employing too long
time) all the singularities either of the Garden and Fountain, aforesaid, or
of the multitude of contentmentes and pleasures, which the Nymphs took in
dalliaunce with this little demi God: Assuring you, that if he had been
somewhat more of stature, he had become an husband to some of them. For they
loved him so well, that they could never content themselves without his
company. And I duly deem that the Goddess Citherea, never loved so the Son
of Cynara, King of Cyprus and Mirrha, as these Nauoundes cherished this little
youth Gerileon, who dured a long season with solace and delites in this
terrestial Paradise, before he had occasion of misliking or yrke somnes any
way. For if he were not in the Garden in the company of the Naiades, he was
in the palace perusing some pleasant or profitable book of Hystorios, of the
Wars of the Grecians, Trojans and Romans, as ye Iliades of Homer, the
Aeneides of Virgill, the Commentaries of Caesar; or some such like, or else
he skirmished against some one: for there was the fairest place for that
purpose in all the world, or else he occupied himself in ye woods, somewhiles to
assaie himself to sit an Horse, which he guided so well as was possible, or
else to pursue the pretty Birds, with a brave Silver Bow, which the Nymphs
had given him, having his Quiver well garnished with Arrows, wherewith he could
well behave himself, either after the Hare or Heart, wild Boar or other
Beast of the pray, were he never so fierce: and quitte him self so well with
the help of his Hounds (all which were most expert in that exployt) that
there was noe Heart so swifte, nor Roebueke so nimble in the course, to whom
with small pursuit he gave not the overthrow.

And there was neither Bear, nor wild wood Boar, whom (after having settled
most sharp assaults with his Arowes, or Darts) he made not taken by flight,
or left not stretched stark dead upon the Grasse-In so much that one day as
he went to hunt in the Forest, halowyng his hounds with his Horn of Yuorie,
hanging about his Neck, most finely wrought and wrapped in a Scarffe, with
rich Chains of Gold, there rowsed a fierce Lion, which at the noise of the
horn issued out of a Thicket: whom he having seen, endeavored to strike him
with a mighty Dart, which he held in his hand: but the Lion (which is the
most noble and gentle of all other beasts) began in sign of humility to
incline his head down to the earth, and pacyng softly toward him, came to
kiss him, and with great favor to lick his feet, and to fawn upon him,
as though he had been ever accquainted with him. The Youth without any
astonishment, seeing him so meek and humble, without doing him any harm,
took him by the ear, and led him toward the Castle, to the place where the
Faierie was, to whom he said: Madame, see I pray you what a kind of Dog I
have found in the Forest. O my Son (said the Faierie) that is neither
Dog, neither Lion, whereof he has the form: but certes it is the Squire,
which (I mean) shall serve you when you shall be a knight. And how can that be
(said he) seeing he has neither feet nor hands, would you have him serve
me with these gripes and perilous Paws. I will soon make him find (replied
he Fairie) both feet and hands, when time shall serve to use them. Then the
youth without saying to her any more, returned into the Forest, where he had
left his Hounds: whom he found devouring a great Heart which they had taken,
and had welneere eaten up: but the Lion which followed him then and ever
after, terrifiyng and making them flee from about the pray, devoured the rest
in less then an hour. Such was ye life which the young youth Gerileon led in
his Infancy in the compagnie of the Fairie Oziris and her Nymphs Naiades,
with all the honest entertainment and exercise, meet and decent to a young
Infant, well borne and issued from so noble a stock as he was: whom we will let
pass there in such sort certain years of his Adolescencie, to recompt unto
you that which happened to king Floridamant his father, after that he was
delivered from Prison, and by what means he escaped thence.

By what means the King Floridamant was delivered from prison in the red
Castle, for cause of whose deliverance and ariuall, were appointed Iusting and
Tourneis, wherein the King himself bare away the price: whereupon the Image of
the Fairy Oziris, which was before the Portall of the Palace, gave him the
Olive branch which she held in her hand, and than vanished away
inco^tinently. And how the king made a sumptuous feast, during the which, the
Prince Grandilaor moved many amorous matters to the Maiden Antiziliane, which
things being in doing, there entered into the Hall a Page which brought a
Letter to Dorian, Prince of Spain, who sttaight ways after departed the
Court.

The seventh Chapter.
YOU have heretofore heard, how the Queen Bellizenne, upon the intolerable
pain she suffered, as well for the absence of the king Floridamant, as for the
loss of her little Son Gerileon, was at point to kill her self, where she
was disturbed and let of her enterprise, by the ariuall of king Floridamant.
Who seeing her come comfortless and sad for sorrow through the Forest, held
him self hid behind a bushe, to mark what she would say, and to see what she
pretended to perpetrate. And not to give cause of abashment to the Reader in
this adventure, but to give him to understand how she should come then thither
with such opportunity, seeing that (as we have before said) he was in the prison
of the traitor Minofoll, how it came to pass we will show. It is to be
understood, that the red Castle wherein he was emprisoned, was builded (as
you have before heard) by the Enchauntmentes and diabolical coniurations of
the Necromantian Minofol, wholly to work this feate: the which
Enchauntmentes could never take end, but by the only beath of the Enchaunter
himself. Whereupon the valiant Prince Dorian, son to the King of Spain,
encountered the said Minofoll in a mighty Battle, which you have seen so
sufficientely written in the fifte Chapter, and so transperced his body with
his spear, that he then and there fin shed both his life and enchauntmentes.
Whereupon the king felyng himself delivered from so miserable a Prison, after
having secretly seized upon some Harness, which he found in the chamber of
the Magicien, without stay, made such a spoil and staughter of those which
he could encounter, that it was terrible to be told. Then taking his ways
toward Great Britain, wherein he found adventure worthy recital, he had
deliberated before his going to the City of London, to soiourne certain days
at Mirandoll: but as he approached near thereunto, he encountered the Queen
Bellizenne, in the estate as you have before heard: with who^ after his abode
there about ye space of fiftene or sixtene days, not without great Joy of all
his Barons, Knights, and other Subjects, and chiefly also of the Princes
Hubert of Scotland and Dorian of Spain, who were at London when he arrived, he
went to the City, into the which he entered most roially and magnifice^tly:
where were in sign of joy adressed Iustinges and Tourneis, for the love of
ladies, wherein it is not to be doubted if the Scottish and Spanishe Pruices
gave not clear testimony to the Worthies of Great Britain, of their haughty
chivalry, in that there was none whom they pitched not out of their Sadelles,
to take their measure on the ground, and that was the king Ferrand of Norwaie,
whom the valiant Prince Hubert dishorsed after the breach of vj. Spears, and
at the vij. threw him to the ground: howheit, not without streinyng himself to
forsake the Stiropes. And the young Grandilaor also after having hardly
assaied to abbate and beat down the Prince of Spain, was forced to kiss the
ground him self, in his own proper person, to the no small grief of the
Damozell Antiziliane, who was thereof noe less abashed then the Queen
Bellizenne was glad and joyous, when as she saw the king Floridamant. Who
beholding all the knights so beaten down by two strangers, came in Habit
and harnes unknown, to assaie them both, the one after the other,
nevertheless not without great difficulty and breaking of many spears,
Which knights not knowing him which had them so hardly handled, desired to
come to combat at the sharp, excusing them selves by the feeble wearines of
their Horses. But the king (of whose passing prowes they were nothing
ignoraunte) being discovered and known, they ceased and moderated their
marvel and great Melancholy. And the Iustinges being thus ended, they led
him to rest, and refreshed him self in his Palace. But so as he marched
before all the rest, having the Princes Hubart and Dorian, the one on his
right side, the other on his left, he was altogether astonished, when (entryng
by the great port of the Palace, he aperceiued the triumphant Pillars of
Marble, which during his absence had been thither sent and set by the crafty
coming of the beautiful Fayrie Oziris. The effigy of whom her self, was
set upon the chief Pilier, which heide it (having a Chain of Gold
hanging about her Neck, with a Scrolle thereto annexed, and a Roolette, with
a Branch of Olive which she held in the one and the other of her hands, in
form as you have heard before. But there was much more occasion of
astonishment, when he leuelyng his vewe on hie to contemplate the clear
brightness which issued out of the eyes of the said Image (which till then had
rested immouable) he perceived her to incline douneward, and to present him
with the Olive Branch, which she bare in her right hand. Which branch as
soon as he had received, there rose a sudden marvelous Lightning, with a
terrible Thunderclap, which was dispersed and vanished all soon away,
together with the Statue: whereat all the Troop wonderfully was amazed and
chiefly ye king, who as yet knew nothing of this enchau^tme^t: but enquiring
more of the matter, all the process thereof was to him recou^pted by those,
which were there tha^, where it first happened, who did not also forget to
declare unto him ye great fear, which they had that day. Then without further
inquiry, he entered into the Halle, where they had covered the Tables for
dinner: accompanied with a great multicude of his Barons, friends, and
knights, of whom, each one placed himself at the table, some on hie, some in
the midst, and some below according to their honorable degrees. Where if
they were well used and served with all fortes of Meats exquisite, I leave that
to those to skan which know how great Kings and liberal Princes are
accustomed to feast their friends, and to give entertainment to those whom
they favor and love: without omitting, to tell you how when they had dined,
the pleasant Daunces of all sorts, as Pauins, Galliardes, Measures,
Mattachines, Moresques and other such like, with Mummeries of a marvelous
strange fashion, and diverse manner, were not there wantyng: and the exercise
of the Ciprian Infant, was in no wise there forbidden the^. For I am assured,
that there was none, who) during the time, that the others daunced) drawyng to
her who^ among the Ladies hebeste affectioned, remained without kissyng, and
embrasyng her, with many an amourours toye, and delectable device: lettyng her
(perchance) to understand, his Martyredome, (if thereof he had aforehande any
hid within the marrowe of his mind) thereby to receive some comfort and ease.
But I believe, that the Dames and Ladies, belongyng to the Queen Bellizenne,
and other great Princes at that feast present, were so honest, that for
motionyng thereof, it was but lost time. For those that were led by the
only affection, and ardente desire, which they had to enjoy the pleasure
commonly (as it is called) amourous, or rather (as some would term it) a
cast of close contentation, by some amity more sincere, and to an other
better intention, so secret and cruel, that with all honest endeavor, they
enforce not themselves possibly to staunch the arde^cie, and appease the fire,
which their servants affirm do consume, and make them dye a thousand
times a day, through their blasyng beauties. But there were such compainie
within the Hall, and in each bypathe of the Palace, yt I dare not assure you,
whether there were any one (perchance) more pitiful then the rest, who
retyryng her self with her mate, behind the hangynges of some tappissarie, or
other secret Warderobe, to bar the sight or hearing of any person, were not
even there amoued with compassion of his desease, who more filed in speech
(peradventure) then his fellows, had preached to ber so well, that presently
she applied not a Cataplasme or plaster, necessary to his needy wound.
Nevertheless. I am not ignoraunte, that the Prince Grandilaor was in one
corner of the Hall, all alone with her, whose shinyng beauty by fittes badde
him live, or made him dye at pleasure, that is to wit, the Damozelle
Antiziliane whom he held between his arms, not daring to open and discover
the entiere and vehement passion, which without ceassyng tormented him:
whether it were because he was shame fast in showing it, or rather for that he
doubted her displeasure and refusal, if thereupon he made any disgression, too
tedious for her tender stomach. But in fine, the sharpnes and rigor of his
ragyng fire; burning the veil of this bashfulnesse, and surmou^tyng his
shiueryng fear, which to him seemed a stay, or let, in giuyng rest and
appeasement, to his dismeasured Martyrdom, he determined (chance what chance
might) seeing so passing an opportunity, to try the watch, and understand if
he were so well beloved of her, that he might obtain any medicinable salve to
recure his malady. And beginning with a voice enterrupted, with many sobbes and
sorrowful sighs, half tremblyng for fear, like him which is put in place of
judgment, to attend either his total delivery, or final end of his life
and misery: said to her on this sort:

Madame, not of power to support (without hastenyng of my last hence
departure) the cruel Martyrdomes, and pitiful passions, which do ransacke
and afflict incessauntlie my poor heart, ever since first the pearcyng
sparcles, of friyng fire, which come from out of those two clear Cometes,
wherewith your face is furnished and adorned, making way through the windows
of mine unadvised eyes, began to broile, and consume, by little and little, in
such sort, that windyng me to wander, from reason (which only makes
difference betwixt brute beasts, and manne) and to forget all guard and
respect due to your grace: I am enforced, to make my peticion to you, if
presumyng of your patience, and of the opportunity which presently offreth it
self to let you understand that, which till now I have kept secret from you,
it may therefore please you, excusing my presumption, and rashness, not to
take it against heart, if I have over holdlie aduau^ced my self to require you,
that you would not with yrkesome or loathsome disdain, any longer deny me that,
which only may restore to me again, the one half of my life: protestyng
that leaving here in your custody, the other moitie, you shall be reputed the
most cruel, and vncourtuous Damozell that lives in so reiectyng my suite.
But as he was purposed to proceed further herein, beginning to let fall
Riuerse of brackishe Tears, from his weepyng eyes: she cut of his complaint,
by these words.

Segniour Gradilaor (said she) I am astonned, and do much marvel and
muse, how you have dared to think, considering the amity, and ample love,
which you affirm to bear me, or at least wise (as I believe) you make
apparante by your deceiptfull, and Crocodilishe tears, to minister to me such
matter: and not to other end, as I think, the^ to betraie and deceive me, or
(after having by your glorious sweet language, bereft and robbed me of that,
which all the world can not once restore) to address your scoffs at my
great folly, in so sone relentyng to you, upon the request, which you make
to me. For well I know, that you men have your affections so light, that
there needs not but one small blaste of wind, or any other object (although
less then that whereof you talk of) to make you change and transporte them
thither and hither, to serve their present tournes and commodity accordyngly,
as you now pretend of us. Wherefore I hartly pray you, not to take it
straungely, if (for the conscruation of my Honor, which I have in greater
price, not only then of your passions and distresses, but also of my proper
life) you be denied, and suffer the repulse of the things, whereof you
demanded me. For I love better, that with mine Honor, I be demed (as you
determine) severe and ceurll, then with mine infamy (losyng that which so
charely I should keep) to be had in the reputation of an disordinate
Damozell, and a Maid of infamous life.

Which reply when she had so finished, the poor Paciente, hearing so hard a
sentence on him pronounced, stove so troubled with ire and annoye, that if the
maiden had not taken him by the hand, and led him into her chamber, to
repose him self, I believe he would have suddenly sounded before all the
Company. But while these things were a doing, I must tell you that the king
was no less idle in kissyng his Queen Bellizenne: For as he daunced with her,
they so mutually beheld, and cast such glauncing looks the one to the other,
with such fine and sweet countenance, that the dimmest of sight, might well
have deemed, what desire they had of yt joy, which so long had been reiourned,
In such forte, yt the King being in ye first course of the dance, more lusty,
brave, and well disposed, then he had been since his deliverance, or long
before, retired secretly, without semblaunce of any thing, into his chamber:
whither full sone after, the Queen having followed him, I leave you to ponder,
if in such liberty, as they had to content the one with the others appetites,
being enflamed as they were, the sweet daliance and amourous embracementes,
were in any wise spared. For why, as tells us the History, they so forgotte
them selves, in their delights and plays, that they remained more then an
whole hour, before they returned too end the dance in the Hall, deeming that
of the chamber, better. Which was chief cause, that shortly after the Queen
felt her beallie so big, that her garments were too little for her. For she
conceived a daughter, whom she awhile after, bare and brought forth, so
perfect of feature, that many brave Knights were enflamed with her love, and
she was named Polydame, of whom we will make more ample discourse hereafter.

And on this wise each one for his part, applied himself to pleasure, and to
content his mind the best he could: as when we see a fair and Sun shine
day, to be obscured, with a sudden shadow of a dark and duskie cloud
which covering the Sun, shows such sad cheer, that we poor souls, are
quite deprived of ye pristinate pleasure, and comfortable clearnes thereof:
their joys were interupted, by the arrival of a certain Page, attired in
yeallowe and blewe Velvet. Who entryng the halle, made inquiry for the Prince
Dorian of Spain: to who^, when he had a sight of him, and each one was placed,
to hear what he would, he thus spoke: High Prince, the fair Lady Amarille,
daughter to the king Belligent of France, has sent me to you, for that she
understood that you were in this Court, to present unto you on her behalf,
co^mendations condign to your highness: and also this letter (said he,
giuyng him a paper which he held in his hand) the which being read I pray
you to dispatche me right sone, that I may with diligence, returue according
to her commandment. Then the Prince Dorian, not without change of coullour
and countenance, having taken and read the letter to himself, found it thus
in tenor and effect.

The Lady Amarillas letter.
I would never have thought (Lord Dorian) that so much infidelity and
discourtesie, as I know now to consist in you, had found place of residence,
or dwelled in a knight so noble and valiaunte, as I have still reputed, and
esteemed you, until this time, that seeing evidently two imperfections so
great, to be possessed in you, that forgettyng the feruente amity, which
you to me professed, and likewise the faith which you to me promised, you
have been bold so impudentely to use the same toward me, without ever
giuyng you any occasion thereof: that I marvel that the heavens do not wax
read, and ashamed at this so great lightness, and inconstauncie, which
proceadeth from the imperfection of your judgment. The which feelyng too
suddenly and violently, a certain apprehension of love (that you have so often
preached how beauty, whereof the sooner to deceive me, you said I was
furnished, had so sore enflamed you, yt as you made sembla^t, you could rest
neither night nor day. But sone is the same flowen away, and the tractes
thereof defaced out of your memory, by the sight possible of some obiecte,
which has been more agreeable unto you. And this length of time by you
protracted and neglected (without seeing me, after your departure, when you went
toward her, which is cause of your, long absence) makes me to think and
suppose, and understand that you feinyng to seek out (wherewith as with a
sack you would cover your self) Floridamant king of Great Britain, are
presently in his court. Whereupon I have with great diligence, and at the
decease of the king my Father, addressed this messenger to bring unto you this
letter; thereby to burden you with the fault, wherein not unrightly you are
culpable, if incontinentely you come not toward her, who rests attendaunt
for your arrival, that then she may hear your excuses and iustifications in
this case.

Yours more then, her own, Amarille de Gaul.


The readyng of this Letter, so pinched the Prince Dorian, that he could not
abide to stay the rest of the day in the court of king Floridamant, but
incontinently mountyng on Horseback, and taking leave of the King and Queen,
who fain would, but could not stay him, he iourneyed straight to Gaulewarde,
to her whom he so loved: accompanied only with the Page which had brought him
the Letter, and his Squire: But in this point the History speaks not any
more of him, but that in a while after, he espoused the Lady Amarille, by whom
the first year of his Marriage, he had a Daughter named Angeliana, the best
featured in singularity of beauty, that was of her time in the world,
except fair Porphiria, Daughter to the Emper our of Constantinople: and
shortly after was crouned king of Spain, by the decease of his father.
Wherefore we let him rest and reign in his kingdom peaceably, and king
Floridamant also, until such time as occasion shall put us in mind, to
speak more of them. For that, the dearlyng of the Faierie staieth too long in
the Castle of the woodd of Cipres, which urges us to produce him for the into
the fields.

The Youth Gerileon, being come to the age of fiftene or sixtene years, the
Fairie Ozyris gave him an Harnis, enchaunted so and in such sort, that there
was neither Iron nor Stele (how sharp soever) which could in any wise pearce
it: also she gave him the brave Horse Lycocephal, and a good Sword, and having
turned the Lion which he had taken in the Forest into his first form, she
gave him also unto him for his Squire. And thus appointed, she sent him toward
the Emperor of Constantinople, to receive the Order of knighthoode, and of the
communication she had with him before his departure.

The eight Chapter.
NOw refteth hereafter (noble lordinges, and illustrious knights which
willynglie take pleasure to read the worthy deeds and memorable enterprises,
of those which have adorned and advanced our world) that I let you see a young
Warrior, the brauest and best skild in arms, the worthiest, puisauntest and
most magnanimious of any other, whereof ever mention was made. It is also for
you, other fair and gracious ladies (who are pricked with the pleasant
assaults, which love accustomably assigns to them, which humbly live
languishing in the prisons of cruel desire, tormentyng their hearts with a
continual amorous thought) that I show you of a young Princess accomplished
in all perfections of beauty, rather divine then humane, the liueliest
attaynted, and dispiteouslye enflamed, by the ardent and burning strokes which
proceeded from the person of the young Ciprian Infaunt, above any other under
the celestial vaute since the creation of our first Fathers, if you will have
patience to read and peruse this fine and delectable History. Wherefore ye
must understand, that the gentill Youth Gerileon remained so long at Ozyris
Palace in the wood of Cypres, with such pleasure and contentment as is
aforesaid: that he attained the xv. year of his age. At what time he was so
sage, gentie, modest and courteous, puisaunt and virtuous, that there was as
then none in the world, that in gifts, which either Art or Nature does by
the divine providence of God, bestow upon man, could in any point match him,
much less surpass him For he was so ta^, well made and proportioned in all
his lymmes and members, that one could scarce find any, which in largeness of
body, or pregnantnes of wit, could at that time be his equal: and at that
time (say I) for that, when he was come to man's age, he far surpassed and
excelled the stature of other men. For which cause, the Fairie Ozyris, leeyng
him already so great and puisaunt, thought that it was not for his profit, but
rather to degenerate from the Nobleness of the Place, where he took his
original. Wherefore desiryng naught but his profit and advancement, seeing
that, if he tarried long in that state, and continued any more in that
voluptuous and delicate trade of life, the prowess and valor which were in
him, should be so unprofitable, that they should help no more then a Treasure,
which liyng hid in the entrails of the Earth, serves not the use of any, she
would not hinder the honor and fame which he afterward atchiued, to abide
buried in the profound darkness of a perpetual silence. Wherefore one day
when he was alone in his Chamber, readyng in a book, in which kind of
exercise he took inestimable delight, she entered in: at whose coming the
Youth which was set, arose and saiuted her with an humble reverence, and she
also used toward him a reciprocal obeisau^ce, contrary to her acustomed
fashion. Then taking him by the hand, wherewith as yet he held his Hat, which
she put on his head, she led him to sit in a Chair, covered with Damask,
which stood near to her Bed side, whereon she leanyng, used to him these or
such like words.

My soune (for so she calde him still) seeing you are already come to such
ripenes, and encreasement of age (for the which I praise the almighty God,
which has made, and does govern all things) that as it seems, you shall
from henceforth be sufficient forcible, and strong to toil in the field, with
a cracklyng Corsselet upon your valiant shoulders: I am in opinion, that it
should be most good and profitable for you, and no less conueniente and fit,
that you were made knight, by the hands of some good Prince: not to let here
stippe, or rather steape the grau^d prowess and valiancie, that is in you,
among the chambers, gardens, and wooddes of this Pallaice, rather tha^ to
remain still to take your recreations and pastymes, in a place full of
delites, and mundane vanities, which are so alluring, and entice and flatter
so, with the sweetenes of their bitter baits, the hearts and minds of young
and youthful wightes, whereby they entangle and blind them in such sort, that
they make them forgette their duty (although both noble and gentle, they hold
them so well hampered) yt with great difficulty, they have no power most
commonly, to dispatche them of the same. Neither yield they ought else in the
end, but a perpetual dishonor, accompaignied with a too late repentance,
which after all this, has to feed upon, an infinite number of anguishes and
forrowes. I say not these things (my dearlyng) for any desire that I have
(contrary to your stomach) to send you hence: assuryng you, that I esteem my
self very happy, in having ministered unto you so good entertainment: But
forasmuch as I see, ye have not had yet until this present, occasion of any
miscontentmente. And this your absence shall be to me far more yrkesome,
then all other dolours that may in any wise betide me: But because I foresee,
by my Arts and Sciences, that it should be greater loss and damage, that the
haughty and illustrious feats of arms, which you are to bring to pass by
your valiauncie, should remain any longer in darcknesse, without enioiyng
their future clearenesse, and apparente light. Furthermore if you should
otherwise deal or do therein, you should degenerate greatly, from the
generositie of the place whence you proceaded which by your virtue and
valiauncie, you ought to illustrate and adorn, yet more then ever it was. If
you will believe me, and follow my counsel. I praise you in your presence,
because I know your nature so good, that for any laud that I can give you, you
would not (as in deed it is nothing decente) puff up your courage and stuff
your self with pride: no more then you would endure wrong, and vilanie dooen
unto you by any other, you not seeking perforce to resist it. And know that
too no other intent, I have brought you up, and nourished you with so great
care and diligence, as I have dooen, nor taken you from the hands of your
freindes in your Infancy, for other occasion, then to eschew the misfortunes,
and miserable destenies, which before hand I have seen for you prepared: to
which you could in nowise have resisted, without my succor: To the great
damage, and total ruin, both of you, and also of your noble house, which
thing had been lamentable. Wherefore I will and pray you, for your own
profit, that to morrow Morning you depart, for to go to Constantinople,
toward the good Emperor, to whom you shall make supplication, for the order
of knighthoode: and believe that as I am certain, he will not refuse to do
your demand: afterward to make prooffe of this great valiauncie, which is
in you. Assuryng you furthermore, that my succor shall shield you still, and
my aid assist you ever, to eschew the mortal and perilous encombraunces,
which I shall epsy to be to you hurtful. When she had ended her speech in
this order, the youth who attentively listened to her tale, yea, and not
without great marvel of such matters: answered her thus.

Madame, I am much agreued in this, that you have taken so much pains, in
vsyng so many words toward me, to do that, whereunto your bare commandment
might have brought me to obey without resistaunce in any wise: and wherein if
you had not proved me, I was purposed to pray you: considering the great
honors that diverse have acquired, by haughty and illustrious feats of
valiauncie: whereof I read in this book, which I held in my hand at your
entry: but seeing that of your good grace, it has pleased you to open me the
way, and heat the pathe of a voyage to me most agreeable, seeing (I say)
that it pleased you, I assure my self so well of the bounty and amity, which
you bear me, that you would not send me in such affairs, without Harness,
Horse, Pages, and other necessaries: Which when I have, I will not fail to
depart, when it shall please you to command me. And I marvel much of that
which you have said, that (desirous of my welfare) ye have ravished me out of
the hands of mine own friends, to make me so escape the destenie perilous (as
you say) for me prepared. For which seeing that it is so, I cannot render you
thanks as you deserve, besechyng you to explane unto me those speeches, or else
I shall never set my mind at quiet: Seeing that I suppose my self none others
child but yours. It is true in deed, that of any Father that I had ye never
as yet told me, and I know not what a one he was.

Soft, my freende (said the Faierie) deemed you me so doultishe or
indiscreet, that I would send you toward so great and noble a Lord, as the
Emperor of Constantinople is, to receive the order of knighthoode, without
furniture both of Horse and Harness, according to your calling? I promise you
to be as well thereof provided, as any Knight in the world shall be, and
better: neither shall there be any, that either in goodness of Horse or
Harness shall surpass you, to the end to make you redoubted and feared above
the rest, and to demonstrate the degree whence and whereof you are. Wherefore I
will tell you nothing until such time that through your virtues and
valiauncie (whereof your deeds shall yield clear testimony) you have merited
to be called and esteemed the Son of him who has begotten you: if not, as
well you think you be not my natural Son, but issued from a stock royal,
whereof I pray you speak no more: for at Gods appointment you shall well know
it, the regard whereof in all your deeds and enterprises, I pray you to have
above all things before your eyes, and the Honor of Ladies and Damozelles in
due recommendation together, also with the loyalty and fidelity of her,
which in short space shall rauishe you, of the best thing you have in you.
The youth without any reply made to her, either further of his Race, or any
other matter although very curious, noted and well marked, all that which the
Fairie had said to him: chiefly her last words, purposyng with him self,
that none should rauishe him of ought that he had: but he was more out of his
account then he thought. And having been silente a certain space, he said to
her: Madame, then I pray you, show me if it so please you, what furniture you
will bestow on me, to the end that to morrow Morning, I may find it all
ready, when it behooves me to depart, and also what Squire you will that I
have. Then the Fairie took the Lion, which the youth had found in the
Foreste, which as then lay stepyng under the Table like a Dog, and recityng
certain words of Enchauntemente, and annointyng him with a kind of licour
which she had, she caused him to receive the form of a youthful manne of
twenty years of age, or there about. And you must understand, that this was
Geliaste the Ioylie, Squire to the Queen Bellizenne, who in searchyng the
youth Gerileon at first, when he lost himself in the Woodde of Cipres was by
the Faierie, changed from his first form, into the likeness of an hideous
Lion, and had without waxyng old, in any wise, remained so till that time:
followyng usually the youth into every place like as the Dogs also, to the
chase: Wherein he killed multitudes of wild beasts. He also had the same
apparel which the other had, when he was first Metamorphosed, or rather (if
it be not lawful to empaire the Greek language) to say better, when as he
changed his first shape. At this thing both the Youth, and also the poor
Squire much maruailed. For the Squire remembered of nothing paste, no more then
as if he had been but even then borne: notwithstanding that he was the same,
and had like Sense as he had before.

But the Fairie addressyng her speech to the Youth, said to him: My freende,
see here is now the Squire which I meant to give to you for servant, when you
brought him to me at the first: and you Geliaste (said she to the Squire) see
here your Lord and Master, who^ I will that you serve, and acco^panie in all
that, wherein he shall have need, and through all places where he shall pass.
Now (moreover she said) you want nothing more but Horse and Harness. And
taking him by the hand, she led him over the steps, which stood against
a base Court, wherein when they were come down, the Youth saw the most
gallant, brave, great, and best made Horse that ever man saw, since the
death of Bucephall king Alexanders Horse the Great: of whose kind and breed
the Faierie had so wrought, that she had recovered this of a stranger
Thessalion called Philonicus: who of two fair Horses which he had, sold the
one to king Alexander for thirtene Talentes, that is Bucephall, and this
whereof we speak, to the Faierie Oziris for eightene, which was called
Lycocephall, for that that he had on his forehedde, the form of a Wolfes
hedde, and was far fairer and greater then the other. For the Fairie had
always after her buiyng of him, kept and guarded him well in her Fairie: so
that he was in no point, either waxen older, or empaired. And this was dooen,
purposely for to make a present thereof unto Gerileon, as well to him
appartained. Who seeing him so fair, was thereof joyous, and fain he would that
it had as then been day, that he might have departed, and to have mounted on
his back. For he took him by the bridle, out of the hands of the Nymphe
Aegle: which having not long before, brought him out of the Faierie, by the
commandment of Oziris her Mistress, held him as yet: so he mountyng lightly
upon him, without aid of Stirrope (although he were big and mighty, more
then any other as then to be found) caused him four or five times to fetch
the carrire nimbly, and to gambolde lustily, from the one side of the Court
to the other, and made him to gallop so impeteouslie, that besides that, he
went more swifter then any Swallowe, he made the earth tremble under his
feet, in such sort, as never was before so seen: wherein the Youth took such
great pleasure, to make him turn, and pass to the one side, and to the
other, without any spurs at all, that if the Faierie had not said, that she
would go show him the Harness, which she would give him, I think that he
would not have alighted in one whole hour. But after she had told him
thereof, the great gladness that he had to see it, made him descend
quickelie, and to follow her into her Cabinette. From whence she brought store
of harness, the most sumptuous, industriously engraven, and most richely
gilded, that was possible to see: without any other paintyng in the shield,
then a great Cross of gold, which stretched from the one side to the other,
in a field of Azure, which was Enchaunted in such sort, that no Yro^ nor
Steel (how hard so ever) could in any wise harm it: but rather contrarily,
the harder and violenter that the stroke which fell upon it was, the more it
hurt him which gave it, then him which received it. For in steed of enteryng
or percing into it, the Sword, Spear, Clubbe, or other such warlike
instrumente, rebounded so high into the air, that often times it fell out of
his hands, which was the owner thereof, and used it. This Harness became and
fitted him so well, as though it had been of purpose appointed and made for
him. And after this, she fetched out of her Cabinette, a Sword large, fair,
and of marvelous good edge: the Scaberde whereof, was of the skin of a
great Serpente, which was slain by Hercules, at what time he was very
young: The which was so finely trimmed, that although it was not garnished
with diverse Diamondes, and other precious stones: yet being set against the
Sun, it would have rendered a far finer light, then gold it self. It is
most true, that the Sword was not altogether fit to the Scabarde: for the
puissaunte Nabot kept as then, that, which was made for it, which was the
best that was in the world. For there was no Harness, of what goodness so
ever (no although hardened by enchau^tmente) that could resist it, without
being cut, and mangled in pieces. And it was called Duransarde, which the
said Nabot had conquered, and gotten from the terrible and hideous Giaunte
Scarafarab, who was of the lineage of Encellade, one of them which in times
paste, would have conquered Heaven: and were with Lightnyng destroyed by
Jupiter (as it is said in the first Chapter of the third part of
Chronicles of Brandismell, compiled by Galarx) whereof the Faierie Oziris was
greatly grieved. For never could she possibly recover it, although she had
already gotten the Scaberde, wherein she gave this, that I now speak of
(which was matchable in highness, and almost in making and goodness to
Duransarde) to the Youth of the Faierie (for so must we hence foor the name
him). Which caused her greatly to doubt, least any evil should chance him
there, because it cut what soever it came nere, yea, Enchaunted Armor also
(as I have a-afore said) and which was worse, it was in the custody of one,
which could better use it, then any knight, as then in world. She had also
great fear, least any sinister accidents should happen unto him, by the
means of any Iron Lance Enchaunted: against which, his Armoure, and others
what soever, had no power to resist: which was in possession of an other
most brave, and valiaunte knighte, Son to king Belligent of France, called
Diodamas, which was given to his said father the king of France by the noble
king Brandismell, to whom the Faierie Oziris had made present thereof, at what
time hefought with the mighty Giaunte Perciuall. Whereupon she advertised the
Youth, that he should endeavor to get both the Sword and Lance, as soon as
he should be made knight. Who after that he had thanked the Faiery, for all
this fair and rich furniture, which he gave in custody to his Squire, he
retired straight ways thence, by reason that the darkesome night, began as
then to chase the bright some Day, from out of the Celestial Manor, to the
end to take his rest, that he might the sooner be stirryng in the next Morning.

The youth of the Faierie, departed with his fair and gracious Faierie
Oziris, to go to ward the Emperor of Constantinople, who gave him the order of
Knighthoode: and the Lady Porpheria got him with his Sword: which dooen,
he would have departed, to have sought strange adventures in Great Britain,
but the Emperor auailed so with his words that he stayed him, and made him to
promise to tarry fiftene days in his service, whereby that chanced to him,
which you shall hereafter hear.

The ix. Chapter.
TRVE it is (Noble Lords and Ladies) that whatsoever great heaviness and
desire of fleepe he have, which feels in his head the Hammer of some great
Affairs of his own: So is it, that the rest and tranquillity of Senses are
berefte him (yea although his bed be never so good) by the pleasant
detention of the same. For the Youth of the Fairies, (having withdrawn him
self into the Chambers, after his Harness which Ozyris had given him) was
brought in thither, he laid him full soon in his bed: where he began to
sleep well for a while, thinkyng to rife before day the next morning,
according to his earnest desire. But scarce had he remained the space of one
hour, in the forgetfulness of this sleep, but that he awaked: and supposing
that it had been now broad day, be cause of the great glimeryng of the
Moon, which entered into his Chamber by the windows of the same (which he had
of purpose left open) he hastily called his Squire, which was laid in
another Chamber next to his, to look if Mournyng as yet in any wise apeared:
and caused him to cloathe himself to watch (and so to advertise him, when the
day began to draw near: expressly enioynyng him not to fail to aduertife
him thereof incontinently, and hereupon sent him into the stable to dress and
make ready his Horse, against his speedy departure: all which, he did
willyngly. But whilst he was about the same, the Youth not able to sleep,
did naught but ponder and premeditate with him self, how and in what order he
should demand his knighth ode of the Emperor of Constantinople, and what
condign thanks he should yield him, after the receipt of the same. But as soon
as he had builded any fair. Bulwark how to atchiue the same, it was
straight ways stricken out of his mind, by the invention of some other to him
seeming better. And in this cogitation abode he so long, that Geliaste was
returned from the stable: whom a new he caused to set open the Windows, to
behold if the glimmeryng light of Cynthia would as yet depart and give place,
in the Celestial vaute of the Mournyng sky, Messenger of her Brother Phoebus.
But he answered him, noe, (because of the great desire that he had to sleep)
although Aurora began as then to wax red: which brought to pass that the
Youth, and likewise his poor Squire fell both a sleep, till such time that
the Sun, was well eleuate from the Indian Regions, and began to cast his
Rays upon their faces. Whereof Geliaste which in his Clothes was couched
upon a little field bed in his Masters Chamber, being first awaked, run
half a sleep as he was, to awake the Youth: who much blamed him, that he
had not done it before tha^: but he swear to him by his honesty, that he had
called him two hours since: but because of his sound sleep, he had suffered
him to rest still: and better to confirm his saying, he said that he had well
broken his fast, and drunken a good Cup of white Wine which was given him.
Wherefore the Youth blamyng his too much sluggishnesse, converted and turned
the anger on him self. And taking in great haste his apparel, by the help of
his Squire, was quickly clothed and also harnised. Than descendyng down into
the Halle, found his breakefaste all ready, where he had scarce either eaten
or drunk, but he mounted upon his brave Horse Lycocephal, and his Squire upon
an other: and after leave and congee taken of the Noble Fairie Ozyris, and of
the fair Naiades, who at his departure wept and mourned bitterly, he departed
and went straight toward the Port, where he found a Bark full fraughted
and appointed ready to pass, wherein when he was embarked, the Pilot launched
forth and hoiste up sails, the wind being to the^ favorable. And so they
passed still on, one whole Month, without any danger of shipwreck, or any
other tempeste. Atende whereof they took Land, in a Haven before the City of
Constantinople, late in an evening. And then when the Morning was come, the
Youth of the Fairies being landed with his Squire Geliaste, mounted on
Horseback all armed except his Head and Arms, which were adorned with very
fair and rich Garments, went on straight toward the Palace of the
Emperor, which as then was at Divine service: and therefore he remained on
horse back still in the Court, attendyng to see his coming from out of the
Chapel, not without giving great occasion of astonishmente, to many Knights
and Gentlemen there walking, who took great pleasure to behold the singular
grace and incomparable beauty of the Youth: and by his only look and
pleasant gravity, they judged that he was descended of some noble house, and
full of manly courage (as in verity there was nothing otherwise to their
wenings, nor contrary to their esperau^ce) And whiles they were thus busy, to
behold him as it were with admiration, he gave two or three pricks with his
Spurs, to the good Horse Lycocephal: who thereat vautyng into the Air with a
marueisous might and nimblenesse, soon sent back the beholders from his
Master: who were now more astonnied at the goodness of the Horse, and at the
grace of the Knight, which had pricked him. And during the while that he thus
dallied with his Horse, the Lady Porphiria, daughter to the Emperor, the
goodliest and fairest Gentlewoman, which ever was in the world, was as then
in one of the Gallaries of the Palace, over against her Chamber: taking
singular great pleasure in contemplatyng of the Youth of the Fairies. Of
pleasure sothly (say I) for she not able to satisfy her self with the sight
of his singular beauty and grace, was so ententiue to behold the points and
pricks which afterward pierced her as you shall understand, that she
leanyng and restyng on her two arms in the gallerie, was so ravished with
marvel and astonishement, that one would have judged some sound sleep, had
sealed her settled eyes: when as out of her Chamber there issued out a most
fair and young Damozell called Harderina, which was daughter to the king of
Hungary, and Cousin to the Lady: who with beauty and brauitie of Graces, was
as well endewed, as any other there to be found in all Greece: only
excepting the Lady Porpheria, who in all points glittered more perfect, not
only before her, but also before all other which were under the cope of
heaven. For I believe that nature had expressed in her, all the precious
treasures of perfect beauty, the most rare and singular, that she had in
store from the beginning of the world, so prodigally and with such cunnyng,
that fince the memory of man, under heaven was never seen such a piece of
work: were it that any other Ladies or Damozelles (though full famous in
Feature) chanced to approache near unto her, one would have deemed that
Nature had dispoyled them of their dew and requisite beauty, for to bestow
it wholly on her: and that they seemed foul to show her more singular fair and
perfect. And here it forces not to make comparisons with that beauty so
famous, which caused the utter ruin and overthrow of proud I^ion, with the
destruction of the Troiane king, his children and subjects, and much less,
that, of the pompous proud Roman, whom the Senate caused to be canonized:
to cover her impudicitie. Yea we may imagine, that if the goddess whom the
Poets feign to be mother to him which causes us love, had been set by her,
her beauty had had more light, then Diana has of clearness, being
adioygnaunte to her brother Phoebus. But what is it for me to amaze my self
here in describyng of beauty, because of her inestimable perfection:
considering yt the most skillful in eloquence, and those which have the
faculty to discover with greater Emphasis (if so I may say) and abundance
of flowyng Phrases, should be well wearied in vnwindyng this as it is worthy,
therefore now let us reclaim our digressions. The maiden Haderina seeing her
fair cousin Porphyria so profoundly pensive, requested of her what she so
busily beheld, who as it were newly awaked out of a dead sleep, said thus
to her: I pray you dear Consine mark well this Youth which is below, if
he be not singularly proportioned and of a passing grace: and also skillful,
in so gallantly guidyng his courageous Horse: verily Cousine, (answered the
Maiden) you say well, know you not whence he is, or what he would? I promise
you said the Lady, I never saw nor heard of him till now.

These and such other small communications had the two Maidens together, so
long till at the last the Emperor arrived: who coming from out of his
Chapel, entered the great Halle of his Palace, having in his Train many
brave Knights and Gentlemenen, followyng him. Which things the gentle Youth
of the Fairie beholding, descendyng incontinent from his Horse, which he
delivered to keep to his Squire, entered incontinently after the rest, and
apperceiuyng the Emperor placed in his Imperial Seige, to deliberate upon
certain matters, he kneelyng humbly before him, spoke on this manner.

Most puisaunte and most virtuous Emperor, I deem undoubtedly that you and
semblably all this noble Assistance, do greatly merueile, in that I have so
temerariously, and vnrenerentely dared to present my self poor soul, before
the highness of your Imperial Majesty: doubtyng least this my audacitie and
rashenesse, which I have used herein, will turn toward me, your
displeasure, and be odious to all the rest, if I had not such confidence, in
the consideration, bounty, wisdom, clemency, lenity, and other virtues,
wherewith (as a rich and pompous Jewel is illustrified and pollished with
Pearls and precions Stones) so are you fraught and adorned: that not only you
will willingly pardon mine indiscretion, but also I trust in your great
bountifulness and courtesy, that you will in no wise denic me of that which
I am purposed to request of you that is to wit, that I may receive the order
of knighthoode by your hands, and for that, I have heard you above all others
far extolled) I have been desirous thereof ever from my Cradle. The Emperor
who whilst he thus spoke, had his eyes and ears bent to regard and hear such
witty words and so good a grace: taking him by the Arms, caused him to stand
up before him, before he had fully ended his speech: knowing even by his
pleasant gravity, that he could not choose but be come of a good house and
Princely race, and gave unto him this gracious answer. Fair sir and friend of
mine, although it were not true yt your youth could not excuse you, if (as
contrary it is) you had used any rashness or temeritie in making to me the
request which late you did: yet nevertheless ye great beauty, and singular
countenance which I note in you, and likewise the honest manners and behauour
which you have observed in this point, would constrain me, not only to
condiscende (which I offer you as now) to have that which you demanded, but
also, if there had appeared auie indiscretion in you, they would have incited
me, to remit and pardon it totally. Assuryng my self (although as yet you
seem too tender of age, to be called to such vocation) that if the bounty of
your heart be correspondent to the beauty and appeeraunce of valor which I
deem and conjecture to be in you, you are sufficient and capable to discharge
such a charge as well as any other that now lives whatsoever: and for that
cause there rests no more as now, but that you go to prepare your self, as
the custom is, for to receive the order of knighthoode, when as you shall
please and be thereunto ready. Then the Youth, thanking him humbly as well he
could: retired secretly thence, to go make his prayers in the Chapel of the
Palace as the custom was, where re remained till it was the next day
morning, at what time he came to present himself to the Emperor, who dubbyng
him with the Neck stroke put on his right Spur, and the Lady Porphyria who
had scene him come, descendyng down, girt his Sword about him, by the
commandment of her father. Which to do, she was well pleased: and the
Youth who (whiles she did her deuoyre in this behalf, much marueiling at
her miraculous beauty) was not ill contented that the chiefest, fairest and
beautifullest Princess under Heaven, did unto him so great a service. This
done: the Emperor, who the more he beheld him and saw him so garnished in all
points, the more he was willing to wit, who he was, he required and asked of
him his birthe, and the estate of his race and progeny. To which the youth
made a most civil answer, that he was of the Realm of great Britain, but
of none of his Parents, had he any knowledge: and that for this cause it might
please him to excuse him, if he were constrained herein to keep silence: true
it is (said he) that I know well, neither will I conceal it from you (most
noble Lord) that I was nourished by a Fairie, who sent me toward you so
furnished as ye see, and she is called Ozyris. The Emperor who aforetime had
heard talk of the Fairy, deemed and doubted that she had kept him for some
occasion (as most certain it was) being proceeded from the progeny of the
noble kings of Great Britain, as she had aforetime done by the virtuous king
Moridant, father to Brandismel, which was the first extoller of that
magnificent Realm, and much marueiled thereat. Nevertheless without more
talk with him, he commanded some of the Assistauntes, that they should
conduct him into the Empresses Chamber, to pass forth the time with her
Damozelles, and to discourse with them of many an honest and amorous devise,
as well (it seemed) he could. But the Youth willing to excuse him self herein,
prayed him humbly that it would please him to give him leave to return into
Great Britain, there to seek adventures: so to assaie if the order of
knighthoode, which he had obtained, were well or evil employed upon him. And
also that he had great desire to Just and Combat with king Floridamant,
which as then was had in prise for the best and valiauntest knight in the
world. The Emperor not well pleased in that he would so soon depart from his
Court, said to him. Why (fair sir) will you so soon abandon us and our
Court, not in any wise feasted or cheared there as yet, according to your
calling? I promise you, that if you will remain with us but the space of
fiftene days, that besides the good and honest entertainment which I hope
thereby to bestow on you. you shall here also find knights both brave and
strong to make proof of your valor and prowess, seeing your ardente desire
is so to do. For I must one of these days make a most sumptuous Feast,
during the which, neither Justice nor Tourneis shall be lackyng: wherein you may
experiment your valiance in this behalf: thereby to prepare your self the better
against the worthy knights of great Britain, which are the flowers of
chivalry in the world, and chiefly as you say against king Floridamant, who
has not his match under heaven. And I suppose yt otherwise it would sooner
turn to your dishonor then advancement, and that it should rather be imputed
to your rashness then courage. The Youth hearing the Emperor speak with so
great modesty and chariness, conceived a certain singular love of his
prudencie, and such a one as forced him with a reverent fear not to offend
his hestes, neither to do any thing disagreable unto his mind: and knew that
he had erred in willing to depart, having received far above his deserts,
so much honor of so great a lord as he was, without doing him any deed of
duty of service. Wherefore to cover his fault, he said unto him. Seeing it
pleases your Majesty to do me so much honor, as to retain me in your
court, it shall be then my duty to go about to do you the best service I can:
Assuryng you that no worldly felicity, could happen as now more greater, nor
more agreeable to my mind, then to have the mean hereby to satisfy your hestes
and desires. And over that, I shall think my self most happy, it I may
gratify your contentment, in dooyng you ought which male be to you pleasant
and agreeable: that I may rid my self out the bands of foul Ingratitude:
wherein I were fast linked, if I did not put in practice to atchiue your
commaundementees, and accomplish your desires: Seeing you have already so
bound and made me yours, that it is paste my power, ever to show you so much
service, but that still I shall be far in your debte and danger. Wherefore I
am not of power (since so it pleases you) to pass the limits of your will.
The Emperor well content and satiffied, with the gracious answer of the
Youth of the Faieries, commanded again a Damozell, which was there
present, that she should conducte him to see the Empress Chamber: Whereto she
promptly obeyed. And taking him by the hand, she led him near where she
was, accompanied with so many fair Ladies and Damozelles, that at his
entrance within the Chamber, he seemed to se so many Angels in Paradise, as
there were Ladies waityng about the Empress: who talkyng with certain
Princes there with her, she made them stand somewhat a side, the better to
see the Youth of the Faieries: who enteryng into the Chamber, saluted her
humbly: to whom when she had used like courtesy, seeing him so fair and
courteous, she could not stick (being much astonished to see a young manne so
comely) to say to them which were about her: I believe that if this Youth have
the bounty and prowess of the mind, equal and matchable to the making, and
proportion of his body, he will be the best and worthiest knight under the
Skies. And whiles she said these words, the Youth being approached more
nere, she began to ask him of his birthe, and why he was come into a
country so far, to receive the Order of knighthoode, seeing there was in
Great Britaigne, King Floridamant, who was reputed the most royal King, and
valiant Knight of the whole Earth, and such other odd talk: whereto he
answered so aptly that she remained well satisfied. But after that she had
ended her speech, her Damozelles, which still attended when she would leave
him, for them, began here and there to enforce them selves, to please him
the best they could, both in words and other things: to each of whom he
answered well and honestly, according to their demand: assuring you that none
gave him a quippe in any cause, but that he requited her again quickly, with
the like coin. But he which well knew how to shifte between two walls,
was scarce contented to be conversant with them, for that there he could not
see one spark of the beauty of her, which girded his Sword about him,
wherewith he was somewhat attached: for that, she which had cast her eyes on
him so attentively, began already to have her senses troubled, through the
love of him: whereupon she was retired secretly into her chamber much pensive:
at whose issuyng forth, that chanced unto him, which you shall hear.

The Lady Porphyria being come out of her Closet, to enter into her mother the
Empress Chamber, seeing the Youth so fair and comely, was so attainted with
his Love, that she fell in a sound before the Empress her mother, and the rest
of her company: who thereat, being much astonished and abashed, conveyed her
as well as they could, into her Chamber again: where she having recovered her
late lost senses, the Princess Harderine her cousin, which would have known
the cause of her desease, went also out of the chamber, for that the Lady made
denial to tell it unto her, and listenyng at the door, heard her co^plain of
the of the Youth of the Faierie. Wherefore going into the Hall, and findyng
the Damozell Marcelle, she recounted to her the Ladies words, who going
thither to visit her, had with her such communication as I will recoumpte
unto you.

The. x. Chapter.
Fatal desteny, daughter to God almighty, having once by the commandment of
her Father, purchased some misfortune, to any mortal wight: what prudence,
policy or human devise so ever a man applies, to euite and shun this
eternal decree of things, yet is it so still, that she rages, and has
swaye over all our dooges. I say this, for that, what means soever the Lady
Porphyrie could invent, to eschew and flee the love of the Youth of the
Faierie, which as now began to weaken the strongest, yea the soundest of her
inner parts: yet notwithstanding was it vnpassible (Destenie so apointyng) to
exempte her self, from any part of those amourous cogitations, which through
their violence, took still increase within her clogged heart, with this want
of senses, which you shall hear. Wherein it is to be noted yt whiles the wise
and gentle Youth of the Faieries, conuersaunt amongst the Damozelles of the
Empress, did hold them in, with many a merry ieste, and honest devise, though
therein he took no great pleasure, because he saw not her, whose Idea of
perfection he had somewhat imprinted in his heart, to wit, the fair Lady
Porphyrie, who as then was of the age of fowertene or fiftene years (an age
without doubt, capable enough of the contagious scorchinges of cruel Love)
behold where she came half sad and sorrowful into the Halle, of purpose to
see him. Nevertheless, feignyng that she came not for other occasion then to
solace, and sport her self accordyngly, as sometimes she had accustomed with
the Maids of the Empress her Mother. Emongst whom, in evil time apperceiuyng
the fostered son of the noble Faierie Oziris, and having espied her coming,
did his endeavor to salute her, and she reciprocally also rendered the like:
seeing him (I say,) so fair and beautiful, that it was impossible to say
ought more, she was so ententiue to entertain him in salutations, with
semblaunce of likyng, as no less he did to her, that the sweet denime of
Love, which on this wise is supped, began to inebriate the hearts of the one
and of the other: so much that the Vermilion red, which retired from the
middle of their visages, gave conjecture to some of the Damozelles (who were
more skilled and conuersaunt in the case then others) of that, which was
happened. For there wanted not much but that ye Youth (transported with a
beauty unmatchable, and never having felt such impressions of love in his
fantasy before) had almost fallen down in a slumber: but taking heart to him,
he dissembled his dolor the best he could. But the lady, were it yt she was
charged with more matter of this Marrowe then he, or that she was less
courageous and able, to bear out these bruntes, bestowed by the little God, on
the^, whom he inwrappeth in his nets, was through fancy forced to fall in a
sou^de suddenly in the place where she stood. Whereof we need not doubt if
the Empress and her Damozels, who saw her fall, were afraied, and marueiled:
for they thinkyng that she was dead, with an infinite number of cries, and
lamentations most pitiful, ran speedely on this side and on that, to lift
and raise her up, still tremblyng and astonished for fear, which they had,
least she were dead. But after they had felt her poulces, findyng her yet a
live, they appeised and moderated the vehemency of their dolours, to
recomforte the Empress: who having her heart cloied with distress, could not
speak a word: saying one to an other, that some defaulte of heart had
surprised her: or else that not having eaten any meat that Morning, her senses
and stomach failed her: some other said that possibly it was her goune
being to straight for her. And thus these women Philosophatyng upon her
sudden sounynges, they took and carried her charelie into her chamber: where
being laid upon her bed, they cast certain drops of cold water in her
visage, and then she began to reuerte, and come again to her self: and
openyng her eyes, she was altogether amazed to se so many people busied about
her, and chiefly to hear her cousine Harderine (weepyng so bitterly, that
kissyng her she watered her cheeks with tears) to call her with a loud voice.
Wherefore with a feeble and low voice, the Lady badde her, that she should
shut all the windows of the chamber, and then cause all the rest of the
Damozelles to depart, because she had great desire to sleep. Then the lady
Harderine asked her saying: Will you not that I tarry here with you (Madame)
that if in case any necessity perturbe you, I may prevent it to my power?
That is as it shall please you, cousin, said she: and incontinently all the
Damozelles went out, and made report to the Empress, how her daughter was
somewhat better amended then before, and that this sounyng proceeded not of any
other cause, then of the quaisinesse of her stomach, which had surprised her,
in that she had not rested the Night before, because of the Alarmes which the
Giaunte Ferclaste, and his two brethren, made nightly to the City, wherewith
the Empress was somewhat satisfied, and ceased her tears.

The Lady Harderine, who remainyng solie in the Lady Porphyria her Chamber,
willing to know the cause of her dolor, began to fetch her in with these
words: I am greatly astonished and abashed (Madame) whence or how you should
have this great default of heart, that so sudden lie you should fall down
soundyng before the Empress: do you feel your self evil? Is there any
interior malady, or secret sorrow within your corpse, which through his
violence, has caused this auoydance of senses? I pray you not to conceal it,
but rather to communicate it freely to me, so that it may be amended. For if
you secretly shroude and shadow it, I assure you, your self shall be the
speedy procurer, and seker of your own decaie, which if it should once
chance, I should not long after live. Wherefore I pray you once again my
sweet Mistres (said she in kissing her) vouchsafe to make me know your
malady. Ah cosine (said she to her) think you me so sottishe, indiscreet,
and such an enemy to my self, that if I felt any evil to anoye me, whereto
the Phisicions might apply the order of amendment, that I would conceal it
from you, having heretofore manifested to you, all the motions of my mind, and
secret thoughts that I ever suffered? The Lady Harderine hearing her so
speak, had at the first great fear, least she had felt some corporal
malady within her self, dangerous and incurable: but having pondered somewhat
apart upon her speeches, she doubted suddenly that perchance she was pricked
with the perilous darte of Love, which only is incurable, either with
Herbs or Siropes: Wherefore to lighten her doubt, she thought good to try
the watch further, saying on this sort:

And how then Madame does the cause of your doloure, and sounyng proceed from
any malady, which the Phisicions by no means can cure? I can not rightly
deem, what desease paineth you, seeing there is no sickness so sore, that Sir
Sagibell your father the Emperors Physician, who is the most skillful and
tried man in his Art, can not by his medicines give some recure and help
unto. Cousin (replied the fair Lady) you know well, that I never concealed
from you any of my secrets, though very private, were they never of so great
importance, And therefore I will not now hide from you my langour, seeing you
are so destrous to know it: and that which I answer, proceeds not from
ought else, but of the great desire I have to sleep. Wherefore since ye know it
presently, I pray you no more to disquiet me, but do so much as depart the
chamber, that then I may sleep the more at my ease: And an hour hence you
may return to awake me, at what time you shall perceive my malady much
amended. I se well, said Harderine (doubtyng more now then asore, of an eele
under the stone) that the case stands not so, that you may hide it well
enough. For the Fire was never yet in a place so secret, neither hid in a
den so deep, but that some smoke thereof appeared and was seen: at which
words she went for the of the chamber, shuttyng the door after her, and
feining to go along the Gallerie, correspondente to the issue of the same, she
went not far, but returned softely again, to harken at the door, if in any
point she could hear the distressed Lady complain: who as soon as she saw
her departed, had begone her plotte to this purpose, drawyng most sorrowful
sighs, from the bottom of her heart. Woe is me, what passion of mind might
this be that I feel? O miserable and desolate that I am, what strange dolor,
what unknown alteration dde I feel, to martire and crucify my heart, with
such outrage, that I attend naught else but the arrival of that cruel and
inhumain death, to end my doleful days and to deliver me from the passions,
and anguishes wherewith like friyng fire, I now still feel my bowels to burn?
Behold O thou Serpentine Youth, replete with poison: how lucklesse and
unfortunate for me the day was, wherein thou did here arrive, and come in
presence: for since first I saw thee, I know not how nor whither mine
affection is transported. I know not where my tender heart is become, I know not
what rage, and what fury has surprised and holde^ my senses and raison so
captiuated, yt I cannot (alas) I cannot see nor know, how nor by what means I
may deliver my self from this mischaunce and misery, without great loss and
blemish of mine honor. Ah cruell^^^ felonious and pitilesse: Is it possible
that (as well it appears) you art come to this Coast for no other occasion,
then to cause me to pine in this dolor and distress, by thy beauty and
behauour, which I well believe thou haste bought or borrowed by Charms and
Enchauntementes of some skillful Fairie (yea rather Sorceresse) which has
sent thee expressly hither, so to captiuate and deprive me of my pristinate
and ancient liberties* But alas sot and senseless fool that I am: suffices
it not me enough to be vexed and tormented, but that therevppon I must also
curse him, who never in his life either wrought or thought my displeasure? and
who (perchance) if I required him thereto would not seem to deny me his
service. For if he knew that for his love I languished as I do, I am
ascertained by the affability, bounty and courtesy, wherewith (as I surely
conjecture) he is complete and furnished, that he would be much vexed and
agreeued at mine unfortunate encombraunce: not having as I suppose, given any
attempt either in thought, word or deed, to procure or work never so little
woe or displeasure, whereof I may justly accuse, him. I can not therefore
imagine from whence it is, that this trance now troublyng my Soul,
proceeds, if it be not from the fountain of frettyng love. The which being
natural, as often I have heard say, and now in some part have proved, it is
great injury, that I should blame him so: yea rather I ought to reprehend mine
own nature, or the cruel desteny, guider of my years, which (yea and
possibly for my prefermente) has ordained that he shall one day be the
Lord and true Master of my heart and body likewise. For the which cause I
will enforce my self yet still, cloakyng the color of mine ill chance the
best that I can, to bring him, if he yet be not so much to obaye me as I am
at his commandment: in that he can not choose, but that I may love him,
having his perfections imprinted in me with so sure a Seal, that the process
of time is in no wise able to deface it: Seeing that the love which I entende
to use, is a thing holy and constituted of God on hie. And thereon let come
what will: let the Emperor my Father fret and fume hereat at his pleasure: let
all things herein turn vpsidedoune, if it may chance that in any wise I
may understand, that he is atteinted and caught with the same sickness that
I am. But seeing that I my self can not bring this to pass, and because also
that my Malady which proceeds from love, has this particularitie in it
self, that it may receive no redress, if it be conceiled and kept secret, I
am in mind to discover and make it known to my Cousin Harderine, and to the
Lady Marcella, who not bewraiyng me, shall gene me counsel in this mine
hard affair. When she had ended her speech to this purpose, the Maiden
Harderine which was at the scoute watch, hearing this resolution, went away
thence, making the smallest noise she could, and so passed through the Gallerie
into the Empresses chamber, where having found the lady Marcella (who was a
woman right wise and honest, widow to the late Duke of Chalcyde: to whom,
because of her modesty and demeaner, was given the custody of the young lady
Porpharia, she recompted to her all the complaints, which of her Cousin she
had lately heard. Whereat she not greatly marueiled: as one which doubted, by
the countenaunces and behauors of lovers, in doing the duty of courtesy, of
that which was veritable and true in deed. Wherefore* she and Harderine hand
in hand went into the young ladies chamber, who^ they found sadly walkyng up
and down: who discriyng them, died her face with a more joyful hew and
show, then her heart had of contentment: and adressyng her speech to
Harderine she said: My sweet cousin is it not true, that when I told you I had
slept, I should be better? Aha, said the other, which knew the greatest
secrets of her heart, you have not as yet the mean to be so whole, as to us
ye make semblance: for the desease, whereof I heard you not long since
complain, receives not so soon recure, without apliyng of an other remedy,
the^ you have yet had. What Cousine, (said the young Lady) of what Malady
have you heard me make my moan, whereof I am not yet rid and delivered of?
Of the fever which proceeds of the heat of Cupids burning infections, said
she. Porphirie, seeing that her Pot was discovered, and her Secrets known,
caused them both to sit by her and said. Although it should be so that you
had in no wise known my misfortune: yet in no wise could it so continue, that
you being the persons only in whom I have confidence, more then in any others
whatsoever, I would have hidden from you any of my sinister fortunes, and
distresses: knowing you ever to have continued loyal and faithful toward
me: and so that I have no cause to complain my self, since I have never
concealed and covered from your so laudable taciturnitie, all that (although of
great importau^ce) which I have still made you partakers of: which makes me
hope, that not to purchase my anoyaunce or displeasure, but rather to succor
me in this my so vrgente affair, you would not begin at this time,
considering the consequence of the deed, from whence the question comes: and
what danger I have used at the first, to discover it unto you. I pray you
(dear Cousin) be not thereat displeased. For though I was loath to make you
privy of it, yet it is not good so to do things rashely, without
premeditatyng what issue it may have and consultyng thereof, which was the chief
cause, yt assured of your loyalty, which never yet failed me, I was of purpose
to imparte my secrets to you both. I know it well (said Harderine) for if I
had not heard your resolution, which did manifest unto us the cause of your
Malady (whereof we need not now to trouble you with talk, seeing we are
sufficiently informed of the matter it self) I would have had regard not to
have so manifested it to Maistres Marcella, and to bring her hither, for fear
of doing a thing displeasaunte unto you. But intendyng that, whereof you were
tailkng, and the confidence which you have in her, being to me not unknown, I
pray you take no displeasure, if I be enboldened rashely to bring her in
presence: For I well know that herein she can give you better counsel then I,
as one that is more trained and experime^ted, not only in matters of love, but
also in many other things. Then the lady Marcella cutting of her words, began
to speak on this wise. Madame Harderine, seeing here rises no question,
neither is it needful to spend the time in praising the one the other:
touching that that you say, how I am more sage then you, therein I report me
to the sayings of those which know us both, who well enough know the
contrary: nevertheless taking these your praises in good part, for that he
or she which receives not a praise or laud upon any occasion bestowed upon
the^, seems to make himself culpable of outrage and dishonor, which any
obiecte may offer unto him. But let us change our style: and as for that
Madame said she (addressyng her speech to the Lady Porphirie) that you request
me to keep your new sprung loves in secrecy, I promise you, yea and
protest before God, that I will sooner suffer a thousand deaths then to
discover any part thereof contrary to your commandment: Neither shall it
be known or come out on my side, said, Harderine. Then Marcella proceeded
and said: I marvel where you have lost your Senses, or where that opinion is
become, which you had not long since, when here being alone in this chamber,
you said to me, that neither the flames nor the strokes of Love, should cuer
have any puissaunce upon you, and that those which under that yoke of
servitude, endured so many Martyrdomes and passions, as Amidree told you, that
she suffered for the love of Pharisor your cousin, the flower of valia^ce in all
Greece, were but fools, inconstante and void of understanding: saying
furthermore, that as for you, none should ever have part in your favor and
grace, much less in your Love: who was not reputed for the puissauntest and
beautifullest Prince in the world. And now through the only vewe of a new
Knighte estraunger, who never burste as yet Spear ne lance, I see you
trasported from that stedfastnes, whereof ye so vaunted, and so dispossessed
with your amourous passion, that having lost all that which best seemed in you,
you were forced to fall down sounded and half dead, and scarce yet know where
ye are. Alas it so behooves not any to govern them self: it is not fit to use
such fashions and deeds: for if you proceed any further, I assure you, it
can not chance but to your great dishonor, being in fine discovered. But I
will tell you, seeing in this, it pleases you to use my counsel, I think
this best in my conceipte, yt for these fiftene or sixtene days you seem to
keep your Chamber, fainyng to be somewhat sick: as well not to give any
conjecture of the cause of your Malady: as also thereby loosing the sight of
the Youth, which is the only obiecte (as I understand) of your Passions, who
at that term prefixed must depart, abandonyng this motion of Love which is
but imaginatiue. Which the more violente and sudden it has been, so much
the sooner shall it vanishe away, and the webbes thereof be worn out of your
memory. Like as their custom is, who lightly having apprehended the obiecte
of Love, and attiryng them selves therewith: Do suddenly and vnconstauntlie
forgette the same by discontinuaunce of contemplatyng their chosen mark: and
this is the only remedy which you must use for your amendment. Assuryng
you, that if you do otherwise, (as look how near that one approaches the
Fire, the more forcible feels he the flames, and scorchyng heat: likewise
imitatyng the Butterfly, who strives to burn her self in the Candle) if you
call him into your presence, affectionatyng your self more to behold him: the^
your malady, no less then your defamatio^ will take such root and increase,
that you not able to rid your hands thereof, too late will come repentance.
What (said the Princess) lady, is this same the best counsel and succor,
which you seem good to give me? Deem you, that I have so lightlye
apprehended and emprinted, the love of the young Gentleman in my heart, that I
can disburden my self thereof at pleasure, as you say? Seeing that the same
should proceed from me, rather of a great imperfection of judgment,
dependyng upon an opinion without effect, then of the loyalty and
steadfastness, which I am already resolved to bear him, all ye days of my
life: which surely shall shortly take end, if I know not quickly, that his
amity is reciprocal, and correspondente to mine. No, no, if ever ye did me
pleasure, or if ever you had a good mind to gratify me, it behooves you my
Ladies and friends, that at this present you do me so much service, as to
search where he is, and to learn by some honest and subtle manner, if he may
find in his heart to love me, or if he have his mind fixed else where.
Beseeching you herein, to proceed in such manner, that mine honor may thereby
be as little as ye can, blotted, neither mine intent discovered: which thing if
ye vouchsafe to do, I am so acerteined in your forefight and wisdom, that you
shall thereby gain to your selves great honor: or at leastwise if this seem
of to hard disgestion for you, I pray you give me some other better counsel,
not like to that before recited: assuring you, that if you forbid me not the
discontinuaunce of love, I will enforce my self by all means possible to use
your advise. Liege Princess (said Marcella) to tell or certify the Youth
that you are amourous of him, or to give him other notyce thereof, then by the
eyes (which are the true and accustomed Messengers of the most privy
intentions of the heart) seeing you are so stiffely bente never to love any
other: it seems me, that it cannot be done, without inferring great dishonor
to your personage. For in speaking by my Mouth, or any others, you should seem
to use the Office of askyng that, which were enough rather to make you loose
for ever your new chosen friend, then to make him youres For thereupon he would
hold himself so proud and pre sumpteous, if in this case he caught sinatche
of the least thing in the world, that in lieu of loving you, he would rather
disdain you. Nevertheless, I will tell you what I have seen, and more then
that, have marked: that when so ever he has chanced to see you, he has no
less changed countenance then you, which makes meedeeme, that wheresouer he
be, he is not altogether exempte, from the feelyng of affection like to yours:
which thing we may thoroughly know to the truth, during these fiftene days
which he has to remain here. In such prefixed space, I believe, that if there
be any goodness in him, we shall know it. For he will be at the Iustes
which the Emperor will cause to be proclaimed to morrow, as I understand:
whereat all the best knights of Constantinople, will be as Assistauntes: and
Don Gillant de Burtage of Create Britain, who is merueilous valiant, will be
there also: against whom, we shall see how he can bear him self, and what he
will do moreover, if he have any affection toward you. For if it be so, I
assure my self, that if he may vanquishe any, he will send him to be your
Prisoner, or will use some such gentleness or courtesy in your behalf: for
verelie it seems me, that if he be of so hie lineage, or if he be so
valiaunte as in appearaunce he seems, certes he is worthy to be beeloued of
some great and beautiful Princess. Wherefore, Lady, I pray you, cease
your Tears, that you give not out any suspicion of your distress: be
temperate till to morrow, and then I promise to give you counsel, upon further
deliberation, more wholesome and agreeable, then presently I can. For now we
must go toward the Empress, to deliver her of the dolor wherein she yet
rests, supposing that by this time, you are near hand dead. And keep the
best countenance you can, thereby to cloak your care: and so God will aid you
soon (you shall see) in some sort. Then taking her by the left hand, and
Harderine by the right, who said unto her: good God, Cousin, I would not for
any thing in the world, be so amourous as you: and for this cause will, I keep
my self quiet from blaspheming of love ever hereafter: seeing that his
puissaunce punishes so pitifully, those whom he once takes in hand. And then
they arrived in the Empresses Chamber, who was exceedyng glad when she
understood that her daughter seemed as now to have no further malady: where
we now will leave them, and tell what chanced to the Youth of the Fairies.

Of the perplexity of the Youth of the Fairies, after the sight of Porphyria
her surpassing beauty, and how the Emperor sent to seek him by his Squire
Geliaste, who came and found him being all sad and pensive: and lettyng him
understand how the Emperor had asked for him, he went into the Hall, where
the Table was covered for dinner: where he being set with him in the co^paignie
of his Barons and Knights, much marueiled to see them dyne in their Harness:
whereof he making inquiry, the Emperor recompted to him the adventure of
three matueilous Gyantes Ferclaste, Androfort and Ergoferant, which caused
that shortly after he departed secretly from the Court, to go fight with
them, and of the adventures which he found by the way.

The xi. Chapter.
AND on the other side was the Youth of the Faieries, who having seen the
incomparable beauty of Porphyria, felt him self (when as he first set his
eyes upon her, wounded and smitten by the same shaft, and seniblable pricks
of love. True it is, that his passion was not at the first show so violence,
that (like her) he should presently sound, in that, he was more manly and
strong, to suffer assaults, (or perchance to speak more plainly) he was not
burdened so much, as she then presently: but long it was not, ere their
passions were equal: For seeing her to fall into a trance, amongst her
Maids and Damozelles, who bare her up, and brought her into her Chamber, he
all astonished, passed by a Portall, from out of the Hall into a Gallerie,
which bordred on a fair and pleasant Gardein, at the end whereof, he
found certain steps to descend down, and so walked long time, solely
descantyng upon the new cogitations of his Love. And herein he imagined so
well, and called so curioussy to remembrance that Angelical shape, which he
had seen, and which held him so ravished, and wherein he had entered so far,
that becommyng ardently amourous, he felt for certainty, the final loss of
his late power and liberty. But worte ye how: Frsooth this impression
imaginatiue took such increase in him, that he knew not where he was: for his
heart yet tender, young and easy to receive such like violente impressions,
did naught but imagine how to find means, to let her understand his grief,
and to win her favor. Well daryng (although he knew not of whence he was)
to aspire so far, as too promise him self the Alliance of as great a
Lord, as the Emperor of Constantinople: as well as if he had been assured of
the house, whereout he was descended: so magnanimous an heart had he, and in
such forte was his haughty mind settled. But moreover, considering the
impossibility of the fact, be changed soon his opinion, and became
astonished, as once was the lame Smith of Jupiter, at what time through Choler,
he was cast down headlong from heaven. For he tormented him self through the
vehemency that he felt, broiling in the fire, which continually increasing in
flames, made him to suffer more torment and aff^tition: when sagely he
considered the inequality of his loving Lady and him. Finally, all these
things considered, seeing his affairs fell out so ill, and that the fire
increased in his breaste, by the imagination of his Miffresses feature and
beauty, which in beholding had dimmed, and darkened his eyes and senses also
with their dulcet venime, whereof feelyng the alteration and violence more
vehemente (seeing he durst not to make semblante thereof to his Dame) he
resolved to separate him self from that pleasant infection: to the end,
that being absent from the Coals, he might rake the rest of the Fire, under
the Cinders of his Cogitation. And verelie this his counsel was very good
and wholesome: if the body being absent, he could also have estraunged his
thoughts, and forgotten the obiecte of his tormente. On the other side, he
waied the promise, which he had made to the Emperor, which was, to remain
in his service: which thing for any worlds good, (seeing him self so bound
and vowed unto him) he would not break nor violate. In this perplexity rested
he more then two long hours, still walking up and down the Cardeine, while
the Princess Porphyria, (who drew with him the yoke of equal torments,) was
in counsel with her Damozelles, as you have heard in the Chapter precedent.
And I deem he might have remained so longer, had it not been for his Squire,
who sought him on all sides, by the commandment of the Emperor, to come to
Dine with him: who went so far from chamber to chamber, and in such order,
that in fine he found him dreamyng, and musing in the Cardeine, in such wise,
that he called him twice or thrice, being very nere unto him, before he heard
or apperceiued him: who approchyng more near to him, called out on this sort.
Hola Master, what mean you, are you become deaffe or blind? For now it is a
whole hour since I have been here with you, to tell you how you must come to
the Emperor to Diner, in all which while, ye have not made semblante, either
to hear or see me. And how? (In Gods name) more then an hour, Said the
Youth of the Faieries? Yea forsoothe, said he. But not of these great
hours, which you think not, but of these short hours, which pass in so
small season, as you may employe in calling you thrice at the least. Aha
(said the Youth) I believe ye well: For I have my mind so busied otherwise,
that it may well be, that not thinkyng on thee, I have ne seen nor heard thee.
What Sir? And whereon may you have your thought so fixed? Unless it should
be, that you were stricken with the love of the Emperors daughter, who is
esteemed the most perfect in beauty, that is known presently to be in the
world. Verelie if you have seen her, I think you have tasted enough, whereon
so to occupy your thoughts. O Geliaste (said he) for Gods love speak no more
to me of that: For I have never seen her, but to my great damage. Wherefore I
pray thee, that incontinently after dinner, my Horse and Harness be ready:
for I mean, (without making any prynie to my determination) to absent my self
hence, so to banish and defeat this opinion. I willingly will Sir, (said the
Squire) but by mine honesty, since you have so far gone, I fear you half
lost, if you use none other remedy but absence. And what thing more expedient
may I use, replied the Youth, I would wish you (said he) to find means to
speak to her, and to let her understand your Passions, possibly she will
take some pitiful compassion upon you, or at least wise, ye shall receive by
discovery of your evil, some recure and help. For so would I deal if I were
in your case. Hence Sotte that thou art, think thou me so ill trained by,
that I should seem to give the least suspicion possible of my Sorrows,
either to her or to any other person, against all reason? Nay, take thou also
good heed from giuyng out any adverse speeches I warn thee: considering the
great reproaches which I may incur by my folly, in that such a simple
Knight as I, not wittyng my self from whence I am, ne ever have atchiued
feate, worthy of the favor of the worst Damozell in the world, dare aspire to
seek the acquaintance of one so great a Princess: who, if I should do as
thou say, she worchely scorning me, would not (I fear) deigne to take me
for the worste of her servants, having many my hetters in worse place of
service than that. Wherefore never move me more of so manifest a folly: And
what my Lord (said again Geliaste) how is it that your heart is so base, and
pusillanunous, that ye bear not your self in worth, always above a woman? Not
above such a one as she (said he). Verelie (answered the other,) if ever one
had seen me break a couple of Lances against a dou^ghill, (which is easy
you know) and that I were horsed at advantage, as you are: also if I had your
beauty and personage, I know not so gallaunt a Girl in all this Town, but
she would think her self happy, to have me for her friend. Therefore
(Master) my best advise and counsel is, that to morrow you show your self
valiant, and courageous in the Iustes, which shall be: for (surely) by that
means ye shall win her heart. Thou speak now better then you did
erewhile (said the Youth. And I will not only prove my self to morrow at the
Iustes: but also (if I live) will (to make my self more renowned) go search
strange adventures in Great Britain, and Combat with the best Knights that
there be, yea not exceptyng King Floridamant, who has so great renoume of
valiauncie, before I will assure my self to obtain the good grace and favor
of my new Maistresse, whom I am determined to serve and honor in mine heart,
as long as life shall be resident in my body, and to her only will I vow my
love. Wherefore remember that, which I have said to thee, that after dinner my
Harness be ready: for I will not be known to morrow when I shall come to
the Iustes. Master, said Geliaste, trouble your self no more about that, for
each thing shall be pressed at your pleasure.

So, secretly devising together, they arrived in the Emperors Halle where the
Tables were covered against dinner. And the Emperor being set down, caused
ye youth to be placed next unto him, so to do him the more honor, and all his
Knights and Barons after him in order: who at dinner time were all armed with
their Sweardes by their sides, and Helmets on their heads, and did eat having
their Beuers put up: the Gates of the Palace being all shut, and many
Soldiers about ye same, to be their guardes. Whereat the Youth of the Fairies
much merueiling, could not but enquire, whether it were the custom of the
Country, so to dine Armed: thereby to honor the Emperor the more, who only
was vnharnized, or if there were any deeper occasion, which drove them so to
do. Know (Youth, said the Emperor) that according to your opinion, this is
not done without cause. For against such a day as to morrow (which is the
day of my nativity) I have annually accustomed to make a most sumptuous
Feast, whereunto I call all my most private friends, and grande Princes of
mine Empire, as you see here present, and appoint Iustes and Tournmentes, and
all other sorts of pastime. But whiles we are in mirthe and feasting, we
always feel our selves troubled in some sort, by the invasions of a
monstrous and vnreasanable higge Giante called Ferclaste, who keeps an
Houlde, not paste four of five Miles hence, in a certain Rocky cave, commonly
called Rock Alpine: who with his two Breethren, who are neither better nor
lesser then he, and another ravenous kenell of Dogs which he keeps,
never fails as to morrow, to come and do some outrage to some of the City:
as to rauishe some maid, or murder some Knight. In so much, that the last
year, he came hither even into this Hall, and with his great Club, even in my
presence, he cut of the Dukes head of Chalcyde, who was a Knight right wise
and valiant. And furthermore this night last past, word was brought unto me
that he had ravished a gentleman's daughter of my Court, called Florenges, who
now is not here for the great dolor he has of ye loss of his daughter.
And does me so many other outrages (against which I can find no remedy nor
order, for that he still keeps him self encloased in his Rockie Cabin) that
I can not well declare them. Many worthy Knights there have been as well of
this Empire, as else where, that have fought with him hand to hand, but never
was seen any to return: for either he quickly kills the^, or else quietly
keeps them in Prison: and amongst the rest he has one, if happlie he be
not dead, who was the best of all my retinewe, and for whom (as well
therefore, as that he is my Neuewe) I am much sorrowful, and he is called
Pharisor. And thus ye now know, why my folks not of their own courtesy, but
straightly constrained thereto, take themselves thus to their Gardes. Yea, would
GOD it had cost me the half of mine Empire, that some good knight had rid
these Costs of him. For I doubt me, that at the Iustes to morrow, he will do
us some mischief, seeing he comes not to day, for his wonted hour is past.
Care ye not (my Liege) said the Youth of the Fairies when the Emperor had
done speaking. For God who leaves not any wicked Act unpunished, will deliver
you well of the damages yt they have dooen you, through his grace, guerdonyng
them according to deserts. If he set not hand thereto, said the Emperor
(I fear me) it is impossible for any humain wight to vanquishe the^. For this
Ferclaste who is the strongest of them all, finds not so hard iron, that with
his ij. hands he easelie pulls not in pieces, sooner then one of us, a
Branch or Sprig of a Tree: and carries a Club so big and mo^struous, that
four strong men cannot lift it up from the ground: with which I believe
there is not so sure an Armor, nor so stiff a shield, but he will with one
stroke break it to Powder. And his brethren Ergoferant and Androfort, have
some whiles a battle Axe, so sharp and pearcing, that there is neither Iron
nor Steel, of what hardness soever, which flies not in pieces at the attaiute
thereof: otherwhiles they carry each of them the Clapers of two Belles, which
they had brought into their Cave, from Saint Peter's Steeple of this Town, the
greatest things that ever were seen, which they handle and weild, as well as
one of us would do his Sword: Briefly that is the most hideous thing to
behold, and horrible to hear, that ever was toulde or related.

So with such and other like talk they passed away the time, until the Table
was taken up, and then after dinner the Youth separated him self so well as he
could, from the other knights, with whom he could have been content to have
talked more of the Grantes: of whom although they could him marueilles, yet
he went to see his Squire at the Stable, where his Horse and Geliaste was,
whom he found both ready Sadled and Bridled. Being harnised with the good
Armor which the Fairie had given him, be mounted upon the good Steed
Lycocephal, and Geliaste upon his, and so demaundyng the way to Rock Alpine,
they took on that way, which was taught them, leauyng them astonished at
their hardines, of whom they had demanded the way, each one judging that they
meant to try some maistries with the Giantes. But Geliaste, whom this game
pleased not best, had no delight to give and ieste as he was wont, but rather
trembled for fear, seeing his master and him draw near to the Den of
such Giantes, saying to him. Alas Master: why purpose you to go spill your
self? whither is it, that you go? or what will ye do? woe is me, have you no
regard of your self: what mean you to cast your self into the fire which will
assuredly hurne you? you haus heard yt in this Rock Alpine are such
monstrous Giantes, as will soon rent and tear you in pieces, and yet go you
thither? But what think you to do there? when as you well know, that they
have destroyed and put to death an infinite number of so valiant Knights,
which thither went, and never returned. Hold thy tongue, Beast (said the
Youth) for if they kill me (as thou say) I shall be delivered from the
most miserable tormente that ever poor wretch endured: and if I chance to
vanquish them, I shall get both great renoume, and also the Emperous favor: and
possibly moreover (which most I desire) the good will of the Princess
Porphyria. And so I shall be exempte from my Passion, or at least wise, somewhat
eased: supposing by this little service, which I shall do her herein, that she
shall have some occasion to favor me, and to make more account of me then
ever she yet did. And if thou be so affraide as thou make semblant to be,
thou may hyde thee in some part of the Rock, until such time that thou see
me either vanquisher or vanquished of ye Giantes. The devil take me if I hide
me in their Rocks, said Geliaste, for if these monsters find me there, they
will eat me all up at a Morsel: wherefore think not that I will ever leave
you. Do therein as thou will, said ye Youth. And with such talk passed they
the time, all the long way, till they arrived in a certain wood, which was not
far from the Rock Alpine. Where in when they were entered a little, they heard
the voice of a Damozel, who complained sorowfully. They staiyng their Horses to
understand what it was, apperceiued the foulest villayn that ever was seen,
and not so diffigured, but far worse apparelled. For his clothing was so
rent and torn, that it showed the one half of his flesh more filthy and
black, then any Colliar or Chimneisweper of the City, which fellow carried on
his shoulders a sack full of somewhat. Whom the Youth espiyng, remained more coy
as well in that he heard again the former voice, as that he would also see
whither the Paisaunt went: who^ at length he saw to rest himself near to a
great Ditche, which was about the wood, and there casting his sack on the
ground, he heard him speak in this wise, counterfaytyng his voice. Madame, had
you not rather be beloved of a brave and valiant Knight and Gentleman who
will take you to his spowse and wife, if so you be pleased: then to suffer your
self, perish and die this rashly. For here now is the ditche wherein you must
be drouned. Then heard he a voice from out of the sack, which said, yes
willyngly: But I would feign see him. Then the Villain vnbindyng his Sack
which was of Tanned Leather, plucked out the headde of a brave Damozell,
which was there within: who looking all about her, demanded of him where the
gentleman was that spoke of her. Behold here, Wenche (said the Ruffian by him
self) setting his hands on his side bravely, and marchyng gallantly five or
six times about the Sack: go wicked Villain said the Damozell) I had
rather be dismembered, by peicemeale, then that thy filthy flesh should
toutche mine. Scarce had she said so, but the Villain angrilie shut her
again in the Sack, and was about to cast her into the Ditche: when as the
Youth having seen all the matter, ran to him and stayed his purpose, saying.
Rascal, what is this that thou have in this Sack? Sir. said he. it is the
Bolster of an old bed, which my Master Ferclaste has bidden me to cast into
this ditch, because it is rotten. Thou lie, said the Youth, for me thought I
saw a Damsel, who because she would not condisce^de to thy filthy lust, thou
would cast into this Ditche. But sir, you shall supply her rowme: and in
steed of her, end your unhappy days: and so taking him by the beard, he
commanded his Squire to unloose the Lady from out of the sack, wherein he put
the pernicious Peasaunte, his head dounewardes, and so cast him into the
Ditche: which done, he demanded of the Damozel from whence she was: and why
they would have drouned her? Whereto she answered and said. Worthy sir I am
daughter to one of the Emperors knights: who was taken away yesternight from
out of the city by the Giant Ferclaste, to whose disordinate lust, because I
would not willyngly obaie, he has commanded this villain on this wise to
make me away: from whence you have saved me, and thereof I heartily thank you.
And if it may please you, to go with me to my fathers house in the city, he
will for your happy deliueryng of me, reward you to his power, although not
according to your deseruyngs. For well I know, that he is sorrowful for my
sake. Damozell (said the Knight) of Guerdon for your delivery I smally care,
seeing that therein I have done but my duty, which is to succor Ladie^
oppressed as you were. And to return into the City as yet, I must not,
because I have first vowed to fight with the Giant Ferclaste, to see whether he
be such an one as men say: as well to revenge the outrage which he has done
to you: as also to rid the world of so pernicious a Plague and hurtefull, as
he is. All which while, you may remain here with my Squire, if you have any
fear of him. Fair sir (said she) I shall do all, as it pleases you, for
in greater peril can I not be, then that, whereof you have delivered me. And
so the Damozell remained with Geliaste in the Forreste, hidden in the thickest
bushe they could find: bitterly bewaylyng the peril of the Youth of the
Fairies, who was departed from them, and gone to fight with the Giantes at
Rock Alpine.

The Youth of the Fairies being departed from his Squire, did so much, that at
last he came to the Castle of Rock Alpine, where being discovered by the
Giantes folks, they came and assaulted him on all sides, to kill him or take
him Prisoner. But he used them so, that having slain some of them, the rest
durst not approache him: which thing the Giauntes within their Rock seeing,
came thither them selves in person to take him: but he bare and defended
himself so valiauntly, that after he had slain two of them, that is to wit,
Ferclaste and Androfort, he saved the life of Ergofarant, who yielded him self
to him.

The. xij. Chapter.
THE Youth of the Fairies being departed from the Damozell, and his Squire,
whom he had left hid in the Woodde: went not very far, but that he was
out, and then he apperceiued the Castle of Rock Alpine, not far from him, in
a place very steep and high: on the top whereof, was a Thicket, or little
Woodde, continually pestered and stored with Thieves and Robbers, who there
still lurked to epsy, if any one passed before the lodgyng of the Giauntes,
that they might suddenly set upon them, and put them to the spoil: with
whose coin and harness they furnished them selves afterward. These fellows
espiyng the young Knight coming on horseback soberly that way, thirty or
fourcie of the wightest and best horsemen among them, came down speedily, of
purpose to take him, whom he quietly suffered to approach him, to the intent he
might speak to them: but when they thought them selves nere enough, one of
them which came foremoste* and was Captain of the Giauntes Guard, called
Mitrocarde, having discried the Knight, who as yet had his Helmette unclosed,
seeing him so young and fair, and so well horsed, said unto him. Hola fair
Soune, alight, alight, for this will serve to carrye our master Ferclaste,
when he goes a progress, seeing he skarse can find a better, or a stronger
to bear him in my judgment. Do this and I will work so with him, that
(because you seem so fair and beautiful) he shall save your life, but then
you must serve him for a Lackie: and I believe, he will be content to take you
to his Page, at my entreataunce, but you shall give me for my labor this fair
Harness which you wear. When the young Knight had heard him thus speaking, he
answered him. I am come hither, to give thee and thy Master also this
harness, which thou see in my hand, showing him his Spear: which
presently he put in Rest, and pricked the good Horse Lycocephal with his
Spurs, who enflamed like lightnyng, ran with such force, that the first
whom he attainted, was the said Mitrocard, who had so spoken to him. And so it
befell, yt he sent his Spear forcibly through the midst of his body, which
appeared behind more then two fathomes: whereat the others thus seeing their
Master which was so valiaunte, and who erst had slain and taken so many
gallaunte knights, without ever foil or damage of his own body, slain so
quite outright, with the sudden stroke of the Spear, they were much
astonished. Nevertheless, seeing them selves so many against one, in hope to
weary him, they ran upon him, and enclosed him round about, with great
Swords and Halbertes, wherewith they gave him many a foul stroke upon his
Shield: but it was so good, that they did them selves more hurt then him, and
the Swords wherewith they stroke him, flewe back out of their hands, whereof
they were much abashed. But to dispatche him self the sooner of these
Raskalles, he took Sword in hand, using the same with such dexterity and
fury, that those three which encroched so fiercely upon him to kill his
Horse, went by his help to hear their Captain compaignie, into an other
world. The sight wheref so vexed the rest, that they heinde him round about,
both behind and before: meaning miserably to Massacre him with their Axes,
Clubbes, and Spear staves. But he handled them so, that in less then an
hour, ten of them lay dead slain upon the ground: which sight so
affrighted the rest, that happy was he, which was farthest of from this new
found Enemy. And so retiryng still back, knowing that they could in nowise
endamage him, by reason of the surenesse of his Harness, they straightwaies
devised with themselves, to try, if they could kill his Horse: in such wise
that one of them stroke him by chance, between the Trappers of Iron with a
Lance, and somewhat wounded him, but he rested not long skotfree. For the
Horse being so hurt and galled, ran upon him with such force, that (willed
or nilled his Master) strikyng him with his two hinder feet, he burste his
paunche, sendyng him two yardes from the place where he stood, so that his
bowelles fell out of his beallie: and then o^derly approaching to the rest,
helped his Master to supplant them: who so handled and entreated them, that
after their hurtes, the* neither needed Surgeon, nor Physician. And he had
brought them to such pass that they were about to take their heels: when
the rest which remained upon the Rock, attendyng his taking, that his body
might be emprisoned, and that they might cast Dice for his Armor and spoil,
seeing their compaignions speed so il, ran hastily to help them, at once criyng
aloude. Take heed in any wise that he escape not: for our Lords the Giauntes
will be much offended, if they have him not anon, to use at their pleasure,
and to punish him for his presumptuousnesse, in that he has killed so many of
their folks. At this their cry, the Giauntes which were within the Rock,
castyng Dice who should have the Maidenheade of a certain fair young
Damozell, whom they had ravished three or four days before, who was Niece to
the Emperor of Constantinople, and Sister to Pharisor the valiant and worthy
Knight, whom they kept also in Prison, they start up all three, to see what
the matter was, and saw on the plain, how their folks were tasked by the
Youth of the Fairies, who so had handeled them, that more then twenty of
them were already dead in the field: and angry was he only because the
Giauntes came not. For much was his mind set, and great was his desire to
kill those Monsters. Which thing the Giauntes seeing, they roared like Bulls
with their voice, making such brute, that the stoutest hearted would thereat
have trembled for fear. O ye Villains and Dogs, what mean you, that ye do
not bring us this presumptuous and gluttonous princockes, that we might
recompense him for the damage that he has done to your fellows? We charge you
dispatche it quickly: for otherwise if we once come down among you, both you
and he shall be hanged with our own hands upon these Trees. Then staiyng to
see the knight either taken or slain, they saw him so lustely hacke and hew,
that he quite cut of the arm of one of those which (hearing the thunderyng
and manacyng words of the Giantes) would have done more then the rest in
taking his Horse by the Bridle. Which another seeing, and willing to show
himself more nimble in this point then his fellow, the Horse stamped upon
his Belly, and so suddenly slew him. Then running amongst the thickest of
them, who labored painfully for fear of the Giantes their masters to take
him, he brought them to such an exigent, that dispersyng theimselues this way
and that way, for fear of his blows, they durst not any of them after that,
come near him: which the Giant Ferclaste seeing, said to his brother
Androfort, who was youngest of the three, for that he was already armed, as
one that had not long before been robbyng in some odd place: I pray you
Brother (quoth he) go you to fetch in yonder dapper Yonker, who so handles
our Folks: and kill those Cowardes which so flee from him. But take ye heed
that ye neither kill him nor his Horse, for he seems fair and good, and I
believe he would carry me very well, and we will burn the other quick, or
make him die cruelly. Verily (said Androfort) you speak well, for he has
truly deserved it, and my self will take pains to punish him with mine own
hands, and you shall have his Horse for your part: which if he cannot bear
you, I fear me none else will, and my Brother Ergoferarnt shall have his
Shield, for it is so good, that our folks could in no wise endamage nor perce
it with their Darts and Arrows. Wherefore to the end that I may go take him
and not kill him let one bring me my Clapper of the bell, for therewith I will
but touch him a little, to make him fall down the sooner: which done, I will
lay hand upon him, and bring him hither upon my Neck. Then incontinently
there issued out the Rock four great Lubbers, who with much pain brought
forth the great Clapper of the Bell, which he took and cast easily upon
his Arm, and ran in great have toward the knight: who seeing him come, was
thereat right joyous. But as he approached toward him, he heard him speak
to his folks, saying. Ha Caitifes and Dastardes, by the Bearde of the mighty
God Jupiter, my brother will make you all be hanged, for fleeyng from this
squallishe Elfe here. But one of them answered him shortly again and said: I
know not well how you will speed, if you come once there where we have been.
Whereat the Giant being chaffed, gave him so great a blow with his Clapper
upon the head, that he passhed out all his Brains, and laid him for stark
dead on the ground. And aproachyng near to the Youth of the Fairies said,
how now pretty Sir, have you not played rexe, and dealt desperately enough,
here? must I needs burn thee quick, (seely Caitiffe) for the Choler that
thou have caused in me, and my Brethren? I know not what thou will do
(said the Knight) but guard thy self well from me, for I mean to send thee
packyng with him whom even now so rashely thou have slain. Oho (said the
Giant) in mockyng wise, seeing him come with a spear, couched in Rest against
him, see here a retchelesse boy: but scarce had he so said, but that the
Knight had stricken his Lance two foot and more within his body, wherewith he
fell to the ground: nevertheless he soon rose again, and came to have
killed his horse, nothing remembering his promise made to his brother. But the
Knight seeing him come, alighted soon down, and with his Sword drawn,
spedde him self toward the Giant, who discharged such a stroke upon his
shield, thinking to fell him (according to his fore promise) that the Knight
kneeled down ready to fall on his face: and with that stroke (so strong it
was) had he put him in like estate as he did the other before, had it not been
for his good Shield and Arm which sustained it with such virtue, that the
Clapper flewe out of the Giantes hands: which as he stowped to take up, the
Knight wisely markyng how the matter went, thruste his Sword so far through
the Giantes back, that he fell stark dead on the ground, roaryng like an
Ox, when he is by the Butcher stricken down: in such sort, that he was well
heard of his Brethren, who stark mad for rage, entered into their cave, and
there taking such Harness as they had, Ferclaste with his Clubbe, and
Ergoferant with his Cymetere, they issued forth, and went to assail the gentle
Knight of the Fairies, who attended them with great devotion meaning so to handle
them, as he had done their brother, all on foot as he was. Then behold,
Ferclaste arrived first, who quietyng his folks (which afar of still
assailed him with Daries and Arrows on all sides) said unto him: O mischeuous
wretch, what vengeance may I take of one so wicked as thou art, equal to the
damage which thou haste done unto me, in staiyng so many of my solkes, and
(which is to me more unsupportable then that) my puissant brother Androforte,
who (if thou had not traitorously used) would have slain a thousand such as
thou art? Oh woe is me, that the subject thereof is no greater. And if I
knew, that thou werte in service with that wicked Emperor of Constantinople,
and that he had sent thee hither, to do this that thou haste done, I should
thereat be somewhat more comforted, in that I could extend the reuengement of
the death of my Brother upon him by to morrow: for as soon as I have slain
thee with this my Club, I will assemble six hundred men, to go kill him, yea
even in his Palace, and all his folks also which shall be easy for me to do,
whiles they apply them selves to feastyng and drunkenness as their custom is.
Wherefore tell me if thou be one of his, to the end that then I may
dispatche thee the sooner, otherwise I will make thee die the cruellest death
that ever was spoken of. Verily I am of the Emperors train (said the Raight)
but thou art not yet priest and ready to do as thou preachest, for I will
quickly God willing seal thee a Quittance for any such matter. The Giant
hearing him so say, came angerlie with his Clubbe, to discharge so great a
stroke upon his Helmet, and so to have killed him, that the same quite
unbuckled and unlaced, and fell to the ground, together with the Giantes
Clubbe, which also fell out of his fistes, which so were wrinched that he
felt them not. Then the other Giaunte Ergoferant seeing his head bare, came of
purpose to have cut it in twain, but the blow light upon the shield, which
was so violent, that he fell backward on the ground, his Cimetere falling out
of his fistes, as the Clubbe did from his brother: which whiles he sought for,
the Knight being active and nimble, starte up lightly, and went (disarmed as
his head was) toward Ferclaste: who had gotten his Clubbe into his hands,
wherewith he had brained him, if by his agilitie he had not slightly stepped
a side, to shun the stroke: which was so vehemente and horrible, that the
Giaunte could not recover again his Club, being entered more then two foot
into the ground. Which caused that whiles he striued to pull it out to strike
the Knight again withal, he came and gave him such a blow over the arms,
that he fell down flat upon the stumpes, his arms being cut of by the
elbowes. This done, the other Giant seeing his brother so maimed, came toward
the Knight with his Clubbe in his hand, which he had gotten out of the
ground, and all enraged, leaueled such a blow at his head, that if it had
not light partly upon his shield, he had been dispatched. Notwithstanding, the
blow was so great, that it dashed the shield full against his bare head: in
such sort that it made a deep wound: provided still, that the Clubbe fell
out of the Giantes hands again: which when he went to recover, the Knight
feelyng his blood, which he never before had seen, to run a long his tender
face, was so enraged that he had rather have been dead, then not to be
revenged, of that outrage. And thereupon he ran suddenly unto Farclaste, to
whom (as he was holdyng his Clubbe in his left hand, to have wounded him) he
raught such a rappe, that he cut of the other arm, Clubbe and all. Whereat
the Giaunte being mad and enraged, ran upon him, and gave him such a
blow with his foot, that he smote him to the ground: nevertheless, he sone
rose up again, and eftsoon encounteryng the other Giaunte, which came
afreshe toward him, he lent him such a blow on the croune (leapyng
^^stelie into ye air, for otherwise he could not have done it) and dashed it
so sore, that with the great pain he felt thereby, he fell down and souned
in the field. Then seeing him self as he thought, dispatched of this fellow,
he came toward the other, who with great blows of his feet still assailed
him: but he which well knew how much they weighed, startyng somewhat
aside, cut of one of his legs just in the gartering place: whereat the
Giaunt fell to the ground: whereupon the Knight approchyng unto him, cut of
the other also.

Then he seeing himself in so piteous estate, began to howl and cry like a
Wolf, reyling and blaspemyng all his Gods, and in this sort bathing himself in
his own blood, he ended his miserable life. The Knight seeing him self in so
short space to have atchiued so great a victory in vanquishyng three so
monstrous Giantes, and bringing their whole Crewe to such extremity: that
they durst not once open their mouths to speak one word (for that their
governors were thus slain) after most deuou (thanks given to God (without
whose grace he well knew that he never could have quelled those Monsters:) He
took up his Helmet which lay on the ground, and went toward the rest of
the Giantes Crewe and folks that were yet alive: with full purpose to destroy
them all, because of the grievous wound which he had received in his head.
But they seeing him come fiercely and furiously toward them, kneled all down,
and humbly besought him of Pardon: pretending for them selves, that since it is
a Servants duty to obey his Master (they being servants to the Giantes,
at whose charges and costs they were kept and nourished) could do no less but
accomplish to their powers, their Hestes and Commandments: and that it would
please him to pardon them, as persons being without fault: for that (saving
only for their Masters wills) they would never have endamaged him. Noe, noe,
said the knight al enraged, one must not obaye their Master to do evil, and
much less to take hyre of any, to such end: but you your selves being as
ill as they, took pleasure to be in their company, thereby to enriche your
selves, with the spoil of poor passengers: wherefore as Ministers of their
wickedness I will cause you all to die: at which word he slew one, which was
hiest, because (of a stuborne mind) he would not knele down. But seeing all
the others so humble, that they neither fled nor made other defense,
considering that it was noe less virtue for a man to vanquish and moderate his
affections, and anger in showing him self piteous and merciful toward the
vanquished, then to show himself hardy and courageous to overcome them, as
he which was both courteous and kind of nature: And knowing, that it were no
praise worthy to destroy those, which resisted not, allaying (as they say)
his wine with water, he pardoned and took them to mercy lovingly, upon
condition, that they should after that time still be at his commandment,
which thing with common accord they promised him to fulfill. This done, he sent
to seek his Horse, and mountyng upon him, he went to wards the Rock, as well
to deliver the Prisoners therein, as to apply some Plaster or medicine to the
wound in his head, For the doing whereof, he asked if there were any amongst
them, that was skilled in Chirurgerie whereto it was answered, that there was
one amongst them in that Art most excellent, which accustomably did heal
all those knights, whom the Giantes having wounded would not kill, but famishe
to death in Prison: which person had one kind of Oyntmente, of such virtue,
that there was never so great a wound, but therewith in three days it would
be well healed, and thoroughly cured as though it had never been. And how is he
called? said the Knighte. he has to name, master Rabalon, answered they
again. Then said the Knight: needs must I have him for my servant, seeing
he is so skilful, is in case he will like thereof. For against his will I mean
not to constrain him to do any thing. I think well (said one of the
company) that he would rather be with you, then with the Giantes: for they
took him perforce from the Emperor, because of his great cunning, and have
dealt with him very discourteously. And in so saying, they arrived in the
Rock, which was finely cut and carved within like unto a Palace, whereat the
Youth was greatly astonished. For there were Halles, Cha^bers, Wardropes both hie
and low made, by great skill and industry, which the Giantes had founded not
long before, when with their huyge force, they had hollowed the Rock, which
was meruellous hard, to keep them in more safety: and therein none entered but
by one only Gate, although within, were more then sixty, as well of Chambers
as prisons, which all were shut up with mighty keys. The which the knight
took as soon as he was entered, having found them upon a Table, tied all
together with an huyge Chain of iron, which the Porter had left there, fearing
that the knight asking for him, and being informed of his wickedness and
cruelty toward the Prisoners, would reward him according to his deserts,
like as his Masters were: and therefore hid he himself, in a Vaste and
darkesome cave, under a Tun where he was smothered. and so he ended his
wicked life. But he soon found the good Chirurgian Master Rabalon: who at
the entry of the door crooched down humbly on his knee, to desire him of
Pardon. The Youth taking him by the hand, made him stand up, saying: I will
not pardon thee: for why, thou never offendedst me, and therefore thou have no
need to ask mercy, but for this that I hear say, that thou have
appertained to the good Emperor of Constantinople, toward whom it is
expedient that thou go to impertrate that, which thou requirest of me, for
the offense that thou have wrought, in being so long absent from his company,
to serve such mischiuous Tyrauntes as thou have done here: and I will that
from me, thou do present and show these dead Giauntes and knights, being
laid upon some Chariot, to his Majesty. For I wotte well, that knowing of
their destruction, he will be much joyous, considering the manifold annoyes
which they have still wrought him: and in thy company shall go all the
Prisoners which are within, to thank (for their delivery) the fair
Princess Porphyrie his Daughter after humble salutations to her done on my
behalf: for she alone is the cause hereof. And if she do enquire who has done
it, tell thou her that it was the Youth of the Fairies, the least of her
Seruitours (if for one she will accept him) though far unworthy of such
preferment. Then gave he him the keys to go deliver the prisoners, but seeing
him to be somewhat wounded, first he gave him some of his Oyntmentes to his
sore: which had such speedy operation, because the wound was not great, that
the next morning it was whole and sound. But whiles he was thus appliyng his
Medicine, he saw the Giantes (whom he had pardoned, and who stood without)
enter fearfully, tremblyng and quaking to hyde them selves here and there with
great diligence. Whereat the Youth lacing his Helmet and taking his Shield and
Sword, set forward out of the Gate to see what was happened: and he
apperceiued the Giaunte Ergoferant to come that way (for he had not quite
killed him as the others were, but only amazed him with a blow upon his
head) who being come again to him self, having cast away his Battle Axe,
and left of his Helmet, Shield and Jack, and seeing his brethren dead, came
and prostrated himself at the Knights feet (whom he found with Sword and
Target in hand ready) craving him humbly of Pardon. The Youth who was right
merciful, seeing him (contrary to those of his kind) so meek, freely pardoned
him, conditionally (notwithstanding) that he should go with the rest of the
Prisoners the morrow followyng, to ask Pardon of the Emperor, for the harms
which he had done him, and to thank the Princess Porphyria for his life so
saved, and to present to her his service, doing still what she should appoint
him, whereto he gladly condiscended: and thereupon he commanded him to set
free the Prisoners and to ask them forgeuenes for the damage which he had
long done unto them, which thing he did. Immediately he took the keys which
Master Rabalon had in his hand, and went to deliver the Prisoners, who seeing
him, thought what he had come for some other purpose. But much were they
amerueiled, when they saw him kneel down before them, askyng them
forgiveness, praiyng yt for the love of him which was cause of their
deliverance, and who had pardoned him, it would please them also to use the
like courtesy toward him: whereto they willingly agreed, for that this same
Giant (as it were quite contrary in nature and disposition to his brethren)
had before time been cause that they were well used and entreated: for he was
full courteous and pitiful, wherefore he led them toward the Youth, whom
they humbly thanked for such a good turn, offering him their service
perpetually from that day forward: especially the Knight Pharisor, who
greatly requested him that he would vouchesafe to take him into his company:
prote^ting that he would be to him a true and loyal friend, and that naught
but death should have force to end their amity. All which the Youth was well
pleased of. And for that night with the Giant Ergoferant, who showed him self
full humble and diligent to do him honor and service and the Prisoners
likewise, he rested in the Rock till the next morrow.

The Giant Ergoferant being departed from Rock Alpine, to accomplish his
promise toward the Emperor of Constantinople, met by the way the villain
whom the Youth of the Faieries had cast into the Ditche, whom he left there
because he heard certain Outlawes in the Forest, who would misuse the
Damozell whom the Knight of the Fairies had delivered out of the Sack, and
cruelly did beat the Squire Geliaste: both who^ he delivered after he had
slain the Thieues. And finally how after his arriual in Constantinople, he
spoke to the Emperor, who courteously pardoned him of the faults he had done
to him, and made him promise to marry the Maiden Dinamia, Sister to Pharisor,
and of the Iustinges holden in Constantinople, wherein the Youth of the
Fairies, and his friend Pharisor got the pryse, being come thither in habit,
disguised and unknown.

The xiij. Chapter.
While the Youth of the Fairies was setting order in the Castle of Rock
Alpine, and in loadyng the Giantes dead Carcasses in hosse Litters and such
like, to be carried the next morning to Constantinople, as well thereby to rid
the Enperour of the great fear which he had, lest that his feast should be
by them disturbed and troubled, as also to furnishe and disguise him self to
go the next day unknown to the Iustes: the glittering Lamp of Phoebus had
given place to the darkesome Mantell of the shadie night. Whereupon he was
then perforce constrained to stay and lie in the Rock with the Giante
Ergoferant, and his good and valiant friend Pharisor, where he could not long
rest, at his case, for that his quietness was interrupted, by the late enkindled
fire of his new spro^g love. And so often as he recorded the incomparable
comelines of his Lady, he took such increase of arde^t affection into him,
that had it not been for the hope which he had to win her grace and favor by
his feats of Arms and valiancie, I fear that (he pressed with extreme
passion,) would have the^ presently dyed. But (because it commonly happens,
that hope is the nowrice and maintenance of life to them that are sick or in
any wise ill disposed,) he yet comforted himself, and with great disquietnesse
and difficulty passed that night, and partly also was he perplexed with some
fear of his new Confederate Ergoferant, of who^ notwithstanding any League or
promise which he had made, he could not assure him self. And thus he stood on
his own guard, whiles his friend Pharisor made ready his Furniture to go to
the Justes on the morrow followyng. And whiles (I say) that these things were
in doing, the day began to appear clear and bright: whereupon the Giaunt
Ergoferant, who knowing the virtue and puyssaunce of the Knight which had
vanquished him to smell and resemble more of divine then human nature, and
supposing him another Hercules, sent by Jupiter into the world to pourge and
deliver it of monsters and savage creatures, he studied and enforced him self
to do him service agreeable: and therefore came to him in his Chamber, to see
if he had ought else to command him, offering willyngly to atchiue it, yea with
the hazard and loss of his own life. Who giving him thanks therefore said
noe, but only that he should take heed to keep the faith and loyalty
which he had promised to him.

Then taking leave of him with humble reverence and amiable embracement, he
went to find Master Rabalon, who the might before had so well healed his
wound, yt he felt noe more grief thereof. This being done, they took their
way toward Constantinople with the Prisoners, and Chariotes laden with dead
Carcasses as was before appointed. But as they entered into the Forest near to
Rock Alpine, they heard a gross and lubberly voice, which yelled and housed
wonderously: and it seemed to the Care to come from out of the earth, wherefore
the Giaunt Ergoferant, and Master Rabalon, who was well Horsed, went
thitherwarde, the other Prisoners holdyng on their way still toward
Constantinople. And when they were come where they heard the voice, they saw
the Villain whom the Youth of the Farries had cast into the bottom of the
Ditch in the Sack, wherein he carried the Damozell, who cossed and tormented
him self desperately therein, which the Giaunt seeing, said: who is he that
has cast thee there: The villain who knew by his voice, that it was one of
his Masters, answered, it was the accursed My Self. Then carry there thy
self still (said Master Rabalon) seeing it pleased thy self so to do. And
so answered the Villain because that after the Youth of the Fairies had
left Geliaste, and the Lady hid in the Bushe, the Villain cried so loud,
that he made the For rest ringe with his voice, and kept the Squire from
hearing what wait his Masters Horse went, disturbyng him much. Wherefore he
went to him again, and bode him hold his peace, for by his criyng he should
never be delivered. I pray thee then at least ways (said the Villain)
seeing I must hold my peace, that thou tell me his name that cast me here.
It was (said Geliaste) my self: what say thou therein? The Villain
thinkyng that he said the Knights name was, My Self, gave such answer to
the Giant Ergoferant, as is aforesaied: who supposing him so foolish, that for
fear he had (having as he judged lost the Damozel) to be beaten or slain of
his Brother Ferclaste, had put him self in the Sack, to hide him, who left
him there to end his days, and departed thence: for that he heard a
trampling of horses and voices of men who spoke as though they were angry, and
the voice of a Damozell who cried pitifully. Wherefore going thither, he saw
fiftene or sixtene Outlawes, armed with great Staves and Clubbes bound with
Pron at both ends a foot long, sharp and pearcing, who with huyge blows did
beat a poor young Squire, and four of them haled and drew a fair young
Damozell by the Arms, and hear of the head most dispiteously. But as soon
as they saw the Giaunt come toward them, they left their pray, and
fleeyng this way and that way, they striued to escape and save each one his
own life.

But all could not do so well: for six of them whom the Giaunte could
catch, remained dead on the Grass there for gage: then retournyng where he
had left the Damozell, he was much amerueiled that he found her not. Then
seeking here and there for her on all sides, at last he found her hid with
the Squire Geliaste, behind a little bushe, so cloase and so nere the one the
other, that they seemed but one person. Then alightyng from his Horse, he
took her by the hand, and the Squire also, who thikyng them selves fallen out
of a lingeryng Fever, into a sudden sweat, trembled with such fear, that
they could skarce stand an their feet before the Giante: who to comfort them,
spoke most courteously, and prayed them to tell him, whom, or from whence
they were: chiefly the Squire: for the Damozell he knew well to be her, whom
his brother Ferclaste had commanded the villain Franquetrippe to go cast
into the ditche, who somewhat emboldened, answered him that he belonged to a
young Knight, named the Youth of the Faieries, who as he thought was by that
time prisoner to the Giaunte Ferclaste: humbly praiyng him that he would not
hurts him, until be knew whether he were dead, or alive. The Giaunte after
having amiably recompted unto him all that had passed and being dous, in the
Battle betwixt them, assured him of the health and victory of his Master, and
that he should have him safe and sound at Rock Alpine. Whereat the Squire
was so glad, as if the whole Monarchy of Europe had fallen to his share. And
the Giaunt having left him, to go to Constantinople, they departed, the one
with the Damozell, that is to wit, the Squire to go find his Master. And the
other which was Ergoferant, to go to Constantinople, where he was not so
soon arrived, but he found Master Rabalon: who^ in the Forest he left
pursuing the Outlawes, who told to the Emperor intentiuely listening unto him,
and unto his Baro as, in the great Hall of ye Palace being all armed from head
to foot, how the Youth of the Fairies, a young Knight, to whom he had given
his Knighthoode not long before, had by his force and valiauncie vanquished the
Gardes of Rock Alpine: part of whom he had thither brought for better
assurance of the same: whose dead Carcasses with the two Giantes Ferclaste and
Androfort were come in Chariotes, and also how he had brought the prisoners
which they had perforce long time held, to do therewith at his pleasure: The
other part remainyng with him alive at Rock Alpine: and how he had overcome
and brought to his subjection the Giant Ergoferant, who (while this other was
thus tellyng his tale) entered into the Hall, and castyng his Battle Are down
in the place, and then villacing his Helmet which he laid down at his feet,
he addressed his speech to the Emperor on this wise.

Mighty Emperor, I assure my self, that if you have regarce to the infinite
damages and displeasures, which I and my brethren have daily done unto you, I
merit to be punished more grievously and worse then ever yet was any. But
puttyng my confidence in your courtesy, and bounty abundant, I have presumed
(according to promise) to presence my self personally before your Imperial
Majesty, being so enjoined to do, by the fair and gentle Youth of the
Fairies, the Flower (although as yet young and tender) of all the Knights that
now live, that you may do and dispose with me at your own good will and
pleasure. Beeseeching you in his name, and for the great good will which he
bears you, to grant me mercy and pardon of all the faults which I have
ever committed against you: which with true repentance, and vowing to you my
service, henceforwarde (as he has expresselie commanded) I humbly require
and obtest. The Emperor who in benignity and clemency was second to none in
the world, as well for the good news brought him, as for the love of the
Youth, whom he deemed sent from heaven, to help his calamity concerning the
Giantes, pardoned him with good heart, being joyful of so good fortune*
knowing further this Giaunt by his sookes and countenance (coutrarie to the
kind of such) to be very mecke and gentle: and also having heard say that
through his clemency, and courteous nature in his brothers life, he had
released and let go many prisoners, if at any time they chanced to be absone.
Wherefore he prayed him to vouchesafe to tarry in his service, for which he
would well recompense him, whereto the Giaunt (humbly thankyng him) answered
that ever whises life lasted him he would not fail nor be faithless to him.
Whereat the Emperor exceedyng joyous, said that he would marry him to his
Niece Dinam^^, sister to Pharisor, which offer (because the Damozell was
merueilous fair, and grattous) he willingly accepted, thereupon he made them
to promise the one to the other (...) the of marriage: which done, the Emperor
and all his Barons and Knights arose, and went to see the dead Knights and
Giauntes liyng upon the Chariotes without: whereat they much meruened, how
one only person could by his valiauncie, without other aid at all, put to
death and dispatch so many puissau^t Personages, who in their life had troubled
whole Arnues: and they also marueiled at the mighty blows and wounds which
they had. For some were riuen down to the Belly: other some quite cloven with
one blow of the Sword: and others (as the Giaunt Ferclaste, had their Arms
and Legs cut of: and they said one to another, that aforetyme they had seen
men slain, but never did they, ne never should they see men so mangled and
martyred as these were. Whereupon they largely praised the Youth of the
Fairies for his valor: saying: that if he continued as he had begone, he
would be the best Knight that ever the world fostered or had brought forth.

This dooen, the Emperor commanded to hang all those dead bodies in a
Woodde, not far distaunte from the City, which was done incontinently.
Then he caused the best Painter in all his Empire to come unto him, and to
depaint ye History (as a matter worthy of aye lasting remembrance) in the
great Hall of his Pallaice, with the most rich and costly splendizant
coullers that could be found. And for the great desire he had to see the
Youth, he dispatched three or four knights, to go search him spedilie at
Rock Alpine: which done he commenced the Iustynges and Tourneis, without
further fear, whereat were present upon skaffoldes, set up for that intent,
the Empress, the Princes Porphyrie, and the Lady Harderine, with the sage
Marcella, and the gentle Amidree, with many mo Ladies and Damozelles, right
richly attired and adorned with chains of gold, gounes of Velvet of all
coullers, clothe of Gold and Silver, and other Iewelles: whereof they had
left none that day behind in their Chambers, which might help to enhaunce
their beauties, or perfectness in any point: which standing against the
shinyng Sun, showed as they had been things divine rather the^ humain: which
thing gave such hartenyng, and encouragement to the knights that should Just,
that they taking lofty stomachs unto them, each one seemed to be far more
valiaunte, then in prooffe he was: those which were priest and renged for the
Iustes, brake and strained them selves with such force on the course, that at
the dashyng and stroke of their Lances, which in shiuers flewe up into the
air, some of them being cast out of the Saddles, fell down to the ground:
the rest more expert and valiaunte, without breach of staff, atchiued their
course gallauntlie. Which thing a certain young knight seeing, who seemed in
countenance and show, to be of great virtue and valiauncie, who that same
Morning was come to assiste at the Iustes, advanced himself, and came so
fiercely with his Spear toward one of them, which had not been dishorsed, and
who seemed to him the sloutest Iuster of all, called Anthenor, and who had
cast adoune the gentle knight Florenges, and stroke him so roughly upon the
shield, that at the first blow the lance passed through his body, more the^
a yard in length: whereat the Emperor was much agreeued, and likewise all
his Barons and Knights (for next his nephewe Pharisor he was the valiauntest,
and wisest of all his Empire: and specially Gyllant of Cartage, who was his
great friend and compaignion: who to revenge his death, came toward him, but
he received him so bravely, that after his Lance was broken, he took such a
leap to the ground, that all the beholders thought he had broken his neck.
The young Knight continuyng his course, came against an other busy fellow, and
he used him so as he did the other, and without breach of Spear, he
ouerthrewe, and slew that day more then fifty of the finest and ioyliest
knights: whereat those which saw him, were much amerueiled, for he ran
not against any, whom he bare not from his Horse to the ground, and made
them moreover there to confess, that his Lady was more fair then theirs,
whereof the good Giant Ergoferant being advised, disdaining much that he should
triumph so long, purposed to try one blow for the love of his new
Mistress, and came all armed, and mounted upon a luster Steed, weenyng by his
only presence to astonishe him, and to make him flee incontinente. But it
chanced clean contrary. For the young knight having spied him, came with
Spear in rest toward him, and little fearyng him, received the blow bravely
upon his shield, which was so huge and sharp, that pearcyng quite through, it
passed under his arm an elle or more, which being recovered, he finished
his course: the Giauntes blow (though strong and weighty) not remouyng him
one whitte. Whereat he being much despited and angered, took his great
Battle Axe, and with much fury came against him (who ioylily received him
with such force, that if he had not by his agillitie and nimblenesse, eschewed
the weighty blows of the Giaunte, he had not so long stood against him as
he did. But fleyng some while the Giauntes furious blows, some while
receiuyng those which he thought less dangerous upon his shield, so to give
him better occasion of play, by rappyng him now on his shield, and now on his
Helm, he bare himself so valiauntly that the battle endured an whole hour:
the Assistauntes (who of his valiau^cie wist not what to judge, were so
transported with marvel) not perceiuyng any advantage either of the one
party or of the other, and so weary were they of the Combat, that to take
breath they retired back assunder, a Roodes length, the better to begin their
next encountrie. But when they had rested in quiet about a quarter of an hour,
they would have begone again, when behold there arrived two Knights all
covered with the skins of wild beasts, down to their horses hoofes, so
hideous to behold, as ever was Monster that Hercules slew: who having long
time been hid behind the preasse of the people, who busily beheld the Combat
of the Giaunte, and the brave vncoothe Knight, to see the end and issue
thereof, were wearied to stand so long idle without plaiynge some part of
the Tragedy: wherefore leapyng into the field (not without great
astonishment to the Assistaunce, chiefly to the Ladies, who (deemyng them
Devils or Hags of Hell so disguised) cast forth such a cry, that amazedly
descendyng from the Skaffoldes where they sat, they fled with all speed
possible toward the tops and Turretts of the Palace, to see with more
suerty the issue of the Combat, and to co^template these new come knights
more further of. But the Empress nor her daughter, neither any of their
Damozelles moved one whit, being certified by a Squire disguised with a
Visarde and a long white Beard, that these were two of their knights, who of
purpose were come to break of the Combat betwixt the Giaunte and the valiant
young knight. Who having certified the Empress hereof, road speedely to ye
Combatters, who by this time had begone to hacke and hew the one the other,
and presentyng to each of them a Lance, said these words. Worthy knights.
I pray you, that taking a little Truce, you will hear what I say. The savage
Knights my Masters enamoured and desirous of the great prowess which they
see to be in you, desire you of courtesy, that geuyng some releasement to
your Combat, it will please you, to take each of you one of these Lances, and
let them prove their force by the breakyng of one only Staff against your
persons: assuring you that they be men and mortal creatures, but yet right
strong and valiant knights, and not as some suppose, Sprites, or walking
Ghostes, either Castor or Pollux, so disguised. Verelie for one blow, said
the young knight, they shall not be refused on my side, no, not for two or
three, if they will so many: but it shall be with this on the Ground (said
he) which I will use in this case, for in mine opinion it is stronger then
thine. And as he would have descended to take it up, whiles the Giaunt seized
upon the biggest of the others, the Squire took it up lightly, noc
permittyng him to stoop dou^e: and gave it into his hand, which was the same
wherewith he had slain and overthrown so many knights: and as soon as he had
it, he and the Giaunt came together, saying, what know we whether they be
deuilles or no, according to their apparel, and straight ways they saw them
come with such force against them (with their Spears in Rest) yt the greater
wild man made the Earth tremble under him, who hit the young knight on the
Shield with such force, that he burste his Spear without stirring from the
Sadle: although the other had pierced his Shield in diverse places: wherein his
Lance abidyng fastened, he fell huygely to take his measure on the ground:
whereat all the people that saw it, said, that the great devil had cast the
little devil adomne. And on the other part, the meetyng together of the
Giaunte, and the other savage manne was such that breaking their staves the
one upon the other with out failyng, they bravely performed their courses: and
had begun again to Just, if the savage manne seeing his fellow with the
Lance in hand, which he had drawn from his shield, to fly like ye wind from
out of the field, had not paced after him with great have, and the disguised
Squire also, who had brought the Spearestaues in such forte, that sone their
were out of sight. For being passed the Tonne, they entered into a Woodd so
thick and far, that none could after that set eye on them. Whereof the
young vncoothe Knight was so abashed (who thought to have had the price of the
Iustes) that he seemed to go beside him self, and mountyng on Horse, took a
Lance and rode after them, to he avenged of his fall, leauyng the Emperor
and all the rest so ameruailed that they knew not what to think of this
adventure, if it were not that the young Knight, who was cast down, were not
the Youth of the Faieries: considering the courage that in him consisted, and
that the other were some Magiciens, who had made him loose his glory and
honor, which he had gained in the Iustes, had it not been for this: but
they were far out of their compte, and so it fell out that by the common
consent of the Judges, the price was allottet to the greater of the wild men,
who had carried away the Lance.

The Emperor knew who the wild men were, who then wanne the prise of the
Iustynges: the one of which (that is to wit) he that had ouerth owen the young
unknown Knight: so spurred his Horse all the long day, that being gone
astraie from his mate, whom he left in the Forest, he arrived in the euenyng
nere to a Castle, which stood upon a plain: where hearing the sound of a
Clarion, and the melodious voice of a Lady, he stayed and was lodged there
for that night, where he had much amorous talk with the loving Lady, wantyng
a Lover.

The. xiiij. Chupiter.
YOU have heard heretofore, how the good Giaunte Ergoferant delivered the
Squire Geliaste, and the Damozell, daughter to Flore^ges, whom the outlawes
would have ravished, who shortly after, as they went toward Rock Alpine, met
with ten Savage Knights, of whom, one having his Helmette vn^aced was known
to the Squire: who by his commandment disguised him self, and went on
message to the Ladies, as you have heard before told, and to present the
Lances to the knights to Just with all, and so went with them. Now this
Damozell (after that each one was retired) so as they were a^ the Table, and
divised of that which had passed at the Iustes, the Emperor being
determined, to send after the Savage men, to know what they were) entered
into the Hall (whereof her gentle Father Florenges was most joyous) and with a
merry countenance and pleasant tongue, recompted to all the compaignie, that
one of the Savage knights, that is to wit, he which conquered, the Lance
from the young knight unknown, was the Youth of the Faieries, and the other
was the good knight Pharisor, who were in such habit come to Just, and not
to be known. The which Youth required the Emperor by her, that he would
hold him excused, in that after the Iustes he so departed, and was absent from
his Court, because so great and vrgente affairs pressed him thereunto. But
as soon as he had dispatched his business, he would not fail to come, and
accomplish his promise made, and to remain fiftene days in his service.
Whereat the Emperor and the rest were much amarueiled, and scarre would have
believed it, had it not been for the good Giaunte Ergoferant, who said, that he
deemed thereof no less: in that the night before, he had marked Pharisor to
patche, and sow together a great many of beasts skins, as Bears, wild
Bores, Lions, and such like: and therefore it might well be, that they came so
apparelled: which thing coming to the ears of the Princess Porphyria, who
had enquired it aforehande of the Damozel who on the Youths part (as he had
commanded her) had dooen to her commendations, I leave, you to think whether
she were glad or sorry: for these two coutrarieties gave such assalutes, and so
troubled her heart, that she knew not on what side to turn her, neither could
tell whether she should rejoice: in that love (past al hope) had so much
favored her as to make her settle her affection and mind, upon Knight, who
even in the beginning of his deeds, made all them so astonished, that heard
speak of him: in so much that never having heard the like, they deemed, and
the Painims would firmly have believed, if they had seen or heard of the like,
that he was either Mars or Bellona, who had left Heaven, and come down, by
his worthy deeds to put people in admiration: Or whether she ought to be
sorrowful and sad, in being deprived of the presence of the thing, that in
this world she esteemed most dear. Restyng in doubt whether his Love, was
fained or no. In this gladsome and sorrowful perplexity consisted she,
pondering still how she might best know the truth of a thing so doubtful.

And on the other part, the Youth (in trauailyng and endeavoring himself by
his valiancy and prowess, to acquire and get of her yt which she would with
all her heart, honestly assign unto him, to wit, her grace, good will, and
favor) was secretly depatted, without discoueryng him self: to the'nde that
the Emperor, and the rest of the Knights through their importunauncie,
should not stay nor allure him to remain so near that fire, which still
flamed more and more, not able by oblivion to quench the heat thereof, so
sore kindeled by fancy in the furnace of his mind: being thereby so
distressed, that (as it were furious and half in a rage) after his sudden
departure from the Iustes, he so pricked forward (without thinkyng of ought
else) all day upon his good Horse Licocephall, that his friend Pharisor,
neither his Squire, not able to accompaignie him, in being not so well Horsed,
were constrained through the weariness and feblenesse of their Horses, to
remain in the midwaie, being in a rough and thick Forreste, where they of
force did then take their rest, the night coming upon them. And this
Forreste was fiftene miles from Co^stautinople, and at the end thereof, which
stretched in length more then twenty miles, where stood a very fair and
pleasant Castle, in the midst of a plain: near to the which the Youth of
the Faieries arrived late in the Euenyng, and would also have passed it, but
that he heard within, a Trumpette, which founded right melodiouslie, which
caused him to stay upon the plain, over against the Castle wall, to hear
and conceive the pleasant notes of the solemn Clarion: but when he had so
stayed a while there, (his ears being ravished with the sweet soundyng
Instrumente, he heard a Damozell (the Trumpette ceasyng) who syngyng most
melodiouslie, seemed to answer it in this sort.

WHat more excessive pain
Then that which my poor heart
Does day by day sustain,
Of anguishe, woe and smart?
Can one endure or pacientlie abide
But death must soon his threede of life decide?
Nor of what fire what flame
Is never seen to cease,
But that which has a game
To make my woes increase.
And boyles and burns within my balefull heart,
With languishing and still tormentyng smart.
That Thief Prometheus
Although a greedy grype,
Fast chainde on Caucasus
His flesh did tear and byte.
And still thus painde, was yet more blessed then I
Who in worse woes do wallowe still and cry.
For his ill had recure
And fortune framde this hap,
That Hercules by power
Did his anoyes vnwarp.
And that the gredy grype by him once slain
Prometheus was releasd from further pain.
But as for me I fear
My woes will nere take end,
And that my care to clear
The fates do nere pretend.
Till that the course of lucklesse life do pass
And I return forworne to that I was.
For Atrops homicyde
That plays a Butchers part,
Must be the sole Alcyde
That well may with her Dart,
In me this grype of love to Mortify,
Since (else but death) I see no remedy.
When she had atchiued this lamentable Song with note and voice, most
pititifull, she retired from the top of a Turret, which was at the one corner
of the Castle, most fair and pleasant to behold: and then was no more heard,
either voice or Clarion. Wherefore the Youth was exceedyng sorry: for in her
voice, and sound of the Instrumente he took so great pleasure, that seeing
him self deprived thereof, a sadness equal in contrariety to all his former
joy bechaunced him. But as wretched and unfortunate persons have naturally a
custom to comfort them selves in others harms semblable to theirs, so this
Damozel seeming to him to be tutched with the same disease that he was, he was
thereby somewhat revived: and determined (taking compassion of the Damozell) to
go to the Castle, and if it were possible, to recomfort her, But considering
well that such as are of perfect eyesight must lead the blind, and the free
from affliction, likewise comfort the desolate, he channged his opinion. In
fine, considering that he that is blind in his doings, leaves not yet of, to
comfort others in their affairs, though nere so like: As those sick
Physicians, who can give to their Pacientes better council the^ they can take
for them selves: In like sort do Advocates in other men's causes, although
most ignorant in their own proper affairs: he wholly resolved with him
self, (seeing also that as well he as his Horse had need of harbourough) to
go to ye Castle, to see if they would lodge him for that night. And being
approached nere thereto, he knocked mightily at the Gate: whereat there came a
Page well appointed. Who was in a little Gallery over the Portall, and puttyng
his head out at a Window, and seeing the Knight in such array he had so
great fear of him, that he ran out of the Gallerie through another which
stretched along the walls of the Castle even to the Chamber where the Lady
made her residence. Whether he being come, in post haste hid him self,
tremblingly under a Bed. Whereof the Dame being advertised, demanded of him
what he meant. Whereto he with great solemnes answered. Alas Madame, we are
all dead, for there is a great and monstrous Devil at the Gate, who would
gladly enter and come in, which if he do, we are all but dead. Go fond
coward (said the Lady) do Deuilles now abandon Hell to come hither? And
making him to depart from whence he was hid, she sent him to call another
Squire out of the next chamber, whom she commanded to go see who it was that
knocked at the Gate: whereto he obeyed. But having once seen the Knight, (no
less affrighted the^ the Page) he came and could to the Lady the like Tale:
whereupon she called a Knight, who somewhat more bold then the other, spoke
to ye Youth, who because he had seen the other asaied of his Skins, put them
of, and with his Helmet unlaced, stood uncovered, which more encouraged the
knight to speak, and to ask what he lacked. I would (said he) enter in, if
so it please the Lady to lodge me for this time. Tarry there a little (said
the Knight) to ease your self and take the ^ire, while I go to see what she
will therein do: and being departed from him, at last he came to open him the
door, which through (with his Horse) he entered into a large and spacious
Court where he alighted: And the Knight having delivered his Horse to the
Horsekeeper to carry to the Stable, much marueilyng at the growth and
goodlinesse of the same, and no less at his Master, led him into the Ladies
Chamber, who received him most honorably. And findyng Supper ready, with good
appetite he took his refection order: during which, she demanded whence he
was, and also what his name was. Whereto he answered, that he was borne in the
Realm of Great Britain: And to set the Lady deeper in matters of love, he
said he could call himself by none other name but Beauties Slave. At which
word the Lady fetched a grievous sigh: which the Youth well notyng, and
seeing the way now open to attain to his intended purpose (which was to
know the cause why she chau^ted so dolorous a Song as she did in his hearing)
he asked why she sighed so. Ha courtuous Knight (said she) it is not without
cause, as well you me deem: for by your name you have reopened all my
Wounds, bringing me in memory and mind of him, which by imitatyng you, I
may to my self usurp. For seeing you say that you are Beauties Slave: it can
not be, but that in seeing some infectiue semblance, you have drunk of the
same Licour, that I most unhappily have supped up, which makes me to be in
equality of il ease with you, who as I judge by your gesture and countenance
(if I be not to much thereby deceived) are neither less, nor (as well it may
not be) greater then mine, I may name my self from hence forward rightly, (the
same being correspondent to my miserable condition as well as yours) the Slave
of Love, for so has he tied: fettered me under the Yoke of his servitude (as
none living being able to surpass me) I will not hope of my self, being in
dispeire (from which I believe you are, exempte) ever to franchise my self from
his servitude: thereto seeing neither way nor Pathe which may conduct and
lead me out of this Labyrinth of la^ guishyng thoughts of Love: in deepth
where of I am plunged and drowned. I doubt not Lady (said the Youth) but that
it is possible that you have some great feeling in your self, of the ardent
fire which Cupide commonly kindles: but to say yt it approaches (which GOD
forbid) to the vehemency of that, which I feel to consume me, I can not be
thereof persuaded: seeing that (as you faigne youres) it is my Mallady that is
incurable, and not that which afflicts you, as far as I can perceive. For
women's amourous co^ceites are resembled to ye biting of the venomous Scorpion,
which has remedy again of the woundmaker. Wherefore I conclude of your
disease, being unequal in painefulnes to mine, that this name which you seek
to usurp, is not so fittyng or convenient to you, as mine is to me: being
perchance contrary to that which you have declared, of having any power to
reap redress of him, who has fowen you those seeds of sorrow: but I am not
so. Worthy Knight and my dear friend (replied the Lady) I confess in verity,
that those last whoroes ye spoke touching your alledgment, yt an amorous in
flitence may be quenched by him yt kindled it, is a truth. But also I say that
which is fatally in men being of the same nature, as you said at ye
beginning, that is: that my malady is unmatchable to youres, I ought not to
name my self by a name (as I have done to imitate youres) not groundyng ought
on truth. For why may I sooner attain that remedy whereof ye spoke, then
you: since it is much more impossible. For that (said the You the) that
Ladies, being surprised with the love of some Knight, by their only count
naunces and beckes, which they well know how to contriue (when they would
come to the accomplishmet of their Loves) better then men, there archiue more
and obtain sooner the fulfilling of their desire, then men being less
careful of their Chastity, which above all things they ought to guard and
regard, whereof, when, and at what time love forces to use liberality so
prodigally to allay their amorous Passions, they are sooner succored then
men: who (like as I have done) having hoysed the sail of their lives, into a
place too haughty and rebellious, for fear of being too shrewdely shent and
checked, not daryng to manifest their mallady, are constrained to consume them
selves in the Smoke of flow and languishyng fire. Whereas these (men being
far more pitiful and courteous in this case then they) at the least show or
twinklyng of the eye receive redress of their dolor.

Sir knight) replied again the Lady, if I would here again allege the force
of shame, which is, or at leastwise ought rather to be in women then in
men, to have more efficacy, in lettyng her from obtainyng that which she
defireth, then the cruelty of Ladies, which in vain you have brought in
question, to make for your self in this disputation, I assure you, that of me
you shall not get the upper hand. But seeing perchance you have desire to
go take your rest, and that disputyng hereon would be to tedious I will
confound you, and make you confess, my malady to be incurable, and
therefore equal, or far worse then yours. By an occasion which I have more
apertenaunte and brief: the which is even so as I will recite to you, whereby
you may more clearly understand my sore distress. Wherefore know you, that
I was daughter to the Duke of Chalcyde, who in his second Nuptialles, having
married a Damozell of noble house, called Marcella, he retired unto ye Emperors
court, where a year ago he was slain by the cursed Giaunte Ferclaste, leauyng
me here for the gouernesse of this Castle, which presently is in my possession
through his deceasse: and to the end I might have no occasion of sadness he
left me, for guard and compaine such Knights, as he had greateste confidence
in: one of whom is he, who opened you even now the gate, who is a good and a
loyal Knight. But as no body is without a shadow, so few men are found
without Print, or press of some imperfection, which accustomablie is natural
in the^. For he has this vice in him, that if he see any thing which likes
him, or is agreeable to his fancy, he will work so by some slight (if
otherwise he can not) that he will have it. The other whom I deemed of less
disceipte and treason, was far more malicious. For incontinently after the
departure of my said Father, he showed himself to be amorous of me, and by his
filed speech and messages, with all other means possible (feigned himself so
distressed, that he could not at any time rest, without disturbyng me) to have
of me the accomplishemente of his desires: which caused me, that seeing his
distoyaltie, I took it so sore against heart, that after having checked, and
chastized him, I kept him so short, that in despite of this my refusal, he
changed his late love into dire desire of vengeance, and that so vehemently
that there was no treason so great, which he left unattempted, to bring me
to his purpose, and filthy practice. But not findyng the success of
accomplishement in his enterprise, behold a sudden chance, which to mine ill
luck herein happened, and on a sudden to him was favorable.

For one day as he walked in the Forest hereby, busied in his deceivable
inventions, he by chance encountered a Pilgrim, who^ without thinkyng thereof
(as I have since understood) he asked whence he was, who told him that he was
of the Realm of Persia: But for that in his time, he had been a great
Magicien, and by his Nicromancie had committed many execrable deeds and
works, for which to do penance, he had been to see the holy Sepulcher of
of pur Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ: the Knight asked him further, what
adventure had forced him to travail so far into these quarters: Whereto
again he answered, that he durst not go into his own Country of Persia to
dwell, for that the great Sophie of Persia called Mutinell, would work his
death, because he once vau^ted, to have made by his art a Cup of such
virtue, that who so ever drank therein (of what drink so ever) they should be
so taken with the love of him or her, which gave it them, that maugre them
selves, they should be constrained to love paste all measure: which cup he
never would give to the Sophie, therewith to make him beloved of the Princess
Porphyrie, daughter to the Emperor of Constantinople, of whom he was so
amorous, that having now four or five times demanded her for wife, the
Emperor was constrained to accord, so that she would love him and consent to
chose him for housebande, and that he would Baptize him self, and hold the
Christians Law, which for his part he has done. But he was so foul and so
ill favored, that although he was esteemed one of the best knights of the
world; yet she hated him mortallie: wherefore he would have used my Cup
(said the Pilgrim) but I choose rather to abandon the Country, and to pass
the rest of mine aged days, in some vncothe coaste, then to be occasion of
so great wickedness, as this my cup might work to all Christendom, as
well I have foreseen by my Art. My Knight having understood so much of the
Pilgrim, was well apayed of so good an encounter. And after askyng him whether
he yet had the Cup, the Pilgrim showing it, he slew him: and taking his
Cup, came toward me, and showing me fair semblaunce, served me with the
same, by means of a Squire, who atte^ded on the Table, being full of wine, made
pestiferous by virtue of the vessel: which has brought to pass, that ever
since I have been enuenomed by this cruel and murderous drink. Having so
said and concluded, she (sheadyng a number of brinishe tears) I look quod
she for none other delivery but Death, and the final end of my days, which
me thinks too long slacketh, and staieth his paces, from releasyng me of this
great servitude. And now see sir knight, how not without cause I chaunted that
song which you ouerheard, and ordinarily do use it at the same hour. For
that, in tellyng and complainyng my self so shrilly of mine adverse Fortune, I
feel great ease and solace. And having heard your name, it seemed me good to
usurp the same, which newly I have attributed to my self. But what? (said
the Youth) is there not means to appaise your malady, by the enjoying of
him, on whom you are so amorous? Alas no (said the Lady) for the wretch (to
take the more revenge of me) slew the Pilgrim to withstand my purpose, and
so sledde, since when I never could hear word of him, that I might have
punished him, according to his deserts.

Then the Youth being in a confused amaze, knew not what to think, but
taking great compassion of the Lady (who wept pitifully) he betook him
self to recomforte her, the best that he could, and did so much that after
having stayed her tears, she caused him to be conducted into a very fair
Chamber, where there was a rich bed, and much costly furniture, wherein he
laid himself but in little rest, being still troubled with the talk, which
the Lady had with him, where we a while leave him, to tell of other matters.

The worthy Knight Pharisor, who remained in the Forest, heard a Knight
bitterly complainyng, to spoke much ill of the Youth of the Fairies: whereat
he taking disdain, there was between them so hard and sharp a Combat, that
both two were smitten down in a maze, but the Knight of the Forest being
sooner revived then Pharisor, would have slain the Squire Geliaste, who fhyng,
met with a Knight that was armed with the Arms, and mounted on the Horse of
his Master, against whom when the unknown Knight had foughten, he slew him.
And supposing he had been the Youth of the Fairies, took his Armor and Horse,
and went unto the Emperors Court, who supposing that the Youth of the Fairies
and his Neuewe had been dead, was much agreued against him: who thereuppon
refrained his Court and departed.

The xv. Chapter.
WE left the gentle knight Pharisor in a rough Forest, and full of Trees,
much weried and vexed, because his fellow, the Youth of the Fairies was so
far passed, that he could not be overtaken, as not being so well horsed as
he. But as he was in thought and talk with Geliaste the Squire (who also was
constrained to keep him company) what way they should hold the next day to
find him out, behold they heard the voice of a knight, who by his words
seemed much forrowfull and complained very dolourously, saying with a pitiful
and lamentable voice. O wicked and perverse fortune. Is it not now, that I have
better occasion to complain me, of the diffauour thou sheweft me presently,
then for the favor and grace which thou bestowedst on me in times past I was
bound and bent to bless thee? For even as they which will commit some
Traison, show them selves willing, practicing abundance of pleasures toward
them whom they will betraie, to have thereby afterward, better means to
execute more cruelly their traitorous and disceptiue thoughts: thou have used
toward me like ways and means: extollyng me so hie, that being ready to
pass, up to ye hiest degree, of thy wheel, where I looked yt thou should
set and place me, if thou had brought to pass and letten me to have
achiued and brought away the prise of the Iustes, so to have accomplished the
promise which I made to my dame and Lady Polidamia: thou have contrarily (to
the end that my fall might thereby be more damageable and shameful)
traitorously precipitated me to the most low and base room thereof: the
better to bereue me of all the honor, which heretofore I have had in these
Coasts, which have the report to be most abounddant, in multitude of good
knights: the greatest part of whom, I have by my mighty Arm and valiauncie
vanquished, not only with Lance, (which was no great honor to me being
enchaunted) but also with Sword, so far that not without great joy and
contentment of her, whom I love more then my self, and who likewise loves me
more then her self, I was had in reputation for the best knight of the world.
But alas what might she say, if she knew, that in the Emperors Court of
Coustantinople, there were one found, who (doing that, which all the knights
of great Britain could not do) had made me forsake ye Sadle at one stroke
with his Lance, I not harming him in any wise? would she not esteem me as it
were Paris couched in Helens Lap? I being so much favored of her, that I
were become a degenerated Cowarde, and nothing worth: who after having
vanquished (before he fell in love at the Games of Wrestling) the most
valiant of al Valiauntes, Hector, fled in fine when most need was of his
prowess, before the fury of fight, less fearful of Menelaus. Noe, noe, I
will loose my life, but I will gain again the guard and gloss of mine
honor: I will so pursue the Glutton (who after he had with one blow so cast
me to ground, fled away) that if I take him, I will make an Anatomy of his
body, (be he the biggest of all the Deuilles) as severe Medea did once of the
Corpse of her brother. The gentill knight Pharisor having heard these
reproachful, and outrageous words against his Companion, could not stay, but
that lacing his Helmet, and taking his Spear and Shield, he went thither
where he had heard the knight, whom he found liyng on the grass, and his
Helmet under his head, which served him as a Pillowe or Bolster: which he
(seeing his adversary come) put on, and taking his Horse which he held by the
Bridle in one hand, and his Spear in the other, he mounted up lightly, which
thing Pharisor permitted him to do: who never thelesse afterward said to
him. Sir knight, upon what occasion have you called him Glutton, who is worth
without comparison, more then ever you were worth in your life? and why do you
accuse of Treason his great valiauncie? well appears it, that you have put
small store of wit in your brain.

To this answered the Knight no thing at al (who in his shield bare a Griffon
of Silver, in a field of Sable) but retiryng from Pharisor (who put himself for
ward to defend him) being fully bent, to revenge the injuries which he had
said by his friend) came suddenly (so transported with pre and fury, that he
could not answer: and rushed against him so fiercely upon his shield
(which was of good metal) that he made him forsake the Saddle: but for
counterchaunge of this blow, he was so rudely smitten by Pharisor, that he was
also brought to ground and the Saddle attwixte his legs: and thinkyng it had
been him, that had once before brought him from his Horse, he rose lightly in
hope to revenge him: and very glad to have found him so fittlie to his wish,
he came against Pharisor (who attended his coming with Sword in hand)
wherewith he raught him such a rappe, that abatyng one graunde quarter of his
shield, the blow light on the Helmet so right, and with such force, that his
eyes sparkled with fire, who thereupon rendered his change shortly, by a blow
so violente upon the side of the Helmet, that (had it not been good) he had cut
his head in twain, for so it went, that he staggered ready to fall to the
ground. But retournyng to him self, he took such heart to him, that giving
him with all his force five or six thwa^kes all on a row, he so amazed him
that he knew no more where he was: then as one pricked with a certain desire
of reuengemente, and feelyng him self so roughly handeled and taking heed
that his adversary gave him not such, nor so more heavy blows to endamage
him) be came to strike him on the right side, and on the left, so that he was
constrained to give over his former blows and to settle his shield where now
need required. And the^ one might have seen good sport, for ye one encountered
the other so rashely, as though they had been both mad: one would have
thought that there had been more then ten Knights in the Combatte, which
lasted in this forte more then an hour, without ceasing of strokes, still the
most furious that ever were seen. In so much that finally, through feblenesse
and weariness (the blood issuing from their many wou^des) they were forced to
fall both down in a Trance, the one here, and the other there, as if they
had been dead, where they remained more then a long hour, without stirryng
either hand or foot.

Whereat the poor Squire Geliaste, supposyng Pharisor to be dead, and seeing
him self all sole and alone, after an insinite number of piteous complaints
and dolorous lamentations, he went to unlace sir Pharisors Helmet, to see if
certainly he were dead or no: but before that ye knight with the Silver Griffon
arose, being revived out of his sound, which thing the Squire seeing (for
fear of having that which he willingly would not) he took himself to flight
as fast as he could. But (as he stedde, the Knight still pursuyng him) who
(deemyng Pharisor dead) meante to show upon the Squire the extremity of his
enraged revenge. But he encountered by chance in the way, a knight armed at
all points, bearyng a Shield with a great Cross of Gold, in a field of
Sable, mounted upon the good Lycocephal. To whom (taking him for his Master)
he cried and said: for Gods love, Master succcour me, and revenge with like
death, the knight Pharisor, whom this Glutton has stain even now. Then the
knight who had no Spear nor weapon, came to the other knight, and stayed him
in speaking thus:

O fair and Noble Knight (for as much as I can see, you are not very
courteous, so to handle and use a Squire, who has not wherewith all to defend
him self. Whereat the Knight chaffed paste all measure, and said to him all in
Chollere: it is even thee, it is even thee, whom I will use so then, as well to
serve in his steed, as a more ample subject to my pretended revenge, as to
have that fair Horse, and those gallaunte Arms, which thou bear far
fitter for me, then for thee. And saying so, with his naked Sword in his
hand, he discharged such a blow upon the Knights Shield of the Golden
Cross, that he astonished the arm wherewith he held the same. But he hurt
him not otherwise at that blow: for his Sword lept into the air more then an
elle high: whereat being astonished, he redoubled with more force his blows,
but he felt it worse and worse: For at last, his Sword leapte out of his
hands, which thing the other Knight seeing, who had gotten the Sword to
defend him self with all, beganue to strike him with all his puissaunce, in
such wise, that the Knight of the silver Griffon, not knowing how to behave
him self, as not having wherewith to offend his enemy, warded by such
slight and skill, his blows, that in like manner he came to catch hold of
his body, and cast him so bluntly to the ground, that (being not one of the
lightest fellows in the world) be could not rise again so sone, but that the
other had caught him, and dislaced the Helmet of his head, which he cut in
two pieces with his sword: notwithstanding that the other cried him mercy.
And disarmyng him of all the rest of his Harness, he put it upon him self,
and cast the Shield on his neck, taking the Sword which he had: and
mountyng upon the good Horse Lycocephal, who feelyng the Spurs, begaune to
praunce and manage in such manner, that the Knight never having ridden Horse,
so prompte and nimble as this same, at his bounty and dexterity became much
astonished. Nevertheless, more joyous of the conquest, then if he had been
made Emperor of Constantinople: And taking his way toward the Town, he
arrived there the next day about Noone, where he found the Emperor and all
his Barons and Knights: who all of purpose most joyous had put them selves
in way, with most magnificall brave equipage of the Gate, where through his
entry lay, the more sumptuously to receive him.

For the good Knight Guillant of Cartage, who the day before, had followed him
to fight with him at the Sword, and so to repair his disgracemente gotten at
the Iustes, having seen him that Morning, in a village six or seven miles from
Constantinople, where he was alighted to bait his Horse, and deemyng him to
be the Youth of the Faieries, he returned in all haste, to bring word to
the Emperor of his coming: who at the entrance of the City with all his
train, came to meet him, causyng at his ariuall, to sound an infinite noise
of Trumpettes, Clarions, Fyfes and Drums, with such other like Instruments.
Whereof he was much amarueiled: and could not judge for what cause he made him
so great cheer, nor wherefore the gentle Knight florenges, advanced him self
to embrace him, and to kiss his hands, saying: that he thanked him, for the
deliueryng of his daughter.

For as much as I can guess (said the uncouth Knight) you take me for an
other, in that I never remember me, to have delivered Damozell from any man's
hands in this Country. In saying of which words, and other such like
(they supposing that he spoke these things, to co^ceale and keep himself
unknown) they arrived in this magnificencie at the Pallaice, where the Tables
were spread for dinner. Then at the instaunte request of the Emperor, the
unknown Knight disarmed him self, to sit next his Majesty: who (so doing)
had not wholly unlaced his Helmet, but that he made all the compaignie
marvelous much astonished, when they saw plainly yt he was an other, then
they took him for. Yea, look how much in his Harness, and being yet unknown
he was loved, cherished, and much made of: so much more, out of his Harness,
and known, he was mocked, and mortally hated of many. Seeing it to be him,
who at the Iustes, had used and handeled them so rudely, yea, and killed some
of their compaignions and friends. In so much that (had it not been for fear
of the Emperor, who for nothing would suffer any person to have outrage in
his Court) a little thing would have made them to have slain him there
presently. Nevertheless, dissemblyng their angry affections, the best that
they could, each one stood bytyng his lip, for the great sorrow and
sudden change they had seen. Whereat, howheit he was much abashed, and
amarueiled, yet placed he him self at dinner (notwithstanding) next to the
Emperor. During the which (the Emperor askyng him whence he came, yea, how
and wherefore he had so changed Horse and Harness, in obtainyng such fair
ones as he had) he recompted to him from point to point his whole adventure,
and how (as he was in the black Forreste) he encountered with those savage
Knights, whom the day before at the Iustes, after an hard and sharp
Combatte he had there left deadde. And taking that Horse and Harness from
the one of them, he was therewith returned, to see the end and issue of the
Iustes: thankyng him nevertheless for the honor, and great entertainemente,
which without deserte, it had pleased his Majesty to do him: protestyng
therefore to perform any service, yt it would please him to command him.
Whereto the Emperor (thoroughly moved with ire and sorrow, as by his face,
countenance, and rolling eyes, well might appear) answered in this sort.

Knight (said he) you need not to thank me; of the honor done to you, at
your entrance into this City: for so much as to you ward it was not meante,
neither was your person the Saint, to whom my magnificent Sacrifice was
vowed. In no wise was it for your entry (which has been too damageable and
hurtful for us, yea, that ever you came hither) that the pomp and
magnificencie (wherein you have been brought thus far) has been prepared: but
rather for one of them, whom you vaunte to have slain, whereof if I were
assured, I promise you, you should never pass my Palliace, but that your
cruel carcass should be cut and chopte in pieces, to serve therewith the
Crows and Ravens. But doubtless, the beginning of his deeds, and feats of
Arms sooner acertaine me, that if you have slain him as you say, or rather
robbed him of his Harness, and Horse (as well it may be) it was surely when
he was a sleep. For otherwise your valiauncie was vile, and courage
incomparable to his, as well appeared, detwixte you in the Tournemente: whose
virtue shined as a fair Face does, in a five and Cristaline glass. And
whereas you offer me your service (said the Emperor, redoublyng his Chollere,
and knockyng his fiste against the Table) I have no need of it, and less of
you. Neither know I, of whence you are: but this I say, that who soever ye
he, it is not in your power, neither in your frei^des powers (were it that you
were King Floridamantes. Son of Great Britain) although you and they
employed all their forces to gratify me, so as you have displeased me in
killyng them: of whom the one being my near nephue, to wit, the King of
Austria his Son my dear brother, was one of the best and valiauntest knighte
of all mine Empire: And the other, was he, who in prowess and valiancie was
second to none, as well has appeared by the valiaunce which he showed, in
conqueryng the Giauntes and their Guard, at Rock Alpine. For which deed I
being much beholding to him, it will be impossible (I not knowing otherwise
from whence he was) to acquitte my self of so great an obligation, as he had
gotten of me, by this great good turn: which will cause, that ever
henceforthe, I shall be attainted and blotted, with th foul vice of
Ingratitude, which about all others I abhor and detest. And get you from my
presence as soon as you can, that I find you no more in my Court: else will I
make you.

And for the great grief which he had of the two Knights deaths, he could
speak no further, but al angered and chaffed with despite, he arose from the
Table in great agony: which thing his Meyny seeing, who were partly pricked
with the like passions, they would have ouerrunne the Knight: who hearing the
Emperor so grievously displeased, was lightly lopen over the Table, and
(fearyng outrage) had already seized upon the best part of his harness, as
Helmet, Shield, and Swerd, which he held naked in his hand, and had slain
two of the first, who went to offend him. Which thing the Emperor seeing,
caused the other to cease, who as then busely began to assail him mortally
on all sides, blaming and reprehending them sharply for being so rash, in
outraging a knight unknown, in his presence, and uncommanded: who
acknowledgyng their fault, retired and ceased the conflict, leaving the young
uncouth Knight so boiling in ire and despite, that it passed. Such was his
stomach enflamed with grief and anger, that if he had had them before him in
the field, they had not escaped with the loss of so few as they did, neither
could he but speak these outrageous words to the Emperor. Know (said he)
thou Emperor of Constantinople, that thou haste misused in thy Court, the
Son of one of the most puissaunt and valiauntest Kings of the Earth,
albeit that with his person he has done thee so much favor, (thou not any
way deseruyng it) as to come honor and beautify thy Court: who is of power
with the aid of his friends, not only to take vengeance of thee and thy
folks for this outrageous fact, in destroying thine Empire: but also to bring
in subjection unto him at his pleasure, the whole Dominions of all Asia and
Africa. Wherefore deem well, that if thy future chances be not guided and
blessed by the bounty of some good destenie, which may take pity and
compassion on thee: that to thy great prejudice this pranke shall not remain
unpunished. And having so said, he went to find the good Horse Lycocephall,
which his Squire had made ready in the Stable: wherefore he armed himself with
the rest of the enchaunted harness which he had gotten: and being on
horseback, he went with all have toward the Haven, where after he had made
bargain with a Ship which was pressed to pass into the parties of Gaul, he
entered aboard and sailed quietly on the maine Sea, toward the most small, but
most fertile place that is in the world. But if as then, the puissaunt and
toylesome Giaunt Ergoferant, (who was gone to set order for the government of
the Castle of Rock Alpine: ye possession whereof (as well by the Emperor, as by
the Youth of the Fairies, as far as he knew, was left to him vaca^t and
paisible) had been there present, he had not gone so thence without Battle,
especially if he had heard his last words of presumption to the Emperor,
whereby he manaced him most ignominiously: whereat he was so galled and greened,
and the other knights so troubled, that they knew not what to do. But after
that the blood of the Emperor, which through chafed Choler urged him to this
anger, was cooled, and that he had given some release to his grief, he much
repented him, so to have used the unknown knight as well for the great virtue
and prowess which he esteemed to be in him, as that he understood he was a
Christen kings Son: and reputed himself for so foul a fact committed in
his Court, indigne and not worthy any more to wear Imperial Crown upon his
head, or to bear Scepter. Nevertheless ponderyng upon the vehemente Passion
and just occasion which had moved him thereunto, he changed opinion, and
then again blamed his Meynie for being so bold in this attempt. On thus wise
assailed with these two co^trarieties, (which in great fury made him walk up
and down fretting and fuming) none daryng to presume presently to comfort or
counsel him, there entered into the Hall a Page, who certified him that a
great Lord of Persia was arrived, who greatly desired to speak with him, and
had brought him Letters on the behalf of the great Sophy: whereupon the
Emperor chaungyng and dying his countenance with a certain feined color of
gladness and joy, caused him to be brought in, to hear his Message, and so
to answer him: where we leave them for a certain time ere we tell you any
further.

The pitiful and dolorous complaints which the Lady Porphyria made, when she
heard of the death of her lover the Youth of the Fairies: and the Maidens
Dynamia and Amidree also heard that Pharisor was slain, which thing being
known by the Giaunt Ergoferant, he put him self in queste of the unknown
Knight, to revenge their deaths.

The. xvi. Chapter.
WHiles the Emperor was much enraged toward the unknown knight, (as you
have heard in the Chapter precedent) the Empress with other great Dames and
Damozelles were at Dinner in her Chamber, and the Lady Porphyria with her Cousin
Harderine, were in theirs, to prate and parlee of the Personage and prowess of
the Youth of the Fairies, whom they deemed to have been at Dinner with her
father the Emperor, and the Lady Porphyria was purposed to have spoken to him,
after Dinner, and give him some certain secret sign and testimony of the
amorous alterations, which with an infinite number of griefs and dolours
still distressed her poor heart. But the Empress hearing into her Chamber
the prefull words of the Emperor, who cried and spoke loud, and also the
sound of Swerdes and Harness in the Hall, when as the Emperors folks would
have slain the knight unknown: desirous to understand the cause of this
tumult, she had sent one of her Damozelles down, expressly to know the
news, and to bring her word thereof: who having learned the matter, came again
all amassed and sorrowful, to tell her of the pitiful death of her Neuew
Pharisor, whom she so much loved, and of the valiant Youth of the Fairies who^
she no less esteemed, for the great good tournes which he had done them, in
deliueryng them from the continual care, that clogged them all, whiles the
Giauntes Ferclaste and Androfort were alive and unslain of him.

The Empress and her Damozelles hearing so piteous a stir and disorder, cast
forth a most lamentable cry, accompanied with a flood of Tears, distilling
from their radiant eyes along their most amiable faces: and so quite
dispossessed with new distresses, ceased not to weep and lament, some for
the love of Pharisor (who to many of them was friend and Parent) other some
per compagnio, to see their fellowcs weep so extremely, took thereat so
great compassion, that (as women are always most enclinable to the change of
affections) as I said, to bear their friends company, more then for grief
they had, they made such accordaunt moan and dose, that never heart was so
hard whom it would not have moved to pity and compassion: and especially if
he had heard the co^plaintes and lamentations of the Damozell Dinamya sister to
Pharisor and Amidree, who (though he were in no wise amourous of her) yet
burning in love toward him, she made such lamentations, that (as it were
half mad) she ran away shritching and criyng into her Chamber, which was
adjoining to that where fair Lady Porphyria was (not knowing ought of all
this) with her Cousin Harderine, who hearing the lamentable moanes of Amidree,
went presently into her Chamber, where they found her dead sounded in the
place. Whom (after they had with cold water, and other such like things,
recovered to her former senses) they asked and prayed her deeply, to declare
unto them, the cause of her dolor and great lamentations: which she (not
able to keep it covered any longer) confessed, and with a low and troubled
order of voice, said thus: Alas and wellawaie, Ladies mine, Ah my dear friend
Pharisor is dead: what (said the Lady Porphyria, may that be? and is he dead
in deed? O my dear Cousin: But tell me Amidree in verity who has reported
these news? For I can not persuade my self yt it is so, seeing he had in his
co^paigny a Knight, by whose safconduite (as well of his valiauncie has
experience been showed) he was sufficient to discomfite a whole army: but I
believe it is some one, who (to make a kind of proof of your love toward him)
has dashte you out of countenance, with this crafty cloaked tale. Ah Madame,
(said Amidree) would GOD, you now said true: but there is nothing more
certain: as well his murderer is lately come to vaunte him self thereof
within, armed with the Arms, and mounted on the same Horse, which was once
that gentle Knights, that overcame the Giauntes, whom he has also slain, and
spoiled thereof. And hereat the Emperor is so enraged, that he has
ignominiouslie chaced him out of his Court, although the Caitiffe was he (a
thing which makes me rather to believe it) which lastly bare him self so
valiant in the Iustes, that none could resist the poise of his puissaunce,
but to death he went, were he never so well Armed.

At these last words was the Lady Porphyria, so surprised with a sudden
shiueryng of dolesome fear, that she could not speak a word more: her heart
and mouth being as it were closed up round, with a sudden passion of those
pitiful news: in so much that she fell down flat in the place, rather as
one dead, then in a sound as she was: and became so pale and wanne, that it
was wounderfull: not moouyng nor stirryng, more then a corpse quighte destitute
of vital breath. Where of the Maidens Harderine and Amidree had so great
fear, that tremblyng for sorrow they ran (redoublyng still their
complaints) with speed, to recompte to the other mournyng Maidens (whom they
found although quite drouned in tears, yet enforcyng them selves the best
they could, to comfort the desolate Dinamya) this second mischief, and
mournful hap of the death of the young Princess. Whereat they all leauyng
Dynamya, ran suddenly to see her, and first of all the Empress, who first
enteryng into Amidrees Chamber where she was, she saw the corpse of her
miserable child, liyng flat in the place for dead: and running to embrace
it, it is impossible to express, and much less to write the dolorous
complaints, and bitter cries which she cast forth: bedewyng her (I believe)
with greater abundance of tears, tricklyng from her tender eyes) then the
gaie spryng time is wont to show of Flowers and Plants, in quantity and
quality both, to deck and illustrate the green fertile Fields, environed
with the River Nilus: or rather with more number and show, tha^ there is
Sands, upon the banckes of each running River that make their courses and with
furious force vomit their fomie floods into the wide Ocean Sea: and (if I
should say more) then the number of Stars in the heaven, when in a clear
and frostie night they seem most to appear, I should not lie. So was the
number infinite, wherewith this unfortunate Dame bathed (as though she had been
plunged in a deep runnyng River) the corpse of this incomparable fair and
desolate Princess. Who (in fine) felyng her so bewette, and hearing the
scrichyng and lamentable cries (tedious to tell) as well of the Empress, as of
her coufine Harderine, Marcella, and all the other Damozelles, she began to
revive, and by little and little recoueryng, in castyng for the a pitiful and
profounde sighe, she opened her eyes a little, then seeing and understanding
their cries and lamentations, which were about her, enforcyng them selves to
lift her up, and carry her into her Chamber, to repose her self upon her
bed: she fell down again worse then before: this puttyng her a new in
remembrance, of her vehemente and late dolor. Then should ye have heard a
fearful redou: blyng of Tears, and lamentable cries on all parts: who then
thinkyng verily that she was paste recovery, seeing that neither with cold
water, with rubbyng her pulses, ne ought else, they could not work, but that
she was a whole long hour in this ecstasy, without either stirryng hand or
foot: They wailed piteously, and made a stir, yea greater then the Trojans
Cassandra and Hecuba, seeing their Infantes, Brothers, and Nephues slain and
murdered, by the reuengyng blades of the Greeks, and their noble City put
to sack by Fire and Sword, which sone consumed it. Nevertheless, not
knowing what remedy to use, they conuaighed her straight into her Chamber, and
laid her upon her bed, departing all, saving Harderine and Marcella, who
upon the corpse, ceased not to wail and speak thereto, as if it had understood
them, the others going toward the Empress.

Who on the other side was sounded in Amidrees Chambers, thinking at the
second cry of the Damozelles, that verily her daughter had been dead, who
after a while being somewhat revived, was then laid in her bed by the
Damozelles Harderine and Marcella, who to their power did strive to comfort
her: but all in vain. For she not able to give never so little release to her
dolor, considering her self quite destitute of mean whereby she might ever
recure her ragyng love, which still flaming and increasing in her, caused and
made, that her grief was far greater then death it self, chaffed in her mind
a great while against love, for wounding her so suddenly, yea so sharply and
surely with his venomous Shaftes: then again excusing him for so much
favoring and blessing her, as to bend and set her best likyng in a place so
digne and worthy of her, who under heaven found none her match but him only:
then breathed she forth her ire and anger against death, for taking from her a
gift so rare and precious: whom Venns Infant of mere bounty had bestowed upon
her: Beseechyng her, that in midst of so many miseries and sorrows, she would
in like wise strike her with the same Darte, wherewith her dear friend was so
wounded and murdered: to the end, that where he was either in the Celestial
or Infernal Mansion, she might go and accompaignie him, so to open unto him
the sum of her dolorous distresses. Then considering that Death, having no
puissance on her (as it, which is nothing else but the dissolution and
separation of the Soul from the body) through the defaute of some of the
four Elements (whereof the divine providence has created man) she made her
humble and hearty Prayer unto the sovereign Creator of all things, most
inslauntlie requiring him, to cut asunder the Thride of her life, if it were
his pleasure: thereby to rid her from the unsupportable dolours and distresses,
which most impaciently she endured. But GOD, who had not ordained to end and
finish her days in such hasty forte: not lettyng her to wit, that as he can
turn the most clear and bright days, into obscure and darkesome nights,
and the same again into days more shining and radiant, then the resplendaunt
beams of Phoebus: even so also has he power (showing her the severe Visage of
a Fortune more propitious and favorable, then it could then seem or appear,
employing her back to the burden of an infinite number of anguishes and
dollours, covered with a cloudy Veil of cares and distresses,) to take her (at
her own desire) out of the midst of the Labyrinth of so many mischieues,
which oppressed her on all sides, and would not hear her Prayer, albeit he
well permitted, that through mere grief, she nerehand had approached, the
Port Acheronticall, by the excess and vehemence of a grievous Malady, which
caused in her a continual Fever: which surpryzyng her, handled her in such
sort, that through the tremblyng fittes commonly accompanying such like
payned pacientes, she made the bed to dance, whereon she lay: which
nevertheless ceasing, a slumbering Sleep surpryzed her, which coueryng her
cogitations, with a dreamyng obliniousnes, suffered her to take some rest. For
unless the natural order of all things be perverted, as one sees not
always, the hot skaldyng Planet, to dry up the floatyng streams of flouddes
and Rivers, nor the cold North in Winter, to make destitute the pleasant
Forestes of their green colored garments, which the sprouting Springtyme
has bestowed upon them: So is it also impossible, that (without release) a
continual grief should have place in a human corpse, not adnichillating and
totally ruinating the same. No less neither can an extreme joy remain
without some intermission of his contrary. And therefore Nature being then so
favorable to this anguishe and miserable Princess, that (to encounter her
adverse Fortune) she permitted her the having of some little rest: her
Damozelles drawyng the Courteines of her Bed, and shutting in the chamber
windows, departed toward the Empress. To whom (not long before revived from
sound) they recompted) to consolate her withal) that her Daughter slepte
soundly at her ease: which thing she could not believe, before she saw it: but
when she had tried it true, she enforced her self to give truce to her pitiful
plaintes and tears. But if she lived the^ in dollour for the love of her
daughter, and her daughter likewise for the death of her late friend, the Youth
of the Fayries, the young and fair Maiden Dynamia (who by the Emperors
consent, was lover and beloved also of the good and valiant Giant Ergoferant)
was oppressed with noe less grief then they, for the death of her good and
loving brother Pharisor, not able without incessant weeping and lamentyng, to
supporte and endure the remembrance of so luckles a chance, through the
vehemency of fraternall amity (which in all honest and natural loves has
and holds the head room, and place) so that she was in her Chamber
lamenting and complaining in sort as follows:

Alas Dynamia the most lucklesse and desolate, that is at this day living
under Heavens, yea, no less then thou wast happy and fortunate, to be sister
to the most valiant and best knight in perfections of all Greece: what
hap, what blessedness, what rest, what consolation, or what supporte
hopeste thou to have from henceforwarde in this world, wherein naught can be
durable or parmanente, that in one day is not found unstable? Somewhiles when
one is deprived of joy, by the success of some lucklesse encomberaunce or
chance: somewhiles when any grief most tormenteth us, and ouerwhelmeth our
stomachs, by the hap of some good hour: which nevertheless is less durable,
(chiefly to me) then the said mischief and most hapless hap: since that it
is so, that thou see thy self deprived of a brother, the most active and
valiaunte, that ever was seen in these coasts: who being causer of all the
felicity, and contentmente thou had in this life, it can not be that
henceforwarde, thou should live to see ought else to follow or enuiron thee,
but al sorts of ill hap and discomforte, laboursome travail and
discontentation: if Death show not her self so courteous, and extend not her
clemency so much toward thee, as to use upon this thy miserable corpse, the
same rigor that she has showed to thy beloved Brother. O murderer cruel,
inhumaine, and detestable, which haste slain him: accursed be the hour and
journey, that ever thou made, to come into this Country, to leave us so
pitiful a pattern of thy wickedness. And accursed be the Chymaera or
cruel Lioness, whose pappes erst gave thee suck: and that it had pleased
God, that thou had been untimely borne, or smouldered in her womb. O art not
thou of more perverse and naughty nature, then a Tigre, Bear or wild Boar?
more fell and cruel then ever Afrique bredde or nourished? So traiterouslie
and villanouslie to have murdered him, which never gave occasion (no not in
the least of his thoughts) wrongfullie or without cause, to damage or offend
the least creature that ever GOD made on earth? at leastewise hungry Wolffe
glutted with human blood, why was it that thou satisfied not thine
unreasonable appetite, upon this poor and miserable Damozel? Why have thou
not with the same murdryng glaue, (which so ended his days, and made me
destitute of the thing, I held most dear in this world) bemangled and
killed the corpse of her, who how long so ever she lives, can not be but
unfortunate and distressed. Ah, noble King of Austria my Father, I fear me,
that the insupportable dolor which you shall receive (in hearing these heavy
and dolorous nouelles of the death of him, which was the only stay and
vpholder of your old age) shall not give much aduaunceme^t to the course of your
long years, who already have whitened both your hoary head and beard. And that
ensewing shortly after the message, which shall acertaine you of your daughter
Dynamias Death, who for love of him is resolved to dispatche her self with her
own proper hands. I have great fear (and the fear I have thereof, makes me
use this language, and to premeditate that mischief) that with a headlong and
swift hastenyng course, you will bend your steps toward that part, where
the Feriman Charon uses all his trade. But what? seeing that the destenies
have of long time spunne us this ill hap, Is there any that can withstand
it? No, no, none, be he never so strong or mighty, can resist it. It restes,
it restes, that to make an end of my miseries, I go to keep compaignie and
visit him, on whom depended all my joy and comfort.

Whiles she thus spoke, complainyng, and tormentyng her self most bitterly,
and dolorously, the good Giaunt Ergoferant, which hastened to arrive from
Rock Alpine, beholding all those which were in the Emperors Hall assembled,
with intent to dispatche and answer the Letters of the great Sophy of Persia,
to have their faces changed with a certain great kind of sorrow and sadness,
and which much vexed them. To know the occasion thereof, he took his way into
the Chamber of his Lady and Mistress Dinamya, who^ he sorowfully found in
estate as is aforesaied, whereupon (after he had employed some pains to
pacify her, and she consolatyng her self somewhat by his coming) he asked
her from whence proceeded these plaintes and lamentations which incited her to
torment her self so? to whom, not able to co^ceale her sorrow, she recompted
(although much fearful to loose him thereby, as in deed she did afterward)
the occasion of her great grief. Whereat it needs not to tell, if the most
noble and virtuous Giaunt that ever was, were angry, as well for the loss of
his Ladies dear and loving brother: as for the love of him, who only saved
his life, and for that cause he was no less bounden, then for her. For in
giuyng comfort and consolation to this young and noble Princess, he armed him
self with his Harness and Club, and mountyng upon a good and mighty Horse
which he had, he departed in the secretest wise he could, from the Court,
in deliberation never to taste sound sleep, till he had reencountred the
knight murderer of those, who in this world he esteemed most: and to be
reue^ged of their deaths, else to go visit them where ever they were. Where we
let him go and leave the Ladies much sad and sorrowful, to recompte unto you
how the knight, which was slain in the Forest by the knight unknown, had
stolen the Youth of the Fairies his Horse and Harness, who^ me left in the
Castle de la Plain, with the amourous Damozel, louelesse, and slave to love
for ever, daughter to the Duke of Chalcide: and of that that chanced him after
he went thence: chiefly also to speak of Pharisor, and where he happened to be
revived from his Trance.

The Youth of the Fairies being lodged at the Castle de la Plain, his Horse
and Harness were stolen from him: and going to seek the Thief, he
encountered in a wood, a marvelous Crocodile, which after a long co^bate he
slew: Then going somewhat forward, he found the dead corpse of the knight,
which had stolle^ his Harness and horse, which he could not find, but those
of the unknown Knights he saw: which he took, and armed him self, and
after encountered the Squire Geliaste, which slept in the Forest: who led him
into the place where the Combat had been between Pharisor and the unknown
Knighte.

The xvij. Chapter.
AFter the hard and sharp Combat which was bet ween the good Knight
Pharisor, and the valiant unknown knight, we have before declared, that he
pricked with great disdain and dolor, to be so cast to ground by the
Youth of the Fairies, extended further the desire of his revenge: which
blinded him in such sort, that forgettyng all honest courtesy (which
naturally accompanies the hearts, that are repleate with gentilitie and
noblenes, such as his) and without any regard thereto, when he was revived
from the Trance sooner then Pharisor, he purposed in him self to annoy and
hurt the Squire Geliacte, who to shun the danger of death which he saw
imminent, took himself to sudden flight: and his enemy the knight following
him, was stayed by one, who armed with the Harness and mounted on the good
horse of the Youth of the Fairies, was by him slain, as at large you may see in
the sixte^th Chapter. Whereupon thinkyng he had put to death him, who had
foiled him before in the Iustes, and his fellow who^ he had left so faint and
feeble, for loss of his blood through an innumer able forte of wounds, which
he had sustained, he had vaunted himself thereof in the Emperors Court:
thinking it a valiant Act, as if it had been true: and thervppon caused that
sorrow and sadness, to trouble the Court withal, as before you have heard in
the Chapters precedent. But to the end the hap thereof may be notified to
every one, it is to be understood, that the fair and gentle Youth of the
Fairies being entered into the Castle de la Plain, where he received the best
entertainment, that the amourous Damozell, (friendless perforce) could devise
to make him: The knight which came to open him the Gate, seeing him armed and
horsed so well, and being desirous to be purueied of such like Horse and
Harness as his was, premeditated with him self, by what means he might have
them. And (as one which was not the bouldest man of the world) seeing, and
knowing, that if he presumed to have them perforce (the event of Battle being
doubtful and uncertain) fearyng lest the loss should light on his side,
considering the great prowess and valiauncie, wherewith, by his face and fair
disposition he seemed to be adorned, with who^ he in this case should have to
deal, thought it better (to his great dishonor) to obtain them by disceite
and trayson as he did. For the Youth being brought abedde, having before spent a
great part of the night, as well in perpending the talk which he had had with
the Damozel all Supper-while, as in imagination of her beauty, who deemyng her
dead, was nearer thereto him self, he fell on sleep about midnight: whereof
ye covetous knight being advised, which was in watch in a Chamber next to his
adjoining, which he had forgot to shut at his going to bed, entered easelie
and secretly into the same: and findyng his Sword and Harness, took them,
and went into the Stable, where he mounted upon his Horse, and departed with
full intent to do merueiles, or else of so fair a gift to make presentation to
the Emperor of Constantinople, so to win his good grace and favor. But he
was not far past, but they were taken from him, with loss of his life also,
by the unknown knight, as you have before heard. (God who is the just revenger
and punisher of outrageous Faults and Traisons, not suffering not only w that
a Robber and disceiuer should be suffered to have long or profitable enioynig
of this so euelly gotten, did punish the offense both sore and shortly.) This
notwithstanding could not mittigate nor appease, the bitterness of sorrow
which the Youth of the Fairies had, when as he in the morning arising, found
neither his Swerd nor Harness in the Chamber, where over night he had laid
them, neither his Horse in the Stable. For of all his furniture the Thief had
lest him naught, but the only chaunted Lance, which he had won the day
before, in the Iustes of the unknown Knight. Which he taking, and after
having known certainly, that without the Damozelles consent of ye Castle
(which of his misfortune was much displeased) the Knight, who in the euenyng
had opened him the Gate, had committed this disloyalty and traison, he took
leave of her: who gave him a horse the best she had: whereupon, unarmed as he
was, he leapt and departed straight toward the Forest, to take and apprehend
the disloyal Knight which had so disceiued him: thinkyng that soonest that
ways he would take his Journey. But when he was far entered into the same,
the Sun then drawyng hie and castyng ardent heat, and he also going toward
the most thick and rough places, as well in that, he had some opinion yt the
Thief was hid there, as to shun the parchyng heat of Sun) he heard a very
lamentable and plaintieffe voice: which so moved him to compassion, that
thinking it had been some poor desolate person, fallen into the hands of some
Robbers and Villains, or rather some unfortunate Damozell, ravished by some
Roysters, he went thetherwarde, to succor her, although with much
difficulty: for what blows with spurs so ever he gave to his horse, he could
not in any wise make him go forward: yet pricked he him so sore, that Mawgre
himself, he was constrained to go to the place where the voice plaintiff was,
near which he scarce had come by six or seaue^ paces, but yt he espied the
greatest and dismeasured Crocodile yt ever was seen, coming toward him with
open throat, and gapyng Jaws to devour him, and with his two forepawes
rampyng, seized upon the Horse by the Neck with such force and vigor,
wreathyng his Tail of ten or twelve foot long all about his Feet before,
that he was forced to fall forward to the ground, and his Master also: who
being light and nimble as he was, without semblaunce of any fear at al,
recovered himself straightwaies (for before his Horse fell, he had prepared him
self for the Beasts coming, and was ready to alight) and gryping the Lance
which he had in his right hand, and his Mantell wrapped about his left Arm,
he came toward this furious and terrible Beast: which did her best to take
and devour him, as being much an hungered: and not having eaten ought of long
tofore, he gave her such a forcible blow upon the belly with all his might,
that he pierced quite through the same. Then the Beast seeing her self
wounded to death, approachyng him before he had leisure to redouble his
stroke, with one of her Paws gave him such a graspe, that if he had not with
great lightness stepped back, and cast his Mantell before him: without doubt
therewith he had ended his days. For this horrible beast had the Nails of
his paws more then a foot and a half long, pearcyng and sharp past measure,
wherewith in great rage and despite, perceiving his death to be near, he tare
and pulled the Mantell aforesaid in pieces, which was of Skarlet, the fear
that could be seen, edged and embrodered with Gold, and great Buttons of
Pearl, to wit, those which the Fayrie Ozyris had given him. Thus whiles he
which had more care to spoil and put her to death, then to save and take his
Mantell from her, smoate her on the back and breast, with such merueilous
blows (albeit such beasts have commonly Skales on their corpse more hard
then any iron or Stele) that at last he left her dead in the place. The^
leaping on his Horse, which pitifully was wounded upon the Neck by the
Crocodile, he passed forward in a little pathway, straight to the place where
his Thief was slain, whose Carcass he found half devoured, with birds and
wild beasts: whereat he was much abashed and ameruelled, chiefly because he
found not his Horse and Harness with him: but well he found the Knights
Harness which had slain him: which he knew by and by to be his, against
whom-the day before he had Iusted. Wherefore doubtyng that which was come to
pass, he took the same and armed him self therewith the best he could, and
having the shield about his neck, and the Sword at his side, he took his
Spear: and being about to mount on his Horse, and depart to search after
him which now had his furniture, behold his horse fell stark dead to the
ground, because of the great quantity of blood which he had shed by his
wounds. Whereat the gentle Youth of the Fairies was much amazed, because
against custom he must now trudge on foot. But with patience housdyng the
same Pathe which had brought him thither, he had not gone far, but he espied
a Horse which being well Sadled, having the Bridle hanging at the Sadle bow,
fed fast on the Grass: which he knew also to be the foresaid Knights
Horse, of whom he had conquered the Lance in Iustes, and now had his Harness,
nevertheless he staid not for that, but after he had put the Bridle in his
mouth, he mounted on his back, glad of so favorable an hap: And continuyng
his queste according as he saw the traces of the Horses before him, he went
so far, that an hour or two after Noone, at the foot of a shadye Tree, he
apperceiued a young Squire a sleep, stretched along upon the grass, having an
Horse fastened to his right Arm by the Bridle, and his Face all besprent with
Tears: whose Visage seemed to see too, most sorrowful and sad: whereof the
Youth was right sorrowful, and had much pity to see him in so poor an
estate, chiefly knowing that it was his Squire Geliaste: who awaked, whiles the
Youth of the Fairies al astonished of so strange an adventure, stayed himself
to behold him: in so much that his Horse perceiving the other strange Steed,
would have fled, and so trailed the poor Squire after him (till his Master
taking him by the Bridle, stayed him: which done, and Geliaste awaked, it is no
need to tell if the poor slave were amazed or not: seeing his shape there who^
he thought was come for none other intention, but to put him to death, and
would gladlye have run away, but that the Bridle held him by the Arm.
Whereat the Youth, much marueilyng, said: what meanest thou Beast, or upon
what occasion, art thou so afraied, lest I kill thee? Alas sir (said he) I
do it because yesterdaie ye would have kilde me after ye had put to death my
Master, the Youth of the Fairies his friend and fellow: who willing to
succor me, was therefore slain not far hence by your hands. The Youth more
desirous then before to know what made him so to say, and seeing him still more
and more astonished: unlaced, his Helmet that then he might know him. Who then
remembering him, and coming to himself, was surpryzed with such extreme
joy, that it transported him without respect to run and embrace his
Master: saying. Ha Master, what is it that has raised you again from dead?
Might it possibly be the Fairie Ozyris, your good Mother, which has by her
art reduced you again from death to life, and given you these Arms like to
those which the discourteous and outrageous knight had, which yesterday would
have slain me, to the end to affraie me, so as you have done? I assure you I
am now thereof as glad as I was even now sorrowful, thinking at your hands to
have received my deaths dint, since you seemed another. But tell me I pray
thee Geliaste, why thou thus speak, said the Youth: or upon what occasion?
for I can never remember that I was wounded of any person, but of the Giaunt
Ergoferant, when I fought against him, much less slain: then how can this
be? Also I meruell very greatly, in that thou say my dear friend Pharisor
is dead. Then did the Squire recount unto him, (from point to point) all the
success of the adventures passed the day before, as is aforesaied: whereat the
Youth was tossed with extreme dolor, having intelligence of Pharisors death,
and commanded the Squire to bring him where he yet lay, whereto, (they being
both mounted on horse) he failed not to obaie. But when they were arrived to the
place where ye combat had been atchiued, they were much sorrowful that they
could not find his corpse, to bury and Entombe it honorably, as to the
greatness of his birth, but chiefly to his great virtue and valiauncie,
apperteined. They found the place where he had lain long all bleedyng and
bloody, which also was covered with many little pieces of his Harness: which
moved the Youth to such compassion, that being attainted in heart with an
insupportable dolor and distress which suddenly at the sight thereof
surprysed him, it lacked little that he had not then and there fullye sounded
in the place: and I think that if his magnanimity and hearty valiauncie could
have given place in greatenes and force, to his extreme dolor, he had done
it. So sure already had he emprinted the vehement amity that he bare, to that
man in his heart, having been in his company, but three or four days:
as well for the prowess and virtue, wherewith he was enriched above all
others, as for the singular courtesy and frendshippe which so shined in them
both alike, that they almost seemed both one body, bente to one course of
kind. But supportyng the most pacientlie he could, his extreme dole and
sorrow, he did as then naught else, but weep and bewail him so lamentably,
that dole and sorrow themselves could not surpass him in sighs and tears,
which ran like rushyng Rivers down his tender Cheeks: which to declare I
must take a briefer course: tellyng only how as soon as he could have any stay
of his lame^tations, he made vow and swear never to rest in place, clymat or
country, till he had found out the Knight which had slain him, to revenge his
death, although in deed he were shortly after as sound and lusty as ever
he was. As you shall hear in the Chapter followyng.

How the Giaunt Ergoferant who was gone to seek the knight unknown, to
revenge the death of Pharisor, findyng him in place where he was left in a
Trance, after the Combat, took and carried him unto the Emperors court,
where he was healed of his wounds, by the excellent Chirurgian Master
Rabalon: whereof the Damozelles Dynamia and Amydree, were much joyous, and the
Lady Porphyria, somewhat consolated. And how the Youth of the Fayries arrived
in a village, where he had tydinges of the unknown Knight, who bare his Arms
and had his Horse.

The. xviij. Chapter.
THe slow ariual of the Youth of the Fairies toward the place where the
cruel and dangerous Combat had been between the two good Knights
unknown, and Pharisor: was occasion and let, that he found him not as he
had thought to have done, and that because it was very long ere he could ariue
at the place, where he was left for dead, through the abundance of blood,
which he had lost being so wounded in the Combat. For a while before, the good
Giaunt Ergoferant, (who was gone to seek for the unknown knight, to revenge
his death, going through the Forest heard him: who revived from sound, and yet
liyng on the Grass, not able to arise complained, and lamented, right
dolourously, for his dear friend and fellow the Youth of the Fairies: and going
where he was, yet not thinking it to have been him, he found him in so
pitiful and miserable an estate, that if then presently he had not had
succor, he must have yielded up the Ghost: not so much for the grieuousnes of
his wounds, which were not mortal, as for the yrke somnes he had of his
friends absence, whom he thought to have fled (of purpose) to leave him, as
dispising his company. But the good Giaunt not without great marvel of so
good a reencou^ter, took him up softly between his arms, and as one
wondrous strong, carried him easily toward the Town of Constantinople, not
without telling him along by the way, the sorrow and dole wherein he had left
his sister Dinamya, with the Empress and her Damozelles, and consequently all
the Emperors Court, because of his death, which they had heard by the self
same Knight, who so had wounded him: demanding him in like manner the cause of
their combatyng, which he told unto him at large: until such time as
approachyng near to a certain village which was but five or fix Furlonges
from the City, ye night (also) approaching, they were constrained to retire
into a certain Inn, where the were honestly and honorably entertained by
the Host of the house: who knew the Giaunt and the Knight also to be of the
Emperors Court: and there were some Salues and Plasters laid to the wounds
of Pharisor, by a certain Chirurgian which dwelt in that Town, which
notwithstanding, when they arrived, the Morrow after at Constantinople, were
taken away by Master Rabalon: who puttyng in their place precious
Oyntementes, whereof he had always store, he did so well, that to the great
contentment of the Emperor, Empress, and Dynamia, with all the other
Knights, Dames, and Damozelles, he recetued his perfect health in the space
of five days. And for this cause though the renouation of an unspeakable joy,
the thick Myste of forepassed sorrows, which before had holden their hearts
with infinite number of Anguishes and Tears, remained, as vanished and
dissolved, especially with Dynamia. Who having recovered the object of her
grief, was reduced into her pristine form of joy and felicity, contrary to
the Lady Prrphyria: who seeing her self deprived of him, who on her had
fatally fixed his fancy, not able to give any releasement to her Passions and
grievous mallady, what comfort or consolation soever, either the Emperor or
Empress gave unto her, bringyng her in mind of her Cosines return: the
fear and suspicion of whose death was cause of her Mallady, as they deemed,
and therefore should now cause (their opinion being false and vain) her sinall
recovery of health. But being wholly ignorant where the Thorn pricked her,
they could no ways work, but that she waxyng still worse and worse, hastened
still toward the black Stygian Lake, had it not been for the comfort
which the Damozelles Marcella and Harderine, (who knowing the full occasion
thereof) recomforted her with the hope they had that his Death was noe less
true then Pharisors: and that the unknown knight which had caused those
Nouelles, had not done it, but only to brag and boaste him self thereof, or
else to cover the dishonor he had gotten at the Iustes, whereat she was
somewhat released of pain: yet not able altogether to leave her Fever and
become whole and sound. In this wise remained the poor languishyng Princess
full of sorrow, and pain, for the love of him, who being noe less grieved
through the equality of their Disease, if he had known their affections and
alterations of the Spirit to be reciprocate, rather then to live in continual
thought and anguish, as afterward he did, he would otherwise and sooner have
put him self in endeavor, to salve and pacisie this amourous wou^d, which so
pained them. But as one (who thought himself so unfortunate and smally
favored of love, that he thought him to have made their wounds quite
contrary, and otherwise then they were) could never be in any place, but
that, thinking on his estate and new love, he entered into deadlye despair
of hope ever to attain the Typpe of his desire. In such wise, that where he
then was, to wit in the Forest (where we left him seeking the unknown Knight,
to revenge the death of his dear friend Pharisor, accompanied with his Squire
Geliaste) he so converted the care he had of findyng him into cogitations and
contemplations of her passing beauty, whom above all others he praised and
esteemed, that in steed of holdyng the right way out of the Forest, to find
a place to embarcke him self, and go into some strange Country, he came
toward Constantinople which he thought to be most far of: whereof the
Squire advised, who was somewhat more ioconde, then the day before, asked him,
whether he would, or if he thought to find his Enemy in the City, from
whence the day before he had sworn to separate him self a far of, so to
shun the dangerous heat of the Fire, (...) ^gence to overtake him (as ye
say ye will) I am sure that between this and that place, you may do it
easily. But seeing it is now late, I counsel you to go and take your rest for
this Night, that to Morrow you may bring to pass your pretended purpose as
luckelie as I would wish you. After the man of the House had made this promise
to the Youth to set him in the ready way wherein he might overtake the knight,
of whom he thought himself more iniuried the^ he was, to the intent he might
arise betymes in the Morning, he went thereupon straightwaies to sleep in a
fair bed, which the Host had purposely prepared for him, where we let him
rest (for change of matter) till the next morrow.

How Grandowyne King of Hybernia and Cornewaile, Uncle to the Nigromantian
Mynofoll, addressed a great and puissaunt Army to revenge the death of his
two Children Mawgarde and Vaspazell, whom King Floridamant had slain: And how
going toward London, he was encou^tred by a little Flete of christians, the
Captain whereof were the Princes Ferrand of Norwaie, and Grandilaor of
Swethland, which came to give the onset on the Painims: with whom they joined
Battle in such sort, that many there died.

The xix. Chapter.
Forasmuch (noble Lords and Ladies) as I am sure you are not ignoraunte, that
as there is no meat, what sweet or delicate taste so ever it have, were it
Ambrosia it self, the food of the Gods, (as Poets feign) which with too long
usage seems not to us yrkesom and unsavory: In like manner beeleue I, that
there is no discourse or History, be it never so sweet or delectable, but
being too long continued without intermission or success of some change or
other novel chance: which (as it were a new kind of meat) may be agreeable
to the hearers ears, or delight of the readers, may be dulsome or pleasant
unto you. For this cause knowing that which I will recite unto you in these
Chapters followyng, shall be no less delectable unto you, nor smell worse to
your co^tentations, then the valiauncies of the Youth of the Fairies, from
whence we wander a little, to bring him in hereafter with more pleasure,
delectation and astonishment of haughty feats of Arms, then you have
heretofore heard, if you have the patience I deem you to have: hopyng that the
generositie and singular bounty of your sprites, will not refuse to hold on
to read this mine History, set forth and put in light: both for great
pleasure and profit, that you may have therein. I will as now therefore
recompt unto you, (albeit briefly and succinctly as is possible, that which
chanced and happened to the valiaunte and invincible King Floridamant of
great Britain, and chiefly in the self same time that his Son the Youth
of the Fairies was in Greece in pursuit of the vnmatcheable and valiant
unknown Knight, according to the verity of the Commentaries of our ancient
Galarx, which in the same manner also makes thereof mention. You ought
therefore to know, that after the deliverance of this illustrious Lord from
the Traitor Minofols Enchaunted Prysons, as in the Chapters precedente I have
most briefly declared unto you: after he was arrived into his country (as is
aforesaied) he went into the green I Will with a great Host of armed men, and
so dispeopled it and destroyed all the Towns and brave buildings, that there
were not left alive any of the race or house of the traitrous Enchaunter: who
being apprehended, was also put to the point of the Sword: amongst whom
also was slain two Children of the Kings of Cornewaile, Uncle to the
Traitor Minofoll, the one of whom (if ye mark it well) was slain by the King
Floridamant, at the same time that the Damozell (which afterward was hanged
on a Tree, led him traitorously into the Prison of the red Castle, as you have
heretofore heard: and then when his Horse failed him in the Forest, when he
had heard the cry of the Damozell complainyng, he encountered him by chance,
as he was going to London to work some Traison: and this same was called
Mawgard. The other was then slain in the green I Will (where he was Lord and
Master through the death of his Cosine) by the Prince Hubart of Scotland,
against whom he would have defended himself: and this had to name Vaspazell
the proud: whereat the King of Cornewaile, being vexed without measure,
having heard so doleful News, and angry at king Floridamant more then
before, although he long had borne him mortal hate, determined and resolved now
to revenge the death of his two Sons, with the destruction of those of his
kin. And to do this (as one that was rich both in substance and friends,
and of alliance to great Lords and Princes, and who also was stout of person
and valiant as was possible, he sent Ambassadors to his Friends on all sides:
and chiefly to two Sons which he had yet left: one of the which, was king of
Corse, named Angrofolt the Cruel, who failed not to come to revenge the death
of his Brethren and Parents, with a Navy of a hundred and four score
Ships, and sixty Galleis well furnished: wherein he brought about thirty
thousand footmen, and ten thousand horsemen brave, and in good order: and
moreover he brought with these, Six Giauntes, the greatest and biggest that
ever were seen since the memory of man: who only served him for men of
Arms, to guard his person: yea with them was he better guarded, then any
other King, although he had six hundred horsemen in his company. And for
this cause was he of his Neighbors and borderers so renowned and feared, that
none (were he never so puissaunte) durst once offer to do him the least injury
in the world, although for his great cruelty and tyranny to his neighbors,
many had just cause so to do. And besides this, he was so valiant of his
person, that few there were at that time in the world, which in corporal
force, dexterity and skill in Arms, might or could surpass him: for through
his valiauncie and prowess, he had with a small power, brought under his
obeisaunce, the I Will of Corse, and having expelled king Pollinestor, who had
married King Belligent his Sister of Gawle, who was true possessor and owner
of the said Island, he married perforce a daughter of his, so to cover his
tyranny, and to insinuate himself the better into the peoples grace and favor:
of the most part whereof (as one favored and loved) he was King peaceably,
as a Rich and Mighty Lord. Yet nevertheless, not like his other you^ger
brother, who by his graund force and extreme prowess, was beecome King of the
Isles Fortunate, which are beyond the furthest parts of Mauritayne Westwarde,
and are at this day called Canaries, because they abound in Dogs of all
sorts. This same king called Brandissant, who in valor and prowess exceeded
far all other knights, having hard the pitiful tydinges, which king
Grandowyne his Father had sent him, of the death of his Brethren Mawgard and
Vaspazel,, which were slain by king Floridamant, incited with an extreme
prick of reuengement, stayed but a while after his brother: but went with an
Army of an hundred thousand footmen, and four and twenty thousand horsemen,
to invade great Britain, whith such a fury, that in every place where he
passed or came, there was no Town, Castle nor House, were it never so great,
which was not by him destroyed, yea to the first foundation: neither men,
women, nor little Infauntes were there, whatsoever, that could escape the
pearcing blades of his Gensdarmes and Soldiers: who all the way as they
went, made both Earth and Water tremble at there presence: such havoc made
they, deming all their own already. For the said Brand^ssant king of
Canaries, had with him four puyssaunte kings, Paynims, his Vassalles, which
all were Brethren and the most strong and monstrous that ever Nature bred. For
first of all, the youngest of them, which was king of Ombrione named
Sallazart, was so strong and puissaunte, that in closse Camp, he once slew
four Huige Giauntes, and a Monster which was engendered by one of those
Giauntes, called Astigard: The Effigy of whom he bare Pictured in his shield,
all murdered by his hands in a field of Synople: having the rest of his
furniture and harness wrought and pollished the gallantest that might be
seen, and mounted upon a brave Courser of Araby, which ran like Swallowe,
swifte in flight: This fellow seemed (being thus armed) the brauest knight in
the world. Although in deed he was the most deformed and foulest that could
be.

For first, he was so great, that he by half exceeded the vulgar and common
proportion of other men: his hayres of his head as black as a coal:
neither was his Face any whitte fairer: wherein were two eyes that shinyng as
well by night as by day, would have made the stoutest afraied: having his
brows a foot of good measure broad. The Nose a spanne long or more, the
Mouth stretchyng to his Ears, which with length lay on his Shoulders, like
a Bloodhounde. And moreover he had two long Tuskes or Teeth, sharp as a Pike,
which raught fully half a Foot out of his Mouth: his Chinne was like the
rest, whereon appeared no more hair then on a Cow tail: for like a stinkyng
Goat he had it hangyng to his girdle stead. As for the rest, he was the
finest Youth of the world: but that he was great Bealied, and big Shouldred,
cariyng a Mountain (as it were) upon his back. Notwithstanding this he was so
valiant, that there were few, no not one (but King Brandissant) which in
ought that appertained to corporal force, or warlike affairs, were like unto
him, as you shall more understand hereafter. Consequently his brother Zorlot
King of the I Will Niuaria, which was no less fair then Salazard, was mighty
and strong, that with one blow of his Lance, (in a certain Battle) he
slew thirty Cantabrians. And no worse (to make short) were the kings of the
Isles Innoues their brethren, Cambarel and Phagotrof, which had in their Band
about thirty thousand men, both for foot and Horse. And so this
Thunderyng warrior Brandissant being thus appointed, in a marvelous brave
araie, and equipage, passed into Great Britain, there wastyng and destroiyng
all, till they came to the Country of Cornewaile, where he found his father
Grandowine, which for his part did his devour, to gather men from all
parts of his Dominions, to revenge the death of his two sons. In whose
company was Agrafolt, King of Cantabria, Marton and Barant King of the I Will of
Caribe, who a while before was arrived with great puissaunce of men, to help
King Grandowyne: whose joys I can not well tell you, when he saw his son
Brandissant come to succor him, with such a multitude of valiaunte Soldiers
and Gensdarmes: and chiefly when he told him, of the great waste which he
had made coming through Great Britaigne. Assuryng you, sir (said he) that
had it not been for the desire I had to see you, and my brother Agrafolt, with
all these good Lords, and some others, who by me requested, promised, sance
fail, to come shortly to succor you, this wretched King of great Britaigne
had not had by this time either Castle or Town to defend himself in. I
trust good Son (said King Grandowyne) that we shall be there time enough
by the help of the Gods, to disherite and ruinate him both with the'ffusion
of his own blood, and also of all those who shall be so hardye as to make to
us any resistaunce. And I swear by all our gods, that if he be (as I hope he
shall) once taken by us, I will make him die a worser death then ever that
cruel Tyrant of the Agrigentines, Phalaris did, or could imagine to vex and
torment his people: neither shall that glutton Dorian of Spaigne escape with
less reward, who at all assaies is his aider and fellow. For it behooves us
to put all his Realm to Fire and Sword, if we were once dispatched of this
Floridamant here, which shall be shortly as I hope. And that Ferrand also king
of Norwaie, who is his Vassalle: neither him of Denmark, nor that other of
Swethlande which will succor him, shall also escape our sharp and trenchant
Blades. Truly my Liege (then said Agrofolt the cruel) if once we might
exterminate all these: it is expedient for us also to destroy that old
Tyrant of Gaul: for he maintains that glutton Palistenor, my Godfather, who
hoping of his aid, manaceth to expel me out of my Realm: saying that by
right it is his. Give me leave on my behalf (said wicked Marton King of
Cantabria) for as for my part I hold my self assured, that that presumptuous
King of Spain, which so often sends Pirates and Robbers into my Domimous
(who do me more annoyes, then one would think) shall not have long
continuance, neither shall he against us work any great resistaunce. For one
night will I give him such Alarm, pursuyng him upon the Spurs so near, yt
neither he nor none of his shall have any leisure to flee and save them selves.
Assuredly that shall do very well, Sir Marton, said the (fierce King Barant of
Caribe: for then may you Crown your self King of all Spaigne, and Sir
Grandowyne king of great Britayne. Also good Prince Agrofolt shall have the
Realm of Gaul for his part, and you) said Brandissant which are a most
puissaunte Lord with king Salazard, Zortor, and Phagotroffe shall have the
Realms of Scotland, Norway Swethlande and Denmark. But the Prince Cambarell
and I, will then go to Constantinople, where we will make our selves Lords.
Thus these Prodigious Monsters of Nature, spoke and talked amongst them
selves, being assembled in king Grandowynes Palace of Cornewayle having more
confidence in the force and puissaunce of their bodies (which in no wise
lacked) then in the Divine providence, without which noe human enterprise
can ever come to good issue. And I can assure you, that if the sovereign
creator and governor of all things, had not by his infinite bounty and
goodness, preserved and sustained the part of the noble and valiant Christian
Princes, they had then been in danger to have lost their lives and to have
their Realms and poor Subjects destroyed, undoubtedly. For these cursed
Paynims were the most puissaunt and valiauntest personages, that ever History
made mention of, and had with them more then two hundred thousand footmen,
and a hundred thousand brave knights, besides the Giauntes which I told you
of, whose only force was able for a whole Army: and there were the strong
Brunissant, Angrofolt, Salazard, and his brethren, which had either their
Bodies or Harness in such wise enchaunted, that neither Iron nor Steel could
pearce or hurt them: and there with endewed with such force, that nothing was
able to abide it. And to increase their number also, came there a while after
to their help king Tawladas the worthy knight of the I Will of Canada, and fierce
Guydard of Baccaleos, with either of them an Army of more then thirty
thousand fightyng men, mounted on mighty Horses and Elephantes which carried
every one five or six men well furnished with shot in the little Castles of
wood, which that had upon their backs: which two in force and prowess were
nothing less then Brunissant and Sallazard, whose allyaunce and confederauncie
to have, they came to this match, and also to try the force and valiauncie of
king Floridamant and his Brytishe knights, whether they were correspondent to
the fame that went upon them or nay.

And on this wise this puissaunt army being assembled in Corn wail, and the
Country thereaboutes, they made not long delaie, but embarked them selves to
pass into great Britain: and in what magnificent order you shall
understand. First there went before, eighty great Galleis wandryng on the
main Sea with Sealecloathes spread, and abundance of Dares, marchyng like a
Tempeste: neither met they any vessel on the Seas, whatsoever, but they drowned
it: and they went ten and ten in a Rank Quadrangle wise, and not one swifter
any whit then another. Also there were fiftene great Carrickes, which went
before the Galleys about a mile or less: and at every side of the Quadrangle
Galley fleet, was also ten, wherein were the Cantabrians, who at this day are
called Biskaynes, a People near to Spain, who were conducted thither by their
King Marton, which in Sea matters was most skillful, and was ordained
Admiral general, of all the Army by the other kings apoyntmentes: from whom
he was separated, and came in a Galley, which marched alone amongst the
foresaied fleet, and a great Troop of Foystes, Boats and Brigandines,
which in number amounted to more then six score, which followed after: which
Galley exceeded all the rest in bigness, in beauty and in brave araie: for the
men of the same were all araide in Cassockes and Bonnets of Ueluet, half green
and half blewe, rowyng the Dares: to every one of which (being fifty on a
side painted all red) there were ten set, all tied by the Legs with great
Chains of silver. And moreover the couerture of the place where was Martons
Chamber, was also all of Silver, wrought with spangles and leaves of Gold, and
Azure most rich and sumptuous, on the top whereof appeered a mighty shaking
Enseigne, wherein was painted a great. Sea Monster, much resemblyng a Crocodile
all mailed with Scales of green, and the Ensign was blewe: about the which
was written in Golden Letters this same Verse or saying, Upon the Seas I all
destroy: for none I meet may me annoye. And a little lower was written
Marton, the Terror of the Waves: neither was there place in all this Galley
as well upon the Hatches, as Roapes and Cords which held the Mast: but that
there was such a like Ensign (either little or great) tied, to every one of
which was fastened an infinite number of Cimbales, and Silver Belles, which
shaken with the Wind, yielded a merueilous sweet harmony.

After this magnificent Galley, that went without either rule or certain
order, dispersed here and there about the wings of the Sea fleet, these
foresaied six and twenty Foistes, Galliottes, Gallions, and Brigantines: In
the greatest of the which Foistes, were the kings Tauladas of Canada, and
Guytard of Baccaleos, with their Horsemen, and the Elephauntes which they had
brought, being in thirty great Ships, which followed after marueilouslie
well ordered, with sail displaied, and top and top gallant brave to behold:
wherein was a great noyce of Drums, Fites, Trumpettes, and other instruments
of War, solemn and hideous to behold. Finally, after all these foresaied
vessels, came a Fleet of two hundred Ships or more, and some Barks,
which marched all in order triangled, in forefronte of the which, there is was
one Ship, far greater and fairer then the rest, which cut the Seas with
such celeritie and swiftenesse, as was possible to behold: and therein were
king Grandowine, Angraforte, Brunissant, Barant, Salazard, Zorlot and their
brethren Cambarel and Phagatroffe, which hastened to advertise king Marton, to
take order how to draw a little sideward, to assail a certain Fleet of
ships, which they had discried in the maine sea, going straight to great
Britaigne there to take Haven, and so to make them captives, if they would not
yield to be on his part. But as they were thus busied to give order hereunto,
and to set their things in a readiness, behold they were all astonished on
the sudden, by the Carrickes, and Galleis which went still before, of who^
they were met, and the folks therein assaulted, and many put to death by an
other there Fleet (which came a bywaie with a marvelous celeritie) whose
number was about fifty five, or sixty brave Ships of War: which
fiercely enteryng here and there aundde the great troop of Galleis (whereof
they ouerthrewe and burned many with Fires artificial, and other Instruments
of War) they made at the first a marvelous Martyrdom of the accursed
Painims therein. For they were not a whit afraied of this encounter: which
thing the Admiral Marton seeing, caused incontinently his great Galley to
prepare her self with diligence, to come and aid at this pinch, and also a
number of the Foistes and Brigandines which came after: all which with speed
hastened to assault the little fleet. When the Captain of the same,
(foreseyng what danger he was in) would feign have retired and fled, but that
the other fleet, who (as I said before, was first discovered of Paynims,
joined powers thereto: and so recuilyng and musteryng somewhat together, they
behaved themselves so well, that more then twenty of the Paynims Foystes and
Galleis were sounke and burned. For in the Ship which was Admiralle, there
were two brave Knights, which commanded all the Army: who set in araie with
their Swords in their hands, and brazen shieldes pressed for their better
defense, raged in their enterprise, and with fury colored the bellye of the
Goddess Thetis, with ye blood of those accursed Painims. Nay, they caught
none, but they sent him to seek him self in the bottom of the waves, where
he might drink his last, or else to taste of death on the Hatches: which thing
the valliaunt King Marton seeing (who raged to see so many of his men slain
by two knights) addressed his Galley that way, and ioynyng with one of the
Knights, who bare in his shield a Dragon of Azure, in a field of Sables, for
cognizaunce, was there ye most dangerous Skirmishe between them that ever was
heard of. For King Marton (who was exceedyng strong) thinkyng with his fierce
looks to have fraied and made flee those two doughtie Captains, was much
astonished when he found himself so matched with the one, yt in all his life
he never had been so troubled, in so much that he thought there to have lost
his life presently: such were the blows which he received at the knights
hands of the Dragon, yt had it not been for the enchaunted Helmet which he
bear, it had been doubtful whether he should have returned sound as he did.
But because he was armed with Harness wholly so enchaunted, that neither sword
nor other weapon whatsoever, could pearce or cut, he resisted well more, then
an hour against his adversary, who also defended himself valiantly as (God
knows) he had need: for both of them were strong, valiaunte and skillful in
Arms. True it is, that if King Marton exceeded him somewhat in force, he
again counterueiled it in agillitie and nimblenes of body, and in craft of
Skirmishyng, as well appeared by him in this mutual combat. But the other to
counterueile all that, gave him now and then such grene atteintes, that the red
blood began already in some places to run down his body: but for all that,
never made he any semblaunce of grief, to condemn him self of Cowardyse. But
as the Bear and the wild Boar being enuenomed one against another, strive
still with rage to pull each other in pieces: so these two valiant Champions
did all their powers to deprive each other of life, although the one had small
advantage of the other: which made them marvel much of their own prowesses,
still paiyng each other as the Smith with an heavy Hammer does his Anuild
often: and as the one his Harness, so did the others nimblenes keep them both
alive long

And thus endured the Combat a great while, during which, the Knight of the
Dragon his fellow rushed in amongst the Paynims (of whom he made a merueilous
buttherie and slaughter) and with his Meyny behaved himself so well, that many
were slain, and a multitude drowned, neither coaped he with any, but he lost
either Leg, Arm, shoulder, Neck, or some part of his body, always having a
sovereign care to save his own Ships notwithstanding: whereunto after a while
all his men reentered by his commandment. For seeing the rest of the
adversaries Vessels at hand, which King Grandowyne and his two Sons led
(whom if they had tarried, they had been all discomfited) they hoyst up sails,
and moved Dares to depart with all speed, contenting them selves with the
honor which they had gotten in resisting so many with so small a power, to the
great damage and ruin of their Enemies, and yet loosing a very few of their
own party: neither any vessel, but that wherein was the knight of the Dragon,
who whiles his men prepared them selves to gain the North, kept Marton play
still: to whom (seeing then ready to depart) he gave such ablowe with his
Sword on the head, that he made him fall on his knees, so astonished, that he
knew not where he was: and then taking a little Boat, which was swiftly
furnished with Sails and Mariners, he retired with the rest of his Army
away from his adversaries, leauyng them agreeued at this encountrie: who not
knowing how to be revenged, set fire on that great ship, whom he had left
them. For as it was better, they thought it good rather to retire with that
gotten victory, then with danger to attend the coming of the rest of the Army,
to their great overthrow and confusion: a thing rather to be reputed rashenes
of them, then hardines.

Although the Paynims thought verily to have gotten the honor through their
flight. Who taking their voyage toward great Brittayne, took Port a while
after, at the City of London, where as then lay the good King Floridamant:
who with a great Troop of his Barons and Lords went to welcome those two
valiant Knights, which so had used the Paynims: whom he a far of knew (by
the ensigns hanged on the Mastes of their ships) to be the valiaunte King
Ferrande of Norwaie, and worthy Grandilaor, his Neuewe, whom not long before
Floridamant had made crowned King of Swethelande, at the discease of
Antizilianas Father, whom he had married, who were come from their kingdoms,
sent for by King Floridamant, in order as is before said, to give him
succor. For you must note, that the Noble king of great Britain being
certified of the waste and injury which king Brandissant had made, in going
through his Realm, perceived well that he went toward his Father the king of
Cornewayle, who prepared against him a mighty Hoaste, to revenge the death of
his two other Children, whom he had put to death. And being aduertized of the
great force and puissaunce wherewith he came against him. And doubting him
self not able to resist so great an Army had sent Ambassadors on all
sides to the kings his Neighbors, to desire their aid, and chiefly to these
two his Subjects, who failed not herein to come: And by the way knowing that
the Paynims were not far from them, they had parted their Army in two, to
embushe and assail them (as you have before heard) to their great ruin and
decaie. Who a while after them, came to take Land before the City of
London: from whence after a long and a sharp Combat, they were expulsed and
driven back, and so constrained to cast Ancour elsewhere, about a Mile from
the City, where Maugre the Christians they descended: as I mean to show you
in the first Chapter of my next book, God willing, with the rest of their
Battles and discomfitures.

But as now you must accord to grant me some rest, to the end that with
more grace and excellency I may recompte it unto you, then I have done any
thing heretofor. For my Head now is amazed, my Pen worn, and my Hand so
benomnie,

That if I have not now some rest:

I never can at chiue the rest.

The Pagans having laid seege to the City of London, determined with one
consent, to root out all Christians universally: and for the winnyng of the
City, they elected the Kings Guitarde of Baccaleos and Angrofolt, who took
with him the two mighty Giauntes Brizard, and Rogemont: and with main force
entered into the City, where Guytard, bearded by King Floridamant, was forced
to retire back in more haste then he had entered, not without the slaughter of
all his people: whereupon Angrofolt being encontered by King Floridamant,
after Combat enduryng a long season, was taken Prisoner, with the stout
Saracen Micophron.

The. xx. Chapter.
NOw (my noble Lords, and favorable Dames) since that my spirits have
reposed them selves, and the instruments of my speech are recreated, even as
of your favors ye have deigned, I entende in prosecutyng my purpose, to
recounte unto you the residue, as yet vnrehearsed, whereunto I crave your
attentive ears: For so much as I am assured, that in the rehearsal thereof,
your minds shall receive singular contentation, even as my studies are bent to
guide you into the possession of such passing delights, as ensue. Mention was
partly made before, how after that the Pagans: who at their first landyng
would have entered, and harbored their Navy directly against the City of
London, by the valor of the Kings Floridamant, Ferrand of Norway, and
Grandilaor the hardy, and by the courage of the valiaunte Knights resiant and
soiournyng there, no less manfully, then bloudily beaten back: bloudily I
say, for that with great slaughter and occision of their people, they were
enforced to take landing at an other place difficult and untoward enough,
liyng more then a Mile distaunte from the City: where immediately upon their
ariuall, without any stop or impedimente (because the Inhabitauntes of the
City perceived them selves not of sufficient force to pursue or assail them
any further) they descended from their Vessels, and went a Land, with a
great noise and Tintinare of Trompets, Shalmes, Drommes, Fifes, and other like
melodious Instruments of War: at sound whereof, the Pagans that first took
Land, did naught else but dance and triumph iolily, which bravery of theirs
endured but for a short season. For presently after that the kings Grandowin,
Angrafolt, Brandissant, and the rest with their Soldiers and all their train,
whom they had conducted to assault the City of London (which they imagined
to take within three or four days at the most) were descended from their
Ships, they marched on: meaning to encampe in a fair and very wide plain,
which as then was situate not far from the City. In the midst whereof, a man might have seen the stately and magnificente Pauilions of the mighty
Heathenishe Kings, and the others, which resembled an high Grove, environed
with a multitude of lopte Trees, among which there was erected one, far
surmountyng all the rest in length and breadth, which served the use of these
kings, in steed of an huige Halle, to consulte and deliberate, touching their
affairs: the same as a sumptuous and brave Castle with Towers, was hemde in
with Pauilions of the Kings Angrafolt, and Brandissant, on both sides:
whereunto did closely adioyne on the one part, to the lodgyng of Brandissant,
the Pauilions of king Salazard, Zorlot, Cambarel, and Phagotrof: on the other
appeared the lodgings richely besene, of the puissaunt Tauladas king of
Canada, and Guitarde lord of the I Will of Baccaleos, together with those of the
old king Grandowin, Barant, and Marton the strong of Cantabrie. All which on
the morrow, as soon as their whole train and furniture, were set in order,
failed not to assemble them selves in the great Pauilion, to take
deliberation and advise, what were best to be done, where unto all the
principal knights, that is to say, Dukes, Earls, and Barons were called, of
whom there was a great number. The old king Grandowin, for that by occasion of
him the assembly was made, sittyng on the highest Seat of all, which was
very sumptuously prepared and adorned, having his two Sons Angrafolt on
the right, and Brandissant on the left hand, and all the other kings, with
Lords of great power, stout and brave knights, above six hundred, begann
to speak unto them in this manner.

Most mighty, and excellent Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and
knights, if the grievous sorrow, and extreme heaviness, wherewith, through
the remembrance of the loss and death of my two Sons, my heart is burdened
and tormented, had stirred up my courage alone, with an inflamed desire to take
such strange and dreadful vengeance as uneath has been heard of, upon the
murderer of them, and of the chief part of my lignage: certes I would have
had no slender regard, as one loathe to seem importunate upon your Majesty's,
excellencies, and honors, in requiryng your aides, and succors in this
enterprise: well weighyng that my merit to you wards, is of no such
consequence, that of so many mighty Lords, as in this assembly are present,
to offer and adventure their gooddes and lives, upon the hazard of Fortune,
and of death also, should emploie them selves in this attempt for my sake:
seeing that for the accomplishment of the same, I my self am of power
sufficience, with the aid of these my two sons, who are no less bound to
take vehemente indignation, at the shedyng of their blood and mine, then mine
own self. But since the case so stands, that the devotion of the Gods, and
the desire to augmente our Law and Religion, ought to embolden and inspire our
courages, with an unaccustomed valiauncie, and provoke our stomachs with
bloody rage, not only to bring to utter ruin, the most traitorous and
mischeuous Tiraunte, that ever did wear Croune, him I mean of Great
Britain, but also wholly to extermine and root out this cursed ofspryng of
Christians, who in comparison of us, that hold in subjection, Asia, Afrique,
and the greater part of Europe, are but an handful: and yet if we suffer
them to reign in peace, they may receive such increase, that (as it
happens not seldom, the lesser augmente, and the greater decrease) in
conclusion they may dispossess, and deprive us of our Countries, and
Dominions* the Inhabitauntes whereof, to the great dishonor of our God
Mahomet, they will infecte with the contagion of their false belief, to our
singular damage, and confusion of our Successors For which cause, perceiuyng
that the destruction of this accursed king Floridamant of Great Britaigne, who
is one of their proppes and pillars of their Faith, is an act in mine
opinion, very necessary for me to atchieue, it semes also to be a very good
and easy enteraunce, by means of your assistaunce, into the residue of our
exploites remainyng behind, that is by our prowess, to deface and abolishe
the universal race, and cable of Christians: whose wealth and Seignories, we
may afterward divide among our selves, as in our Judgments shall seem
reasonable. Behold, ye noble wightes, the chief occasion that has moved me to
assemble so many powers at one instaunt, borrowing also your aides, the which
as I think should encourage you much more, chen if the enterprise were only
attempted in my behalf: considering that it concerns and touches you well
nigh, so much as my self. Wherefore, this is mine advise, that we prosecute
earnestly our enterprise undertaken, and begone: since that we are here
ready to put the same in execution, do plie the Iron whiles it is hot, and
that without delaie, if you judge it best to enter forcibly, or by other
practizes into the city, which in respect of the goodly buildings and
monume^tes thereof, we will neither burn nor raze, but it shall suffice that we
only put to the edge of the Sword all the people, which we shall find
within the same, as well the small, as great, both Women and Children,
murderyng and stayng them in such sort, that there shall not rest one to
carry tidings: and to him that can take the king Floridamant alive, and him
deliver into our hands to be done to vile and ignominious death, we promise
to give in lieu of his deserte two thousand Talentes, and so to advance his
estate, that he may account himself a fortunate person: but the Dames and
Gentlewomen, such as are endowed with singular beauty shall be saved, to
serve for our share, and to be disposed after our likyng.

Immediately after this Saracen had belched out these words out of his
malicious mouth, and stinkyng stomach, all the other Pagan kings said with
one voice, that he had spoken passing well, and that it behooved him to
deliberate forthwith, to which of them the charge of scalyng the walls, and
entryng the City should be committed: with whom should an hundred thousand
footmen accompaignie, to make short work in the assault, and to open the
gates the sooner, that the kings and knights remainyng without the walls,
might enter at their ease without resistaunce. And after the matter was
thoroughly ranuased among them, the puissaunt king Guitard of Baccaleos was
appointed to undertake the charge. Whereat Angrafolt was greatly aggrieued,
because he especially desired to have been the first, that should have
entered the City, to the intent he might violate, and deflower the fair
Lady Polydamie: of whose beauty (albeeit she had not attained to the age of
forty years) he had heard such exceedyng commendations, that her match was
never seen in any Heathenishe laud. And as the valiaunte king Guitard was in
preparyng, and orderyng the army under his conducte, for the accomplishing of
his unfortunate attempt, he spoke these words in effect, to the Painime
kings. who had chosen Guitard for the taking of the City:

My Lords (quod he) for so much as king Guitard, of whose prowess and bounty
I doubt not, may not without great labor and travail, atchieue the mighty
charge given to him, because that (as I believe there is none of you thereof
ignoraunte) they with whom we have to deal (I mean these knights of Great
Britaigne, with whom this City in great number is furnished, as you might
understand, when of late we purposed to have taken land) are such, as there
are very few knights in the world, of greater prowess and valiauncie then
they are: it therefore seems unto me (submittyng always my self to better
counsel) that as well for the supportation of the said Lord of Baccaleos,
as also for the speedy dispatche of that we have consulted upon, we ought to
elect some other amongst us to assiste him: and if you think good that my
self be he, the charge I will undertake with a good will, and the reason that
month me to be so desirous to deal therein, I will tell you in brief.

This night passed, as I soundly slept, me thought. I was entered into the
City, and made great chere and feastyng with king Floridamant, and the twelve
courageous knights of his house: dreamyng (as me seemed) that you pressed into
the, Hall and then as many as could, leapte out at the Windows: the residue
were by you cut in pieces, wheruppon I awaked: This Dream animateth me, and
has caused me to conceive a strong imagination, that ye euentes shall so fall
out: notwithstanding there be some which say, that dreams are but illusio^s
and mockeries. For it has been in my hearing oftentimes affirmed, that great
Princes have dreamed of things that afterward have happened: but the Dreams
of mean people are naught else but vanities, because our Gods pass not
greatly for them, neither do reveal to them the foreshewinges of chances to
come: but the apparitions that great Kings do conceive, are of an other sort,
and I am assured that not without some vehement foretelling of that which shall
fortune, the God Mahometh, has made me dream of these matters. The other
Kings perceiuyng by the tale of the cruel Angrofolt, how greatly he coueted
and longed to fight, graunced to his demand without denial, howbeit the
mighty King Tauladas of Canadas was somewhat discontented thereat, mistrusting
in his conceit, that one of those two stern warriers would without
peradventure, dispatche King Floridamant of his life, whereas he himself upon no
other occasion, then how he might have trial of the renoumed prowess of the
said King, did so soon intermedle in the same war: but for that he needed not
to have taken thought: for in dealing with king Floridamant, both he and his
accomplices also were like to have their hands full.

While the affairs among the Pagans stood in these terms, there entered
secretly into their Camp a Spy, whom King Floridamant had purposely sent to
mark and learn all the dryftes and policies of the enemies: he being
disguised, like a Pioner, so handled the matter, by means of his skilfulnes in
all Sarazin languages, that he understood the whole sum of their doings
before declared: whereupon he returned into the City unperceived of any,
making report thereof, to the noble Floridamant, and other the kings and
knights of his Court: who without uttering any sign of doubt, which
nevertheless they had closely conceived in their minds, knowing the forces
and powers of their enemies to be so great: but rather demeaning their
cou^tinaunces corresponde^t to their haulty hearts, showed themselves to their
Soldiers, whom they had mustered out of al parts, both within the City and
without: And with a sufficient number of them, marched with all expedition
toward those parts of the walls, which sustained the fearcest assault of
their enemies: who by the help of infinite corded Ladders, wherewith the
cranies of the Walls were on every side pestered, having entered into the
City in great multitudes, began already to kill and slaye all that came
in their way, without any resistaunce, until the coming of the valiaunte
Prince Floridamant, being accompanied with the kings Ferrand of Norwaie,
Grandilaor of Swethelande, and Murcibell of Denmark, who then was freshly
arrived, to the succor of his Lord, with a good number of hardy knights, and
men of Arms. All which well mounted, marched together in one Troop against
the enemy, guarded on the one side with Duke Candior of Normandy, and his
Son Don Siluan, Earl of Flaunders, who was a very young knight, but well
esteemed for Feats of Arms. On the other side were the l^stie Acciall of
Surrey, Sir Hewald, the courageous knight Melchior of Irelande, Ramelin, Druic,
and Frangard Earl of Durford, who confrontyng this outrageous multitude of
Sarazins, murderyng the Christians without mercy, charged those Butcherly
Dogs, void of all humanity, with such fury, that at that first
encounter, happenyng within a broad place far within the City, you might have
seen the Members, as the Arms, Legs, Heads, and breast parts of the
Pagans, fly thick in the air like Flies in the Sun shine: which these
valiaunte Knights dismembered in such wise, that those Rakehelles that had
begone to make their Brauadoes along the City, were never so astonished in their
lives: so that feelyng their ouerlong tariaunce, to turn to their
hinderaunce, and seeing their unableness to make any further resistaunce, they
were constrained to return the way they had passed before, and yet they
could not behave them selves so well in the retyryng, but that three thousand
fell down stark dead in the place. Whereof the king of Baccaleos, (as he
stood on the walls encouragyng his men to clyme up apace, being aduertized,)
descended from thence, and came incontineutly with a trusty band of his
stoutest knights, among whom there was one brave Sarazin, of mighty strength,
named Micophron, that was his Cousin. As soon as he approoched near the
place, and saw what havoc the Christians made of the Pagans, he was almost
mad with rage and spite, to see his people so disordred and slain: whom he met
sleeing, being chased by the knights above named: and with maine force entered
into the Croude on foot as he was, being followed of his people: who viewyng
his manhood, took heart agrace, laying about them with all their might, in
such wise, that if God had not taken compassion upon the poor Christians,
there had not one escaped that day: for he encountered nothing in that place,
which he did not hew in pieces: next unto him the fierce Sarazin Micophron
made such a terrible slaughter and spoil of the poor Christians, that none
there were, that durst withstand him, for fear lest they should be sent to
their long homes. And assuredly they had overcome the whole City, if that the
renoumed king Floridamant, the valiant Ferrande of Norway and Don Murcibel of
Denmark, (whose strength by Gods divine power, I believe was then redoubled)
had not in time hasted to the succor of their people. But these noble Princes
beholding this miserable spectacle, used wonderful diligence and celeritie,
and bare them selves so valiauntly, that king Floridamant coaping with the king
of Baccaleos, Don Ferrand with Mycophron the strong, and Murcibell among the
other Pagans, smytyng before and behind, and on both sides, compelled them
after an hard and sharp conflict, to turn their backs, and show their
heels. For king Floridamant surprised with fury, and chafed in fightyng,
raught king Guitard with all his force, such a violent stroke, that he made
his Helmet flee of his head, and had slain him without doubt, if his people
had not the more speedely succored him: but perceiving his head unarmed, he
retired hastily to the place from whence he came, having received no other
hurt but, that, by the violence of the blow, his eyes so sparkeled, that for
a quarter of an hour after, he could see very little at all: and it is to be
co^iectured, that had it not been for ye goodness of his Armor, being that,
which Achilles did wear, at the bataile of Troy, when he slew the valiant
Hector, doubtless he had not been left alive: howbeit he was afterward much
vexed, yea and ready to run out of his wits, for that part of the Armor
which he had lost, having won them from the strong Bagellan, king of
Ithaca, by Combat enduring three days continually: which Bagellan received
them from his Auncestour Ulysses, who after the death of Achilles, was made
owner of them.

But now to go forward in the recital of the rest of this hideous hurly
burly, between the Painims and the Christians: you shall understand, that
after king Guitard with the loss of his armor, was so escaped out of the
tumulte, mighty Mycophron his cousin, whom he had left behind in the Briers,
with much ado and difficulty, sustained the brunte of his enemies, being
welnigh overcome by the assailers of him: for he was so roughly charged and
pursued, by the three Christian kings, that notwithstanding his manfull and
courageous defense, he was taken Prisoner. For he had once before brought king
Ferrand of Norwaie, to so hard an exigent, for all his excellent prowess,
that he had not long endured against him, had not the kings, Floridamant and
Murcibell afforded their aides: who chargyng the Pagans as aforesaid, forced
him to yield himself prisoner, and in respect of his valiauncie, slew him as
they did his people, who were entered into ye city: of who^ he made such
havoc, that not one remained unslain, to carry news of the defeatyng of his
fellow soldiers.

Thus you may perceive how nobly the three Christian Kings in those parts
behaved them selves, from middaie, till the Sun was welnigh set: It
remains that we make rehearsal, what was done on the other side against
cruel Angrofolt and those monstrous Giantes, Brisard and Rogemont, by the
residue of the twelve valiaunte knights of Great Britaigne: who being in
other quarters of the City, and hearing the noise and Alarm of their enemies,
who had made enteraunce in great multitudes, under conducte of the same
Angrofolt, accompanied with these two Giauntes, marched on in marvelous haste
thetherwarde, being assisted by the more part of the garrisons of the city,
with such diligence and dexterity, that the Pagans being not far entered
into the City, were by them compelled to recuyle unto the very walls, not
without great loss and slaughter. How as the Giauntes were entered with
Angrofolt their Lord, be seeing the resistaunce that they of the City made,
commanded these two Butcherly Giauntes to succor their men: him self
only taking ware to the kings Palace, to seize upon his desired pray: being
the Lady Polydamie, who as then kept her self within her Chamber, lamentyng
and weepyng, with noble Queen Belizenne her Mother, who made pitiful moan,
meenyng her total ruin to be at hand. Now as that cruel Tiraunt of Corsica
approached nere the Palace, to his misaduenture, he was breasted by the kings
Floridamant, Ferrand, and Murcibell: who having happily dispatched them selves
of Guitard, bastened to other quarters of the City, where they knew the
Painims were entered. For he was no sooner espied, but he was presently charged
very rudely, by these three valiant Christian Champ^ons with dinte of Sword:
which although he received with great assurance, yet the match vnegally
made, he could not endure long, but was compelled to tourue his back, fliyng
toward the place where his men fought: but being agaste with the violence
of the strokes he had sustained in the encounter, he missed of the right way.
Forthwith king Floridamant meaning to pursue him, and to fight with him hand
to hand, commanded the kings Ferrand, and Murcibell, to haste them to the
aid of his knights, and in the pursuit of the Pagan (as one that was more
nimble and active) demeaned him self so well, that in a narrow Lane, where the
other rested to breath himself, he ouertooke him: who seeing none other to
follow save the king, reioysed greatly, and taking his Sword in his hand,
and his Shield on his arm, attended, vaunting on foot to receive the onsett,
howbeit to his no small prejudice. For the king closely bucklyng with him,
assailed him with such force and violence, that had not his Enchaunted Arms
served him at that pinch, he should have been soon dispatched, but by the
help of them, he continued the fight more then an hour and an half, wherein
such manhood was showed by the assailant and defendant, that it was hard to
discern who had the better or worse, till at last two hours after the
Battle begone drawyng on, the Pagan because of his feebleness and
fainenesse, being unable to endure any longer, fell down in a soune on the
Earth: the King partly taking the advantage, although he was weried in the
Combat, set his foot upon his breast, and having taken of his Helmet,
intended to have slain him, when the other who had recovered him self, cried:
O Noble King, for Gods sake spare my life, and at this instaunt extend I
beseech you, that exceedyng mercy and clemency, wherewith I have heard you
always renoumed: since that by my death you shall not purchase so great
honor, having now no means to defend my self. The king the mirror of
courtesy and pity, showed himself toward this cruel Tyrant so merciful,
that he did him no other harm, save only made him his Prisoner, wherewith
the Pagan was partly comforted. The chief conductor of the Pagans, having
rendered himself vanquished, was by King Floridamant brought unarmed, to the
place where the Christians and Heathen people fiercely fought: so that they
issue to what side the victory was more likely to incline, seemed uncertain
and doubtful: when as king Floridamant, who made more account of the life of
his men, then of the death of a thousand of his foes, on the one side, and
Angrafolt his Prisoner on the other side, caused them to surceasse. The force
of the Heathenishe rested principally in Brizard and Rogemont the Giauntes, who
made great spoil and havoc among the Christians, and had taken up and
carried away under their Arms (as though they had been Chikens or Capons)
four of the courageous Knights of great Britain, to wit Don Acciall of
Surrey, and Ramelin of the I Will of Wight by Brisard, Melchior of Irelande and
the Earl of Durford, by the fell Rogement: who notwithstanding were rendered,
and the Pagans chieftaines compelled to retire with those few that remained on
live: for of fifty thousand Pagans that by scalyng the walls, had entered:
scarce twenty thousand were left one live: and of Christians about fifteen
thousand were found dead, as well of Women and Children, as of men of base
condition, that with Weapons, Stones, and such like, ran upon their
enemies. Howbeit no knight of name was slain, saving the valiant Heroald, who
was found among the press almost smothered, and the young Don Siluan of
Flaunders, who had all that day fought against the cruel Giaunt Rogemont, and
by a wound which he received in his Arm, lost so much blood, that if he had
not been helped in time, he had been in danger to be lost: but as it
fortuned, he suffered no other hurt, save the pain of his wound, which
shortly after was cured, as we find in the ancient Commentaries of Gallarx
the Historiographer: who for that he surceaseth to entreat any further,
touching these affairs between the Pagans and Britains, we also will leave
of, for a certain time, and turn our talk to the most delighteful and
strange adventures of the Youth of the Fairies: showing you only by the way,
that the Pagans having retired themselves for certain days: king Floridamant
gave his Prisoners Angrafolt and Mycophron very sumptuous entertainment,
according as he before had dreamed.

How the Youth of the Fairies set himself on Sea, to pursue the unknown
Knight: where after he had a long season sustained the violence of a terrible
Tempest, he discovered a man swimmyng upon the Pla^cke of a ship, and in
danger of drownyng, who by him being saved, as they were there discoursing of
their adventures, they were assailed by Rouers on the Sea, whom they slew all
saving one.

The. xxi. Chapter.
THe continual unrest, and perplexity, enwrappyng their hearts, whom the
blind Archer has atteinted with his enuenomed shaftes, not only depriueth
them of the se^sible taste and release of most dainty Viandes, tournyng their
sweetness into bitterness, that it is impossible for them to receive
sufficient for the nourishmente of their bodies, and conservation of their
health, seeing themselves for the most part led with fond conceiptes and
vain imaginations of the beauty of such as in their minds they make their
Idols: but also occupiyng their heads in contemplation of those fantasies,
seldom can they take any rest: as by the example of the Youth of the Fairies
evidently appears. Who during the time that the affairs of great Britayne
continued in the state before mentioned in Greece, spated no pain nor travail,
to the intent he might attain to the estimation and renoume of a worthy and
valiant knight: the better to purchase the good grace and favor of his new
Dame, whose excellency in all respects had so ravished his senses, that in
the Inn where we left him last, he could neither take repast nor repose.
Wherefore as soon as the obscurity of the night began to dyminishe, seeing
neither his mind nor body by concourse of his passionate pangues and amourous
cogitations, no disposed to quietness, he leapeth out of bed, notwithstanding
the morning was very cloudie and dark: when as his Esquier, who steapte, not
knowing with what conceit his master was tickeled, likewise left his bed, and
making himself ready, failed not forthwith to haste unto the stable, there to
saddle and bridle his Horse, and to prepare all other things requisite for his
Master when he should take Horse: dispatchyng the same with such diligence,
that nothing lacked when his Master being armed came. Who accompanied with his
Host, departed with all speed, to overtake the person which he sought for:
trauailyng so fast, that before the dawnyng of the day, they arrived at
Byzaunce. Where taking leave of his Host, whom he satisfied to his
contentation, he embarked him self in a Ship well furnished, whom he found
pressed to make voyage toward France: for that he having enquired of the
unknown knight, the Master of the ship had told him, that the Euenyng
before the same knight had taken Ship in a Barcke, of a Companion of his,
that sailed thetherwarde: whereof he was not a little joyful, commaundyng the
Sea man with all expedition, to hoise up the Sails and away: so that they
passed along the mean Seas, the space of two days and a night: at the
expiration whereof the Sailer in the morning, perceiving the sun to appear
read of color, and the winds to blow blusteryngly, alteryng the calmenes
of the weather, and stilnes of the waves, into a troublesome and tempestuous
rage, would have declined out of the determined course, and bente his ship
toward a little Island, lying far distaunt from the ready way into France.
The Youth of the Fairies suspectyng no less, gave him in charge both earnestly
and half displeasauntly, that he should sail directly on. For (quoth he) fall
back, fall edge, no hap so hard, no, nor fear of death, during the safety of
this Vessel, shall enforce me to change my purpose. The discrete Sailer
knowing the will of the Knight to be constantly settled to abide the
vttermoste that the wrathful Skies might threaten, or froward fortune
procure, as one contented to suffer pacientlie whatsoever distress it would
please the almighty to throw him in, would not gainesay him: for the small
experience which so short time could afford him of his worthiness, bou^ty, and
comely qualities, wherewith the Youth was adorned, had persuaded him so to
dedicate his mind to please and serve him, that he would in no wise
withstand his commandment: howbeit, because he saw the imminent ieoperdie of
their lives now approaching, for to assaie whether by any persuasions he
might turn his opinion, he told him yt he had perceived certain usual
signs, betokenyng always some mischaunce and violent tempest, as the high and
sudden towering of the Heron: which, Sir (says he) makes me to mistruste
that with no assayling, but with great danger of our ruin, we may pass
any further. Moreover the continual leaping of the Dolphins above water, which
I epsy, abasheth and warns me to avoid the perilous outrage of ye winds
and weather. Wherefore I think it very expedient, that we soiourne in some
surer harbor for a season, waiting for the appeasing of the Seas and ceassing
of the Tempest: for so much as the same being assuaged, we way dispatche
further in a day, the^ we may during this rage in a month: for in doing of
such things, as you know, we must tarry the opportunity of ye season.
Notwithstanding, since your pleasure is, that we shall sail on, I will not
disobay your will, albeit we shall never (if I be not deceived) accomplish the
same without some lamentable accident: aduertising you, that if God extend not
his mercy to your succor, the end of our days is at hand. Howbeit, for all
these words and many a tear besides, which fell from the good Seamans eyes,
who trembled for fear, seeing the Waves like mighty Mountains, offering to
ouerwhelme them, and the Seas ready to swallow up their vessel, yet would not
the Youth rele^t, nor was any whit abashed, saying that either alive or dead,
he would pass further. In ye mean while the master of the ship turned the
Sails toward the Region of France: whereupon the chief wind with such
violence rushed against ye maine Maste, that it had like to have overthrown
the Vessel: but partly by the timely ceasing of the boisterous blaste, partly
by the incredible strength of the Youth of the Fairies: who embrasing it in his
Arms, held it with all his might, from leaning toward the Seas, the ship
and all was recovered. Notwithstanding the Tempest surceased not, but continued
so cruel and forcible, that it might have been compared to that, wherein the
Trojan Chieftaine Aeneas, was tourmoyled when ye wrathful Juno (ince^sed
against the remains of Troy) had requested Aeolus, to give to his most fierce
winds the raynes to torment him. For their vessel was with such outrage
tossed to and fro, up and down, and almost vpsidedoune, wind shaken and
weather beaten, that when I consider of it, I am forced to stand in
admiration, wonderyng how it could escape so horrible a ieoperdy without
shipwreck: for sometimes the Waves like Mountains lifted them up aloste,
making them think that they were in ascending into the Clouds: again the
ship falling down between the mighty Waves as it were in a deep valley,
made them to dread, lest that Hell were openyng to devour them up. So that the
Mariners and Passengers abandonyng the Tacklinges, began to cry mercy,
knowing no other remedy or rescue from such immine^t dangers saving prayer
unto God, with such an heart, as they possess, who are surprised with the
like hazard. Nevertheless the merciless rage of the winds increasing, Hail
and sharp showers fell aboundauntly, the Skies were quite ouercast, the Air
wonderfully darkened, the darkness berefte the Sailers of all light, except
it were that which proceedyng from the twinklyng eyes of the Whales, and
Wherlepooles, or else of flashes of lightening, intermedled among the stormy
Rain, and forerunnung most ghastly and hideous Thunder crackes, and terrible
Wheriewindes. But yet all these dreadful accidents had no power to abate the
noble courage or daunte the stout Stomarke of the worthy and valiant Youth of
the Fairies, steadfastly settled in a firm opinion, that all bitterness was
sweet, all evil good, and all danger, disease, and travail, to be repose
and assured tra^quillitie in respect of the incessant, vnasswaged and remediles
pain, which his restles mind suffered by vehemency of his amorous wound:
for albeit he did see the great part of the Mariners, and the residue in the
ship, shifte out of the same, and commit themseues unto the Shipboate for
their safegarde, yet he not once offered to remove himself from thence where
he was: neither respectyng couerte from the brunt of the tempest, nor reiectyng
the unseasonable weather, but accepting either in like part. Which Tempest
toward the evening, when the Vessel had all day run at randon, without
government, began to cease, and moderate his rage, the importunate winds
packyng away, and giuyng place to the comfortable Beams of Dan Phoebus, who
as then guided his horse, weary of their days task toward Thetis Waves.
Now the Youth, who alone stayed in the Vessel, with his trusty Esquire, that
would not forsake him in weal or woe, perceiuyng the weather to wax clear,
gate him out of a Cabin of the Ship, where he had remained during the
Tempest, and mounting upon the Hatches, he might epsy not far from his
Vessel, the half of a ship flotyng, which the tempest had torn asunder:
within the which there was a man almost faintyng, and pressed to yield his body
to the mercy of the Waters, whose Waves had almost overwhelmed him: yet
betwixt sinkyng and swimmyng, he labored to lengthen his life, without
likelihood of recovery, if an unhoped hap had not reserved him from such
distress, liyng in the maine Seas, deprived of his natural forces, and
distaunte from Land any way twenty Leages: but as he was in this plight, a
gracious gale of wind, did drive the Board whereon he groueled half dead,
toward the Youths Vessel: who taking pitiful compassion, with diligent
endeavor labored to save him: sparing not to despoyle himself, stark naked
to leap into the water, and tying a Coarde of the Ship about his body,
swamme to the other man, and attainyng unto him, threw him the end of the
same Cord, which he stiffly grasped in his nummed hands: this being done, he
swamme again toward his ship: drawyng the other after him with much ado:
into the which he mounted, and being tired, lifted up the other being hardly
handeled and moyled in the salt waters: who being entered, fell down in a
sound, vomityng up the water in great abundance, which he had glutted in,
at his Nose and Mouth.

Whereupon the Youth of the Fairies seeing him so fair and so comely a
Personage, and gessing by his countenance that he should be of some good house,
employed al diligence possible, for the safe guard of his life, and taking him
and lifting his feet upwards, with ye help of his Esquier, made them fast to
one of the Cables, and hanging his head downewardes, he powered out the water
into the Sea, which remained in his Stomach: after being recovered from his
swone, he prayed the Youth, that he would untie him, for he felt no more
pain, which he delaied not to do, with all expedition, being so glad, as if
he had found the Treasure of Croesus, or conquered the Roman Empire, as well
for that he longed to understand what he was, as also what fortune had brought
him into that distress. Whereof having demanded, the other that was so
enfeebled and weried, by turmoyling in the water, that he could not easily
fetch breathe, requested him instauntly, that he would vouchsafe him some
restyng place out of hand, and that after he were reposed a while, he would
recount unto him his whole case. Then the Youth knowing that he needed the
same, and that he uttered his words with much difficulty, commanded his
Esquier, that he should lead him to his chamber, and lay him in his own Bed,
whereunto he obeyed incontinently: but he was scarce entered, when as the knight
seeing the Arms of the Youth, and likewise the Spear that lay by his bed
side, stayed for a certain season, without speaking one word, (he was
surprised with such astonishment): afterward touruyng him toward the
Esquier, regarded him heedefully, and remembered that he had seen him not long
before: and forthwith called to mind who he was: howheit without making
semblaunte of any such thing, be began tovnaraie himself: and his apparaile
(whiles he prepared himself to Bed) the Esquier bare into the open air to
dry: who failed not to rehearse unto his Master, touching the countenance and
behauour of the man, when as be beheld his Armor. Who being therefore more
desirous then he was before, to know what he was, hyed him into the Chamber, to
common with the Stranger, whiles that the ship without any Sterneman did
run at randon: but at the first entrance* finding him fast a sleep, he would
not awake him as then, until midnight came: when he had rested himself a long
season, the Youth (who in the evening was laid down by hm, noti disposed to
cloase his eyes all that part of the night, by reason of the unquietness of his
thoughts) heard him speak in his sleep thus. Ah Madame (said he) and what
will you say when ye understand of the death of your Knight? After wallowyng
from one side to another, and wauyng his Feet and Hands as though he would
have swimmed, he muttred in his dream sundry like speeches, and complaints,
whereby the Youth who gave good ear, perceived that he was dedicate to the
Hestes of the Patroness of Paphos: therefore both for that be supposed the man
to be troubled in mind, through the fearful obiectes which were presented
to his inward senses as he dreamed, and because his longyng to know what
person he was, did still augmente, iogging the man hard with his Elbowe till
be was awaked, said: Ho, ho, Companion! what ails you? you are further from
the water then you were yesterday, God be thanked. The man in his awakyng
geuyng a leap (as it were one half aghast) was recomforted when he found
himself in so safe a place: for in his sleep he imagined, that he was yet in
the Sea. Wherefore reuokyng to memory the dangerous hazard from which by the
Youths aid then lying by him, he was recovered, he showed not himself
displeased for his late thrustyng of him, but shrouding himself again under
the couerte of the Bedclothes, began to speak to him on this sort: Sir Knight
(said he) if it seemed not offensive to you, I would instauntly request you,
to vouchsafe me one benefit: assuryng you that I will in any matter
concerning you, avoid the crime of ingratitude, as well in respect thereof, as
also in that you have been the only refuge and rescue of my liefe, out of
those apparent perilles, wherein (hopeless) I was environed: which causes me
to account my self so much bound and beholding to your gentleness, for your
unspeakable and exceedyng merits, that unfeignedly I do acknowledge my own
power, far, unable to recompense the slenderest part of those your so high
deserts, yea though I do adventure my life in the hazard of innumerable
dangers, for the defense and conservation of youres: vowyng furthermore, that
you shall require nothing at my hands, which gladly I will not occomplishe
for your sake, not only because you have recovered me from present death,
but also for that your liniamentes and countenance alone do seem worthy,
that so great a Prince as I am, should employe himself for you. Wherefore as
you esteem my words true, and my promise to proceed from a faithful and
constaunt heart, I pray you to grant unto my first request, which I never
seemed to deny to any creature living. Verily Sir (said the Youth) of the
Fairies, you seem unto me so courteous and well spoken, that albeit you were
but a mean Knight, and not descenden from any royal house, as you have
uttered here, yet would I not once offer to conceal any thing whereof ye
should demand me: always foreseen, that it rests in my power to do:
reposing such confidence in your good nature and courtesy, that you will not
forbear ne disdain to show the like at mine instaunce, after that I have so
satiffied your desire, which I request you not to differ: geuyng you my
word in faith of a knight, that you shall require no thing of me, which
(mine honor reserved) I will not attempt with my whole might.

I beseech you then (quoth the other) that it would please you to discover unto
me who you are, and what Fortune has forced you, being of so young years, to
wander thus alone amids the Seas, and likewise, where you conquered the
Harness and fair Spear, which yesterdaie at my entry into this Chamber I
did behold: wherewith as I be leave, you arm your self, when occasion
offers or necessity constrains so to do: and the reason which moves me
to be desirous to understand the first of these three things, is to the end,
that I may know the person certainly, unto whom I stand so deeply endebted,
that if I may possibly have a thousand lives to ieoperde in his defense, when
need shall require, they may in noe wise be spared: wherefore I am again to
desire you to disclose the same to me. I promise you (said the Youth) that
since it is so, that you have prevented me, by demaundyng that which else I
had enquired of you, I will not gainesaie your demand, having a sure trust,
that you will use the like courtesy to me. It remains therefore, that you
know, that I was borne in great Britain, and being very young, was nursed
and trained up in the Fairie of the Nimphe Ozyris: it may be that you have
heard report of her, who not long sithence sent me to Constantinople to be
dubbed Knight by the Emperor there, who of his gracious inclination refused
not to do it: but misfortune who lay in wait euerywhere to surprise me,
would: alas (sir Knight) I pray you to hold me excused, If I utter no
further of my mishappe, said he, sighyng deeply, and that in performance of
the promise, which I have made unto you, this short declaration may suffice:
for if you understand any further of my calamities, I do believe that you will
scarsely refrain your eyes from Tears, and your heart from bewailyng of my
lamentable case. The man (who was more desirous to know where he had recovered
those Arms which he had seen the euenyng before in the Chamber, then to
hear of any thing else) ceased not very importunatelie to charge him with
his promise, alledgyng many vehement persuasions, to encourage him thereto:
saying (as though he had coniectured somewhat of the passions of the Youth, by
his gesture and manner of pronouncyog) that if the original of his mishap and
grief proceeded of love, in discovering it to him (as without inconvenience he
might assuredly do, as to his especial friend) he should receive such
comfort as should yield him singular solace, and if it did arise of any
offense namely against him, he promised with all his power to assist him in the
execution of the reuengemente thereof. Whereupon the Youth (the passages of
whose voice by the sourse of his sorrows, were burste open) revived at the
remembrrunce of his Dames beauty, rather heavenly then human, and discoursed
to him a large process of the adventures befallyng him, mentioned before: not
concealing any Jot untold: and he had not as yet attained to the end of his
rehearsal, when the dawnyng of the day bade them to forsake their beds, so
that leisure sailed the Youth ere he could declare where he had recovered the
Armor.

But setting themselves upon the Puppe of their ship, as obiectes to the
glitteryng beams of Dan Phoebus, as he was addressyng his tongue, to finishe
his rehearsal, by fortune they kenned a Vessel that skmimed the Seas with
wonderful swiftnes, wherein as the same approached near, they might epsy two
knights armed at al points, who flourishing with their naked swerdes in their
hands, and their shieldes upon their Arms, manaced them more and more.
Whereof the Youth, who was unarmed, at the first blushe abashed, and
mistrustyng that they came to enterprise upon them at such advantage,
descended in all have to his Chamber, where having taken of his Armor the
Shield and Sword only: leauyng to his companion, whom he had found in the Sea
the rest, to wit, the Corselet, the headpeece and the Spear, mounted up
upon the Hatches, where they met with the two Archepyrates, who already had
to their own mischief borded their Ship. For the former of them both, being
confronted by the Youth of the Fairies received upon his Headpeece such a
stroke, that his Head and Body was cleaued down to the Breast,
notwithstaddyng the defense he made with his Shield, his Helmet and other his
Harness, which prevented not that fatal blow: not much unlike was the
mischaunce of his Copesmate, who by his Spear pierced the body so violently,
that down fell he into the water stark dead: at sight whereof the two
Knights stood a certain space, as men amazed each one at the prowess of
the other: but especially, he who had been preserved from death, beholding the
Youth of the Fairies, with exceading admiration, to reach that miserable Rouer
(whom he had slain with wonderful force) the mightiest stroke yt ever he did
see with his eyes: whose Companions but smallie dismayed at the slaughter of
their Companions, runnyng out of their Forte in heaps, assailed these two
worthy Knights furtously: who receiuyng their charge with great assurance,
made such havoc, yt of thirty of them in half a quarter of an hour, there
remained not past twenty: the half of whom being grievously wounded, they
were by fine force compelled to give ground: part of whom leapte into the
water to save themselves, the rest that either thought the water over cold,
or peradventure unable to swim, fled to their Ship, addressyng their Sails
to return thither, from whence they came: but omittyng the expedition
requisite in so urgent necessity, they were all hewn in pieces, one except
being reserved, to utter what people they were. For these two excellent
Knights, whom I may truly term the most valiant and redoubted wightes under
the Coape of Heaven, as their deeds hereafter, and namely in the second and
third part of this History do clearly witness, after that they were become
Masters of the ship, wherein the Pirates had assailed them, entered
therein, meaning to take Land with all possible speed, for that the same was
furnished with all necessary things, for a Voyage: whereas on the contrary
part, their other was not, by reason of the violente tempest, and outrage
before declared: which they did accordingly: where they lighted upon
marvelous adventures, which hereafter you may understand.

How the Pyrate whose life was saved by the Youth of the Fayries, recounted
unto him the Pedegrewe of the Giaunte Squamell, and of the mighty Nabot,
together with the love between the same Squamell and the Lady Lucinde,
daughter to the King of high Mysia: of whom the Giaunt findyng himself to be
despised, did happen upon a Knight, who bare an enchaunted Cup, within which
who so drank, whatsoever the drink were, should become extremely amorous of
the person that offered the same: likewise in this last chapter are many
notable adventures comprised.

The. xxij. Chapter.
AS the variety of matters heretofore handled, have yielded occasion to you my
Lords and Dames, of no slender solace and recreatio^, so I doubt not but that
the residue of this work which hereafter shall be set to open vewe,
concerning this History, will suspend your inte^tiue minds, with the
expectation of rarer delights, and delightfuller discourses: and by
performance of that which is pretended, satisfy your conceits, with
surplusage of pleasant inventions. And now to prosecute our purpose,
understand ye, that as soon as the Youth of the Fairies had left his ship,
which wandered upon the Sea, without any government, and was entered into that
which be had conguered of the Pirates, who had attempted to assail him, to
their damage and utter confusion, with the aid of the man, whose life he had
delivered from the danger of death, obiectyng himself to perilous hazardes
for the others safegarde: for the self same person was he, whom he sought for,
to the end that he might revenge the supposed death of his faithful friend
Pharisor, whom he thought to have been slain by him: being I say sailyng
upon the Sea in his very company, and making great speed to overtake him, who
was no other where but in that Sippe, both to know if the Rouer whom he had
taken, could tell any tidinges of him, and also to understand who were those
Sea Robbers, whom he had slain, he did the mean while command that the
same Pirate should be brought unto his presence: and having questioned with
him concerning those news, and showed the cognisaunces which the knight (whom
he pursued) bare in his arms, in the hearing of the same knight, whereat he
stood much amazed and astonished, perceiving that he enquired for him, the
Pirate spoke and answered in this wise:

My Lord (said he) as touching the Knight of whom you spoke, I am to certify
you, that we have never understood any news: true it is, that yesterdaie in
the euenyng, when the Tempest that troubled the Seas, was aswaged, as we were
rouyng from one Coaste to another, searching some pray to enriche us, as we
were accustomed to do, by commandment of the strong Giant Squamel, our
Master who is brother to the most mighty and puisaunt Knight Nabot, of whom
there is no doubt, but you have heard notable report (forasmuch as he is the
most redoubted Knight formartial prowess, living at this day under the Sun)
we by chance encountered upon the border of the fair I Will, which lies not
far hence, belongyng to the said marvelous Giaunt, a Ship, which the
surges of the Sea had cast to wards shore, being rent and wracked in many
places. Within the which we heard a great tramplyng and noise made by a
horse, the gallauntste and goodlyest I believe in the whole world: who with his
heels bounced against the boordes of the ship: whom we drew for the, and sent
him by one of our people that did lead him by the bridle (for ride him he
durst not) to our Lord Squamel, with an Harness, and Sword so brave, as
possibly might be, which we found there also: and in the Ship (whereof I
will tell you) were the cognisaunces which you have described: and I think
that the Harness appertained to the Knight for whom you seek: whom
(notwithstanding) we saw not, nor know where he is become, except he be
among an infinite number of drowned bodies that be on the shore. In as much as
you demand what we are, it seems unto me, that by the declaration I have
made you (being a sage and wise Knight, as does appear) you may gather that
you require, without any longer process. But tell me (said the Youth) what
were those two brave fellows who first enterprised to boorde our ship:

The Rouer then answered thus: my Lord, (quoth he) the man whom you slew,
was our Captain, and named Falsant, not so much for that he was the most
doughtie of our Masters Subjects, as for a consideration which I will
recounte unto you, if it like you to give me the hearing. Speak on (said the
Youth) and we will give attentive ear to thy tale, since we have no other
thing to pass away the time with all. First then my Lord, before I
participate unto you that which I have promised, I will recite (so that it
stand with your contentment) the pedigrewe of the Giaunt Squamell my Master,
because it imports much in that matter. Know ye therefore, that the
merueilous she Giaunt Horfelle (who was of the progeny of the Triple headed
Giant Gerion, Son of Chrysaore, who was slain by Hercules, after the decease
of his predecessor Ferramond, who had been King of Maiorica and Minorica, and
of Erbusa in Spain,) being in her young years, of such dexterity and might in
feats of arms, that no man in her time was found, that could withstand her
force, had not yet exceeded the age of xvij. or xviij. years, but that she
supposing her self of streingth sufficiently, to abide all pain and travail
whatsoever should befall, one day among the rest, without taking leave either
of Ferramond her Sire, or Garrande her Mother, departed secretly out of the
country armed with an unknown Armor. Afterward having scoured the Seas a
long season, visityng all the Isles and Regions which she might discover,
where she left behind her triumphant tokens of the victorious conqueste,
which she had gained, and of the wonderful adventures atchiued by her, as
many a time I have heard reported by them that were living) whereof a few
remain as yet, did so much by her deeds and worthiness, that she as
Conqueresse entered the Indies. Where understanding by brute of people, the
famous renoume of a king of Gedrosia descended from the line of King Porus,
that was vanquished by Alexander the Great, and in knightly prowess far
surmountyng the chiefest knight of those days, passed thereupon into the said
Realm of Gedrosia which is bounded with the River Indus, from whence the
greater part of the Regions of the Cast, do take their name. Where (to be
brief) after a long and sharp conflict, she overcame the same king, who was
called Corlorant, and subdued and brought under her obedience, not only the
Realm of Gedrosia, but also iourneyng to Ganges the River, and the deserts of
Camul triumphed of the victory which she obtained against the great Cham of
Cathay, in the fardest parts of all the Cast, enthronizyng her self in ye
seat royal of Oriental Scythia, which otherwise is termed Tartaria,
adioynyng to the country of Bactria near unto Parthia. But not contented
therewith, whether it be for that as you know, the more that some persons
abound in riches, the greedilier they covet worldly wealth, or for that she
desired to extend the fleight of her renown further, and yield a Testimony
of her hautie and invincible prowess, to the unknown parts of the world,
she travailed so far, that she attained to the extreme Confines of Africa:
where malicious fortune spityng at her fame, plaide here a trick of her
waueringnes and inco^stancie. Now therefore as soon as this valiant Virago and
vauqueresse Horfelle, was received into the Region of Spithanne, she wondered
greatly to see the inhabitauntes thereof so little, that six of the tallest
that there could be found, being set one upon another, could scarce reach unto
her waste: howbeit that hindered not the blind Pigmey Cupide, to assault her
more vehemently, then any her enemies in Gedrosia. Tartaria, Parthia, or any
other part which she had been in: who for to surprise her, and to give her
to understand, that he was more mighty then she, for all her pride and
iolitie, although before time there was none that could daunt her courage,
pursued her being furnished with his Shaftes, Bow, and flaming brandes into
that country, where by his subtle sleightes he wounded her in one of the
soundest parts of her entrayles, after an other sort, then she was wounded in
the combat, which she had with the hardy Corlora^t. For she was enamoured on
the king of that country, in such sort, that she could neither rest by night,
nor employe her mind by day on other affairs: saving in the feeding of her
affections with those ceaselesse conceiptes: albeit that this petite Prince was
not past three cubits in height, and had to name Nabro^: at which thing Sir,
those that have not tasted the experience of love, hearing, have been greatly
astonished: as at a thing impossible: but if they weigh well, that this pretty
Archer having his eyes ouercaste with a black Cipresse band, and his eyesight
bedewde therewith, can not clearly discern what he does, after that his
scorchyng Shaftes, being guided as destiny dryues them, are shot thick and
three fold among the multitude of mortal Wightes, he wounds the great as
well as the sinall, and contrariwise, enforcyng the sister to be sometimes
ravished with an unlawful fancy toward her brother, as Biblis: the daughter
toward the Father, as Myrrha, or the father toward the daughter: I am
persuaded, that changing their opinions, and ceasing their astonishment, they
will not marvel a whit, if Horfelle that was of unmeasurable greatness, was so
rapt with the love of a Pigmean King, in such manner, that in steed of
employng her force against some stout knight or Giaunt, or destroying horrible
and fell monsters, she held him company at such times, as he with his
manlinges went to skirmishe with the Cranes: that were so grievous unto them by
reason of ye daily battles, which they fought with them, that he seemed to
be in no less extremity, then Phineus, by the assaults of ye foul Harpyies
was, so that he could take no one repast at quiet. Howbeit being acquainted as
before is showed with this noble Dame (as was not uneasy for him to procure,
because of her extreme passions) she found her heart shortly after exempt
from these miseries. For one day in an encounter and skirmishe between the
Pygmees and Cranes, this amorous Horfelle, entending to give trial with what
affection she would adventure her self in his service, and how much she
alone exceeded in might and main, both him and all his people together, by her
only presence affrighted so these Master Birds, that never sithence they
attempted war against him, nor as yet durst approache the place where the
King soiourned. Upon which occasion Nabron considering how much beholding he
was to the Dame (whom he honored, and entertained as well as he could) on a
certain day made unto her an offer of all the Treasures and riches which he
enjoyed in this world: for which the she Giant Horfelle thanked him humbly,
refusing it as she that was much more abounding in wealth then he, and his
Treasures were far unfit and disagreeyng from the Medicine appliable to her
Malady, which she felt day and night, to reave her of all delight and
contentation. Wherefore seeing the Path (to pass unto the purpose which she
pretended) ready beaten, she discovered at a certain time her grief: and
being alone in the Chamber of the King Nabron, did so coll him and kiss him,
and used such other wanton daliaunces, yt the little dandiprat receiuyng in
good part the fortune offered, not willing to refuse the amity of the Dame,
for fear that he should be accounted a discourteous or sottish person, made no
conscience or pause at the matter, but lustily mounted upon this Princess, to
vewe her thoroughly, without further process: for she was beautiful and of a
good grace. And either of them found such sweet taste in this new sport,
that having renewed the Combat often times, the fair she Giant Horfelle, at
the end of five months after the fashion of the Pigmees was delivered of a
fair Child: about a four months after that, she brought forth another,
whom nine months she had conceived and borne according as the order of nature
requires: the one of them was named Nabot, and this is he who is famous
throughout all the world, being endued with such exceedyng force and
marvelous hardines, that his piere lives not this day on the Earth. This
man in regard of his hardines is the chiefest knight in ye Court of the king
of Thracia, who long ago sailyng toward the Indies, arrived by fortune in the
Realm of Spithamye: and there findyng Nabot, being then a Child, but strong
and sturdie as possible might be in tender age, howbeit of so great stature, as
at this present he is (for he is scarsely three Cubits in height,) taking
him away, privily carried him into his Country, where he has caused him to be
nourished and iustructed with such curiosity and diligence, and likewise to
be trained up in feats of Arms so carefully, that in fine by reason of his
expertnes in Martial affairs, and worthiness of the said Nabot, he is so
feared and redoubted, that in Europe is no king that dare attempt to do him
any annoyance. But now to return to my purpose, and to the end, that I stray
not from the path that guides me to ye sum of my discourse: it follows, that
the other child of the she Giant Horfelle, and of Nabron the dwarf, was
herein unlike and contrary to his Brother Nabot: for he was so huge, that in
Childbirthe his mother died, and is at this time most huge and monstrous in
size, and piereles for force and prowess: he is named Squamel: whose servant
I was, and also every of them yt were slain by you, who also is Lord and Ruler
of the fair I Will, the most fruitful and pleasant place that is situate in all
this Sea, which he conquered by the means which I will tell you. You are to
note, that after his nativity, being as then but a little one in comparison of
the huygenes of his body, at this instaunt he incurred such fortune as his
Brother had done before him: for he was also stolen away by certain
Merchants, who traueilyng into Indie, were by fortune driven to shore, in the
confines of his Fathers Dominions, from whence they carried him away, and
sithence soulde him to the Ryng of higher Mysia, for a great Mass of Money:
who likewise gave order that he should be nourtured and brought up honorably:
and gave him for my Esquire, being as yet very young to serve his daughter, who
was the most accomplished Lady in all perfection of beauty, that could be
found, and was named Lucinda. Of this Dame, the young Giant was enamoured, being
now come to the age wherein the fervent heat of love begins to augment, and
that so exceedingly, that his lively and ruddie color turned to pale and wan
looks: his body became lean and feeble, through want of sustinaunce, he
eschued all company, and chused to live solitary. But all in vain suffered
he those torments and perplexities in respect of the squeymishnes of his
disdainefull Dame, who to counteruaile his hoate love, because of the great
stature and extraordinary proportion of his lymmes, was so scornefully
despised and abiectly esteemed by her, as if he had been the basest of her
householde servants. Whereupon his restless thoughts did continually so
vex him, that either unwilling or unable to recant his Religion, I mean to
swerve from the service of the Sainet to whom he had vowed all reverence and
adoration, one day it came into his fantasy, to require the King his Lord to
grant him the order of Knighthoode. The King who knew that he was extracted
from Royal lineage, as the Merchants that had soulde him did enfourme his
Majesty, gamesaied not that motion of his, considering therewithal, that his
service might stand him in great steed, by means of his strength and
mightines incomparable. But immediately after he was dubbed with that degree,
he abode not long there, but set him self in queste of strange adventures,
whereof he honorably atcheued so many, that at this day he is reputed one of
the oddest Knights upon the face of the whole earth: as also his worthiness,
meriteth no less reputation: for encountering his brother Nabot, by chance
upon a day, he fought against him hand to hand, with such fury, that their
Combat endured a whole day until the euenyng. When as each of them (amazed
at the valiaunce of the other, having never as yet found any wight, that long
could withstand them) entered into questionyng one of the other, concerning the
place of their birth, and what they were: so that having recounted their
fortunes, as they sometimes had heard told by such as nourished them, they
knew themselves to be brethren: and dooyng away all debate, entertained
each other, with an other kind of greetyng then all the day before they had
done. Afterward iournenyng both together, they were separated, I know not by
what adventure, but in such sort, that the Grant (the fame of whose prowess
was spread over all the Circuit of the world) came unto the king of higher
Mysia, where he was somewhat welcomed by his Lady, who was glad of such a one
for her Knight. And feedyng himself with the conceit of good hap, for that
the Princess had cast certain glaunces toward him, he took upon him at
last, the boldness to discover his love unto her: who cuttyng of his suite with
a short and sharp answer, compelled him as then to desiste from his
enterprise: nevertheless his kindled and secret fire, brussing at length into
open and fervent flames, intolerably, and continually vexyng him, made him to
hazard his speech once more, to assaie if he could mollify her indurate
breast, with the compassion of his misery: but the Dame persistyng obstinatly
in her accustomed manner, answered him with the like denial as she had done
before: howbeit not sauced with such bitter tau^tes: which brought the Giaunt
into conceipte, that her intractable rigor and selfwill began somewhat to
mittigate. Wherefore espiyng fit opportunity for the renuyng of his suite, he
finds means to have access unto her, being alone in her Chamber: where
enteryng into communication, he discourses unto her, a fair and Courtly
Tale: whereof he had provided himself before hand, concerning his extreme
passions: setting it forth to the uttermost, in words, voice, countenance and
gesture, concludyng every sentence with such sighing, that the scornful Dame
seemed partly to relent, renderyng him an answer tolerable enough. For (quoth
she,) I can not persuade my self, that your affections are so fervent as you
(though fainedly) have here expressed, seeing that you have not as yet
adventured your self in any attempt, deserving my favor: but if for my love
you will not shrink to enterprise one Combat at my appointment, I will not
stick to accept you for my Knight and friend: so that you worthily atchiue
the same. The Giaunt exceeding joyful of so wished an answer, said, that
she should command him nothing (were it never so difficulte and uneasy) but
that in hope of her good grace, he would bring it to pass. Mary then (said
the Dame) you are to go to morrow to the castle of Melande, where you must
fight against all them that you shall find therein: and if you return from
thence victorious, then you shall be he that may dispose of me according to
your own will. For I have vowed, that no person shall purchase the grant of
my good will, nor enjoy the fruits of my love, but only he that shall
acco^plishe that act. These words did cast the Giant into his dumpes,
especially for that he had charged his own shoulders with so troublesome and
heavy a burden: for it behooved him to Combat with more then a Million of
Devils, who were enclosed in an old ruinous castle, being inhabitable by reason
thereof, being there set by the Inchauntmentes of an old Sorceresse named
Melande: and to chase the^ out it was impossible for any, saving for him that
surpassed all other Knights in force and prowess. So it was notwithstanding,
that the Giaunt purposing with himself, that a speedy and praiseworthy death,
was to be preferred before a languishyng and unhappy life (such as he
endured,) failed not to put in execution the commandment of his Dame. And did
so much by his worthiness and courage, that he defeated the Charms of the
Enchaunteresse, and drove from thence the Deuilles: who daiely raised up an
horrible Tempest and vproare in the Castle: after departing from thence, a
victorious conquerout, he hasted to his Dame: requiring her to perform her
promise. She understanding thereof, and forced to her extremities, settled her
wits to the invention of some mischiuous practice: whereby the Giauntes day
might be abridged. Wherefore, albeit at the first her outward countenance
descried the inward motions of her spiteful heart, yet to the entente she
might the more certainly entrappe him unawares, she entertained him courteously
enough, and lookyng forth at one of the casementes of her chamber window,
that stood over against a Park, wherein the king her Father had caused a
great multitude of Lions, Bears, Boares, and sundry other savage beasts to
be put, willed the Giaunt to look out at an other, that they might talk
together, which he presently did: Deemyng himself happy in receiuyng such
favor of his Dame. But as he was in beginning to declare the vnfainednes of
his affections, the Dame who was wilye and guilefull, seemyng to give attentive
ear to his speech, did let fall (as though it were by misregard) one of her
Bracelets, garnished over with fine Diamondes, Rubies, Emeraldes, and other
Precious stones curiously wrought, which she was accustomed to wear on her
Arms: whereat she seemyng to be somewhat agrieued, did complain for the loss
of her Bracelet. Squamel seeing her grief conceived for the want of so rich
and precious a Jewel, and mistrustyng no whit the malice of his Maistris,
offered rather hastily then willingly to descend into the place, if it liked
her: thinking yt she loved him so well, that she would not permit him to
assubiect his person to such evident hazardes among such a number of wild
Beasts: but his expectation was deceived. For the Dame most instauntly
required him to do it, and he without gainesaiyng or delay, furnished with
no defensible thing, except his Sword only, descended deliuerly into the
Park of rampyng Lions and other cruel beasts: who had no sooner perceived
him, but like unto a company of dogs (when they see a Wolf inuadyng the
flock to catch a Sheep) so ran they from all parts to assail him: but so
incomparable was his mighty prowess, in that exigent, that after he had
killed a great maynie of them, he escaped alive out of that deadly danger,
houbeit not without sundry Wounds and Bruises: whereof report being made to
the king, he was no less astonished at the hardines of the Giant, the^
aggreued at the loss of his beasts: for he took great delight in the
keeping of them. Wherefore in his indignation he threatened to put the Giaunt to
death without respect of the service done by him. Who being aduertized of his
displeasure, caused six or seven great ships to be rigged for his speedy
auoydyng out of the Realm of Mysia: to the end he might escape the reach of
the kings power being his Lord, against whom he would not for any thing in
the world make resistaunce. Then committyng himself to the Surges of the Sea,
bearyng an Ocean of Passions in his mind, before his departure he took
Congee of his Dame: who in steed of Adieu, vomityng out the venyme which she
carried in her cankred stomach, she vpbraided him with a thousand injuries and
peeuishe slanders: which might have apparauntly assured the Giant of the
spitefulnes of his disloyal Lady. Yet he making small account thereof, and
supposing that she had spoken the same in jest, persuaded himself, that (such
discourtesie and mischieuousnes, findyng no place in the heart of so fair and
lovely a Dame) it could not be but that he was ardently beloved of her, saving
yt she would not have it appear, for fear lest any should thereof certify
the king her father. Wanderyng on the Sea, and blinded with this false opinion,
by adventure he discovered the fair I Will, which with the aid of many of us
that were his especial friends (who had accompanied him in all that Iourny) he
conquered, and established himself in the seat Royal, after that he had
chased him that was in possession before, from thence: although he was a
puissaunte Prince, and defeated the more part of them that withstoode his
attempt. And in consideration of the beauty, wholesome site and plentifulnes of
the same I Will, he determined to make the same a place of continual aboade for
him during life. Now, for because it is a place where many vessels do use to
lie at Ancre, he determined to spoil as many as he could possibly catch,
which he omitted not to do accordingly: so that by the Riches and Furniture
which he has purchased through such kind of pilling, he is become one of the
most puissaunt and redoubted Princes that is in Greece, except the Emperor of
Constantinople, as sometimes I have heard him report unto the knight slain by
you: who had been not long sithence in his service in the company of the Duke
of Chalcide. That knight falling extremely in love with the Daughter of the
same Duke, had required sundry times her love in lieu, but the proud and
disdainefull Damozell despising him, did set light by his suite: whereat the
knight taking exceedyng indignation, and thinkyng to be revenged, as he walked
abroad on a certain day, he met with a stranger, who in his time had been
so connyng in the art of Magique, yt by his skill he had formed a Goblet of
Gold (wherein were set many fair Precious stones of value inestimable) endued
with such virtue, that who so drank therein, whatsoever the Potion were, should
be enamoured on that person, who had poured the drink into the said Goblet.
Which he refte from the poor Magician, who had been an exile of Persia: for
that the great Souldan of that region would have had it, to the end he might
purchase the love of the Emperors daughter of Constantinople. Thus having
recovered this enchaunted Cup, he found means that his cruel Dame drank
therein, who was and is yet so entangled in the love of a young Page, which
somtymes served her, that she shrinked not to prostitute her body, to be abused
by him in Venus daliaunces and disportes: but to the end he might bereue her
of the sweet delights, which she had with her new love, the knight slew him:
and upon this occasion was forced to forsake his country, lest he should be
apprehended and punished. As he was wanderyng on the sea, entendyng to have
gone into Persia, to sell the same cup to the great Souldan, he was
prevented, in his Journey by us: who under the conduct of our Master Squamel
(seeing that there artued no other ship at our I Will, by the spoil whereof we
might increase our wealth as we were accustomed) we began to roue along the
Seas from Coaste to Coast, to get some good booty. And so this knight being
taken as before is said, the Giaunt Squamel commanded him to be Closed up
into an evil favored and lothesome Prison, in the company of many others
whom he had held there in miserable thraldom: who^ at such times as he
entered any voyage on the Sea, to apprehende some vessels passing by, he
caused them to be bound very straightly to the maste: So that the same knight
being there placed among the rest, and chauncyng to hear the Giant complain
of the cruelty and rigor of fair Lucinde his Dame, told him that if he
would grant him liberty, he would so use the matter, that the Giant should
be so much beloved of her, as now he is hated, by the virtue of the golden
Goblet, whereof we baue made mention. The Giaunt consented thereto willingly.
Afterward the knight having delivered it, he travailed into high Mysia, where
he found means to make his Dame secretly a Present of the Inchaunted Goblet,
wherein he caused her to drink, saying that it retained the property that the
Dame or gentlewoman which he should grant to drink in the same, should become
so fair, that she should be second to none in perfection of beauty. But the
trial verified his words to be untrue, for in steed of augmenting of her
beauty, she is contrariwise so withered, wanne, and disfigured, that she has
lost the principallest part of her beautifulnes: she has ever since, and is
still so worn away by force of her amourous passion. For our master has
purposed to suffer her to languishe so long, as he remained bound under the
servile yoke of her love. Whereat he received such contentation, that for the
recompense of the gift offered unto him by that knight, he constituted him
Lieutenante general and vicegenent in his absence, of the kingdom of the
fair I Will: co^mittyng unto him all charge to pill and rob whatsoever he may
by any possibility attain unto: which he endeavoring to accomplish, this
misaduenture is happened unto him (and to the other knight being his cousin, and
taken with him whom your companion has slain) which you know better then my
self. For ^a^yng discovered you, he left his Army that is not far hence,
^o search for that which he was no more able to demand then I or al they,
whose days you have cut of. And assure your self (my Lord) that if the rest
of my compaignions should understand of his death, you shall hardely escape,
they happenyng to encounter you: for they are more then six hundredth stout
and lusty Soldiers. Behold (my Lord) the occasion whereupon he was appointed
to be our Captain, and what he was, according to your demand.

After that the Pirate had ended his tale, in the order before declared, the
Youth who attentively gave ear, called to his remembrance, that this Knight
was the person, whereof the Lady enamoured (lackyng her Lover) spoke even as
you heard reported before, when he was separated from his faithful freende
Pharisor. Wherefore he rejoiced not alittle, for that he had revenged her
quarrel, in recompense of the intertainme^t, which she had made him in her
Castle. And co^sideryng with him self, that the Inchau^ted Cup, detained by the
Giant Squamel, should serve his turn passing well, in the pursuit of his
Love, determined therefore, to winue it from the Giante, either by fair
means, or force: after that he had found, and fought with the unknown
knight, to wreake the death of Pharisor, who on the other side adventured to
do the like: whereupon such chances befell him, as more fitly and
pleasauntly I entende to recounte in the second Book. For now am I
constrained to leave the Youth of the Fairies, wandryng upon the maine Seas,
in the compaignie of him, whom he pursued (to who^ fortuned the most strange
adventure that ever was heard of) because that reason requires me to end this
first part: for so much as the same order is observed, by our ancient
Chronicler Gallarx, whose style and manner of writing I do imitate. Wherefore,
my Lords and Dames, I humbly request you to hold me excused, if any defecte
happen to be found in this book: assuryng you to supply all such wantes in
the next, with more pleasure and contentmente, if so be it shall like you to
bestow your convenient leisure, in the readyng thereof, and that with usury:
recityng unto youth dreadful combat between the Youth of the Faieries, and
the Giant Squamel (who withhelde his horse and Armor) and of the most
courageous and puissaunte knight Nabot, who had the good Sword Duranzarde,
which he had conquered from the Giant Scaraferab: and did cut any thing that
it did light upon: and likewise the enchaunted Armor: which I persuade my
self, shall yield no less delight unto valiant knights (who receive pleasure
in hearing of the worthy acts of our ancestors) then the love full of bitter
pleasures and sweet bitterness, between the said Youth and the Lady
Porphyrie, will be pleasureable to all beautiful and favorable Dames. For I
will there describe many other accidents, no less delectable then wonderful,
contained within the compass of this History.

FINIS.

